Antychrist Storme^


Antichrist STORMED: OR, Mystery Babylon the great Whore, and great City,
proved to be the present Church of Rome. Wherein all Objections are fully
answered. To which is added, The Time of the End, or a clear Explanation of
Scripture Prophecies, with the Judgment of diverse Learned men concerning the
final Ruin of the Romish Church, that it will be in this present Age. Together
with an Account of the Two Witnesses, who they are, with their Killing,
Resurrection and Ascension. Also an Examination and Confutation of what Mr.
Jurieu has lately written concerning the Effusion of the Vials, proving none
of them are yet poured out, With Mr. Canns Reasons to confirm the same.
Likewise a brief Review of D. Tho. Goodwins Exposition of the 11th chapter of
the Revelations, concerning the Witnesses, and of that Street in which they
should lie slain, proving it to be meant of Great Britain. And a brief
Collection of diverse strange Prophecies, some very Ancient. By Benj. Keach,
Author of Sion in Distress

To which is annexed, A short Treatise in two parts. 1. The Calculation of
Scripture numbers by Scripture only, without the help of Humane History. 2.
Upon the Witnesses; giving light to the whole Book.

LONDON, Printed for Nath. Crouch at the Bell in the Poultrey near Cheapside.
1689.

TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
THat which induced me to publishthe ensuing Treatise, at this time, is first,
the consideration of the present Providence of the great God, under which we
are exercised; wherein it may appear to all, that he has with an outstretched
Arm, begun to deliver his people, and to plead the controversy of Sion,
against his old and implacable Enemies, such a gracious dispensation as we have
certainly never before seen, and what the issue or event of it will be, we
cannot be ignorant, if we consult his word, Babylon must fall, that is evident,
and that this Mystery Babylon is the Church of Rome, is fully cleared in this
Treatise, which we hope may tend to convince such who have had any doubt upon
their Spirits about it, and confirm others in the steadfast belief thereof; true
it is not above 6 or 7 years, since we wrote something of the same nature, but
that lying in a folio, a book that comes but into a few hands; Besides this is
great part new, and many things of another nature insisted on; I have been
stirred up to make it public in this small tract, hoping that such who read it
will see some further cause to hate the Whore and all her offspring who still
retain her Persecuting Spirit, though blessed be God, this Nation and Scotland
likewise, are stirred up of late, with just revenge against her, the Lord
continue it, for there is much work still to be done both here and abroad,
before that glorious state of the Church comes in, which we have so long waited
for, as touching the time of Babylons final ruin and overthrow, something we
have here said, and have also given the various Apprehensions of many learned
and worthy Writers in respect of that, as also tou^^ing the Slaying and
Resurrection of the two Witnesses, together with their Ascension, which will
have its further opening by the works and providence of God, so that our light,
like the path of the Just, shall shine more and more to the perfect day; time
will make manifest what is in the Womb of the present Providence. That which
adds further encouragement, is, I perceive almost every where Gods people are
much upon the search into the Prophesies of the Scripture, and Revelations of
St. John about the time of the end.

We have given some brief hints touching the seven Seals, Trumpets, and the
seven Vials or last Plagues spoken of by St. John, which may, we hope, let in a
little light into some men's understandings, and tend to the putting of them
upon a further search, we conclude that the six first Seals spoken of, Rev. 6.
open things that were to come to pass in the World, from the time that John
received his Revelations until the years 311 or 320, or there abouts, which
produced, (1.) That fearful Apostasy from the Apostolical Faith, and true
Christianity of the Gospel Church. (2.) The utter overthrow of the sixth Head
of the Beast or Pagan Emperors Reign, and so put an end to the ten bloody
Persecutions under them, for under the sixth Seal was effected or brought to
pass their final ruin signified by an Earthquake, Rev. 6. Which overthrow was
first begun by Constantine the great, and fully completed according to History
by Theodosius about 379. under the 7 Seal there was silence in Heaven for half
an hour, viz. A short time of rest for the Church and Saints of God, which
began in Constantines days and lasted as some conceive till the troubles rose
by the Arians which was, if I mistake not, about the latter end of his Reign,
but others say it continued till Theodosius died, in the year 395. also under
the Seventh Seal come in the Angels with their Seven Trumpets the 6 first
Trumpets ('it is concluded by most learned writers) brought in those things that
were effected or accomplished under the Papal power and Turkish Empire as also
the death and Resurrection of the Witnesses, and so brings in the second woe.

The seventh Trumpet, as I conceive, brings in the Ascension of the Witnesses,
and then comes out the seven Angels with the seven Vials and last Plagues; the
first of which I cannot believe has as yet been poured out, nor shall, till
the Ascension of the Witnesses, which will be attended with that second
Earthquake, Rev. 11. and from that very time I conclude the Kingdom of Christ
will begin, which I know is quite contrary to what Dr. Goodwin, Dr. More, Du
Moulin, and of late Peter Jurie^ have written; the reasons why I am of this
Opinion, you will find if you read the latter part of this Treatise. Dr.
Goodwin, if I mistake him not, says that Waldo, etc. might be said to pour out
the first Vial, and that two or three more of them have since been poured out
by the Angels or Ministers of God out of the Temple, as they have been endued
with more or lesser light, but we cannot think any of the Sackcloth Witnesses,
who have lived under the time of the Beasts 42 months, can be said to pour out
any of those Vials, because they are said to be clothed with pure white linen,
and to have Golden Girdles about their breasts and for several other reasons
which we have here given, it is indeed very strange to many wise men that Mr.
Jurieu should so confidently affirm that all the Vials should be already poured
out by Gods Ministers, and that they are still in their Sackcloath* and have so
all along.

Others there are who Judge that the Seven Vials shall none of them be poured
out till the Seventh Trumpet shall begin to sound, which will effect her utter
overthrow, and so bring in the third woe; of this opinion was that Worthy and
Learned Divine, Mr. John Can and some others, time will open these things
more clearly, but I am persuaded whenever those Vials and last Plagues come
to be poured out, Gods Judgments will be so manifest, that they will be
discerned and known of all, and be quite different from all other Judgments
that have fallen upon the Antichristian State and people from their first rise.

But since we are in the Judgment of all Godly and Learned men, come toward
the end of the wonders, let none be discouraged, for though there is very near
a most dismal hour, yet it will doubtless fall upon the heads of the wicked,
and such who are of Baby lons Race and Spirit, the Godly shall see the Lord
has not forgotten them, nor the righteous Blood that has been shed, but will
appear suddenly to plead Sion's controversy, and set up his own Kingdom;
therefore let us be much in prayer, and cry mightily to God, and be ready to
meet the Lord in his more glorious appearance, for we are very confident a very
dreadful hour is near, and it will come upon carnal, secure, and all formal
Protestants, nay, fear shall surprise the sinners in Sion, though it will be a
glorious hour to all that are found faithful to Jesus Christ; I desire all
enquiring persons to weigh well what we have said in the latter part of this
Treatise, and if it affords any further light to any of them, let them bless
God, I am in hopes it will put many upon a further search into the Prophesies
of the Scripture about the time of the end: However I sha'l at present say no
more, but leave it to the blessing of the Lord, (till I see a little further
what God is about to do) and at present take my leave of thee, and remain thy
Servant in the Gospel,

Benj. Keach.

THE CONTENTS.
CHap. 1. Various Opinions concerning Mystery Babylon. 1. Not the World of
wicked men. 2. Not old Chaldea Babylon. 3. Not Jerusalem. 4. Not the Turks and
Saracens. 5. Not Rome Heathen. 6. Not Rome toward the end of the World, after,
some Papists say, Rome shall Apostatize to Paganism again. 7. By Mystery
Babylon is meant the present Papal or Romish Church, proved from p. 4. to p. 38.
Chapter 2. Proving all the marks that the Scripture gives of Mystery Babylon meet
directly in Papal Rome, from p. 39. to p. 102. Chapter 3. Literal Babylon a Type of
Mystery Babylon, showed in 12 particulars, from p. 103. to p. 116. Chapter 4.
Showing the little Horn, Dan. 7. to mean the Pope in 10 particulars, from p.
117. to p. 127. Chapter 5. Proving that our Savior in Mat. 13. 15. and St. Paul in
Acts 20. 29. and 1 Timothy 4. 2 These. 2. 3. pointed out the Papal Church, from p.
128. to p. 135. Chapter 6. Showing the Judgment of diverse Eminent Writers
concerning who the two Witnesses are, and who not, p. 136. That they have been
lately slain, and are risen, or about to rise, p. 140, 141. What the Ascension
of the two Witnesses are, and that it is near, p. 145.
Chapter 7. Where is showed the Judgment of many English Writers about the seven
Vials, with an Answer to Mr. Peter Jurieu, who has lately asserted in his
Treatise, that they are all poured out; Proving by many Arguments that there is
none of them as yet poured out, nor will till the seventh Angel blows his.
Trumpet, from p. 153. That England is the Street of the great City where the
Witnesses were to be slain or lie dead. p. 182, 183, etc. The Kingdom of Christ
begins at the Earthquake, or at the beginning of sounding of the seventh
Trumpee, and that it is at the door, p. 186, 187, 188. Diverse strange
Prophesies, p. 188, 189.
Postscript. Wherein you have the substance of what a late nameless great
French Writer has said in Answer to Mr. Jurieu about the Non-effusion of the
Vials, p. 193.
Antichrist stormed: Or Mystery Babylon the great Whore, and great City proved
to be the present Church of Rome, or Papal Hierarchy.
CHAP. I. Wherein the various Opinions concerning Mystery Babylon, are
discovered and all their Objections Answered, who deny by her is meant, the
Papal Power, or present State and Church of Rome.
IT IS evident to all who are men of any Reading, that most of our Eminent
Protestant Writers, both Ancient and Modern, do affirm without the least doubt,
that the Church of Rome is the great Whore spoken of, Rev. 17. called, Mystery
Babylon: yet we find that most worthy men, who have of latter times, so well
defended the truths of the Gospel, in opposition to Popery, have not so much
bent their Study this way; I mean directly to prove that which is our present
task -- as it has been to detect diverse or most of her erroneous principles,
and detestable practices, which is rather to Lop off some of the Branches of
this Evil and Cursed Tree, than to Dig it up by the Root, for if it be clearly
proved, that she is that great Whore; viz. Mystery Babylon the great, Mother of
Harlots; down she goes at once; and if we have not done it so effectually as it
may be desired, yet we are in hope wherein we have been defective, it may stir
up some abler Pen, to perfect what we have anew undertaken; -- But to proceed,
for the more orderly management of our present work, it may not be amiss if we
give you the various opinions that have more or less presented themselves to
the World, about who or what People this great Whore Mystery Babylon is, which
may be reduced to these seven following heads.

1. And first of all, as Reverent Mr. Pool observes, some would have it to be
the whole World of Wicked men. 2. Others would have this Woman, ^or this
Babylon to be old Chaldean Babylon. 3. That it is Jerusalem; and that for two
Reasons: 1. Because the man of Sin, or last Beast, that is to Head this
Babylon, is set forth by St. Paul, to sit in the Temple of God, showing himself
to be God. 2. Because this City where the Beast reigns, and -shall slay the
Witnesses, is Spiritually called Sodom and Egypt, where our Lord was Crucified,
Rev. 11. 8.
4. That it is the Turkish Empire, or Power of the Saracens; which Mr. Mede
somewhat touches, and in a brief way most Learnedly argues against: in his
third Book, page 644, 645. 5. That it is indeed Rome, the Seat of the Fourth,
or Last Empire; but Rome, in its Heathen state, under the Idolatrous and
Persecuting Emperors: so the Rhemists would have it, if there be a necessity to
fix upon Rome, to be this Apocalyptical, or Mystery Babylon. For this opinion
the present Romanists have no better Advocate than Dr. Hammond, who has done
very worthily at other turns; but here has doubtless greatly mistaken his way;
see his Annotations upon the 17th Chapter of the Apocalypse. 6. That it is the
present power and Church of Rome who under pretense of the most High and
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, does influence and govern the Secular Power and
State of Kingdom^. Of this last opinion were the ancient Waldenses who felt the
bloody Power of of Rome, venting it self in most horrid and Barbarous Cruelties
against them, and that for a long Series of time, as appears by our most
Authentic, Ancient, and Modern Writers, who give a very ample account of the
great Persecution of Christians for many hundred years last past, in all parts
of the Christian World, where they have had Power. To which opinion of the
Waldenses most of our Modern Protestant Divines agree, of which we shall
mention only Cartwright, Fulk, the worthily Admired, and Learned Mede, not
forgetting famous Du Moulin of France, as may be seen in their works at large.
7. Some of the Papists who grant that by Babylon, Rome is meant, but would have
it to be Rome toward the End of the World, when they say Rome shall apostatize
from the Pope to Paganism again; and now, because we will not take things upon
trust, nor refer the reader to many Books and Quotations, it appears needful
that we remove the Objections with as much brevity as we can.
And first, That Mystery Babylon cannot be fairly applied unto the whole World
of wicked men, nor to old Chaldean Babylon, nor to Jerusalem, the Turks nor
Saracens, nor terminate in the Heathenish State of Rome, no^ Rome toward the
End of the World, when they say Rome shall Apostatize from the Pope to Paganism
again.

And that none else can be meant or intended by her but the Papal Power of the
Church of Rome.

1. Mystery Babylon cannot be the whole world of wickedmen; for in opposition
to this, 1. The Apostle John speaks here of a certain great City which reigns
over the Kings of the Earth, v. 18. This cannot be meant of the wicked world.
2. The World of wicked men, are those Inhabitants of the Earth, whom this Woman
made drunk with the Wine of her fornication: Now she that made them drunk, and
those that were made drunk, cannot be the same. 3. This Woman, v. 9. sits on
seven mountains, and so do not all the wicked of the World. 4. We are Commanded
to come out of this Babylon, but we are not obliged to go out of the World.

2. If she were the old Chaldean Babylon then, (1.) Where is the mystery
mentioned Rev. 17. 5. (2.) Mystery Babylon here mentioned is by all
acknowledged to be the Seat of Antichrist; So was never old Chaldean, (3.)
Besides it is generally agreed to by all, not without good grounds, that
Literal Babylon was no more than the Type of her, which is all we will speak to
it.

3. It cannot be meant the City of Jerusalem.

1. Because Jerusalem did not reign over the Kings of the Earth in St. John's
time, when he saw this Vision, and wrote the Revelation, which this City
Babylon is expressly said to do, Rev. 17. 18. And the Woman which thou saw is
that great City which reigns over the Kings of the Earth. Jerusalem having
been not only under captivity diverse times before, but was then entirely under
the Power of the Roman yoke, as the whole History of the Gospel does confirm,
and themselves do most plainly Confess; We have no King but Caesar.

2. Jerusalem was never in so high esteem with the Beast, as to be capable to
ride as Queen Regent upon him, (as this Woman, Whore, or City is said to do)
Rev. 17. 7. And the Angel said unto me, Wherefore did thou marvel? I will
tell thee the mystery of the Woman, and the Beast that carries her, which has
the seven heads, and ten horns, Rev. 17. 7. compared with verse 3. so he
carried me away in the Spirit into the Wilderness, and I saw a Woman sit upon a
Scarlet Colored Beast, full of Names of Blasphemy, having seven Heads, and ten
Horns, -- For by the Woman sitting, and the Beast carrying, is undoubtedly
signified, Influence, Power, and Dominion, which Jerusalem was far remote from,
not only under the Roman Monarchy, but also under the three Kingdoms that went
before it, ( viz.) the Babylonian, Grecian, and Persian; as might be largely
illustrated both out of Sacred and Humane History.

3. Jerusalem did not sit upon many Waters, which is Interpreted to be People,
Nations, and Tongues, that is, had not command or dominion over them: as this
Woman, Whore, or City is said to have, Rev. 17. 15. And he says, The Waters
which thou saw, where the Whore sits, are Peoples, and Multitudes, and
Nations, and Tongues: The whole Land of Judea, being under Tribute to the Roman
Government at that time, Luke 2. 1. And it came to pass in those days, that
there went out a decree from Caesar Augustus, that all the World should be
taxed; and particularly Galilee, Nazareth, Judea, and the City of David called
Bethlehem.

4. Jerusalem was not capable to Enchant and Bewitch all Nations round about
her, either by her Religion and Doctrine, or by great Gifts and Rewards.

1. Because the Roman Power, kept her under, and much in awe, on the one hand,
not owning nor subscribing to her Religion.

2. The Christian Doctrine and Religion; Blocked up her way on the other hand,
that she could not Extend her Influence to either Neighboring, or Remote
Nations, as this Woman, Whore, or City is said to do, Rev. 18. 23. For thy
Merchants were the great Men of the Earth; for by thy Sorceries were all
Nations deceived.

5. Jerusalem though she were guilty of much Blood, from the beginning of her
Excellency and Glory in Solomon's time, Killing Prophets, even all that were
sent unto her, Murdered, John Baptist, and our Lord and Savior, as also the
blessed Martyr St. Stephen; yet in her could not be found that great Mass of
Blood that was shed, and Myriads of Christian Saints that have been Barbarously
Murdered, by Massacre, and Public Martyrdom, since they were ruined and
destroyed by Titus Vespasian, which we find positively charged upon this City
Babylon, Rev. 17. 6. And I saw the Woman Drunk with the Blood of Saints, and
with the Blood of the Martyrs of Jesus; and I wondered with great Admiration, as
indeed well he might, (as shall be shown:) And in her was found the Blood of
Prophets, and of Saints, and of all that were slain upon the Earth, that is,
since the Destruction of Jerusalem.

6. And Lastly; not to multiply more upon this head, Though Jerusalem was
fearfully destroyed, as the History of Josephus shows, yet shall she rise
again, be Built upon her own Heap, be replenished with her own Children, which
this City Babylon under Consideration shall never be, after this Catastrophe,
which John saw visionally coming upon it; Rev. 18. 21. And a mighty Angel took
up a stone, like a great Millstone, and cast it into the Sea, saying, Thus with
violence shall that great City Babylon be thrown down, and shall be found no
more at all.

5. It cannot be the Turks and Saracens for two reasons offered by the Learned
Mede, Lib. 3. p. 643.

1. Because, though they did arise to great Power in the World, yet they had
not their seat in that great City, which in St. John's time, reigned over the
Kings of the Earth, which this Babylon is Expressly said to have.

2. That they did not rise by Apostasy, from the Christian Religion, which this
Babylon, with her head (the Man of Sin) did; for, as this worthy Author says,
the Turk, (whatever he be) could be no Apostate, because he was of a Nation
that never was Christian. To which we shall add something for the clearing of
this head, that we may discharge that Debt we owe to God, to the Church, and
the World.

3. It cannot be the Turks, because they are not strangely and wonderfully
mysterious, which this Babylon is said to be, Rev. 17. 5. And upon her
forehead was a name written, MYSTERY BABYLON THE GREAT, THE MOTHER OF HARLOTS,
AND ABOMINATIONS OF THE EARTH. And the Angel said unto me, Wherefore did thou
Marvel? I will tell thee the mystery of the Woman and the Beast which carries
her, which has the Seven Heads and Ten Horns.

What special mystery has showed it self to the World from the Turks and
Saracens, more than from other common Empires or Kingdoms, that is matter of
admiration to the wisest of men? Is it matter of wonder, that the Turks do own
but one true and most high God? Is it matter of wonder, that they do own Jesus
Christ to be a Prophet and a good man? Is it matter of highest wonder that they
prefer Mahomet above Jesus? Is it matter of wonder, that they appear true to
their Contracts, in matters of Civil Commerce? Is it matter of highest wonder,
for them to endeavor to keep what Dominion they have, and to enlarge it, to
make Slaves and Prizes of those professed Enemies they take Prisoners? We say, in
none of these things is there any high Mystery, or matter of greatest Wonder,
being things common to all Places and Kingdoms Invested with Power: For,

1. Did not the great King of Literal Babylon own the only true God, yet still
held the Church in Captivity?

2. Did not Israel own the same, and yet kept their Idols after their revolt
from Judah.

3. Did not Judah prefer Moses above and before Christ, and at that time when
Christ was personally among them working most Stupendous Miracles which did
evince his Divine Mission? Nay, did they not prefer a Common and Notorious
Villain before the Blessed Lord of Glory, when they desired a Murderer to be
freed, and pressed hard to have the good and Blessed Jesus the Savior of the
World, killed? And did not this wise Apostle know this to be true in fact, and
to Equal, nay, outdo any thing that the Turks, or Saracens ever did, or can be
accused of? And if St. John was Transported with astonishing wonder, at Matters
much less than he had seen before, does it not give good reason to suspect him
of Weakness and Defect, that he should suffer himself to be surprised with the
greatest wonder, at far less things than he had seen and known before;
certainly therefore we must conclude there was something more of mystery in
John's Vision than what had been showed to the world, by the great Turk, or any
other Power; and indeed undoubtedly, the greatest Mystery that ever the World
was acquainted with: For the Characters of Babylon must either be singular,
that is, such as none have besides; or else they must be transcendent, to go
far beyond what others had in a Lesser degree. Otherwise John might have kept
the Description of Babylon to himself, there being no clear Distinctions, to
render the wisest and most Discerning men able to make Judgment upon her; The
mystery then, that is written upon this woman, Babylon, seems clearly to lie in
these particulars following.

First, That she does transact the most horrid wickednesses that ever the world
was or is like to be acquainted with. Secondly, That under this monstrous
Guilt, she is prodigiously Confident, and without all regret, or show of shame,
and most Impudently boasts of the highest Sanctity and Holiness in the World, (
viz.) That she is Totally Pure, Infallibly Certain, and cannot err, etc. That
this indeed is a Mystery to be wondered at, let it be Considered,
1. That a Shepherd should be a Wolf, and devour that flock which he pretends
to be an Overseer or Pastor of.

2. That a professed Servant of Jesus Christ, and the meanest of Saints, should
exalt himself above his Master, and not above his Master only, but above the
God of his Master, and all other Deputed Gods, that are Vicegerents to the King
of Heaven, by slighting and trampling upon the holy Scriptures and Laws both of
God and Princes, dispensing with the breach of them, indulging the highest
violation thereof, and setting up his own Inventions, Traditions and Decrees
above them; insomuch that there is a thousand times less danger (in their
esteem) in respect of Excommunications, and Corporal Punishments in this World,
or of Damnation in the World to come, in breaking and violating the Laws of God
and Princes, than there is in the violation or breach of the Inventions,
Traditions and Decrees of Mystery Babylon, and her Head.

3. That one sitting in the Temple of God, pretending himself as a poor
Apostle, Vicar, and Successor of Christ, nay, as the Successor of a poor
Fisher* man, should wear the highest Ensigns of Imperial Dignity!

4. That he should be so Lordly and prodigiously Insolent (who was commanded to
the greatest Humility and Abasement) as to tread upon the necks of Emperors,
kick off the Crowns of great Princes, and make Kings his Foot Pages.

5. That he should pretend highly, most highly, to God, Christ, Religion, and
Holiness, and yet Espouse to himself, as the Darlings of his Bosom, not only
the Chiefest Sons of Belial, but all that will decline Sanctity and Religion,
and embody themselves with those first born Sons of Wickedness, that are of the
highest Magnitude, and engage themselves in such Monstrous and Butcherly
Practices, that humane Nature, as such, could never act in the Butchering Brute
Beasts.

6. That the Spouse of this prodigious Monster should in Profession own God,
Jesus Christ, and the things of Religion, of which Justice and Charity,
Holiness and Compassion, are not the least parts; and yet under this Vizard,
and in the very time of these pretensions, perpetrate the greatest and most
unparalled Villainies in the World; First, In being the Top of Pride;
Secondly, In committing palpable Idolatry; Thirdly, Fill themselves with Excess
and Drunkenness; Fourthly, To curse, swear and blaspheme the very name they
profess to be sacred; Fifthly, To cast down the Truth, burn the Bible, deface
the holy Books and Laws of God; Sixthly, To assume not only a Power to Dispense
with the Violation in the highest Nature, but to pardon and forgive them at
pleasure; Seventhly, To commit Adultery, and account it a Venial Crime;
Eighthly, To break Covenants, to drive a Trade in Perjury, forswear every thing
they are justly charged with, and is fully proved against them; Ninthly, To
foment Wars and Broils in every Kingdom and Country where they have Power,
contrive the Ruin of Towns, Places, Cities, Countries, and Kingdoms, by Fire,
Sword, and most Cruel Devastations; Tenthly, To slaughter, kill, and
barbarously murder both Men, Women and Children, even all that dare make a
show of Conscience and Religion, so far as to abhor and dissent from these
Villainies: This is such a Scheme of Religion, and Systeme of Divinity to come
from an Apostle, a Shepherd, a Vicar, and Successor of Christ, from a Church,
Sheep, Saints, and the pretended followers of the Meek, Peaceable, and Innocent
Jesus, who taught altogether otherwise by his Doctrine and Example, that it
might well be wondered at, and is the strangest Mystery that ever appeared, of
which we challenge the whole World to show the like in the Turks and Saracens.
For men to Swear, Lie, and to Forswear themselves, and yet be true Men; to
contrive Rebellion, Murder, and Treason, and yet be as Innocent as the Child
unborn: To be elevated to the highest Pinnacle of Pride, even above Emperors
and Kings, above Jesus Christ, and God his Father, and yet be humble and lowly:
To commit gross Idolatry, and yet be the Servants of the Living God: To be
filled with, and make a Trade of Excess and Drunkenness, and yet be Patterns
and Standards of Sobriety and Temperance: To cast down the Truth to the ground,
deface the Laws of God, and burn the Scriptures, and yet be the true Witnesses
of it: To forgive sins, and yet be the greatest Sinners themselves: To commit
Fornication and Adultery, and yet be spotless and pure in heart: To foment Wars
and Broils in every Kingdom and Country where they have power; to contrive the
Ruin of Towns and Places Cities, Countries and Kingdoms, by Fire, Sword, and
cruel Devastations, and yet be as harmless as Doves to all mankind, the only
Sons of Peace and Quietness: To slaughter, kill, and barbarously murder Men,
Women and Children, that dare not be so wicked as themselves; and yet to be
full of mercy, tender pity and compassion, an Apostle, Shepherd and Vicar,
Successor of the Meek and Lamb-like Savior. And for the dear Consort of this
Impious Head, on Man of Sin, do not only confederate with him, but a Principal
in all these unparalled Villainies, and most butcherly and rapacious Murders;
and yet be the Holy Catholic Church of God, the pure and spotless Spouse of
Jesus Christ, the true Sheep, the harmless Lambs, the best of Saints, and close
followers of the Lord Jesus, who always taught the contrary by his holy
Doctrine, and meek Example. We say, these things not being found by secret
search, but are written in Capital Letters upon her forehead, appear in open
view, to be read by every one that is not wilfully blind. Let any one show us a
greater Mystery in the World than this, and we will subscribe to it.

4. It cannot be the Turks, because they are not the Mother of Harlots, and
Abominations of the Earth; which this Babylon is said to be, Rev. 17. 5. And
upon her forehead, was a Name written, MYSTERY BABYLON THE GREAT, THE MOTHER OF
HARLOTS AND ABOMINATIONS OF THE EARTH. And here we demand, in excuse to the
Turks, this one Thing.

From whence did proceed the Murders, Massacres, and Martyrdoms, of all the
Religious Professors of Christianity, that have died by violence in the
Christian World, for the space of twelve hundred years last past? And from what
people did proceed those horrid Oaths, Blasphemies, and Execrations, that the
World has woefully been acquainted with, most horrid and strangely astonishing
to repeat?

Came these unparalled Degrees of Impiety from the Turks? from the
Waldensians, Lutherians, Calvinists, or any Nonconforming Protestants? No, no;
why whose Language then is it? Whose! Why, it is the Language of the Beast of
the Bottomless Pit, and Bloody Whore, who bare these Blasphemous Sons of her
own Body, daily nourishes them at her Breast, and strengthens them in their
sinful courses, by accounting them the Sons, the precious Sons of Sion, the
true Sons of the Catholic Church, the Darlings of Heaven, the beloved ones of
the Virgin Mary, and gives them Pardons for these Bold and Heaven daring sins,
as often as they commit them, and come to ask Pardon for them; so that Sin and
Pardon is as constant and common with them, as Breathing and Eating. And these
things are done to Seal and Confirm Lies, which is the more heavy, heinous, and
prodigious; For if men may Lie by Allowance; may kill, and shed Innocent Blood,
without control of Conscience and Church censure^; may Swear and Blaspheme,
and Challenge God himself to Damn them; may burn men for Religion, consume
Cities to Ashes, conspire the death of Kings, the Ruin and Overthrow of
Kingdoms, Whore, and Murder Infants; and yet be accounted a Church, the
Members and Parts of it called Saints, Holy Children and the Sons of the most
high God: Then may we claim a Patent, and take a License to change the name of
all things, and alter the Ideas of the minds of men; call and account Beelzebub
a good God, and all his black Tribe, the pure Saints of the most High; call the
lower Regions of Blackness and Darkness, to which he is confined, the Heaven of
Glory and Eternal Light, of which things we ought in Justice to clear the
Turks: until Witnesses of undoubted credit shall come forth, and evidence that
the Turkish State, is the Mother of as great Abominations as these are.

5. And Lastly; The Turks cannot be Mystery Babylon, because they never were
made drunk with the Blood of the Saints, and with the Blood of the Martyrs of
Jesus; which this Woman Mystery Babylon, is expressly said to be, Rev. 17. 6.
And I saw the Woman drunk with the Blood of the Saints, and with the Blood of
the Martyrs of Jesus: and I wondered with great admiration. Now let any man show
such bloodshed, Saints bloodshed, by Massacres and Martyrdom, for the
Professing of Christianity (which must be if the Text be answered in that
clause, Blood of the Martyrs of Jesus,) by the Turks, either within their
Dominions, or without, as has been shed by a Generation, nearer home, and we
shall become like the Man without the Wedding Garment, wholly speechless, and
say not a word more about Babylon.

6. Now that Babylon in the Apocalypse is Great Rome, that in former times
Reigned, and in suture times shall be destroyed, is owned by some of the
Papists themselves, and is asserted by all Protestants; the Difference betwixt
them is brought to this narrow Point. The one wholly confines Babylon to Rome
Heathen, and there totally to terminate; the other brings Babylon down lower,
to Rome Antichristian, or Papal Rome. Now that this work may be to edification,
and more full satisfaction in this great case, we shall advance to the last and
chief Secret that is to be opened and considered, namely, Whether all things in
John's Vision or Prophecy that are applied to Mystery Babylon did completely
terminate in Rome Heathen, and came no further?

In answer to this great Enquiry, we do with the body of Protestants in
opposition to the Papists, conclude the negative; viz. That all things in the
Apocalypse applied to Mystery Babylon, did not terminate in Rome Heathen; the
reasons of which Negative are as follows.

1. Because the Beast, that Mystery Babylon, rides on, is the eighth Head, or
last Ruling Power of that City that is seated upon seven Hills, which must be
Rome Papal, because the whole Race of Rome Heathen was gone off, before the
eighth Head came up -- The sixth Head was in John's time; the seventh was to
come and continue but a short space; The Beast that carries the Woman; (viz.)
Babylon, is of the seventh, but is the eighth, and shall be the last; for he
goes into Perdition. This being so evident from the Letter of the Text, needs
nothing more to confirm it. Now that Rome Heathen was not the last part of the
Romish Power, is not only the full and joint Consent of all Writers upon this
subject, but is so evident to all the Christian World, that it would be vanity
it self to make a show of proof. The Conclusion then is this; If the very last
part of the Roman Power carries the Woman Babylon, and that the Heathen State
of Rome went off before, and was not the last; then Babylon could not terminate
in Rome Heathen, but must come down to Rome Papal; see Rev. 17. 3, 7, 9, 11.

2. If Babylon be totally terminated in Rome Heathen, then the Book of the
Apocalypse is of little use to the Latter ages of the Christian World? For if
the whole. Transactions relating to the Persecution of the Church and the
slaughter and destruction of God's Enemies, did end in Rome Heathen, then it
served only to give a Characteristical account of a Beast, and Whore that was
grown old, and ready to go off the Stage; but has wholly left us in the Dark,
and given us no notice at all of that horrible Confusion and Bloody
Persecutions, which have Reigned in the Christian World for more than a
thousand years last past; which for length of time, Numbers of Murders, and
manner of Cruelties, has outdone all the wickedness of Rome in its Heathen
State. Which is not at all likely, that a Vision should be given, and a
Revelation made, and called so, about a State that was almost expired, and the
most and great principal part wholly left out, and said nothing to. Who can
Imagine, that a careful Savior should be so full in his discoveries to the
Jewish Church, concerning their sufferings, and the time under Egypt, and
Babylon Literal; and be so short and lean to his Gospel Church, to leave them
altogether without any written Prospect, or extraordinary Prophet, to inform
them what should come to pass in the world, from the going off of the Power of
Rome Heathen, to the end of all the Churches Troubles, which have already
lasted above a thousand years? The Conceit of which is fit but for two Ranks of
men to Receive, ( viz.) The Roman Catholics and such Protestants as Look for
Antichrist to come at the end of the World, after the Restoration of the Jews
to their own Land, and building a material Temple at Jerusalem where Antichrist
shall sit three days and an half, or years, to kill two men called the two
witnesses.

3. If this last Babylon was wholly to terminate in Rome Heathen, then there
was no cause of wonderment and great admiration for a wise man, to see in a
Vision an Heathenish State, under a Diabolical Influence, to perform Actions
suitable to their State, and not contrary to their Professions for what matter
of Wonderment can it be to feel the Wind blow, to see the Sea foam and hear the
Waves Rage and Roar, when the Winds oppose his Effluxion? And what cause of
great wonderment and admiration for a wise man to see wicked Heathens oppose
and Persecute Christianity when it is so suitable to their Spirit, and
agreeable to their Profession so to do, we cannot yet understand, and we will
diligently Listen to them who will undertake to inform us: For the thing is
true, that a wise man did wonder at the sight he saw with great admiration,
Rev. 17. 6. I saw the Woman drunk with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus, and I
wondered with great admiration. Wondered! O strange! At what? To see that which
was Common to all ages, the Seed of the Serpent, that professed Heathenism, the
wicked, even the worst of the Wicked by Principles and profession, to plot
again^ the Righteous, and to gnash upon him wit^ their Teeth; Idolaters;
Professed Idolaters, t^ persecute the Servants, and Worshipers of the true God;
those that were born after the flesh and live after the flesh, to persecute
them tha^ were born of the Spirit, and lived after the Spirit; Surely if our
adversaries opinion w^ true in this Case, that Babylon is only Rom^ Heathen,
St. John had forgot that Cain kille^ Abel, and Ishmael persecuted Isaac; and
too^ not so much notice of the course of the World common to every Age, as Paul
did, wh^ said, But as he that was Born after the Flesh persecuted him that was
Born after the Spirit as it was then, so it is now: And what strang^ wonder is
in all this?

4. Rome Heathen never was espoused married, or united to the Lord Jesus, in
spiritual way, Visibly owning his Laws, and submitting to his Government, as a
Wife submits to, and obeys her Husband, and afterward casts him often, and
chooses another Hea^ and Husband; and therefore cannot be mystical Babylon, or
the great Whore: for though the Heathens were great Idolaters, yet were they
never charged with Spiritual Adultery^ nor could they, unless they had once by
visible profession, made a covenant with, o^ espoused themselves to the Lord
Jesus, which Rome Papal before its Apostasy did; Therefore Rome Heathen could
not be the great Whore or mystical Babylon.

5. Rome Heathen cannot be the Babylon ^et forth by St. John, unless she be
guilty of all the Christian Blood shed upon the Earth since the destruction of
Jerusalem, for as the guilt of all the Blood shed, from Righteous Abel, to the
Death of Zacharias, is by our Savior fixed upon Jerusalem, and cannot be
^emoved to another People, so the Blood of ^ll Martyrs and followers of Jesus
is by the Revelation fixed upon the last Babylon, Rev. ^7. 6. I saw a Woman
drunk with the Blood ^f the Saints, and of the Martyrs of Jesus, Chap. 18. v.
24. And in her was found the blood of the Prophets, of Saints, and of all that
were slain upon the Earth. But Rome ^eathen was not guilty of all the Christian
blood that was shed upon the Earth, by Mur^ers, Massacres, and Martyrdoms since
the ^istruction of Jerusalem: for to look back, ^ut for six hundred years last
past, in which ^me we shall find hundreds of thousands of pro^st Christians
most Butcherly and Barbarously ^ut to death for their Zeal and Love to the
^hristian Religion, in the respective Nations ^f Europe, before which the
Heathenish state ^f Rome was gone off about the space of six ^undred years, so
that if we will regard the full satisfying of this Prediction about Mystery
Babylon we must of necessity bring her down lower than the Heathenish State of
Rome.

6. Rome Heathen cannot be this Babylon under consideration, because the
discovery: of other Prophecies, relating to the same State, no way agree to
the Power of Rome Heathen.

1. This State of Babylon is called Mystery of Iniquity, This no way agrees to
Rome Heathen, but fully agrees to Rome Papal; compare 2 These. 2. 7. with Rev.
17. 7. (viz.) For the Mystery of Iniquiry does already Work -- The, Angel said
unto me; Wherefore did thou marvel? I will tell thee the mystery of the
Woman, and of the Beast that carries her.

2. The head of this State of Mystery Babylon, is called the Man of Sin by way
of Eminency, (...) not only beyond the common rank of Men, but beyond the
highes^ Sons of wickedness that went before him* And there is a great Truth in
this, for if w^ consider the Pope in respect of Pride, Hypocrisy, Idolatry, and
Blood, he is the most un^ paralleled Man of Sin.

3. This State or Mystery of Iniquity b^ began to work in the Apostles days,
which (...) no way applicable to the Power of Rome Hea^ then; for that did not
then begin, it being at that time in the very Meridian of its Greatness, and
universal Sovereignty, Luke 2. 1. And it came to pass in those days, that there
came out a Decree from Caesar Augustus, that all the World should be Taxed.

4. This man of Sin, mystery of Iniquity, or head of the Babylonish State, is
said to be let or hindered in his designs, He that now lets, will let, until
he be taken out of the way, 2 These. 2. 7. But now Rome Heathen had no let or
hindrance, either from the Word of God, or that declared it (as it was a Civil
Magistracy) to be Gods ordinance; nor from any opposite power, either Civil or
Military, they giving Laws to the greatest part of the World, and enjoying the
supreme Government of the best Kingdoms in the Universe, none being able to
Cope with them at that time.

5. This head of the Babylonish State is said to sit in the Temple of God,
which the Power of Rome Heathen did not do, neither in the Temple of Jerusalem,
nor in the Church, which is more properly the Temple of God: for the Jews kept
the possession of the Litteral Temple, till it was destroyed; and for the
Church of God, the Heathen Emperors never loved it so well, as to make their
residence in it, but the Bishop of Rome before he showed himself to be that
wicked one ( viz.) the man of Sin, did evidently sit in the Church or Temple of
God, and so fulfilled this Prophecy in the very Letter of it.

6. He (that is, the man of Sin, or head of this Babylonish State,) was to rise
by Apostasy, or falling away from the Christian Religion, 2 These. 2. 3. There
shall come a falling away first; exactly agreeing with another Prophecy to the
same purpose, 1. Tim. 4. 1. Now the Spirit speaks expressly, that in the
latter times some shall depart from the Faith, etc. But Rome Heathen did not
rise by Apostasy from the Christian Religion, or a departing from the Faith,
which they never professed, as is Evident to the whole World: Ergo. Rome
Heathen Cannot be this Babylonish State.

7. This man of Sin, or head of mystery Babylon, lay hid in the Apostles time
and was not revealed: but the Power of Rome Heathen did not then lie hid, or
wanted to be revealed; for it stood visible and high, upon a Hill, even upon
seven Hills according to the Roman Poet Ovid, (who lived about the very time of
Christ's being on Earth) in Lib. de Tristibus.

Sed quae de septem totum circumspicit Orbem
Montibus, Imperii Roma Deumque Locus.
That is,

But Rome which from her seven Hills, the whole Earth views around, the place
of Gods and Rule etc. Ergo Rome Heathen cannot be this Babylonish State.

8. This mystery of Iniquity is said, to oppose and exalt himself above all
that is called God, or that is worshipped, 2 These. 2. 4. But this the power of
Rome in its Heathen State did not do; for they Worshipped, offered Sacrifices,
and bore a reverence to their Gods, which by nature indeed were no Gods; and
it is only the head of Rome Papal, that runs down all Gods: but those of his own
making; Ergo Rome Papal, and not Rome Heathen, must of necessity be this
mystery of Iniquity.

9. The rise or coming of this mystery of Iniquity, is after the working of
Satan, 2 These. 2. 9. But the rise of the Romish greatness and power, when
Heathen, was not after the working of Satan, but was said by Daniel to be
produced by the Providence of God, or the four winds of Heaven; And by the
Apostle, to the Powers ordained of God, Romans 13. 1. Therefore Rome Heathen
cannot be the mystery of Iniquity etc. here meant*

10. This mystery of iniquity is not only said to come after the working of
Satan, 2 These. 2. 9. but also with all Power, etc. But the rise of Rome Heathen
was not after that manner: Ergo etc. To illustrate the first Proposition note,
that the Term (all Power) marks out the Romish Pope so notoriously, that
whosoever runs may read it; for if we do but impartially consider his impudent
usurpations upon Crowned Heads, and his pretenses of supremacy over the whole
Christian World; his proud imperious Decrees, Bulls, etc. his disposal of the
Kingdoms of Princes, and the Inheritances, yea the very Lives of private
Persons, of any Rank, that dare disobey him; his pretenses to shut and open
Heaven, Hell, and his feigned Purgatory; his carrying a symbol of that vast and
God like Power ( viz) a brace of Keys hanging at his Girdle: All these will
appear as clear demonstrations, that the head of Rome Papal, is the head of
Babylon, and the grand Impostor, or the capital manager of this mystery of
Iniquity, he having (most sacrilegiously) assumed to himself, all Heavenly
Power of Damning or Saving, and all Earthly Power, both Temporal or Civil, and
Ecclesiastical or Spiritual.

11. The wicked Babylonish State, comes forth with a great pretense of
Miracles, which are but false Signs, and lying Wonders, to deceive and cheat
the People; and by this means they Conquer Nations, and carry away their Kings
to their wicked Interest. This Rome Heathen did not do; for though the
Heathenish Power of Rome did Conquer Nations, and Countries, with their Kings;
yet it was by State policy, and force of Arms, not by pretended Miracles, false
Signs, and lying Wonders, therefore Rome Heathen cannot be this mystery of
Iniquity, or Babylonish State.

12. This wicked State, under consideration, is declared not only to depart
from the Faith by a Palpable Apostasy, but to forbid Marriage, and Command a
long Lent, and many other fast days, whereon some sorts of Meat are prohibited
to be eaten; which does so fully agree to the Papal State of Rome, that nothing
can be more plain, unless the Spirit had expressly told us; this will be
fulfilled by Rome Papal, for these two things we have their Canons upon Record,
the which if none can show the like of the Heathen State of Rome, then Rome
Papal shall carry the Title of this mystery of Iniquity, and Babylonish State.

7. If the Babylon under consideration, be only confined to the Power of
Heathen Rome; then there is a more evident, and apparent mystery upon the
State, or Power of Rome Heathen, than upon any Power o^ State that went before
it, or shall come after it; for so the Text Imports, Rev. 17. 5* And upon her
forehead was a name Written, MYSTERY BABYLON THE GREAT, etc. But there did no
such mystery appear, upon the Power, or State of Rome Heathen, therefore this
Babylon cannot terminate there; what great mystery appeared upon the Power and
State of Rome Heathen, more than appeared upon the Power and State, of the
three foregoing Monarchies?

8. This Babylon cannot be confined to the Power of Rome only in its Heathen
State, because Babylon is to continue till the good people shall (with the
Horns that did support her, which is the last part of the wicked and
Persecuting Power, answerable to the te^ Toes in Daniels great Image) reward
and destroy her, for the injury that she did unto them; according to these
three Texts of Scripture, Rev. 18. 4. Dan 7. 22, 26, 27. Rev. 17. 16. And I
heard another Voice from Heaven, saying, Come out of her, my People, that ye be
not partakers of her Sins, etc. ver. 6. Reward her even as she has rewarded
you, and deal unto her double according to her Works: In the Cup that she has
filled, fill to her double: How much she has Glorified her self and lived
Deliciously, so much Torment and sorrow give her. And the ten Horns which thou
saw upon the Beast, these shall hate the Whore, and shall make her desolate
and naked, and eat her Flesh, and burn her with Fire: which the Power of Rome
in its Heathen State felt not, but ended its Course without being destroyed by
good People, and the ten Horns, which is the last part of the Image Government.
And in the days of these Kings, ( viz.) (ten Toes, ten Horns, ten Kings,) shall
the God of Heaven set up a Kingdom which shall never be destroyed: and the
Kingdom shall not be le^t to another People, but it shall break in pieces and
consume all these Kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever. Which could not be
fulfilled in what Constantine did in the time of Maxentius, as Dr. Hammond
would have us believe, for these three reasons.

(1.) Because the ten Horns, that afterward the Roman Power fell into, were
not come up, and so could not destroy the Power of Rome in its Heathen state.
(2.) Because Babylons Persecution, mystery and confusion, did not utterly
cease, which it must have done, so as to rise no more for ever, if the power of
Rome Heathen destroyed by Constantine, had been this mystery Babylon. (3.)
Because tho there might be a body of good people with Constantine, when he
overthrew Maxentius, yet the Power of the Kingdom was not so Established in the
hand of good People, as not afterward to be Left to others, as the Text
affirms. And the Kingdom shall not be Left to another People. For (as we shall
anon show) the Kingdom or Power that ceased to be in the hands of Heathens, and
by mighty and Divine Providence came to be in the hands of worthy and renowned
Christian Emperors came afterward into the hands of very Devils incarnate, who
acted all the violence of the Heathen Power over again, and indeed out-did
them.
9. Those that are for confining this Babylon to the Power of Rome in its
Heathen State, are not well aware what they do; for if they do Demand it, their
opposits who hold it to be Rome Papal, may Grant it for arguments sake: But
then the remedy is worse than the disease; for they slip into such a Precipice,
as neither Baronius, Bellarmine, Dr. Hammond or the Rhemists, can save or
deliver them from. The true State of the Case (...) this:

Rome Heathen is Mystery Babylon; th^^ say the Papists: And the more willing
they are to say so because it is a good argument to Prove that Peter was at
Rome he subscribing his first Epistle from Babylon, 1 Pet. 5. 13* The Church
that is at Babylon Elected together with you Saluteth you, etc. But this being
allowed, the worst is to come. This Babylon is Destroyed, when the power of
Rome Heathen is taken away, so as to be no more for ever; but then what
Condition does the State of Babylon fall into? Does it become the Throne of the
Lamb* the City of the living God, the Habitation of Holiness, and dwelling
place of Zion, the true Church, the place of the holy ones, and Saints of the
most High? O No! What then? Hearken, and an Angel from Heaven shall tell you,
Rev. 18. 1. 2. And after these thing (of the horns hating the Whore, making of
her Naked, and burning her flesh with Fire). I saw another Angel come down from
heaven, having great Power, and the Earth was Lightened with his glory; And he
Cried mightily with a strong voice, saying, Babylon the Great is fallen, is
fallen, and is become the Habitation of Devils, and the hold of every foul
Spirit, and a Cage of every unclean and hateful Bird. Now, you Papists, if you
will have Babylon to be Rome Heathen, take it, but then make Rome Papal better
than an Habitation of Devils if you can.

If it be not Rome Heathen, then adieu to Dr. Hammond, and the Rhemists; we
have what we desire. If it be, then Rome Papal ^s a far worse (if possible)
than Rome Heathen, ^n Babylon never was: And then what a fine Church do the
People make themselves?

10. If the place, Seat and City of Rome was not utterly ruined (so as to be no
more for ever as a place of Commerce, Trade, and Humane Society) when the
Heathen Power ceased, then Rome Heathen cannot be this Babylon, because at the
ending and downfall of this Babylon, the Place, Seat, and City will be utterly
ruined so as to be no more a place of Trade, Commerce, or Humane Society, Rev.
17. 16. And the ten horns which thou saw upon the Beast, these shall hate
the Whore, and shall make her desolate, and shall eat her flesh, and bur^ her
with fire. v. 18. And the woman which thou saw is that great City which
reigns over the Kings of the Earth, Revel. 18. 8* For her sins which God has
remembered which have reached unto heaven, therefore shall he^ Plagues come in
one Day, Death, and Mourning, and Famine, and she shall be utterly burn^ with
Fire: For strong is the Lord God w^^ Judges her, v. 11, 12, 13. All sorts of
Merchandise, Traffic, Trade, and Commer^ with Humane Society, shall cease, so
as to be no more in her at all; and the good things which she in fullness
enjoyed before, even al^ things that were Dainty and Goodly, are no^ Departed*
from her, and shall find them (...) more at all, ver. 14. For in an hour is s^^
made desolate. And a mighty Angel took up a Stone, like a great Millstone, and
cast it into the Sea, saying. Thus with violence shall that great City Babylon
be thrown down, and shall be found no more at all, ver. 21. And the Voice of
Harpers, and Musicians, and of Pipers, and Trumpeters, shall be heard no more
at all in thee; And no Craftsmen of whatsoever Craft he be, shall be found any
more in thee; and the sound of a Millstone shall be heard no more at all in
thee; ver. 22. And the light of the Candle shall shine no more at all in thee;
and the Voice of the Bridegroom, and of the Bride, shall be heard no more at
all in thee; verse 23.

But the Place, Seat and City of Rome was not so utterly ruined as to be no
more, for ever a place of Trade, Traffic, Merchandise, and humane society,
when the Heathen Power of Rome ended, Ergo Rome Heathen cannot be the Whore of
Babylon under present consideration, whose Seat or City, has since had a
Powerful Government, Reigning in Pride and Pomp, for some hundreds of years.

VII. As touching that notion of the Papists, (i. e.) that by this great* Whore
mystery Babylon is meant Rome after she shall Apostatize from the Pope to
Paganism again at the latter end of the World it is such an opinion that has no
foundation in Scripture, nor in the Judgment of the Ancients; besides, some of
the Papists themselves reject it as improbable and detestable, as our
Annotators observe, for then Sr. John in the Revelations passes by in utter
silence, all the transactings that have been in the World, under Papal Rome,
even ever since the seven head or Christian Emperors Government went off of the
Stage, which is near 1260 years which is ridiculous to suppose.

Besides it cannot be understood of Rome in either of the other notions, as
has been proved.

1. Because Antichrist is to sit in the Temple of God, 2 These. 2. 4. as God,
therefore not in a Pagan City. The mystery of Iniquiry was working in the
Apostles time, but v. 7. the Roman Empire hindered the appearance of Antichrist,
till the Popes had wrung Rome out of their hands, and were the sole rulers
there, then Antichrist showed himself.

2. Because there is nothing said of this great Whore or this Babylon, but
admirably agrees to Rome in its present state.

We shall conclude with the whole* If by mystery Babylon, is not meant the
whole World of wicked men, nor old Chaldean Babylon, nor Jerusalem, the Turks
nor Saracens, nor Rome in its Heathenish State, nor Rome after she shall desert
the Pope, and turn again to Paganism, then it must be Papal Rome, or the Romish
Church; But she is none of the former six we have proved: Ergo she is Papal
Rome.

Now to make way for the second Chapter, we shall state this argument following.

If all the marks and characters left us upon divine records, to know mystery
Babylon by, do most aptly and directly agree to Rome Papal, then Rome Papal is
mystery Babylon, But all the marks and characters left upon divine record do
most aptly and directly agree to Rome Papal, or the present State and Church of
Rome: Ergo Rome Papal is mystery Babylon.

CHAP. II. Wherein is clearly proved that all the marks of mystery Babylon does
fully meet in, and agree to Rome Papal, or the Church of Rome.
FIrst of all let it be considered, Babylon is set forth by a Woman, which
Imports either a single Person ranked in the feminine Gender; or a body of
People related to some Head, Husband, or public person, to whom she is joined
in Wedlock, by Covenant or Matrimonial Contract, as Eve was related to Adam,
and therefore called woman; or as Judah and Israel, who were Joined in Covenant
with God, and therefore called a woman, or as the true Church now Married or
Joined to Christ, and therefore called a Woman. A single Person as Eve was, she
cannot be, because the Character given of her in respect of her State and
Actions, does no way Comport with it: she must therefore be a body of People,
related to some Head, Husband, or Public Person, as Judah and Israel of old
was, who are often called by the Title of a Woman: and in like manner Babylon,
before the Degeneracy, where a People, Joined in Matrimonial Contract, by
Gospel Covenant and Profession to the Son of God.

1. Mystery Babylon ( it appears from hence) Imports a body of people that were
once united in a solemn Gospel Covenant to the Son of God and hence
Metaphorically called a woman and I saw a woman set, etc. And the woman was
arrayed in Purple and Scarlet, etc.

Parallel. Rome Papal or Church of Rome is a body, a great body of People,
which before their apostasy were a true Church, by Gospel Covenant and
profession united to the Son of God as her public head and husband, Romans 1. 6.
Among whom are ye also the called of Jesus Christ. To all that be in Rome
beloved of God called to be Saints.

2. Mystery Babylon is a City, a very great Mystical City in a threefold
respect.

1. In respect of power, Rev 17.

2. In respect of people, Rev. 18. 10. 16. 18, 19, 21.

3. In respect of place, or Residence, where this power and people is seated,
City being indefinitely taken for either of these, or comprehending all, as in
these Instances, Psalm. 121. Isa. 14. 31. Acts 19. 28.

Parallel. So likewise the Church of Rome is a City, a very great mystical
City, and may be so called in a threefold consideration.

1. In respect of power, which is twosold; 1. Civil. 2. Ecclesiastical,
signified by two horns like a Lamb.

2. In respect of people, which are great, the fame of which people as a
mystical City or Church was great before the power and chief dominion of the
place was joined with it as a Church which came in by the Apostasy, Romans 1. 8.
First I thank my God through Jesus Christ for you all, that your faith is
spoken of throughout the whole World. And since they adulterated from their
primitive Purity, and become Antichristian, they have been and still are a
great people, no united body calling themselves a Church of Christ in respect
of number and for fame coming near them.

3. Great in respect of place or chief residence where this power and great
people are seated, and by way of eminency, as a Mystical City, it may indeed
well bear the Bell away. For what people have given further occasion to be
spoken of in respect of power, people and place of chief residence throughout
the whole world as Rome has, as will hereafter be made more evident.

III. Mystery Babylon is not only a mystica^ City and Woman, but a bad Woman
and City, a City of Confusion. For so the word Babel or Babylon signifies, viz.
Evil or Confusion

Parallel. Rome Papal or Church of Rome is not only a mystical Woman, City, but
a very evil Woman, a City indeed of confusion; there is the name of the lamb
much spoken of, but his doctrine contemned slighted and under valued and his
Laws and Ordinances trample^ upon, and notoriously violated, his institution
not regarded, nor his example imitated, either by the Bishop himself, his
Cardinals or inferior Orders, they having his humility and self-denial only in
their mouths, but none of it i^ their hearts, like those the apostle speaks
of who in words profess they know God, but in work^ deny him. For under this
verbal and pretended humility lies covered the greatest pride in the world, and
under this verbal meekness and self-denial the greatest oppression, cruelty,
superstition, covetousness, vain glory and love of the world that ever was
manifest, as appears by their pompous and glistering garbs, their cruel
persecutions, and the vast sums of money brought in from all parts of their
dominions, by sleights, cunning and deceitful Cheats: Besides a mere hodg-podg
of principles, one Order or Fraternity professing that which another writes
against, and cries down; which is the more strange to come from a Church
infallible, and that cannot err. Besides the strange mixtures in their visible
worship, of traditions, and humane inventions, of lying and diabolical tricks,
of blessing by a Cross, Pardons and Indulgences for money, consecrating holy
water, and cleansing by it, which are too numerous and tedious to relate, and
less needful to mention, because so well known to all men. And let any people
in the Christian world pretending to religion be compared to them, for
supernumeraries, trifling and ^nsignificant ceremonies crowded into their
pretended worship; Nay, let all the people in the Christian world be laid in
the balance against the Church of Rome in this respect, and they will be found
inconceivably wanting, for which we have this Reason to judge her to be Babylon
or the City of confusion.

If there is more confusion (in contrariety of principles, practices,
contradicting pretensions, supernumeraries, foolish and unscriptur^ inventions
crowded into their visible worship in the Church of Rome, than is to be found
amongst any sort of people pretending to Religion, in all the world besides,
then is Rome Papal or the Church of Rome the great Babylon or City of
confusion; But there is more confusion in the forementioned respects to be
found in the Church of Rome than in any other Church or people in the world
pretending to Religion: Ergo Rome Papal is Mystery Babylon.

IV. Mystery Babylon is not only set forth (...) a Woman, and City of
Confusion, but is also called A WHORE, a word which carries in it, one of the
highest Impeachments, yet no other that was given to Israel, Judah and
Jerusalem in the days of old upon the very same reason? Isa. 57 3. and 16. 17.
and Hos. 4. 8. 5. 3. For they being joined in covenant with God (as a woman is
to an husband) to be the Lords, to serve him in Obedience and Subjection, did
like to an adulterous Woman, break Wedlock, and set up other Lovers, or Idols
in his stead, and continued so a long time, till a Bill of Divorce w^ given,
and God proclaimed them Adulteresses, and that he was not their husband, nor
they his wife, but a whore and divorced; Yet it is observable, that they, tho
they worshipped Idols, cried, The Temple, the Temple of the Lord are we, and
would by all means be accounted the Church of God.

Paral. Even so in like manner Rome Papal, or the Church of Rome, is not only
called a Woman; But according to Scripture History, and notorious matter of
Fact, she is a whore, having utterly adulterated from what she was once, and so
may justly bear that brand or black name, for in the Apostles time she joined
her self to the Lord, to be his, by firm ties of a Gospel covenant and
profession, and as a renowned Spouse of Jesus Christ, owned and professed him
in the time of heathenish Rome, and received the Apostles and Servants of God
amongst them, and withstood the fury of the Emperors, suffering Persecution,
and had their faith spoken of throughout the whole World; but yet after all
this, like Israel of old, She left God, Jesus Christ, and almost all his Holy
Laws, and Ordinances, and made Idols to her self of Saints, Angels, Relics
and Images, upon which she doted, and forsook the Son of God, upon the working
and appearance of the vile person or man of Sin, who exalted himself into the
place of Christ; and became her head, by which means she is so far degenerated
from what she once was, that she retains nothing of what really appertains to
true godliness, but the bare names of God, Christ and Christian Religion,
having corrupted the true worship of the Son of God, her first Husband, and
notoriously abandoned obedience and subjection to him, taking this vile person
the Pope to be her head, and chief guide, and setting him up in the place of,
and in dignity above Christ, her first head and only guide of her youth, and
yet (like Israel of old) still cries, The true Church, the Holy Catholic
Church, and Mother Church are we; having on her forehead a strange mystery
written, i. e. God, Christ, Truth, Verity, Unity, Universality, Infallibility;
And yet with that on her forehead, and in her heart too, is written, Devil,
Pope, Lying, Blasphemy, Idolatry, Deceit, Perjury, Blood and Horrible Cruelty
toward the best of men, professing Christ and Religion in uprightness and
truth: for which her abominable Idolatry, and change of her first Head and
Husband, and setting up this vile Person with which she commits most horrid
lewdness or Spiritual Whoredom, together with the Kings of the Earth, she is
ranked by the Holy Ghost, amongst the worst of Women, and styled the great
Whore, and as her type and predecessor of old, a well favored Harlot, but
since her Spiritual Adultery and Whoredom has been so apparently proved upon
her, by many worthy and eminent authors, or Protestant Writers, we shall
conclude this black character with this following Argument and proceed to the
next mark.

If there be no body of professing People, in the Christian World, that have so
apparently, declined, or adulterated from what they once were, deserting the
holy headship, doctrine, example, and right government of Jesus Christ, having
set up another visible, public, and universal head of the Church, in room and
stead of him; whose Power, Laws and Edicts, are preferred above and before the
authority, laws and precepts of the Lord Jesus Christ, as Rome Papal or Church
of Rome has done: then the Church of Rome is mystery Babylon, or the great
Whore spoken of.

But there is no body of professing people in the Christian World, nor
throughout the Earth, who have so apparently declined, adulterated, and
deserted the Holy Headship, Doctrine, Example and right Government of Jesus
Christ, ut supra, as Rome Papal or Church of Rome has done.

Ergo Rome Papal or Church of Rome, is mystery Babylon the great Whore.

If any should think this argument not weighty, let them show if they can, that
some other people different from the Church of Rome, have made as great or like
change in point of Religion and Headship, and matter^ thereto pertaining, so as
this black character of Whore, great Whore, may more fitly and fully be made to
meet upon them, and we must confess our argument not weighty, but till then, we
conclude it carries conviction in the Bowels of it.

V. Mystery Babylon is not only set forth by a Woman, City of Confusion and
Whore, but also a great City, and great Whore, and the great City was divided,
etc. Rev. 16. 19* And the Woman which thou saw is that great City, Rev. 17.
18. I will show thee the Judgment of the great Whore, Rev. 17. 1. I think it
necessary to reassume this character again, the Spirit of God noting this as a
most eminent mark of her.

Paral: Now that the Church of Rome is not only a Whore and Mystical City but a
very great City, and Whore, will yet appear more evident.

1. She has a great name; no name so great in the Christian World, as the name
of Rome; she is called a Queen, and being joined by Contract to her universal
Head, viz. the Pope or Man of Sin, she would seem to be far greater than
Emperors, and temporal Princes, and pretends a power to give them their Crowns,
and set them upon their Heads, and kick them off again at pleasure.

2. Great in Power. She gives Rules and Laws to Kingdoms, advances her
Ecclesiastical Edicts above Temporal; she sets the Pope, and the chiefest of
her Sons, above secular Jurisdiction; makes them unacountable, and pretends a
power, to Absolve, to Bless and Curse at her pleasure, and without controversy
the lesser is blessed of the greater.

3. Great in multitude. There are no People besides, that are in a spiritual
united Body, and visible community, professing Christianity, comparable to her,
for multitude, or the vast numbers of her Children.

4. Great in actions, vile actions, such as deposing and poisoning Princes,
fomenting jealousies, raising Wars, setting Nations together by the Ears,
invading rights and properties of Nations and Kingdoms by subtle insnarements,
and cunning stratagems, making tumults and uproars, contriving Masscres,
burning Cities, and carrying on dreadful devastations, where she is gainsaid;
and that which adds to her greatness, is that invincible confidence she has,
that all persons and things are made for her, and given to her, so that all
things she does are allowed as Legal and Just in Heaven, tho the actions are
most vile and as unhumane as any can be, in the Judgment of any undeceived
mortal: from whence we shall frame this argument.

Arg. If there be no united Body of People, or visible Community in the
Christian World, that is so great in name, power, multitudes, and actions, vile
actions, as Rome Papal or Church of Rome has been, and still is -- then the
Church of Rome is mystery Babylon.

But there is no united Body of People, or Community in the Christian World
that is so great in name, power, multitude, and actions, vile actions, as Rome
Papal or Church of Rome.

Ergo Rome Papal is this great City, Whore or Mystery Babylon.

VI. Mystery Babylon is said to sit upon many Waters, which is expounded to be
People, Multitudes, Nations and Tongues, Rev. 17. 1, 17. And he said unto me,
the Waters which thou saw, where the Whore sits, are people, and
multitudes, and nations, and tongues, etc. which according to the learned Mede,
Peter Du Moulin, and other famous Protestant writers, is more than a third part
of the ten considerable parts, which the Roman Monarchy fell into, not long
before the Pope that man of Sin, and Head of mystery Babylon, assumed the
imperial Seat and Throne, which afterward became ten Kingdoms with Crowned
Heads, assisting the Beast against the Lamb, and Persecuting of the Saints,
distinguished into ten Kingdoms of the Empires, I. of Germany. II. France. III.
England. IV. Scotland. V. Denmark. VI. Polonia. VII. The Kingdom of Spain.
VIII. The Kingdom of Navarre. IX. The Kingdom of Hungary. X. The Kingdom of
Naples and Sicily.

All which Rome Papal had in possession, as our French author says, in the
days of Pope Leo the tenth.

Paral. So then it appears evidently that the Church of Rome has directly this
mark of Mystery Babylon also, she sitting upon many Waters, viz. people,
multitudes, nations, and languages, that she sat upon, or ruled over, more
than one third part of the ten, which was formerly under the Roman Empire, in
its civil state, is evident, which (more* than one third part) has since
fallen into ten Kingdoms, under the Government of ten Crowned Heads, and have
all agreed to give their Power to this last Beast (as they received power as
Kings one hour with him) according to what was foretold, which makes good what
St. John ^n the Apocalypse has made known; as also Daniel concerning the
little horn, which had ^ mouth speaking great things, whose looks were more
stout than his fellows, Dan. 7. by whom three of the first horns of the Roman
power in its civil state, were plucked up by the roots, and in their place
succeeded ten Kings or Crowned Heads, who have their Crowns given to them by
this last Beast; (and as they had their Crowns given by, and hold their Kingly
power under the Pope, little Horn, last Beast, or man of Sin,) in requital of
his fatherly care in giving his Sons so great a Patrimony, so they give their
power to him, and engaged against the Lamb, in making War with, and persecuting
the Saints of the most High, and will do so till the Word of God, or Prophecy
of Daniel, and Revelations of St. John, etc. is fulfilled; which ten Crowned
Heads answer to the ten Toes in Nebuchadnezzars Image, and to the ten Horns in
this 17th of the Apocalypse, which are so concerned in the Beasts Kingdom; and
who will at last by the gracious providence of God (that is some of them) be
overcome by the Lamb, and turn to hate the Whore, and make her desolate, whom
before they for a long time joined with and supported, and for whose pleasure
they did persecute the Saints; which ten States or Kingdoms are by our French
author Peter du Moulin, (in his book called the accomplishment of the Prophecy,
page 345.) distinguished, as we before showed; all which Kingdoms, as King
James the First, in his learned works makes out, took their rise with Rome
Papal, upon the division or ruin of the Roman Empire in its civil state, the
body of which Kingdoms may well be called many waters, viz. people, multitudes,
nations and tongues, or people of several languages, which were as well known
to have been under the Usurpation, and Jurisdiction of Papal Rome, as it is
known there have been and still are Papists in the World, which does fully
answer to the very letter of the text, viz. The Waters which thou saw
whereon the Whore sits, are people, and multitudes, and nations, and
tongues, Rev. 17. 18.

2. This is very evident yet further by her making all the European Kingdoms,
and Merchants thereof Rich, that traffic by Sea, by the great expense of all
commodities, which are swallowed up, by reason of her pride and bravery, which
could never be effected, unless she had nations, and multitudes, under her
jurisdiction to contribute to her great pride and luxury.

3. A third Instance to confirm it is, the numberless number of good Christians
she has preyed upon and murdered, in most of these Kingdoms for no other cause,
but for witnessing against her Idolatry and Usurpation, which shows what power
she had over these nations, and tongues, etc.

4. And lastly, The vast sums of Money she has extorted and squeezed from these
Kingdoms and Nations, to uphold her pretended right, preheminency, and
usurpation over them, which you have an account of by several worthy Writers,
who fully witness to the truth of what we say upon this respect.

And from the whole we shall draw this argument and proceed.

Arg. If there be no Body of people, professed Church or State in the World
(under any single denomination) that sits upon, i. e. commands, or bears rule
over people, multitudes, nations, and tongues, as Rome Papal or Church of Rome
does; then Rome Papal or the Church of Rome, is Mystery Babylon.

But there is no Body of people, professed Church or State (under any single
denomination) that sits upon, i. e. commands, or bears rule over people,
multitudes, nations, and tongues, as Rome Papal or Church of Rome does; Ergo
Rome Papal, or Church of Rome, is Mystery Babylon.

To the establishing this argument, let it be considered that the whole state
of the Christian World consists but of these two parts, viz. the Church of Rome
considered as Head and Body, and those who dissent from her, who are so
inconsiderable, whether the Waldenses, Albingenses, Hugonots or other parties
of Protestants, that no one party of, nay if we put them altogether, can be
said to sit upon, i. e. command, or bear Rule over people, multitudes, nations,
and tongues, to answer to this Character of Mystery Babylon; the Waldenses and
Hugonots, have been and still are a Persecuted People; the Lutherans never got
up so high as to command many States, or Kingdoms, or people of many languages;
Great Britain (tho a Protestant State or Kingdom,) comes not up to answer this
character, much less the seven united Provinces that of late times revolted
from the Crown of Spain; so that if Rome Papal has done so, and no other
people that dissent from her, have ever yet nor could do the like, then this
proves Rome Papal that great Whore viz, Mystery Babylon that sits upon many
Waters, etc.

VII. The seventh mark or character of Mystery Babylon is this, viz. She is
such a Whore, that Kings and great men of the Earth, are said to commit
Fornication with her; see the text Rev. 17. 2. With whom the Kings of the Earth
have committed Fornication, i. e Spiritual Fornication* or Fornication in a
mystery, or after a mysterious manner, such as Jerusalem of old was charged
with, 2 Chronicles. 22. 1. Isa. 16. 26. Which was a following like Idolatry that
this Woman Babylon has done, viz. corrupting the true worship of God, and
adoring Idols, or making of Images and Representations of the true God, by
which they pretended to worship him; and so great was her Fornication that it is
said she did corrupt the Earth with it.

Paral. Now that Rome Papal, or Church of Rome, has this black mark and
character upon her, is most evident, viz. such a Whore that the Kings of the
Earth, have committed Fornication with her, she having corrupted the Earth with
her filthy Fornications, they following her abominable Superstition and
Idolatry.

1. For First, Has she adored the Pope, as her Lord God, universal Head, and
infallible Bishop, setting him up above all Laws? The Kings of the Earth have
been so intoxicated, with the cup of her Fornication, that they likewise have
done the same.

2. Has and does she worship the Virgin Mary, Angels, and many departed
Saints? Even so have and do many of the Kings of the Earth likewise.

3. Has she adored Images, the Crucifix, the Host, and Pictures of pretended
Saints? Even so she has caused the Kings of the Earth to do likewise.

4. Has she foolishly, and Idolatroully de based her self with the adoration
of the Relick^ of known and unknown Saints? So the very same has she caused the
Kings and great men to do also.

5. Has she grossly, and superstitiously worshipped the true God, in a false
manner? By crouding in an innumerous train of detestable, and foolish fopperies
into his worship, and pretended service, which he never ordained, as Candles,
Candlesticks, Altars, Vestments, Spittle, Salt, Oil, Holy Water, Beads, and a
world of such like trumpery? So have the Kings and Noble ones of the Earth done
and still do; as the Emperor of Germany, Kings of France, Spain, Portugal and
England, formerly and of late also; from whence we will draw this argument.

Arg. If there be no Body of people in the Christian World, pretending to a
Church State, that have set up Idolatry to such a degree, and with whom the
Kings of the Earth have jointly agreed, and complied, as Rome Papal or Church
of Rome has done, then Rome Papal or Church of Rome, is this mystery Babylon
spoken of.

But there is no Body of people in the Christian World, pretending to a Church
State, that has set up Idolatry to such a degree, and with whom the Kings of
the Earth have complied, as Rome Papal, etc. has done, Ergo the Church of Rome
is Mystery Babylon.

To reinforce this argument, let any man that will become an advocate for the
Church of Rome, show that any people, differing and dissenting from the Church
of Rome, are guilty of like Idolatry, with whom the Kings of the Earth have
complied, as aforementioned, and we will reject this argument; but if this
Character does more fitly, nay directly meet in Papal Rome, our argument is
good and unanswerable.

VIII. Another Scripture Mark and Character of Mystery Babylon is this, i. e.
she does not only cause the Kings of the Earth to commit Fornication with her,
but she has intoxicated the minds and hearts of multitudes, and corrupted
great part of the World, with the Wine of her Fornication, even the common sort
of people; see Rev. 17. 2. And the inhabitants of the Earth, have been made
drunk with the Wine of her Fornication, etc.

Paral. That Rome Papal or Church of Rome has not only caused Kings of the
Earth, and great men, to commit fornication with her, by dancing after her
Pipes, in all her mysterious allurements, and detestable errors, but has also
intoxicated the Minds and Hearts of multitudes, and miserably corrupted and
bewi^ched great part of the World, or common sort of people, by her erroneous
and wicked doctrine: O what a world of poor people has she a long time
deceived, and made to commit Spiritual Fornication with her, in Italy, Germany,
Poland, France, Spain, Portugal, Ireland, and lastly in England and Scotland
too, besides many other Countries!

1. As first, Is it not a strange intoxication, that such a multitude of the
Inhabitants of the Earth, should believe, that a wicked man should be appointed
of God to be the Vicar of Christ, as if God had no more regard to the Honor of
his own Name, and the good of his Church, and Dignity of his Son, than to
substitute a Child of the Devil, (as all wicked men are) to be Vicegerent to
the most holy Jesus, in the highest transactions that relate to Heaven and the
Souls of Men? Surely if God shut Judas out of his Bishopric for his
wickedness, tho an Apostle, it cannot stand consistent with his truth and
holiness, to set up or allow of a wicked and imperious Pope, got up to the
highest pinnacle of pride, and make him the Immediate Deputy, and successor of
Christ, and to impose a Wolf as Shepherd upon the universal Church.

2. One who says that he is an infallible Judge, to determine Articles of
Faith, and endued with power to Impose them, upon great Penalties; so that as a
Lord he has Dominion over Men's Faith, Consciences, and Souls too; which the
Apostles disclaimed.

3. Is it not a strange intoxication, that such a multitude of poor People
should believe, that the Church cannot err, tho God and Thousands of good Men,
see and fully know, there are not such abominable Errors in Principles, nor
such villainous Enormities, cursed Actions, cruel and immoral Practices, in the
World? Nay, such that Turks and Infidels do abhor. Yet this doctrine that the
Church is infallible, and cannot err, the poor deluded multitude believes, and
hate, nay kill, others that oppose it, and venture Body and Soul upon it.

4. Is it not a strange intoxication, that such a multitude of the Inhabitants
of the Earth, should believe, that the Pope tho never so wicked, nay a priest
(tho he be a treacherous villain, a contriver of Murder, and an abominable
Adulterer) has power to absolve his equals and fellow Sinners from all their
Sins, tho directly committed against God; If he come to confession? tho the
pretended penitent keeps his old evil habit, of wickedness still; contrary to
what God and Jesus Christ in his blessed Word says; where it is recorded that
it is God alone that forgiveth Sins, and blo^^eth out our iniquities, and that a
man must be born again; i. e. the evil habits must be changed, and all wicked
practices must be forsaken; or no forgiveness nor entering into the Kingdom of
heaven, John 3. 3.

5. Is it not a strange piece of Witchcraft and Intoxication, that such a
multitude of the inhabitants of the Earth, should believe that there is a
Purgatory, which is no part of Heaven nor Hell, and that men may be redeemed
out of it with Money? tho God says, The redemption of the Soul is precious,
and cease for ever, Psalm. 49. i. e. After the offering of the Body of Jesus
Christ once for all, and that it is only the Blood of Christ which purges and
cleanses from all sin, 1 Jo. 1. 9. and that we are not redeemed with
corruptible things, as Silver and Gold, but with the precious Blood of Christ,
as a Lamb without Blemish and without Spot.

6. Is it not a strange Intoxication, and a clear demonstration that the
Inhabitants of the Earth have drunk of the Wine of this Whores Fornication,
that such a multitude of poor Souls should believe, that a filthy and wicked
Priest, by speaking a few Words can not only make Bread and Wine sacred, but
also turn and change the Bread into the real Body and Blood of the Son of God,
and make whole Christ of a pittyful Wafercake, by a charm of five Latin words,
viz. Hoc est enim corpus meum; and this transubstantiated Idol they fall down
before, and adore as their Maker, anathematizing and cursing all that shall
deny this Idol of indignation, to be adored with the highest degree of Divine
Worship, which is proper to God only, for she says it is her God, as she
sings in her Roman Missal.

Plagas sicut Thomas non intueor, Ri^^mus St. Thom. adsac^. Eucharist.
Deum tamen meum te confiteor. Wounds as Thomas did I not see, Yet do I confess
thee my God to be.

In this, as one observes, they outdo the vanity of the Heathens, who thought
none was so witless, as to believe, that that which is eaten is a God, yet this
God of theirs these Canibals devour, even Flesh, Blood and Bones in their
conceit, the poor deluded multitude believieng contrary to their own natural
Reason, and all their senses, that they eat real Flesh, when they eat that
Wafer-cake, the substance nor quality being changed, the Form, Color and Taste
of Bread remaining after the Words of Consecration.

7. Is it not a strange Intoxication, that such a multitude of people should
believe, that evil and idle doctrine of hers, viz. that no person, how good and
pious so ever he be, can be saved, out of the Pale of their polluted, ungodly,
and devilish Church, notwithstanding it is a great doubt and question whether
any member of such a false Church can be saved, since the Holy Scripture says,
that no Idolater has any inheritance in the Kingdom of God; and again, that If
any man worship the Beast, and his Image, and receive his mark in his Forehead,
or in his Hand, the same shall drink of the Wine of the wrath of God, etc. Rev.
14. 9, 10. And he shall be tormented with Fire and Brimstone, in the presence
of the Holy Angels, and in the presence of the Lamb, etc. Besides, considering
the Scripture directly holds forth that all who are born again, or truly
regenerate, shall be saved, let them be of what Church they will, provided they
are sound in the essentials of the Christian Faith, and not guilty of Idolatry,
for certainly the new birth comprehends, a change of all such erroneous
principles, as well as of other evil and corrupt habits and wicked practices.

8. Is it not a strange kind of Spiritual Intoxication, that such a number of
the Inhabitants of the Earth, should believe, that it is no Sin to Lie, Swear,
and For-swear, to Kill, Slay, and Murder, such they call Heretics (tho never
so Godly) if it be for the cause of Holy Church, with a thousand things of the
like nature, which the people do believe, and dare not disown upon their
Salvation, but boldly adventure to engage at all opportunitys to Fight, and
make War, burn Citys, lay waste Countries and Kingdoms, and destroy by
Massacres, and all manner of Murdering ways, all Ranks, and Degrees of Men,
who oppose the horrid principles of this vile Church, and cursed practices of
these Sons of Belial. Nay they will go boldly to their own deaths, when
convicted and justly condemned for such like villainies, and deny to day what
they were convicted of yesterday, and tho never so notoriously guilty, yet will
take it upon their Death, they are as innocent as the Child unborn; what can
this be, tho they drink it down as sweet Wine, but an Infusion of the rankest
and most deadly Poison that the lowest celler of the bottomless Pit can afford,
the very Wine of the Whores Fornication, and the most dangerous Intoxication in
the World? Which is attended with this aggravation, i. e. the best medicines of
the wisest Physicians will not recover them; for Babylon having made the
multitude drunk with this sort of Poisoned Wine, how rare is it to have any to
come to themselves, or to their right minds again? And to shut up this Head
take this argument.

Arg. If no people in the Christian World have made the multitude of the common
People, or Inhabitants of the Earth drunk, i. e. corrupted and Intoxicated
their minds with wicked Lies, Falsehood, and detestable Doctrines, as Rome Papal
or Church of Rome has done; Then Rome Papal, etc. is Mystery Babylon.

But no People in the Christian World, have made the multitude of the
Inhabitants of the Earth Drunk, i. e. corrupted, and intoxicated their minds by
wicked Lies, falsehood, and detestable Doctrine, such as before mentioned, as
the Church of Rome has done. Ergo Rome Papal is mystery Babylon.

IX. Mystery. Babylon is said to sit upon a Scarlet-colour'd Beast; and this
Beast is full of the names of Blasphemy: And I saw a Woman sit upon a Scarlet
colored Beast, full of the names of Blasphemy, etc. Rev. 17. 3. So that it
appears the Woman and the Beast are distinct; by the Woman is meant the false
Church, by the Beast is meant the secular power or civil state, or the
Antichrist, or that Government that is the eighth, and of the seventh, who
assumeth both the Civil and Ecclesiastical Authority by whom the Whore, false
Church and Worship is supported: That the Beast and Whore are distinct is
evident,

1. From other Prophecies relating to the same thing. 2. From the letter of the
text. 3. From arguments grounded on reason. 4. From the confession of the Whore
her self.
1. From the Prophecies in the Scripture describing the same state of the Roman
Monarchy, Dan 2. the latter part of the Image is partly Iron, and partly Clay,
two states that were really distinct, that could never so in corporate as to
become one.

2. From the letter of the text, I saw a Woman sit upon a Scarlet-colored
Beast, full of the names of Blasphemies. The colors of the Royal and Imperial
vestments, as the Angel declared them distinct, so the Apostle saw them
distinct.

3. They appear to be distinct from argments grounded upon reason. For,

(1.) The Beast is in the Masculine Gender, the Whore in the Feminine Gender.
(2.) Because the Whore is Rev. 17. v. 11. 6. 16.
said to ride upon the beast, the one carrying the other. (3.) The horns being
of the Beast, it is said, shall hate the Whore; if they were not distinct the
Whore must hate her self, and eat her own flesh, etc. which is nonsensical.
(4.) The Beast shall abide, tho in captivity, after the Whore is thrown down
and destroyed.
4. From the plain confession of the Whore her self, they are distinct, who
says I sit a queen, I am no Widow, etc. Ergo, she has a Head or Husband,
which is the vile Person, little Horn and Ecclesiastical Beast, or that man of
Sin St. Paul declared should rise after the then present Romish power which did
let, was taken away, which the primitive Fathers, as Tertullian, Cyprian,
Jerome, and others understood to be the Imperial power in its pure, civil, iron
or unmixt-state or Legs of the Image, Dan. 2.

Paral. Rome Papal, or Church of Rome, has not only drawn into Idolatry the
Kings of the Earth, great men abusing God, his Son Jesus Christ and the
Christian Religion, and the blessed books of the Old and New Testament, but she
has made the lower and ruder sort of the people drunk too, (as has been
showed.) And it is no wonder she thinks she may do any thing, having a
dispensation from heaven (as she pretends.) which the Pope keeps the Keys of,
fearing no power on Earth.

And now that she has the secular power to support her, upon which she sits or
rides in great pomp, is evident, and that they are really distinct, for what of
the secular power is still left at Rome, is under the conduct and management of
the Church, there being no civil administration of Justice or exercise of Laws,
but what is authorized and allowed by the Pope, the Head of this Ecclesiastical
State; to make this further evident, the Pope does not only exercise a power of
appointing seculars at Rome, and near to it, but he claims the like supremacy
abroad in other Kingdoms; if the secular Princes fall off from him, or will not
be reconciled to him, and own him as head of the Church, he will excommunicate
and depose them, and takes away their Crown^ and Sceptres from them; that the
Pope is a temporal Prince, as well as an ecclesiastical Bishop, i. e. makes
Laws, exacts Tribute, raises Soldiers, and acts a Monarch, is notoriously
known; which fairly affords him the title of Beast, that his Royal and Scarlet
Robes, the Chair he sits in to his very Hose and Shoes, with the Vestments of
his Cardinals, is Scarlet; so that ye need not doubt but here you have the
Scarlet colored Beast; besides no man can reasonably doubt, that what the
Civil power claims the Ecclesiastical power exercises, and that this Princely
Pope is in the Masculine, and this Harlot or false Church in the Feminine
Gender is owned by all partys.

That the Church state does sit upon, ride, and govern the secular at Rome,
Italy, and all its Territories; that the Church of Rome owns that she is no
Widow, but has a head, called his Holiness, or supreme ruler of the Church,
is so evident, that we cannot find them upon any file of record of controversy.
There remains therefore, no more to be done here, since this black character of
Mystery Babylon does so well meet in the Romish Church.

Arg. If there be no visible state in the Christian World, that does so
apparently sit upon, command, and govern the Beast or a great secular power,
clothed in Scarlet Vestments, as Rome Papal does, then Rome Papal (...) Church
of Rome is Mystery Babylon. But there is no visible state in the Christian
World, that does so apparently sit upon, command, and govern the Beast, or
secular power, clothed in Scarlet Vestments, as Rome Papal or Church of Rome.
Ergo Rome Papal etc. is Mystery Babylon.

To reinforce this argument we challenge any Papists, Atheists, or any else to
show where there are any other people or party to whom these Characters agree
as well as with Rome Papal, and then we will let this argument sall.

X. The Beast that Mystery Babylon sits upon, commands and governs, is not only
clothed in Scarlet, but is also full of the names of Blasphemy, Rev. 17. Paral.
Now that the Church of Rome has this mark also of Mystery Babylon is evident,
viz. that the Beast clothed in Scarlet that bears up that whorish Churhc, is
full of the names of Blasphemy; this appears by his ascribing that to creatures
which belongs to God and Jesus Christ only, and in diverse other respects.

(1.) When the cursed Beast is called our Lord. God the Pope, cum inter. in
glosl. extr. Job 22. in Live. 2.
and whatsoever he does, no man may say to him, Why do you this? And whosoever
obeys not his precepts incurreth the Sin of Idolatry, does he not in this
show himself indeed to be God? What greater Blasphemy can there be?

(2.) When he is called universal Head of the Catholic Church is not this
Blasphemy against Christ, who alone is the head of the universal Church?

(3.) When he is called the Lamb of God, he Light of the World, the Root of
David, the Lion of the Tribe of Judah.

(4.) When the orders of the Church, Oral Traditions and Decrees of Councils
are said to be of greater authority than the Holy Scriptures; Cardinal Hositis
in his Advertisement to King Sigismund has these expressions, If they (that
is, the Heretics) say it is written, that is the voice of the Devil, speaking
in his members; De expresso dei verbo.
they call the Scripture Paper and Parchment, and that it is an absurd thing to
attribute more authority to the Scripture than to the Church, which they call a
nose of Wax, which suffers it self to be turned hither or thither as a man
pleases, and that the Scripture is the Daughter and their Church the Mother;
is not this horrid Blasphemy against God, and the Holy Spirit who gave the
Scripture forth, and whose sacred offspring they are?

(5.) When the Virgin Mary, Angels, and Saints, are invocated with Prayers and
Addresses, that only belong to the Divine Majesty, as if those creature were
infinite, and could hear us at so great a distance as Earth is from Heaven,
which they could not do if perpendicularly over us, much less from all parts of
the World, over which they cannot be; whether this ascribing Infiniteness and
Omnisciency, and Divine adoration to Creatures, which is only due to the
Creator, is not Blaspemy?

(6.) Whether it be not Blasphemy, as well as Idolatry to say that Images ought
to be worshipped, with the same honor and worship, which is given to him whose
Image it is. For so Azorius affirms, and Bellarmin says that Images are not
only to be worshippe^ Epiphanius horis. 97. per totum.
as they are exemplars, but also properly and by themselves, so as the worship
may be terminated i^ them. de Imag. 1. 2.


(7.) To conclude with this mark, Whether it be not Blasphemy with a witness,
to affirm that a Priest can make a whole Christ of a Wafer Cake, by uttering a
few words? And is not this to exalt the man of Sin above God himself? For this
which they affirm i^ to do more than God indeed can do; see M^ Pools Dialogue
p. 109. there are some things which it is no dishonor to God, to say he cannot
do them, because they are either sinful (so God cannot lie;) or absolutely
impossible: God himself cannot make a man alive and dead at the same time, God
cannot make the whole to be less than a part of it; he cannot make three to be
more than threescore; he cannot make a Son to beget the Father, he cannot make
the same man to be born at two several times, (as Popish Authon confess;) and
therefore he cannot make the same Body to be in two several places (much less in
two thousand places at one and* the same time;) to which we may add, Can God
make that to be that, which it is not? All know the Bread is not Flesh, but
really Bread after Consecration.

Arg. If no people in the Christian world are born up and supported by a
Scarlet colored Beast, full of the names of Blasphemy, maintaining from him
such blasphemous Opinions, than Rome Papal, or Church of Rome, then Rome Papal
is Mystery Babylon: But there is no people in the Christian world that are born
up by such a blasphemous Beast as the Church of Rome is; Ergo Rome Papal as
Mystery Babylon.

XI. Mystery Babylon is not only said to sit upon a Scarlet colored Beast,
full of the names of Blasphemy, but also that she is adorned with great pomp
and outward glory, Rev. 17. 4. And the Woman was arrayed in Purple and Scarlet,
and decked with Gold and precious Stones, and Pearl, etc.

Parallel. Rome Papal, or Church of Rome* does not only sit upon a Scarlet
colored Beast, etc. but she is also beautified and adorned with great pomp and
external glory, beyond any people calling themselves a Church of Christ in all
the Christian world: This is such a visible brand and mark upon this people,
and well noted by all, that much we need not speak to it; for all the world
knows the Church of Rome delights in outward Gaudery, being a people whose
Worship is filled not only with detestable Tradisions, and blasphemous
Doctrines; but also to please the carnal and sensitive Eye, she se^ it off with
rich and costly Pictures, curious^ drawn, and other outward gallantry. (2.)
Loo^ into the Patrimony of consecrated Saint there you shall find riches and
honor, the not durable riches and righteousness. (3.) Loo^ upon their Garbs
and Vestments, and the^ you shall find her Popes and Cardinals g^^ stering in
cloth of Gold, and adorned li^ Emperors and splendid Princes; nay, and are
some of her Priests and Heads of Parti^ What think you (says one of the Anti^^
Fathers) of this Man the Pope sitting on hi^ in his Throne glistering in Purple
and clo^ of Gold -- sitting in the Temple God, showing out himself as if
Bernard.
were a God; her Priests are ado^^ in such costly Habiliments, that for riches
the might become the highest Order of ^ Jewish Priesthood. (4.) Look on the
Inst^ments and Mode of their Worship, and the you shall find rich Altars, and
Candlesticks Gold, the Vessels for Oil, and Po^s of P^sication, as if their
Predecessors had been Solomon's Temple. (5.) Look into (...) Churches, and
there you shall find great o^ ward glory and bravery. (6.) Enquire concerning
her Revenues and vast Incomes, a^ there you will find she out-does all
Comm^nities in the World.

Arg. If no people in the Christian World has such riches, splendor, outward
pomp and bravery in the maintenance and management of their Worship, as Rome
Papal, or Church of Rome has: Then Rome Papal, or Church of Rome, is this
gaudy Harlot, or Mystery Babylon. But there is no People or Church in the
Christian World, that has such riches, splendor, outward pomp and bravery, in
the maintenance and management of their Religious Worship, as the Church of
Rome has; Ergo the Church of Rome is Mystery Babylon.

XII. As Mystery Babylon is thus adorned with outward pomp, and external riches
and glory; so likewise another mark or character the Holy Ghost has laid down
of her is this, i. e. upon her forehead a name is written, MYSTERY BABYLON THE
GREAT, THE MOTHER OF HARLOTS, AND ABOMINATIONS OF THE EARTH. Mother of Harlots
may refer in part to external Whoredoms, but chiefly it is to be taken in a
mystical sense, i. e. she breeds and brings forth Spiritual Harlots; viz.
unclean Communities.

Parallel. That this Character meets directly in the Church of Rome, is very
clear, upon her forehead denotes (as our late worthy Annotators observe) the
open guilt and impudence of this Spiritual Harlot Mystery Babylon, that is,
there is a Mystery in what follows in her name -- the Great, not to be
understood of the Chaldean Babylon, but of a City or Policy under the Gospel,
as cap. 11. 8. she is called Spiritual Sodom and Egypt; so in a spiritual or
mystical sense she is called Babylon, because a City like to Babylon for
Idolatry and Persecution of God's Israel. Not a mere Harlot, but one that
breed* up Harlots, and nourishes Idolatry, communicating it to others; and this
is the true name of Rome instead of Mother Church*

1. Here is a name written in capital Letters, and written upon her forehead,
so as to be read of all, i. e. there is no way to hide o^ cover her Whoredoms,
or to defend or deliver her self from being the Mother of Harlots* if this were
not to be seen and read by all enlightened Christians and Professors, it would
not not so much concern us; for if the Book of the Revelations were not written
for the Christian World, it leaves us at an uncertainty; nor are we in a
capacity to make a Judgment in this great case, who this great Who^^ is.

2. Nay, and if this Babylon were a small and private People and Community of
Christians (or such who pretend themselves so to be) she could not be called
Great Babylon* and Mother of Harlots, and Abominations of the Earth.

But Rome is a great People, a great Whore, or false Church; and her detestable
Spiritual Adultery appears obvious to the whole World; nay, her Images and
Idolatry causes both Jews and Turks the more to hate and abhor that Christian
Religion which she professes, (as it has been manifestly made known by many
worthy Writers.)

3. And for Mystery, see what we have said in the first Chapter of this
Treatise, wherein is opened that strange Mystery of the Romish Church. Is it
not this Mystery Babylon that says she is the true Church, by pretending to
Visibility, as one of the chief Evidences thereof? and yet it is positively said
That the true Woman or Church of God was for the space of 1260 years in the
Wilderness, Rev. 12. where she was hid all that time, or abode in an obscure
condition. Is it not a Riddle and confused Mystery, that she being Queen
Regent, riding upon the Beast in state, all along, and yet that very poor and
distressed Woman, that fled into the Wilderness, and abides there in a
suffering condition all the time of the Beasts Reign.

Is not this a Riddle and strange Mystery* that one pretending her self to be
the only true Church of God, and Mother of Peace, Purity and Charity; and yet
notoriously known to be the breeder, bringer forth, and cherisher of Division,
Falsehood, most* Bloody Butcheries, and Barbarous Cruelties and Murders.

4. She is called Babylon, or Babel, i. e. Confusion; and does not this agree
to the Church of Rome? does she not openly show her self to be the absolute
Antitype of old Babel?

1. In devising and setting up another way to Heaven (than what God has
ordained and appointed; viz. a Tower of their own raising) not by Christ alone,
but by the demerits of their own good works; and you know what some of those
works are that she calls meritorious, which is, to destroy and cut the Throats
of such she calls Heretics, i. e. godly Protestants: This is the way she ha^
found out for the Salvation of her dear Children.

2. In plucking up, or endeavou^ing to raze out the true Worship of God, as old
Caldea^ Babylon did, and setting up Idolatry in the room of it.

3. The Church of Rome may well be called Babylon, in respect of her Doctrine*
Principles, and Modes of Worship, which i^ such a jumble, strange mixture, and
heap o^ Human Inventions, that may well go for ^onfusion it self (see our third
mark) in her orders, diversities, and long muster Roll of officers, that are so
numerous, as well as un^criptural, that if mixture, and confusion be any where,
it is to be found in this pretended Church, where you have Pope, Cardinals,
Priests, and Arch-Priests, Bishops, Lord Bishops, and Archbishops, Deans, and
Arch^eacons, Suffragans, Patriarchs, Abbots, Friars, Monks, Nuns, Seminaries,
Jesuits, followers of St. Francis, Jansenius, Augustine, Capu^hins, etc. and
what not, this Romish Har^ot has received some of her jolly Church ^relats,
with their exorb^tant power from her heathenish Predecessors, Romu^us Livius l.
1.
and Numa Pompilius who made Flamins, Arch-Flamins, and a Pon^ifex maxim^s, to
sacrifice unto the Gods; and some of her ceremonies she has taken from other
Infidels, as the shaving of Priests Crowns like the Priests of Isis and Serapis
in Egypt, nay for confusion and filthy abomination she has outdone Heathen
Rome, for Numa, the King of the Antique Romans, forbad them to think that the*
Image of Plutarch in Numa.
God had the shape of a man, or form of other living Creatures; yet this mother
of Idolatry allows the Image of God the Father, in form of an old Man, and
Holy Ghost in form of a Dove, tho the holy Prophet, inveigh^ing Bellar. de
Imag. Sanct. l. 2. c. 8. Isa 40. 18.
against this detestable vanity, demands, To whom will ye liken God? Or what
similitud^ will ye set up unto him? -- Yet this whoris^ Church to these
teachers of lies (as one observes) and counterfeits of God, to the shame of
Christians, adoreth these Images, or rather the Devil in them, whose worship it
is, and so fulfils that which is written of her, Rev. 9. 20. That men would not
repent of the works of their hands, and of the worship of Devils, and Idols of
Gold, and Silver, and Br^s^, and of Stone, and of Wood, which neither can see,
neither ^ear, nor go.

As she appears in all these things to be Mystery Babylon the great, and
abomination of the Earth, so (as worthy Mr. Ainsworth observes) in her Divine
service, she has Babels very language, an unknown Tongue; so is it an Idol
wholly made (as the Scripture speaks) according to her own understanding; and
is all the works of the crafts-men, the Prelates and Popes, the lovers of this
great Whore who have patched together in their several ages the limbs of this
deformed monster, the Mass and Canon thereof, a sacrifice for the sins of the
quick and the dead; with the Litany and Collects, An^hems and Responds, and in
this Liturgy, God and his Angels, Apostles and Martyrs, and Confessors with he
Saints, and she Saints (and some, that had Satan's sanctity,) are wrapped up
together, with a Stage Play like worship, with musical instruments to make them
merry, as Nebuchadnezzar; with melody celebrated the dedication of his Golden
Image, which Portal, and Missal, these Artizans have framed, exceeding all
superstitions, abominations, and confession, that ever were in the World, the
mere device and forgery of their own Brains, by the help of the Devil,
provoking God to Jealousy and Wrath, which suddenly she must partake of
without mixture.

4. Mother of Harlots. Has not Papal Rome this very character upon her
forehead? It meets in none as in her, all Protestants of what denomination
soever, utterly disallow of Fornication, Whoredom and Adultery, in persons of
any Ranks whatsoever, maintaining constantly that Marriage is honorable in
all: whereas the Church of Rome, it is noto^iously known, gives public
toleration to ^bominable Whoredoms, and the most shame^ess and unatural
Bestialities as ever were in the World, but this Epithet, Mother of Harlots,
^ay more properly refer to Spiritual Adultery, and that the Church of Rome is a
Mystical Mo^her is very plain and evident, for do not all her Children own her
to be the Mother Church? and therefore

1. Protestants are exhorted to return into the bosom of their mother.

2. All polluted and national Churches in the European Kingdoms sprang from
her, as the Churches of France, Spain, Portugal, etc. and do call her Mother.

3. All corruption in Doctrine and Discipline, were bred and brought forth by
her, she is certainly the Mother of all these cursed titles, and errors
following, viz. Universal, Supreme, Infallible Head, Holy Father the Pope, his
Holiness, in the abstract -- our Lord God the Pope, unerring Church* Priestly
Absolution, selling Pardons, Indulgences, Dispensations, adoring the Crucifix,
worshipping of Images, Anointing, and sprinkling of Holy Water, the adoration of
the Mass, nay and the adoring the Devils own Engine, i. e. the Cross or Gibbet
whereon the Devils Emissaries killed or crucified the Lord of Life and Glory,
for the curse of the Law was* to be done away by ^ cursed Death upon a tree, o^
Gal. 3. 13.
which whosoever was hanged* the curse of God was upon him; this death the
innocent Lamb, Jesus Christ suffered f^^ our sakes, at the hands of wicked
Sinne^ Pilate and the Jews, the Children of the D^vil; who used all exquisite
torments to mak^ his death miserable, Crowning him wi^^ Thorns, piercing his
Hands, Feet, and Sides with Nails, and a Spear, hanging him on the Tree until
he died. And this pretended Tree or Cross, Thorns, and Nails, with other
counterfeits of them, this Mother of Harlots, teaches her Children to adore and
honor, with as good Ground and Devotion (as one observes) as the Ophites or
Serpentories, are said to honor the Serpent the Devils instrument, for to
bring man to the knowledge of good and evil. And that all the World might take
notice, that Rome is the City, where our Lord was crucified, this Mother of
Harlots does proclaim, that the Cross was that Altar, whereon the great
Sacrifice Christ* was offered: whereas the Scripture teaches that the bodies
of those Beasts whose blood was brought to make reconciliation in the holy
place were burnt, without the Host, or Camp of Israel, and not on the Altar
which stood before the door of the Tabernacle, according to which figure Jesus
also, that he might sanctify the people with his own blood, suffered without
the Gate of Jerusalem, which was a reproach; yet will these Godeaters, and
crucifiers of our blessed Savior* make the cursed Cross, to be the Altar most
holy, and so greater than Christ the sacrifice, as being that which sanctified
him, for the Al^ar sanctified the offering. And hereupon they call the Cross
blessed, and ascribe unto it worthiness to bear the Talent of the World, they
account it among the most precious Relics, and not only the whole, but every
piece thereof; they adore it, salute it, pray unto it, and trust therein for
Salvation, crying, Hail, O Cross, our only hope, increase thou to the godly
Righteousness, and unto sinners give pardon; save thou the company gathered
together in thy praises; yea, the very sign of this Idol made in the Air, upon
the forehead, or over any thing is Sacred and Ven^rable, and has force to
drive away Devils, and do many like feats: wherefore this abomination has
prevailed above other, and is like Beel^ebub Prince of the Devils, the Badg of
the Beast, and Character of Mystery Babylon, Imprinted in Churches, Chapels,
Altars, Houses and High ways, in Books, Writings, in Prayers, Sacraments, in
Garments, Bodies and Souls of Men, both Quick and Dead; nay, nothing is well
hallowed without it, no Sacrament perfect without it. And this great honor
has the Cross, because the Devil, and his Instruments, Killed or Crucified our
Savior upon it; so that a marvel it is, how Judas lips escaped honor, seeing
he also was Satan's instrument, to betray Christ with a kiss, wherefore this
Spiritual Egypt, Pseudo Catholic Church, deserves more to quis nescit Vo^usi,
Bithinice qualia demens Egyptus Protent a colat, etc. J^venal sat. 15.
be branded by some Satyrist, for worshipping monsters, than the first Egypt,
whose less impiety a Heathen Poet did deride.

4. As she is the Mother of Harlots, and Mother of all corrupt Doctrine and
Detestable Errors, etc. So also is she Mother of all personal vices, and
fleshly abominations, as horrid Oaths and Blasphemies, most astonishing
perjury, and subtle equivocation, hypocrisies, uncleanness, lying,
subornations, secret poysonings, stabing, throat-cutings, adulteries,
covenant breaking, and what not; are these things allowed amongst Protestants?
No certainly; yet they are not only allowed by this Whore, but esteemed
merito^ious, if it be done for the good, and promo^ion of Holy Church; and for
these things may she not rightly be called Mystery Babylon the great, the
mother of Harlots, and Abominations of the Earth? -- Which I shall conclude
with this Argument.

Argu. If this name Mystery Babylon the great, the Mother of Harlots, and
Abominations of the Earth, in all these respects we have noted, does not so
fully and fitly agree to any People as they do to Rome Papal or Church of Rome,
then Rome Papal etc. is Mystery Babylon; but this name Mystery Babylon, the
great Mother of Harlots, and Abominations of the Earth, in all these respects
noted, does not agree so fitly and fully to any people in the World as to the
Church of Rome. Ergo Rome Papal or Church of Rome is Mystery Babylon.

XIII. But further, to put it out of all doubt, who this Whore is, it is said
she was drunk with Blood; this is another Mark and Character the Holy Ghost
has given to know her by. And I saw a Woman drunk with the Blood of the
Saints, and the Blood of the Martyrs of Jesus, and I wondered with great
admiration, Rev. 17. 6.

Now if the Church of Rome be guilty here, or has this black Mark and
Character upon her, she is the unhappiest Church and People in all the World,
and gives cause enough to Angels, as well as to the Apostles and Holy Men to
wonder, i. e. to see a Woman pretending to be nobly descended, the Daughter of
the great King of Heaven and Earth, the only chaste Spouse of the Lamb, the
Mother of all Peace, Holiness, and Innocence, not only defiled with all those
foul and abominable errors, Idolatries, and detestable pollutions, but also
guilty of so much Blood of Saints, and of the precious blood of the Martyrs of
Jesus, and not only guilty of Blood, but also drunk with Blood, yea drunk with
such Blood; but that this the Church of Rome is guilty of nothing is more
clear, which indeed gives cause to every good man in the World to abhor her.
And that we may make this most evidently to appear,

1. Consider what it is to be drunk. 2. What things do necessarily contribute
to it. 3. Show what the true and proper signs of it are. 4. Whether such things
can be fixed upon the Church of Rome.
1. To be drunk is to take in excessively any thing as disorders nature in its
course and operations; this we take to be a general definition of it, including
the proper and metaphorical notions thereof.

2. Such things as necessarily contribute to it, are,

(1.) Great and vehement desire or thirst after it. (2.) Plenty of the thing
thirsted after. (3.) The greedy taking their fill of it.
3. The signs of drunkenness, are

(1.) When the faculties are so disordered, that they will not submit to the
best Reason that can be given them. (2.) When they will abuse those whom they
are most obliged to love and respect. (3.) When they have cast off all
considerations of their own, and others good, and for bear no mischief but what
they are restrained from by force. (4.) That these things are evident in the
Church of Rome will appear,
1. Because she has shed a Mass, a very great Mass of Blood of Saints, and of
the Martyrs of Jesus; who is able to account the numbers of them that she has
murdered in all parts of the Christian World, only upon the account of
Religion, particularly in Bohemia, Germany, Poland, Lithuania, France, Spain,
Italy, Portugal, Low Countries, England, Scotland and Ireland?

It Is enough to pierce an heart of Stone to hear of the barbarous crueltys and
devilish inhumanities exercised for more than five hundred years upon the poor
Waldenses and Albingenses, by the hands of this Bloody Whore or Romish Harlot,
besides the wonderful numbers and multitudes of them, for according to the
account I have met with in History, hundreds of Thousands, nay some millions of
those Godly Christians were most unhumanely butchered by the bloody Papists,
Children Born of her own Body, nay, in every street of this great City, the
Blood of the Saints has run down like a River; were this not notoriously known
to the whole World, I could give an account of the vast numbers slain in
Bohemia, in France, and in Ireland, of late years, where there were not fewer
than two hundred thousand souls sacrificed, to allay the thirst of this Bloody
Whore.

So that it is out of dispute, she has the first signs of a most filthy,
shameless, drunken Strumpet, i. e. she has been excessive in drinking of
innocent Blood; and 2. Not only so, but she has drunk so much, that she is
intoxicated, and disordered, that she would never submit to the best reason
that could be given her, for she has been so mad, that none could dissuade her
from exercising her cruelties (on the Bodies of the Saints, whose Blood she
thirsted after) in as unhumane a manner as incarnate Devils could devise; as if
to murder them was not sufficient, nor could it satisfy her, but she would
have them die many deaths, as hanging by the Feet, by the Hands, by the middle
on a Beam, by the Hair of the Head, on Tenters, pouring melted Lead on their
Heads, Boiling in Caldrons, rosting alive, and burning alive.

The poor Waldenses living in, and about the valleys of Piedmont, about the
year 1560 were most cruelly and barbarously murdered; to allay her excessive
thirst, some were stripped stark naked and whipped to death with Rods of Iron,
others drawn through the Streets and Burnt with fire brands, some thrown down
an high Tower, and some cut in pieces with sharp Knives, fourscore persons had
their Throats cut, as Butchers kill their Sheep, threescore Women were so
cruelly rackt, that the Cords pierced their Arms and Legs to the Bones, and
then being cast into Prison they all died except nine of them; young Virgins
were Ravished in a Barbarous manner until they died, Children were pulled alive
out of their Mothers Bellies, and the Breasts of many Women cut off, so that
the Infants died of Famine; and many other strange kind of tortures, for many
years together multitudes of those Godly Waldenses endured.

And the Albingenses who professed the same doctrine and principles, were all
along in the like or worse sort and manner (if possible) butchered; in the City
of Bezier, there were, says my author, threescore thousand persons slain, the
Priests and Friars going about the Streets in the mean time with Crosses and
Banners, and singing, Te Deum Laudamus; in the year 1655 in the Valley of
Lucerna and other places, this bloody Strumpet thirsting still after the Blood
of the Saints, and like a filthy drunken wretch caused an Edict to be put
forth, that such who would not turn Papists within three days, must take what
would follow, and indeed that was bad enough, as you may see in Sir Samuel
Morelands History of that late Persecution, it began Jan. 25. 1655. upon which
some Thousands of those poor Souls were forced to fly for their lives in the
depth of Snow, when all the Valleys were covered with Water, there being
amongst them some Women with child, others newly delivered, some sick and
diseased, Children crying and lamenting, Old Men and Women, some decre^it
leaning on their Staves, all dragged or forced over the Ice and Snow* etc. with
bitter tears, sighings, cries, and wringing of hands, beating of Breasts,
mourning and complaining of the cruelties of those merciless Papists, but alas
so drunk with Blood before, that they like brutes regarded none of their cries,
no more than the bleating of Sheep; but this is not all, no sooner that they
were forced from their ha^itations, but their houses were pillaged, rifled, and
ransackt of all that was left, and this not sufficient neither, to satisfy
their rage and cruel thirst, they fell upon them, putting them to all manner of
unhumane and cruel deaths they could devise; so that in a few days they
destroyed near thirty thousand Souls in one place, they most cruelly tormented
an hundred and fifty Women and Children, and afterward chopped off the Heads of
some, and dashed out the Brains of others, some had their Feet nailed to Trees
with their Heads downwards, one ancient Woman they ripped up alive, putting a
sickle into her privy parts, and so slit up her Belly, after which they dragged
her about, and at last cut off her Head; other Women had their Breasts, Noses,
Privities and Hands cut off, and so left miserably to perish; Another they
stabbed in the Soles of his Feet, then cut off his Privities and Fried them,
giving them their comrades to eat as a delicate dish, then they seared his
Wounds, with flaming Candles, cut off his Ears, and to^e off his Nails with
burning Pincers, to make him renounce his Religion. and then ti'd one of his
Legs to a Mule, (being yet alive) and dragged him about the Streets, and after
all this, they bound a Cord about his Head, and twisted it with a stick till
his Eyes and Brains burst out, and then cast his Body into a River; An Old
Woman had her Hands and Nose cut off, and so was left alive, some had their
Bodies cut all into pieces, and their limbs strowed in the highways, some had
their flesh sliced from their Bones, and chop't like minced meat; little
Infants were thrown down steep Rocks, whereby they were dashed to pieces Some
Children they tore limb from limb before their Parents faces, others they flead
off their Skins alive, in another place they took eleven Protestants, and
heating a Furnace they forc'^ them to throw one another into it, till it came
to the last, and him they threw in; If these are not signs of one drunk with
Blood, I know not what is. But time would fail me to tell you of all the cruel
deaths, and sufferings of this poor people, for that it contains a great volume.

In Bohemia, Poland, and Lithuania, the sufferings of the Lords Witnesses were
as great, and their cruel usages as Bloody; besides, in one or two of those
places they began very early, about 977. where my Author says Godly Ministers,
and other Pious, Holy, and Godly People suffered such Barbarities, and
Inhumanities from this Harlot, that the Ears of a Christian cannot hear, nor
his Tongue relate them, without the greatest abhorrency and indignation; Some
of them were Stoned to death, others hanged upon a Beam, with a soft fire made
under them were Roasted to Death as well as Hanged, they Hanged one Minister up
by the Privy Members being seventy years old, and burned his Books under him;
Another they laid on his back, ramming his mouth full of Gunpowder, set Fire to
it and so blew his Head all to pieces.

At a Town called Meldorp a Godly Minister was forced out of his Bed, and to go
some Miles on Foot in Frost and Snow, upon the Ice barefooted and bare-legged,
beating, cutting, and slashing him, and pricking him with their Halberts, andat
last they cruelly roasted him to death; They yoked some Ladies and Gentlewomen
together like Beasts, and forced them into Woods, where they were ravished and
abused, and then had their Hair and Ears cut off and disfigured, they forc'^
some poor Christians to eat their own Excrements, and if any refused so to do,
they thr^^ them down their Throats, till they were choked, they crammed the
secret parts of several Women with Gun powder, and setting fire to it most
barbarously tore their Bellies and Wombs thereby; Others they hung up by the
privy parts; some they plained the faces off with Chisels; others they made
(...) put on Boots filled with scalding Oil, and then roasted their legs over a
fire; Some men the^ Gelt in the presents of their Wives and Children; Some had
Gags put into their Mouth and then put stinking Water and Piss down their
Throats through a Tunnel, till the^ Bellies swelled like a Tun, whereby they
perished in a miserable manner; They saw off the Legs of some alive; a Godly
Minister they bound upon a Table, and placing a C^ so that she scratcht his
Guts out of his Belly with her Teeth and Claws, till he miserable died. In
Lithuania 1643. this Whore thirsting still for more Protestant Blood, great
slaughter was made without regard to Aged Sex; here many had their Skins flead
of whilst they were alive; Others had their Hands and Feet cut off; The Bowels
of diverse were also taken out alive; Others having their Shin-Bones bored
through, they poured melted Lead into the wounds of others, whom they had cut
in the Head, and other parts of their Bodies; Some had their Eyes pulled out,
and multitudes were hanged in diverse places, nay, and the poor Protestants
accounted it a mercy and great favor, to be killed outright without any other
torment.

Should we come into France, and give an account of the horrid cruelties of
this great Whore there, it would, if possible, exceed what you have heard, the
Blood of ten thousand this cursed Strumpet has drunk off, (as it were at one
draught) there, and not a jot more satisfied than she was before; here they
roasted young Children, ravishing Women and Maidens in such a shameless manner,
and barbarously killing them afterward, that it is not fit to be spoken.

A black smith had his Head laid on his own Anvil, and then his Brains beat out
with Hammers, also a young Woman was forced (after they had ravished her) to
take hold of a Rapier, wherewith one of the Villains thrusting her Arm, made
her kill her own dear husband, some Women with child were ripped up, and diverse
buried alive. I migh come to the siege of Rochel, and tell you what misery some
thousands suffered by famine; some hundred thousands of poor Protestants, have
been barbarously murdered by her means in France, and tho of late she has not
put many to death, yet they have exercised all manner of new invented ways to
destroy their Souls, and the Souls of their Children too. I might also speak of
the Spanish Inquisition and of the hellish torments thereof, as also of the
crueltys of this Whore, exercised on the poor Heathen in America by the
Spaniards, where they destroyed more than 20 millions of Souls, as appears by
History besides, they put them to all manner of cruel deaths they could devise,
but I am weary of relating these dismal stories; besides, they are generally
well known, together with the Massacre in Ireland where no less than the Blood
of two hundred thousand persons could satisfy the Blood of this craving
Locust, and sh'd in as barbarou^ a manner as you have heard in other places. ^
might also mention the Bloody Persecution here in England in the reign of Queen
Mary^ wherein many holy and gracious Prelates an^ People were burned to Ashes,
for witnessing to the Truths of Jesus Christ; all which fully shows, that this
second mark of drunkenness* drunk with Blood of the Saints, and of the Martyrs
of Jesus, meets in the Church of Rome.

Thirdly, She has the other mark of drunkenness upon her also, i. e. she
matters not who she abuses, and exercises her cruelties upon; she has sometimes
cut off her own dear Children, viz. Roman Catholics, amongst such she calls
Heretics, as it happened at Bezier, and other places, crying out, Kill all
both Catholics and Heretics, saying, the Lord knows who are his; nay, she has
made the Wife to kill her Husband, the Husband to murder the Wife, Children to
destroy their own dear Parents, and Parents their Children, ^f these things do
not show she is drunk, drunk with Blood, what can? From whence ^ shall draw
this argument and conclude.

Arg. If there be no body of people or community of Christians in the World,
who have been guilty of so much Blood, Blood of Saints and good Men, even so as
to be drunk with Blood, as the Church of Rome are; Then ^he Church of Rome is
Mystery Babylon. But there is no people or community of Christians, that are so
guilty, etc. as Rome Papal or Church of Rome is. Ergo the Church of Rome ^
Mystery Babylon.

XIV. Mystery Babylon has one mark more whereby she may be known, i. e. She ^
said to sit upon a Beast, that has Seven Heads and Ten Horns, the Seven Heads
^^em to signify (as the Angel opens it) seven sorts of sovereign governments as
well as hills* read the Text, And here is the mind that hat^ wisdom, the seven
Heads are seven Mountains on which the Woman sits; And there ar^ seven
Kings, five are fallen, one is and one ^ not yet come, but when he is come, he
man continue a short space; And the Beast that w^ and is not, even he is the
eighth and of the seve^ and goes into perdition. Rev. 17. 9, 10, 11* Besides
all that we have said, it we find n^ Papal Rome here viz. having this characte^
upon her, we will acquit her for ever, for t^ city that is built upon seven
Hills is Rome nay, you will find that all Authors do general assert that Rome
is the only City in the Wor^ that is founded on seven Hills, and fame for it by
its old Poets (as it is noted by ^ late Annotators) as Ovid, Virgil, Hora^
Propertius; The names of these Hills a^ known, viz. Palatinus, Quirinalis,
Ave^^nus, Celius, Veminalis, Esquilinus, Capit^nus; But the seven Heads do not
only (as ^ said before) signify seven Hills or Mountai^^ but also seven Kings,
that is, seven sorts governments, which ruled or were to rule that City where
the Beast reigned, that ca^ried this cursed Harlot (the term Kings, Scripture
signifying rulers, whether the government was in a single person, or more, ^
Deuteronomy. 33. 5.) Now that Rome has had Sev^ sorts of distinct sovereign
governments in her, is so notoriously known that the Romanists cannot deny it.
^. Kings ( Romulus being the first King,) II. Consuls, III. Tribunes, IV.
Decemvirs, V. Dictators, VI. Emperors that were Pagans. VII. Emperors that were
Christians, five of these were fallen or gone off the stage before St. John
received his Revelations, the Government of the Pagan Emperors was in being at
that very time the seventh was to appear and to continue but a short spaco,
viz. the Christian Emperors government; For it cannot be the Papal power for
that was not up in St. John's time so not the sixth Head. And as the Papal power
for that reason, could not be the sixth Head, so for a very good reason it
could not be the 7th Government, because whenever that appeared it was to
continue but a short space; which cannot intend the Papal power, but answers
to the Christian Empire, for that government did continue but a little while
comparatively, but it is evident the Papal power has continued longer, than any
of the other sove^^ignties* *that wont before: and if the Papal power be not
the sixth Head nor the seventh, then it must needs be the eighth, which is of
the seventh and ^oes into perdition, ^fe it cannot be any power at all of the
fourth (...) Roman Monarchy; But a power it is, yea, and a great power too of
the fourth or Roman Monarchy; And that which carrys the Whore, according to the
express letter of the Text, and so acknowledged by the best of exposition, so
that in the whole by the Woman, City, or Whore, that sits upon the seven
Mountains, and where there has been seven several sorts or forms of Government
is meant Rome, there is no cause to doubt, for the great Sons of Rome
themselves, as Baronius, Bellarmine, and many others do confess the same, but
would defend their Mother from being Mystery Babylon, by putting it off to
Romepagan, which we have clearly detected in the first chapter of this
treatise; And therefore do affirm that Rome Papal is neither the sixth no^
seventh sort of government, but is the eighth and of the seventh. The Christian
Emperon in an overheated zeal and bounty to the Roman Bishops, giving him the
advantage by getting that power which through policy and pride he attained to
in the end, and so he comes to be the last Beast or eighth Government, in which
there is a secular and an Ecclesiastical power, joined together which makes up
^ Beast, a blasphemous Beast (who has two Horns like a Lamb, which is this
twofold power but a mouth like a Dragon) and a Whore, a most devilish drunken
and bloody Whore. etc.

Arg. If Rome Papal or Church of Rome, be born up by a secular power which has
had seven sovereign governments in a City, seated upon seven Hills or
Mountains, then Rome Papal or Church of Rome is Mystery Babylon the great Whore.

But Rome Papal or Church of Rome, is born up by a secular power, which has
had seven sovereign governments in a City, seated upon seven Hills or Mountains.

Ergo, Rome Papal, etc. is Mystery Babylon.

XV. There is yet one mark or character more of Mystery Babylon; i. e. she is
said to be that City that reigned over the Kings of the Earth; and the Woman
that thou saw is that City that reigns over the Kings of the Earth, Rev. 17,
18.

Now that Rome is such a City that since St. John's time has for several
hundred of years, reigned over the Kings of the Earth is so evident none can
deny, nay, and that Rome Papal has governed a great part of Italy, her self
owneth, ever since Constantine who gave it (as she says) as a Patrimony to St.
Peter, and that she has governed or has had her Kingdom over Germany, Poland,
France, Spain, Portugal, England, Scotland and Ireland, etc. is clear so that
their Kings have been governed by her, whom she would they killed, and whom she
would they saved alive, whom she willed they worshipped, and so became guilty of
drinking the Wine of her fornication; whom she willed they set up, and whom she
willed they pulled down, when she willed they raised Arms, and when she willed
they laid them down again; what shall we say? The Church of Rome has had such
power over the Kingdoms of Europe, th^^ the power and wills of Princes have
been controuled and overruled, when in any considerable case, they have gone
contrary to the sense and interest of the Church, and to such a degree, as they
have sometimes made th^^ do penance, resign up their Crowns, and receive them
again as an act of kindness, that he set them upon their Heads with his Foot
such is the Pride and Grandeur of St. Peter Chair. See our first Chapter.

If the Church of Rome is that People, Woman or Church, that above all others
in the World, has reigned over the Kings of the Earth, then Rome Papal is
Mystery Babylon.

But the Church of Rome is that People, Woman or Church, that reigns and has
reigned over the Kings of the Earth.

Ergo Rome Papal or Church of Rome Mystery Babylon.

CHAP. III. Proving that literal Babylon in Chaldea, was a Type or Figure of
Rome Papal or the present Church of Rome, and that in many particulars.
WE having showed and clearly evinced by an induction of fifteen particulars,
that Rome Papal is Mystery Babylon the great, the Mother of Harlots and
Abominations of the Earth, she having all the marks or characters directly
meeting in her, that are by the holy Ghost given of that great Whore; we shall
in the next place briefly consider, how the acts and progress of the Romish
Church, do most fitly and fully comport with other Types, and Prophecies of her
in the holy Scripture, and first with literal or Chaldean Babylon, from whence
I find most writers conclude, she had the name Babylon, given to her, in
respect of the growth, acts and deeds of that old Babylonian Monarchy, which we
shall now open and run the parallel in diverse particulars as follows.

I. Literal Babylon had a great Head or King ever her, called a Head of Gold,
also Lucifer or Son of the morning.

So likewise Rome Papal has a great Head or King over her, called the
Universal Bishop, whose power is magnified above the powers of Emperors, and
all Kings and Princes of the Earth.

II. Literal Babylon had dominion over many Countries or Provinces.

In like manner Rome Papal has had dominion over many Countries or Kingdoms,
no less than the Territories or Jurisdictions of ten considerable Kingdoms,
called ten Horns, (^ we have showed.)

III. Chaldean or Literal Babylon, fell under a fourfold circumstance, in
respect of her Supreme Head, viz. Nebuchadnezzar. (1.) That he was, when in
great Pride he insultingly said, Is not this great Babylon that I have built by
the might of my power, and for the honor of my Majesty. (2.) He was not, when
by the Watchers, and the Holy Ones he was tossed from his Throne, and made to
eat Grass with Oxen till seven times past over him. (3.) Yet he was, When his
Reason, and the Hearts of his Nobles, and Glory returned to him again. (4.) He
went off finally, when God brought the Medes and Persians against his
Successor, into whose hands the Kingdom was translated.

Rome, or Mystery Babylon, is foretold by the Angel to fall under a fourfold
circumstance also, in respect of the Beast that is said to carry the Whore, and
make War with the Saints; and the Beast which thou saw was, is not, and yet
is, and shall go into perdition, Rev. 17. 8. (1.) He was of old in his Pagan
state, triumphing in great glory and grandeur, but received a wound, yea a
deadly wound in one of his Heads, viz. in his sixth Head (which was the Pagan
power) in Constantine's time, and so he was not. The Christian Emperors having
the Government of the Roman Monarch; and to the same purpose speak our late
Annotators on the 13 chap. of Rev. v. 3. and chap. 17. 8. It must, says he, be
the sixth Head, viz. the Pagan Emperors who had that mortal wound, and that
wound was the Conquering the Pagan Emperors, and the abolishing of Paganism and
Idolatry, and putting an end or stop to Persecution, which was done by the
seventh Government, viz. the Christian Emperors, He yet is, i. e. his wound was
healed by the rising of the eighth Government which was of the seventh, who
appeared in a new dress, viz. a beast with two horns like a lamb but spoke like
a dragon, which was the Antichristian power or Papal Rome, and more
particularly the Pope; time (the best opener of these great Mysteries) has
fully discovered these things to (...). (4.) He shall go into perdition, i. e.
be utterly destroyed by the bright appearance of the Lord Jesus, and be cast at
last into the botomless Pit after the 42 Months are expired; so that in these
four respects Chaldean Babylon, it appears, was a lively Type or Figure of
Papal Rome, who from hence also shows her self to be Mystery Babylon.

IV. The Chaldean Kingdom or Literal Babylon Invaded Judea, Besieged and took
Jerusalem, and trampled it under foot, etc. Even so in like manner the last
Beast, the Pope and Papal power has Invaded the City of the living God, or
true Gospel Church, taking away all her sacred Rights, Laws and Privileges,
and not only Besieged her, closely Blocked her up, but trampled under foot the
Holy City for a long space of time, Rev. 11. ^.

V. Chaldean or Literal Babylon, was a mo^ lofty, proud and imperious people
called the Lady of Kingdoms, and the glory and beauty ^ Excellency, for which
God does severely threaten her, Isa. 13. 19. Behold I am against thee, O thou
most proud, says ^ Lord God of Hosts, etc. Isa. 50. 31.

So in like manner Rome who is Myster Babylon, notwithstanding her horrid crime
and most amazing wickednesses, is a v^^ proud and imperious people, exceeding
all ^ the Christian World, saying in her Heart, sit a Queen, am no Widow, shall
see no sorrow; for which haughtiness and pride the Lord will suddenly remember
her with Judgments and sore severity, he being now risen up to make Inquisition
for Blood, and to avenge upon her the injury done to Sion, Rev. 18. 7. How much
she has glorified her self and lived deliciously, so much torment and sorrow
give her.

VI. Chaldean or Literal Babylon set up Images, and had Idols of Silver and
Gold, Wood and Stone, to which they bowed and worshipped, which were also
representations of the Gods and Saints whom they adored, to wit, of Bell (which
was Jupiter) and Nebo and Succoth berioth, and the like, and such who would not
bow down to her Images, she threatened to cast into the Fire, into the burning
fiery Furnace, Jer. 5. 30. Jer. 10. 3* - 9. Isa. 46. 1. Dan. 3. 6.

Rome in this shows her self to be her Antitype very plainly, for has she not
ordained to her self Temples, Images of Christ and the Virgin Mary, and other
Saints, nay; and not only these but the Crucifix, but especially the great Idol
of the Mass? so that whosoever will not own that most ridiculous Idolatry of a
piece of Bread consecrated by the foul Mouth and unhallowed Hands of their
cursed Priests, to be their God and Savior, must be burned at a Stake, these
Idols they tell us ought to have due honor given to them, because the honor
which is given to them is referred to the Prototype whom they do represent, and
these abominations she kisseth, as Idolaters of old were wont to kiss the
Calves; lights Tapers before them as the Literal Babyloniam did Candles
before their Images, etc.

VII. Literal Babylon or Chaldea were not only a people of great Pomp, Pride
and Covetousness, but had also great Riches and Treasures. O thou that dwell
upon many waters, abundant in treasures, thine end is ^ome, the end of thy
Covetousness, Jer. 50. 37. 51. 13.

So in like manner Papal Rome is not only ^ people puffed up with pride and
vainglory, but as it is said of Mystery Babylon she is very rich, being arrayed
with Purple, Scarlet, Gold, Pearl and precious Stones. But she sits also upon
many waters; to wit, People, Multitudes, Nations and Tongues. But is very
covetous as well as proud, and full of treasures, for besides the gifts she
boasts were first given to her in the time of Constantine the Great, she has
made a prey upon the Nations through her fearful covetousness, and not only a
prey upon Nations and Kingdoms, but a spoil upon Saints and Holy Martyrs, and
has had the Gifts of Kings, and vast Revenues settled upon her Orders and
Clergy; nay, and she has peeled the people by selling Pardons and Indulgences,
and raising Peter Pence, besides vast sums for praying poor Souls out of the
scorching flames of Purgatory; nay, so horrid covetous is she, that she is not
willing any should go to Heaven without great Gifts of Money to Holy Church;
besides, much Money comes in by tolerating Whores and Whoredoms, (which thing
is notoriously known to be done in many Cities of the Popedom) by which slights
she is grown-so exceeding rich and full of treasure, that she can afford a
Golden Cup to present her intoxicating Wine in, to be clothed (as we said
before) with Scarlet, decked with Gold, Pearl and precious Stones; yea, she
makes the Merchants of the Earth rich who Trade with her, she does indeed as
fully answer to the Type in this, as Lam. 1. 10. stretching forth her hand upon
all the pleasant things of those Countries and Kingdoms where she has sat as
a Queen.

VIII. Literal Babylon made the worst of men among the Nations and Provinces,
chief Officers and Rulers, those that were raised to Preferment were Enemies to
Gods people, and to his ways of worship -- Her Adversaries prosper (that is,
the Adversaries of Sion) and are the chief, etc.

This Character has Rome Papal upon her, for she has all along made base and
vil^ men Rulers and Chief among the people, not suffering any men to bear
Office in Kingdom, Cities or Corporations, but such vile timeserving Persons
that would Sacrifice all Justice* Right and Honesty to her cursed Will and
unsatisfied Lust, no nor indeed have so much as a Vote, to choose Persons to
bear Rule i^ Government, nor comfortably to buy nor ^ell unless they would
relinquish all Goodness and Religion, and receive the Mark of the Beast in
their Foreheads or right Hands, viz. publicly to profess, or privately
subscribe to ^ud Injunctions and Commands of the Beast, the against their
Consciences, and inconsiste^ with their Religion. Who can be Cardina^ unless
they do own the Pope? Who can b^ Kings without being in danger of being deposed
or poisoned that subscribe not to the S^^ of Rome? Who can sit safe as Governo^
over Cities, etc. where she sits as Queen Regent, without truckling under that
Yoke o^ Subjection which she puts on the Necks of all her Vassals; nay, Pope
Martin the Fifth i^ his Bull added to the Council of Constance (^^ Pareus tells
us) Prohibits all Roman Catholics to suffer any Heretics to have any
dwellings in their Countries, or to make any Bargains, or use any Trades, or to
perform to them any Civil Offices, which makes good th^^ word, Rev. 13. 16, 17.

IX. Chaldea or Literal Babylon made the ways of Sion to mourn, hindered men to
come to her Solemn Assemblies, made her Ministers to sigh, defiled the godly
Women, and ravished the Virgins in the Streets of Jerusalem, and burned down
the Houses and Dwellingplaces of Gods people, starving and famishing of them,
and miserably destroyed them by several cruel deaths, hanging their Princes by
the Hands, and caused the Faces of their Elders not to be honored, etc.

Rome Papal, or the Romish Church, in all these things has exceedingly
outdone Literal Babylon, that so she might make it appear she is her direct
Antitype, and that they were but her Forerunners in these respects, for this
Mystical Babylon has with a witness made the ways of Sion to mourn for these
twelve hundred years, hindering all she could in every Kingdom from coming to
their Solemn Assemblies, driving them into corners, frightning and dispersing
their Auditors by Fines, Imprisonments, Banishments, and other cruel Usages;
pulling down their Churches and public Meeting-places, causing her faithful
Ministers to sigh, and Pastors to mourn, because they might not Preach to their
poor afflicted Flocks, and the people grieve, because they could not hear the
pleasant voice of their Pastors by reason of violence, etc. She has also been
guilty of that most horrid cruelty of forcing both Ministers and people from
their dwellings, laboring to starve or famish both their Bodies and Souls too,
and not contented to burn their Bodies to ashes, but has ofttimes burned their
Houses, Towns and Cities, as Germany has woefully experienced, and England
also, witness the burning of the famous City of London, Southwark, and its
adjacent places; who knows how many Fires she has kindled in the space of
twenty eight years last past in this Island? And then for ravishing godly women
and chaste Virgins in a beastly manner, she has imitated old Babylon, nay, far
exceeded her, that she might show to all she was her Antitype in these
villainies. They have ravished Women before their Husbands Faces, Maidens before
their Parents Faces, as you have heard, openly in the Streets in the sight of
the Sun, and then imbruing their barbarous Hands in their Blood, as diverse
Histories do declare.

X. There is one thing more in Chaldean Babylon in respect of her ruin, which I
think not amiss here to add, viz. We find God by the Prophet speaks of her
sudden destruction, Jer. 51. 8. Babylon is suddenly fallen, and that also she
shall be destroyed by an Army out of the North Countries, For lo I will raise
and cause to come up against Babylon an Assembly of great Nations from the
North Country, and they shall set themselves in array against her, from thence
she shall be taken, etc. Jer. 50. 9. From hence we may conclude as some, to
judge that those people who shall be the Instruments in the Hand of God to
destroy Mystery Babylon shall be the people in these Northern Countries, as
Brandenburgh, Sweedland, Denmark, the United Provinces; together with England,
Scotland and Ireland; and it may be hoped the people of these Nations and
Kingdoms, (some of which were always accounted as Horns of the Beasts) do
already begin to hate her, and are preparing War against her, and that from
hence her ruin shall suddenly come; and it may be a just and righteous thing
with God thus to order the matter, since she has such an Implacable hatred of
these Northern parts, because of that which she calls the Northern Heresy, and
has of late without all doubt, designed and secretly resolved utterly to
destroy these Protestant Countries, and to make these Kingdoms and States
desolate, but God has, and will put it into their Hearts to agree and fulfill
his will, i. e. Hate the Where, and make her desolate, eat her Flesh, and burn
her with Fire, Rev. 17. 16. and so avenge the righ^eous Blood she has publicly
and secretly poured out like water; nay, I am very confident a very short time
will make this thing to appear, and it shall as fully be made good in the
Antitype as it was in Type, concerning the Medes, etc. Nor shall they do it
alone, I mean the common people of these Countries, with their heads and
renowned Heroes, but Gods choice and beloved ones in these Nations shall join
in with them, and so fulfill also what is said in Jer. 51. 20, 21. Rev. 18. Thou
art my Battle Ax, with thee will I break in pieces the Nations, and with thee
will I destroy Kingdoms, etc. Come out of her my people, reward her as she has
rewarded you, double upon her, etc.

XI. Chaldea or Literal Babylon, carried away into captivity Judea, and the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem, or the Church and People of God, and there held them
for the space of seventy years, a prefixed time by the Almighty, and when that
set time was come to an end, the Lord brought them back, and caused Cyrus to
make Proclamation f^^ the rebuilding the Temple and Holy City Ezra 1. 1. 2. So
likewise has Papal Rom^ captivated the true Israel and holy people ^ God, and
held them also under sore oppress^ on and persecution, for the space of 126^
years, a set time also prefixed by the Lord, a^ when that time is expired, (to
which Peri^ it is hoped we are arrived) the Israel of G^ shall be delivered, and
our captivity shall be returned, but as they gradually returned out of the
Literal captivity, so shall the Lords people out of their Spiritual captivity;
and as it was said of them, When God brought back at first the captivity of
Sion, they were as those who dreamed, Psalm. 126. 1. So likewise are we at this
very time, under this most amazing providence of God, who has begun to deliver
us from the cursed yoke of Mystery Babylon; and now also you shall see, I doubt
not, Liberty proclaimed (as it were) for the rebuilding of the holy Temple the
second time, the work having been obstructed by those Sa^ballts and Tobiahs of
our times, and the work shall go on in the hands of our renowned Zerubbabel,
and that not so much by might nor by power, but by the Spirit of the Lord,
Zech. 4. 6, 7. and the great Mountain on the other side of the Flood shall
become a plain.

XII. Literal Babylon or the Chaldean Monarchy, was brought down not only
suddenly, but with great vengeance which they could not avoid by all their
craft, subtilty, nor strength, and also in such an hour as they little thought
of, when Belshazzar was feasting with his Concubines, and drinking Wine in
Bowls and Vessels, taken out of the Temple which was at Jerusalem, Dan. 3. 1,
2, 3. praising the Gods of Gold and Silver, of Brass, Iron, Wood and of Stone,
doubtless they thought themselves very safe, and little dreamed of their sudden
overthrow, till the han^ writing came out of the Wall, -- The sa^^ night w^^
Belshazzar the King and the Chaldeans slain, and Darius the Median took t^^
Kingdom, etc. Dan. 3. 31.

So in like manner shall Rome or Mystery Babylon, not only suddenly in one hour
com^ down, but with great vengeance, which s^^ shall not be able to avoid, nor
put off with (...) her craft, subtilty nor strength, but as a mil*stone is cast
into the Sea, so with violence she the great City Babylon be thrown down, a^
shall be found no more at all, Rev. 18. 2^ and that too when she thinks her
self safe an^ secure, and seems to fear no danger, but sai^ in her Heart, I sit
a Queen, shall see no so^ro^ nor know loss of Children, nor Widdow-hood (...)
more. And somewhat like this sudden fall, cannot but think we have seen of late,
(in (...)*pect of Babylons fall) in England,* the te^ part of that great City,
and as suddenly (...) may hope it will come upon her in ot^ places in due time.

CHAP. IV. Showing that by the little Horn, Dan. 7. and vile person, Dan. 11,
is meant the Papal power of Rome, or the Pope, who is the supreme Bishop
thereof, all the marks and chief characters of the little Horn, meeting
directly also in him as the head of the present Church of Rome.
SOme will have this little Horn to be Antiochus Epiphanes, others Julius
Caesar, others the Turks. I suppose Antiochus Epi^ha^es might be a type of this
little Horn, for it could not, be Antiochus, because he rose up under the
Grec^an Monarchy, whereas this is ^^id directly to rise up under the fourth
Mo^archy, or when the Roman Empire stood upon his last Legs.

(...) For concerning this little Horn: read (...) Text Dan. 7. 7, 8. After
this I saw in ^he night Vision, and behold a fourth Beast, readful and
terrible, etc* v. 8. I considered ^^e Horns, and behold there came up among
^^em another little Horn, before whom there was three of the first Horns,
plucked up by the Roots, and behold in this Horn were Eyes, like the Eyes of
Man, and a Mouth speaking great things. And so the Popes of Rome were kept
under by the Emperors, who kept a strict Eye over them, curbed their
insolences, and exorbitances, and at the first appearance nipping their
aspiring projects in the very bud; Sometimes deposing and banishing some proud
Prelates, when they showed at what they levelled their designs. But after the
power of Rome, which before was in tire in one Emperor, fell into ten parts and
divisions, which happened in or about the year of our Lord, 456* as Du Moulin,
and the learned Mede show (...) large, out of the Roman Histories, upon the
division and Weakening of the Empire, the Bishop of Rome took his Advantage to
ma^^ his advance, and rose up to regal power, enacting Laws, raising Taxes, and
levying Soldiers; By which means he struck in wit^ partys, and encroached*
upon Italy, and the parts adjacent.

2. This power arising upon the weakening and division of the old* State of the
fourth Monarchy or Kingdom, is called a little Horn, because truly so at its
first beginning Dan. 7. 8. And behold, there came up among them another little
Horn etc. The Pap^^ power, or Bishop of Rome, before this division, was but low
and small, being confined to his Episcopal power over the Church, till by his
Arts he had got up gradually to the Regal Seat, and power of the Temporal
Sword, which he managed with so much Craft and Policy, that afterward he
enlarged his Dominions; but is very rightfully in his Infancy styled a little
Prince, Power, or Horn, arising up amongst, or after the rest, which began
presently after the death of Julian about the year 365, in which time was a
most fearful Earthquake, the like never known before, betokening the decay of
the fourth Kingdom, in its Civil State or Power by a division or falling of
Nations, who set themselves against the power of Rome, and harassed, wasted and
destroyed the Provinces thereof for near forty five years together. See Mede
lib. 3. page 659.

3. This little Horn, after his rise to Temporal Power, plucks up three of the
ten Horns by the Roots, Dan. 7. 8. Before whom there were three of the first
Horns plucked up by the Roots. The Papal Rome having gained the Temporal Sword,
tho* but a little Horn at his beginning; did practice and prosper so, that
betwixt the year 365 and the year 456, or soon after, when Rome was sacked by
Gensericus, he gained such enlargments, that he came to possess about three
parts of ten, of the former or old Roman dominions, according to the rule or
measure of the Compass, as we find in Mr. Mede, Lib. 3. p. 658. and famous Du
Moulin ubi supra, upon which three characters of the little Horn, we frame this
short argument. If the Pope of Rome did rise to Temporal Power, upon the
weakening of Caesarean Dominion (which before did hinder him in his aspiring
usurpation) was but little in his first rise and appearance, did enlarge and
grow to a possession of power, about a third part of the old Roman Dominion;
Then the Pope of Rome is the little Horn, the wicked power, and vile person s^
forth by the Prophet Daniel. But the an^^cedent is true. -- Ergo, so is the
consequent*

4. This little Horn has Eyes like the Eyes of a Man, etc. -- The Pope of Rom^
has Eyes like the Eyes of a Man, i. e. the resemblance of a humane look, but a
Heart lik^ the Dragon, out of which foul mouth he utters presumptuous things.
His predecesson had Eyes like a Leopard, a Bear, a Lion, (...) Dragon; But his
high Eyes like a Man, (...) which there are three things to be note^ (1.) He
looks higher. (2.) Sees further and (3.) Is more enticing than those the went
before him. (1.) He looks higher that is, makes pretense of Pretty, and desig^
for Heaven. (2.) Sees further, that De ceit, Flattery and Policy, will do more
than strength. (3.) Is more enticing to Kings and People, than the Eyes of a
Leopard, Lion, or Dragon, or the former powers in their Heathenish State.

5. This little Horn has a Mouth speaking great or presumptuous things, above
the rate of ordinary men. Dan. 7. 8. The Pope of Rome has a Mouth speaking
great or presumptuous things above the ordinary rate of men. This is evident in
many respects, of which we shall give you but a few instances out of many. (1.)
That he is (he says) the highest Deputy of God, above all the Kings of the
Earth. (2.) That he is infallible and cannot err, which is an incommunicable
attribute of the most high. (3.) That he is universal Head and Bishop of the
Catholic Church. (4.) He assumes the attributes of his Holiness and holy
Father; such an oracle, that has right or power to give Laws to the World, to
which all ought ^o subscribe and yield obedience, and none ^ught to dispute;
greater and more loftily ^an no man speak, unless he will say, I am ^he supreme
Being, and there is no God in Heaven or Earth above my self; which would ^e so
highly ridiculous that every Idiot would be able to detect it.

6. The little Horn had his looks more stout than his fellows, Dan. 7. 20.
whose looks were ^ore stout, etc. The Pope of Rome has looks more stout than
the Horns that have been contemporary with him; which appears in three things.
(1.) In his terrible Bull^ that he makes to roar and stare most dreadfully.
(2.) In his power and acts of deposing Princes. (3.) In asserting himself to be
Gods Vicegerent, against whom no person, upon any cause or pretense whatsoever,
ought to lift up hand or tongue upon the penalty of a total ruin in this
World, and an eternal ruin in the World to come.

7. The little Horn makes War with the Saints* Dan. 7. 21. I beheld, and the
same Horn made War with the Saints, and prevailed against them, and for a long
time, even to the wearing out of the poor Saints of the most high* v 25. The
Pope of Rome has made Wa^ with the Saints, and prevailed against them, and
that to their ruin, as to Liberty, Estate* and even Life it self: as the true
Witnesses of Christ have most sadly experienced in many Countries, in diverse by
past ages, even for such a series of time, that may be properly called a
wearing out of the Saints of the mo^ High.: for his cruelty ended not in a
month or a year, but has lasted for many hundred years: so that for length of
time, number^ of Countries and multitudes of Persons, there is no Power that
ever reigned, has outdone or equalized this vile and bloody Monster; upon
which we frame this Argument.

If the Pope of Rome may be more fitly said to have Eyes like the Eyes of a
Man, a Mouth speaking presumptuous things, and looks more stout than his
fellows; to have made War with the Saints, to have prevailed against them, and
worn them out, more than any other power that ever yet reigned; Then he is the
little Horn, or vile person, under consideration.

But the former is true. -- Ergo, so is the latter.

8. The little Horn is diverse from the rest of the Horns* Dan. 7. 24. And he
shall be diverse from the first, and shall subdue three Kings. The Pope of Rome
is diverse from the rest of the Potentates, in these four respects, (1.) The
manner of his rise, (2.) His pretentions to power. (3.) In his progress to his
height of dignity. (4.) In his management of the power he has usurped. (1.) He
was small or little in his rise, but an ordinary Bishop, before he came to be a
Temporal Prince. (2.) He pretends not to hold his Kingdom by Inheritance, or
gift of the people, as other Kings do, but by a special and divine Patent. (3.)
In his progress to the height of his dignity, by leaving his fixed station, as
pastor of a Church, and by Deceit, Treason, and Violation of all Laws, mounts
the Throne of imperial grandeur. (4.) He rules by a supreme ecclesiastical
power, as well as temporal; pretends to the Keys of Heaven, as well as the
Sword of Justice on Earth, showing himself to be the Beast that has two Horns
like a Lamb, spoken of Rev. 13. 11.

9. This little Horn has so many marks upon him, that they are too numerous to
handle distinctly after our usual methods; and therefore we shall put the
remaining part into a General rank and conclude this subject. The Pope of Rome
has so many marks or characters upon him, that are too numerous to be handled
distinctly in a little room; and therefore we shall but touch upon them so far
as they show the Text made good, and form an Idea of truth in the minds of men.

(1.) He must change times and laws, (2.) Continue a long a space of time. (3.)
He is a vile person. (4.) Had not the honor he has Dan. 11. 21.
fairly given him, either by God or man, but gained it by flattery. (5.)
Removed the proceeding by the Arms of a flood. (6.) He became strong by a small
people. (7.) ver. 22.
He shall have power over the fattest places of the Provinces, and there
scatter his Riches. (8.) Such as do wickedly against Religion, he shall accept.
(9) Under him the Saints fall by captivity ver. 23.
and spoil, by sword and flame many days. (10.) Shall do according to his own
Will, not accounting himself tied to any Laws. (11.) He shall exalt himself
above every God, and speak mavelous things against Dan. 11. 35.
the God of Gods. (12.) Shall not regard the God of his ancestors, (13.) Nor
the desire of Wedlock. (14) Nor any God in a pious way. (15.) Shall give honor
to them that have armed forces. (16.) Shall own a strange God with splendid
Ceremonies, Dan. 11. 38.

1. The Pope of Rome has changed times and laws in two respects. 1. He has
set up and plucked down Kings, which is called a Changing of times and seasons,
Dan. 2. 21.

2. He has made strange alterations of the Laws, Orders, and Institutions used
in the Church, in respect of Officers, administrations of Sacraments, and
celebration of days. 2. Has continued above twelve hundred years. 3. He is as
vile a person as any in the World, tolerates all kind of wickedness, by his
Dispensations, Pardons, etc. 4. Had his exaltation neither by Inheritance,
lawful conquest, nor rightful gift from rightful donators. 5. He had the help
of Phocas, to kill the Emperor, Mauritius; and by the help of Goths and
Vandals enlarged his power. 6. Became strong by a small People, having only a
declining Church, and apostate Christians to assist him. 7. He has power over
Italy, which is reputed to be the Garden of Europe, etc. 8. He accepted,
entertained, and encouraged the people of any nation, that would turn wicked,
and sacrifice all Pretty and Religion, to serve his Interest. 9. Under him the
Saints have fallen, by flames, captivity, and spoil, many days. 10. He has
done according to his own will, and does not look upon any Laws to be
obligatory to him, either from God or men. 11. He (the Pope) has exalted
himself above every God, (that is, such that are so accounted amongst men, or
Gods on Earth) by excommunicating, deposing, treading upon their Necks, and
kicking off their Crowns; by his Blasphemous Edicts and Injunctions he exalts
himself above God himself, and his written Laws, etc, 12. He does not regard
the God of his Ancestors, either the Idols of the Emperors, or the God of the
good Bishops that went before him* 13. He has been remote from the desire of
Women in a lawful way, nay, and frights his Clergy from it too, who are made
incapable of Spiritual promotion, and censured as heinous transgressors, if
married. 14. He has not regarded in a pious way any God; for though he does name
the true God often, and in words profess him, yet in works he does defy him,
and profane his holy name. 15. He gives honor to them who have armed Forces,
and lends them assistance to carry on his black diabolical designs. 16. He has
owned a strange God; a mark completely made up in the Mass, which is adored
with splendid Ceremonies. 17. The people of the Saints, it is said, shall take
away his power to consume and destroy it, to the end; i. e. the Lords people in
their representatives, shall take away the Papal power, etc. and is it not done
in part already here in England? upon all we may frame this Argument.

If all these characters meet no where so clear and evident as upon the Pope of
Rome; then the Pope of Rome is the little Horn, and vile person, set forth in
the Book of Daniel.

But all the aforesaid characters meet no where so clear and evident, as upon
the Pope of Rome, etc. Therefore the Pope is that little Horn.

CHAP. V. Showing that the Prophecies of our Savior in Mat. 13. 15. Also that
of Paul, Acts 20. 29. and 1 Timothy 4. and 2 These. 2. 3. Concerning false Prophets
and grievous Wolves, as also of the Man of Sin, may and ought to be applied to
the Pope and Church of Rome.
FIrst, The Lord Jesus foretold that Enemies should come in his name and
deceive many, and that they should appear in Sheeps clothing, and under that
Vizard hide their devouring Teeth; see his words, Mat. 13. 15. Beware of false
Prophets which come to you in Sheeps clothing, but inwardly are ravening
Wolves; that is, have a design to destroy.

Now it is most evident that the Popes of Rome, and their long Succession have
thus (especially at first appeared) i e. in Sheeps clothing, covering their
hellish designs under the name of Christ, Vicar of Christ, an Apostolical
Bishop, etc. the true Church, holy Church, and Christian Religion, but with an
intent hereby to deceive, for all their pretenses of Jesus Christ's being the
truth, Christ has been but as a Vizard to hide their wolvish nature and
devouring teeth, for whilst they under the notion of Christianity hide
themselves, they have carried on most pernicious and destructive designs, and
that in these three respects following; viz. (1.) If there have appeared any
Kings or Queens in the Christian World, that have been piously inclined, they
have forth with endeavored to pervert them by their Diabolical Doctrine, often
destroying them with their holy Poison. (2.) If any Ministers, or Men of Parts
and Piety have risen up to set forth Gods holy truth, and so bless the dark
World with Gospel Light and Saving Doctrine, they have either choked them with
Gifts and Preferments, or affrighted them by dreadful fears, or by a ravenous
thirsting after their Blood, and have most wickedly and treacherously destroyed
their lives by cruel torments. (3.) If collective Bodies of pious Congregations
of Saints or good Men, have sprung forth in the World, they have followed them
like Bloodhounds, and devouring Wolves, with Fire and Sword, fearful Massacres,
Devastations, Murders and Slaughters, till they have spoiled them, torn in
pieces, and devoured them: Completely fulfilling the Prediction of Christ and
that of the Apostle, Acts 20. 29, 30. For I know this, that after my departure,
shall grievous Wolves enter in amongst you, not sparing the flock: Also of your
own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw the Disciples
after them; who can this Prophecy so exactly agree to as the bloody Popes, who
at first arose out of the Church, and acted the part of Wolves to purpose, as
has been hinted.

II. It Is also evident that all the marks of the Man of Sin spoken of by St.
Paul, 2 These. 2. 3. do agree exactly to the Pope and the Romish Church.

1. As first he was to rise after there came a falling away from the Primitive
Faith; see his words, -- That day shall not come except there come a falling
away first, and that Man of Sin be revealed, etc.

This cannot mean a particular falling away, (as our worthy Writers have
showed) but a general Apostasy of the Church, from the Holy and Apostolical
Doctrine and Disciplin^ of the Gospel, or such a falling away that should be
obvious and visible to all; that should not fall out in a corner, or among^ a
few private Christians, because it is laid dow^ as a general Rule, whereby the
Saints in general might know and judge of the Revelation of Antichrist, or Man
of Sin. And now it is well known that there happened this falling away or
general Apostasy three or four hundred years after Christ, out of which (and
soon after which falling away) he Pope showed himself to be this Man of Sin,
nor did he arise till that Apostasy happened in the World.

2. Another mark he has is this, -- i. e. He shall exalt himself above all
that is called God, etc. viz. Magistrates and Rulers, as Kings and Emperors,
for these are called Gods; I said, Ye are Gods, etc. There are Gods many, etc.

This mark meets directly in the Pope or Popes of Rome, he exalts himself above
all and every one of these who are called Gods. 1. He has assumed a Name above
them. 2. greater power than they, in that he pretends to give them their
Crowns, and not only so, but has power to excommunicate them, nay and depose
and divest them of their Regal power as he pleases, and also in his disposing
of Kingdoms, yea, making Emperors wait a^ his Gate, hold his Stirrup, prostrate
themselves to kiss his Toe, and then to tread upon their Necks as Alexander the
Third did to Frederick Barbaross -- And this is allowed and justified by the
Doctors of the Romish Church. And Bellarm. de Romans Pont. lib. 5. c. 8. give^ ^
as a reason why the Pope would not come to the Council of Nice, lest if the
Emperor should come thither, he should attempt to sit above him, so that by
these two words in the Text, the Apostle describes him, both in his Enmity and
Pride, Opposition and Exaltation. For observe first, he assumeth to himself an
higher power than those that are called Gods; theirs is Humane, his is Divine;
theirs on the Bodies or Estates of Men, his over the Conscience; theirs to the
living, his to Men's Souls after death.

3. The Man of Sin, it is said by the Apostle, shall also exalt himself above
all that is called God, or that is worshipped as God, sitting in the Temple of
God, showing himself to be God, verse 4.

Even so the Pope makes himself like God, and as God, as the King of Babylon of
old said, I will be like the most High, Isa. 14. 14. And as Gods place of
residence of old was said to be in the Temple of Jerusalem, so he as God
sits in the Temple of God, not in the Material Temple, but in the Spiritual
Temple, i. e. the Church of God which is so called; the Apostle speaks of him
as a Bishop who had a Seat, and the Popish Writers give the Pope that, and such
like Titles.

Dominus Deus noster Papa, idem est Dominium Dei and Papa, tu es alter deus in
terra. Council Later. Sess. 4. Thou art another God on Earth. And as God he
makes Laws to bind the Conscience, and dispenses with Laws both Natural and
Moral, and pardons sins as he pleases, past, present, and to come, can deliver
Souls out of Purgatory, and translate them to Heaven; so that this Man of Sin
is not to be looked for amongst the Turks, Pagans or Infidels, he sits in
the Temple, the Church of God; not that it can be the true Church, where he
sits and acts, but rather the Synagogue of Satan: But that which he
calls so, and which bears that name, and also was really so before the
falling away, when he first got up. He also exalts himself above God, when he
makes the Scriptures to derive their Authority more from the Popes Canonizing
than God himself, and without it no Man is bound to believe them, ^it. 2. 23.
Again, if the Pope should err by commanding Vice, and forbidding Virtue, the
Church is bound to believe Vice is good and Virtue to be evil, Bellarm. lib. 4.
de sum. pont. c. 5. Besides he can forgive sins though the evil habits be not
changed, what is all this then to make himself God, and to exalt himself above
God? etc.

4. The Man of Sin it is said could not get up until that which then, i. e. in
the Apostles days did let, was taken away. For the Mystery of iniquity does
already work, only he we now lets, will let until he be taken away, verse
7. which was the Heathen Emperon Government, or sixth Head of the Beast.

This also shows the Pope to be the Man of Sin, for he rose to his glory and
wicked grandeur not till the sixth Head or Pagan power was gone or taken out of
the way, for though the Mystery of iniquity did work gradually, and corruptions
crept into the Church early, yet did he not appear till after the Christian
Emperors had made way for him; hence he i^ said to be an eighth, and of the
seventh.

III. There is another Prophecy concerning this cursed Antichristian state, it
is i^ 1 Timothy 4. 1, 2, 3. Now the Spirit speaked expressly that in the latter
times some shall depart from the Faith, giving heed to seducing Spirit and
Doctrine of Devils.

No doubt but Rome is concerned in the place, for either by Doctrine of Devils
are meant such Doctrines that are brought i^ by the power and influence of the
Devil or Devilish Doctrines, or else the Doctrine of Damons, the Apostle hereby
signifying that is the latter times, that is, after the general Apostasy, the
Man of Sin, or Papal Rome should bring in the Doctrine of the Pagans concerning
Demons, which were looked upon by them to be an inferior sort of Gods, a kind
^^ middle Beings between their highest Gods and Men, whose Office was to be
Advocates or Mediators between Men and the highest Gods, because they judged it
was not lawful for Men to come to the highest Gods immediately, and these they
worshipped by Images.

Even so the Papists or Mystery Babylon has divos and divas, Saints of all
sorts whom she has Canonized, to be called upon in her public Prayers, Altars
and Feast days dedicated and kept unto their memory, and many other Honors,
acknowledging them to be Mediators between God and Men, and unto these Demons
or petty Gods she makes her Prayers, and has their Images, and to whom they do
divine Homage like as did the Pagans of old.

CHAP. VI. Showing the Judgments of diverse Eminent Men concerning the Death,
Resurrection and Ascension of the Witnesses, and final downfall of Mystery
Babylon; and that in all probability it will be in this present Age: Together
with an account of diverse strange Prophesies relating thereto, some very
Ancient, and c.
HAving clearly demonstrated that the Church of Rome is that great Whore
Mystery Babylon, It may not be amiss before we conclude this (...) Treatise, to
give you some account concerning her full and final overthrow, which has been
for ^ long time the expectation of Gods people, and multitudes of Prayers have
and still do go up to Heaven, for the accomplishment thereof; and reason there
is for it, considering what a Plague she has been to the World and Church of
God for so many hundred of years, and certainly God will at la^^ hear that
mighty cry of Prayer, and of innocen^ Blood that continually is in his Ears,
and since the Death, Resurrection and Ascension of the Witnesses (if rightly
understood) gives such clear light as touching the fall of Babylon, we shall
give you some brief hints concerning this important and weighty point. The
Beast is to continue for the space of forty two Months, and the Witnesses are
to Prophecy in Sackcloth for the space of 1260 days, which most Writers
conclude to be one and the same term of time, and that by days is meant yea^^
all generally conclude; and the long continuance of the Beast and Papal power
clearly show, that to be the mind of Gods Spirit in those Mystical numbers Yet
a late Worthy and Learned Writer has said a great-deal to prove the forty two
Months are to be reckoned by the Moon, and not by the Sun; and if so, then as
he shows the time of the Witnesses wearing Sackcloth is thirty eight years
longer than the forty two months, but yet are to terminate together, he
concluding the Witnesses put on their Sackcloth so many years before the
beginning or Epoch of the forty two Months. See his Book entitled, The command
of God to his people to come out if Babylon. Moreover he says, the time, Epoch
or beginning of the forty two Months must be fixed at the cessation of the
seventh sort of Government, or Christian Emperors Reign, which, says he, was
in the year 475. and the whole time of the Beasts Reign and Tyranny being but
forty two Months, which by the Moon he accounts to be just 1222 years, the
period of which will be, says he, in 1697. And this we will say, he has
doubtless fixed the Epoch or beginning of the Beasts Kingdom more fairly than
many Writers before him have done, because all along where the Reign of one
Head or Government ended the other begun, as it is said, (you know) the King
never dies. Take his own words, p. 25.

Thus far the matter is determined according to the Prophecy; i. e. Whenever
the 7th King, asserted to be the Christian Emperors Government expired, viz. by
a civil death, or the cessation of the Imperial Name and Power, immediately the
eighth King according to the Prophecy must succeed, and bear up the Roman City
in gratideur, and whoever has born up that City in Supremacy, since that time,
must be according to Prophecy that eighth King, i. e. the Beast. Now I appeal
to all the World what year that was when the Western Imperial Name fell, and it
is known in all History to be the year of our Lord 475.

-- For in the wonderful disposes of God, no one has claimed a Title of Empire
from that City since that year, but the Pope.

I do commend the ingenious Reader to the Book it self.

Now if this be true or can be granted we are very near the final ruin of the
Papistry, nay, and from diverse other authors, most or all that I have met with,
agree it will be in this very age; Peter du Moulin a wise and renowned French
Author, in his book entitled the accomplishment of the Prophecy, says, from
the year 1689. Popery shall fall and go down, but all conclude that the tenth
part of this great City falls first, and I doubt not but the providence of God
has brought us forth in the time of the accomplishment of that part of the
Prophecy, for that great Britain is that part of the great City, I see no
cause to doubt, and that also the witnesses are risen, or arising, and will
soon be upon their feet, is the thoughts of several worthy men, but I being
limited to the number of Sheets cannot enlarge as I would do, therefore we shall

1. Briefly give you our understanding, who the t^ witnesses are, in which we
agree and accord with s^v^i^ learned men. 2. What is meant by the slaying of
the witnesses. 3. Also some probable conjectures concerning the ti^^ when
slain, as also of their Resurrection, standing (...) their feet and ascension.
1. It Is not unknown to the Judicious Reader what different sentiments there
have been about who or what the two witnesses are, some thinking they are the
Old and New Testament, others Magistracy and Ministry, others two sorts of
Godly Churches, some have thought them to be Moses and Elias, who tho, along
time since are glorified in Heaven, yet shall come again and be killed on Earth
(which is the most improbable of any of the other^ yet the Papist writers and
some others of late time^ have asserted this.

But we Judge by them are meant Gods faithf^^ people, called two witnesses,
because of the sma^ness of their number, who have born witness to the truths of
Christ, all the time of Antichri^^ reign, or else called two as comprehending
both Ministers, (who are more directly intended) and people; also they may be
called two, (as so^^ think) in respect of their twofold Testimony to (...) true
Gospel Ministry and Magistracy; and this th^^ conclude because called also two
Candlesticks, and (...) alluding to those two Sons of Oil, i. e. (...) and
Zerubbabel; it is evident God calls his people especially his faithful Ministers
his witnesses, Ye are (...) witnesses, says the Lord, Isa. 44. 8. and says
Christ, ^^ shall be witnesses unto me, Act. ^. 8. and Act. 5. 32. We are his
witnesses, etc. also called two, because two (...) the number which God
ordained, as sufficient to establish a Truth by; as much as to say God has ^ad
sufficient witnesses to bear a testimony to his Word and Gospel, in every age
against Antichrist, his abominable lies, usurpation and cursed Idolatry.

2. As touching the slaying of them, it must either intend a natural Death, or
external slaying, or else ^ civil death; now I see no ground to conclude the
former, because they were so killed all along whilst they Prophesied in
sackcloth, besides, friends nor enemies would not suffer their Dead Bodies,
to lie ^^buried in the Street for the space of three years and half, for the
best of expositors conclude generally, that is the time meant by three days and
a half, therefore it must be a civil Death or slaying.

This then I conclude to be intended, viz. near the end of the two and forty
months, or 1260. years of their Prophecy the Beast who rose out of the
bottomless Pit, shall make a new rally or attempt upon Gods faithful people,
quite to extinguish or put ^n end to their testimony, and so far prevail as
they shall be looked upon as dead in Law, or be accounted as dead and lost
people, in the eye of the Enemy, and in their own sight also, both in respect
of the Ministry and Magistracy too. To this effect also Dr. Tho. Goodwin
speaks, p. 154, 155. This killing them considered as witnesses, not as men,
that is, a taking away of all power from them, of prophesying as they were
wont, a general silencing of Ministers, and deposing Magistrates and men of
worth, that profess and uphold Religion, etc. putting them out from all places,
etc. That the Popish party should again arrive to such ^ in some one or more
Kingdoms, that were formerly a Horn, or Horns of the Beast, or one ^ the
Streets of the great City; nay, and prevail ^ far, as to have great hopes to
work the utter ^ of Gods faithful people and witnesses, as to rejoy^ and
conclude the day will, nay is their own, ^ that to such a degree that she viz.
Mystery Babyl^ shall say in her Heart, I sit a Queen, and shall see ^ sorrow,
nor know less of Children any more. This ^ ing dead, says the Dr. here of the
witnesses, ^ needs be taken metaphorically, and underst^^^ of a civil death,
and of a suppression of them, ^ their cause, And as they are witnesses to be
put do^ and extinguished that they for a time remain^ men dead laid forth by
the Walls for dead, and ^ men in whose Testimony, there is in appear^^^ no
likelihood of a revival, their Enemies has ^ now got such power over them; this
certai^ made the great matter of their Enemies rejoyc^ that as the Pharisees
thought they had Christ (...) enough, when they got him condemned and
cr^cified, and had him in the grave: so these Enemies shall think they have the
witnesses do^ sure enough for ever; so great, desperate, (...) helpless in all
view, will the suppression of (...) witnesses be by their Enemies. And this is
principally intended in their being said to lie (...) And oppositely, the
revival of them, and the cause, is set forth by a resurrection from the de^
this great man has given such an account of ^ slaying and lying dead of the
Witnesses that cann^ I think, be gainsayed, and speaks (though so man years ago)
as if he had lived to see what our E^ have beheld actually accomplished in this
Kingdom in a few years last past; time is the only opener ^ interpreter of
these Mysteries; was there ever s^ ^n hour upon the Lords people since the
beginning of the Reformation, as has been in these five or six years last
past, both here and in France; if he is right, certainly we have seen the death
of Gods witnesses; and with this does a worthy, pious and learned friend ^gree
in a late manuscript which is come to my ^and, and also in his said Papers he
speaks of that ^treet in which they are said to lie as dead, and al^o of the
Resurrection of them as already, though but ^ately come to pass, yet with that
care and caution, that it is left to the consideration of the wise and thinking
Christian, for too great confidence in matters of this nature is not necessary.

But because some are ready to object, says he, that if the witnesses are
already slain, and are rose in these nations, they think there would then be a
far greater appearance of divine Glory, in order to the rescue and deliverance
of Gods people in other parts of the World, as well as here, whereas we know
that the generality of Christ's witnesses elsewhere do yet remain under great
Persecution, etc. In answer whereunto he says it ought to be duly considered,
that the death, and resurrection of the witnesses spoken of Rev. 11. must have
of necessity a peculiar reference unto one of the Streets only of the great
City, for so the Text expressly tells us, their dead bodies shall lie in the
Street, (or in that Street of the great City,) v. 8. which ^eems plainly to
point unto some one principal Street or part of the Roman Jurisdiction which
must needs denote such a Street as where there shall be the greatest number of
the most eminent and faithful witnesses of Christ, even are such who have born
the clearest testimony against the suppersti^ions, and abominations of the
Mystery of iniqui^y, and that have born the clearest testimony, concerning
Christ and the Gospel, in the due exercise, and administration of the Kingly,
Priestly, and Prophetical offices of the Lord Jesus, for a^ reference hereunto
it is that Christ values nation and Kingdoms not in respect of their opulency,
^ greatness, or vastness of dominions, but where there are the greatest numbers
of his chosen Jewels* this may serve to Answer clavis Apoc. in asserti^ Germany
to be this Street; also our French Autho^ concerning the Kingdom of France;
some one Street we see by the plain words of the text is designed ^ the scene
where this glorious Prophecy was to b^ accomplished; (for the work must begin
some where; And what that Street should be, but the Kingdom of Great Britain
we see no cause to doubt which all acknowledge to have been once, one ^ the ten
Horns of the Beast, and where also I thi^ we may modestly affirm, there are the
greatest number of Christ's most enlightened and faithful Witnesses I will not
determine, but I suppose there are f^^ of Ingenuity, but have read and
considered t^ several convincing arguments, of Dr. Goodwin ^ Rev. 11. wherein
he does assert, and I think ^ clearly prove, that that prediction concerning t^
death of the Witnesses and their Resurrection mu^ of necessity be limited to
one of the Streets of the great City, and cannot fairly be expounded as having
any immediate reference unto any of the rest, so ^ does as clearly demonstrate
that the English Juridiction, must of necessity be that street, which ^ does by
comparing the arguments that are brough^ by others to prove that France,
Germany, or any other country under the Papal power should ^ there intended
with those that may justly be alleged to prove England is the spot where that
prediction was to be accomplished.

And now, says he, if the witnesses are upon th^^ feet, as I am strongly
inclined to believe they are; and am more and more confirmed in my notion in
that respect, and that so as they shall never more be flung upon their backs,
then I may confidently affirm that it will not be long ere they shall hear a
great voice from Heaven, saying unto them, Come up hither; And accordingly they
shall ascend up into Heaven in a Cloud, their Enemies beholding them, in which
ascent of theirs, they must be conformable to the resurrection and ascension of
Christ himself.

But whereas it is objected that if the witnesses are risen indeed, so as to be
on their feet, in pursuance of that sacred prediction, Rev. 11. there must
needs have been some more than ordinary appearance, of the presence of God in
the midst of his people, or at the least in a greater degree thereof than as
yet we see.

Ans. I say no, it does not therefore follow that it must be so: nor indeed it
cannot rationally be expected till the time comes of their ascension, for this
is an established rule with me, that there must and will be a signal proportion
or resemblance, betwixt the Death, Resurrection and Ascension of Christ's
witnesses, and that of Christ himself. Now as to what concerns the
resurrection of our Savior himself in his own person, thus we are told, that
he showed himself alive after his passion by many infallible proofs, being seen
of his Disciples forty days, and speaking to them of the things pertaining to
the Kingdom of God; yet for ought as appears to us, he appeared unto them in
all that time, but as he did before, there was no discovery of any signal
Majesty, or visible glory, upon him, more than they had seen upon him before
his Death and Suffering; neither indeed was the Spirit come down upon them. And
the reason is expressly rendered, because that Jesus was not yet glorified,
neither could the glorification of Christ be expected till his ^cention; and
consequently they could not look (...) the effusion of the Spirit till then --
Wherefore, though it is true there is as yet no appearance of any signal glory
upon Gods people, nor any considerable measure of the Holy Spirit th^^ there
was before, yet for as much as it is highly rational to conceive that there
must be, and will be as clear resemblance or proportion (as I said before)
betwixt what passed at the Resurrection of Christ and his Ascension, and that
of the Witnesses* from hence it plainly sollows, that we have (...) just ground
to expect that abundant effusion of the Spirit which God has promised (and we
have been a waiting for) till we see the Witnesses upon th^^ Ascention-work.
For as it is evident, that th^^ will be a time of great confusion and
desolation upon the Enemies of God, so it is as evident, and we may no less
groundedly expect, but that it will be a time of great glory and refreshment
unto God^ people by the abundant pouring out of the Spir^^ upon them, whereby
Conversion work will swiftly go on and prosper, and the Gospel run and (...)
glorified; to which let me add, why may we no^ then expect such great light to
break forth, or the Spirit in such a manner to be given as to convict (...)
Gods Children who they are that are in the true^ order of the Gospel; so that
all the Saints and Protestant Churches may be United into one Body an^
Communion, according to that holy Primitive an^ Apostolical pattern and purity.
Then says he, (...) may justly conclude, that as it was promised of (...) in
the Type, it shall be much more in the Antityp^ viz. That the glory of the
latter House should exceed the glory of the former, which in the Ty^^ was
fulfilled by Christ's Personal presence ther^ according to that promise, The
desire of all N^ti^^ (...); and I will fill this House with glory, says (...)
of Hosts, Hag. 2. 7. Now if the Personal (...) of Christ in that day and state
of his Humi^ filled that latter House or material Temple (...) glory, so that
it exceeded the glory of the forther, we may after the same rule as justly
conclude, that though the Spiritual or Gospel Temple in the first Edition of it
in the Apostle's days was glorious through the abundant effusion of the Holy
Spirit; that the same Spiritual House in the second Edition thereof in the
latter days, to be sure will not come short, but rather exceed in glory, etc.
To which let us add the glorious Deliverance promised from outward Oppression
and Persecution, which never quite ceased in the Primitive days, together with
that glorious Union, they shall have that pure Language, and shall serve the
Lord with one consent; together with the great increase of the Church, bringing
in both Jews and Gentiles into one Sheepfold, but till the Ascension of the
Witnesses comes to pass, these things cannot groundedly be expected. He also
gives some hints concerning the time of the slaying of the Witnesses, as also
of their Resurrection, which things he does not presume positively to
determine, but rather conjecturally expresses himself; the exact time he
mentions I shall not relate, but you may conclude he fixes the slaying of them
between the year 1680 and 1688. For since the ^ime that the pretended
Protestant Plot was talked ^f, and as they said discovered, and several worthy
Christians Executed, as the ever Renowned William Lord Russel, Sheriff Cornish,
the Noble Earl (...) Essex, Col. Sidney, and that godly Woman and Martyr Mrs.
Ga^nt, etc. What a Flood of contempt, reproach, and what not, has been (as he
^^serves) cast upon the whole of the true interest (...) Christ in this
Kingdom, with the barbarous slaughter of those worthy Christians and Witness^^
in the West, together with that Storm of Persec^tion, which we have no ground
to doubt was ^^^ried on by the Popish Enemy, and Emissaries of R^^^, together
with the turning out of places of tru^^ many good Protestants, and the taking
away of Charters of Cities and Corporations, silencing worthy Ministers, etc.
nay, striking at the root and whole constitution of the English Government,
^^thing being designed but the utter subversion of the Protestant Religion,
things growing every day worse and worse, nothing appearing but the blackness
of darkness, and that which was worst of all many of Gods witnesses seemed to
be strangely despirited, whilst others truckl'd to the Enemi^^ yoke, suffering
Chapels to be erected for Popery and Cursed Mass Priests, and Jesuits; and
that to^ in many of the chief of our Cities, nay, in famo^^ London it self, and
that in the very Heart of it. O^^ state seeming desperate and hopeless in the
view (...) all at home and abroad, many good men basely misled, joining in with
them unawares, in carry^^ on the design of this Whore, in this her great (...)
last attempt, wherein she doubted not but to (...) all the Heretics under her
Foot, and utterly to extirpate the Protestant Religion, such a death (...) face
of things never sure appeared, before this ho^^ and power of darkness, and it
was strangely pr^^ged, as many feared, by that lightening before (...) in 1678.
upon the discovery of the Popish (...) when our hopes were raised by that great
zeal (...) our brave English Parliaments, against the Pa^^ and Popish Religion,
most thinking at that (...) our morning light appeared to break forth, and the
^^^terness of death was over, but lo what a sudden ch^^^ did we see? how was
our light turned into dark^^ and our joy to sorrow and lamentation, and (...)
^oy and triumph attended our Popish Enemies? what ^ingings of Te deum at Rome,
and in all Popish Countries, and sending gifts one to another, for joy that
these witnesses of Christ were overcome, and said by the walls, and their
testimony and spirits gone in this Kingdom, which was always a terror to the
Popish Church, together with that wonderful success they had about the same
time over the Protestants, and Turks in Hungary, that Kingdom being restored to
her too? these things made her doubtless to say ^n her Heart, I sit a Queen,
etc. But as God foretold, the people of the Nations, (viz.) the neighboring
Nations would not see nor endure to see the dead bodies ^f Gods witnesses, and
people put into Graves, (...) for their eyes were upon us, before they
appeared) for our help, and the fear of them doubtless ^^id prevent under God
our Enemies, from attempting that which we may conclude they longed to be (...).

The worthy Gentleman I mentioned before, ^ells us that he was so much the more
strengthened in ^is opinion in respect of the death and resurrection of the
witnesses from a threefold testimony.

The first is that of Socrates, who in his Ecclesiastical History, affirmed
that such things did appear in ^^ch a year (which he mentioned) that gave him
^^use to conclude there to begin the Epoch or beginning of the 1260 years of
the witnesses prophesying in sackcloth, viz in the year 426 which brings ^^wn
the said time of the slaying of the witnesses, ^^ft to the same year he speaks
of, which if he was ^^ght, the witnesses must now be risen and upon ^^eir feet.

The second was, Mr. William Alleine whose ^^count brings the great things down
to the very ^^ne year.

Third, Mr. Bright-man, he says, also affirms that about the self same year
Antichrists Kingdom should expire.

And our Author looking for these great revolutions just at that time, and now
perceiving them (to appearance) come to pass, as he says, it may be easily
supposed, could not but be filled with joy, besides intimates, he still
continues in a hopefulness of expectation, that the present work will go on,
and sol hope it is with us all, for that God who has begun to work such a
miraculous and blessed work w^^^ perfect it, he that has showed us such
things, w^^^ yet show us greater, and certainly the present work of God in this
Nation, is the admiration of all the Nations round about, and strikes terror
into the Hearts of all the Lords Enemies; And in particular makes the French
King to have other thoughts, the he had a few months ago, and we hope his time
(...) at hand to drink of the cup of divine vengeance.

Dr. Goodwin speaking, p. 172. of the resurrecti^^ of the witnesses, says,
that whereas through a forced consent and yielding, the Popes power (...) again
been entertained by that tenth part of (...) City for the killing the
witnesses; they now (...) cast off that power, with a mighty commotion (...)
insurrection, and so proceed to ruin the oppo^^^^ party unto the witnesses, who
were the instruments of that former slaughter, of which p^^^ the remnant
unslain do, as men affrighted, g^^ glory to God, and turn back again to embrace
the truth, and acknowledge God to be in these witnesses and in their cause.

So that although this may and shall end in (...) ruin of Rome, (which is the
highest effect of (...) fifth Vial) (for this Resurrection and Ascen^^^^ of the
witnesses, are truly the preparation unto (...) yet this other passage of the
Earth quake, etc. (...) here is said to be the same hour with their rising, is
rather to be understood of the means, or thing making way unto that their
Resurrection, so that this Insurrection, or rising of the people in the tenth
part of the City, (which is meant by the Earth quake) is the preparation unto
their resurrection, which ends in the ruin of Rome, the scope of the holy Ghost
here, being to show, what did properly and peculiarly concern the rising of the
witnesses, as the means to it; yet so as still this Earthquake here, and fall
of the tenth part of the City, are reducible unto that fifth Vial, as a degree
unto it; and so that fifth Vial may also be ultimately intended in this
passage, recorded of the witnesses rising, as the preparation unto it; thus in
the interpretation of the Vials, I showed that there may be many sprinklings of
the same Vial, both long before it come to its (...) and vigor, and also
after; all which are, notwithstanding, to be reduced unto that Vial of the kind
whereof they are, or unto which they are either preparations or appendixes.

1. By the tenth part of the City, I understand as Mr. Brightman before me,
some one tenth part of Europe, which as it all once belonged to the
Jurisdiction of the City of Rome, (and is in this book called ten Kingdoms) so
now again, upon the Gentiles, or Idolatrous Papists, their recovering the
outward court shall now at last, more or less come under the Jurisdiction of
that City, but especially, or at least this tenth part of it here intended,
where most faithful witnesses shall be ^ound, and where most of them shall be
triumphed over and slain, shall during these three years and a half, become a
part of the City again; and so is ^^lled a tenth part of the City; City being
put ^ere (as it often is in this book) for the extent of the jurisdiction of
the City of Rome, which had these ten European Kingdoms by Charter allotted
unto it, Chap. 17. and unto which these Kingdoms are a second time to agree, to
give up their power in one of which ten, or in the tenth part of the whole, the
witnesses shall first begin to rise; and therein shall this Earth quake
accompany their resurrection; this tenth part of the City may perhaps be all
one with that Street of the City, mentioned v. 8.

2. By the Earthquake here which is said to be a great one, is meant, as still
in this book it is, a great concussion or shaking, of States, Poli^ique, (...)
Ecclesiastical, for of either, or of both, it is used thus under the sixth
seal, the great alteration wrought in the Roman Empire, when it turned from
Heathenism to Christianity, brought abo^^ by the power of Constantine, with the
depo^^^^ those Heathenish Emperors, Captains, and altering the face of the
Empires Religion, is called (...) Earthquake, Chap. 6. so that the like mighty
commotion, with an alteration of the face of things (either civil or
ecclesiastic) shall fall out in a tenth part of the City, and shall accompany
or usher (...) this rising of the witnesses.

3. Now by, and through this Earth quakes falling thus out, in a tenth part of
the City, this tenth part of it is so shaken that it falls; that is, ceased to
be a part of the City, or to belong unto its Jurisdiction any longer; or, which
is all one, falls of (as we say) from being of the number of those th^^ give
their power to the Beast, which if it prove (...) be any of the Protestant
States, that should yet again (as was said) embrace the Beasts power, and come
under his Jurisdiction, or in order to (...) bringing in again of the Popes
power, should (...) these witnesses, and so thereby become a part (...) that
City, and be reckoned pertaining unto its Jurisdiction; yet now revolting from
under the power of this City, and recoiling again through this Earthquake, it
may truly be said to fall; namely, qua Urbis pars est, as it is a part of the
City which it before was, but now cease to be, it now utterly renouncing
either to belong to its Jurisdiction, or to be of its party any longer, and as
Earthquakes are from inward motions in the bowels of the Earth, so this here
may seem to rise from within that Kingdom it self, whether through the supreme
Magistrates beginning to hate the Whore, as the promise is, Chap. 17. or the
peoples abominating the cruelty and contempt put upon the Witnesses and their
cause; their Consciences having been enlightened in the truth, while themselves
were trodden under as the outward Court, by these Gentiles, and so they come to
shake off that Yoke, and the Witnesses having a Spirit of life now come into
them, these take heart, and join with them and their cause: whether (I say)
through the working of either, or both of these, I cannot determine, but I
think through both; for the ruin of the City (unto which this is at least the
preparation) is to be effected, through Gods changing one of the ten Kings
Hearts so to hate the Whore, as to eat her flesh, and burn her with fire. Chap.
17. And this voice speaking unto the witnesses out of Heaven, Mr. Mede
conjectures to be that supreme authority, with which the people also shall
join: for an Earthquake certainly notes out a commotion in the people and
nations. Thus far the Doctor.

Now that which is said to be previous to the slaying of the Witnesses, is the
War which the Beast would make against them when they were about finishing
their Testimony in Sackcloath or in the end of the 1260. days or years, which
plainly implys two things.

First, That about that time (as the Doctor intimates) the Beast that rose out
of the Bottomless Pi^, viz. the Papal power, would recover strength again in
this Nation or that tenth part of the City called also a Street where the
Witnesses should be ^^ain and lie dead.

Secondly, Make War against them with all imaginable power, craft and policy
that Hell could afford, endeavoring utterly to root out Gods faithful
Witnesses or Protestant Interest; now have not we seen these things which the
Dr. has upon this account writ? is it not evident that things in England, have
for many years last past been carried on by the Papal Power, not only in the
late Kings reign, but also before? have not we seen a strange Spiritual War
managed by Popish councils, Priests and Jesuits, and had they not very far
prevailed? Yea so far, as to the killing of Gods Witnesses, (according to what
the Dr. says is meant thereby) how much different has the late times of
trouble been to former days? What a base compliance with the Antichristian
party have we seen? What a strange dispiriting of godly people, nay, and
Ministers too? Never sure such a civil death in every respect, has been seen
nor known before this hour.

Now as to the witnesses standing on their Fee^, says the Dr. p. 170. First,
As men erect, and taking Heart, their cause being just, though before condemned.
Secondly, As ready to defend it, and as men able and resolved now to confront
their Enemies, which strikes a mighty dread into their guilty Consciences;
great fear fell upon them that saw them, their Hearts begin to sink and die, at
the Witnesses first beginning to live, and have not we seen somewhat much like
this? what a strange Spirit do we see now, in all sorts of Protestants against
the Whore or Antichristian party, both here and in Scotland also? More
especially, as touching the Ascension of the Witnesses, they shall hear a
voice, Come up hither, it certainly signifies some more glorious Church State,
and restoration of the Primitive Purity, that shall attend the Saints and
Church of God, and when that comes to pass, may be such a measure of the spirit
may be given, as to unite all Faithful and Godly Protestants into one Body and
Communion, and then the Spouse or Church of God will come forth out of the
Wilderness, as terrible as an Army with banners, Cant. 6. 4.

CHAP. VII. Showing the Judgment of diverse Learned Me^ upon the pouring out of
the seven Vials, particularly Monsieur Jurieu a late French Writer; as also Dr.
Goodwin, Mr. Can, etc. Proving that none of the seven Vials are yet poured
out, and Monsieur Jurieu's Arguments answered, etc. Together with an answer to
what he says of the slaying of the Witnesses, and that by the Street is not
meant the Kingdom of France.
THus I have given you a brief account of the Judgment and Opinion of diverse
Worthy and Learned Men concerning the ri^e and ruin of Antichrist and Mystery
Babylon; together with the Death* Resurrection and Ascension of the two
Witnesses, which is left to you to receive or reject according to your own
conceptions and understandings, according to the Light and Knowledge God has
given you of these great Mysteries; -- There is one thing more I shall speak
to, and a little further open, which is a matter of great Importance to
understand, in order to the finding out the final overthrow of the Papal Power
and ruin of Antichrist, which is that of the seven Vials, and last Plagues
spoken of Rev. 16. It seems not a little strange to me, to see how exceedingly
the learned and most renowned Expositors, differ about the time of the pouring
out of the Vials, some concluding they are all already poured forth, others
that there are only the first three poured out, and some others affirm there is
not one of them as yet poured forth, but do believe they shall all be poured
out under the seventh Trumpet, which contains the third woe, and will effect the
utter overthrow of the Beasts Kingdom, and the setting up the Kingdom of Jesus
Christ, we shall therefore give you some brief hints of what most of our late
Interpreters have said, in respect of this matter; and in order to the doing of
this, it is not amiss to note unto you, the three several periods spoken of in
the Book of the Revelations, which seems to me to be a Key to open most of
those deep Mysteries contained in that wonderful Prophecy.

First, The Seven Seals. Second, The Seven Trumpets. The Third, The Seven Vials
or seven last Plagues.

Expositors generally all agree that the six first Seals contained those
Judgments of God, executed upon the Heathen or Pagan Emperors, which fell out
and was wholly accomplished in the space of three hundred, or three hundred and
ten years or thereabouts after Christ, and so (as some conceive) brought in the
first Woe.

The seventh Seal (according to the late famous Peter Jurieu, a French Writer,
and some others) produced or brought in the Seven Trumpets, Pet. Jurieu accom.
Prophe. p. 37.
and brings the events even to the last Judgments, the first Trumpet not being
sounded until the seventh Seal was opened, so that these Seven Seals, as he
observes, are like six Branches, that shoot forth from the Body of a Tree, with
a seventh great Branch, which it self became a great Arm, and shoots forth into
seven other Branches (which are the seven Trumpets).

Secondly, The six first Trumpets contain the Judgments of God upon the World
under the Arian Apostate Persecuters, and the bringing in the Antichristian
state, i. e. the Beast or man of Sin, and Mystery Babylon, with the Mohammedan
Monarchy, together with the death or slaying of the Witnesses of Christ, which
lasts for a long series of time, at least as some conceive 1300 and odd years
and compleats the second Woe.

Thirdly, The seventh Trumpet, some wise and understanding men of late do
conclude, produces the seven Vials and seven last plagues, which they do not
think any of them as yet are poured forth, but will gradually effect the utter
overthrow of the Papal Church containing the entire Judgments or wrath of God
upon the Beast and Babylon, and therefore called the seven last Plagues, and so
let in the Third Woe. Upon the Antichristian World, and brings in the glory of
the latter day or Kingdom of Christ; if this may be admitted, we may very well
say that the Seven Seals contained in them the whole events of things from the
time that St. John received his Revelation to the end of all Gods Mysteries
there spoken of; but then you must observe the rule we have noted, and this
seems to me the clearest and best exposition, I can arrive to the knowledge of,
who have labored, according to that light and understanding God has given me,
to find out the Mysteries contained in this Book, for near 30 years last past,
though I dare not be positive that none of the Vials are yet poured out knowing
what has been said by our able expositers to the contrary; some of which I
shall here mention, and their arguments upon which they build their
conceptions; amongst those that say the three first Vials are poured forth, are
these following.

First, Mr. Joseph Mede, Dr. More, Du Moulin, Mr. Durham, De Launay, Dr.
Goodwin and many others; the first Vial, they say, was poured forth by the
faithful Ministers of Christ, at the first reformation before Luthers time, and
that grievous sore that fell upon the Antichristian state, was the discovery of
the abominable Idolatry of the Romish Clergy; together with that hatred of
them, for their odious and impure lives.

The Second Vial some of them affirm, was poured forth by the Preaching of
Luther, and those worthy Witnesses of Christ in his days.

The Third Vial was poured forth, according to their Judgments, by other worthy
Ministers signified by the third Angel, who rose up in the Church after Luthers
time, who in some things had more light; and partly also by laws made against
Popery in the days of Queen Elizabeth, etc. Mr. Mede and Dr. More seem to agree
in this, as likewise do our late Annotators, read them on Rev. 16.

The Fourth Vial, they, as well as Dr. Goodwin, seem to hint we are under,
which is said to be poured forth upon the Sun, which the Dr. concludes p. 99.
to mean either the Emperor, or King of Spain, or both, they being of the same
house of Austria, Mr. Parkins long before hinted that by the Sun, did mean some
Protestant Prince in Germany who should have some of this Vial poured forth
upon him by the Popish party, but being provoked thereby afterward he should
rise again, and like the Sun scorch them with his heat, but the Dr. rather
inclines to Mr. Mede and Dr. More.

But to proceed, our late French Author Peter Jurieu, positively affirms that
six of the Vials are already poured forth, and that we are under the seventh,
which will effect the final ruin of the Papistry or Church of Rome, (if I
mistake him not) one reason why he does thus believe, is because the Vials
signify seven periods of time, which ought to be distinguished one from
another, 2 part p. 68, 69. as the seven Seals and seven Trumpets did signify,
seven periods, which succeeded one another; and he concludes that the periods
described by every Vial, are each of them more than one age, so that, says he,
if there is but two or three of them yet to be poured out, we shall have four
or five hundred years to come, before Antichrists Kingdom comes to an end,
which I do not find him to give any convincing demonstration to make appear,
though I cannot but say he seems to be a person of good understanding in many
respects, touching these great Mysteries, contained in the Book of the
Apocalypse moreover he distinguishes between the Vials and Plagues, viz. saying
the Vial signifies the Period of time, the Plague signifying the Judgment of
God, which falls out during the Period, which if it be granted, yet why must
every Period contain a 100 years, or at least (as he intimates) 50 years, or
See his preface, advice to all Christians.
70? the first Plague of the 7. he fixes to the 10 Century, in respect of the
dismal corruption of the Popedom in that age, p. 79. the first Vial was poured
out, says he, upon the Earth, i. e. upon the whole Globe, for Earth contains
both dry and moist; the corruption of manners was spread over the Head and the
Members, over the whole Papal seat, and all its subjects, but, says he, the
Second Vial is poured out only upon the Waters, the Sea and Rivers, i. e. upon
the people of the Antichristian Empire, or upon the different Nations, Tribes
and Languages, -- the Waters of the Sea were turned into Blood, and every
living Soul died. What more native and lively representation, says he, could
have been made of the rage of the Croisades? In all Languages and in all sorts
of style, a Sea of Blood, Rivers of Blood, streams of Blood, signify a very
great slaughter. Now the proper character of the Croisades is slaughter,
Murder, which falls not upon the head of the Antichristian Empire, but upon
the people, all was turned into Blood. Never was there such a prodigious
effusion of Blood in the Sea, i. e. among the peoples, in the first Croisade,
there died more than 2 Millions of men in 3 or 4 years; it is evident that God
did lead these wretched creatures as it were to the shambles, that they should
find the punishment of their crimes: he took so great a quantity of Blood, that
he might cure the Ulcers of Christendom, for that he might purge it of that
vast rabble, he permitted the Devil to inspire them, either with such sottish
superstition, or an extravagant ambition, that they must go and deliver the
Holy Land, or go and conquer Kingdoms in the East, this Plague lighted only on
the Sea, not at all on the dry land, upon the subjects of the Popedom, not at
all upon the Popes. On the contrary, the Popes Improve that evasion to greaten
their power, to plunder whole Countries, to make Generals of Armies, to act as
sovereign Monarchs, and to lay a heavyer yoke upon Kings, whom they ordered to
march, and sent them as their slaves into the East, and during their absence
plundered their Kingdoms.

We must not, says he, imagine that all the Plagues laid down by St. John,
must tend to the ruin of the Sea of Rome, or to the diminution of its power;
for some are to light upon the head of that Empire, to crush it, others upon
the people to punish them, because they worship the Beast, the Plague of Blood
and Slaughter is for the people.

This Plague of Croisades, says he, is divided into two Plagues, because of
its long duration, for it lasted 200 years, from the end of the eleventh age,
until the end of the thirteenth, this he Judges the time of the 2d. Vial and
Plague.

The third Vial or Plague, fell upon the Rivers or lesser Waters, which he
fixes upon some particular nations, as of France under the conduct of St. Lewis.

The fourth Vial poured out on the Sun, it is known and confessed says he, of
all who know any thing of Prophecies, Dreams and Visions, that the Heavens, the
Sun, the Constellations, and the Stars, are Emblems of Dignity and Grandeur on
Earth, etc. The Sun does always signify the Sovereign, the Stars inferiors
Magistrates, and so by the Sun under the 6th Seal, it is always understood the
fall of the Pagan Empire; that the Antichristian Kingdom is treated of here
says he, is generally agreed to: therefore it cannot be doubted that the Sun
is the Sovereign of this Kingdom.

And he fixes upon the increase of Antichrists authority and power, in the
thirteenth and fourteenth Centuries to be meant hereby, when the Sun by his
excessive and scorching heat, i. e. the Pope by his usurpt authority tyrannized
over Kings and Emperors, p. 89. deposing, and taking away their Crowns, etc.

The fifth Vial and Plague poured on the feat of the Beast, he affirms with
other Writers to mean the City of Rome; and when was it that this Vial of Gods
wrath fell upon the seat of the Beast, i. e. Rome? it was, says he, when Rome
lost its Sun (which is spoken of in the foregoing Plague) i. e. the Pope, the
Papal Court, that like a Gulf or Whirl-pool, drew to it all the riches of the
Kingdoms of Europe. In the year 1305. Clement the V. left Rome to go to
Avignon, the City that was Mistress of the World then became desolate, -- when
its Masters kept their seat at Avignon, p. 94.

The sixth Vial and Plague he affirms are the Turks who pass over the Bosphorus
and invade the Greek and Latin Empires; at this I cannot a little wonder,
because most expositors conclude, and I think with good reason, that the rise
and increase of the Turkish Monarchy began under the sixth Trumpet, and not
only so, but because it is said the Angel poured forth his Vial upon the great
River Euphrates, and (mark) the Water thereof was dried up, etc. which seems to
intimate the decay and wasting of the Turkish power, and not the increase of
it, but he would have us understand the Kings of the East, to mean the Turks,
and not Euphrates, p. 200, 201. the time that this Vial was a pouring forth, he
says, was about 125 or 130 years, viz. from 1390. until 1526. by this he must
believe the Battle of Arma-geddon is long since past, which he runs into a
mystery by showing that Arma-geddon signifies a cutting off by a Curse or
Excommunication, which he applys to the Orders, Laws and false Oracles of the
Popedom and the Antichristian head, -- there is, says he, it is known, a Curse
and a Arma-geddon at the end of every Canon. The seventh Vial and Plague he
affirms was by the Preaching of Luther, and other reformers by which the Latin
Church was divided into three parts, Papists, Lutherans and Reformed, I suppose
he means the Calvinists; the Voices, and Thunders, and Lightnings, that are
said to be under the seventh Vial, mean, he says, the Voices of Preachers, who
labored in the reforming the Church, page 217.

The great City he affirms is the Antichristian Kingdom, and this City under
the pouring forth of the seventh Vial, is said to be divided into three parts,
this, he says, is exactly come to pass, i. e. one part remained with
Antichrist, one part did separate from him, under the name of the Ausburge
confession A third part did separate under the confession of those who are
barely styled the Reformed; Sweden, Denmark, and a great part of Germany, make
the second part, England, and the united Provinces, the reformed part of
France, and part of Germany, make the third part; these, says he are the three
grand parts, that divide the western Church which is the great City.

Let this be attentively minded, says he, for I affirm that this passage does
as it were speak with a Tongue, and is able alone to convince, that our Systeme
of the seven Plagues is most undoubted truth; this division of the great City
into three parts, so clearly points out the three communions of the Latin
Church, that to deny it can proceed only from unreasonable passion, and
opinionativeness. And if we have hit upon the truth in this point, we have done
so in all; for if this character of the seventh Plague is true, and is already
accomplished, all other Plagues are also accomplished; and if they are
accomplished, I do boldly affirm they cannot be applied to any other effects
than those to which we have applied them.

He further shows that England cannot make a fourth part, because in doctrine
she agrees with other reformed communions, in which she differs from the
Lutherans, -- p. 220. who refuse such communion, etc.

Thus (says he) in truth there are but three grand parts, into which the Latin
Church is divided, i. e. Papists, Lutherans and Calvinists -- and this division
is not her utter ruin, but after she is thus divided, God will prepare to give
her the last cup of his wrath which signifies, that the division of the Latin
Church into three parts must continue until the complete ruin of Popery.

This is the seventh and last Vial-glass, which, thanks be to Here I must n^te
since by the Church he speaks of thus divided* into three parts, is meant great
Babylon or Church of Rome, it f^llows plainly from hence that all these three
parts are Antichristian, and but as so many Limbs of the great Whore.
God, will in a little time be run out, now we have that we seek, namely, an
evidence that the Antichristian Kingdom is near at an end. We need not longer
wait for the accomplishment, either of all the 7 Plagues (as some of our
interpreters say) or of some of the 7 Plagues as others say -- it is done, all
is accomplished, we are at the end of the seventh period.

First, That in the whole explication of this 16th. chapter, there is not the
least forced application; the Emblems which the Prophet makes use, do exactly
resemble the events set down in History.

Second, that in the Application of these seven Plagues unto the events, every
thing does hang together, no part of this System contradicts another; this
being supposed, I do entreat them to consider, if chance may hit right in some
points, but never does so in all, I say again, that we are at the end of the
seventh period; for it ought to be well observed, that there is not one Vial,
which is distinct and separated from others, lasted 200 years, -- this has
already lasted 170 years, it cannot last much longer, it is true, the Papal
authority whose beams so scorched men under the fourth Vial, lasted above 200
years, but this was because it was inlayed or jointed in those that preceded,
and those that followed. And its particular strict period must be reckoned to
be only 108 years, which begun at the year 1270, when the Croisades ended, and
continued until the grand Schism, which happened in the year 1378. for then
began the diminishing of the Papal Authority, and the darkning of the Kingdom
of the Beast.

The seventh Vial has lasted already longer than any of the rest, and it is
probable, that it must last about 200 years, which none of the others has
done, but we shall see the reason of this, when we show that this seventh
Period, is it self divided into three Periods, i. e. the Harvest, the Vintage,
and the time that is betwixt the Harvest and the Vintage, the Harvest is
already past, the time betwixt is almost expired, and we are approaching to the
Vintage, -- p. 223, 224.

He then preceeds to explain what he understands by Harvest and Vintage; which
the ingenious reader may guess at, I thought good to cite thus much of this
Author for their sakes, who have not his book, it being grown scarce, and also
because he is so much cried up; and lastly because, what he speaks concerning
the Vials seems new, nor shall I passover this man's sentiments about the Vials,
without some modest reflections, though he seems to write with great confidence,
in which he differs from most worthy men before him. --

1. It may be doubted whether he is in the right or no, in my Judgment, about
the 7 Vials, because it appears to me very clear, that the Angels that are said
to pour them out, are brought forth under the seventh Trumpet, to which I find
some worthy men agree; which if this be granted, he is mistaken.

2. Because the Angels that pour them forth, are said to come out of the
Temple, clothed in Pure and White Linen, and have their Breasts girded with
Golden Girdles, Rev. 15. 6. which signifies doubtless a more Perfect and Pure
State of the Church than was in any of those centurys he mentions, when
diverse of those Vials, he says, were poured cut, for till near the time of the
coming forth of the seventh Trumpet, the Saints and People of God are called
Witnesses clothed in Sackcloth, mourning as it were for the loss of the
visibility, and glory of the Gospel Church state, according to the Apostolical
constitution; and are represented as a few or small number of scattered
Christians, but under the latter part of the 6. Trumpet, the Tabernacle of the
Testimony in Heaven was opened, Rev. 15. 4. signifying (as I conceive) the
restoration of the Church to its former glory and purity in a great measure,
and that the Witnesses had put off their Sackcloth, being gloriously and
differently clothed, which will not be perfected till the ascension of the
Witnesses which will be about the beginning of the seventh Trumpet, for the
text says, when that begins to be sounded the Kingdoms of this World become the
Kingdom of our Lord and his Christ, Rev. 11. 15.

3. It should seem strange that all the Vials, (that contain in them the whole
of the seven last Plagues to the utter overthrow of the Beasts Kingdom,) should
be already poured out (save the remaining part of the seventh) and yet so
little be done comparatively to the ruin of the Whore or Papistry, or that the
6. first Vials should be so long a time a pouring forth, and so little effected
for the ruin of Antichrists Kingdom, and so much should be expected to be done
in so short a time (as this French Writer says) by the remaining part of the
seventh.

4. And why he should suppose if 2 or 3 of the Vials should not be yet poured
out, that the Whore and Beasts Kingdom, must continue still at least 200 years,
I know not, for if we should conclude with some worthy men, that none of the
Vials should be poured forth to this day, yet why may not the ruin of the Papal
Power, or end of the Beasts Kingdom be near, for though it be granted they may
have their distinct Periods, yet they may be very short, since God positively
intimates his Judgments, for the ruin and downfall of Babylon shall be swift and
on a sudden, and as it were in one hour, which certainly signifies but a very
short time; besides, he strangely confounds and mixeth the Vials with some of
the Trumpets which I cannot see any ground to believe, considering the method
God uses in this Book. -- Moreover at the resurrection or at the ascension of
the Witnesses, which finishes the second Woe, and brings the period of the 6.
Trumpet, then the tenth part of the City falls and this is all of the fall and
ruin of the great Whore or great City, we read of, till the seventh Trumpet
begins' to sound. And to conclude with this, I shall Pools Annot on Rev. 11. 15.
say with what our late Annotators intimate on Rev. 11. 15. it seems that the
seven Seals, the seven Trumpets, and the seven Vials, are all mentioned, in the
same form of Speech, and therefore the seven Vials are not to be divided, some
to one Trumpet* some to another.

2. Because the seventh Trumpet, and 7 Vials are one and the same thing,
nothing being revealed under the seven Vials, which does not belong to the
seventh Trumpet; they agree in their titles of Woes, in the nature of the
Revelations, in their objects, both the one and in the other, declaring the
ruin of Antichrist; both of them are mentioned as the last Plagues to come upon
the World before the last day.

3. All the Vials are of the same nature, declaring but the Judgments by which
God setting up the Kingdom of Jesus Christ would ruin Antichrist, they differ
in the degrees.

4. The seventh Trumpet cannot declare the ruin of Antichrist unless the seven
Vials be poured out under it, for they show the means by which he must be
destroyed; and so bring in the third Woe.

5. The seventh Trumpet sounded immediately upon the Slaying and Resurrection
of the Witnesses, and contemporizeth with the whole course of their renewed
liberty, and therefore the period by it must be before the fall of the
Antichristian Kingdom, declared by the sixth Vial.

6. The seventh Trumpet sounded immediately after the expiration of the 1260
days, before the end of which, I see no ground to conclude any of the 7 Vials
were to be poured out.

Now those who think that diverse of the Vials were poured out (as he observes)
or shall be poured out before the sounding of the seventh Trumpet say,

That the Beasts Kingdom beginning to fall under the sixth Trumpet, several of
the Vials, declaring the degrees of his falling must belong to that; in answer
to which we say, it appears by all we have in this chap. Rev. 11. 15. that
Antichrists Kingdom was in a great measure weakened under the sixth Trumpet,
particularly from v. 11. to 13. And tho this we grant, yet they are but some
previous preparations to the final ruin of Antichrist, during the period of the
sixth Trumpet; but the seven Vials signify the surther progress and perfection
of his ruin, which falls under the seventh Trumpet; this being premised we
proceed with the Text; It is, says he, doubted whether these words, are become
the Kingdom of the Lord and his Christ, v. 15 be to be understood as being
actually so, or now beginning so to be; those who make the sense that they now
actually were so, must understand the time to be the last days, or near the
coming of Christ, -- but I rather take the words thus, i. e. are beginning to
become the Kingdom of our Lord, or shall shortly be so; and if none of the
seven Vials are yet poured out, but do all belong to the seventh Trumpet, then
when that begins to sound, the little Stone cut out of the Mountain without
hands, spoken of by Daniel, shall begin to smite the Image upon its Feet, and
Antichrist from that time shall reign no more, but gradually fall and be broken
to pieces, and the Lords people take the Kingdom, and bear the only rule in the
Earth but the beginning of this glorious Kingdom state will be small, and
hardly discerned, as it is signified by the little Stone, and by other passages
and places of Scripture.

Just as I had writ this, I met with a book that Mr. Can had wrote some years
ago, in which he gives very great arguments to prove none of the Vials are as
yet poured out, notwithstanding what our French Author has with much confidence
asserted; some of the reasons Mr. Can gives to prove that none of the Vials
are as yet poured out, I shall give you, being sorry I saw not the Book sooner,
and that I am limited to a number of Sheets, else you should have had more of
him; his first reason is taken from what Mr. Tilling have and diverse other
learned men affirm concerning Rev. 14. 1. viz. that they are Gentile Saints,
who stand upon Mount Sion with the Lamb, and is to come to pass after the
rising of Witnesses, this being so says he, (and that is indeed so, he further
says he could give many reasons) then there is little reason to carry the
beginning of the seven Vials any higher, for though it be the opinion of learned
and godly men, that some of the Vials are poured out, yet so that they hold
likewise that the 14440 have already stood with the Lamb on Mount Sion, and
there is reason and weight in it, that where we ^^gin the time of the 14440.
etc. that there we also take the beginning of the Vials. And the order of the
matter seems to make this clear; the Holy Ghost having chap. 14. spoken of the
Harvest and Vintage, that is, what Sore Plagues the Lord brings (first and
last) upon Babylon and the followers of the Beast, comes presently in chapter 15,
and 16. to show how and by what means, the Earth shall be Reaped, and the
Clusters gathered, and cast into the great Wine Press of Gods wrath, namely,
seven Angels shall come out of the Temple, having the seven last Plagues. -- So
then, to take the 14440. to be after the Witnesses are risen, and to begin the
pouring forth of the Vials before they are risen, in my understanding, is very
improper to the scope and drift of the Prophesy, and crosses that excellent
order which the Spirit seems to observe.

2. I do not conceive how the pouring out of the Plagues, and Vials full of
divine wrath in any good sense, and according to Scripture use, may be applied
to, and understood of the Preaching of the glad tidings of the Gospel; truly I
think, that the publishing of the sweet and most precious Soulsaving truths of
Jesus, all the time of the Beasts reign, even 42 months or 1260 years, is in
another way, and by other words expressed, and not by the Vials full of wrath;
see Rev. 10. 9, 10, 11. and therefore by the Seven last Plagues filled up with
the wrath of God, Rev. 15. 1. I understand real and proper Plagues, and not the
preaching of the Gospel, either by Grosthead, Wickliff, Luther, Calvin, etc.
but rather such temporal Plagues as shall be poured out upon wicked men for
despising and persecuting the truth; In her was found the Blood of the Prophets
and Saints, Rev. 18. 24. It is not said that the effects of the Vials shall be
wrath, or turn to wrath, for in the it is filled up the wrath of God.

3. Suppose it be granted there is a Vial of wrath poured out (which to me
sounds harshly) and that Wickliff, Huss, Jeremy, Luther, etc. were the Angels,
the question then is, who before them poured out their Vials upon the Earth;
for it is said these seven Angels had the 7 last Plagues, signifying, that
there were Plagues before, although for time, persons, matter, and manner of
proceeding, and other circumstances, unlike.

4. I have (says he) not seen any reason why so much time is allowed between
the first and second Vials: Some allow 100 years, others 200, and some more,
namely, from the pouring out of the first Vial, to the beginning of the second,
and to all the rest not half the time.

If those Vials and last Plagues have an allusion to the Plagues of Egypt, (as
it is generally held) then it is probable, when there is once a beginning, they
will suddenly all be poured out. Some have observed from History in Exodus,
that within the space of 30 days the ten Plagues fell upon the Egyptians; now
if (in the Antitype) we reckon a day for a year (as it is often in Prophetical
Types) then the seven last Plagues will be finished in thirty years when begun;
neither is it to be doubted, but a short work will the Lord make upon the
Earth, Romans 9. 28. when those Vials begin to be poured out upon the Earth,
wherefore is Babylon's fall set forth under the sign of a great Millstone cast
into the Sea by a mighty Angel, not only to denote her irrecoverable
desolation, but also what speedy and quick dispatch the Lord will make, when he
calls his Angels out of the Temple, therefore shall her Plagues come upon her
in one day, Rev. 18. 8. in one hour, v. 10, 17, 19. i^ a moment, suddenly, Isa.
47. 11. why (...) ought not to conclude her Plagues to intend ^ose 7 last
Plagues all of them as well as some of them, I know not, I desire this may be
considered, hinted it before when I had not seen this worthy writer, for this
French Author makes Babylon a ^elling many hundred years, which must doubtless
be a grand mistake, these Scriptures considered.

He further confirms this reason and answers Objections, which I have not room
to insert.

5. I cannot conceive, says he how any of those Persons to whom the first,
second and third Angels are ordinarily applied, do fairly or fitly parallel and
agree with what the Scriptures hold forth; certain it is, none of the Angels
came out of the Temple, till John saw as it were a Sea of Glass mingled with
Fire, and them that had gotten the Victory over the Beast, and over his Image,
and over his Mark, and over the number of his Name, standing on the Sea of
Glass, having the Harps of God; and they sing the Song of Moses the Servant of
God, and the Song of the Lamb, Rev. 15. 1, 2. All this well agrees with the
description of the 14440. Rev. 14. 1, 2. But to carry these things to Grostead,
Armachan, Wickliff, Luther, etc. if need were, I could show by many reasons of
the improbability of it; for though many of Gods people formerly received not the
Mark of the Beast, nor his Name, yet to say any of them during the 42 Months
got the Victory over the Beast, or over his Image, and number of his Name, I
cannot assent unto, neither do I think their Opinion is well bottomed who hold
this Victory over the Beast, and singing the Song of Moses, and the Song of the
Lamb to be before the rising of the Witnesses, which is the time of their
prophesying in Sackcloth, and whilst the woman is in the wilderness. -- It Is
strange indeed to think the witnesses wearing Sackcloth, or in a mourning
condition, can be said to sing the Song of Moses, as having got Victory over
their Enemies, and yet overcome by their Enemies for the Song of Moses, it is
well known to be that i^ Exodus 15. Thou have overcome the Horse and his R^der,
etc.

Again, (says he by way of question, p. 16. Why should the Song of Moses, Rev.
15 etc b^ carried up to the times before the rising of the Witnesses and the
new Song Rev. 14. 3. brought down many hundred years after this, seems to be
against the order of the Prophecy. (2.) The matter of the Song, if rightly
understood, is not suitable to any time in which the Beasts reigned; neither,
Lastly, Can it be showed -- that ever the Church of the Saints, have had any
occasion through any Deliverance or Victory to sing the Song of Moses, etc. I
am of the same Opinion, unless it be in these and the approaching days.

6. That none of the seven last Plagues or Vials are yet poured out, nor will
be till after the rising of the Witnesses, (does appear) for this reason, viz.
because none of the seven Angels come forth with their Golden Vials, until the
Tabernacle of the Testimony is opened in Heaven, Rev. 15. 5. but that part of
the Tabernacle of the Testimony is to be shut all the time of the Witnesses
prophesying in Sackcloth may be gathered from Rev. 11. 1. with v. 19. Hence
this Argument might be framed, viz.

No Angel is to come forth with his Golden Vial, till the Tabernacle of the
Testimony in Heaven is opened.

But the Tabernacle of the Testimony is not to be opened till after the rising
of the Witnesses.

Therefore no Angel with his Golden Vial is come forth till after the rising of
the Witnesses.

The proof of this Argument are the Scriptures before, viz. Rev. 15. 5. cap.
11. v. 1, 19. Now if any do think that the four last Angels shall come forth
from the Temple opened in Heaven, and not the first three such an Opinion is
against the Text expressly, (...) says the seven Angels come out of the Temple,
verse 6. Neither do I know any ground they have, who think that the Angels
pouring out the four last Vials shall have more Light, Zeal, Faith, Holiness,
etc. than the former three had -- but certainly there is a vast difference
between the state of the Church now, and that when they say the first Vial was
poured out, nay, and the second or third too, and none can doubt but the
opening of the Tabernacle of the Testimony in Heaven points to some greater
Church glory that shall be then, or a different state of the Church than ever
was before under the Beasts reign.

7. Neither do I (says he) think, that the effects of any of the Vials (which
some suppose are poured out) make good what is said, Rev. 15. 4. For thy
Judgments are made manifest, which holds forth to me much more than what
followed the preaching of Grostead, Wickliff, Huss, Luther, Melancthon, etc. or
the Switzers Wars, or of that of the Parliament in England, for Gods Judgments,
notwithstanding what has been yet done, remain still more dark, doubtful and
disputable, especially to the World, than shall be under the effects of the
Vials.

For the followers of the Beast, as the Egyptians under their Plagues, though
they are hardened and repent not, but blaspheme the God of Heaven, not giving
glory to him, shall notwithstanding see the hand of God lifted up, and be
ashamed for their envy at his people, Isa. 26. 11. So manifest at that time
shall his Judgments be, but hitherto no such things have appeared,
notwithstanding all the Judgments of God upon them, so dark and hidden, not
manifested, have the actings of God been to his Enemies, nay, and not clear or
plainly manifested to his own people neither, as it appears by their different
apprehensions and opinions about what has been past, until these very days.

And hence it is also that Mystery Babylon ever, un^il of late (if not still)
said in her Heart, I sit a Queen, and am no Widow, and shall see no sorrow,
Rev. 18. 7. Nay, and also it is from hence that the Antichristian party in their
Writings and ordinary discourse do stiffly maintain, that Gods Judgments have
been and still are as much manifested upon the Witnesses, i. e. the Heretics,
as she calls Protestants, and all such who oppose them, as those of their
Church, viz. the Papists, however let the Judgments of God be hid or made
manifest to them, certainly the vengeances shall clearly be seen and known to
the godly, when the Vials of his wrath come upon the great Whore, or when the
hour of her Judgments shall come, they shall see it, rejoice, and all iniquity
shall stop her mouth, Psalm. 107. 42.

8. It Is evident the Witnesses do not put off their Sackcloth till they have
finished their testimony which will not be until the end of the 42 months of
the Beasts Reign and Tyranny; but says he, these Angels which pour out the
seven last Plagues or Vials of Gods wrath, have put off their Sackcloth, and
are clothed in pure white linen, and are said to have Golden Girdles; from
hence it must needs follow, as he observes, that none of the Saints of God, in
the time of the Sackcloth state, during the 42 months can be meant by any of
these seven Angels, neither Waldo, Wickliff, Luther, etc. for what is meant,
says he, by being clothed in White Linen? the Scriptures show it was an
Ensign of honor, which great Persons used to wear, their condition and state
being changed, Genesis 41. 42. Est. 8. 15. Pro. 31. 22. Ezekiel. 16. 10. Psalm. 30. 11.

The truth is, if we take not heed to distinguish between the Sackcloth time
of Mourning Saints, and the time in which they are clothed with White Linen,
and having Golden Girdles that is, raised out of the dust and set with Princes,
even with the Princes of his people, Psalm. 113. 7, 8. but confound these times,
which ought to be kept distinct and apart, we shall want that excellent light
to bring things to their proper places. I would to God our Frenchman and
others would consider this; for I find those that affirm Luther, Mclancton,
etc. to be one or more of those Angels, that poured out one or two of the
Vials, do hold that the Witnesses had put off their Sackcloth, the time of the
1260 days being expired, etc.

But Jurieu denies this with many others, and yet says all the seven Angels
have already come and poured out their Vials, and yet in their Sack cloth
state; but I can see no reason to believe he speaks right.

9. (Says Mr. Can) If what is spoken, Rev. 18. 21. of the mighty Angels
taking up a great Millstone, and casting it into the Sea, saying, Thus with
violence shall that great City Babylon be thrown down, and shall be found no
more at all, belongs to the Vials (as it seems most evident) then what is
attributed to Grostead, Wickliff, Luther. etc. is far from the works of the
Angels, which shall pour forth the 7 last Plagues; Thus shall Babylon be thrown
drown, etc. A Millstone rises no more, etc. thus, that is, when any of the 7
Angels pour out their Vials, the work shall prosper in their hands, and not be
hindered nor retarded by any power whatsoever. But hither by whatsoever has
been done us, yet upon Babylon she has not so fallen, -- but one while she
seems to sink, and then rises again, many Judgments have been poured out upon
Babylon, no doubt of that, nay, and some too soon after she got up, but
doubtless none of the seven last Judgments has she felt to this day, every
Vial shall effectually do its work, where, or on whom it is poured out, it
being full of the divine wrath of God.

10. According to this notion that some of the Vials are poured out, he
observes all the Vials may be poured out, and but a little may be done, for
(...) three or four have been poured out, and no more ^ffected; for the tyranny
and Idolatry suppressed by them, did soon rise and spread it self again in the
^ame places.

And if so, why may not after all the Vials are ^oured out, the enemy rally or
rise again, or the ^nterest of Christ be suppressed, after the pouring ^orth of
the last Vials, as it has been after the pour^ng out of the former.

Besides, how can we think the Harvest of the Earth, can be said to be ripe
before the set time is come that God has appointed for its cutting down, which
is 42 months or 1260. years? The sin of the Amorite was not fully ripe; or that
Harvest fit for cutting down till the 400 years were expired, Genesis 15. 13. and
yet shall Babylon be ripe, and the Harvest of wrath come so long before the set
or appointed time of Harvest? this is a paradox. Jurieu says p. 79. the first
Vial and Plague, where (sa^ I) begins the Harvest, was in the tenth Century
which is 600 years ago, and above so many years before the set time of Harvest;
for that was before or about the time the Beast was in the height of his glory
he seems to assert the Harvest came soon after the seed time; (though it is true
he fixes it on the last Age) this cannot be thought, we must sure make the
first Vials the time of the Harvest, and the latter the time of the Vintage;
let this be considered, certainly none of of the former Judgments on Babylon
belongs to the seven last Plagues, for the dominion of the Beast was not then
ripe, nor the Harvest come, but now it is near, woe unto the Earth and Earthly
Men, the gross body of the Antichristian professors, for they must have the
dregs of this first Vial, it is poured out upon the Earth, those that partake
with her in her sins must receive of her Plagues; many will be found in her,
who little think of it. But again if the Vials be poured forth by the Witnesses
Preaching the Gospel in the time of the Beasts reign and tyranny, why do they
begin the Vials, no sooner? for there were faithful preachers who bore their
testimony against the Beast from his first rise, and so downward all along, and
it had much like effects with Waldo's, Luthers, preachings, etc. to conclude
with what Mr. Can has said upon This account, it does appear to me that he
is right in respect of the seven Vials, not being yet poured out, because the
Temple is said to be filled with smoke from the glory of God, and no man could
enter in, until the seven Plagues of the seven Angels were fulfilled, Rev. 15.
8. If by the Temple being filled with smoke from the glory of God, etc. the
Spirit alludes to the History of the Tabernacle, and History of the dedication
of the Temple, which was filled with the Cloud of the glory of God (as most
agree to,) then here is signified a most glorious pouring forth of the holy
Spirit upon the Angels, who pour out the Vials, -- and that they must tarry in
the Temple (as the Disciples were to do at Jerusalem) until endued with power
from on high, Luke 24. 59. and this may be expected at the Ascension of the
Witnesses and not before, for as yet, we see not such a spirit given from the
glory of God, and from his power, nor may we expect it until then, that the
Church comes out of the Wilderness as clear as the Sun, and as terrible as an
Army with Banrers. Cant. 6. 4. and like Pillars of smoke perfumed with Myrrh
and Frankincese, Cart. 3. 6. 7. the Judgment of the 7 last Plagues for the ruin
of the Enemy, will be the time of Glory and Salvation of the Church, and by the
14440 on Mount Sion with Harps, etc. Singing the Song of Moses, etc. are held
forth (I am persuaded) the ministrations of the Saints under the seven Angels,
with the seven Vials or seven last Plagues, which days we hope are now even
upon us, or very near; and that we might let in what light worthy men of
different opinions have helped us to, about the Slaying and Resurrection of the
Witnesses, we shall give you a brief account of what Jurieu our French Author
says of them; see p. 241. etc. these words, when they shall have finished their
testimony, must (says he) not be understood as if the holy Ghost would say,
when the 1260 years shall be finished, for after the 1260 years are run out
there can be no Persecution, seeing the Beast shall have lost his power; so
that this Persecution must begin and end within the 1260 years, but yet at the
end of them, it is the ordinary custom, not only of Scripture, but of all men to
say, that something comes to pass when this or that is finished, because it
happens when that thing is finished, and very near its end, this is therefore
the last Persecution of Antichrist against the Church; this Persecution has
its Characters. -- 1. It Is compared to a War; The Beast that comes up out of
the Bottomless Pit, shall make War against them. 2. This War of Persecution
must end in a victory over the two Witnesses, and shall overcome them; mark,
God does not reckon the Death and Martyrdom, which the faithful suffered for
the truth, as a victory that the Devil gains over them, (a very good note) for
it is said, they, i. e. the Saints and Martyrs of Jesus overcome them, i. e. the
Beast and his Emissaries, and they loved not their lives unto the death, Rev.
12. 11. He speaks of martyrs, when he says, He that overcomes I will make to
sit down on my Throne, etc. So that when it is said, that the Beast shall
overcome the Witnesses, this signifies that he shall make them saint under
their Trials, which thing ought to be well observed, that we discern the
singular Character of this present Persecution that has conquered and overcome
above a Million of Souls, (he means the late and present Persecution in
France.) 3. This victory of the Beast must prevail even to a total extinction
of profession: there shall remain no more signs of outward life in the
faithful, who shall stand for truth, In this he agrees much with Dr. Goodwin
and many other English Writers that the slaying of the Witnesses is not a
temporal slaying but only a^i^il death, and it much comports, as we before have
noted, with the late dismal days in England.
they shall lie on the ground as dead bodies. 4. This murder and effects of
this Persecution shall be done in the Street of the great City. 5. The death of
these Witnesses must be 3 years and a half, denoting these 3 years and a half
6. During those 3 years and a half, the truth shall remain as it were dead, but
notwithstanding, not buried: men shall not dare to make profession of it,
notwithstanding it shall be visible the people who are neighbors of them, who
shall have slain it, shall hinder it from perishing and putrefaction, -- 7. At
the end of 3 years and a half, the faithful who are oppressed and whose
profession shall have been violently suppressed, shall rise again; after that
shall ascend to Heaven, and shall be exalted, -- 8. At the same time, and after
the exaltation of the faithful, there shall be an Earth quake, i. e. a great
emotion and trouble in the World, and in Antichrists Kingdom. 9. In this
emotion, a tenth part of the City shall fall, i. e. a tenth part of the
Antichristian Kingdom, shall be taken away from it, and seven thousand men
shall perish in this Earthquake, and be buried under the ruin of this City;
that this shall be brought about with some Blood she^, though not considerable.
-- Now when I search after the time, in which this Persecution must happen, I
cannot doubt but this is that in which we now are; after this Persecution shall
be over, God will begin to strike those sore blows to destroy the Antichristian
Kingdom which must be destroyed with in 25 or 30 years.

That none may wonder, (says he) that I speak so positively about a thing
which seems to be as yet hid in futurity, I entreat all equitable minds to
consider, that I have (as I think) with great evidence proved, 1. That the
Reign of the Popedom must last 1260 years. 2. That these 1260 years began about
450. or 455. and consequently they must end about 1710. or 1715. This being so,
we are but 25 or 30 years from the end of the Popish Kingdom. And if this be
so, the present persecution must needs be the last, since there is no
probability, that this present persecution being ended, the calm restored to
the Church should leave room for another. -- For we must allow the space of at
least 20 or 25 years, in which Popery shall be attacqued and not be the
Aggressor and the Persecutor. And certainly a shorter time cannot serve for the
utter destruction of so vast a Kingdom, for it shall not be destroyed in a way
of violence, but in a way of persuasion. -- Yet he says (it shall not be done
without blood and slaughter) I have, says he, further proved that the fall of
this Popish Babylonian Monarchy is divided into two parts, viz. The Harvest and
the Vintage; that the Harvest is the reformation of the last age, and the
Vintage is the reformation that must be made in this present age, etc.

He then proceeds to show his apprehensions that France must be that Street of
the great City in which the two witnesses should be slain and lie as dead, etc.
p. 24^. The bodies of the two witnesses, says he, shall lie in the Street of
the great City. It Is to be observed, that in the Text it is not in the Streets,
in the Plural, but it is in the Street in the Singular. And I cannot hinder my
self from believing, that this has a particular regard to France which at this
day is certainly the most eminent Country which belongs to the Popish Kingdom,
her King is called the Eldest Son of the Church the most Christian King, i. e.
The most Popish according to the dialect of Rome; the Kings of France have by
their liberalities made the Popes great at this day; it is the most flourishing
State of Europe, it is in the middle of the Popish Empire, between Spain,
Germany, England, exactly as a Street or place of Concourse is in the middle of
a City; it is also foursquare, as such a Place or Street of a great City, i. e.
almost as long as broad, and I believe, says he, that it is particularly in
France, that the witnesses must remain dead, i. e. That the profession of the
true Religion must be utterly abolisht, this is already done by the revocation
of the Edict of Nantes, and by the enormous Cruelties of the Soldiers, -- Page
254. says he we are in my opinion certainly in this Persecution which must
extinguish the true Religion for three years and a half; if we will reckon
those 3 years and a half from the abrogating of the Edict of Nantes, in the
month of October, 1685. The deliverance of the Church will fall out in the
year, 1689. And this is absolutely the conjecture of Monsieur du Moulin in his
accomplishment of the Prophesies, he hopes that the Persecution of the Church
by the Antichristian party shall cease in the year 1689, But in p. 255. He
seems to intimate he is not confident it will happen then; one main reason I
cite this French Writer thus far, is to give you all his reasons why he Judges
France to be the Street of the great City where the two witnesses shall be
slain, etc.

And to gratify my Reader, I shall also here add something out of Clavis
Apocalyptica written many years ago by a famous German Doctor who endeavors to
make it appear that Germany is meant by the Street of the great City in which
the two witnesses shall lie as dead; but by the way it is observable what he
says, p. 46. Concerning the 7 Trumpets in the Second period, says he, from the
three hundred ninety fifth, until the one thousand six hundred fifty fifth year
of our Lord, where the seventh seal is opened, and seven Angels with seven
Trumpets declare to the Roman Empire by seven Judgments its ruin, c. 8. which
Plagues have been fulfilled. -- (See he calls the Trumpets Plagues.) The first
by the invasions of barbarous nations, Anno 395. v. 7.

The Second by the destruction of the City of Rome which first happened by
Alaricus, Anno 410. v. 8.

The Third by taking away Imperial dignity in Augustulus, Anno 476. v. 10.

The Fourth by the Abolition of all eminent public charges at Rome, Anno 552.
v. 12.

The fifth by Saracens as the first woe, c. 9.

The Sixth by the Turks, Chap. 9. v. 13. as the second woe.

In the Third Period when the 1655. year does begin the seventh Angel does
sound, and withal the seventh Judgment is executed upon the enemies of the
Church, with the third woe, whereby the Mysteries of God are fulfilled -- Rev.
10. 7. Now tho this great Author was mistaken as all have been hitherto who
have prefixed upon an exact time, and yet he may be right as to the seventh
Trumpet which, he says, brings in the last Plagues, and the third and last woe.
But to proceed, p. 69. The two witnesses shall be overcome and killed, says
he, that is, they shall be removed and thrust out of all Ecclesiastical and
Political Offices and Employments; it appears he understood the death of the
witnesses to be taken as we have hinted before, i. e. Only a Civil death, and
so too do all Expositors affirm that I can meet with, but now observe what
Street it is in his Judgment they must lie as dead in, and that is, he says,
Germany, p. 74. The tenth horn yet remains; Germany, or the German Empire, --
cannot be accounted, says he, but one of the Horns, -- (which we do not deny)
and a Kingdom, says he, by it self in the whole body of the fourth Monarchy,
this is the Principal Street in the great City, the Principal Horn of the
Beast, the Principal Kingdom in the fourth Monarchy, whose head is represented
by the City of Rome, this German Empire is called the Street per excellentiam,
-- because it is the Principal Street in the Empire -- because,

1. It Is called the Roman Empire. 2. By reason it is as it were a Figure and
Image of the old Roman Empire having seven Heads, in regard of the seven
Princes Electors, and ten Provinces, in respect of the ten Circles into which
it is distributed. 3. It has the pre-eminency above all other Kings adhering
to the Papal State; now, says he, in this Street we must seek the War, etc. he
seems to say more for Germany being the Street, in my Judgment, than Jurieu for
France to be it --
But they that read our great Writer Dr. Goodwin, will soon, I am persuaded,
see more ground to believe that Great Britain is that very Street of the great
City in which the Witnesses of Christ were to be slain and lie dead, than any
other, for, as my worthy Friend before cited intimates, God values not nor
accounts of People and Nations from their Greatness or external Grandeur, but
from their Light, Glory and Excellency of their Spirits, and Purity; now what
Nation or Kingdom is so famous, or has been since the beginning of the
Reformation, or has obtained so great Light as this of Great Britain. It must
be in one Street of the great City doubtless, where the Witnesses have finished
their Testimony, in which they were to be slain, and lie as dead; and I
question whether in any one Kingdom of Europe the faithful Witnesses of Christ
may be said to have finished their Testimony as here in this Nation, for by
finishing their Testimony may be meant (as some observe) bearing Witness to
Christ, not only in respect of every one of his Offices, but also in all his
Ordinances. And that according to the Primitive purity of them, which many
think there has not been the like Testimony upon this respect born any where
else; as also in respect of true Church Constitution and Discipline, and to
true Magistracy and Ministry, and to Christ's absolute Authority as King of
Saints, and King of Nations, and born in such a public manner as it has been
here formerly and of late; take the Doctors words, p. 165.

And if in this last Combat the Witnesses be singled out as one party, and by
Witnesses be meant only such faithful Christians and Professors as do, in
respect of their Godliness and Sincerity, hold forth an Eminent Testimony and
Witness, above that which others of the crowd of the common Professors do, and
so not men of Learning, but of Holiness and Zeal, are they who are here said to
be the real tormentors of these Enemies: Then surely in that part of the
Reformed Churches, where such Witnesses are chiefly found, who do continue
eminently to hold forth such a kind of powerful Testimony as holy men (for this
is a Testimony of Holiness, not of Learning.) -- surely there especially will
be the Seat of this War, and the field where this Combat is to be fought.

Now then look generally over (almost) all the Reformed Churches, and how few
of such Witnesses, with difference from the common crowd, do appear amongst
them; the fire, the heat of those godly men, their first Reformers (which is
the thing that should torment these Enemies at last) being gone, and the light
only remaining, which gives but a faint, cold and dull Testimony, and which
these Enemies do therefore despise. Only in the Witnesses of Great Britain,
both the light and heat of Religion have been kept up and increased; and among
them only has the profession of the power of godliness been continued, with
difference from the crowd of common Professors. (And according to what appears
in view) more of such true Witnesses now in these last days (wherein this
slaughter is to fall out) are to be found in it, and belonging to it, than in
all the Reformed Churches besides; and that, according to the Testimony which
they of those Churches (who in these times of scattering have come hither for
refuge) have and do give; and surely the place of this killing the Witnesses,
must be where most Witnesses are. And so that, that Kingdom may be designed
more than any other; as in which also more Eminent are found of those last
sorts of Champions, for the Beast who receive only the number of his name, who
yet shall be the chief Executioners Our times in respect of the late King and
his Confederates have sufficiently made this good which the Dr. so long ago
hinted. --
of this last slaughter. -- Add unto this, this conjecture upon Daniel 11. ult.
which Chapter from v. 36. has Graserus, and Mr. Mede in his Discourse of
Demons upon 1 Timothy 4. 1. 2. applied unto the Pope who is that King there
mentioned. --

Now when he shall go forth in this last War in such fury and rage with a
purpose utterly to destroy; the main event and issue of that expedition of his
is made to be this; viz. That he shall plant the Tabernacle of his Palace
between the Seas in the glorious holy Mountain: yet he shall come to his end,
and none shall help him, Dan. 11. ult. which the Dr. says he fears that these
British Islands are here intended, in that they so eminently above all other
places of the Churches Reformed, and with difference also from all others do
stand between the Seas, even wholly among Seas ( penitus toto divisos Orb
Britannos,) which Islands likewise God has made the Eminent Seat of the Church
in these latter days, and which he has loved above all the Inhabitants of
Jacob.

And in that the Angel there calls this Mountain, in an high and transcendent
phrase, yet of further difference, [the Mountain of delight of holiness] or as
Junius turns it -- [the Mountain of holy comeliness] it seems in some way of
peculiarity from others, even in that respect also, to note out a place, which
for holiness should more eminently be Gods delight, and comely in his Eyes,
where he should have a most holy people, and which he should make a Land of
uprightness, where his Ma jesty and Glory should more eminently shine; which
place notwithstanding, for the trial of the Witnesses in it, God shall again
give up unto the power of Antichrist, there to plant the Tabernacle of his
Palace or Throne, (or his Clergy, as Graserus reads it) even as a sign
Nebuchadhezzar did his Throne at Taph-hannes, when he had Conquered Egypt, as a
sign of that his Victory; by the Conquest of which Kingdoms, and regaining them
unto him, he shall seem so rooted in his ancient power, that in hope of all the
rest, the Whore shall fing, I am no Widow; and that just before her fall: Yet
this prevailing is but a preparation to Antichrist's ruin: for is follows there
in Daniel Yet he shall come to his end, and no^e shall help him; which notes
out as that this is to be done just before his end; so also that that regaining
his power should seem so to strengthen him, that he should be, as it were, out
of the danger of ruin, and as for ever secure.

But this his sudden Victory is but as the planting of a Tent or Tabernacle in
a Field, not to stand past three years and a half, tho* that Party, and their
Abettors, do in their hopes think they build for Eternity; but it being of
man's, not Gods planting, it shall come to nothing.

I cannot but conclude what this great man has said, that Great Britain is
more like to be that Street of the great City in which the Witnesses should be
slain, rather than France or Germany, or any other Kingdom, and also am much
persuaded the late times have accomplished what he so long ago foretold.
Methinks three years and a half sometimes since expired, looked just like the
times he mentions; had not the Pope placed his Tents here again, and hoped to
have had a settled Throne? and has not also here been a dreadful slaughter of
the true Witnesses of Christ, as we before have hinted? and does there seem any
ground to expect the like again? So that either the time is past, or I hope the
Dr. was mistaken, if it be to come it will be the amazingest providence and
revolution that ever was in the World; I must conclude we are in a most happy
hour, or else there is the most dismal hour near that ever the Godly knew or
saw since the Reformation; a little time will show us more. I cannot but expect
the ascension of the Witnesses to draw on apace, in which will first fall out
that great Earthquake wherein 7000 men of name will be slain, who were the
chief instruments in bringing that death and dismal hour upon the Witnesses of
Christ, which the Dr. has most excellently opened; moreover there is one thing
more he has showed his thoughts upon, that I am affected with, viz. concerning
Daniel's 1290 days and 1335 days or years, the first he says begun from
Julian's time, which he concluded ended at 1650 or 1656, and that the other 45
years will bring in the Kingdom of Christ, which makes 1335, and that will
expire about 1695 or 1701, between which time he prefixeth the Death,
Resurrection and Ascension of the Witnesses and the Earthquake, etc. We are no
doubt coming toward the end of the wonders, and the Vials of Gods wrath will
suddenly be poured forth upon the Enemies of the Church, neither can I think
that Jurieu is in the right, who thinks the Papal power, etc. will fall without
or with little Blood, for although when the Harvest is ripe there may not fall
so many as at the time of the Vintage, yet it is said of men of name shall be
slain seven thousand; how many of other sorts who can tell? Besides, that is a
certain number put for an uncertain; but when the Vintage time comes, the Blood
shall come out of the Wine Press, even to the Horse Bridle, by which our
Expositors generally say is intended a wonderful slaughter, and under the
second Vial, which may take in the Harvest Hour. God gives them Blood to drink,
they being worthy of it, because they have shed the Blood of the Saints.
Babylon is to be rewarded as she has rewarded the Lord's people, and must
drink double of the same Cup she measured to them, and then what must she look
for but Blood, Blood, Blood with a witness, Rev. 16. 5, 6. Rev. 18. 6. For what
Rivers of Blood has she caused to run down in every Street or Kingdom of this
reat City. --

There are two things more had I room I would speak to.

1. To show how all our Writers do agree that the rise of the Beast was between
the year 410 and 455, but most fix upon 450, or near that time, for then the
ten Horns appeared with Crowns upon them, who are said to receive power as
Kings one hour with the Beast, Rev. 17. Dr. Goodwin says, p. 63. that by the
year 456 all the ten Kings were up. Brightman begins the Beasts Reign sooner by
above 20 years; Jurieu says, he began about the year 450, and will end totally
about 1710.

The second thing is to have showed the nature and glory of Christ's Kingdom,
which I judge will begin at the Ascension of the Witnesses, for then, as I
conclude, the seventh Trumpet begins to sound, and the first Angel pours out
his Vial, it is certain with the seventh Trumpet, the glory of the latter days
begin, and the little Stone then will begin to smite, and will never cease till
all the Image power is broken in pieces, and the little Stone becomes a great
Mountain, and fills the whole Earth; the Saints must and shall take the
Kingdom, and the knowledge of the glory of the Lord shall cover the Earth as
the waters cover the Seas. -- I am persuaded His present Majesty is raised up
to do great things for Christ; and though some may strive to obstruct the work of
God, and uphold an interest for the Beast, yet they shall be blasted in their
designs, and come to shame and ruin in the end; for God is risen up, and his
Enemies shall be scattered.

An Account of several Strange Prophesies.
MIchael Sa^divogius, in his treatise Printed at Cologn 1616. speaks of a
Northern Prince that shall arise of a Warlike disposition, endued with
excellent Virtues which no Monarch does go beyond in Victories or excel in
humanity and piety, and then mercy and peace shall meet together, and Peace and
Justice shall kiss each other, truth, (says he,) shall rise out of the Earth,
and Justice look down from Heaven, there shall be one Sheepfold and one
Shepherd, he positively intimates that he shall arrive to a universal dominion.

Another of a nameless Author in a Book Printed, 1650 p. 9. Sect. 14.
I find these words speaking of the Judgments of God upon Europe, for
neglecting the overthrow of Antichrist, ruin of Rome, and Annihilation of the
Sodomitical order of the Society of Jesus and in the Extirpation of all
Kingdoms, are free Estates of Papists, adhereing to them to make way for the
Lion of the North to erect his fifth Monarchy in the ashes of Germany wherein
shall be established the eternal felicity of the Church, etc.

These three are Predictions said to be of above fifty years standing.
THE Eagle Droops, and Moults his Wings,
And fewd shall grow twixt Northern Kings,
Holland is threatened, So it is now by France.
Spain shall pine,
And blood shall swell the River Rhine,
When once the Orange and the Rose,
Unite, beware England's old foes,
This done, no more shall monstrous pride
Triumphant over Nations ride,
The Miter falls and scarce shall have,
A Mournful tear, or certain grave,
The Lillies now bewail the loss,
And serve but to adorn the Cross.
The Northern Star at last appears,
And an all Conquering banner bears,
Howl, howl ye Merchants, all your deeds,
Shall now receive their worthy meeds.
The fourth translated out of French in the year, 1668.
WIth headlong speed, that juncture does advance,
Wherein the Royal Seat and State of France,
The Pope, Priests, Masses, Images, Saints Shrines,
And what with these against Heavens will combines,
By divine Justice, shall to ruin fall,
I much mistake* or some Angelical
Spirit these verses did suggest,
Whilst in the morning sleep I took my rest,
I God to witness call, and^s heavenly hosts,
I saw indeed, or at the least supposed,
I saw an Angel who did show to me
In a fair written Table this same Prophecy.
The fifth is another transcribed by Paraeus in his exposition of the
Revelations.
A Prince shall rise out of the Nation of the most illustrious Son -- having a
Long Forehead, lofty Eyebrows, long Eyes, and an Hau^^ Nose* he shall draw
together a great Army; and shall slay all those who fly from his face, and hide
themselves in the Mountains and Caves, he shall be married to Justice, as the
Bridegroom -- he shall destroy and burn Rome, and Florence with fire; he shall
put to death the highest Prelates of the Clergy, who have usurped Peter's seat,
and many other things, he says, he shall do.

Predictions of Mr. George Withers.
I Shall not fail in it which is to presage,
That Babylon shall fall in this our age,
Or set a lasting Period to their hate,
A bloodless Massacre here is already,
Begun amongst us and it will be bloody,
When you perceive admittance of those strangers,
Who first began our ^lagues, renew our dangers,
And then they who suppose their persons free,
Will with the rest in equal Perils be,
For boundless lustings Mischiefs will beget,
Which lies within the Womb unheeded yet,
Where sin and Death are Twins conceived together,
Though born a little while before each other.
Another of Mr. Withers.
THere will to th ^art your hopes a new Star blaze
Within the West, that shall the world amaze,
And influences through the universe,
So quickly and prodigiously disperse,
That aided by Concurrent Constellations,
It shall have some effects upon all nations,
And cause such changes, as shall make a stand,
In their attempts which they have now in hand.
60 Grebner 69 Banner
IS thus inscribed in that family; In comitum imperii leones, cum principis
Gulielmi Uraniae filio Mauricio, faeli^i Heroi socianti se alicui Daniae de
stirpe.

61. And subscribed thus, Hoc vexillum de fratribus quod; Uraniae principis and
eorum posteris Illustrissimis intelligendum; his words of them are these,
Leones nostri audaces in prima acie fremu^t, unde nobis potentia crescit, and
gloria, and fama.

I know not (says my Author) whether formerly the Family of Orange, did
Intermarry with any descendent from a Daughter of Denmark, as is here
intimated, it is sufficiently known this Princess was by her great Grand Mother
Queen Anne of that family. And if the Prince of Orange as he here predicts,
must lead the forlorn of the Northern Army, as he manifestly musters them with
the Auxiliaries of England, their growing Estate and Honor, must be by their
Aid; and so shows who is to be the leadng Monarch. This has been Printed
several years.

Nostradamus predicts,
THAT Rome shall be ruled by the Britanish head, -- That the new Prince that
joins the lower and Northern Countries of Europe, shall be the instrument of
loss to the Church of Rome. And that the Bishop of Rome, together with his
Clergy, except they show themselves willing to be reformed: shall be made to
spit Blood when the Rose shall flourish. --

That of the Trojan Blood shall spring, a Prince of a doughty Dutch Heart, who
shall attain to so high a degree, that he shall chase far away the Arabic or
Mohammedan multitude, and likewise return to the Church her Ancient Eminency and
Sincerity.

I leave every man to his own liberty to Judge of those predictions as he
pleases, I always looked upon such kind of Prophesies as doubtful, and no
certain conclusions to be drawn from them.

A Postscript, Giving an Account of the Judgment of a late nameless French
Author, concerning the Non-offusion of the seven Vials, with his Answer to Mr.
Jurieu.
JUst as I had quite finished this Treatise, I met with a Book lately writ by
another worthy French Minister, entitled, A new Systeme of the Apocalypse, who
asserts the Non-effusion of the Vials, proving that none of the 7 Vials or last
Plagues as yet are poured out, with an answer to Mr. Jurieu; which Author I am
not a little affected with, and therefore have thought good to add some short
hints of the most remarkable passages contained in it about our present
Controversy.

First, Of the Harvest and Vintage.
The Harvest, he says, signifies those initial Judgments which were executed by
means of the Reformation begun in the last Age by the ministry of Luther,
Zuinglius, etc. p. 91. to which I cannot agree, because I judge the Harvest is
not ripe until the end of the 42 Months, and signifies more and greater ruin to
the Beast and his Kingdom, than was effected then, or till this time.

2. The Vintage, he says, signifies a definitive Judgment which shall ruin the
Papal Empire, beyond recovery, and to begin at the beginning of the end of ^he
42 Months, I conclude the Harvest comes in at ^he beginning of the 7 Vials, and
the Vintage at the ^^tter part of them.

Secondly, As to the opening of the Temple, and of the Smoke, and c.
He says, the opening of the Temple alludes to the Church of the Jews, which
was shut up under ^haz, and opened under Hezekiah. From hence he notes three
things. (1.) That the Vials belong to this state of the Church, wherein
Antichrist is made manifest, and wherein there shines a measure of light in
the Church. (2.) That the Vials are all contained under the 7th Trumpet. (3.)
The Temple is not only here represented open in order to give passage to the 7
Angels that pour out the Vials, but to give way for all Nations to enter in,
according as it is said, v. 4. That all Nations shall come and worship before
God. The smoke that filled the Temple answers to the Cloud that covered the
Tabernacle of Moses, and the divine glory -- the Smoke was a Symbol of Gods
gracious presences in the midst of Israel -- and so signifies Gods return to
his Temple, or the glory of the Church; -- it is added, No man was able to enter
into the Temple till the 7 Plagues of the 7 Angels were fulfilled, which
inmateth that though the time of the destruction of the Churches Enemies draws
near, and the time wherein the Gospel shall shine bright in the World, yet that
the Gospel will not be universally received till after the subversion of
Babylon, which will not be until the Vials have been poured out; -- yet some
are ready to think the fulfilling of the 7 Plagues, etc. alludes to the
fulfilling of the time of their first pouring out, and not till they are all
poured out.

Of the 7 Trumpets, 7 Thunders, and 3 Woes.

As touching the 7 Seals and 7 Trumpets, he much agrees with our Expositors, he
concludes the first Woe fell out under the 4th and 5th Trumpets; take his own
words. St. John tells us, c. 8. 13. that he heard an Angel flying through the
midst of Heaven, saying with a loud voice, Woe, woe, woe to the Inhabitants of
the Earth, by reason of the Trumpets that are yet to sound. After the sounding
of the 5th Trumpet St. John adds, One woe is past, and behold there come two
more hereafter. One of these two woes fell undoubtedly out under the 6th
Trumpet, under which Mahometanism and the Turkish Army destroyed the whole
East, and therefore the third woe must come to pass under the seventh and last
Trumpet.

That all the Vials, says he, being contained under the 3d woe, they are yet
to be poured out, for as much as we are this year 1687. still under the sixth
Trumpet, and groaning under the pressure of the 2d woe.

So that here we have a new proof that all the Vials from the first to the last
are yet to be poured out, for as much as the Vials are no other thing than the
7 Thunders which are spoken of, Rev. 10. and indeed the Thunders are 7 in
number as well as the Vials are; and as the Thunders do signify the Judgments
of God against the Enemies of the Church, so the Vials do signify the same, in
that* by them the wrath of God is to be consummated. Moreover, the things
threatened by the Thunders are delayed from being executed until the sounding of
the 7th Trumpet and therefore were to be sealed up until the Mysteries of God
should be finished, (which in my judgment means the whole of the Beasts 42
Months,) which agrees with what he further says, p. 249. The Mysteries of God
(says he) is the bringing in of the Kingdom of Christ, and the uniting of all
Christians, from whence that peace of the Church shall arise, and if there be
any difference between the Vials and the Thunders, it consists only in this,
viz. the Thunders are the denunciation of the Judgments of God, and the Vials
are the execution of them, for though the Thunders were heard by St. John under
the 6th Trumpet, yet they were not to be executed till under the 7th, when all
the Vials shall be poured out.

He then proceeds to speak his conjectures about the pouring out of all the 7
Vials.

1. On the earth, which (he thinks) intends the Joss of Church Revenues and so
falls upon the Worldly and Carnal Interest of Antichristian men (let the Carnal
Earthly and Self-seeking Prelates and Clergy look to it.)

2. Vial upon the Sea, etc. The Sea, he says, is the Papal Kingdom, (in this he
agrees with reverend Mr. Knowles.) In its uttermost extent, not only the
Country where the Pope is Sovereign, but likewise all those Princes who
acknowledge him, and this Empire shall become as the blood of a dead man, etc.
So that every Soul which lives in it shall die. That is (says he,) the
government of Popish Princes shall not be able to endure their Yoke, as fish
cannot live in waters which are turned into blood.

3. Vial on Rivers, he concludes, means Popish Doctrines.

4. Vial on the Sun, in all likelihood, says he, is the Ottoman Emperor, as
the 4th Trumpet raised him, so the 4 Vial shall pull him down; I think it
rather means the German Emperor.

5. Vial, on the Seat of the Beast, is meant the City of Rome, says he, which
is here threatened, and all agree with him in this.

6. Vial poured out on the great River Euphrates, and the waters thereof were
dried up, that the way of the Kings of the East might be prepared, etc.

The sixth Vial destroys the Empire of the Turks and their Religion which the
sixth Trumpet had advanced to the highest pitch of its Grandeur for the River
Euphrates does, says he, undoubtedly signify the people of that part of the
world, and its waters being dried up denotes the end of that Empire and their
Religion, after which there will be nothing to hinder, either the Kings of the
East who shall be enlightened and converted, or the Jews who are there
dispersed in great numbers from marching into the West, to help to finish the
destruction of the beast, he after intimates that he believes by the Kings of
the East the Jews are meant, etc. And by the unclean Spirits he judges are
intended the Jacobins, the Cordeliers and the Jesuits.

7. Vial poured into the Air, he thinks, signifies the Antichristian Religion,
and that this Vial shall clear all places of it; It is done, that is, the
mystery and total ruin of the Papacy -- time shall be no more, for the Whore or
Church of Rome, and her Idolatry.

Of the rise of the Beast.
As touching the rise of the beast, he says, p. 275, It was when that Imperial
Edict came forth to establish Rome, as Sovereign over all other Bishops which
was in 445 in favor of Leo I. and so may hope to see the end about 1705. but
reverent Mr. Knowles rather fixes on the year 428, or See Mr Knowles Exposition
on the Rev. p. 130.
thereabouts, for which he cites Simpsons History of the Church, lib. 4.
Socrat. hist. Eccl. cap. 3. Helvicus in council. Taurinat. cap. 7. Magdeb. cent.
5. cap. 10. Which ended in 1688. a year I hope that has laid a foundation for
the utter ruin of the Papacy in this Kingdom, and brought a sudden change and
great overthrow upon the OldWhore here amongst us; we have a King now, blessed
be God, who has it put into his heart with other Kings and States to hate the
Whore, and the work we hope is begun.

Some brief hints of this French Ministers Answer to Mr. Jurieu, about the
Vials.
Says he, Mr. Jurieu builds his commentary on Rev. 16. i. e. in that he
considers the seven Vials, as seven Periods of time, making the first Vial to
fall upon the 10th. age, and lasted 150 years p. 2. and the 6. Vial he affirms
to have continued from the year 1429. till the time of Luther, at which time he
begins the seventh. Vial.

This, says he, is the great principle that Mr. Jurieu goes upon, i. e. the 7
Vials are certainly 7 Periods of time: and after this principle, says he, he
draws three conclusions. (1.) That there is a difference between the Vials and
the Plagues, that the 7 Plagues are the Judgments of God, and the 7 Vials
denote the 7 Periods of time, wherein those Judgments are to fall upon the
Papal Empire. (2.) That all the Plagues are designed against the Papal Kingdom,
and not so much as one of them against the Empire of the Turks, it is certain,
says Jurieu, that the 7 Plagues are entirely intended against the Empire of
the Beast. (3.) That there are in all thirteen Plagues, whereof the 6 first
have destroyed the Roman Empire as civil, and these 6 Plagues fell under the 5
first Trumpets, and that the 6th. Trumpet which is divided into 7 Vials, shall
destroy the same Empire as Ecclesiastical and Papal, and that the Vials have
been pouring out since the 10th. Century, that the 7th. is not yet wholly
poured out, but that it begun at the time of Luthers reformation, and will end
at the general reformation, etc.

Now, says this learned French Minister, whereas Mr. Jurieu's principle is,
that the 7 Vials are certainly 7 Periods of time, this has no evidence in it,
being neither certain nor clear, to those that are versed in the reading the
Prophets, -- says he, Jurieu affirms that the 7 Vials signify an Hourglass
and not a cup; for a cup is of another form than a Vial, in that this has a
large Belly and a narrow Mouth, -- to which our Author says it is not about
the form of a Vial that we treat, but about the signification of it, nor is
there any Greek Author that ascribes to the word Vial, the signification of an
Hourglass; -- But by all Dictionaries it does appear that the term Vial
signifies a Cup, a Chalice, in a word, a vessel designed to drink in, so that
Mr. Jurieu's great principle is more than doubtful; but then the use to which
St. John applies this term Vial, does make us plainly see its falsehood in Rev.
5. 8. The 24. Elders fall down before the Throne, having Golden Vials full of
odor, which are the Prayers of the Saints, where Hour-glasses used to offer
Incense in, and to scatter perfumes in places of worship, -- Again he says,
that the term Vial can have no other signification but this, i. e. in that the
wrath of God whereof they are said to be full, chap. 16. the Vials are said to
be full of the wrath of God, and are poured out, are (says he) Hour-glasses
said to be cast into the Air, on the Sun or Sea, etc. Moreover he refutes
Jurieu about the Trumpets, and that they rather signify Trumpets proclaiming
War, than Trumpets whereby the Jubilees were published, and so shows his
weakness in asserting the Trumpets to signify Periods of time: since years of
Jubilee were years of joy, but these Trumpets brought in woe and lamentation
with them, so that it is not true, faith he, that the Trumpets of St. John,
intimate Periods of time, by an allusion to the Trumpet which published the
Jubiles, and it is yet less true that the Vials are Hour-glasses to mark these
Periods by; Mr. Jurieu's principle being false, says he, all the conclusions
which he draws from it, must necessarily be false also. (1.) It Is false that
there is a difference between the 7 Plagues and the 7 Vials, seeing they are
the same Judgments of God, against the Enemies of his Church. (2.) It Is false
that the Plagues are designed only against the Empire of the Beast, for, says
he, the Trumpets and Vials have in part for their object the Turkish Empire,
and Mohammedan Religion. (3.) It Is false that the 6th Trumpet is subdivided into
the 7 Vials, and that the 7 Vials have been pouring out since the tenth
Century, for it is the 7th Trumpet that is subdivided into the 7 Vials, because
it is under the 7th Trumpet that the Vials shall be poured out; whosoever well
considers what is to arrive under the 6th Vial, according as St. John has
described it, and thereupon compares it with what is to come to pass under the
7th Trumpet, may from thence prove, that the Judgments of God represented by
pouring forth of the Vials, agree admirably with the effects of the 7th
Trumpet, and may from thence conclude, that the subdivision which Mr. Jurieu
attributes to the 6th Trumpet, agrees only with the 7th, p. 10.

He then proceeds to defend a former Book written by himself, (as I suppose)
against Jurieu about the Vials.

The first foundation upon which he goes is, that the Apocalypse is nothing but
a continuation of the Prophetical History of Daniel concerning the 4th Monarchy
which is the Roman Empire; and concerning the Kingdom of Jesus Christ. --

The 2d is, that the Apocalypse predicteth 3 changes that were to befall the
Roman Empire, by the first, it was to pass from Paganism to Christianity, by
the second, it was to pass from Christianity to Antichristianism and
Mahometism, and by the 3d it is to return from Antichristianism and Mahometism,
to Christianity purified by a general reformation.

The 3d rule by which he goes is, that the first change fell out under the 6th
seal, that the 2d came to pass under 6 of the Trumpets, and that the 3d shall
arrive under the 7th Trumpet, that brings in the Vials.

The 4th is, that these three visions, viz. that of the Seals, that of the
Trumpets, and that of the Vials, are the three principal Visions, and do
comprehend the whole Prophetical History concerning the Roman Empire, and the
Church of God, and that all the other Visions are but commentaries upon these
three.

The 5th is, that none of the Vials are contemporary with any of the Trumpets,
except the seventh Trumpet, and that there is as much difference between the
time of the Trumpets, and that of the Vials, as there is between the time of
building, and the time of destroying what is built, and that we are to see all
that overthrown under the Vials, which was established under the Trumpets; this
does evidently appear, in that the Trumpets and the Vials display themselves
toward the same subjects, and that the effects of the Vials, are different
from those of the Trumpets. And this difference is so great, that whosoever
considers it carefully and without prejudice, will be convinced that
whatsoever was produced and rais^d under the Trumpets, shall fall into decay
and come to ruin under the Vials.

For whereas under the 1st Trumpet there fell upon the Earth, Hail mingled with
Fire and Blood; instead of this under the first Vial there falls upon the same
Earth, i. e. those who worship the Beast, etc. a noisome and grievous sore.

And whereas under the 2d Trumpet there was a burning Mountain cast into the
Sea: So that the third part only of all that was in it died.

The 3d Trumpet made the Fountains and Rivers become bitter; but the third Vial
represents the Rivers and Fountains changed into Blood.

The 4th Trumpet, lays before us, the third part of the Sun, and of the Moon,
and of the Stars, smitten, i. e. The 3d part of the Roman* Empire darkened by
the pestilential Doctrine of Mahomet, and invaded by the Army of the Turks: But
the 4th Vial which is poured forth only upon the Sun, seems to threaten the
Ottoman Empire and Religion.

The 5th Trumpet foretells the fall of a great Star, to whom were given the
Keys of the bottomless pit, out of which there rose a Smoke and Locusts. The
Keys plainly show Rome to be meant, in that she challenges to have the Custody
of the Keys committed to her, and pretends to be the Seat of St Peter; and this
denotes the growth of the Papal Empire. But the 5th Vial is poured out upon the
Seat of the Beast, i. e. upon Rome, which predicts her destruction, and
therefore represents his Kingdom become full of darkness, and his Subjects
Gnawing their Tongues, through despair.

The 6th Trumpet, as also the 6th Vial have the River Euphrates for their
Subjects, but with this difference, that the 6th Trumpet loosed the four Angels
that were bound in the River Euphrates, which represented the growth of the
Turkish Empire and of their Religion, whereas the 6th Vial dries up the said
River, and produced the end both of their Religion and Empire.

The 7th Trumpet* denounces the 3d, and last woe, and under it the Vials of
Gods wrath are to be poured out upon all the enemies of the Church, in order
thereby to manifest and fulfill the Mystery of God, which is nothing else save
the reuniting all Nations under the Scepter of Jesus Christ which will begin
the Millennian Reign.

These are the principles, upon which, says he, the Anonymous Author, has
built the Systeme of his Explanations, which as he Judges to be beyond all
possibility of being overthrown, so it is from this source that he will bring
his answers to those reasons which Mr. Jurieu has endeavored to prove that
all the Vials are already poured out, and also the defense of the Reasons, by
which he has in his Illustrations proved that they are not yet poured forth,
p. 14.

He then proceeds to answer all Mr. Jurieu's reasons which the said Jurieu
brings to prove all the Vials already to be poured out.

The proof, says he, which Mr. Jurieu grounds upon the conformity of the first
4 Vials, with the Events observable in the history of the Pagan Empire, is
perfectly overthrown by considering the nature of the Vials themselves, for
they are nothing else but the Judgments of God upon the Papal Empire, in order
to destroy it, but the events which he will have to answer the 7 Vials,
produced a quite contrary effect, i. e, They raised it, they increased it and
brought the Papal Empire to its grandeur, the wonderful corruption of the tenth
Age signified according to Mr. Jurieu by the noisome sore of the first Vial,
served to diffuse the darkness of Error and Idolatry by which that Empire is
supported, the Croisad's, which he will have to be signified by the Sea and
Rivers under the 2d and 3d Vials, as likewise the Suns scorching men under the
4th Vial, which he will have to prefigure the growth of the Papal Authority,
did all contribute to the rendering the Empire stronger and more terrible.

How then could these Vials (which are the Judgments of God, nay and the last
plagues and Judgments to finish the wrath of God upon the Beast and Babylon) be
said to be poured out to increase and perfect the grandeur of the Papistry or
Papal Empire.

Jurieu to answer this difficulty would have us believe, that some of the
severe Judgments of God, nay and they must be some of the last Plagues or
Judgments too, the Popes are not the Subject, but the instruments, these
plagues, says Jurieu, fall upon those who worship the Beast and his Image, and
not upon the Beast himself and false Prophet.

To which our worthy Author replies that it is Impossible that an Empire should
be smitten with Plagues and Judgments of God, in order to its being weakened,
and impaired, and that its head and Sovereign should in the mean time no ways
suffer (to which I might add but contrariwise great strength thereby) the
union, says he that is between the head and the members, is wholly
inconsistent with any such a notion, whenever the body is very sick, the head
is in a very ill condition; and this holds more truly in reference to a
Political body than to the body Natural, whereas it is a Spiritual Empire, viz.
Antichristianism, the Judgments that are to be executed upon it are to be
Physical and Penal evils, which as punishments are to weaken and subvert it,
the Judgments of God against an Empire whose criminalness from the very nature
of it, lies in its Errors, i. e. Idolatry, Tyranny, etc. which comprehends in
them the corruption of manners, cannot consist in evils of offense, but the
first 4 Vials according to Jurieu, import evils of crime, and not of
punishment, and do strengthen and advance the Empire or Papistry in all that is
essential to it, instead of depressing and enfeebling it, for it never had so
great power and Splendour as it enjoyed from the 10th to the 14th Century, and
that is the time according to Mr. Jurieu, for the effusion of the 1st 4 Vials,
never man was certainly more mistaken; our author proceeds and confutes Jurieu
as fully, in respect of what he affirms to be the effects of the other 3 Vials,
which I have not room to insert, p. 17.

In p. 24. our Author confesses that Luthers reformation was a Judgment of God
upon the Papal Kingdom, (yet not the effects of the 5th Vial according to Mr.
Jurieu, nor the 1st Vial according to some of our English Writers) for he
withal says, that it was an effect of the 6th Trumpet, which continues to
represent the War of Antichrist against the Church of God: till then Antichrist
had been always victorious against the Saints for more than a 1000 years, but
then came to receive a disaster; now this misfortune befell the Papal Empire,
says he, under the sixth Trumpet, which being the last save one was the season
that the War was hastening to an end, and that the last Trumpet was about to
sound under which this War will both actually end, and all the Vials come to be
poured forth, but the damage which the reformation has done the Papal Kingdom,
though it has dismembered it, is only a beginning of its sorrows, and is but an
effect of the War which was to continue 42 months, during the time of all the
six Trumpets, and which shall be finished through the effusion of the Vials under
the 7th Trumpet; to which let me add, what greater reason have our English
Writers to fix the pouring forth of the 1st Vial, about the time of Luther's
reformation wrought by his preaching above others, who go as high as Waldo,
nay, with Jurieu, to the tenth age, since there was some worthy men in every
Century, that bare a brave testimony against the Papal Idolatry, and wounded
the Papistry very sorely, though it is granted not to such a degree as in the last
age? Besides, what reason is there to conclude the Harvest of Gods wrath is
come, till it is fully ripe? and why should we conclude it will be fully ripe
till the 42 months are expired, which seems to be the set time of cutting down?
I do conclude the slaying of the Witnesses of Christ quite fills up their
measure, and so makes way for the 7th Trumpet and Harvest of Gods wrath, --
when the measure of the Churches afflictions shall come to their height, and
the Beast will have filled up his number and measure of wrath against Gods
people, then will the time of Gods fury break forth, which will be as he
observes when the 6 Trumpets cease sounding, and the seven Vials, which are the
seven Plagues, shall arrive and begin to take place against the Papacy, and
against Mahometism; it is, says he, for this reason that it is said by the seven
last Plagues (which are the Vials) the wrath of God is finished; from whence it
follows that the Vials are not contemporary with the sixth Trumpet, and that
it is not the sixth Trumpet that is subdivided into the seven Vials, but that
this subdivision is to be assigned to the seventh Trumpet; the sixth as well as
the five preceding speaks nothing save War against the Church of God; so long
as it lasts Antichrist abates nothing of his fury, but constantly makes the
same Efforts for the oppressing of the Truth, and such who do profess it: But
as soon as the seventh Angel comes to sound, the case will be quite altered,
the Wrath of God will break forth, and the Vials empty themselves. And this is
the reason why the Vials are called the seven last Plagues by which the Wrath
of God is fulfilled.

Lastly, He shows us that the seven Vials or last Plagues do manifestly allude
to the Plagues of Egypt, because they are called Plagues as well as Vials, and
are also poured out upon Spiritual Egypt; and seeing, says he, the Plagues of
Egypt did take up but a short space of time, we may not allot years; nay, may
be, says he, not allow months, for the Execution of all the Egyptian Plagues,
why then should it seem strange that all the Vials should be poured out within
the space of fifteen or eighteen years? The third woe comes quickly under
which all the seven last Plagues shall be poured out, which signifies that all
the Plagues shall be poured out, says he, close upon one another; (in this he
so agrees with what Mr. Can has written upon the same account directly) let
us remember, that there is no natural Agent which acts with the rapidity that
fire does, our God is a consuming fire, and it is a terrible thing to fall into
his hands; the fire of Gods wrath will burn doubtless (when it begins to seize
upon the combustible matter of the Antichristian state) with great fury God
will make a short riddance of his Enemies; the second woe is past, and behold
the third woe comes quickly, Rev. 11. 14. We are to observe (says he,) that
this is not said in prediction of the two first woes, all that is said of them
they shall come; but this quickly is not added, save in the prediction of the
third woe. When we may conclude, that the seventh Trumpet shall immediately
follow the Resurrection of the Witnesses, whose death, as it fell out in 1685,
so their Resurrection shall ensue within three years and a half; in this he
agrees directly with Jurieu, it will be well if they do not both prove mistaken.

However there is no doubt but we are near the time of the end, and I hope the
Witnesses are risen, or suddenly (here in Great Britain) will rise. Bone
(methinks) is coming to his Bone, or already have not we seen of late a day
like that spoken of, Ezekiel. 36. 7, 8. A noise like that of shaking, and the
Bones came together Bone to his Bone, and Sinews and Flesh coming upon them,
and is not Breath come into them? and do they not begin to live? is not their
hopes revived, and are they not up upon their feet? -- They ^ay be a very great
Army in due time. Look about you, O ye Saints, what is your expectations? are
ye ignorant of the sign^ of the times and willingly ignorant? do you not look
for great, things? or are ye still as men that dream? know ye assuredly that
the Kingdom of our Lord, and of his Christ is near; nor let none persuade you
there is no greater glory, nor different Kingdom state approaching, than what
has been since the Resurrection and Ascension of Christ, for it is not till the
ending, or the latter end of the fourth Monarchy, that the God of Heaven will
set up his Kingdom in the glory of it, when the knowledge of the glory of the
Lord shall fill the Earth as the waters cover the Seas, all the Kingdoms under
the whole Heavens shall be given to the people of the Saints of the most High.
Dan. 7 Look suddenly for a fearful and an amazing Earthquake, for it will come,
it cannot be far off, and it will be such a dispensation that England has not
known, it will be the time of Jacob' s trouble, but he shall be saved out of it
woe to the Earth, to the wicked, to those who have had a hand in the slaying
the Witnesses, who are Enemies to the power of godliness, who strive to keep up
an Antichristian state, their day is near, and the time they must be judged,
God will now turn his hand upon his Enemies, his wrath is come, and the day in
which he will plead the Controversy of Sion, the Decree is gone forth, and it
cannot be reversed, watch and pray, take heed you are not found in the Earthly
Spirit, for if you are, you will be shaken in pieces, and full with the Enemy,
and rise no more, yet I doubt not but the Enemy will strive, kick and struggle
exceedingly, (like a Beast that has received its deaths wound,) just as they go
off the Stage, and somewhat like this, methinks, we plainly see at this very
time. But though the work may seem to be obstructed, yet I doubt not but it will
revive again, and in due time prosper and be accomplished.

The Mystical Numbers in Daniel and the Revelations, calculated by the H.
Scriptures only, without the help of Humane History.
By a worthy Minister of the Gospel.
GOD having given the Scriptures to his Church 2 Timothy 3. 16. for her use and
benefit here on Earth; so the Times and Numbers (part thereof) have, are and
will be of use to her: Therefore the Angel Dan. 10. 21. (for the opening the
Vision, and the confirmation of his Faith, in the Will of God revealed therein,
v. 14. concerning his Church, and what should befall her for times to come here
on Earth) tells him that he would show him what was noted in the Scriptures of
truth. And although this part of the Word, has been most hard to be
understood; yet (besides that common advantage to our Faith, that the times are
set by God, not only in his own Eternal purpose, but his revealed Will; which
is a good Foundation of Faith to believe and expect accordingly) the more
particular knowledge of them as truly opened, must be of special use and help
to our Faith, both to prepare for suffering, and expect deliverance. With what
diligence then should we with unbiassed minds make our applications to him that
is the Revealer of secrets: An Essay toward which follows.

First, I premise there is as sweet a Harmony in this part of the Word as in
any other. Secondly, That this harmony, and the right understanding of the
Times set, is to be found out in the Scriptures them selves.
The first number I shall begin with, is that great number of 2300 days, (a day
for a year, as is usual in Scripture,) Dan. 8. 14. Which I conceive includes
all the lesser in Daniel and the Revelations, all of them being but parts of
this; God in his wisdom having so divided this number according to the several
Circumstances of Providence the Church was to come under.

I conceive this number of 2300 was headed, or does take its beginning, from
the year God translated the Babylonian Monarchy to the Medes and Persians,
which was the third and last of Belshazzar's Reign, who was also the last of
the Babylonian Kings.

1. Because I find no times set in Scripture to begin before they are given
forth, though several a great while after.

2. The Question, Dan. 8. 13. is, How long is the Vision to give both the
Sanctuary and the Host to be trodden under foot? and the answer is, to 2300
days: So that time relates to the suffering of the Church then to come.

3. Daniel chap. 8. 1. dates it in the Third of Belshazzar, in the year he saw
the Vision; though when he saw it, he was in Shushan, a chief City in the
Province of Elam, which is in Persia. Daniel was in Babylon, called to Expound
the Handwriting when the City was taken, chap. 5. 13, 30. But when Darius the
Median had taken Babylon, and had so enlarged his Dominions by the Kingdom of
Babylon, he, for the better Government of the whole, Dan. 6. 1, 2. set over the
Affairs of the Kingdom 120 Princes, and three Presidents over them, of which he
made Daniel chief; so that there is great reason why he should be in the Royal
City Shushan. But this falling out in the third of Belshazzars Reign, that he
lost his Kingdom, Daniel dates the Vision that year, though he was in Persia when
he saw it. God ( chap. 7. and in the first of Belshazzar's Reign) showed in
Vision unto Daniel, under the representation of four Beasts the four Monarchies
which should rule in those parts of the World, where his Church then was, and
was to be in after times, during all her suffering state, till Christ's Kingdom
on Earth was to come, Dan. 7. 27, 28. God having before showed by Jeremiah,
chap. 25. 11. the sufferings of his Church under the first of these for 70
years; The ending of that Monarchy, and the 70 years was to be together in the
self-same year, which was also to fall out in the Reign of Nebuchadnezzar's
Grandson, Jer. 27. 7. which was this Belshazzar. Now in the last of this
Belshazzar, and the first of the Medes and Persians, God shows to Daniel how
long the Church was to suffer under the three that were to succeed, and 'twas
to be for 2300 years longer, before the Churches deliverance was to be
completed, and Peace and Righteousness established in the Earth, under the
blessed and glorious Reign and Government of Christ and his Saints on Earth,
Dan. 7. 27* 28. with Psalm. 72. the whole Psalm. Well might these heavy Tidings
cause his countenance to change by the trouble of his mind about this matter,
as the Repetition after Dan. 8. in the description of the 3 that were to Reign
the 2300 years yet to come, as v. 19, 20, 21, -- 26. caused him to faint, even
to sickness for certain days, v. ^7. I say, well might these things be so
di^^ressing to the Mind and Spirit of the Prophet, when he was expecting
deliverance to the Church of God* For in this very year* the first of Darius,
Dan. 9. 1, 2. He understood by the Books of Jeremiah, the ending of the ^o
years Captivity in Babylon, together with Gods providence in ending that first
Monarchy, Jer. 27. 7. they ^^ing at a loss at which of the 3 goings into
Captivity to head that number before, for there were ^ goings into captivity,
as 2 Chronicles. 36. 6. and 10 17.

The next thing is how to carry on this time of 2300 years, according to
Scripture. And first I shall premise,

1. That it is not so material to enquire what of this time is run out, in and
under each of these Monarchies (there being so much time alloted by Divine
appointment for the whole) if we can but find the time carried on in Scripture,
it is sufficient, for as God set the time then to come, of the first Monarchy,
in the 70 years of his Churches sufferings under it, so he sets the whole time
of the three that were to succeed in the 2300 years of his Churches sufferings
then to come.

2. That Histories do greatly differ, both as to number of Persons reigning,
and the time that each reigned, that they rather confound than help in this
matter, and is one reason why Expositors have so varied; each following him
whom he liked best, and endeavoring to reconcile the Scriptures to them, when
indeed we should reconcile them to the Scriptures, and if they speak not
according to them, not to hear them. And therefore to prosecute my design, I
find we may reckon up this account of 2300 years (so many of them as were past
at Christ's death) by Scripture thus.

First, 21 years after the 70 years expired in the ending of the Babylonian
Monarchy, which was the time of Darius his Reign, after he took Babylon, before
Cyrus came to the Throne, who was foretold by Isaiah the Prophet, Chap. 44. 28.
to be the Person that should let go Gods Captives; who accordingly did, Ezra.
c. 1. Now the Scriptures give us this account;

1. That the Medes and Persians were but one Monarchy. 2. That the Government
was in the seed of the Medes, at the time when Babylon was taken, D^^ 5. 31.
chapter 9. 1. 3. That Darius was 62 years old when he took Babylon, Dan. 5 31.
(there is some reason for the Spirits noting of that) so that he might well
Reign 21 years more, for that is but 83, and many live to that age. 4. That he
ordered, over the affairs of the Kingdom, 120 Princes, and 3 Presidents, etc.
5. He by the motion of these Princes made that Law, as firm as the Laws of the
Medes and Persians, that Daniel was cast into the Lions Den by, Dan. 6. 7, 8,
9, 10. 6. Upon his miraculous deliverance, he made a Decree to own the God of
Daniel, chap. 6* 25, 26. and published it through all his Dominions; all these
things must take up time. 7. Daniel, c. 6. 28. is said to prosper all his
Reign; therefore he did Reign. 8. The Holy Spirit gives us the description of
this Monarchy under the Ram: He tells (...)* Horns came up one after the other,
and the last grew highest, which was Cyrus a Persian How he came to the Throne,
Historians differ: some say by conquest; this could not be: Others by marriage,
or some natural Alliance, which is probable; but that is not material to me,
it is sufficient that I find the Scriptures say that he came to the Throne. 9.
Now these 21 years, I judge, are the 21 days, (a day for a year) the Angel
says the Prince of the Kingdom of Persia withstood him, Dan. 10. 13. For the
better understanding of which,
(1.) In Dan. 9. after Daniel had understood by Books, the expiration of the 70
years captivity under the Babylonians, he sets himself to pray for Mercy and
Deliverance, and has no other Answer than ^th Vision of 70 weeks, and the
division of them, Dan. ^9. 25, 26. which account was to begin from the going
forth of the Commandment to build the City Jerusalem: 7 weeks it should be
building: and built 62 to the Messiah, and in the midst of the last week, the
Messiah should be cut off. So that in all this, there is no direct answer to
Daniels prayer for present deliverance, for the Temple took up a long time in
building, through the long death upon the work, before the command here spoken
of for building the City came forth. Now as his prayer was in the first year of
Darius, that is, not of his being a King, but his taking Babylon, and so being
concerned with the Church of God, (for God in his Word takes little or no
notice of earthly powers, but as* in Relation to his people) so when Daniel was
even now going out of the World, He sets himself to pray again, in chapter 10.
which is said to be in the third of Cyrus, v. 1. and has this for Answer, that
God was not unmindful of his Prayer, as v. 12. and gives a reason why
deliverance was not yet to come; The Prince of the Kingdom of (...) the Prince
of Persia, but the Prince of the Kingdom of Persia, i. e. Darius who, tho'he
was of the seed of the Medes, was Prince of the Kingdom of Persia, withstood
him, that is, had not let Israel go, though he had strengthened him in his
Kingdom, chapter 11. 1. Now this third year of Cyrus, might possibly be but the
first of his absolute Reign, for it is like he might under Darius, being old,
rule 2 years before his death, because its said, 2 Chronicles. the last, and 1.
Ezra. 1. That in the first of Cyrus, he let Israel go, and it is probable that
Daniel died in the first of his absolute Reign, Dan x. last, for he continued
but to the first of King Cyrus. Now the continuance here cannot relate to his
honors, that King Nebuchadnezzar advanced him to, chap. 2. 48. for after his
death, if not before, he retired and lived obscure at Court, chap. 5. 11, 13.
Neither did the Prophet Daniel come out of captivity, which it is like he had
done if he had lived to the time of liberty to return, being a man whose Heart
was so engaged for the good of the Church of God; besides, it has been, that
such as were to succeed in the Throne, have been in the management of the
Government, before the death of him that preceded, as in the case of Solomon,
and Darius, being 62 years old when he took Babylon, must be 81 when Cyrus came
to the Government, if he managed these affairs the two last years of his life,
as it is probable he did, and 83 when he died, being the third of Cyrus his
being concerned in the Government, but the first of his absolute rule; and then
he gives liberty to the People of God to return and build the Temple. Now this
work after they entered upon it, did soon meet with interruptions in the time of
Cyrus, that made the Decree for building the Temple, Ezra. 4. 5, 24. But in the
Reign of Darius, as v. 25. with chap. 5. 1. In the second year of his Reign,
Hag. 1. 1. Zech. 1. 1. God stirred up the Spirit of his People, to set about
the work afresh, encouraged from the Prophesying of those two Prophets,
speaking to them from the mouth of God, and God disposing the Heart of that
Prince to encourage it also, so that it was finished in four years, ( i. e.)
the sixth of his Reign, Ezra. 6. 14. 15. How many years this interruption
continued; or how many years it was between the first Decree of Cyrus, when
they laid the Foundation of the Temple, including the years of Preparation,
Ezra 3. 8, 10. and the Decree of this Darius, in the sixth year of whose Reign
it was finished, the Prophet Zechariah gives us an account, chap. 1. 12. to be
seventy years, for the seventy years here intended, cannot be the seventy of
their captivity in Babylon, in which time they were to pray for the peace of
the City, and of the place where they were carried Captive; For God promised
that in the Peace thereof they should have peace, till the time came of their
return, according to divine appointment, they were to build Houses, to Plant
and to Marry, Jer. 29. 5, 6, 7. without attempting to return to build the
Temple, till the seventy years were out; therefore in that time to build Houses
in Babylon, and not God's House in Jerusalem, was no crime. But the great thing
the Prophets Zechariah and Haggai reprove them for, was this, -- consider (1.)
The Prophets were contemporary, and prophesied in the second of Darius, the
time that the Temple work is revived and finished. (2.) They tell the People,
1. That God was displeased with their Fathers, and now with them. 2. For what
he was displeased, viz. For minding their own private things, as Houses and
Lands, etc. and letting the House of God lie waste. 3. The effects, in blasting
all their labors, etc. (3.) He promises them that upon their applying
themselves to the work of finishing his House and the service of it, he would
abundantly bless them; So that the Prophets applying it to that time, we have
reason to judge, that it was no other but the interruption upon the work which
was, as all apprehend, some considerable length of time, but are at great
uncertainty how to reckon it, when the labor may be saved, and we at no loss
in the thing, when the Holy Spirit has reckoned it for us; now the Scripture
tells us, that as the work was revived after seventy years Death upon it, in
the second year of Darius, so it was finished in his sixth year, Ezekiel. 6. 15.
which sixth year was his last, Artaxerxes succeeding him, in the seventh of
whose Reign there is another decree to beautify the House of God, and to
provide it with Sacrifices, Ezra 7. 21, 22, 23, 24, 27. for this decree relates
only to the House of God, and his worship therein; In the twentieth of whose
Reign another Decree comes forth to Build the City, Neh. 2. 1. -- to the ninth,
and here begins Daniel's seventy weeks of years; so that, if this account be
right, we have a very plain and certain account of the time, adding the seventy
weeks of years to the death of Christ. I know it is the Opinion of most, if not
all, to reckon otherwise, and indeed they cannot otherwise do, that go by
History, which tells of more Kings Reigning, and that some of these I have
mentioned did Reign longer, as that this Darius, in the sixth of whose Reign
the Temple was finished, Reigned in all nineteen years, as Helvicus, Juni^s,
Alsted, and others say; but whence have they the account which we with so much
confidence take up from them? It Is from no infallible Writ; they say also, that
from Cyrus, including him, there was fourteen Kings Reigned in the Persian
Monarchy before it was taken by the Grecians; also that Cyrus in the nineteenth
year of his Persian Monarchy Conquered Darius the Mede King of Babylon; all
which could not be: For

1. The Babylonish Monarchy was to end, and did in Nebuchadnezzar's Grandsons
Reign, Jer. 27. 6, 7. which was Belshazzar. 2. Darius, who was of the Seed of
the Medes, Dan. 9. 1. Was King of Media and Persia, when he took Babylon, Dan.
5. 28, 31. 3. There was to be but four Kings in Persia after Cyrus, how then
could thirteen Reign? Dan. 11. 2. The Angel, for the help of our Faith, tells
Daniel, he would show him the truth; and that there should stand up yet (that
is, after Cyrus, for this Vision was in the third of Cyrus, as before I have
noted, for the 10, 11, 12 chap. are but the continuance of the same Vision; for
as I have noted also, Daniel died this year) three Kings, and the fourth shall
be richer, etc. -- and shall stir up all against the Realm of Greece, and here
this Monarchy ends.
To sum up all that we have said, there is, I. -21. years Of Darius, before
Cyrus came to absolute Regal Power. II. 70. years Interruption after Cyrus's
Decree for building the House. III. 4. years Of Darius in finishing it after
they set to the work again. IV. 7. years To the Decree of Artaxerxes to furnish
it with Sacrifices. V. 13. years To that of the 20th of Artaxerxes to Build the
City Jerusalem.
In all 115 years after the 70 years Captivity in Babylon was out before they
began to Build the City Jerusalem again.

In Daniel 9. 24. the Angel tells Daniel that 70 Weeks are determined upon his
People and the Holy City, to finish transgression, to make an end of sin, to
make reconciliation for the people, and to bring in everlasting righteousness.
Then v. 25. he divides them, that from the going forth of the Commandment to
Build the City should be seven Weeks, that is, before it should be Built and
Finished, so long in Building, 49 years, and 62 Weeks it should be Built, but
it should be trouble some times, and so it was with the Jews, what by the
Grecian Monarchy, and after the Roman, for when the Messiah Christ came, they
were tributary to the Romans; and in the midst of the last Week the Messiah
should be cut off, but not for himself, by whose Death the Everlasting Covenant
was Sealed, Ratified and Confirmed, and all the Typical Sacrifices and
Oblations to cease, as now no longer useful to the true Church of God, and
great desolation was to ens^e upon that people for their unbelief, which
accordingly fell out, and was brought upon them by Titus Son of Vespasian some
years after the death of Christ, as Christ also fore-admonished them, Mat. 24.
15. Luke 21. 20. Add now these 69 Weeks, of years, and Week (for he was to
suffer in the midst of a Week) which amounts to 486 unto the 115 years
aforementioned, and it makes up 601. 69 Weeks 486 before 115. In all 601.


As to all the other Numbers, Dan. 7. 25. of Time, Times, and dividing of Time,
and the same Dan. 12. 7. and the 1290 and the 1335; I conceive all relate to
the Times under the Gospel, and in Dan. 11. 31. and 12. 11. when it is said the
Daily Sacrifice shall be taken away, and the abomination that makes desolate
placed in the room of it, and Dan. 12. 11. that from the time that this shall
be done there shall be 1290 days, that is, years as before, Dan. 8. 14. the
Sanctuary shall be cleansed, that the purity of Gods worship shall be restored
at the end of that time; and that blessed is he that comes to 1335, which is
forty five more than 1290. As these relate to the Church under the Gospel, and
Gods worship there, therefore not properly rendered Sacrifices, as Dan. 9. 27.
but by way of Supplement; so I shall rather offer my thoughts of them under
that of the Witnesses Prophesying, etc. only all must and do fall in within the
time of this great number of 2300 years, and from what has been spoken to it,
we may guess how long it will be before it will expire. There are 601 to the
death of Christ; and if we are right in the Tradition of years since his Birth,
(for Divine Writ being finished a little after his death, we have nothing else
to go by,) taking off the years of his Life which were 30 Luke. 3. 23. when he
entered upon his Ministry, which he accomplished in or about the three years or
half Week spoken of by Daniel 5. so that thirty three from 1686, there rests
1653, which added to 601 makes 2254, which last Subtracted from the Capital
Number 2300, there remains 45 the only overplus of Daniel's last number; 601
1653 2254
2300 2254 0045
so that I hope that Deliverance to the Church and people of God is not far off,
and all our sad sights are but good signs.

To what has been said there is something Objected, the which with the answers
take as follows.

Obj. That this calculation cannot be right, because it is said, that when the
Foundations of this second Temple were laid, many of the Priests and Levites,
and chief of the Fathers that were ancient men, that had seen the first Temple,
wept, when others, that were young, and had not seen the first house, rejoiced,
etc. And if this be true that it was so long before Cyrus came to the absolute
Government, and before the Decree for their return out of Babylon to build the
House of God, they must be older, than in reason we can Judge men to live; and
this first, Because they must not be Infants when carried into Captivity, for
then they could not remember what the first Temple was, ^ly. The 70 years of
Captivity and the 21 years of Darius before Cyrus came to the Kingdom, and at
least a year of preparation before they began to build, with their own age when
carried Captive, which could not be in reason much less than twenty years, is
102 years in all, which is an age beyond what usually men lived; and it is said
there were many of those Ancient men that wept, etc.

Ans. First, It Is to be noted, for so it is in the Scriptures of Truth, That
there was a threefold going into Captivity. The First, in the 3d year of
Jehoiakim, 2 Kin. 24. 1. with Dan. 1. 1, 2. which was the 1st year of the Reign
of Nebuchadnezzar, Jer. 25. 1. In this Daniel the Prophet was carried Captive,
and was but young, as v. 4. This Jehoiakim Reigned in all 11 years, 2 Chronicles.
36. 5. Then Nebuchadnezzar Bound him in Chains, and carried him to Babylon, v.
6. And made Jehoiachin King in his stead, who Reigned 3 Months and 10 Days, and
then the King of Babylon carried him and the rest of the Vessels of the house
of God, and a great Captivity of the People, 2 Kings 24. 10. -- to 17. This was
the second going into Captivity. Zedekiah was made King by the King of Babylon
and Reigned 11 years, as 2 Kin. 24. 18. In the last of whose Reign and the 19
of Nebuchadnezzar's, Jerusalem was taken, (as 2 Kin. 25. 8. with Jer. 52. 4, 5,
6, 12, 13.) and burnt with the Temple. This is the third and last going into
Captivity; between which and the first it evidently appears, there were 18 or
19 years, and the Temple was not destroyed till the last: So that the ancient
men spoken of in Ezra, might be of the last going into Captivity, and then
there is no need of reckoning them older than 20 years when carried Captive, 51
years of the Captivity, 19 being gone before and 21 of Darius, in all 92 years;
and it is very probable many might live to that Age. Obj. But how does it appear
that the 70 years does begin in the 1st of these goings into Captivity? Ans.
Very plainly; For in Jer. 28. 3. The false Prophet says that the Yoke of the
King of Babylon should be broken, and the Captivity should return in two years;
In the 29th of Jer. the Lord tells them, that were then in Captivity, that they
should build houses, Plant Gardens, and take Wives in the Land of their
Captivity, and pray for the peace of the place, for in the peace thereof they
should have peace, and and in the tenth verse, that after seventy years were
accomplished, they should return, and not before; so that it is evident that
the seventy years in Gods appointment, did begin in their going into Captivity,
that were then in Captivity, and not in their Captivity that was yet to come,
which was not till the last of Zedekiah's Reign.

Obj. 2. Zerubbabel who came out of Captivity, the Prince and Governor, did
not only lay the Foundations of the house of God, Ezra 3. 8. But did also
finish it, c. 5. 2. Now if the interruption was seventy years, he must be very
old when he finished it, or very young to be chief when they first came up, and
laid the Foundations.

Ans. We know they were reckoned Princes, or Chiefs by their being Elder
Brothers, or Families, whether Younger or Elder in years; and he might live (as
doubtless he did) all the time of the Interruption, and be twenty or thirty
years old when he came out of Babylon, and be but ninety or a hundred years
old, when the Temple was finished, and we read not of him afterward. For Ezra,
who came up the seventh of Artaxerxes, and Nebemiah who came the twentieth of
his Reign, both Governed and set things in Order themselves, according to the
Commissions they had. And what Ezra writes of Zerubbabel is but Historical, of
things past and done. But if this be not right, they that go by History, must
be much more out, who make the time between Cyrus his decree, and the sixth of
Darius his Reign, in which it was finished, to be at least a hundred twenty
four or six, which is almost double seventy.

Obj. 3. is about the one and twenty days, Dan. 10. 13. Some reckon it in the
time of Cambyses Reign, and so part of the time of the interruption upon the
work after the Foundation was laid; but this could not be; For Daniel lived but
to Ans.
the first of Cyrus absolute Government. Dan. 1. v. last. He prospered all the
Reign of Darius, Dan. 6. 28. and in the Reign of Cyrus, that is, to the first
of his absolute Government, and then dies: For he came not out of Captivity,
which doubtless he had done, if he had lived, being a man, whose heart was set
upon the work of God, and the good of his Church. Others take it to be the one
and twenty natural days of Daniels fasting, as v. 2. But Ans.
this cannot be, because the holy Spirit, that we might not be misled, reckons
them twice by weeks of days, as v. 2. 3. That we might not take them for the
time after v. 13. Of one and twenty days as usual in Scripture, a day for a
year. And in what sense can we suppose that the Prince of the Kingdom of
Persia, could withstand an answer from God, of Daniels prayer, when the Angel
tells him, that from the first day he set his heart to understand, etc. he was
heard, v. 12.

Therefore to conclude, what Persons Histories say did Reign, which the
Scripture knows nothing of, or the time they say they did Reign, is nothing to
me; For I cannot think that God in his Word would have been so distinct, and
particular in the persons Reigning, and their time, had it not been for a guide
to us to calculate by. Therefore let others go by what Rule they please, I
desire to abide by that word, which I know is a sure word of Prophesy, and
cannot deceive any that have the mind of God in it.

An Essay toward the understanding the Time set in the Scriptures respecting
the Witnesses, left in the Word for the Use and Benefit of the Church.
AND First, why two Witnesses? First, Either because the Scriptures tell us,
That in the Mouth of two or three Witnesses every thing shall be established.
Two are sufficient, and less cannot; holding forth this truth to us; That let
God's faithful Servants be never so much reduced as to their number, yet he
has not left himself without sufficient Witness in this World. Or, Secondly,
To signify unto us the greatness of that Apostasy that should be from the
truth, of which the false Church should be composed, the whole Earth wondering
after the Beast, and that but few comparatively should be found faithful in the
time of the Holy Cities being trodden under footby the Gentiles. Or, Thirdly,
Signifying to us, That as the Church at the time of Christ's coming was but one
National Church, therefore represented by one Candlestick, Zech. 4. 2. Now
under the Gospel the true Church of God, the Mystical Body of Christ her Head,
consists of several visible Churches, and therefore is represented by two
Candlesticks, Rev. 11. 4.

Secondly, Who those Witnesses are? Ans. Leaving them to their own thoughts,
who take them to be either the two Testaments, or Magistracy and Ministry, or
two particular Persons, I conceive them to be the faithful people of God, that
have obtained Grace to hold the truth of Christ in all Ages, in a faithful
adherence to him, under all the Apostacies that have been made from them, and
Oppositions that have been made by them that have Apostatized from them that
have not loved their Lives unto the death, for the Love they have had to Christ
and his Gospel.

Thirdly, The time of their Prophecy is set down, Rev. 11. 3. and is 1260
days, that is, so many years, which time is contemporary with the Gentiles
treading under foot the Holy City for forty two Months. Now although in forty
two full Months there are more days by about eighteen than 1260, yet the Text
seems to give us to understand that these times shall begin and end together,
though thus differently reckoned, the one by the Sun, the other by the Moon, as
may more fully appear in the next consideration of their work.

Fourthly, Their work is implied in the name given them; they are called
Witnesses. To make a Person a true Witness, he must have a full knowledge of
what he says or testifies, 1 John 1. 1, 2, 3. Therefore they are Gods Children
here intended, that have experienced the things they testify unto; so the
matter of their Testimony is that Act. 1. 8. to testify to Christ his Person
and Offices the alone Mediator, as revealed, opened and held forth in the
Gospel, which is that upon which the true Church of God is Built, Ephesians. 2. 19,
20, etc. And which is the Temple not given to the Gentiles, whilst the Court
and Holy City is given to them to tread under foot forty two Months, all which
time the Witnesses here intended are to Prophecy and Testify to those truths,
that others under a name and profession of Christ Apostatized from, and
intruded their false Doctrines and Corruptions instead of the truths and true
worship of God, Acts 20. 28, 29, 30. 2 These. 2. 1, 2, 3, 12. etc. 1 Timothy 4. 1,
2, 3. etc. 2 Timothy 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. 1 Pet. 3. the whole chapter, 2 Pet. 2. the
whole chapter, the Epistle of Jude, all are Prophetical of great Apostacies
that would be from the Truths and Purity of the Gospel. Now, I say, the work of
the Witnesses is, to stand up for the defense of the Gospel, and they shall do
so for 1260 years together, and then they are slain and lie dead for three days
and a half, that is, three years and a half, then the Spirit of life from God
shall come upon them.

Fifthly, Their finishing their Testimony, this must either respect their
Testimony it self, or the time allotted to them, that is, the 1260 years; I
conceive the first is intended, for after or when they are upon the finishing
it, there is a fresh War made upon them, in which, they that make the War upon
them prevail, so as to overcome them, and kill them, and then they lie dead for
three years and, now how long time this shall take up, is not said. And if the
holy Spirit who had been so exact, in setting down the time of 1260 years of
their Prophesy, and the three days and of their lying dead, had omitted a time
between both, the Church of God had been at as great uncertainty, as if no time
had been set almost. Therefore if we take the finishing their Testimony to
respect their work, then it is our concernment to consider wherein this
finishing part does lie; And that I conceive to be in a witness to the Kingly
Office of Christ. His Prophetical, and Priestly Offices were first Witnessed
to; And this has been lastly contested for, even to blood, in the last Wars in
England, as the other had been upon which this last War has been commenced.
The Testimony being further confirmed in the Martyrdom of many of those
concerned in the finishing of this Testimony. The sufferings of the Church in
these late years has been carried on against her otherwise than in former ages,
in other Methods, and under other names, and pretenses, all bespeaking that the
time of finishing the Testimony is come, and the War commenced, and it may be
an overcoming, if not killing also.

Sixthly where this shall be? Ans. It will be there where this finishing part
of the witness to Christ is born, for there the last War is (which is the last
effort which Antichrist shall make against the Church of God) and overcoming,
and killing will be: And where they shall lie dead, and where they shall rise?
when the Spirit of life from God comes upon them; Now where shall all these
things be? The Holy Spirit tells us, it shall be in the Street of the great
City, Rev. 11. 8. Not in all the Ten, but in one Street, and upon their
resurrection the tenth part of the City falls, not the whole City at once, v
13. So that in the Street, or Kingdom where the Testimony has been finished,
there all the rest follow, and there the deliverance of the Church shall begin,
to an utter overthrow of all her Persecutors and Mortal Enemies.

Seventhly, When this shall be? Ans. To know the beginning and end of these
times and things, there are two ways of calculating. The one is beginning at
the Head of a number, so reckoning forward to its end; The other is back-wards,
as Daniel did, Chap. 9. beginning our reckoning at the end of the number, and
so reckoning to the beginning; Now by one of these two ways, in Gods time we
shall infallibly know. But to the Question, I suppose both ways may be a help
to us now, and Scripture numbers have a dependence one upon the other, and
there lies the harmony of them, when that is understood. The great number,
which includes all the rest, throughout the sufferings of the Church of God,
under the three last of Daniels four Monarchies, is that of 2300 years, which I
have endeavored to carry on by Scripture to the end of it, within forty five
or forty four years, from this year of our Lord 1686. There are two other great
numbers in Daniel, chap. 12. one of 1290. the other 1335. which is forty five
more than the other; so that although they both begin together, they do not both
end together, by 45 years. That they begin together is evident, for the 45th is
the addition of so many to the 1290. therefore blessed is he that lives to the
forty five longer than the 1290. for although the Churches deliverance shall
begin at the 1290. it shall not be completed till forty five more; Therefore
blessed is he that lives till that time: so that when ever these 1335. years
begin, they end with the 2300 years also. Again, the 1290. is thirty more than
1260. in Rev. 11. therefore though they may end together, yet they cannot begin
together. And because of this, expositors have generally judged, that the 1290.
in Daniel relate to the Jews, and the 1260 to the Gentile Church, but by what
reason I cannot be satisfied. Hence they head this 1290. at Julians attempting
to rebuild the Temple; The reason of which was this, he had apostatized from
Christianity, and restored the Gentile Worship and Sacrifices, and as an
affront to Christians, put the Jews upon Sacrificing also, who told him that it
was not lawful for them, but in the Temple at Jerusalem, therefore he orders
them to build it, which they attempted to do, but could but attempt, for God by
his immediate power prevented them. This Julian began his Reign in 365. and
Reigned but three years, so that this opinion time has confuted; For add 1290
to 368, it makes but 1658. at which time they reckoned the Jews would be
called; but no such thing has been: Therefore they expounded all these places,
which we read Sacrifices, with a supplement, in Dan. 8 12. chap. 11. 31. chap.
12. 11. to intend the Jewish worship, which Julian attempted to set up in
confront to Christianity, to be the abomination that makes desolate, for all or
any of which I see no reason. It is properly translated Sacrifice in one place,
as chap. 9. 26, 27. And this does relate to the taking away of the Sacrifices
then in being, of Gods own appointment, which accordingly were taken away, as
Christ himself also admonished. Mat. 24. 15. by Titus -- etc.

368 1290 1658
But the abomination which makes desolate, I conceive is some corruption in the
Gospel worship, the true worship of God; And therefore seeing we, as before,
find the Apostle concerned so much in forewarning the Church by a Spirit of
Prophecy, of what had also been expressly foretold by the Spirit of God; If it
was expressly foretold, it must be written some where or other: and take the
Apostles own exposition, 1 Timothy 4. 1, 2, 3. Why may we not rather reckon this
to be the abomination, to astonishment foretold by Daniel, and this came in in
the 383. year, when Syricius was Bishop of Rome and continued 15 years; in his
time Marriage was forbidden to the Priests, and in the 425. year Caelestinus
was Bishop of Rome and continued eight years; He assumed the temporal power, as
2 Timothy 3. 1, 2, 4, 5. and why we may not head these numbers here, I would be
glad to understand. In the last of which I conceive Antichrist did make his
first visible appearance in the World: so that add the 1260 to 425 it makes
1685, and you bring it to the end of 2300 days within forty five years, or a
year or two, which time I conceive is alloted to pour out the Vials, and to
accomplish the great revolutions in, that shall come upon the Earth, in order
to the possessing of the Kingdom, that shall be given to the Saints of the most
high, Dan. 7. 26, 27, 28. There is time expressed by time, times, and dividing
of time, three times in Scripture, as Dan. 7. 25. 12. 7. Rev. 12. 14. I find
time thus expressed but in one place more, and that is, Dan. 4. 23. where it is
certainly taken for years, and by what rule we will construe it otherwise in
other places I see not. And that in Dan. 12. 11. seems plainly to relate to a
special time of the Enemies accomplishing to scatter the power of the Holy
People, then all shall be finished, ( i e.) the sufferings of the Church, or
deliverance shall thence begin, and bear date from the end of this three years
and In Dan. 7. 25. He tells who shall act this last part, compared with Rev.
11. and in Rev. 12. 14. how God even in that time will provide for his Church,
when the Devil pours out his last wrath upon her, knowing his time is short,
and what time this should be, except the three years and of the Witnesses lying
dead; I cannot see the time when Babylon shall say in her Heart, she sits a
Queen, shall see no sorrow, Widdow-hood, or loss of Children any more, having
accomplished what she had been 1260. days laboring 1260 425 1685.
at, the slaughter and death of the Witnesses, whom she has now dead at her
feet; Therefore they make merry, send gifts to one another, not knowing how
near utter destruction is at her door, she being like Pharaoh of old. but a
noise, and past her time. For I conceive the Witnesses cannot be said to
Prophesy when dead, therefore this time follows immediately upon the end of the
1260 days of their Prophecies; which ending in 1685 according to the preceding
computation; at which time Popery came to be enthroned in this Nation,
accomplished the slaughter and death of the Witnesses; the time of whose lying
dead, which was to be three years and an half, being added to 1685, amounts to
1688 and an half, which was the very time of Gods lifting up his hand by his
present Providence to save these distressed Nations.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books Printed for Nath-Crouch at the Bell in the Poultrey near
Cheapside.
History.
1. ENgland's Monarchs: Or, A Relation of the most remarkable Transactions,
from Julius Caesar; adorned with Poems, and the Picture of every Monarch from
K. Will. the Conqueror to this time. With a List of the Nobility, and the
number of the Lords and Commons in both Houses of Parliament, and other useful
particulars. Price one shilling.

2. THe History of the House of Orange: Or, a Relation of the Magnanimous
Atchivements of his Majesty's Renowned Predecessors, and likewise o^ his own
Heroic Actions, till the Late Glorious Revolution. Together with the History
of K. William and Q. Mary, Being an Account of the most remarkable passages to
this time. By R. B. Price one shilling.

3. THe History of the two late Kings, Charles II. and James II. and of the
most observable Passages during their Reigns; and the secret French and Popish
Intrigues in those Times. Pr. 1s.

4. THe History of Oliver Cromwell L. Pro^ector, being an Impartial Account of
all the ^attles, Seiges, and Military Achievements, wherein he wa^ engaged in
England, Scotland and Ireland; and of his Civil Administration when he was in
Supreme Dignity, till his Death. With a Character of his Humor, Temper and
Inclinations. Relating matters of Fact, without Passion or Partiality. Adorned
with Pictures of some remarkable Passages. By R. B. The third Edition, very
much Enlarged and Altered. price 1s

5. THe Wars in England, Scotland and Ireland, containing an Account of all the
Battles, S^eges, and other remarkable Transactions, from the beginning of the
Reign of K. Charles I. 1625. to 1660 The Trial of ^. Charles I. at large, and
his last Speech with Pictures of several Accidents. Pr. 1. shilling

6. HIstorical Remarks and Observations of the Ancient and present State of
London and Westminster, showing the Foundation, Walls, Gates, Bridges,
Churches, Rivers, Wards, Halls, Hospitals, Schools, Inns of Court, Charters,
and Privileges thereof; with the most remarkable Accidents, as to Wars, Fires,
Plagnes, etc. for above 900 years past. Pr. One Shilling.

7. ADmirable Curiosities, Rarities, and Wonders in England, Scotland and
Ireland, or an account of many remarkable Persons and Places; and of the
Battles, Sieges, Earthquakes, Tempests, Inundations, Fires, Thunders, Murders,
and other Occurrences, for many hundred years past: with the natural and
artificial Rarities in every County; and several Pictures. p. 1^.

8. THE History of the Kingdom of Scotland, containing an Account of all the
Wars, Battles, and other remarkable Transactions, Revolutions, and State
Intrigues in that Nation during the Reigns of 72. Kings and Queens to the reign
of King William II. Intermixed with variety of strange Accidents, Prodigious
Appearances, and other considerable Events. And a List of the present Nobility
of that Kingdom. Illustrated with Pictures. Pr. One Shilling.

9. THE History of the Kingdom of Ireland, being an Account of all the Battles,
Seiges, and other memorable Passages during the late Wars there, till the
entire Reduction thereof by the victorious Arms of K. Will. III. To which is
prefixed a relation of the Ancient Inhabitants, and the first Conquest of that
Nation by K. Henry II. The horrid Rebellion in 1641. and the Popish and
Arbitrary designs in the last Reigns. Pr. 1s.

10 THE History of the Principality of Wales in three parts: Containing, 1. A
brief account of the ancient Kings and Princes of Britain and Wales, till the
final extinguishing of the Royal British Line.- 2. Remarks upon the Lives of
all the Princes of Wales of the Royal Families of England, from K. Edward I: to
this time; particularly of Edward the Black Prince of Wales, who with 30000
English defeated an Army of 100000 French at Cressy; and at Poictiers with
10000 beat 80000, and took John the French King Prisoner. Also of Hen. of
Monmouth (afterward K. Henry V.) who with 13000 routed 90000 French, whose Son
Henry VI. was crowned K. of France at Paris. 3. Remarkable Observations on the
most memorable Persons and Places in Wales, and of diverse considerable Passages
for many hundred years past: With the birth and strange actions of Merlin the
famous Welsh Prophet. And the Natural and Artificial Rarities in every County
of that Principality. price one shilling.

11. THe Unfortunate Co^rt Favorites of England, Exemplified in some Remarks
upon the Live^ Actions and Fatal Fall of diverse Great Men, who have been
Favorites to several English Kings and Queens. Namely, I. Pierce Gaveston
Favorite to K. Ed. 2. II, III. Hugh Spencer the Father and Son, both
Favourito^ to K. Kd. ^. IV. Rog. Mortimer Favorite to Q Isabe^, Mother to K.
Ed. 3. with their private Amour^, etc. V. H. Stafford Favorite to Crook* back
Richard with that King's secret Intrigues for usurping the Crown. and murdering
his Nephews. Likewise the Character of Jane Shore by Sir Tho. More who saw her.
VI. Cardinal Woolsey; VII. Tho. L. Cromwell; both Favorites to K. Henry 8.
VIII. E. of Essex, Favorite to Q. Elizabeth. IX. D. of Bucks Favorite to K.
James I. and K. Charles I. X. E. of Strafford, Favorite to K. Charles I. With
all their Pictures. Price one shilling.

12. THe English Empire in America, or a prospect of his Majesty's Dominions in
the West Indies, namely, New Foundland, New England, New York, New Jersey,
Pensylvania, Maryland, Virginia, Carolina, Bermudas, Berbuda, Anguilla,
Monsetrat, Dominica, St. Vincent, Antego, Mevis or Nevis, St. Christophers
^arbadoe^ and Jamaica: With an account of their Discovery, Situation and
Product: The Religion and Manners of the Indians, etc. To which is prefixed a
Relation of the discovery of the New-World and of the remarkable Voyages of
S^bastian Cabot C. Frobisher, Captain Davis, C. Weymouth, C. Hull, C. Hudson,
Sir T. Ca^endish, the E. of C^mberland, Sir W. Rawleigh and other* English,
Worthies. With Pictures of the strange Fruits, Birds, Beasts, Fishes, Insects,
Serpents and Monsters found in those parts of the World. pr. 1^.

13. A View of the English Acquisitions in Guine^ and the East Indies: With an
Account of the Religion, Government, Wars, strange Customs, Beasts, Serpe^^^,
Monsters, and other Observables in those Countries A description of the Iste of
St. Helena, and the Bay of Sould^nia; intermixed with pleasant Relations. pr. 1^

14. THe English Hero: Or, Sir* Francis Drake Revived. Being a full* Account of
the dangerous Voyages, admirable Adventures, notable Discoveries and
^^^gnanimous Achievements of that Valiant and Re^^owned Commander. As ^* His
Voyage in 1572. to ^os* in the West Indies, where they saw a Pile of Bars of
Silver near 70 foot long, 10 foot broad and (...)* foot high. II. His
incompassing the whole World in 1577. which he performed in 2 years and 10
months, gaining a ^ast Quantity of Gold and Silver. III. His Voyage into
America in 1585. and taking the Towns of St. J^go, St. Domingo, Carthagena and
St. Augustine* IV. His last Voyage into those Countries in 1595. *with his
Death and Burial. Revised Corrected, enlarged, and beautified with Pictures By
R. B. price one shilling.

15. TWo Journeys to Jerusalem, Containing first, An account of the Travels of
a English Pilgrims some years since, and what Accidents befell them in their
Journey to Jerusalem, Grand Cairo, Alexandria, etc. II. The Travels of 14
Englishmen in 1669. With the Antiquities, Monuments and Memorable Places
mentioned in Scripture. To which are prefixed, Memorable Remarks on the Ancient
and modern State of the Jewish Nation, As 1. A Description of the Holy Land,
its Situation, Fertility, etc. 2. The several Captivities of the Jews, 3.
Probable Conjectures what is become of the Ten Tribes carried Captive by the
Assyrians, with Diverse pertinent Relations pursuant there^o. 4. The State of
the Jews since their extermination, with the present condition of Palestine. 5.
Of the Septuagint or 70 Jewish Interpreters of the Law of Moses* Together with
a Relation of the great Council of the Jews in Hungary, in 1650. to examine the
Scriptures concerning Christ. Written By S. B. an Eyewitness. The Wonderful
delusion of the Jews by a false Christ at Smyrna 1666. The final extirpation of
the Jews in Persia the same year, and the occasion thereof. The Proceedings
between the Jews and ^ O. Cromwell L. Pro^. in 1655. The Epistle of Agbarus to
our Savior with his Answer; Beautified with Pictures. pr. 1^.

16. EXtraordinary Adventures of several Famous Men: With the strange Events,
and sig^al mutations and changes in the Fortunes of diverse Illustrious Places
and Persons in all Ages; being an account of a multitude of stupendous
Revolutions* Accidents, and observable matters in diverse States and Provinces
throughout the World; With Pictures. Pr. 1^.

17. THe History of the Nine worthies of the World Three whereof were Gentiles.
1. Hector Some of Priamus. K. of Troy. 2. Alexander the Great King of Macedon.
3. Ju^^us Caesar first Emp. of Rome. Three Jews. 4. Joshua C. General of
Israel. 5. David K. of Israel. 6. Juda^ Maccabeus a valiant Jewish Commander
against An^iochus. Three Christians. 7. Arthu^ K. of Britain. 8. Charles the
Great K. of France, and Em^* of Germany. 9. God frey of Bullen K. of Jerusalem
Being an account of their Lives, and Victories. With Poems and the Pictures of
each Worthy* By R. B. Pr. 1^.

18. FEmale Excellency, or the Ladies Glory, Illustrated in the Lives of nine
Famous Women. At 1. Deborah the Prophetess. 2. The valiant Judith. 3. Q.
Esther. 4. The virtuous Susanna. 5. The Chaste Lucretia. 6. Boadicia Q. of
Britain, in the Reign of Nero; containing an account of the Original
Inhabitants of Britain. The History of Danaus and his fifty Daughters, who
murdered their Husbands in one night Of the valor of Boadicia, under whose
conduct the Britains slew 70 thousand Romans, with other remarkable
particulars. 7. Mariamne Wife of K. Herod. 8. Clotilda Q of France. 9. Andegona
Princess of Spain. Adorned with Poems and Pictures. Pr. 1^.

19. Wonderful Prodigies of Judgment and mercy, discovered in above 300
memorable Histories; containing. 1. Dreadful Judgments upon Atheists,
Blasphemers, and Perjured Villains. 2. The miserable end of many Magicians,
etc. 3. Remarkable Predictions and Presages of approaching Death, and how the
Event has been answerable. 4. Fearful Judgments upon bloody Tyrants, Murderers,
etc. 5. Admirable Deliverances from imminent dangers and deplorable distresses
at Sea and Land. Lastly, Divine goodness to Penitents, with the Dying thoughts
of several famous Men, concerning a Future State. With Pictures Pr. 1^.

20 Unparalleled Varieties, or the matchless Actions and Passions of Mankind
displayed, in near 300 notable Instances and Examples, discovering the
Transcendent Effects, 1. Of Love, Friendship and Gratitude 2. Of Magnanimity,
Courage and Fidelity 3. Of Chastity, Temperance and Humility: And thee*
contrary, the Tremendous Consequences. 4 Of Hatred, Revenge and Ingratitude, 5.
Of Cowardice, Barbarity and Treachery. 6. Of Unchastity, Intemperance and
Ambition. Imbellished with Figures. Pr. 1^.

21. THe Kingdom of Darkness: Or, The History of Demons, Specters, Witches,
Apparitions and other supernatural Delusions and Malicious Impostures of the
Devil* Containing near 80 memorable Relations, Foreing and Domestic, ancient
and modern. Collected from Authors of undoubted Verity. With a Preface
obviating the common Objections of the Sadduces and Atheists of the Age, who
deny the Being of Spirits, Witches, etc. With Pictures. Price one shilling.

22. Surprising Miracles of Nature and Art, in two parts; containing, 1.
Miracles of Nature, or the wonderful Signs, and prodigious Aspects and
Appearances in the Heavens, Earth and Sea; with an account of the most Famous
Comets, and other Prodigi^s from the birth of Christ to this time. 2. Miracles
of Art, describing the most Magnificent Buildings, (...) other Curious
Inventions in all Ages* as the seven Wonders of the World, and many other
excellent Structures and Rarities throughout the Earth. Beautified with
Pictures. price one shilling.

23. THe General History of Earthquakes. Or An Account of the most Remarkable
Earthquakes, in diverse parts of the World, from the Creation to this time,
particularly those lately in Naples, Smyrna, Jamaica, England and Sicily; With
a Description of the famous Burning Mount Ae^na, and several other late strange
Accidents. As I. A surprising Account of Angels Singing Psalms in the Air, over
the ruins of a Protestant Church in France in the year 1686. With the words
they Sang in the hearing of many hundreds. II. The Life of a great Person of
near an hundred years old, now an Hermit in a Forest in France, with the
Devotions, Clothing, Diet, etc. of him and his Companions, etc. III. The
wonderful Army of Grasshoppers near Breslaw in Silesia. September 7. 1693. and
in other parts of Germany, which in their March took up sixteen Miles devouring
every green thing. IV. Three Miraculous Cures wrought by Faith in Christ. in
1693 As 1. of Mary Maillard a French Girl healed of an extreme Lameness. 2. The
Wife of Mr. Savage cured of a Lame Hand. 3. A Shepherd near Hitchin in
Hartfortshire instantly healed of the King's Evil, under which he had
languished Twenty Years. Pr. 1^.

24. MEmorable Accidents and Unheard of Transactions, containing an account of
several strange Events: As the Deposing of Tyrants, Lamentable Shipwracks,
Dismal Misfortunes, Stratagems of War, Perilous Adventures, Happy Deliverances,
with other remarkable Occurrences, and select Historical Passages which have
happened in several Countries in this last Age. Printed at Brussels and
Dedicated to King William 3, etc. Published in English by R. B. pr. 1^.

25. MArtyrs in Flames, or Popery in its true Colors; being a Relation of the
horrid Persecutions of the Pope and Church of Rome, for many hundred years
past, in Piedmont, Bohemia, Germany Poland, Lithuania, France, Italy, Spain,
Portugal, Scotland, Ireland and England; with an abstract of the cruelties
exercised upon the Protestants in France and Savoy in 1686, and 1687. and an
account of God's Judgments upon Persecutors. Price one shilling.

Miscellanies.
26. DElights for the Ingenious, in above Fifty Select Emblems, Divine and
Moral, curiously Engraven on Copper Plates, with so delightful Poems and Lots,
for the lively Illustration of each Emblem, whereby instruction may be promoted
by pleasant Recreation; to which is prefixed, A Poem, entitled, Majesty in
Misery, or an Imploration of the K. of Kings, written by K. Charles I. in
Carisbrook. Castle in the Isle of Wight, 1648. with a curious Emblem. Collected
by R. B. Price 2 s. 6d.

27. EXcellent Contemplations, Divine and Moral written by A. L. Capel, with
some account of his Life, his Letters to his Lady, and his last Speech Also the
Speeches of D. Hamilton, and the Earl of Holland, who suffered with him: Price
one shilling.

28. VVInter Evenings Entertainements, in two parts, Containing, 1. Ten
Pleasant Relations of many Notable Accidents. 2. Fifty Ingenious Riddles, with
Explanations Observations and Morals upon each. Enlivened with above 60
Pictures, for illustrating every Story and Riddle, Accommodated for cheerful
Conversation. Pr. 1 s.

39. ESops Fables in Prose and Verse, with Pictures and proper Morals to every
Fable; Some very pertinent to the present Times containing a new Collection of
ingenious and delightful Fables. Composed by the Famous Esop, the learned
Camerarius, and other Ancient and Modern Authors. Useful not only for
Diversion, but likewise for Instruction, in the Prudent Conduct of our Lives
and Actions. Pr. 1 s. By R. B.

Divinity.
30. THE Divine Banquet, or Sacramental Devotions, consisting of Morning and
Evening Prayers, Contemplations and Hymns for every day in the Week, in order
to a more Solemn Preparation for the worthy Receiving of the Holy Communion;
representing the several steps and degrees of the sorrows and sufferings of our
blessed Savior, till he gave up the Ghost. As 1. his Agony in the Garden. 2.
His being betrayed by Judas. 3. His being falsely accused, smitten, buffered,
and spit upon before Cajaphas the High Priest. 4. His condemnation, scourging
crowning with Thorns, and being delivered to be Crucified by Pontius Pilate. 5.
His bearing the Cross. 6. His Crucifixion. 7. Our Saviors Institution of the
Blessed Sacrament, Also brief Resolutions to those Objections alleged for the
omission of this Important duty. With eight curious Sculptures proper to the
several parts, and Graces. Imprimatur Z. Isham, R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land.
Price 1 shilling.

31 A Guide to Eternal Glory: Or, brief Directions to all Christians how to
attain Everlasting Salvation: To which are added several other small Tracts. As
1. Saving Faith discovered in three Heavenly Conferences between our blessed
Savior, and 1. Publican 2. A Pharisee. 3. A doubting Christian. II. The
Threefold state of a Christian: 1. By Nature 2. By Grace. 3. In Glory. III. The
Scriptures Concord compiled out of the words of Scripture, by way of question
and answer, wherein there is the sum of the way to Salvation, and Spiritual
things compared with Spiritual. 4. The Character of a true Christian. 5. A
Brief Directory for the great, necessary, and advantageous Duty of self
Examination, whereby a serious Christian may every day examine himself. 6. A
short Dialogue between a Learned Divine and a Beggar. 7. Beams of the Spirit,
or Cordial Meditations, enlivening, enlightening and gladding the Soul. 8. The
Seraphick Souls Triumph in the Love of God; with short remembrances and pious
thoughts. 9. History improved, or Christian Applications of diverse remarkable
passages in History. 10. Holy Breathings in several Divine Poems upon diverse
Subjects and Scriptures. Price one shilling

32. Youth; Divine Pastime; Containing Forty Remarkable Scripture Histories,
turned into English Verse. With Forty Pictures proper to each story; very
delightful for the virtuous employing the vacant hours of young Persons, and
preventing vicious divertisements. With Scripture Hymns on diverse occasions.
pr. 6d.

33. THe Young Man's Calling, or the whole Duty of Youth, in a serious and
compassionate Address to all young Persons to remember their Creator in the
days of their Youth. Together with Remarks upon the Lives of several excellent
young Persons of both Sexes, as well Ancient as Modern, who have been famous
for Virtue and Piety in their Generations. Namely, on the Lives of Isaac and
Joseph in their youth. On the Martyrdom of the 7 Sons and their Mother. Of
Romanus a a young Nobleman, and of diverse Holy Virgins and Martyrs. On the
Lives of K. Edward, 6. Q. Jane and Q. Elizabeth in her youth. Of Prince Henry
eldest Son to K. James I. and the Young L. Harlington. With twelve curious
Pictures, Illustrating the several Histories. Price eighteen pence.

34. THe Vanity of the Life of Man represented in the Seven several Stages
thereof; With Picures and Poems exposing the Follies of every Age. Together
with several other Poems and Pictures, namely, The History of Cassianus a,
Christian Schoolmaster, who was martyrred by his own Scholars for the
Profession of the True Faith. A Spiritual Hymn by Mrs. Ann Askew a Lady of
Quality, who suffered cruel Martyrdom for the Protestant Religion in the Reign
of K. Henry 8. Divine Exhortations, To a Virtuous Woman. To his Children. To a
Lady written in her Book. To his Brother. All written by Mr. John Rogers
Minister of St. Sepulchers London, while he was Prisoner in Newgate, before his
Martyrdom in Smithfield, in the bloody Reign of Queen Mary. The Glorious Lover,
or a Dialogue between Divine Love and Worldly Lust, the one persuading the Soul
to embrace the Love of Christ in Youth, and the other alluring it to ruin and
Destruction. The Penitent Youths Alphabet, conformable to the 24 Letters. With
many others, very useful for instructing of young Persons. By R. B. Price bound
6d.

35. ANtichrist Stormed, or the Church of Rome proved to be Mystery Babylon the
Great Whore, Rev. 17. by many and undeniable Arguments, answering all the
objections of the Papists, and all others. Together with the Judgment of many
Ancient and Modern Divines, and most Eminent Writers concerning the rise and
final Ruin of the Beast and Babylon, proving it will be in this present Age;
with an account of many strange Predictions relating to these present times. By
B. Keach Price one shilling.

36. THE Devout Souls Daily Exercise in Prayers, Contemplations and Praises,
containing Devotions for Morning, Noon, and Night, for every day in the week;
with Prayers before and after the Holy Communion: And likewise for Persons of
all conditions and upon all occasions: With Graces and Thanksigvings before and
after Meat. By R. P. D. D. Price bound Six pence.

37. SAcramental Meditations upon diverse select places of Scripture, wherein
Believers are assisted in preparing their hearts, and exciting their affections
and Graces when they draw nigh to God, in that most awful and solemn Ordinance
of the Lord's Supper. By Jo. Flavel late Minister of Christ in Devon. Price one
shilling.

38* JACOB Wrestling with GOD, and prevailing; Or, a Treatise concerning the
Necessity and ^fficacy of Faith in Prayer: Wherein diverse weighty Questions and
Cases of Conscience about praying in Faith, are stated and resolved: For the
satisfying of scrupulous Consciences; Conviction of formal Hypocrites,
awakening of all both weak and strong, o this great duty of Prayer. By T.
Tailor, formerly Minister at St. Edmund's Bury, now at Cambridge. price one
shilling.

39. HEaven upon Earth or Good News for Repenting Sinners: Being an Account of
the Remarkable Experiences and Evidences of many Eminent Christians in several
Declarations made by them upon Solemn Occasions. Displaying the^ exceeding
Riches of the Free Grace and Love of God in supporting them under violent
Temptations and at length filling their Souls with Divine Consolations. With
the Memorable Conversion, Exemplary Repentance, and Dying Expressions of the
late Earl of Rochester. Approved of as very necessary for comforting poor
Doubting Believers, By W. Dyer Minister of the Gospel. Price One Shilling.

40. THE Welcome Communicant, Containing brief Directions to the weakest
Christians how to proceed from one Grace to another, according to the Rule of
the Sacred Scriptures, that so they may come with cheerfulness and Acceptance
to the LORDS TABLE. Together with Devotions and Prayers before, at, and after
the Receiving the Holy Communion. By A. H. D. D. Price six Pence.

FINIS.

