REFLECTIONS ON A French Testament PRINTED AT BORDEAUX, An. Dom. MDCLXXXVI.

Pretended to be Translated out of the LATIN into FRENCH By the Divines of
LOVVAIN.

By RICHARD KIDDER, D. D. and Dean of PETERBOROVGH.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's Head in S. Paul's
Churchyard, 1690.

THE PREFACE.
THAT the People have a right to read the Holy Scriptures cannot be doubted of
by him that considers that matter with due Application, and without Prejudice.
And that Man who reads these Holy Books with great Humility and Care, and an
earnest desire to become better, will receive unspeakable Advantages by it. The
Governors and Pastors of the Church are therefore obliged to promote this holy
Disposition, and to furnish and assist the People, who cannot read these Books
in their original Languages, with such a true Translation, and such needful
Explications as may render it more profitable to them.

The Church of Rome does not absolutely deny the People this liberty, but
restrains it: For they have their Versions of the Bible in the several Popish
Countries in the Language of them. But for all that, certain it is, that many
of that Church do not only disparage these holy Books, but discourage the
reading of them.

And that Church, instead of assisting the devout People in their profitable
reading the Holy Scriptures, and furnishing them with all due means to this
purpose, has dealt very insincerely in the whole matter.

I. By obtruding the Vulgar Latin as that Authentic Copy of the Bible, from
which, in public disputes and questions, there is no appeal to be allowed,
which the Trent-Council does. The Version of the Vulgar Latin I grant, is
venerable for its Antiquity, and is of great use in the Church; And is not
always to be d^spised or declaimed against, where at first sight it does not
seem perfectly agreeable to the Original Text; both because it sometime gives
the true sense, where it seems in the l^tter to differ; and also because (in
the N. T. especially) where it differs from the present reading, it do^s not
differ from some ancient Copies. But yet after all it cannot always be
defended: And it were not hard to give proofs of this beyond all exception
whatsoever. This would be too great a digression in this place: And therefore I
shall only add (as a competent proof of it at present) that the most samed and
allowed Commentators and Interpreters of the Roman Church, do think fit very
frequently to forsake the Vulgar: which I shall at any time make good against
that Church whenever I shall be required to do it.

II. By commending that for the Version of the Vulgar Latin which in truth is
not so. After the above named Decree of the Trent-Council, the minds of men
were in suspense and doubtful, because they knew not what Copy of the V. Latin
to follow. And the Pope did not, for above twenty years after, declare what
certain Copy should be taken for the Authentic V. Latin. Afterward indeed
Pope Sixtus V. gave notice to the Christian World what his mind was in this
matter, A. D. MDLXXXIX. He puts out a Latin Bible, in the Preface whereunto he
acquaints the Reader as follows: That agreeably to the aforesaid Decree of the
Council of Trent, He, having called upon God, and relying upon S. Peter's
Authority, for the public good of the Church, had not thought much to set
forth that Bible. He sets forth his labor in choosing the best readings; his
design, that according to the Decree of the Trent Council the Vulgar Bible
might be printed most Correct; and his performance, viz. That he had accurately
purged this Edition from various Errors, and with utmost diligence restored it
in pristinam veritatem, i.e. to its ancient verity. After this declares his
will, viz. He decrees that that Edition should be taken for that Vulgar Latin
which the Trent Council declared Authentic. And this He tells us he does ex
certa nostra scientia, deque Apostolicae potestatis plenitudine; i.e. from his
own certain knowledge, and plenitude of Apostolic Authority. And that it ought
to be received as such, sine ulla dubitatione aut controversia, i.e. without
any doubt or controversy. After this Clement the VIII. puts out his Edition of
the Vulgar, and requires expressly that that be received also. And this he does
A. D. MDXCII. The differences between that of Sixtus V. and Clement VIII. are
too many to be here related. Where'tis in Clement's Edition eduxistis, it is in
that of Sixtus V. induxistis, Exodus xvi. 3. Where the one has opposuit, it is
apposuit in the other, Deuteronomy. xxiv. 6. Clement has extrinsecus where Sixtus
reads it intrinsecus, 1 Kings vii. 8. Where Clement has it a porta, Sixtus
has it ad portam, 2 Ezr. c. iii. v. 28. One reads latitudinem when the other
reads altitudinem, Judith i. 1, 2. What in Sixtus is insipientia, is sapientia
in Clement, Ecclus. xxi. 15. Non respicis in Sixtus, is respicis in Clement,
Hab. 1.13. Where Sixtus has Credentes, Clement has non Credentes, Joh. vi.
65. Where Sixtus has interpretabilis, Clement has in interpretabilis, Heb. v.
11. And where one has doctas, the other has indoctas, 2 Pet. i. 16. Yet are
both these to be received by the authority of Pope and Council, though they
contradict each other. And we shall still be at the pleasure of a Pope to give
us another Authentic Copy.

III. The Church of Rome has done very insincerely in allowing Versions which
pretend to be true Versions of the Vulgar when they are not. I shall more
especially consider those which were done into French; there was a French Bible
printed at Antwerp, by the permission of Charles the V. A. D. MDXXX. and
reprinted, A. D. MDXXXIV. which differs from the present Vulgar. But this being
done before the Bull of Sixtus V. I insist not upon it. After this there was
another Version of the V. Latin into French by the care of certain Louvain
Divines, deputed to this purpose: An Edition of which, Printed at Lions, I
frequently refer to in the following Reflections. This was a Version of great
fame and authority in the Church of Rome; and the Testament of Bordeaux
pretends to be done by these Divines. So it was, that though this Louvain French
Bible were designed to keep the people from reading the Protestant Editions,
yet it was complained of by several of the Church of Rome (as Father Simon
relates) as coming too near the Sentiments of the Protestants. It will appear
(by the following Reflections) that this Version does not exactly agree with
the present Vulgar. Since that have been many Popish Versions in the French
Tongue, which pretend to be Versions of the Latin into French, of the N.
Testament, in which I am particularly concerned at present. I shall mention
none but such as I have perused. The first is that of Amelote, who was chosen
by the French Clergy to this employment, A.D.MDCLV. He has Printed his Version
both with and without Notes. The first, A.D.MDCLXVI. That without Notes I have
seen Printed A.D.MDCLXXXVI. This was Printed with the attestation and
approbation of several Prelates of France, with the permission of the
Archbishop of Paris, Crit. Hist. de Verse. N. T.
and General of his Order. Father Simon says, that he was the first Catholic
Writer that applied himself with Care to turn the N. Testament into French. I
will not deny him to be a person of diligence and good fame; but yet neither is
this a strict Version of the Vulgar.

The Second is the Version Printed at Mons. This is common among us, and has
been often Printed, and is of great fame, and upon many accounts a very
valuable Book. But neither is this a strict Version of the Vulgar, as I could
easily show by very many instances, were it convenient in this place to do it.

The Third is this Testament Printed at Bordeaux, which the following
Reflections relate unto. It bears the Title of, Le Novveau Testament de notre
Seigneur Jesus Christ Traduit de Latin en Francois, par les Theologiens de
Louvain, i. e. The New Testament of our Lord Jesus Christ Translated out of
Latin into French, by the Divines of Louvain. It was Printed at Bordeaux,
A.D.MDCLXXXVI. It has the approbation of two Doctors, viz. Lopes and Germain,
as very profitable to those who shall be permitted and have capacity to read
it. It has also the permission of the Archbishop of Bordeaux, and it is in that
permission affirmed to be reviewed and exactly corrected.

I shall make it appear that this is no true Version of the Vulgar Latin, that
it is not the work of the Louvain Divines as it pretends to be: That is agrees
neither with the Vulgar, nor the celebrated Versions of it which are allowed in
the Roman Church: That is has a considerable number of downright forgeries and
falsifications, a great number of gross errors, and mistakes: That is adds to
the Vulgar and takes from it: That it is inconsistent with it self, and by no
means corrected as to the Typographical Errata. In a word, it has not the
authority of ancient Copies or various Readings to support it: I dare challenge
all mankind to defend it.

Preface to the Rhem. Testam.
Those of the Church of Rome have inveighed against the Protestants Versions.
They have pretended that we have no Bible. They have scoffed and derided us on
this account. They have boasted that they have been the faithful preservers of
these Divine Oracles, and that what we have of them we may thank them for.

But lo here a proof of their insincerity; here is that which may convince any
honest man, even of their own Communion, that is willing to know the truth in
this most important matter. And if any such should read these Papers, I must
conjure him, as he loves his Soul, to take care how he trusts that Church with
the Salvation of his Soul that dares falsify at this high rate. No man will in
other cases trust a cheat or forger of Testaments and Deeds. But how great must
this wickedness be then, when the Holy Oracles of God are corrupted to serve a
turn. They that can do this can make no boggle at the most horrid and execrable
Crimes.

I did intend in the last Reign to have made, and to have published these
Reflections. But I could by no means procure this Testament either here or
beyond the Seas. Insomuch, that I began to suspect that either there was no
such Book, or that it had not those faults in it as had been given out. But,
after I had, by means of a very learned and excellent Person, procured a Copy,
I found it to be, as I have in the following Reflections truly represented it
to the Reader.

IMPRIMATUR.

Z. Isham, R. P. D. Henrico Episc. Land. a Sacris.

October. 18. 1690.

REFLECTIONS ON THE French New Testament, etc.
I Will not undertake to represent all the faults of this Translation: It shall
suffice to take notice of the most notorious, and greater number of them.

I will begin with such as are notorious in an high degree, and deserve no
better a name than falsifications of the Text, merely to serve a turn, and
support a Doctrine that needs confirmation. The Mass, and the Sacrifice of it,
sufficiently need better proofs than have hitherto been produced. These
Translators, in the Contents before Matthew. xxvi. v. 26. tell the Reader that
Jesus Christ did there Institute the Mass. And this Institution of the Mass
they mention again in the Contents before Mark xiv. And they expressly mention
the Sacrifice of the Mass in the Contents before Act. xiii. And what we tender
( v. 2.) As they ministered to the Lord, they render by, Or comme ils offroyent
an Seigneur le Sacrifice de la Mess, i. e. as they offered unto the Lord the
Sacrifice of the Mass. It Is certain that our English Version of that place
follows the Vulgar Latin, and their Rhemist Testament agrees with it herein;
and Amelote renders it, lors qu'ils estoyent occupez au Service de Dieu, i. e.
when they were empolyed in the Service of God. And the old Louvain translation
thus, Eux donc servans en leur Ministere an Seigneur, i. e. as they were
serving in their Ministry to the Lord. But these men make no scruple to
forsake the Vulgar it self, when it will not serve their purpose. I have
elsewhere showed, that Act. xiii. 2. contains no proof of the Romish doctrine
of the Sacrifice of the Mass; and do not intend to enter upon that dispute
here. It Is enough to observe that these Translators forsake that Vulgar Latin,
(which their Church commends and approves) when in the mean time they pretend
to give us a Version of it.

The Doctrine of Purgatory as it is taught in the Roman Church must be defended:
And though the Scripture have nothing in it to that purpose, yet they will rather
add to the Text, and falsify that, than want a color for their Doctrine. And
indeed they have done it: where the Apostle tells us of him that shall be saved
as by fire (1 Cor. iii. 15.) they have it, par le feu du Purgatoire, i.e. by
the fire of Purgatory; without any distinction of letters at all; as if
Purgatory had been in the Text as well as fire. And yet the Vulgar Latin (of
which this is pretended to be a Translation) has only per ignem, i.e. by fire,
as it is in our English; and so it is in the Testament of Rhemes. Nor is there
any mention of Purgatory in the old Louvain Version, in that of Amelote, or
Mons. But these men are hardy, and to support their Doctrine will add to the
Text. The Roman Church will have Marriage to be a Sacrament. These Translators
will help her out in the defense of this Doctrine, and will rather corrupt the
Text than renounce that Doctrine. And therefore (1 Cor. vii. 10.) The married
is rendered by Ceux qui sont conjoints par le Sacrement de marriage, i.e. They
that are joined together by the Sacrament of marriage. But this is forgery, and
a gross addition to the Text, not only to the Greek, but to the Vulgar Latin
also; and yet these men pretend to give us a Translation of it. Again, they
pursue this unexcusable error. Be ye not unequally yoked, says the Apostle:
They render it, ne vous joignez point par Sacrement de marriage, i.e. join not
your selves by the Sacrament of marriage, 2 Cor. vi. 14. See also this
Translation of 1 Timothy iv. 3.

The Doctrine of Merits is not favored by the Holy Scriptures. But these
Translators have pressed them in that cause. That ye may be counted worthy,
says S. Paul, (1 Thessalonians. i. 5.) To the same sense their Vulgar has it, ut digni
habeamini, that you may be counted worthy. So the Rhemes Testament: here is a
great agreement. But though this be the sense of the Greek, their Vulgar, their
Rhemist, yet this is too flat for these Translators. They will have S. Paul
bear witness to their doctrine of Merits: And therefore they render it, Asin
que-vous meritiez, etc. i.e. To the end ye may merit the Kingdom of God. Thus
when we are told that God is well-pleased with good works, Heb. xiii. 16. they
will have it, on merit envers Dieu, that by them a man merits with God.

The Roman Church boasts her self as the only Catholic Church, and pillar of
Truth. The Holy Scriptures (as well as all ancient Creeds) are silent in this
matter. But these Translators have by manifest forgery wrested them to testify
in behalf of this matter. In the latter times (says S. Paul) some shall depart
from the faith, 1 Timothy iv. 1. de la foy Romain, i. e. from the Roman faith, say
the Authors of this Translation: And yet the Vulgar, the Rhemes Testament, that
of Mons agree with our English: And as this is the sense of the Greek, and the
Versions, so it is manifest that the addition of Roman is nothing less than
forgery and falsification of the Text; a crime so great that I want words to
express it by. They have so ordered the matter that the Apostles words, which
describe to us the gross defection of the Roman Church, and give us warning of
their dangerous errors, are made to speak a quite contrary sense. This appears
from the words of S. Paul last mentioned; and will farther appear from their
translation of the following words of the Apostle. What we render the doctrines
of Devils, agreeably to both their Vulgar Latin, and Testament of Rhemes, they
have rendered by doctrines ensignees par des diables, i.e. doctrines taught by
the devils; by which they have endeavored to divert the thoughts of the Reader
from that worship of Damons, which so visibly obtains in the Roman Church. And
whereas the Apostle goes on to describe the nature of the Apostasy, against
which he warns his reader ( v. 3.) they have quite perverted his sense, and
most dishonestly foisted in a sense that is favorable to the errors of their
Church. Forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats, they
translate by, condamnans le Sacrement de marriage, l'abstinence des alimens,
etc. i.e. condemning the Sacrament of marriage, the abstinence of meats, etc.
And thus they turn the Apostles words upon the reformed, as if they were the
Apostates which the Apostle points at, because they deny marriage to be a
Sacrament, and do not think we are now obliged by that difference of meats
introduced by the Roman Church. In this they deal very insincerely. And that
they do so will appear to any indifferent person whatsoever. What we render
forbidding to marry is not only agreeable to the Greek text, but also to the
Versions received in the Church of Rome, viz. that of the Vulgar, the old
Louvain, and that of Rhemes, and Mons, and that of Amelote. Whereas their
Version is destitute of all Authority whatsoever. For the following words in
our Version, And commanding to abstain from meats: I grant indeed that, and
commanding, is not in the Greek Text, and our Interpreters have given warning
of it, by Printing those words in a different character from the words of the
Text: But yet I will maintain that they have given the true sense of S. Paul's
words. For though the words in the Greek are Elliptical, yet our English has
supplied the Ellipsis no otherwise than the Authors of the Mons Version have
done, who have expressed it by qui obligeront de, etc. and the old Louvain
gives us the same sense. Besides the Syriac Version justifies our English, and
(which is more than all) the following words of the Apostle, which God has
created to be received, etc. which words make it plain enough, that they are
marked out who command us to abstain from meats, which God has created to be
received.

The Church of Rome has advanced an opinion concerning sins Mortal and Venial.
I enter not into the dispute. It Is certain that these Translators have
endeavored to bring in the Scripture, as giving express ground for this
distinction: And though they could not find it there, they have found a place to
foist it into. There is a sin not unto death, says S. John 1 ep. v. 17. which
words they translate thus, Il y a quelque peche que n'est point mortel, mais
veniel, i.e. There is a sin that is not mortal, but venial.

I shall proceed to consider some other places, in which these Translators so
order the matter, that they may beget in the Readers minds such an Idea of
Christianity, as bears conformity to the present Doctrines, or usages of the
Roman Church.

Thus when the Evangelist mentions the Chief Priests ( Matt. ii. 4. chapter xxvii,
1, 6, 62. chapter xxviii. 11.) they render it by, Princes des Pretres, i.e. Princes
of the Priests. This carries a show of that eminence and dignity of that Order
which is now to be seen in the Roman Church. But these men are in this the less
blameable, because they do follow the letter of the Vulgar which they pretend
to translate. For which reason the Authors of the Mons Version have the same
rendering. But then these latter explain these Princes of the Priests by the
heads of the twenty four Sacerdotal families.

They render the word Repent ( Matt. iii. 2. c. iv. 17. Luke x. 13, etc.) by
faites penitence, i.e. do penance. Where they give the Reader an occasion of a
very imperfect Idea of true Repentance; it being possible that men may do
penance (according to the importance of that phrase in the Roman Church) and
not repent.

It Is said of the Parents of Jesus that they went to Jerusalem, Luke ii. 41.
These Translators tell that they went en Pelerinage, i.e. in Pilgrimage to
Jerusalem. Thus without just ground they would insinuate that they did what is
now the practice in the Roman Church. But there is nothing in the Greek, or
Vulgar that will justify this Translation. And several other Versions used in
the Church of Rome, import no more but that they went to Jerusalem; and the
Text tells us the occasion of their going. And yet these Translators are so
fond of insinuating the practice of Pilgrimages, that they do it without any
color. If S. Paul mention a brother chosen to travel with us, (2 Cor. viii.
19.) these Translators turn those words by, compagnon de notre Pelerinage, i.e.
a companion of our Pilgrimage. And the strangers in S. John ( ep. iii. v. 5.)
are by these Translators turned les Pelerins, i.e. Pilgrims.

Luke iv. 8. Him only shall thou serve. Thus our English render that place
agreeably to the Vulgar, illi soli servies: And verbatim as the Rhemes
Testament has it. These Translators of Louvain have to the same sense
translated these words in a Parallel place, Matt. iv. 10. a luy seul tu
serviras. But here these men change their style and turn the same words thus,
serviras de latrie a luy seul, i. e. thou shall serve him only with Latria.
This is to keep up the distinction between the Service of doulia and latria,
and preserve the shifts they are put to in the Controversy we have with them
concerning their worshipping of Creatures. The Reader will easily discern their
insincerity, and inconsistency with themselves, as well as the danger the
unwary Reader will be exposed to by such a Version. The words in S. Matthew and
S. Luke, are exactly the same both in the Greek and the Vulgar, the places
parallel, and the subject matter the same, and there is no shadow of reason for
a different Version. Besides, the old Louvain (which this Version ought to have
followed) turns both places by the very same words, and agreeably to our
English and the Vulgar, a luy seul tu serviras, i.e. him only shall thou serve.
The Versions of Amelote and that of Mons turn both places alike, and to the
same sense which we do. These men take a liberty which their other Interpreters
would not take, and which they themselves in S. Matthew did not.

Romans xv. 16. Minister: The Vulgar renders it so too. And so does the Testament
of Rhemes, the old Louvain, Amelote, and Mons. But these Translators, who
pretend to follow the Latin, yet keep the Greek word in their Text, viz.
Leytourge; but then they add even to the Text, without difference of Character,
C'est a dire, Sacrificateur, i.e. that is to say, a Sacrificer. It Is easy to
discern the intention of this; but to reconcile this to common honesty is past
my comprehension.

1 Cor. x. 14. Flee from Idolatry. The Testament of Mons turns the words to the
same sense, Fuyez l'idolatrie. This agrees exactly with the Greek; the old
Louvain Translation and that of Amelote agree also with our Version. But these
Louvain Divines turn the words thus: Fuyez l'adoration des Idols, i.e. Flee
from the adoration of Idols. And yet it is evident that a man may be guilty of
Idolatry though he worship no Idol. These Translators are not to be excused in
this rendering: For whatever pretense they may seem to have from the Vulgar,
it is certain that in other places where they have equal pretense from the
Vulgar, yet they do in those places render as our English does, as may be seen
by comparing their rendering, Gal. v. 20. and 1 Cor. vi. 10. with the Vulgar and
our English.

1 Cor. xi. 2. As I delivered them. This Translation is so unexceptionable,
that it is what the Rhemists our adversaries, make use of themselves. Nor is
there in the Vulgar any thing repugnant to it, or that does so much as
insinuate unwritten Traditions, much less favor the doctrine of the Roman
Church about this matter. Thus the Vulgar renders these and the foregoing
words: Et sicut tradidivobis, praecepta mea tenetis. But these Divines of
Louvain knew very well that their Church wanted all the help that could be got,
and therefore they render the words to the advantage of their Church. Comme je
vous les ay laisse par tradition, i.e. as I have left them with you by
Tradition. Thus when the Faith is said to be delivered to the Saints ( Jude v.
3.) these Translators lay hold of the expression, and tell the Reader how the
Saints came by it, viz. par Tradition, i.e. by Tradition.

These Translators have a great regard to the present Church of Rome, and will
make their Translation speak what may serve the interest of it, and its known
Doctrines and usages. I should be too long if I should operosely insist upon
every instance which might be collected to this purpose. In favor of their
doctrine of the Sacrisice of the Mass, the word Priests ( Rev. i. 6.) is
rendered by Sacrisicateurs, i.e. Sacrisicing Priests. In favor of their
doctrine of the seven Sacraments, the word Mystery ( Rev i. 20.) shall be
turned into le Sacrements, i.e. the Sacraments: with respect to the dignity of
their Priests and Vestments, the Elders upon the Seats must be rendered by
Priests upon their Thrones, and their white raiment by Aubes, i.e. Albs, Rev.
iv. 4. And for the antiquity of their Processions, whereas the walls of Jericho
are said to have fallen after they were encompassed about seven days, Heb. xi.
30. they have it, apres une Procession, etc. after a Procession of seven days.
The Reader may collect more to this purpose out of this Translation of Act.
iii. 1. c. x. 30.

I shall proceed now to some other places where we shall find notorious
falsities in this Translation. I shall lay some of them before the Reader.

Matt. xv. 5. It is a gift by whatsoever thou might be prosited by me. It is
a very odd rendering of these words we find in this Translation; viz. Tout don
qui est de par moy, sera a ton profit, i.e. whatsoever gift proceeds from me
shall profit thee. Though I reckon this Translation far from the sense of our
Saviors words, yet I shall not insist on this as a charge against these
Translators, because this Version of theirs is agreeable enough to the Vulgar,
which they pretend to Translate: And for that reason I pass by their
Translation of Luke ix. 50. However I cannot but take notice, that the other
Versions of the Vulgar, and of the greatest same in the Church of Rome, have
otherwise rendered these words; and have thought the Vulgar so obscure, that
they have added words to their Text, to render them more intelligible. The
Authors of the Mons Translation have done this in terms that seem to be
agreeable to the sense of the Vulgar: And Amelote, another of their famous
Interpreters, has done it in terms that are very different, and much more
agreeable to the sense of our English Version. Besides, he has given an
Explication in the Margin, which gives a sense of the place very different from
what this Version of these Louvain Divines imports, or what the Authors of the
Version of Mons have given.

Joh. xxi. 22. If I will, these Translators turn in by, Jeveux, I will: Here
the Vulgar Latin will not bear them out. Though in the present Copy it is sic
volo, yet Benedictus puts si in the Margin of his Edition (Printed at Paris, A.
D. 1558.) in the room of sic, and with good reason. This reading is agreeable
to the Greek Text. The Rhemists allow that some read it so; the reading is
confirmed by the Syriac Version; and the Authors of the Version of Mons, who
likewise profess to give us the Version of the Vulgar, translate by, si je
veux, that is, if I will. And the old translation of Louvain does also agree
with our English herein. Besides, in the Vulgar Latin Testament printed by
Plantin, A. D. 1574. we find si in the Margin, and in his Edition, A. D. 1582.
of the Vulgar Latin Bible, the Louvain Divines give the Reader notice that they
find it si in three MSS. of the Vulgar: After all it appears from the Context
that this is the true reading, as any indifferent person will easily
understand. And in the French Bible printed at Antwerp, A. D. 1534. by the
Order of Charles V. it is rendered by sy, if, as our English has it.

Romans viii. 1. There is therefore now no condemnation to them which are in
Christ Jesus. Our Louvain Divines transtate thus, Il n'y a donc rien maintenant
qui merit la damnation en ceux qui sont en J. Christ. i. e. There is therefore
nothing now that deserves damnation in them which are in J. Christ. Here the
Vulgar Latin, which those men pretond to give us a Version of, agrees with our
English, and does by no means favor the Louvain Version. The same may be said
not only of the Greek, but the Versions of Rhemes, and of the old Louvain and
Amelote, and Mons also; all of them turned from the Vulgar.

Romans xvi. 5. Achaia. These Translators have it Asia; nor do I insist upon it,
because in this they do indeed sollow the Vulgar.

1 Cor. i. 2. Unto the Church: Al' Evang ille, i. e. To the Gospel. This is so
gross that there is neither shadow or defense for it.

1 Cor. vii. 5. Defraud you not one another. The Vulgar agrees, nolite fraudare
invicem. The Testament of Rhemes gives the very same sense. The old Louvain
Edition agrees exactly with our English, and the Versions of Amelote and that
of Mons give the same sense with the English and the Vulgar. But this of the
Louvain a sense that is contradictory, viz. Ne vous donnes pas le devoir l'une
a l'autre. And yet is this Version obtruded upon the world as a Version of the
Vulgar Latin, and the approved Version of Louvain, though it agree with neither
of them.

1 Cor. xv. 5. We shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed. Thus are
these words translated, Ilest vray que nous ressusciterous tous, mais nous ne
serous point tous changez, i. e. it is true that we shall all be raised up, but
we shall not be all changed. The Syriac Version confirms our English, and so do
our ordinary Greek Copies. But since there is a various reading in the Greek,
and the Vulgar favors this French Version, I shall not insist upon this place.

1 Cor. xvi. 2. As God has prospered him. Recondens quod ei been placuerit, V.
L. Cequ'il a envy de donner. Whatever agreement may seem to be here between
this French and the Version of the V. Latin, it is certain that both Amelote and
the Mons Testament give us a different sense of the words.

2 Cor. iv. 2. We have renounced the hidden things of dishonesty. Abdicamus
occulta dedecoris, V. L. Here Is a good agreement. But these Louvain Divines
render it, nous retranchons ce qui est solid, qu'on est oblige de Cacher. But
the Testament of Amelote, and that of Mons interpret the place in a sense
agreeable to our English, and to the Greek and Vulgar, and so does the old
Louvain also.

2 Cor. iv. 7. By the word of truth, by the power of God. In verbo veritatis,
in virtute Dei. Here the Vulgar Latin agrees with our English exactly. But
nothing can be more extravagant than our French Version is. En chastete, en
connoissance, etc. i.e. in chastity, in knowledge, etc. And so that Version
goes on with those virtues mentioned (even in that Version as well as in the
Text) the verse before, and after all leaves out the word of truth, though at
last it mention the power of God.

2 Cor. ix. 2. The forwardness of your mind. The V. Latin agrees with this
Version of the English: And the Testament of Rhemes agrees with the Latin. But
these Louvain Divines render it, la promptitude de votre courage, i. e. the
forwardness of your courage.

Gal. iv. 25. For this Agar is mount Sinai in Arabia, and answers to
Jerusalem. Thus it is rendered in our French Testament, Car Sina est une
montagneen Arabie, laquelle est conjointe a Jerusalem, i. e. For Sinai is a
mountain in Arabia, which is conjoined to Jerusalem. It must be confessed that
the V. Latin agrees hereunto. For thus the words of that Version are. Sina enim
mons est in Arabia, qui conjunctus est ei, quae nunc est Jerusalem. Where, if
by conjoined, be understood as much as contiguous, or conterminous, it is
certain in matter of fact, that it was not near Jerusalem. It Is evident
besides, that this sense agrees not with the Apostles purpose: nor is it to be
imagined that the author of the Vulgar Version could have this meaning: And
therefore these Louvain Divines should have better considered this matter, and
not have given the ordinary reader such an occasion of a gross mistake. We sind
the Authors of other Versions of the Vulgar have been wary in this particular,
well considering how easy it was to mistake in this matter. Instead of qui
conjunctus est, the Testament of Rhemes has it, which has affinity to. And
the Mons Testament expresses it by represente la Jerusalem i.e. Sinai
represents Jerusalem. And the Version of Amelote of the Vulgar (Printed at
Paris, A. D. 1686. with large approbations of the Bishops and Divines of the
French Church) renders it thus, qui a du rapport avec la Jerusalem. Besides all
this, the former Version of the Divines of Louvain, of the Latin into French,
Printed at Lions, A. D. 1599. have thus translated this passage: Correspondance
a la Jerusalem, i. e. Sinai was a mountain corresponding to Jerusalem. This
agrees with our English, with the Greek and Syriac, and with the design of the
Apostle. Whereas the other French Version is gross and inconsistent with all
these. But the Authors of it on other occasions, make no scruple of departing
from the Vulgar, where there was no cause for it, but adhere to it when there
is.

Ephesians. v. 9. Fruit of the spirit. Le Fruit de la lumiere. So does this French
Version render it, viz. the fruit of the light. I will not here charge these
Divines, because the Vulgar reads it so, and we find it so in a Greek Copy, and
the Syriac Version follows this reading. But then the Version of Mons puts
spirit for light in the Margin.

2 Thessalonians. ii. 7. The mystery. This Version of ours agrees with the Greek, the
Syriac, the Kulgar; and with the Popish Versions of the Vulgar also, viz. that
of Rhemes, of Mons, and of Amelote, and yet for all that our French Version
has it, le decret. So that the Authors of it can depart from the Vulgar
whenever they think sit.

Hebr. ix. 6. -- The Service of God. This by our French is rendered by, les
Services des Sacrifices, that is, the Services of Sacrifices. Nothing can
desend these Translators but the Vulgar only, which renders it by sacrificiorum
officia: yet is there nothing in the Greek to this purpose, and the Syriac is
as far from it. And we know very well that the Priests business in the first
Tabernacle was the ordering the Candles, placing the Shewbread, and burning
Incense. The Sacrifices were offered in the Court upon the Altar of Brass;
there the blood of the Sacrisice was sprinkled, and generally the body of it
was there consumed. And the oblations offered there were Sacrifices in the most
common sense of the Law of Moses. It Is true indeed the Vulgar does in great
measure excuse these Louvain Divines, and would more effectually do it, had
they given us a strict Version of it. But they forsake it when it is not for
their turn, let it be never so justifiable, but keep close to it (as in this
place) when it is faulty. For that it is so is notorious: And this is insinuated
by several Popish Versions of the Vulgar, which in this place vary from it. E.
G. The Authors of the Mons Version very honestly decline the Vulgar as absurd
in this place. What we render accomplishing the Service of God, thus do they
express it, viz. qui exerpoient le Saint ministere, i.e. The Priests, who
exercised the holy ministry. And Amelote thus, poury accomplir le Culte de
Dieu, i. e. For the accomplishing the worship (or Service) of God.

Heb xi. 8. Receive: this in our Fr. translation is expressed by Concevoir
without any authority, or shadow of it.

Ver. 19. In a figure, Fr. T. pour exemple d'obeissance: i. e. for an example
of obedience. This is a most gross misrepresentation of the Text: Nor will the
Vulgar help out this Version. It Is true that Version has it in parabolam: But
this will not justify our Louvain Divines. The Rhemists indeed translate it,
for a parable, but they put an Explication in the Margin, viz. i.e. in figure
and mystery of Christ dead, and alive again. This is indeed to the purpose; but
our Louvain Divines seem to have no shame left in their Version of the place.
For they add to the Text at pleasure, the word obedience which the Vulgar has
not. Amelote renders it, comme une figure mysterieuse, i.e. as a mysterious
figure. And the Version of Mons, comme d'entre les morts, en figure de la
resurrection: So that in truth they render the place in a figure, just as our
English. For the rest of their words are but Explication, and printed in
another letter. And the old Fr. Edition of the Louvain Divines modestly render
it by figure also.

Heb. xi. 21 -- Worshipped leaning upon the top of his staff. Fr. translation,
adora le bout du baston d'iceluy, i. e. he adored the top of his staff. V. L.
and adoravit fastigium virgae ejus. The Louvain Divines have here followed the
Vulgar Latin, which they frequently forsake, and are not therefore to be
charged with mis rendering that Version. But the Greek and Syriac favor not
this rendering. And the Authors of the Mons translation receive it not into
their Text, but put it into the Margin: and they so turn it as it speaks only a
profound inclination toward the Ensign of Joseph's grandeur, and therein a
veneration of the kingdom of Jesus Christ, whose type he was; as they have
explained this matter in the Margin. But our Louvain Divines have not taken
that care, to preserve the simple people from Idolatry, either in the Version,
or any Explication of it.

Jam. iii. 7. For every kind of beasts, etc. Here the Louvain Divines depart
from the Vulgar without any shadow of reason. For as they leave out the word
Serpents; so after those words, has been tamed, they put in par reptibles, i.
e. by creeping things.

1 Pet. iv. 15. A busy body in other men's matters. French translation,
convoiteux des biens d'autruy, i.e. covetous of other men's goods. It Is true the
Vulgar renders it appetitor alienorum; but yet there is not sufficient cause
from that Version for this rendering: For the murderer and thief named before,
are alienorum appetitores, in the sense contended for. The Authors of the Mons
translation were so sensible of this, that they translate it thus, Se melant
temerairement de ce qui ne le regard pas, i. e. one that rashly meddles with
that which does not belong to him. This Version agrees with our English, and
with the Greek. And what we render evil-doer, in the same verse, they also
render to the same sense agreeably to the Original Greek; though in the Vulgar it
be now maledicus, and by the Louvain Divines is rendered medisans; it is very
probable that it was in the Vulgar maleficus at first. In which conjecture I am
the more confirmed from what I find in the note of Amelote upon the place, who
does ingenuously consess that it is highly probable that the present Greek is
to be followed, and affirms, that there is no MS. or Interpreter that has it
otherwise; and that S. Cyprian and Tertullian read maleficus.

1 John iv. 3. That confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh. Fr.
translation, qui separe Jesus Christ, i.e. that separates Jesus Christ. The
Rhemist has it, that dissolveth Jesus. And all this from the Vulgar who has
it qui solvit Jesum. I will not charge the Louvain Divines here with
mis-translating the Vulgar; I only observe that they adhere to it stiffly when
it departs from the Greek, as it does here by the confession of the Authors of
the Mons Testament. Nor does it only depart from the Greek, but without
sufficient ground: For whereas it is pretended that the Vulgar reading is
grounded upon ancient Copies, and that the Nestorians, and such as divide the
Divinity of Christ from his Humanity have corrupted the Text; a late learned
Writer of the Church of Rome, has sufficiently showed that there is not
sufficient ground for this charge. He does maintain that the present Greek is
followed by the Oriental Versions, P. Simon Hist. Crit. du Text. d. N.T. p. 356.
by S. Cyprian and S. Polycarp, and that that of the Vulgar is not very
ancient: and that it is probable it came as a Marginal Note at first, and
afterward crept into the Text.

1 John v. 1. Whosoever believes that Jesus is the Christ, Fr. Tr. Quiconque
croit que Jesus Christ est le Christ. These Divines of Louvain have no pretense
from the Vulgar, nor (I dare affirm it) from any Version extant. It Is their own
entirely: whosoever believes that Jesus Christ is the Christ, is the sense of
their Version. Any man that understands common sense amongst Christians must
see the egregious folly of it. And these men do, where there is only Jesus in
the Text, not only here but, v. 5. of this Chapter, add the word Christ, and
that without the warrant of the Greek or Vulgar, though they spoil the sense of
the place by it. I pass by their rendering of, v. 6, 8. of this chapter: they
agree with the Latin; and I should be too long if I should insist upon all the
differences between the Vulgar, and the present Greek; upon which consideration
also I pass by their Version of Jude v. 22.

Rev. v. 10, 12. Kings, v. 10. Fr. Tr. Royaumes, i.e. Kingdoms; it is indeed
Regnum in the V. Latin, but the Authors of the Mons translation agree with the
English and the Greek and Syriac, and so does Amelote also: I have also reason
to believe that the Copy of the Vulgar, before Clement VIII. had it Reges. I
find in a French Bible, printed 1534. at Antwerp, which is a Translation of the
then Vulgar, and was printed by order of Charles the V. that it is rendered to
the same sense with our English. This agrees with what follows also, viz.
Priests, which our Fr. translation (after its manner) turns into
Sacrificateurs, i. e. Sacrificers. If the first were duly translated by
Kingdom, the following might as well have been turned by Priesthood. What we
render riches, v. 12. the French translation turns by divinite, according to
the Vulgar.

Rev. xviii. 20. Holy Apostles. French translation, Saints, Apostres, i.e.
Saints, Apostles. Thus do these Louvain Divines render it. And yet the Vulgar
Latin agrees with our Version, and so do the Versions of the Vulgar also, viz.
that of Rhemes, of Mons, of Amelote; and the old Version of the Louvain,
printed at Lions, and that printed at Antwerp, 1534.

Matt. 1.11. About the time they were carried away to Babylon. Fr. translation,
quand ils furent transportez en Babylon, i. e. when they were transported in
Babylon. It Is very certain as to the matter of fact, that it was before the
transportation that Josias begat his children, for he dyed before that
captivity. Nor will the rendering of the Vulgar, in transmigratione Babylonis by
any means justify this Fr. translation. For, besides that it does not answer
this French Version, so it is not hard to give a sense of the Vulgar, that is
consistent with the matter of Fact. Thus the Vulgar renders the whole verse,
Josias antem genuit Jechoniam, and fratres ejus in transmigratione Babylonis.
Now the fratres ejus, may be said to be in transmigratione Babylonis, though the
genuit cannot. The other Popish Versions of the Vulgar have showed greater
care. That of Rhemes keeps strictly to the Vulgar: that of Mons and Amelote
render it, verse le temps, etc. i.e. toward the time that the Jews were carried
into Babylon, in which they agree with the Greek, with our English, and with
matter of Fact.

Matt. i. 25. Till she had brought forth, etc. Fr. Tr. quand elle enfanta, i.e.
when she brought forth. And yet the P. Latin has it, donec peperit, agreeably
to our English, and to the Greek; and the Testament of Rhemes is conformable to
them: nor is there any reason we should forsake this Version: we can defend it,
as it is, both against the Jews and the followers of Helvidius.

Matt. xix, 1. These sayings, Fr. Tr. Ces propos. By an obsolete word, used
indeed in the old Louvain Edition, printed A. D. 1599. But the later
Interpreters have thought sit to choose a word of common and present use.
Amelote renders it, son discourse, the Mons Version, ces discourse.

Mark iii. 29. In danger of eternal damnation. Fr. Tr. Coupable d'un peche
eternel, i.e. guilty of an eternal sin. I do not blame our Louvain Divines
here, because the Vulgar has it reus aeterni delicti. But yet there is no
reason however to adhere to the very words of the Latin here, because the sense
of those words may be more intelligibly expressed. And this Amelote has done,
who renders it by, Coupable d'un crime qui ne sera jamais pardonne, i.e. guilty
of a crime that shall never be forgiven. The same may be said, as to Luke ii.
15. where what we render this thing, these Louvain Divines have rendered by ce
verb, i.e. this word: wherein indeed they exactly follow the letter of the
Vulgar, and so far I charge them not: but then they more adhere to the letter
than the sense of the place. And this the Authors of the Version of Mons were
aware of, and therefore have only ce, and take no notice in their Text of
Verbum in the Latin; Amelote does the same. And the old Louvain Version renders
it, ceste chose, i.e. this thing, as our English does. It Is well known that the
Hebrew (...) signifies not only word but thing, and that according to the
subject matter, to which the (...) in the Greek answers exactly.

Luke vii. 3. The Elders. Fr. Tr. des Pretres, i. e. the Priests. These Louvain
Divines are singular in their Version here, and whereas they pretend to
translate the V. Latin, yet they depart from it whenever they please. For the
Vulgar here agrees with our English Version, and renders the Greek by,
Seniores; the Mons Testament by, Senateurs; Amelote by, Anciens; and so does
the old Louvain; and the Rhemists by, the Ancients.

Romans i. 4. -- with power, according to the spirit of holiness, by the
resurrection of the dead; which words are thus rendered by the Vulgar in
virtute, secundum spiritum sanctificationis ex resurrectione mortuorum, etc.
This Version agrees well with our English. Let us see how our Divines of
Louvain render the V. Latin. Thus they do it. Par la puissance qu'il a recue de
fair les miracles, par l'esprit de sanctification des siens, and par la
resurrection des morts, i.e. By power which he received to work miracles, by
the spirit of sanctification of his own, and by the resurrection of the dead.
Let any man judge if this be a true Translation of the Vulgar: it is a
Paraphrase rather, or short Comment, an addition to the Text without any notice
to the Reader, by any different character, what is Text and what is not. This
is very unfair, and does not become men of Probity and Sincerity, but rather
speaks great negligence, or fraud: for it is to be considered that these men
add to the Text. They consider not the variety of Particles, not only in the
Greek Text, but in the version of the V. Latin. The (...); the Latin, In,
secundum, ex, are all rendered alike by these Louvain Divines, viz. by Par.
Amelote indeed was so careful that he renders them by three several French
particles, viz. dans, selon, and par. The Authors of the Mons translation do so
also; so do the Rhemists also observe a difference, and turn them by, in,
according to, by. Our Louvain Divines are not so nice; it is no matter what the
Vulgar does, they will use their freedom.

Gal. v. 19. Lasciviousness; V. I. Luxuria; Mons, la dissolution; Amelote, la
lascivite; Rhemist, lechery. But, though here be a considerable agreement in
these Versions, our Louvain Divines turn it by, insolence.

1 Cor. iv. 5. Praise. Fr. Tr. la lo^ange qui luy est due, i. e. the praise
that is due to him. Whereas there is nothing but praise in the Vulgar, the rest
is added by the Louvain Divines, without any distinction of character.

1 Cor. xi. 10. For this cause ought the woman to have power on her head,
because of the Angels. Fr. Tr. Partant la femone a cause des Anges, qui la
voyent, doit avoir sur sa tete, un en seigne qu'elle est sous puissance, i. e.
Therefore the woman because of the Angels, who see her, ought to have upon her
head a mark that she is in subjection. V. L. ideo debet mulier potestatem
habere supra caput propter Angelos. The fault which I find with these Louvain
Divines is only this, That they do not give us the strict Version of the
Vulgar, which they pretend to translate, but add words of their own to the text
without any different character; which our English has not done, nor ought any
Interpreters to do.

Ephesians. iv. 12. For the perfecting of the Saints. V. L. ad consummationem
Sanctorum. Fr. Tr. pour l'assemblage des Saints, i.e. for the coagmentation
(or, joining together) of the Saints. I do not deny but that the Greek word may
insinuate such a sense, and I will allow that it refers to Architecture, and
that it is well enough expressed by this French word, which implies no less.
But these men pretend to turn the Vulgar, and all the question betwixt us is,
whether or no they have done that truly. Our English expresses the sense of
the Vulgar better. And the Popish Versions agree in the same sense. The old
Louvain Version renders it by, pour la consummation des Saints. The Rhemists,
to the consummation of the Saints. That of Mons by, a fin qu'ils travaillent a
la perfection des Saints; i.e. that they may labor for the perfection of the
Saints. And Amelote thus, pour render les Saints perfaits, which amounts to our
English, for the perfecting of the Saints.

Phil. ii. 17. Service. V. I. Obsequium. Fr. Tr. la Liturgy. I appeal to any
indifferent man, whether this be a Translation of the Latin or not. The
Rhemists render it as we do, by the word Service; so does Amelote: and so it is
in the old Edition of Louvain, printed at Lions, A.D. 1599. and in an older
Edition of the Fr. Bible, printed at Antwerp, A.D. 1534. These men retain the
Greek word, and are so far from the regard which was due from them to the
Latin, that they render it not at all. The Reader, who considers how they have
rendered Acts xiii. 2. and knows the doctrine of that Church, will easily
understand the drift of these Louvain Divines in this place.

Phil. iii. 2. -- the concision. V. L. concisionem. Fr. Tr. la circoncision.
These men seem to have no regard to truth. For here not only the Greek, but
their Vulgar, that of Antwerp, their old Louvain translation, that of Rhemes,
and Amelote, are against them. They all agree with the English, but these
Divines stand alone by themselves.

Col. ii. 18. Worshipping of Angels. V. L. Religione Angelorum. Fr. Tr.
Religion donnee a Moise par des Anges, i. e. Religion given to Moses by Angels.
According to this account of things, the words contain only a warning against
being seduced by the law of Moses. I will by no means enter into disputes, but
keep my self to my design. It Is most certain that these Louvain Divines have
not dealt sincerely with the Reader, in pretending to translate the Vulgar;
when they do in truth add to it, and put their own sense upon it. The Religion
of Angels can never be proved to import the Law of Moses. These Divines add to
the Text to avoid its force against the practices of the Roman Church. Whereas
the old Divines of Louvain keep strictly to the V. Latin without any such
addition; so do the Rhemists also, and the Antwerp Bible. The Syriac
understands the place of the worship of Angels: and the Mons Testament, and
Amelote also interpret the place of the superstitious worship of Angels. The
latter of these (in his Preface to this Epistle) tells us of certain
Philosophers, followers of Plato, who held the Angels to be Gods, and
Architects of the world, and paid them particular honors, served them with
certain Ceremonies, and advanced them above Jesus Christ, and feigning that
they were by certain visions engaged to this worship: and that S. Paul does in
this Chap. fortify them, to whom he writes this Epistle, and in these very
words of this xviii. verse, against these illusions, he adds, That these seem
to be the Angelici mentioned by S. Augustine; a Sect that had taken root in
Phrygia, and condemned by the Council of Laodicea, Canon xxxv. And that
Theodoret affirms that this Sect had built several Oratories to S. Michael; to
which was opposed the Temple of S. Michael at Coloss, where God alone was
adored, and the Archangel honored as a creature.

1 Timothy iii. 11. Grave. Fr. Tr. Publiques, i.e. public. The Vulgar renders it
by padicas. Nothing can defend this Version of our Louvain Divines. We may
indeed suppose it an error of the Press: but there is no notice of it. And we
shall find a great number of those errors besides.

2 Timothy iv. 11. For the ministry. V.L. in ministerium. The Rhemists, for the
ministry. Amelote, dans le ministere. Mons Tr. pour le ministere de P
Evangile. Old Louvain Tr. pour Servir. Here Is agreement sufficient, and all
comes to the same sense. But these Louvain Divines render it, pour me servir de
Diacre, i. e to serve me as a Deacon.

Heb. i. 7. Ministers. The Vulgar has it, Ministros. The other Popish
translations agree with the Vulgar, as our English version does. That of Rhemes
renders by ministers: that of Amelote has it, ministres. So it is also in that
of Mons, and so it is also in the old Edition of the Louvain Divines. It ought
to be so in this translation of the Louvain Divines. But these men have a turn
to serve, they must justify their translation of Act. xiii. 2. the Greek word
here must therefore either not be turned (vid. Phil. ii. 17. with our French
translation,) or if it be it must serve their purpose. And therefore, though
against all reason, and authority whatsoever, they translate it here by
Sacrificateurs, i.e. Sacrificers? it is very certain, that there was no reason
for their interpreting, Act. xiii. 2. as they have done, unless they do think
that a good reason, which Monsieur Veron once gave, Simon. Hist. Cris. des
versal. N.T.
when he was asked, why he turned that place to the same sense; the reason he
gave was, Because he had been often demanded by the Calvinists what Scripture
mentioned that the Apostles said mass

Heb. vii. 22. a Surety. Fr. Tr. Caution. Here these Louvain Divines take a
great liberty; for they depart from the V. Latin, which renders it sponsor: and
the Rhemist Interpreters of the Vulgar render it surety, as we have done. That
is also the meaning of the Greek and Syriac word: Nor does the Mons
translation, Amelote, or old Louvain Version render it by caution, as these men
do without any reason or authority.

Heb. ix. 10. Until the time of reformation. Here our Louvain Divines add to
the Text, without any difference of character. For whereas the Vulgar renders
it, ad tempus correctionis, they render it, jusques au temps que ces chooses
soyent corrigees. A liberty this is, which the old Louvain Divines did not
take; they keep close to the Vulgar. And though the Authors of the Mons Version
add to the Text, yet they do it in a character which gives warning of it to the
Reader.

I shall now reflect upon some other questionable places, which the Translators
of the N. T. into French are accountable for; such are these that follow.

Act. xii. 30. -- Elders. This Version of ours well agrees with the Greek and
Syriac; the Vulgar renders it by Seniores; the Rhemists by, Ancients. But
these men render it by Pretres, i. e. Priests. Whereas the old Louvain Edition
renders to the same sense that our English do.

Act. xvii. 6. -- The world. Fr. Tr. la Ville, i.e. the City. I must confess
that our Louvain Divines have some pretense for this Version, because the
present Vulgar renders it by urbem. Nor should I have mentioned this Version,
had they in other places kept to their Copy, and had there not been great
presumptions that the Vulgar did not from the beginning thus turn the Greek
word? it is an easy change from orbem to urbem, and it is very probable that it
ought in this place to be orbem in the Latin Copy of the Vulgar. My reasons are
these [1.] The Vulgar never renders the Greek word in any other place of the
N.T. as it is supposed to do here by urbem, but constantly by orbem, as I
suppose it should be here. Wherever it renders this Greek word besides in the
N.T. it is constant to it self. This will appear to any man that will compare
the Greek and the Vulgar in the following places, Matt. xxiv. 14. Luke ii. 1.
iv. 5. xxi. 26. Act. xi. 28. xvii. 31. xix. 27. xxiv. 5. Romans x. 18. Heb. i. 6.
ii. 5. Apoc. iii. 10. xii. 9. These, with this, Act. xvii. 6. are all the
places in which this Greek word is found and translated by the Vulgar, and it is
constantly (excepting this one place, Acts xvii. 6.) turned agreeably to orbem
which I contend for here. Indeed the Greek word is found in our present Greek
Copy, Apoc. xvi. 14. But there the word is not turned by the Vulgar at all. Of
which it is no hard matter to give an account were it not too great a
digression. [2.) This rendering which I contend for is more agreeable to the
Context. These that have turned the world upside down, ( and huc venerunt,
V.L.) are come hither also. 'Twould be nothing to the purpose to have said,
That they who disturbed that City were come thither also. But very pertinent to
warn the Citizens that they had disturbed other places before. [3.] Nor do I
want authority on my side. The Greek and Syriac Version give great assurance
that this is the meaning of the place.
And we may collect something to the same purpose from the Popish Versions
also. The Rhemists are strict Interpreters of the Vulgar, and yet they render
it by world (agreeably to orbem,) the Translation of Mons by toute la Terre,
i.e. all the Earth (as it is in the Syriac Version:) the old Louvain translation
has le monde, i.e. the world. It Is true indeed that Amelote (in his first
Edition at Paris, A.D. 1666.) renders it, la ville, as our Louvain Divines do.
But then it is as true, that the same man (in his Edition at Paris, A.D. 1686.)
has rendered it by, toute la terre, i.e. all the earth, and has altered his
former Version in the remaining words of the verse also, which does much
confirm what I contend for. For whereas in his former Edition, he turns those
words, are come hither also, by, and qui sont venus icy, i.e. and who are come
hither: In his latter Edition he turns them thus, and qui sont venus ici pour
le mesme effet, i.e. and who are come hither for the same purpose. I may add to
what has been said, that it is certain that several Copies of the V. Latin
have orbem in the Text. We have two printed by Plantin (before the Copy of
Clement VIII. which is now followed) one of the N. Testament by the Divines of
Louvain, A.D. 1574. Another of the whole Bible printed by him also, A.D. 1582.
and that by the care of the Divines of Louvain also. In both these we find
orbem in the Text, and whoever under stands the care of those men cannot
suspect their integrity in this matter. Moreover in the French Bible, printed
by the order of Charles V. viewed by the Louvain Divines, and printed
accordingly at Antwerp, A.D. 1534. it is from the Vulgar rendered le monde, i.e.
the world, as our English has it.

Act. xvii. 9. Security. Fr. Tr. Pexcuse, i.e. excuse. It is very plain that
this is no true rendering of the Vulgar, which renders it by satisfactione, i.
e. satisfaction: The Mons renders it by Caution, the old Louvain by
satisfaction, agreeably to the Vulgar Version and the English, and Testament of
Rhemes.

-- ver. 30. Winked at. Fr. Tr. Ayant pity, i.e. having pity. This is an
extravagant translation: for the Vulgar renders it by despiciens: and the other
Popish Versions are very far from agreeing with this Version.

Act. xxvii. 13. (...). V.L. cum sustulissent de Asson. Fr. Tr. ayant love l'
Anchre d' Asson. These Louvain Divines have added to the Text without giving
notice to the Reader by a different character. It Is true that the Vulgar seems
to understand Asson to be the name of a place, and therefore it is no wonder
this Version should follow that. And though it do not appear that it signify any
place, yet I cannot blame these men for following their Copy. But this will not
excuse their addition. I pass by the following verse, because therein these
Interpreters follow the Vulgar. And so they do chapter xxviii. 11. Where what we
render, Castor and Pollux, they render by Castors. Though the old Louvain
Version, Amelote and that of Mons agree with our English Version.

1 Cor. ii. 13. Comparing spiritual things with spiritual. V.L. Spiritualibus
spiritualia comparantes. Here Is a perfect agreement between the English and V.
Latin. The Rhemists turn it, comparing spiritual things to the spiritual. But
our Louvain Divines render it by, approprians les chooses spirituelles a ce^^
quisont spirituels, i.e. appropriating spiritual things to spiritual persons. I
leave it to any indifferent person to judge which of these Versions best agrees
with the Vulgar. The case is plain, that we have rendered comparantes in the
Vulgar better than they have done, who are not agreeable to the Text of the
Vulgar, and render it very differently from Amelote, and the Authors of the
Mons Testament.

1 Cor. viii. 4. And that there is none other God but one. V. L. Fr quod nullus
est Deus nisin^us. Whoever considers the Greek, the Syriac, the Vulgar, and the
Context, cannot doubt of the truth of our English Version of this place. But
besides all this, it is farther justified by the most celebrated Versions of the
Vulgar that are in vogue with the Church of Rome. The old Louvain Version
agrees exactly with ours. The Rhemists turn to the same sense, and so does
Amelote, and the Authors of the translation of Mons. But these Louvain Divines
turn the words to another sense against all the reason of the thing, the
Authority of the Vulgar, and of the other Popish Versions: For thus they turn
these words, Et qu'il n'y a aucun Dieu, i.e. And that there is no God.

1 Cor. ix. 3. Examine. V. L. Interrogant. Our rendering agrees with the Vulgar,
and with the Rhemists: The old Louvain renders it by Examinent; but those
Louvain Divines by Controllent.

Phil. ii. 11. And that every tongue should confess, that Jesus Christ is Lord
to the glory of God the father. V. L. and omnis lingua consiteatur, quia
Dominus J. Christus in gloria est Dei Patris. Thus these words are rendered by
our Louvain Divines, and que toute langue confess que le Seigneur J. Christ
est en la gloire de Dieu le Pere, i.e. and that every tongue confess that the
Lord J. Christ is in the glory of God the father. The words of the Vulgar, as
they are distinguished in the ordinary Copy, do not infer the sense which this
Version gives them. For the Confession may well belong to what goes before; and
then the ground of it follows, quia Dominus Jesus, etc. But I lay no great
stress upon this reflection.

Heb. xi. 3. Of. V. L. Ex. Fr. Tr. Par, i. e. by; which quite destroys the
sense of the place, and by no means agrees with the Vulgar Latin, which these
men pretend to translate.

I shall next observe some gross omissions in this translation of these Louvain
Divines. I shall pass by those of the Vulgar, and only mention such omissions
as the Vulgar will not warrant.

Romans xii. 9. Cleave to that which is good. The word good is in the Vulgar, but
is left out of the Text by these Louvain Divines.

Romans xv. 3. Of them that reproached thee. These words are in the Vulgar, but
are omitted by these Translators.

Rev. i. 4. Seven. This is in the Vulgar, but omitted in our French translation.

Joh. vii. 22. Therefore. V.L. Propterea. This is omitted by this Translation,
both in the 21, and 22. verses: For it is a question to which the (...) belongs.

2 Cor. iv. 2. Commending our selves to every man's Conscience. Thus it is also
in the V. Latin. But this translation leaves out what is in the Latin, though it
quite spoil the sense of the place: Thus it is rendered by these Louvain Divines,
nous approuvans toute conscience, etc. i.e. we approving every conscience of
men. In the very next verse, if our Gospel be hid: The French translation
leaves out the word, hid, though it be in the Vulgar, and the sense of the place
be imperfect without it.

2 Cor. vii. 2. What clearing of your selves. This is omitted by these Louvain
Divines. But it is rendered by defensionem in the Vulgar, and by defense in the
old Louvain Version.

Ephesians. iv. 31. With all malice. V. L. cum omni malitia. These words are also
left out by our Divines of Louvain. But the old Louvain Divines have these
words.

Col. ii. 14. Which was contrary to us. The Vulgar reads thus: and the Rhemists
have it so, and the old Louvain agrees with them, yet our new Louvain Divines
omit these words.

1 Thessalonians. i. 1. Grace. This is in the Vulgar and the old Louvain, though omitted
in this Version.

Heb. viii. 12. They omit for, though it be in the Vulgar, and chapter xii. 27.
Things that are shaken, which the Vulgar expresses by mobilium, is omitted in
this translation.

1 John ii. 1. Righteous. The Vulgar Latin has it. So has the old Louvain:
These Translators omit it, though it cannot be spared, Again, ver. 9. These
Translators leave out the particle and. And then their translation amounts to
thus much. He that says he is in the light hates his brother, etc.

The other omissions are not to be charged upon our Divines of Louvain, because
they are such as are warranted by the Vulgar, which they pretend to translate.
These are such as follow, Matt. vi. 4, 6, 13, 18. Luke xi. 2. Joh. x. 42. Act.
xxiii. 9. 1 Timothy iv. 12. 1 Pet. i. 7. Rev. i. 10. chapter ii. 9.15.

I shall now reflect upon the Additions which these Lou. Divines have made to
the Text, and such as the Vulgar will not warrant. Some of these I have upon
occasion named already; the rest follow.

Romans iii. 10. No not one. The Louvain Divines add to these words out of their
own heads, devant la foy, i.e. before the Faith. The Vulgar has no such thing;
nor the old Louvain Version.

1 Cor. vi. 13. The Lord of the body. Fr. Tr. le Seigneur pourvoira all corpse.
Here they add to the Text, which the Vulgar, and old Louvain do not.

1 Cor. ix. 5. Have we not power to lead about a sister, a wife: These Lou.
Divines add, pour nou^ servir en l' Evangile, and nous souvenir de ses biens,
i.e. To serve us in the Gospel, and relieve us out of her goods. In the Vulgar
and old Louvain there is nothing to this purpose.

1 Cor. xi. 26, 27, 28. Bread. There is no Epithete in the Vulgar, in any of
these places, nor in the old Louvain, But these men render it ver. 26. by pain
vivant, i.e. living bread; ver. 27. by pain de vie, i.e. bread of life; and
ver. 28. by pain vif.

2 Cor. i. 12. For our rejoicing is this. These men add, a s^avoir le tes
moinage de notre gloire, i. e. viz. the testimony of our glory. There Is nothing
of this in the Vulgar or old Louvain.

Gal. iv. 3. Elements of the world. These men add, sous la loy; the Vulgar has
it not, nor the old Louvain.

1 Thessalonians. iv. 13. That sleep in Jesus. Fr. Tr. qui dorment du sommeil de paix
en Jesus. The old Louvain and Vulgar will not warrant this addition.

Heb. v. 7. -- was heard, in that he feared. These Louvain Divines add these
words, quand il a este resuscite. i.e. when he was raised again. But there is
no such thing either in the old Louvain, or Vulgar

Heb. viii. 2, 6. To minister. ver. 2. (which our Interpreters render by
Litourge, in which they do not follow the Vulgar.) they add the word
Sacrificattur. And to the word ministry, ver. 6. (which they render by
Litourgie, rejecting the Vulgar Version) they add, Sacrificature. And yet the
Vulgar and old Louvain give them no occasion for so doing.

Heb. x 9, 18. To these words, v. 9. He takes away the first, our Translators
make bold to add to the Text the word Sacrifice. And v 18. to those words,
there is no more offering, they add Legale, i. e. such as the law of Moses
required. There Is nothing in the Vulgar, or old Louvain Version will justify
these additions. But these Louvain Divines make no scruple to add these words
that they may support the Romish doctrine of the Sacrifice of the Mass. These
are soul arts indeed, and they have no reason to pretend, not shadow of
authority for their excuse.

1 Pet. iii. 15. Of the hope. These men add, and de la foy. But there is no
such thing in the Vulgar.

1 Pet. v. 3. Over God's heritage. In the Greek, it is only (...). The Vulgar
Latin renders it, in cleris, keeping to the Greek word; so far is the Vulgar
from determining the sense to persons onthings, much less to particular persons
or a separate order of men. But our Louvain Divines are not scrupulous and nice
in this matter. They have it thus, sur le Clerge. ou sur les heritages du
Seigneur. i.e. over the Clergy, or over the heritages of the Lord? It Is not
agreed yet, that by (...) in the Text is meant persons; and if it were, it is
not certain that the Clergy exclusively to the rest of God's people are meant.
Be all this as it will, these men have not done sincerely, nor as becomes
strict Interpreters, not having kept to the Vulgar which they pretend to
translate. Father Amelote in his notes upon this place does observe, that in
Cleris, in the Vulgar here, does not signify dans le Clerge. And therefore he
does not render it thus: nor do the Authors of the Mons translation expound
heritage by Clergy in the Text of their Version: but render the word as our
English does.

2 Pet. iii. 17. Error of the wicked. In the Vulgar it is, Insipientium errore,
i. e. the error of the foolish. This is by our Louvain Divines expressed by,
erreur des mechans heretics, i. e. the error of wicked heretics.

1 John ii. 14. The wicked one. These Louvain Translators without any regard to
their Copy, the Vulgar, or their Predecessors, the old Louvain Divines; have
out of their own heads, added to the Text, and ses ministres, i.e. and his
Ministers.

Rev. xviii. 20. Holy Apostles. This agrees with the Vulgar, and with the old
Version of the Louvain Divines; but these new Divines will render it, Saints,
Apostres.

There are indeed in this Translation, a very great number of additions to the
Text, if by the Text we understand the present Greek. But these Louvain:
Divines are not to be charged with them, because they are found in the Vulgar.
The Reader that is curious may find some of them in the following places, Matt.
xxv. 1. Act. xviii. 7. xxiii. 25. Romans iv. 5. viii. 28. 1 Cor. xii. 28. xvi.
19. 2 Cor. i. 6, 7. Phil. iv. 8. 1 Pet. v. 2. 1 John ii. 14. Rev. ix. 11.
xviii. 20.

I might add to what has been said, very fitly in this place, that these
Louvain Divines, instead of giving the Reader a strict Version of the Vulgar do
impose upon him a sense of their own, and take the liberty of a Paraphrast
instend of keeping to the strict rules of a good Interpreter.

Thus they do (1 Cor. xi. 10.) as I have remarked upon another occasion. And
chapter xvi. 9. Where we read a great door and effectual: And the Vulgar has it,
ostium magnum and evidens: these men ^ender it by ^esgrande and favorable
occasion. This is a liberty which the old Louvain Divines would not take. They
truly render the Vulgar by une grande (...) evidente port. I do not contend
about the sense of the place: But these men ought not to give a Comment when
they undertake a Version only And tho they thought fit thus to turn the place,
they ought to have added some Marginal note or remark for the Readers use.
Thus, Coless. ii. 20. Living in the world. These men add to the very Text, and
dessous la Loy, by way of explication, when there is no such thing in the
Vulgar, nor in the old Louvain Edition. Amelote takes not this liberty, and the
Authors of the Mons make a distinction of character between the Text and their
Supplements: ver. 22. they take the same liberty, where, after the word using
they add, est a^^ establies, i.e. being established; And yet the Vulgar, and
old Louvain Edition has nothing like it. Again, Heb. ix. 22. We read it,
without shedding of blood is no remission. Both the Vulgar, and old Louvain
Version agree exactly with ours. These men render it thus, sans effusion de
sang des b^s^es la souilleure legalen'est point ostee^ i.e. without the
effusion of the blood of beasts legul impurity is not taken away. There are
several other such places as these where these men add to the Text of the
Vulgar, viz. 1 Pet. i. 4. 2 Pet. i. 14. and chapter ii. 4.

Having showed in many partic^lars how inconsistent this Version is with the
Vulgar, which it pretends to translate, and that of the old Louvain Divines,
whose it pretends to be. I shall now show how inconsistent it is with it self.

Matt. iv. 10. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou
serve. This place is perfectly parallel to Luke. iv. 8. There can be no
pretense for any difference in the Version. And yet these Louvain Divines are
herein inconsistent with themselves; for they give a Version of one place
different from what they had given of the same words before, as has been
observed elsewhere upon another occasion. The same may be said of Matt. xv. and
v. 5. and Mark vii. 11. where (without the authority of the Vulgar Latin) those
men give us a different rendering of the same words, though they are parallel
places.

Act. xi. 30. What we render Elders, they render by Pretres, i.e. Priests, and
yet the Vulgar has it Seniores. This they do also, Act. xv. 22. and chapter xxi.
18. where the Vulgar has it as before. This is not to follow their Copy; nor
do they consist with themselves. For in other places they render the same word
by Anciens, Matt. xxvii. 1, 3, 12. And by Vieillard, 1 Timothy v. 1. So that they
do not follow the Vulgar, nor agree with themselves. They depart from it
frequently, and follow it where there is least reason. And instance of which we
have, and a notorious one in Act. xx. 17. The Elders of the Church, one might
have expected they should have translated by Priests of the Church, considering
how sond they are of translating the word Elders by Priests in other places: no
wonder they should translate Elders by Anciens, Matt. xxvii. 1. because they
are expressly said to be Elders of the people, and consequently to be reckoned
among the Laity. But th^se ^^d called Elders of the Church. And these very
Translators, chapter xiv. 43. where it is said, They ordained Elders in every
Church, translate the word Elders by Pretres, i.e. Priests. Yet in this place
they translate Elders of the Church by, les plus ages de l'Eglise: i.e. the
more aged of the Church. The V. Latin has it indeed, majores natu Ecclesia:
But the Context assures us they were Ecclesiastics. Father Antelote renders it
by Prestres, i.e. Priests, so does the Mons Testament also, and these men might
have done it here with more show of reason than elsewhere. But they who regard
not the Vulgar elsewhere are tenacious of it where there is no cause.

Act. xxvi. 1. (...). Fr. Tr. Commanca a render raison, i.e. began to render a
reason. I do not quarrel about their rendering, because herein these men follow
the Vulgar Latin. I only show that they do not the part of good Interpreters in
that they are not consonant to themselves: For ver. 24. where there is the same
word in the Greek, and the same rendering in the V. Latin, and the very same
subject matter, yet they alter their phrase: There they render (...) by, comme
il se defendoit; which is an argument of great levity in Interpreters; and
especially in them who pretend to be the Louvain Interpreters; whereas the old
Louvain translation is in both places conformable to the Vulgar, and consonant
to itself.

Act. xxvi. 24, 25. In the same Chapter we find as great a Blunder as that
mentioned above. Festus said unto Paul Mairy, i.e. Thou art mad. Fr. Tr. Vous
perdez le sense, i.e. You have lost your wits. I dispute not the translation,
but truly represent the folly and levity of the translators. For whereas the
Greek word is the same, the Vulgar Version the same, the subject matter the
very sames yet these Interpreters have used three several ways of rendering the
same Greek and Latin word. The first as is said, they render by, vous pardez le
sense: The second by fou, i.e. a fool: The third by, insense, i.e. one that
has not his sense. In this they did not follow the old Louvain Version, the
Authors of that took greater care.

1 Cor. x. 14. Flee from Idolatry. Fr. Tr. Fuyez l'adoration des idols, i.e.
flee the adoration of Idols. I do not here charge these men with departing from
their Copy, the Vulgar, in this place. That which they are blameable for, is
that in another place, where there is not only the same Greek word, but the
Vulgar translates it to the same sense as it does here, these Louvain Divines,
as inconsistent both with the Vulgar and themselves, render it by Idolatry, as
may be seen by consulting their Version of Galat. v. 20.

1 Cor. xvi. 9. with 2 Cor. ii. 12. Whereas in one of these places they render
door by occasion (as I have observed before on another occasion) these new
Louvain Divines forget themselves when they come to the latter of the
abovenamed places. And though the Vulgar use the same word, ostium, in both
places, and the subject matter be one and the same, yet what they render by,
occasion, in one place, in the other they render by, la port.

I shall conclude with representing to the Reader some Errata of the Press.
These indeed are the least faults, but yet not to be excused in a work of this
nature. Those to whom this care belonged ought to have prevented these Errata,
or to have given the Reader some notice of them, whereas they have done neither
of them.

Matt. xxvii. 7. This Version has Haseldama, where the V. Latin has
Haceldama; and the old Louvain, Acheldemach. Luke i. 27. This Version has
Anne, for Aune, as the old Louvain has it. Luke iii. 1. Cesa, for Caesar. Joh.
ix. 2. Sa instead of sa m^re. Act. xii. 2. where the following words are
repeated voulant le produire apres Paques. 1 Cor. vii. 9. Li for il. chapter ix.
15. Nom for Mon. chapter xv. 29. notal^ment for Totalement, as it is in the old
Louvain, Gal. ii. 9. Centils for Centil's, as it is in the old Louvain. Coloss.
ii. 13. Ensembe for Ensemble, is it is in the old Louvain. 2 Thessalonians. iii. 6.
Tradiction for Tradition, as in the old Louvain. Heb. xii. 26. Mes for Mais.
chapter x. 30. pleuple for peuple. Jam. i. 1. tribus for Tribus. 1 John i. 1, 3.
ven ouy for ven and ouy, as it is in the old Louvain. Rev. vi. 16. Tone for
Throne. chapter vii. 4. Tributs for Tribu^. xi. 18. Non for Nom, as it is in the
old Louvain. ch xvii. 17. aeuvres for coeurs, as it is in the old Louvain. chapter
xx. 5. Testes, for rest, as in the old Louvain. chapter xxii. 2. Sancte for Sante,
as it is in the old Louvain.


