Charity Directed: OR, The Way to Give ALMS TO THE GREATEST ADVANTAGE.

In a Letter to a Friend.

WRITTEN BY Richard Kidder, Rector of St. Martin Outwitch in London.

Hieron: ad Paulinum Tu Considera ne Christi Substantiam imprudenter Effundas,
id est, ne immoderato judicio rem Pauperum tribuas non Pauperibus, etc. Sen. de
Benef. l. 1. c. 1. Beneficia sine ullo delectu magis projicimus quam damus.
LONDON, Printed for Thomas Parkhurst, and Sold at the Bible and Three Crowns in
Cheapside, and at the Bible on London Bridge. 1676.

CHARITY DIRECTED: OR, The Way to Give ALMS to the GREATEST ADVANTAGE.
SIR,
YOU have well Observed, That of that little which men bestow in Almsgiving, a
very small part gains its end and turns to Account. And you were pleased at
several times to desire me to give my thoughts how a good Man may be Directed
to give to the best Advantage. I have not that Opinion of my self, as to think
I am fit to give you Advice, nor that mean Opinion of you, as to suppose you
need it. You have been Practiced a great while in doing kindnesses, and I do
not believe that you need either Direction or Motive. You are of the Number of
those that are Taught of God to Love one another, and would but others follow
your Example, there would not be so many Objects of Charity: But since the Work
it self carries with it so great an Invitation, and you are pleased to desire
it, I shall very readily consent. And if you conceive what I Offer may be of
any Use, dispose of this Paper as you please. Now, in Order to the Directing^
good man to give his Alms to the best Advantage, and that they may do the most
good, I shall speak to the following severals.

First, I shall show how he may so give, as it may turn most to his own
Account. Secondly, How he may so do it, as may turn to the greatest Advantage
of the Receiver. Thirdly, How he may so Order his Affairs, as that he may have
something to bestow.
And before I speak to any of these severals, I shall take the Liberty to speak
of the Necessity of giving Alms, and of the Arguments and Motives from whence
this Excellent Work may be recommended to us.

And I am very certain that there is great need that Men should be very
earnestly excited to so good a Work at this time. There are about this City of
London some hundreds of Families (you would believe me, if I should say some
thousands) that are under very pressing Necessities. And, if there be not care
taken, very many amongst them will be starved. And the great Poverty of these
Families also has been to them Unavoidable. For it has fallen upon them,
partly, through Age, partly, through the number of Children, and in great
measure for want of Trade and Employment. Nor would it be any hard Matter to
give you an Account how it comes to pass, that very many are not able to get
their Bread by that Employment which sometime since afforded them a competent
Subsistence. But, besides that I shall not need to acquaint you with it, the
thing it self will not Answer any part of my Design. I am not Obliged to show
How Men have fallen into Calamity, but to contribute what I can toward their
Rescue and Relief. And when my poor Brother is fallen into the Ditch, I do not
think my self Obliged to Represent how many ways there are of falling in, but
to do my utmost toward the lifting him out. I shall therefore (without any
more of Preface) show what great Reason we have to Compassionate, and Help our
poor Brother, to do him kindnesses, and show him Mercy. God grant that our
works of Mercy may hold some proportion to the Obligations that lie upon us to
show it.

First, this is the end of our being what we are, and of our enjoying what we
do Possess; that we might do good to others. The Rich Man is Gods Almoner and
Steward, and the Poor are his Receivers: He shall not need to busy his Head in
Building larger Barns, when there are so many Living Houses already Built to
his hand: The Empty and Hungry Poor are the best Granaries. Our Talent was
given us to be laid out to the Honor of our Master, and the benefit of our
Fellow Servants. ^rigen. Hom. in S. Matthew.
Vnaquaeque anima venit in hunc Mundum cum aliquibus Dominicis pecuniis. We do
all of us come into the World with some of our Lords Money in our hand; and
this was given us (not to hide in the Earth, Mat. 25.25.27.) but to Trade
withal for our Brothers Advantage. The Blind Man that carried the Lame upon his
shoulders, had the benefit of the Cripples Eyes for the use of his own Feet;
and it puts us fairly in mind how Useful we may be to one another. And we ought
to judge this the very Reason why we excel one another in any Gift or
Endowment, that we may be helpful to those to whom the Divine wisdom has dealt
out these Blessings more sparingly. Job, that great and good Man of the East,
understood this. I was Eyes (says he) to the Blind, and Feet was I to the Lame:
I was a Father to the Poor, and the Cause which I knew not, I searched out. He
did not cause the Eyes of the Widow to fail, nor eat his Morsel without the
Fatherless; he saw none perish for want of Clothing, nor any Poor without
Covering; the Loins of the poor Blessed him, and they were warmed with the
Fleece of his Sheep, Job 29.15, 16. Chap. 31. v. 16. And yet at that time Job
had seven Sons, and three Daughters to provide for, which is now the great
Objection against works of Mercy. This is also the End of our Spiritual
Mercies, The manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to Profit
withal, 1 Cor. 12.7. In that sense also what we are we are for the good of one
another. In the Natural Body: The Eye cannot say, I have no need of thee; nor
the Head to the Foot, I have no need of you, v. 25. For as the Eye is useful to
descry a danger, so is the Hand to keep off the stroke, and the Feet to run
from it. He that Lives and does no good, Vt arbor in faecunda tanti est in
pretio quanti lignum ejus in trunco. Apulei. Apol. pro seipso.
makes void the End of his Creation: He is like an unfruitful Tree, that
Cumbers the Ground, and is worth no more than its Trunk or Body may be improved
unto. He is the Worlds uneasy Load and Burden, and may be spared without any
miss or loss at all. There is nothing more insignificant than the man that does
no good. He that Does nothing, is more impertinent than he that Is not at all.
Vacua est vita quam non implet cura been vivendi. Impertinentior est qui nihil
agit quam qui nihil est.
Our Life is but a Parenthesis, an heap of Ciphers, that amounts to no sum or
sense if we only Live and do no good. God does not give us Riches to hoord up;
we are not Proprietors, but Stewards. They are entrusted to us to dispense, and
they have a Charge upon them. They are ours, Cum suo onere, with the charge and
burden that lies upon them. God gave them that we might distribute them, and if
we do it not, we are unjust. Riches are called unrighteous Mammon, and as they
are unrighteous when they are unjustly gotten, so they are when they are
unjustly detained: And in that sense those words are understood. Luke 16.12.

Secondly. This is the way to become like God, and like our Blessed Savior. We
can do nothing more safe in it self, nor that is more for our own advantage and
our brothers than to imitate him whom we worship: And certainly it was truly
said that speaking the Truth, and doing Good makes us like God. And we are
commanded to be followers of Him, as dear Children, Ephesians. 5.1. Now God is good,
and does good, and by doing good we become like him. Our Savior uses this
Topic, when he persuades his followers to do good even to their enemies. That
they might be the Children of their father which is in heaven, who makes his
Sun to rise upon the Evil and upon the Good. Mat. 5.45. God feeds the hungry
that never give him thanks, clothes the naked that do not praise him, gives
Health and Riches to the Atheist and unbeliever, to them that love him not and
desire not the knowledge of his ways. Quam multi indigni luce sunt, et tamen
d^^s o^^^ur? Sen. de Benef. l. 1.
How many are there that deserve no light and yet he makes his Sun to arise
upon them! How many that deserve to live upon an Earth of Brass, and under an
Heaven as hard as Iron, and yet he sends them the former and latter Rain. And
this will make us like our Blessed Savior who went about doing good. His very
miracles were the effects of his Mercy as well as Power; and spoke him to be
Good as well as Great: They were works of kindness and benignity, and did at
once confirm his doctrine, and rescue and relieve the afflicted and oppressed.
And though he might have confirmed his doctrine by miracles that should have
wrought terror and astonishment, yet he rather chose to work saving ones. He
taught the ignorant; and by a miracle, feeds the hungry, restores the sick,
heals the infirm, raises the dead, and seeks and saves that which was lost. He
conversed with those that stood in need of his assistance: We hear of him among
Lepers or Lunaticks, Blind or Bedridden; among the hungry or the sick, affording
his aid to those that needed it. And after his many labors and travails, his
excellent speeches and works of Mercy, at the last he prays for his Enemies
that hang him upon a Cross. Father forgive them, for they know not what they
do. And verily if we consider how very short our Saviors life was, and that
not much more than one tenth part of that remained when he entered upon his
ministry; and again remember the many works he did in that time (besides the
very many that are not recorded; Joh. 20.31) that is, how many he fed, and
Taught, and Healed, and Dispossessed, and Raised; and that in Sundry places
distant from one another, as we may truly say of our Savior what the Book of
Wisdom ( chapter 4. v. 13.) says of Enoch, that He being made perfect in a short
time fulfilled along time: So certainly if we be the genuine disciples of so
good a Lord his Example will teach us mercy and kindness to our Brother.

Thirdly. We are bound to relieve our Brother as there is due from us a Tribute
of Thankfulness to God for his mercies and that upon these following accounts.

1. For giving and preserving to us any of the Comforts of this present life.
It was churlishness in Nabal to deny a morsel of bread to David and his
servants, who had been a wall about what he had by day and by night. When our
Neighbors house has been thrown down by the flames, the mercy of God has
kept ours standing: When my Brothers vessel has been split upon the rocks, our
Ships have come to shore safe and well laden. When my friend grows poor by by
me, the blessing of God (for nothing else could do it) has made me rich. We
have escaped those dangers which have swallowed up our friends and relatives.
Our children are living and well, when the next door will lead us to a weeping
Rachel, that mourns for hers because they are not. Others have no abiding
place, no peace, no health or safety, when we sit down quietly under our vine
and fig tree. Do we owe nothing to Gods care for this? Who is it that has
made the difference? Shall we not pay some tribute for so many mercies? It will
become us to look over our store and pay some tribute of praise. Let us look
back and we shall find that we have been preserved from robbers and pestilence,
from sword and famine; And that also when many have fallen on our right and
left hand, We have been restored from a sick bed; when we were within the
prospect of death, not to say of the terrors of Hell. These things call upon us
loudly to do good to our poor Brother, when God has showed so much mercy to us.
If we do it not we may justly expect that God should do by us as David intended
to do by Nabal, Quid ergo dubitas been collocare id, quod forsan tibi eripiet
aut unum latrocinium, aut existens repent proscriptio, aut hostilis aliqua
direptio Lactant. l. 6. c. 12.
that he should destroy us and ours. For in this case our mercies are
forfeited, and they Escheat, and we may expect God will seize and turn us out
of possession. God can soon send a fire among thy goods, leave thee in the
hands of Thieves and Murderers: He can soon smite thy Child, blast thy Corn,
destroy thy Cattle, and render thee as naked as the world found thee, if thou
do not pay thy tribute of praise. Fear not then to offer that to God which is
so due to Him, and so uncertain to thy self. That which a fire may consume, or
thieves steal, or moth corrupt, and which the mercy of God alone preserves unto
thee.

2. For exempting and excusing us from the costly service the Jews were
obliged unto. Their service was not only Carnal but Costly, To say nothing of
their several tithings, (which was far beyond the proportion of one in ten) and
their Sabbatical year, Scalig. de Decimis.
when they neither sowed, nor reaped, nor claimed propriety; Their Morning and
Evening Sacrifices throughout the year, besides the additionals upon sabbaths
and new Moons and Festivals, the Passover, Pentecost, and feast of Tabernacles
(besides the day of expiation) their Oblations or (...) that were constantly
paid to the Priests, and their long and frequent journeys to Jerusalem, and
their offerings there, for their sins and trespasses, for their first born and
of their first fruits; besides their payments for the service of the
Tabernacle, their other offerings, and Emergent expenses which the law required
(not to speak of their lex agraria and the other precepts which prescinded the
opportunities of becoming greatly rich) were things of great charge, and which
did yearly expend a great proportion of their Estates. And I fear that our love
to the world is so great, and our devotion so small that we should have been
very uneasy under such a service, and perhaps have gone as unwillingly to Gods
Temple as the Beast we should have sacrificed would have gone to have been
slain at the Altar. But now since God requires nothing more of us but to do
justly, and to love mercy and walk humbly before God, we ought out of gratitude
to show kindness to one another.

3. For Spiritual Mercies and the great care God has taken of our souls. These
loudly call upon us to do good to the Poor. Has not God given his Son to Die,
that we might Live? Has he not Blessed us with the Revelation of his will? And
has he not given an assurance of the aid of his Divine Spirit? Has he not
given us the means of Grace, and the hope of Glory? Has he not lengthned out
to us the time and space of Repentance when there are many placed amongst the
Dead and Damned? Does he not still follow us with Importunities and Beseechings
that we would turn and live? Does he not woo and beseech us to be Happy? Does
he not do it, though he need us not, and will be nevertheless happy, though we
are miserable? Oh, that Men would retire a little and be alone, and well
consider and ponder upon these things! Let us but think how deplorably
miserable we were if God had not thus provided for us! Let us but suppose our
selves bereft of the means of Grace, and of all hope of Glory! who could
express the horror of such a Condition as should deprive us of these Benefits:
No Tongue could express, no Heart conceive the greatness of such a Misery.
Shall we then think much, after we have received so much Mercy from God, to do
good to an Enemy, to do good to a poor Man, to help a Widow, or a Fatherless
Child? Shall our eye be evil when our Lords has been so good? Shall we spare
our Purse when God has not spared his Son? Shall we shut up our Bowels against
our Brother after such great pity shown us from God? Methinks such love of God
should thaw and unlock the most frozen heart! Methinks it should enter into
hearts of stone! And methinks no Breast should be so impregnable as not to
surrender to such a Force and Power! We must needs yield, and say, What shall
we render to the Lord for all his Mercies! And think it a poor acknowledgment
of our Thankfulness to bestow our Goods upon the Poor.

Fourthly, we are bound to help the Poor, and to do good to the Needy, because
we shall be Judged hereafter according to the good we do here. A great Truth
this is, however we Dispute or distinguish our selves out of our Duty. We are
witty and crafty to find a Cheap way to Heaven, to contrive a Faith that shall
save our Souls, and our Estates also: A Faith that shall Justify our Persons,
whether it cleanse our Hearts or no. We are careful of giving God too much;
and though we profess a great esteem for our Religion, yet we take care that it
keep its distance, and Usurp not over our Temporal Concerns. We are so much
against Merits, that we suspect good works also. We Divide between God and the
World. God shall have good Words, some faint intentions, a few cold Prayers;
but an hearty Love, an unwearied diligence, and vigorous Endeavors we reserve
for the World. Well, so it is, we are crafty, and we flatter our selves; but
our craft will but Ruin us. We shall find it a great Truth, that he who shows
no Mercy shall Receive none. Let us not deceive our selves the time draws on
apace, when we shall give a severe Account of our Time and our Abilities, our
Estates and Opportunities; in a word, of all our Lords Money that we have
received. And much shall be Required of them that have Received much. We shall
not only give Account how we get, but how we use our Estates: And not only
the Oppressor and unjust Steward, but the Unprofitable Servant shall be shut
out of the Kingdom of Heaven. We are told how the Sentence will run hereafter,
Depart ye Cursed (not because ye Oppressed the Poor, and grieved the VVidow,
but) because I was hungered, and ye gave me no Meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave
me no Drink, etc. It Is Mercy makes way, and leads us to the greatest Mercy:
Come ye Blessed of my Father, etc. (not because ye did Miracles, or Suffered
Martyrdom, or Lived a single Life, or used Severities to your Bodies; not
because you went on Pilgrimages, and Visited Shrines and Holy Relics, but) I
was an hungry, and ye gave me Meat, etc. Mat. 25.

Fifthly, Showing Mercy to one another is more pleasing to God than other
services which were not only of his own Appointment, but had also a particular
reference and Relation to Him. To do good and Communicate forget not, for with
such Sacrifices God is well pleased. Now, God may be said to be well pleased
with our doing good with this Sacrifice of Mercy. (1.) In Opposition to the
Bloody and Legal Sacrifices that were prescribed by the Law of Moses: They were
Sacrifices properly so called, and of Gods appointment: They were Homages and
Acknowledgments of the Divine Sovereignty; and such as were in Use both before
the Law, and before the Flood, among Gods People, and among the Heathen: These
did God Command and bear witness to with Fire from Heaven, and therefore with
these Sacrifices God was pleased. But yet was more pleased with Mercy than
Sacrifice, even then when Bloody Sacrifices were Commanded. This pleased him
better than the Fat and Blood that was presented at his Altar. God did not
delight in Burnt-Offerings, nor Calves of a Year old, not in Thousands of Rams,
nor in ten thousand Rivers of Oil, not in the Fruit of our Body for the sin of
our soul; but Required of his worshippers that they should do justly and love
Mercy, etc. Mic. 6.6, 7, 8. The unmerciful Man was always unwelcome to Gods
Altar: he frowned upon Cain, whatever his Oblation was, who did not Love his
Brother. Acts of Mercy and Kindness he always smelt a sweet savor in. For
bloody Sacrifices they were never welcome alone, or for their own sake, nor were
they always to continue. When the Lamb of God was Offered up, and the Temple
fallen down, they were to cease: But neither the Death of Christ, nor the Fall
of a Temple shall put an end to these Spiritual Sacrifices. Mr. Mede, Book 1.
Did. 49.
This Christian Charity and Compassion is a Fire that must burn in our hearts
for ever, now the fire upon the Altar of Brass has of so long a time been put
out. Among the several sorts of Oblations in the Law of Moses, there was one
sort which was not Typical, nor was it to be done away by the Coming and death
of the Messiah, and that was the Teruma: For this was an Oblation whose very
Nature did import Prayer or Thanksgiving. By this Oblation Men acknowledged
Gods goodness and Sovereignty, and testified their acknowledgment by Offering
unto God out of their substance their Tribures of Praise. Now, these things we
are concerned in as much as the Jews ever were; and showing Mercy to our
Brother is a Sacrifice of this Nature. And it is farther to be Observed, that
for this Terumah, or Heave Offering, it is never mentioned among those
Sacrifices which the Messiah was to do away when he should appear. Of the
Messiah the Prophet Daniel fore-tells that he should cause to cease the
Sacrifice and Oblation, (...)
Dan. 9.27. that is, all the Offerings of fire whatever, whether bloody
Sacrifices or Meat Offerings: The Apostle mentions Burnt-Offerings and
Sacrifices for Sin, Heb. 10.6. But then the Terumah, or Oblation of Praise was
not done away. And to this purpose we have a saying among the Jewish Writers,
That every Corban or Sacrifice should cease, but that the Sacrifice of Praise
should never cease. Buxtorf. Lexic. Rabbin. in voce (...)
Now, as the Poor are Gods Charge, as they bear his Image, and are his
Receivers, so we Offer up this Sacrifice of Praise when we Communicate to them,
and when we do it, we Offer up a Sacrifice more pleasing to God than he that
Offered up Thousands of Fatlings upon his Altar. (2.) In contradistinction to
the other Spiritual Sacrifices which we are bound to Offer up to God: He that
Prays to God as he should, and Meditates of Heavenly things, he that Lauds and
Magnifies the Name of God Offers up a Sacrifice which God is pleased with. But
then he that does good to his Brother, he that helps the Poor, Teaches the
Ignorant, Visits the Fatherless and Widow, Offers up a Sacrifice with which God
is well pleased also; Ay, better pleased than with our other Devotions to
himself. God delights to see us love one another: This is more pleasing to Him
than our long Prayers, our deep Contemplation of Heavenly things, our Hymns of
Praise and Thanksgiving, our Passionate and rapturous Meditations. God is
willing to stay for the Sacrifices we are to Offer unto him till we be first
Reconciled to our Brother. Our showing Mercy to him is pure Religion and
undefiled. It Is this we shall come principally into account for at the last
day, Mat. 5.23, 24. James 1.27. Mat. 25.

To what has been said, let me add, that the work it self carries with it an
Invitation. When we do good to another we do a kindness to our selves: we do
Create our selves a new pleasure. He that shows Mercy to a Man in his misery
does a double kindness at once (and it is hard to say which is the greater) one
to his Brother, and another to himself. There is a Delight and Joy that
Accompanies doing good, there is a kind of sensuality in it. As unmercifulness
and Oppression are attended with horror, so are mercy and kindness with Joy and
Pleasure. It Is a blessed thing to give.

I may add, that we all stand nearly related to one another: Every other man is
a part of our selves, and partakes of that Nature which our Lord did not
disdain to take upon him. The poorest Man is our Brother, and he is the Image
of our God, and the price of our Lords Blood. The distance between us is not
great, and if we look up but ten Generations above the Flood, we shall find
that we are a Kin. Let no Man think himself unconcerned in the Poor, they are
his Relatives, and when he provides for them he provides for his own. The Jews
give us several Reasons why at the beginning of the World one man alone was
made, from whom all others were to be derived. Among the rest they tell us that
it was because no Man should boast of his Parentage and Noble Blood beyond his
Neighbor: Lactant. l. 6. c. 10. Sanhedrin. c. 4. m. 5.
But sure I am it does sufficiently recommend Charity and Mercy, as well as
Humility. We ought to be kind one to another, as proceeding from the same
stock. God has made us all of one Blood, Acts 17.26. And this should teach us
sincere kindness, and hearty Love to one another. There are a certain People in
the World that call Men by the Phrase of the Moieties of others. Needy Men they
call Needy Moieties. And so sure they are: M^^^^^gn's Essays, l. 1. p. 106.
They are so many pieces of Humane Nature; one and the same Nature is shared
out and divided amongst them: The same Blood runs in all their Veins, and the
same breath is in the Nostrils of them all; they came from the same Root, and
are of the same Family. This should teach us the greatest kindness to one
another: He that is unmerciful to a man, is so to his own Nature. He that
covers not the Naked, hides himself from his own Flesh, as the Prophet does
express it, Isa. 58.7. Remember them that are in Bonds as bound with them, and
them which Suffer Adversity, as being your selves also in the Body, Heb. 13.3.
In that we are in the Body, we are partakers of the same Nature, as we^^ as
liable to the same miseries and Infirmities.

Again, I may well suppose my Brothers Case my own; for it has been, or it may
be ours. Cui vis potest accidere quod cuiquam potest. Now in this case let us
but do as we would be done by: He that will not give, takes it for granted that
he shall never want. For if he did but suppose he should himself want, he would
be glad both of pity and relief, and therefore would think himself Obliged to
show it. We cannot tell what may happen, but we may well suppose that we shall
not always be prosperous. 'Twill be well that we sometimes put the case to our
selves, that we were stripped of all our Wealth, and then we cannot sure but show
the Mercy that we would receive.

Besides all that has been said, the mercy and pity we show will not be
unrewarded. If we give, God has said he will repay. ( Prove. 19.17.) What we
give will be at once a gift and a debt. We may, if we will, when we give to
the poor set down so much at such a time lent to God. There is no money we lay
out turns to so good an account. The good man that shows mercy will not fail to
receive it: God has promised great mercy to the man that shows it: That he
shall be blessed, and delivered, and strengthened on the bed of languishing,
and be made fat ( Prove. 22.9. Ps. 41.1. Prove. 11.25.) we shall need mercy e're
long: 'Twill be seasonable on a sick bed, in a storm or tempest, in this or in
another life. If we show it we may hope to receive it. It Is the best way to
make our Sickness tolerable, and our Death easy. 'Twas the Observation of one
of the Ancients, That in all his Reading he did not remember to have met with
any Charitable Man that ever dyed an ill Death. It is the most likely way to
mercy upon our selves and our Posterity.

It Is an Advantage to be born of merciful and Charitable Parents. I doubt not
but the Children of such men fare the better for the mercy that their Fathers
showed. I have been Young, and now am Old, yet have I not seen the Righteous
forsaken, n^r his Seed begging Bread. He is ever Merciful and Lends, and his
Seed is Blessed, Psalm. 37.25, 26. I doubt not but many men now Living do fare
the better for the Charity of their Ancestors: God pays them in their Children
and Posterity. The recompense is conveyed by the hand of Heaven that is not
Discerned; and when the Bread has been many days upon the Water it is found
again, and falls into the hands of those that succeed them, that first cast it
away. And though the Children of such men may meet with straits, yet I doubt
not but that they are the special care of heaven. We read a sad Complaint of a
VVidow, who cried to Elisha. Thy Servant, my Husband (says she) is dead, and
thou know that thy Servant did fear the Lord, and the Creditor is come to
take away my two Sons to be Bondmen, 2 Kings 4.1. whose VVidow this was,
Child. Paraphras and Kimchi and R. S^l^m. in lo^um.
the Text tells us not, but the Jewish writers do: They say she was the VVidow
of Obadiah, and we have no cause to doubt it. The Time and Character agree
well. Thy Servant did fear the Lord, says she: Now, Obadiah feared the Lord
greatly, 1 Kings 18.3. See now the Charity of this good man rewarded in his
VVidow and his Sons. He had in a time of Famine fed an hundred Prophets with
Bread and water, 1 Kings 18.4. And now God multiplies her little Oil, and by a
miracle preserves the good man's VVidow and Rescues her two Sons.

The very Heathen could tell us that the gods dealt indulgently with some men
upon the Account of their Parents and Ancestors. Sen de benef. l. 4. c. 32.
That some men came to a Crown upon the Account of a good man that was one of
their Ancestors. And perhaps it would be no hard matter to reckon up a great
many examples to this purpose. But that will not be needful: It Is enough God
has said that he will repay the merciful man. The good man serves God for
greater ends than these worldly things. He is satisfied that he serves a good
master when he serves God, and 'twill be to him all one when God makes his word
good, He gives perfect credit to God, and 'twill be well for him whether he
meet with a reward or his children after him, whether he meet with it in this
life or in the next.

I add, That to show mercy to the poor is the best use that riches can be put
to. Were it not for this, poverty has several advantages above them. It has
less of care, of envy, and makes us less obnoxious to an account hereafter.
It Is use gives riches a color; that makes them weighty and valuable, Argento
n^llus ^^l^^ est n^si splendeat usu.
and nothing gives, them so great a price as that they give us the advantage of
doing kindnesses. This is that which the Apostle directs rich men to, viz: To
do good, to be rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate,
laying up in store for themselves a good foundation against the time to come,
that they may lay hold on eternal life. 1 Timothy 6.18, 19.

I might after all this put you in mind of many great examples to provoke us to
do good to the needy.

Surely the heathen world will rise in judgment against many titular
Christians and will condemn them: Though they had not those obligations upon
them to bind them, nor that light to guide them, nor those promises to
encourage them, nor those motives to excite them that we have, yet they went
beyond many of us. What would they not do and suffer for the general good of
their Commonwealth! What hardships or death did they refuse? Curtius and the
Decij devoted themselves to destruction for the safety of their Country. Quin.
Fabius sold his farm to redeem the Captives of the Commonwealth. The Roman
Caesar reckoned the day lost in which he had not done a kindness: Another of
the Heathen Emperors thanks the Gods (as his phrase is) for two things; that he
never wanted relief from others, and then, Marc. Antonin. l. 4. S. 14.
that when he desired to relieve a poor man he never wanted means to do it.
Their Philosophy had taught them that which we have not learnt from the school
of Christ.

And yet we do not want great examples among the ancient Christians. They loved
one another greatly insomuch that the Heathen world took great notice of it.
We read of some men that made themselves slaves for the good of others. And
Paulinus though a Bishop, sold himself to be a captive to ransom a widows son.
Their Charity was so great that they did not only give their estates but very
readily exposed their lives also for the sake of their brethren.

But there is nothing like the example of our Blessed Savior: He became a Man
that he might bring us to God; He made himself poor and mean, that we might be
rich and exalted; and that he might make way for our Bliss, he submitted to a
shameful and painful Death. A miracle of love! That has all its dimensions;
and that passes all understanding.

Methinks we of all men should be taught of God to love one another; and (God
having loved us so greatly) should need no motive to persuade us to love one
another. We enjoy great blessings, and live in the hopes of life and
immortality of joys that eye does not see, nor has ear heard, nor has it
entered into men's heart to conceive what it is.

Well then let us put these things together and we shall find our selves
constrained to show mercy. It Is in it self a blessed work, and will make us
like God and our Savior: We shall do a kindness to our selves, and profit our
neighbor at once. This course will ease our account hereafter, and adorn our
Religion here. It Is an excellent way to exchange temporals for eternals; It
does our brother good, and it pleases God. It blesses our store, and keeps the
rest of the lump from Corrupting. It brings down many blessings on our selves
and estates, and on our children. If we show no mercy now, it is because we dare
not Trust God, or we do not Love him; We doubt his Truth, or we question his
Power: And if we do, are egregious hypocrites when we pretend to any faith in
God, or love to our neighbor. Such a faith we may have as will save our
Estates but will never save our Souls. And in vain we pretend to love God when
we refuse to relieve our brother. I Shall conclude with the words of the
Apostle. Whosoever has this worlds goods, and sees his brother have need, and
shuts (...) his bowels of compassion from him, how dwells the love of God
i^ him? My little Children let us not love in Word, neither in Tongue, but in
Deed, and in Truth, 1 John 3.17, 18.

Having premised these things, and in that also complied with your Request, I
shall now return to those severals which I propounded to speak to in the
beginning of this Paper.

First, I shall show how a Man may so give Alms as they may turn to his own
Account. That is, I shall lay before the good Man some Rules of giving Alms
that may secure the Duty, and make him certain of the Blessing. And they are
these that follow.

1. He must do it deliberately, and in cold Blood: That is, he must take care
that it be his own Act as much as may be. Hence it is that we many times lose
our Reward because the good we do was not premeditated and designed, it was not
the Issue and Result of our purpose: We are fermented into a Charitable
paroxism or heat by the Example of another; upon some sudden surprise, to
gratify a present humor, or some prevailing Passion. Perhaps, the Poor man
surprises us, and he does it in Company; and then we think our Reputation
concerned, and we give something; or else he follows us with great Importunity,
Multi sunt quos liberales facit frontis infirmitas. Sen.
and we give to be rid of his Noise, and purchase our Quiet with our Alms. And
in these cases we give, but did not intend; we bestow, but did not choose: And
though we may do good in the Event, yet we Designed it not. And whatever good
we do to another, we take not a course to do a kindness to our selves. And Men
sometimes do a kindness, and Repent when they have done it. But that God
accepts which we do deliberately and of Choice. 'That's our Act which we design
and purpose before hand. For as that cannot be called Malice (how mischevous
soever) which was not fore thought and intended, no more can that be called
Charity (how profitable soever otherwise) which was not Designed. God looks at
our purpose, and accepts of that which we choose to do. To this purpose are the
Apostles words to be understood: Done ce qu'il aura resolu en luy meme de
donner. vide. French Tra^^^atio^ Printed at Mons. (...)
Every Man according as he purposes in his heart, so let him give, 2 Cor. 9.7.
As he purposes in his heart, i. e. as he resolved in himself before, so let
him give, as a late Translation has it. And surely it is a great Commendation
of their Charity, of whom the Apo^^le affirms that they had begun before, not
only to do, but also to be forward a year before, 2 Cor. 8.10. To be forward
we render it, but the Greek signifies to be willing: That is, They had of
themselves formed the Design the Year past, even before they were spoken to. To
which sense the same Translation turns those words: And that it is the
Readiness of Will and purpose that God regards is evident from what follows, v.
11, 12. And the Apostle would have the good man lay by him in store what he
intends to bestow in Alms, 1 Cor. 16.2. And the very Heathen have Observed that
many Men do bestow their Benefits rashly and without Judgment, Quae beneficia
aque magna non sunt habenda atque ea quae judicio, considerate, constanterque
delata sunt. Cicero de Offic l. 1.
being hurried by an impetuous mind, as by a strong Wind, and he well Observes
that those kindnesses and Benefits come short of those which are done with
Judgment, Consideration, and Constancy. So that it is very advisable, that we
should before hand set apart so much for the Poor, and then it is ours no
longer, and we may bestow it to no other Use than that to which we have
Designed it; and after this, it must be our care to bestow it as we see most
needful.

(...) Theophyl. in locum.
2. The next Rule I would give, is, that he give speedily: As we have
Opportunity, or whiles we have time let us do good, Gal. 6.10. That is, let us
do it in our Life time, and because our Life is short and uncertain also, let
us do it speedily. Let us make our Eyes our Overseers, and our Hands our
Executors. T^^^ good when we lie a dying is neither so Praiseworthy, nor yet
so safe: Besides, that he that was long before he did it, was a great while
before he was willing. It Is small Charity to bestow that which we can keep no
longer, and we run a peradventure in leaving that to others, which we might see
done our selves. He takes the wisest course that takes the present time; and he
that does not give presently, perhaps, will never give at all. Indeed our
intention is rewardable, but it is so only when it is sincere, and the best
Evidence of its sincerity is to do good to our Brother when it is in the power
of our hand. And thus Solomon does Advise us to do, Prove. 3.27, 28. when we do
what we can, our good will is Accepted. If we do not this, we have cause to
fear we use a subter-refuge. The Apostle has Ruled this case: If there be
first a willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man has, and not
according to that he has not, 2 Cor. 8.12. Our Intention is then accepted when
we can go no further. But he that can do it presently, and yet delays, does not
do what he can, and according to what he has. Our Time, and with it our
Opportunities of doing good, is flying hastily from us, and there is no wisdom
or Operation in the Grave. It has been thought good Advice that the Jew gave
his Scholar, when he bid him Repent one day before he dyed; and that because he
did thereby require him to Repent presently, because he could not tell but he
might dye the next day. What good we do, let us do it quickly, or else perhaps,
it will be too late. How many men have we known prevented in their Charitable
intentions? We know not what a day may bring forth.

3. Let the Alms giver take care that what he gives be the Effect of Divine
Charity and Kindness. This Rule shall not need seem strange: For we may give
(as the Apostles words suppose) all our Goods to feed the Poor, and our Bodies
to be burnt, and yet be void of Charity, 1 Cor. 13.3. Whatever we do of this
Nature must proceed from the love of God, and be accompanied with a most hearty
Love to our Brother, who is his Image. There may be many Considerations may
incline us to give; it is our Love that makes it Rewardable. And then a Cup of
Cold Water given to a Disciple of Christ, in the Name of a Disciple, shall not
lose a Reward, Mat. 10.42. We must not only Help, but we must Pity our
Brother. Our Religion teaches us Mercy and Compassion: and we are Obliged by it
to Pity as well as to Aid our Brother. It Commands us to put on Bowels of
Merc^^ Col. 3.12. The Doctrine of the Stoics allowed the good man to help, but
forbad him to Pity and Compassionate the Needy. But we learn to do both from
the Example and the Precepts of our Lord. Senec. de Clement. l. 2. c. 5.
Our to do both from the Example and the Precepts of our Lord. Our Alms must be
the Offspring of our Charity and Kindness: and if we were allowed to be void
of Pity and Compassion, it is to be feared our Relief would be but small. He is
most likely to help his Neighbor that has a great sense of his Misery. And
Christianity has provided better for the Poor than the Philosophy of the
Stoics. Our Gift without Kindness is like our Prayer without Devotion. It is
not like to be great or lasting, or proportionate to our Brothers Needs, and
the Obligations we are under to relieve him. If we love greatly, we shall give
largely: But if we be void of bowels, no wonder that we abound not in good
works.

4. He that gives Alms must have a great care of Pride and Ostentation. He must
watch against it very severely and diligently. It Is our Saviors Rule: Take
heed that you do not your Alms before men to be seen of them; otherwise ye have
no Reward of your Father which is in Heaven. Therefore when thou do thine
Alms, do not sound a Trumpet before thee as the Hypocrites do in the
Synagogues, and in the Streets, that they may have Glory of Men; Verily I say
unto you they have their Reward. But when thou do Alms, let not thy Left
hand know what thy Right hand does. That thine Alms may be in secret, and thy
Father which sees in secret shall Reward thee openly, Mat. 6.1. -- Let him
chase away every proud thought that would arise in his mind, and remember that
when he has done all he can, he is an unprofitable Servant: Otherwise he gives
to himself, and not to the Poor. He has an ill aim. and he does lose his
Reward. I am far from thinking that we may not give openly, and in the view of
others, we may do this; and it is sometimes needful, and at other times
convenient. We are not strictly Obliged to give all our Alms privately. But we
are indispensably Obliged to avoid Ostentation and vainglory. And because we
shall be most liable to this Temptation when we give publicly, therefore it is
safest that we do it in secret. He that gives must have no other aim but to do
good, and to approve himself to God.

5. He that gives must do it without any hopes of Amends or Restitution. He
must look for nothing back again: It Is our Saviors Rule, Do good, and lend,
hoping for nothing again, and your Reward shall be great, etc. Luke 6.35. We
may Lawfully have respect to the recompense of a future reward. But we must
have a great care that we expect not this from them whom we relieve.

6. Let him give to all. Let us do good to all Men, Gal. 6.10. Give to him that
asks thee, and from him that would borrow of thee turn thou not away, Mat.
5.42. If thine Enemy hunger, feed him, if he thirst, give him Drink, Romans
12.20.. It Is enough that our Brother wants, this makes him a fit Object of our
Mercy. Though he be a wicked man, and unthankful, yet we must relieve him.
Though he be of another Opinion, of a different Religion, a Stranger, and an
Alien, yet he is a Man, and we must help him. Where the Necessity is equal, let
him first relieve the good man: But where it is not, he must give to him that
needs most. And provided we give not what will minister, to the Lust of an Evil
man, we must give to him. And the farther our Charity extends, the more like it
is to the Love of God. For though we say it begins at home (and I wish it did
not with many of us end there too) yet it must go farther off, to our greatest
Enemies, and the worst of men, if it be genuine, and of the right stamp.

7. He must do it with great Cherfulness and Alacrity, not grudgingly, or of
Neoessity, for God loves a cheerful giver; 2 Cor. 9.7. 'Twas the advice of
Siracides; In all thy Gifts show a cheerful Countenance, Ecclus: 35.9. Let us
not need Graning and Skrewing up to so Blessed a work. He is an ill Soldier
that follows his Leader with Sighs. God is not pleased with the Sacrifice that
we bring unwillingly: In Compliance with this Rule let us give as we would
receive. Let us do it before we are asked: Let us seek after Objects of our
Compassion. Let us prevent with kinkness, and be before hand with our Brother.
Let us prevent with appear that we are as willing to give, as the Needy to
receive. There are some Cases in which we must do thus. Some men have nothing
left but great Needs and great Modesty: Here we must seek out, and Enquire.

I shall not need to say, after all this, that he that gives Alms, must give
what is his own: That is to be supposed. He must first be Just and pay his
Debts, and make his Restitution^ else he does but Rob one to give to another;
and must never (...) that such Alms will atone for his injustice.

And thus, Sir, I have shown how we may give to our own Advantage. We may now
Adventure upon a safe Bottom: I am ^ot able to tell you where any Trading or
Wealthy man can put out his Silver to so safe a bank. There Is no man that
Trafficks but runs an hazard, only the good and prudent Alms-giver runs none
at all. It would have been happy for many men that they had put out more of
their Wealth this way. This would have turned to a great Account, when the
course they took turned to none at all. I do not know but they might by this
course have preserved these Estates, which have for want of this seasoning
Perished and Co^^^n^ed. For certainly if there be a God and a providence, if
the Holy Scriptures have not deceived us, there is no man takes a wise course
than he that shows mercy. And it is very sad to think that men a should with hold
their relief from the Poor, and that for (...) of w^^^ing their Estates* when
this crafty course they take (...). God of his mercy grant that we may
understand Our interest better. But I proceed to show

Secondly, How a good man may so give alms as may turn to the greatest
advantage of the receiver, and do him that takes them the greatest good.

It will be needful to consider well here. For so it is that the good man is
often deceived, and what he gives sometimes turns to no account, sometimes to
an evil one, and does very frequently fall short of the greatest and best
advantage. And I have often thought it well worth the while to study the art of
giving wisely. It Is with Alms as with seed; All does not prosper that is
scattered abroad, it requires some skill and care to cast it well abroad that
it be not lost: And though we are obliged to give, and to do it liberally,
Beneficia in vulgus cum largiri in stitueris, perdenda sunt multa ut semel
ponos been.
yet we must take care that we do it not negligently. Indeed some will be lost,
and no wisdom can prevent it, but then it must be our care to place our Alms as
well as we can. And we must not cease to give because we have sometimes placed
our Alms ill, but have the more cause to contrive them to the best advantage.
In the Morning sow thy seed, and in the Evening withold not thine hand: For
thou know not whether shall prosper, either this or that, or whether they
both shall be alike good. (Eccl. 11.6,) Now what I have to offer in this matter
may be comp^^^^d in the following severalls.

1. The Alms giver will be obliged to find fit objects of his charrity. There
are those to whom our relief will be a double kindness. And it must be our
first care to find out to whom we may give with the greatest advantage. Pars
sacrilegij est rem pauprum dare non pauperibus. Hieronym. ad Pammachium.
It Is a kind of Sacrilege to give the poores money to those that are not poor.
And it is next to it to bestow it there where there is least need, and least
reason to give. We are not only to consider what we are to give, but to whom.
And where there are a great many objects before us, and we cannot give to all,
we are to consider whom we are obliged to prefer.

And in the first place, and above all others, I would commend poor
housekeepers who are diligent and industrious; but either through want of
employment, through sickness, and a great charge of children; or for want of
money to buy in stock, or to do it at the best hand fall into great
necessities. There are many of these persons that are very diligent, and very
modest, willing to labor and ashamed to beg. They struggle under great
necessities, and use all honest arts to get a poor lively hood, and yet are not
able to get bread. There are some amongst them that with seasonable relief, and
with the loan of a little money would have been able to have supported, and to
have employed themselves and others about them, and by their labors have
subsisted comfortably; But for want of such help, have been either starved, or
have fallen to beggary; if not to that, which is worse than any of them,
dishonest and unjust courses. The poor man lies under a great temptation to
doubt of Gods Providence and care; and through our cruelty, we let him sink
under his load, and he falls under the temptation, and casts off the fear of
God, and the poor man steals and looses his precious and immortal soul. I
cannot reflect upon these things without some consternation of mind to think
that there should be such things among us under the profession of so Excellent
a Religion as ours is. It is great charity to enquire after such as these. And
that we must do or else we shall not find them out. And I could wish that some
good men in every Ward or Parish would give themselves the care of informing
themselves of the number of such housekeepers about the City. It would be a
blessed work to find them in order to their help and relief. I doubt not but
there are many men would readily contribute toward the upholding these poor
families. And to do what we can toward it, is a very great act of charity and
Compassion: For certainly it is a greater kindness to keep a man from falling,
than it is to lift him up when he is down. And it is much greater charity to
keep men from beggary than it is to relieve them afterward. And by upholding
such sinking families we do not only keep them from beggary but idleness, and
all the dismal consequences that are wont to wait upon it: I deny not but there
may be charity in giving to a beggar, but I am sure there is much greater
charity in preventing beggary. And if he do good that gives a beggar, yet he
does it more uncertainly, and is sometimes deceived, and helps to nourish a
vice when he thinks to help a poor man. When we give to beggars we many times
know not what we do, and what we give is sometimes lost, and neither does good
to the giver or receiver. But he that helps the master of a poor family, and
aids his diligence, helps a great many at once: It is a relief to him and all
that depend upon him. There are some that do not fall alone, and to keep them
from sinking is a kindness to them and all their poor dependants. There are
some Tradesmen that cannot fail but 'twill be to the loss and impoverishment of
many others. And here I cannot but mention the wisdom and Charity of those
Persons, who have taken great care of the poor of Northampton, since that Town
was burnt. There has been some Relief sent thither from well-disposed
Christians (I pray God increase men's Charity to that afflicted place) to be
bestowed upon the poor. And (as I am informed) it has been wisely Distributed.
Those that had the care of it giving larger proportions of it to those Men who
were Traders, and Employed other poor People under them. And in doing so, they
relieved many at once, and preserved among them the Trade and Employment of the
Town.

In the next place, I would Recommend the Widow and the Fatherless: Pure
Religion, and undefiled before God and the Father, is this, to Visit the
Fatherless and Widows in their Affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from
the World, James 1.27. I do not think any Condition in the World more
Compassionable than that of a poor Widow. She is bereft of her greatest Worldly
Comfort and support, and indeed the one half of her self is taken from her, and
yet the whole burden lies upon her. Her streng^^^ less, and yet her burden as
great, not to say greater than ever it was. And it being thus, she is a great
Object of our Pity and Compassion, and the care of her is devolved upon us by
the All wise Providence of God. And accordingly we find that the Christian
Church did at its first Formation and beginning take care of the Widows, Acts
^. And St. Paul Commands us to Honor, that is, to assist and help the Widows,
that are Widows indeed, 1 Timothy 5.3.: And who they are, he tells us, v. 5. And
we find that God declares himself greatly concerned for the Widows. He styles
himself a Father of the Fatherless, and a Judge of the Widows, Psalm. 68, 5. And
promises that he will establish the Border of the Widow, Prove. ^5.25. And God
has given great demon^^^ations of his care of them. He Rescues the Widow of
Obadiah and her Sons by a Miracle. We Read of but three in the Old Testament
that were raised from Death to Life, and one of them was the Son of the Widow
of Sarepta, 1 Kings 17. Nor do we Read of any greater Number that our Savior
raised, and one of them was a Widows Son of Naim, Luke 7.12. 12. They are the
care of God, and they ought to be ours.

I add, that the Condition of Prisoners is very pitiable: I mean those that are
Imprisoned for small Debts, or that are detained for want of Fees. And there
are many such, who for want of a little Money are bereft of their Liberty.
which is so dear to us all. And besides that, they Live miserably in those
places, and are not only rendered Useless Members of the Common wealth, but are
(I fear too frequently) Debauched in their manners in those places. But what
the Condition of these Men is, and upon what small Accounts they are frequently
detained there, I need not in this place represent to you, who have been the
Happy Instrument of Delivering great Numbers of them from their Confinement.

I shall not need to say that the Redeeming of Slaves from their Captivity is
another great act of Mercy. For if a Prison at home be grievous, what must it
be to be in Slavery among Infidels and Unbelievers?

There are many other Objects of Compassion, and ways of bestowing wealth to
great and Noble purposes, viz. The putting poor Children to School (which I
wish were the public Care and Charge, as much as the providing for their
Bodily subsistence;) the encouraging hopeful Students that are forced out of
want to leave the Schools of Learning too soon; Buying provisions when they are
cheap, and Selling them out again without gain to the poor when they are dear,
etc. But I must remember that I am confined, and have not the Liberty to
enlarge now: perhaps, I may hereafter have time to speak more largely of the
several ways and honest arts of doing good in the world. For there are more
ways of doing good than Almsgiving: And I am now limited to that Argument, and
must not trouble you with too long an Epistle.

2. The Alms-giver that would with his Charity do the most good to the Poor,
will do well so to contrive his Alms, that the Receiver may perceive he intends
him a farther kindness: My meaning is, let every good Man aim at the good of
his Brothers Soul in the Mercy he shows him. This is the Noblest kindness of
all; Let the Poor Man discern that he that Relieves the Needs of his Body, has
a greater Design upon him, and that he aims at his Eternal welfare. Our Savior
went about doing good: And so it was that his works he did were such as did at
once give Relief and Instruction. And when he showed Mercy to the Bodies, he
did at the same time show another to the Souls of Men. His Miracles were
Demonstrations, not of his Power alone, but of his Kindness also. And that was
not a single kindness neither, but a double one. When he confirmed his
Doctrine, he healed the Sick, and restored the Blind. And as the Sick and Blind
received a great Advantage in their Sight and Health, so did the Souls of Men
as he confirmed his Doctrine, and by that means strengthened our Faith. Our
Saviors Relief and Instruction went together: And as he fed the Multitude, so
he Taught them too. When he Cured the Body of him that had been infirm thirty
eight years, he is also mindful of his Soul, and bids him sin no more, lest
some worse thing overtake him. Our Alms give us a great Advantage of doing good
to Men's Souls. For by them we may encourage Virtue and sincere Piety. And then
we do Effectually recommend it when we do Reward it. And he that Receives a
bounty, will listen to our Instruction and Advice: Our Liberality joined with
our Exhortations will render them more likely to prevail.

It Is an incredible Force that Kindness has, it will prevail where all other
ways are ineffectual. And when this kindness is joined with the Evidence of
Truth, we shall be most likely to prevail. When Mercy and Truth meet thus
together, it may be hoped they may prevail upon the sinner to lead a New Life.
I have often thought, that if he that Preaches to the Poor could plentifully
Relieve them also, he would not fail of great Success. He must be a very
Obdurate sinner that could stand out against the Evidence of Truth, and the
Force of Mercy and Compassion. Truth it self has a mighty Energy and Force,
and 'twould alone prevail upon us if we would suffer it, Exercere regnum suum,
to Rule over us. But if we join Mercy with it 'twill be greatly strengthened.
'Twere to be wished that all the Ministers of Religion were able to relieve the
Needy: They might by this means (with Gods blessing) render their Sermons and
other Spiritual Advices more available. They might with their Charity they show
their Bodies, win upon their Souls; and be Instruments of the Salvation of more
of their People. However, they and all good Men must Design this in the Alms
they do bestow: We are Obliged to relieve the poor, but especially the
Household of Faith, Gal. 6.10. And if they are to be first regarded, 'twill be
great Charity to endeavor to increase that Number, and by our Alms to
encourage Godliness and Virtue. And therefore when we give, let our Alms serve
the ends of Piety and real goodness; let them advance as much as may be the
good of Souls. Let us give, especially to those that are good, to those that
frequent the public worship of God, to those that are willing to submit to
Instruction, and to those especially that bring up their Children well. Let us
rise in our kindness as we discern them more diligent in Gods Service. We may
with our other Alms give good Books, such as may serve to their Instruction and
Devotion, and enjoin them to a constant attendance upon the worship of God. In
a word, let us so give, that the Poor Man may perceive we have higher and more
generous designs upon him, than what concerns this present Life: That he may
Learn to set some price upon his Soul which he finds us to value and prize at
an high rate.

3. It Is Advisable, that the Alms-giver bestow his Charity with his own hands:
That he do both inquire out for the Needy, Hieronym. Epitaph. Fabiolae. Ad
Oceanum.
and afterward Relieve them himself. Let him go to Prisons, to the Houses of
the poorest, examine their store, and pry into their Necessities. Let him visit
Sick and Wounded poor People, and dress their Wounds with his own Hands if he
can, or at least, see them Dressed. It Is a kindness to help the Poor with our
Purse; but it is a greater to visit them our selves, and to bestow our Charity
with our own Hands. The good Man's Presence adds a new Kindness to his Alms. The
Sick and the Poor are Refreshed with the Company and Conversation, as well as
the Alms of the good Man. The Presence of the Charitable Man revives them: They
are joyed to think that they are not altogether Neglected. Besides, the good
Man by this means will be sure the Work which he intended, is done. He cannot
fear a miscarriage now, and he has a fair Occasion of Commending Virtue and
Religion to the poor he visits, and his Counsel is most likely to prevail.
Besides, by this means he will better Learn to pity the Afflicted, and to Bless
God for what he himself enjoys. 'Twere well we would now and then go to Prisons
and Hospitals, and the poorest Houses and Families. This course would be much
for our own Interest and the Poors also. It Is a most Christian Office to do
this, And would well become Persons of the greatest Quality and the fairest
Circumstances. But this may not be expected; there will be but few that will
take this care upon them. And, perhaps, some cannot bear it, and others cannot
find time through the urgency and multiplicity of their other Affairs. Such as
these however ought to help with their Estates, and whoever does so does well:
But then it is Advisable in the next place,

4. That he make use of Men of great Integrity to bestow his Charity for him.
Thanks be to God there are those that spend a great part of their time in
finding out and helping the Poor. There are those that carry on Charitable
Designs, and Labor greatly in it. And I know some such whom Malice it self can
hardly fasten an Accusation upon; Men who do design, and by the assistance of
others, Effect great things; such works of Charity and Compassion, that no Man
can doubt but he has sufficient grounds both to trust the Men, and encourage
their work. And indeed it is very needful there should be some such Men as
these especially about this great City. The Apostles (when the Number of
Disciples was multiplied) thought fit to constitute certain Officers on purpose
to take care of the Poor, Acts 6. And there had need be always a number of Men
attending upon this great Affair: And they had need be men very Exemplary for
Piety, men of Leisure and Estates, of great Prudence and Humility; of a
merciful temper, and an inflexible Justice: Men that are great Lovers of Piety
and true goodness where ever they meet it: Not Devoted fondly to one Sect or
party of Men, nor yet Admirers of Theories and Speculations of Nice and Curious
Opinions. And besides all this, if they had the favor and allowance of public
Authority, and enabled with power also, they might be greatly Serviceable to
the Community. It Is true, every Parish has by Law certain Men appointed to be
Overseers of the Poor: And though this provision which the Law has made be
good, yet it is still a Question, whether it be sufficient or not. We know that
these Men are Chosen in Course and Order, according to the Houses, or by their
standing and continuance in their several Parishes. And then it may be supposed
it may sometime happen that those may be chosen that are not fit for that
Employment, either because they are men that cannot afford to attend upon that
work, or for want of some other qualification which that Office does require.
Besides, they are limited in their Office, and receive their Laws as well as
their Supplies from the Neighborhood that chose them: And though they are
Obliged to keep men from starving (if Complaint be made) yet they are
frequently overcharged with the Numbers of the Poor they take the care of. And
there are other works of Mercy that we ought to be concerned for besides the
bare preserving the Poor from starving. Besides all that has been said, the
Modest man that Complains not is all this while unprovided for. When the seven
Deacons were Chosen to dispense the Charity of the Church, it is said, that the
Number of the Disciples was Multiplied. And those words, perhaps, may intimate
to us the Occasion of choosing these Officers. What the Number of the Disciples
was then, we are not indeed certain; but yet we do not Read before that, of any
determinate Number above that of Five Thousand in all, Acts 4.4. And how many
of them were poor, and stood in Need of Relief we know not; but yet supposing
the poor among them many, there were seven Deacons to provide for them: And
very probable it is that some of our Parishes may have as many poor as were
amongst them, though not so many Devout and Pious men to take care for their
Relief. I am sure that the Relief of the poor is the Common Interest, and I see
not but there might well be appointed some Common Patrons and Fathers of the
Poor, who might make it a Common Care. When the Deacons were Chosen and set
apart by the Apostles, it is said immediately thereupon, That the Word of God
Increased, and the Number of the Disciples multiplied in Jerusalem greatly, and
a great Company of the Priests were Obedient to the Faith, Acts 6.7. That was
the Consequent of that Blessed work. And certain I am that it is much for the
Interest and Advancement of Religion, that all its poor Proselytes be well
provided for. And it is a work truly pious to contrive a mean how this may be
done, and contribute what we can toward it.

5. He that would do most good with his Alms will do well so to bestow them
that the receiver may be kept from Idleness as well as starving. He that keeps
men at work does a double kindness: He provides them with bread and employment
too. I shall not need to represent how many are the sad consequents, and
temptations of a poor and an idle life. It is sometimes greater charity to lend
than to give. He that lends a trading man encourages his diligence; and the
borrower takes pains that he may repay. It would be a great charity to employ
those that are able to work, and it is no charity to relieve those that will
not. It would be of great advantage to the community to find out a way to
employ all that are able to work: And as it would be no hard matter to do it in
the city, with the united charity of many, so it would ease us of many begging
people, and prevent their growing numbers.

I shall only add to what I have said that it is advisable that he that gives
do it seasonably; we say, he gives twice that gives quickly. A seasonable
releif prevents a greater charge. It Is much easier to prevent the fall of an
house than to build it up when it is once down.

And thus Sir, I have given you my thoughts how a good man may give to the best
advantage to himself, and to the greatest profit of the receiver. But still
there are very many will desire to be excused from giving Alms, and that
because they are not able. And indeed if they are not they have a just excuse.
But there are too many pretend this because they are not willing, and too many
others who render themselves unable by their negligence and ill husbandry. I
shall therefore show.

Thirdly, How a good man may so order his affairs as to have something to
bestow.

I make no question but that a provision might be raised for the poors releif
and employment without hazarding men's estates, or greatly impairing them, which
is the Infidel objection that worldly men have against works of mercy: And how
this may be done I am now to show.

First, by retrenching of superfluities. There are very many that Trifie away
those Sums yearly which if they were united would amount to a very great
treasure, big enough to employ and relieve great numbers of indigent. We might
save much which we spend intemperately, we eat and drink not only largely, but
we do it with great Art, and Cost. That which we might spare would preserve the
poor from hunger and from starving; and we our selves would enjoy a greater
health, and have lesser accounts to give hereafter. It Is for our health to eat
and drink sparingly, Vnde bestias Emis, hinc captos redime; unde feras pascis
hinc pauperes ale -- Lactant. l. 6. c. 12.
and it may turn to the great advantage of the poor here, and of our selves
hereafter. Again, we spend much in our attire that might be saved without any
loss to us, and with great advantage to the poor; What we spend in this vanity
would serve to cloth many that want a Covering. What we trifle away in Sports
and Shows, in Games and Wagers, in unnecessary Beasts, and supernumerarie
Servants, in Visits and Feastings, in needless Journeys, and avoidable
Lawsuits, in pursuing our vain and ambitious Desires, would serve to many and
great purposes. We might at as cheap a rate build Hospitals, erect Workhouses
found Schools, maintain young Students, endow small Vicarages; in a word, do
Great and Noble works, where now we trifle, and spend our money for that which
does not profit. But besides that we spend much in this trifling manner, we
spend very much upon our sins and follies. And they that have nothing for a
poor widow or fatherless child, that begs for the Lords sake, have it for their
lusts and follies. They maintain their vices at great rates when they refuse to
give a little to a charitable work. How often do men contend at a Tavern who
shall pay the score, when they will refuse the next object of Charity that
offers it self. They are our Lusts undo us, and not our Charity. If we loved
our God, we should love our Brother; And if we did this as we ought, we should
deny our selves some things that his wants might be supplied. And certainly our
love is very cold if we cannot part with an ornament, or a vanity to supply his
real needs. We may help him and not hurt our selves: What is to us
superfluous, and we can well spare, will relieve his necessities. It astonishes
me when I see how many abound in all the Comforts of life, even to the greatest
superfluity, and yet have no sense of these men that want bread. And it is
something strange to me how these men can sleep quietly amidst all their
abundance and superfluity with which their houses are stored, when so many of
their poor brethren want bread to eat, Quae utilit as est parietes sulgere
gemmis, et Christum in paupere periclitari? Hieron. Ad Pammachium.
and garments to hide their nakedness. Methinks they should take little
pleasure in their pomp and gaiety if they did but consider the needs of those
that want relief.

Secondly, By giving that or part of that which is looked on by us as very
contingent, or desperate, and which we set little by, and do not much esteem.
As for example, suppose a man some time play at innocent games for his
recreation, and play for something; It Is to be supposed a wise and good man
will play for no more than he is willing to lose, and then he may well bestow
that upon the poor, or some proportion of it: Or again, suppose he do not play,
yet methinks he may set aside so much as he would be well content to lose.
Again, suppose a man receives a desperate debt, which he gave for lost (and
such things do sometimes happen) or have goods arrived which he was informed,
and did believe were lost, in this case methinks he should be inclined to give
at least some proportion to the poor out of gratitude to God: Plutarch. Quest.
Roman.
For as of old those men that were thought to be dead were not received into
their houses the ordinary way; so why should we not separate some part of these
goods at least, and by this means procure a blessing upon the rest? We
sometimes recover what we value at a great rate, and that against the rules of
reason and beyond our hopes, and in this case we may very well spare a part of
its price at least upon the poor: And may reasonably believe that God preserved
it to us for this very end. The same is the case of Lotteries of all sorts: He
that uses them renders what he has the certain possession of uncertain and
contingent, and sure our charity is small if we cannot devote that to the
service of the poor which we are content to render uncertain to our selves.
Again, a good man falls into the hands of Thieves and Robbers: He is surprised
and they are about to rifle him, and he thinks he comes off well without the
loss of his life; but at that moment some company intervenes, and the good man
is preserved, and all he had is safe; In this case it is hard if he have not so
much Charity to give something of what he saves to the poor, when he would
readily have parted with all of it to these violent men. Or thus; we have a
suit at Law, and are very like to be cast, and in our thoughts give up our
cause, but some unexpected providence intervenes and we get the day. In this
case we shall do well to lay aside something to a charitable use. Once more,
Those men that trade much, make frequent bargains and sales: And so it is, the
buyer beats down the price, and at length he and the seller are near an
agreement; The difference is small that then remains, and usually it is parted
(and sometimes after asseverations on both sides to the contrary) but suppose
every trading man that deals for greater matters would instead of dividing the
smaller sum, consent that it should be laid aside for the poor: In doing so a
stock would soon be raised toward the releif of the poor, and a great blessing
would attend upon this way of trading. Thus in every sale something might be
laid by, and but little felt. That this is a very usual practice in some
places I have heard, and can tell where it is in use in this City, and could
wish 'twere more common than it is. I am sure there are some things we may part
with and not feel which would be toward the poores releif a great supply.

Thirdly, By setting a side a certain proportion of our yearly Gains. There are
some lay up, and add yearly to their estate, and these men cannot plead
poverty: Now if such men as these would before hand resolve to lay aside a
certain proportion of their yearly gains, they would do but what becomes th^^
well, and this course would raise a great stock for those that need. This
laying by for the poor the Apostle commends, and he does it in words that rise
higher than what I have mentioned. Upon the first day of the week let every one
of you lay by him in store as God has prospered him, that there be no
gatherings when I come. 1 Cor. 16.2. As God has prospered him, so we render
those words. But they are observed to import something more; It Is not (...) but
(...)
For it is not [as] in the text, but [whatsoever] I shall not therefore press
men to give away all their gains; The case may be presumed extraordinary which
the Apostle commends, but yet still a proportion we shall do well to lay by,
and this men may do without any fear of wasting their estates. I shall not
undertake to prescribe what proportion this ought to be. I do not look upon it
as a thing prescribed, and if it were it would be strict Justice and not
Charity. God has not determined the proportion, but every good man must
consider what is becoming and agreeable, and have a care he do not take too
short Measures. There have been very good Men that I could tell you of, that
have laid aside the tenth of their Income to Charitable Uses, and these Men
have seen cause doubtless so to do. I shall not now enquire into the Reasons of
their pitching upon that proportion: Methinks it should not be thought an
unreasonable thing to invite Men to imitate them, at least so far, as to lay by
the tenth of their Yearly gains and increase, if not the tenth of their Yearly
Income. That we are Obliged to lay by some considerable proportion, no man can
doubt, that considers one thing, and that is, what was required of, and
practiced among the Jews.

And here I shall take an occasion to consider what provision God made for the
poor under the Law of Moses: And one would think we should easily believe that
we ought not to come short of what they were obliged to, under the Gospel of
our Blessed Savior. And the provision that we find amongst them, was this
which follows.

1. The Third Years Tithing, which is called among the Jewish Writers, The
Tithe of the Poor. Every third Year they were obliged to set apart the Tenth of
their Increase (which far exceeds the Tenth of Rent) for the Use of the poor,
Deuteronomy. 14.28.26.12. We should think this a great proportion, it being (if we
disperse it into every Year proportionably) no less than the Thirtieth part of
every Years growth and increase. 2. The Sabbatical Year. Every seventh Year
their Land was to rest (and then the Owners of the Land were neither to Sow nor
Reap, nor claim propriety) and that too that the Poor of the People might Eat,
Exodus 23.11. 3, The prohibition of Usury. Which without doubt must needs be a
great Advantage to the poor. And that Usury in this case was strictly
forbidden, is plain, Exodus 22.25. Deuteronomy. 23.19. And lest we might suppose that
in this case men were not Obliged to Lend, and to Relieve their Brothers N^eds,
it was expressly Commanded notwithstanding this prohibition, that they should
relieve their poor Brethren, Lev. 25.35. And surely this prohibition of Usury
was a great Relief to the Necessitous. 4. The Law which Related to their
Reaping, when they were obliged to leave the Corners of their Fields as well as
the Gleanings of their Harvest, Lev. 19.9.23.22. And whatever these Gleanings
were, Vide Maimonid. H. Mattanoth Ani^m. c. 1.
yet sure the Corners of their Fields were considerable which they left
standing and unreaped for the poor. For though the Law did not determine how
much of the Field they were to leave, yet we are told by one of the Jewish
Writers, that no less than one part of sixty was the proportion adjudged meet
by their Wise Men. 5. The Law that related to the forgotten Sheaf, the
Gathering their Olives and Grapes. This was another Merciful provision for the
poor: When thou Cuttest down thine Harvest in thy Field, and have forgot a
Sheaf in the Field, thou shall not go again to fetch it, it shall be for the
Stranger, for the Fatherless, and for the Widow; that the Lord thy God may
bless thee in all the work of thine Hands. When thou beatest thine Olive Tree,
thou shall not go over the boughs again, it shall be for the stranger, for the
Fatherless, and for the Widow. When thou Gatherest the Grapes of thy Vineyard,
thou shall not Glean it afterward; it shall be for the stranger, for the
Fatherless, and for the Widow, Deuteronomy. 24.19, 20, 21. 6. The Law that Required
Almsgiving among the Jews. They were Obliged to open their Hand wide unto the
poor, Deuteronomy. 15.8. And this Law of Almsgiving the Author abovenamed mentions
over and above those other Laws abovenamed in favor of the poor. He tells us
that they were Obliged to this more than the other affirmative precepts. And
that 'twas the Custom in Israel to have amongst them Collectors for the poor,
that from the beginning to the end of the Week Gathered and Distributed alms:
They had their Chests, the small and greater, stored with provisions for the
poor of their City, as well as those that Lived elsewhere: and he puts the
Case that a poor Man beg of his Neighbor to relieve his Needs, and that his
Neighbor be not able to supply all his Necessity, how far in this Case he
stands Obliged to relieve him: and his answer is, that to give him a fifth part
of his Goods toward his relief, is generous; to give him a tenth, Id. cap. 7.
is Moderate, but to give him less, is an argument of an Evil Eye.
I shall not need to say any more than this, that he that sows sparingly,
shall reap sparingly; and the less Mercy we show, the less we shall receive. I
shall only add the Exellent words of the Apostle: Every man according as he
purposes in his heart, so let him give; not grudgingly, or of Necessity, for
God loves a cheerful Giver. And God is able to make all Grace abound toward
you, that ye always having all sufficiency in all things, may abound to every
good work, 2 Cor. 9.7, 8.

Fourthly, By denying our selves some little satisfaction, that we may have
somewhat to bestow upon the poor. And here will be room for Persons of mean
Estates to show kindnesses to the Poor. We ought to please our Neighbor for
his good, and 'twill be worth our while to do it with some Displeasure to our
selves. Suppose now we go in Clothes that are cheap and plain, that we eat
somewhat the less, that we avoid some innocent Divertisement, and what we save
this way give to the poor. Our Books somewhere tell us, that when Tarentum was
Besieged by the Romans, their Neighbors at Rhegium Fasted every tenth day, and
sent to the Besieged the Victuals which they should have eaten themselves; A
rare Example of Heathens, and that which may shame many Titular and false
Christians. If the Love of God be in us, we shall not think much to Fast, and
to bestow the Meal we save upon our hungry, and almost starved-Brother. And for
us thus to Fast will be acceptable to God, and profitable to our Brother. And
we have but little sense of Gods stupendous Mercy and kindness to us if we
refuse to do more for our Brother than this amounts to. It will well become us
when our Brothers Necessities are great, to deny our selves those things which
we might else very Lawfully allow to our selves. It was a very ill Character
the Prophet gave of Israel, where he tells us, That they did lie upon Beds of
Ivory, and stretched themselves upon their Couches, that they chanted to the
sound of the Viol, and invented to themselves Instruments of Music, and did
drink Wine in Bowls, and anoint themselves with the chief Ointment, when in
the mean time they were not grieved for the Affliction of Joseph, Amos 6.4, 5,
6. 'Twas generously said by Vriah, when he was persuaded to go to his House
after his return from the Camp. The Ark, and Israel (says he) and Judah abide
in Tents, and my Lord Joab, and the Servants of my Lord are Encamped in the
open Fields; shall I then go into mine House to Eat and to Drink, etc? 2 Samuel
11.11. Certainly if we esteem our selves Members of the same Body, we shall not
find our selves much at ease when our Fellow Members are in pain: And shall not
be hard to be persuaded to undergo some inconvenience for the Advantage of our
Brethren.

The Apostle goes higher still than any thing has been said yet. If we have
nothing to give, he would have us Labor for something, that we may have to
give to him that needs, Ephesians. 4.28. We ought to Labor rather than be a burden
to others, and so we must do also on the ^ehalf of our poor Neighbor, that he
may not want what is Needful for him. And if this be difficult, and an hard
saying, how shall we be able to lay down our Life for him?

And if after all this, we are not able to Relieve a poor Man, yet let us Pity
him, and Pray for him; do what we can, and pray to the God of all Mercies to
support and help him. For there are more ways of being Serviceable to the poor
than Almsgiving. Every Man cannot do that. But they that cannot Relieve, can
Pity; they can Pray to God, and intercede with Men; they can give the Poor a
good Example, and good Counsel: They may be able to Advise, and to study ways
for their Advantage. And he that studies the Art of well-doing, and recommends
it to others, serves the Needy, though he be not able to give them Money.

And thus, Sir, I have given you my thoughts about this affair; and I fear I
have, by doing so, given you too great a trouble also. I am very sensible that
this Matter deserves better to be considered. And I am far from thinking that I
have said what the Argument deserves, or requires: Neither my Occasions, nor
other Circumstances will afford me either leisure or power to do that. If I
have suggested any thing that may do any good, and contribute toward the Help
of any afflicted Person, I shall think I have great cause to bless God on that
behalf. I have however complied with your Request (I might say Importunity) and
am satisfied with this, that though I have not said what might have been said,
yet I have not declined so good a Cause, but have said what at present I could.
I shall only add, that I am,

Sir, Your most Faithful Friend, R. K.
December. 13. 1675.
FINIS.

