Advertisement.
THere is lately Reprinted, An Help and Exhortation to Worthy Communicating.
Or, a Treatise describing the Meaning, Worthy Reception, Duty, and Benefits of
the Holy Sacrament. And Answering the Doubts of Conscience, and other Reasons,
which most generally detain Men from it. Together with Suitable Devotions
added. By John Kettlewell, Vicar of Coles-hill in Warwickshire. The Second
Edition.

Printed for Robert Kettlewell, and are to be Sold by the Booksellers of London
and Westminster. Price Bound 2 s. 6 d.

THE Practical Believer: OR, THE ARTICLES OF THE Apostles Creed, Drawn out To
form a True Christian's Heart, and Practice.

In Two Parts.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Kettlewell, and are to be Sold by the Booksellers
of London and Westminster. 1688.

THE Practical Believer. The First Part.

OF THE NATURE and CERTAINTY OF Christian Faith, AND The Knowledge of God: OR,
AN Explication of the Divine Attributes, and Providence.

Febr. 28. 1687.

Imprimatur Liber cui Titulus, The Practical*Believer, etc. Guil. Needham RR.
in Christo P. ac D. D. Wilhelmo Archiep. Cant. a Sacr. Domest.

London, Printed for Robert Kettlewell, and are to be Sold by the Booksellers
of London and Westminster. 1688.

THE PREFACE.
Reader,
I Here present thee with a Discourse upon the Holy Christian Faith: which as
we all profess seriously to believe; so should we carefully endeavor to
answer, and adorn, with an Holy and Christian Practice. In this, I have
endeavored to give such accounts of Almighty God, as may encourage all good
Men to love and serve him; and deter all evil Men, from presuming on his
Favor, or provoking his Displeasure. I have drawn out the consideration of his
Providence, into the usual cases and occurrences, and shown how we may live
upon it, and give our selves the true comfort and advantage thereof, in all
events and transactions. And all the other Articles of the Creed, I have
endeavored to set off in such particulars, as we are most concerned to know,
and which may give them the greatest life, and power with us. In the whole, I
have aimed to lay before thee the sum of Christian Doctrine, that in an Age,
which abounds with unchristian falsehoods, we may keep steadfast in Christian
Truths: and that among all the Truths of Christianity, we may lay out our Care
and Zeal on those, which are most important, and worthy of all acceptance.

My great design in this Treatise, is to lend what help I am able, to those,
that sincerely desire, and seriously set themselves to live as they believe,
and to make Faith a Governing Grace: showing how we may serve our selves of it,
and give up our Souls to be ordered and directed by it, in all our manifold,
and most important cases and concerns. And looking all along at this mark, in
passing through all the Articles of the Creed, I have not sought to fill up a
Book, by inserting all that may be truly, or pertinently said: But have applied
my self to instruct thee, in such, as I thought the leading, and governing
Notions; to inculcate those, which seem to me the most concerning, and powerful
Truths; to set off such particulars about them, as seem fittest to affect us,
or lie nearest unto Practice; and to note wherein we are to follow and attend
to them, in the course, and various exigencies of our lives. And hoping this
may prove beneficial to the instruction, and use of plain Christians, who have
neither leisure to peruse, nor capacity to retain larger Volumes; I have
endeavored to treat of these things with convenient brevity. But withal to
comprize so much, not only of necessary, but profitable Doctrine, as may be
sufficient to any Man's guidance and encouragement, who will set himself
diligently to learn, and walk in the light of it.

I am not without hopes, that this Discourse may, in some degree or other,
serve the end, for which it is sincerely sent abroad, viz. of doing some honor
and service to the ever Blessed Trinity, and making an admirable, and most
efficacious Faith, more lively and powerful in some, that profess it. And if
thou, good Reader, shall reap any benefit by it, as thou will not fail to give
God the praise, for suiting and supplying thy necessity, by the weakness of any
he employs: so one thing I heartily request of thee, which is all the return,
that in this World I either expect, or desire, that thou will thus far remember
the poor instrument of thy Mercy, as in the fervency of thy Devotion, to put up
one Prayer to our common Father, for his Salvation, who with a very ready and
willing mind, has taken all this pains to promote thine.

THE CONTENTS.
PART I. Of the Nature, and Certainty of Christian Faith, etc.
CHAP. I. Of Christian Faith. WHat is meant by Faith in Christ. When this
suitably affects us, it justifies, or avails to Righteousness. An account of
several particulars of Christian Belief, with the respective Affections, and
Practices, that are suitable to them. All these are reasonably to be expected
from them, though they do not follow, where Men will act inconsistently to
their Principles, and against Reason. Faeith with its suitable effects, the
same as Faith and Repentance, On this account such effects ascribed to it, when
alone, as are due only to it and Repentance in conjunction. This Faith with its
suitable effects, was that which justified the Old Testament Worthies. And is
to justify all good Christians. When S. Paul opposes justifying-Faith to the
Deeds of the Law, he speaks of the Deeds of the Jewish Law. That which fits
Faith for these effects, and distinguishes the Faith of Saints and Sinners, is,
First, The sincerity of it. Secondly, Its strength and firmness. This consists
in its being assured. And honest, or seated in one that makes conscience to
keep his word. And resolute. In what sense Faith may be called an act of
Recumbency, or leaning and rolling on Christ for Salvation. And the hand, to
receive and apply him. It Is no part of Faith to believe our sins are pardoned,
nor of infidelity to doubt of it. Of the innocence many times of such doubts.
And of some good Men's confidence of their own forgiveness. p. 1 CHAP. II. That
Jesus is the Christ from Ancient Prophecies. Among those Prophecies, which
prove Jesus to be the Christ, First, Some prescribe the time of his coming.
This they mark out by the nearness of such notable Occurrences, and
Revolutions, as would fall under all Men's observation. And by fixing the very
Year he should appear in. Accordingly there was a general expectation of him at
that time. His coming not put off beyond the time appointed, for the sins of
the People. An account, why the Jews, who read these clear Notes of the time in
their own Prophets, are not convinced by them. Secondly, Others assign many
peculiar, and visible Notes, whereby he may be demonstratively pointed out from
all other Men. As, 1. His being born of a Virgin. This in some sense spoken of
a Virgin of that time, but principally of Messiah, and then only fully
accomplished, when Jesus came. This cleared from exceptions. 2. His having the
Spirit of Miracles, resting on him. 3. His Death, with the particular manner,
and circumstances of it. And his returning to Life again. 4. His putting an end
to the Jewish Sacrifices and Mosaic Covenant, and bringing in a New one, and a
better, to supply its defects. 5. His erecting an Universal Empire, and
appearing as a mighty King. This not a Secular, but Spiritual Kingdom. 6. His
converting the Heathen World, from their Idol-worship. Jesus silenced the
Oracles, and cast the impure Spirits out of their Temples. This an Argument for
him, not only as accomplishing a Prediction, but also as it is plainly a Divine
thing. The Prophecies of an Universal Probity, and Peace under Messiah, cleared
up, by an account both of their meaning, and accomplishment. The forecited
Prophecies understood of Messiah by the Ancient Jews, though denied by some
later in hatred to our Jesus. p. 45. CHAP. III. Proving Jesus to be the Christ,
from other Divine Testimonies. Jesus proved to be the Christ, 2. From the
testimony of John the Baptist. John knew this by Revelation, and had it
confirmed by a sign. He was an acknowledged Prophet, and of most clear and
current fame. And gave this testimony, before he was personally acquainted with
Jesus. 3. From the testimony of Jesus himself. Several considerations showing
the validity of this testimony, though it were in his own case. This not
impugned by Christ's words, John 5. 31. nor gives any color or advantage to
Fanatical Enthusiasts. 4. From his Miracles. These no lying wonders, as may
appear, because shown in several instances not imitable by Demons. As, 1.
Foretelling future Contingencies. An account of Demon-Predictions among the
Gentiles. 2. Discerning Hearts, and Thoughts. 3. Raising the Dead. 4. Casting
out Devils, of most stubborn ranks, and in greatest numbers and combinations.
It may also appear from their intent and design; and from their numbers, and
the manner of working them. No opposing the Miracles, of Moses against Christ's
Miracles because they were wrought to set aside the Law of Moses. That Law was
given with a design to be altered. An account how for all that, several of its
Precepts are justly called Statutes for ever. 5. From the testimony of the
Father, who declared Jesus to be the Christ by audible voices. And by raising
him from the dead, and showing him in full possession of his pretenses. p. 96
The Knowledge of God: or, an Explication of the Divine Attributes, and
Providence.
CHAP. I. Of the Being, and Attributes of God. The World declares there is a
God. He is an eternal Spirit, on whom all things depend. Of God's Holiness.
Several things explained, which seem to infringe it: as when God is said to
harden Men's hearts. To inflict Spiritual blindness, and a reprobate sense. To
send a false Spirit to deceive Ahab: and strong delusion. God often gives Men up
to the delusion of evil Spirits. Cautions to prevent this. To give Men a Spirit
of slumber. An account, how notwithstanding God's irreconcilable hatred of
sin, it is still suffered in the World. Of God's Goodness. Several false
Notions of it. In what things it chiefly consists. Of God's Justice, or
Righteousness, This shown in giving Righteous Laws. And passing Righteous
Judgments according to them, without respect of Persons. His Punitive Justice
cleared from misplacing punishments, in punishing one for another's sins. And
from misproportioning them, in allotting eternal punishments, to momentany
fins. Some false aspersions on this just God wiped off. Of God's Presence in
all places. The effect of this. Of his Faithfulness. This shown by inviolable
performance of his Promises: And interpreting them without evasion, or secret
reserve, according to their plain meanings. And by constant adherence to his
Friends and Faithful Servants: which is no encouragement for any to return to
their former sins. Of God's Wisdom. This shown in setting a just rate and
estimate on all things; so that he is neither gained, nor lost by worthless
services. In discerning the just power and force of all Means, and success of
all Methods; which should beget the greatest Reverence for all his Ordinances.
In seeing the best times, and seasons, for every purpose: so that we must never
think any Deliverance too long delayed, or Affliction too fast hastened. No
reason to pretend to the Love of God, without loving, and imitating these
Divine Excellencies. p. 143 CHAP. II. Of God's Providence. God preserves all
things he has made. And governs them. He observes all our actions. And all our
temptations. He disposes of all good events. For he gives the fruits of the
Earth. And Children. And success in business. How this should influence us in
any enterprise, shown in sundry particulars. He gives promotion. And the favor
of Men. And life and health to enjoy all other Blessings. And all Spiritual
Mercies. He disposes also of ill events. As death of Friends. Unfortunate
accidents, that afflict us in our Bodies, or Goods. Crosses, and obstructions,
in our designs and business. Sufferings from ill Men. How God stints, and
governs these. No excuse of their unjust violence, to say they are God's
Instruments, and follow Providence. He sends also miscarriages of State, and
Government: and presides in the most tumultuary, and distressed times. In
these, still have Faith in Providence. But God must not be called the Author,
or sender of th^se evils, which we bring down upon our selves, by our own
faults, or follies. p. 189 CHAP. III. Of God's Almightiness. God's Almightiness
implies, 1. God's Might and Strength to effect all things, viz. all that are
the object of any Power. And that are not repugnant to his own Nature. The
exerting this Power creates God no labor. He can do whatsoever any things of
the World can do. This an encouragement to all generous Enterprises. And to
build on Providence, especially where we have a Promise. The value and
acceptance of this trust, in a seemingly most improbable case. And whatsoever
any things of the World are inclined, or wont to do, he can hinder them from
doing. This also a ground of trust in God. And to keep us in any distress, from
flying to unlawful aids. How God will use this Power. 2. His Sovereignty and
Power, to command, and order all things. This includes, 1. Empire, as a
Sovereign Ruler. What things God may command. The unalterableness of some
commands. 2. Dominion, as a Sovereign Proprietor. In what cases God allots good
and ill, out of his Power of Prerogative, not according to Men's
pre-dispositions. Where he dispenses Arbitrarily, he does it always most
Wisely, and Reasonably. Saving Grace he allots, not in way of Arbitrary
Prerogative, but according to Covenant Rules. And Heaven and Hell, in way of
Legal Trials. A brief account of the Rectitude of God's Nature, which limits
his Sovereign Will, from the Scriptures. This Sovereign Lord and Proprietor an
All-sufficient, so no selfish Being. Several good uses of God's Sovereign
Dominion. God's Majesty and Almightiness, must beget fear and reverence. p. 232
ERRATA.
PAGE 19. lin. 12. for accepted, read was accepted. p. 34. l. 29. for And half
Faith r. An half Faith. p. 36. l. 13. for such as do r. such do. p. 41. l. 1.
for of sufficiency r. of the sufficiency. p. 70. l. 24. for men in Bethlehem,
r. men of Bethlehem. p. 113. l. 17. for do danger, r. no danger. p. 150. l. 15.
for this peerless Majesty, r. his peerless Majesty. p. 154. l. 7. for in
wickedness contracting, r. i^ wickedly contracting.

The Practical Believer. PART I. Of the Nature, and Certainty of Christian
Faith, etc.
CHAP. I. Of Christian Faith.
The Contents.
What is meant by Faith in Christ. When this suitably affects us, it justifies,
or avails to Righteousness. An account of several particulars of Christian
Belief, with the respective Affections, and Practices, that are suitable to
them. All these are reasonably to be expected from them, though they do not
follow, where Men will act inconsistently to their Principles, and against
Reason. Faith with its suitable effects, the same as Faith and Repentance. On
this account such effects ascribed to it, when alone, as are due only to it and
Repentance in conjunction. This Faith with its suitable effects, was that which
justified the Old Testament Worthies. And is to justify all good Christians.
When S. Paul opposes justifying-Faith to the Deeds of the Law, he speaks of the
Deeds of the Jewish Law. That which fits Faith for these effects, and
distinguishes the Faith of Saints and Sinners, is, First, The sincerity of it.
Secondly, Its strength and firmness. This consists in its being assured. And
honest, or seated in one that makes conscience to keep his word. And resolute.
In what sense Faith may be called an act of Recumbency, or leaning and rolling
on Christ for Salvation. And the hand, to receive and apply him. It Is no part
of Faith to believe our sins are pardoned, nor of infidelity to doubt of it. Of
the innocence many times of such doubts. And of some good Men's confidence of
their own forgiveness.

Question. SInce Men are made to live for ever, and have Souls capable of
Eternal Salvation, What must they do to save them?

Answer. Believe in Christ, and repent. For Faith, and Obedience, which, where
Men have sinned before, is called Repentance, are the conditions of Salvation.

Quest. Is Faith in Christ one thing necessary to Salvation?

Ans. Yes. He that hears my word, says our Savior, is passed from death unto
life, and shall not come into condemnation, John 5. 24. He that believes the
Gospel, and is baptized, shall be saved; and he that believes not, shall be
damned, Mark 16. 16.

Quest. Will all Faith save Men?

Ans. No; for the Devils themselves believe, says S. James, Jam. 2. 19. But the
saving Faith, is only that which suitably affects us, and works Repentance:
Repentance, as well as Faith, being necessary to Eternal Happiness.

Quest Since Faith is in it self one part of the condition of our Happiness,
and instrumental also to work the Rest, it is necessary to understand well what
it is, and wherein a saving Faith differs from other sorts of Faith. Pray what
is meant by Faith in Christ?

Ans. In general, it is the believing all, that is declared to us by Christ:
and sometimes more particularly some things, that are declared of him. The
believing what is said by him, is called Faith in Christ, as his Authority and
Credit is the Ground, and Reason of our Belief: and the believing things said
of him, as he himself is the object of it. And when this belief suitably
affects us, and we so resolve, and practice thereupon, as may be reasonably
expected from Persons under such Persuasions, then is it imputed to us for
Righteousness.

Quest. Is Faith in Christ, believing all that is declared to us by Christ, or
a giving trust and credit to his Word?

Ans. Yes, and so the Scriptures intimate, when they call it faith Gal. 2. 20.
Phil. 3. 9.
of Christ, that is, of his Teaching and Directing; and, as it is sometimes in
the Original, faith Act. 18. 8.
to Christ, that is, to him testifying and declaring; and Faith or belief of
the Mar. 1. 15. and Phil. 1. 27.
Gospel, and of the 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13. Heb. 10. 26.
truth, the Gospel being that Word of truth, which, on his Credit and
Authority, he testifies and declares to us. Besides, Faith or Belief in Christ,
is expressed in Scripture by these several Phrases, of Joh. 12. 47, 48.
hearing and receiving the word of Christ, of Act. 11. 1.
receiving the word of God, of Jo. 1. 12.
receiving Christ, of Jo. 3. 33.
receiving the testimony of Christ, of Jo 6. 35, 37, 64, 65.
coming unto Christ. All which, as is evident from the places alleged, being
made only so many other words for believing, show plainly that Faith or Belief,
is the crediting of his Word, and assenting to those things, that are declared
by him. Which declarations, for their surer derivation to Aftertimes, were all
put in Writing by his Holy Apostles and Evangelists before their Deaths, and
are all contained in the Holy Scriptures.

Quest. Indeed, if Faith in Christ be a belief of Christ's word, it plainly
implies hearing, and receiving it; and that Word being sent down to us by him
from God, receiving it, is a receiving the word of God; and believing it on
Christ's Authority, is receiving his testimony. But how do the two other
Phrases, of receiving Christ, and coming unto Christ, show the Faith they
denote to be a belief of his Word?

Ans. To receive one, notes different things, as it is applied to different
cases. Men receive a Guest, when they entertain him in their Houses; a Ruler,
when they become his subjects; a Friend, when they admit him to intimacies; but
a Prophet and Teacher, under which notion Christ claims belief, when they
credit his Doctrine and Message. And because they who thus believed him, came
personally to attend and learn of him, and associated themselves with him, as
they that retained to, and followed him; therefore was this belief of him, in a
literal sense, a coming to him.

Quest. Does Faith in Christ signify also in Scripture, the believing some
things concerning Christ?

Ans. Yes, and those too such things, as are apt to beget trust, and confidence
in him. For so, though the Devils know and believe the truth of all Christ has
declared, yet S. James says they want the right Faith, because they only
tremble at it, and cannot hope in the least, that ever he will do them any
good, Jam. 2. 19.

Quest. What are we thus particularly to believe concerning Christ?

Ans. Not only in the general, That he is the Son of God, and the Christ or
Messiah, for professing whereof S. Peter was pronounced Blessed, Mat. 16. 16,
17. but also particularly, to believe that he died for our sins, to reconcile
us unto God by his Death, whence it is especially called faith in his blood,
To. 3. 25. That he rose again from the dead, which whosoever believes in his heart,
says S. Paul, shall be saved, Romans 10. 9. And that he is now ascended into
Heaven, and seated on the right Hand of God, there to intercede and mediate for
us, till at last he shall come again to judge the World, and eternally reward
or punish all, according as their lives have been good or bad.

Quest. So that I perceive Faith in Christ, is our believing the Gospel, and
all things contained therein, concerning God, our Selves, or another World,
upon Christ's Authority. And particularly, believing what he therein declares
concerning his being the Christ and Son of God, who died, ro^e again, ascended
to God's right Hand, and shall return again to judge the World, as is also
expressed in the Creed. And that for the sake of his death to expiate sins, God
will be reconciled to Sinners upon their true Repentance?

Ans. Yes, this is the true Faith in Christ, upon profession whereof the
Apostles at first entered Men as Disciples, S. Peter without more ado Baptizing
the three thousand that gladly received the Word, wherein he had declared to
them these very things, Act. 2. 41. And the Christian Church ever since
admitting them to Baptism, upon their professing Faith of the Apostles Creed,
which contains the same particulars.

Quest. By this I perceive what Faith in Christ is. Pray what wants this to
make it saving and available unto Righteousness?

Ans. Only that it suitably affect us, or work in us such Godly Affections,
Purposes, and Practices, as may justly be expected from Men of such persuasions.

Quest. Pray what are these suitable affections?

Ans. They will best appear, by running over briefly some of the chief of those
particulars, which we believe on the word of Christ, and which are to produce
them in us.

Quest. We believe that God is our Father, who at first made us, and still
preserves, and provides for us, with Paternal care and tenderness. How must
this affect us?

Ans. With Love, Honor, and dutiful Obedience. If I be a Father, where is my
honor? Mal. 1. 6.

Quest. We believe him to be infinite in Justice, and Almighty in Power, able,
and ready as to con^er whatsoever is desirable on those that fear, so to
inflict whatsoever is dreadful on those that affront him. What should this
beget in us?

Ans. Reverence, and godly fear. Fear him* who when he has killed, has Power
to cast both Body and Soul into Hell, yea, I say unto you fear him, Luke 12. 5.
and Matthew. 10. 28.

Quest. We be^ieve him to be perfectly Righteous, that is, most Holy, and Just,
and True, and Faithful, and Merciful, and Patient, and pleased only with what
is so. How ought we in reason, to be influenced by this belief?

Ans. Made Holy, and Righteous as he is, that so we may be like him the Supreme
Object of all imitation, and find favor in his Eyes. If we know that he is
Righteous, we know that every one that does Righteousness, is born of him, 1
Jo. 2. 29.

Quest. We believe his Providence orders all events. What should we do upon
this?

Ans. Be content under all that happens, and say, as the Holy Psalmist, I
opened not my mouth, because thou did it, Psalm. 39. 9. or, as old Eli, It is
the Lord, let him do what seems him good, 1 Samuel 3. 18.

Quest. We believe, that this Providence will never leave, nor forsake those
that fear God, Heb. 13. 5. that it will make all the evil they meet with here,
to work for their good, Romans 8. 28. That the desire of the Righteous shall be
granted, Prove. 10. 24. That they shall not want any good thing, Psalm. 34. 10.
And that, when they seek first the kingdom of God, all other things shall be
added to them, without their being solicitous about them, Matthew. 6. 33, 34.
What would one in reason expect, from Men so persuaded?

Ans. That they trust in the living God, 1 Timothy 6. 17. that they lay aside all
distracting solicitude, and tho^ghtfulness for outward things, Matthew. 6. 25,
31, 34. That they be careful for nothing, but making their case known to God,
cast all their care upon him, who cares for them, Phil. 4. 6. and 1 Pet. 5. 7.

Quest. We believe he will not forget his word, although the performance of it
be long delaied, but remember it faithfully, and in due time give it effect.
What should this work in us?

Ans. Patience and Perseverance of Hope, whereof all have need, that after they
have done the will of God, they may receive the Promise: It being God's way,
for some time to exercise Men's Faith of a Promise, before he accomplish it,
Heb. 10. 36, 37.

Quest. We believe he is able to fulfill it when it is most improbable, and
unlike to take effect, there being no word impossible with God, Luke 1. 37. and
that he will do it. What should be the effect of this?

Ans. To beget in us a firm Faith, and unshaken confidence in his Promise: such
as Abraham's was, for having a Child, when both He and his Wife were past Age
for Children; and of having a numerous Issue by him, when at Gods command he
was just about to slay him, Romans 4. 20, 21. and Heb. 11. 19.

Quest. We believe, that for Christ's sake, God will give good things to those,
that seek to him for them, and that if they ask, it shall be given, Matthew. 7.
7. What should follow upon this opinion?

Ans. Prayer and Devotion. So that whatsoever Temporal, or Spiritual Blessings
Men stand in need of, they should seek to God the Author, and by Jesus Christ
the procurer of them.

Quest. We believe that Jesus is the Son of God, and the Christ that was to
come into the World. What would any serious, and considerate Man do, that is so
persuaded?

Ans. Confide in him, and worship and submit to him, as a most just Object of
our Homage, Trust, and Adoration.

Quest. We believe this same Jesus to be our Lord. What should he in reason do,
who believes and professes that?

Ans. Keep his Commandments, and observe his Orders. For why call ye me Lord,
Lord, and do not the things that I say? Luke 6. 46.

Quest. We believe that he came down from Heaven in love to us, to restore us
to God's Favor, and Eternal Happiness. What would any ingenuous Person do,
that is convinced of this?

Ans. Love him most dearly that so loved us, and thank him most heartily, and
entirely, for having done, and suffered so much for our sakes.

Quest. We believe the cause of his dying so painful and ignominious a Death
upon the Cross, was not any ill that he had done himself, but only our sins,
and that at last they will bring us to Eternal Death, unless we repent of them.
What can be expected of all that have this persuasion?

Ans. Irreconcileably to hate sin, and to repent and sin no more, lest they
come to ^eel the same at last intolerably, and that too without all hopes of
remedy, in their own Persons. We must die to sin; says the Scripture, since he
died for it, Romans 6. 6, 8, 11. And if we judge that he died for us, his love,
as well as our own danger, will constrain us not to live unto our selves, but
unto him that died for us, 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15.

Quest. We believe that he is now in Heaven at God's right Hand to present our
Prayers, and intercede for us, and procure whatsoever we stand in need of. What
effect ought this to have upon us?

Ans. Make us look up to him with affiance in his Patronage, and apply to God
by him with confidence in all our distresses. Having such an high priest now
passed into the heavens, says the Apostle, let us come boldly unto the throne
of grace, Heb. 4. 14.

Quest. We believe, that as by his Death he purchased, so in Heaven he is now
taking up, and preparing Mansions of Eternal Bliss, for all such holy Souls,
as, by purity of heart and life, are fit to partake of, and delight in them.
What must every Man of this belief do, to be true to his own sentiments?

Ans. Purify himself, that he may be meet to enjoy, and qualified to relish
the immaculate pleasures, of that pure, and spotless Place. Every man, that
has this hope in him, purifies himself, even as he is pure, 1 Jo. 3. 3.

Quest. We believe, that at the last day Christ will judge all men according to
their deeds, 2 Cor. 5. 10. Eternally rewarding all that are truly Pious,
Humble, Temperate, Just, True, and Peaceable; and eternally condemning all that
are otherwise. What should every Person do in common care and prudence, that is
fully persuaded of this?

Ans. Faithfully serve and fear God, who will call him to this strict account.
He should be sober, and watch unto prayer, 1. Pet. 4. 5, 7. and be temperate in
all things, 1 Cor. 9. 25. and owe nothing, but love, to any man, Romans 13. 8.
and follow peace with all men, and holiness; without which, no man shall see
the Lord, Heb. 12. 14.

Quest. We believe the Holy Ghost is ready to assist us in every good act, and
help all, that will use his aid, to be as Holy, as God requires they should be.
What would all, that seriously attend to this belief, do upon it?

Ans. Obey his motions, and concur with his assistances, and never wilfully do
any thing, that will forfeit the aid and influence, of so desirable, and
Divine a Guest, as he is. Have, that is, use Grace, that you may serve God
acceptably, Heb. 12. 28. Work out your own salvation, for it is God that
works in you, Phil. 2. 12, 13. and grieve not the Holy Spirit of God, Ephesians. 4.
30.

Quest. We believe the communion of Saints, which implies an obedient
submission and adherence to our common Rulers, and particularly a communion in
Prayers and Sacraments. What would God, or Men expect, from a Person of this
belief?

Ans. To keep the unity of the Church, and frequent the public Heb. 10. 25.
Assemblies, where these Saints are to meet, and unite in all Divine Offices.

Quest. So that to name no more, these Points of Belief already mentioned, if
duly attended to, would influence and act on all serious embracers of them,
into love of God, and Honor, and godly Fear, and make them rest contented in
all estates, and trust God with all Futurities, and have affiance in him in the
greatest Difficulties, and show patience and perseverance under the most
tedious Delays, and purify their Hearts and Lives, and render them universally
Righteous as God is, and keep them Holy, and Humble, and Temperate, and Just,
and Peaceable, thereby to come off well at the Great Day of Accounts. It would
cause them to love, honor, and obey their Savior Christ, and repent truly of
all their sins, and put them upon Prayers and Devotions, and keep them in the
unity of the Church, and the Public Assemblies, and make them encourage the
Grace of God, and join therewith their best endeavors, all which are only the
forecited particulars.

Ans. Yes, where a belief of these things is, these fruits may reasonably be
expected from it. For they naturally follow on such apprehensions, and
accordingly are ascribed to them, and intended to result from them in the Holy
Scriptures.

Quest. And as it appears in these, so I suppose it might be made appear, how
we are led on by some Points of Belief, to every other Point of Practice?

Ans. It might so, but I judge these to be abundantly enough.

Quest. But although all among us profess to believe these Principles, yet are
few thus affected with them, or influenced thereby into these practices.

Ans. Too true, alas! But therein they act most unreasonably, and are false to
their own persuasions. Whereas, if a Man has a real belief of these things, and
will both attend or dwell upon it, and be true to it, following on whither it
leads him; in its own natural tendency, and according to all reason, it would
affect and influence him, as has been declared. From this Faith, such Fruits
are reasonably to be expected; though where Men act out of reason, and either
forget themselves, or, to gratify some unlawful lusts, are wilfully false to
their own opinions, no such things will follow it.

Quest. If Faith be such a sertile Grace, and so apt to usher in all others;
though it be but one in the Root and Cause, yet in the Fruit and Effect it will
be all Virtues.

Ans. Very right, and so it is. What in Nature, Pleasure and Pain are among the
Passions; that in Religion, Faith is among the Graces, viz. the Source, Root,
and Groundwork of all the rest, which are only its different expressions,
according to its various Aspects, as it looks several ways, and is conversant
about several Objects. For as Pleasure, simply offered and apprehended, begets
Love; if offered as absent, especially as remote, it turns Desire; if as
attainable, chiefly when that attainment seems near, it becomes Hope; if as
attainable surely, Confidence: and as Pain does the like, with the Passions
opposite: So Faith, as I have observed, when it is of God's Precepts, turns
Obedience; when of his Threatenings, Fear and holy Awe; when of his Promises,
Hope and Trust; when the things promised are to be sought of him, it becomes
Prayers and Devotions; when they are delaied, Patience and Perseverance; when
they are bestowed and received, Thankfulness; when it is of his Providence, it
turns Contentedness; when of the horrible nature and effects of sin,
Repentance; when of the spotless rewards of the other World, purification of
our Hearts and Lives; when of the last Judgment, universal Innocence, that may
stand the trial of it; when of God's Purity and Perfection, Imitation of him,
or being Righteous as he is; when of Christ the Lord, and his Laws, keeping the
Commandments; when of the Holy Spirit, and his assistances, godly Care and good
Endeavors; when of the Communion of Saints, keeping Unity in the Church, and
attending Public Ordinances. So that according to several objects, and
occasions, this one Principle of Faith transforms it self into all shapes, and
becomes all Duties, which are all therefore ascribed to it in the Holy
Scriptures. As when it is said to quench the ^^ery darts of the wicked, Ephesians. 6.
16. to overcome the world, 1 Jo. 5. 4. to puri^ie the heart, Act. 15. 9. to be
the Grand Parent of all Righteous doings, which are therefore called an
obedience, or righteousness of faith, Romans 4. 11, 13, etc. 16. 26. And when the
good deeds of the best Men, such as Noah, Abraham, Moses, Daniel, etc. are
attributed to it, Heb. 11.

Quest. And is it from this effecting all Virtues, that it stands adorned with
all Privileges, and that such Promises are made to it when named alone, as are
due only to it, and all others in conjunction?

Ans. Yes, such as that thereby we are the children of God, Gal. 3. 26. and
abide in the Son, and in the Father, 1 John 2. 24. and have Christ dwelling in
us, Ephesians. 3. 17. That it justifies us, Romans 5. 1. makes us righteous, Romans 10.
10. gains the remission of sins, Romans 3. 25. saves us, Joh. 5. 24. All which,
though they manifestly require Repentance and Obedience, are yet in the places
cited ascribed to Faith, because, as opportunity serves, and objects call for
them, it is productive of them both.

Quest. You have fully showed what are those suitable affections, which Faith
is to work in us. And thereby I perceive plainly, that Faith with its suitable
effects, is the same in other words, with Faith and Repentance, which at first
you said was the way for Men to save their Souls. But will not Faith save us,
and be imputed unto us for Righteousness, till we are thus affected with it,
and act according to our persuasions?

Ans. No, without this it did not save good Men in old Times, nor will now save
us.

Quest. The Old Testament Worthies, both before the Flood and after, were
accounted Righteous, and saved by their Faith, as the Scripture Heb. 11.
testifies. But was not Faith accepted of them, unless it thus influenced and
affected them?

Ans. No, it is plain it was not, from the particular accounts of those Worthies.

Quest. Pray make that out in instances, which will be a clear proof in this
case.

Ans. First, Noah became Heir of the Righteousness by Faith, by believing, in a
sinful and secure Generation, that God would bring the general Flood upon the
World. But that was, when he feared, and acted as one so persuaded, or being
moved with fear, prepared an Ark at God's command, to the saving his own house
from it. By which Fear, and preparation of the Ark upon his Faith, as S. Paul
notes, he condemned the world, and became heir of the Righteousness which is by
faith, Heb. 11. ^.

Again, Moses was accepted, for believing the poor Israelites, who were then
all oppressed slaves in Egypt, to be for all that the People of God. But that
was, as in pursuance of that belief, he refused to be called the Son of
Pharaoh's Daughter, the greatest Honor and Worldly good he had in Egypt, and
chose rather to side, and bear affliction with them. Yea further, as at God's
command, and in confidence of his Presence with them, he forsook Egypt, not
fearing the wrath of the King, who, as he must needs think, would be most
highly incensed at his carrying away so great a Body of a Laborious, and
Drudging People from him, Heb. 11. 24, 25, 26, 27. His Faith is also cried up*
for believing God would pass over all the Houses of the Israelites, when he
went to slay all the firstborn among the Egyptians. But the acceptance of
this, as S. Paul notes, was as through that Faith he obeyed God, to keep the
Passover, and the sprinkling of blood upon the lintel, and the two side posts
of their Doors, which God had made the condition, and Exodus 12. 22, 23.
token of their being preserved, verse 28. It Is celebrated, lastly, for
believing God's Exodus 14. 16.
Promise to divide the waters of the red sea, and make them stand as a Wall on
either side, till he was passed over. But all the Praise of this belief, was as
in virtue of it, he ventured himself and People, betwixt those Mountains of
Water, and passed through as if it had been dry land, as God directed, verse 29.

Thirdly, The Harlot Rahab was preserved as S. Paul, and justified as S. James
says, for believing that the Josh. 2. 9, 10, 11.
God of Israel was stronger than all Gods, and had given Jericho to the
Israelites. But that, as we are expressly told, was only as in pursuance of that
belief, she turned to that side, which she saw God espoused, and concealed the
spies, and sent them away in peace, James 2. 25. and Heb. 11. 3^.

Lastly, Abraham, whilst he Act. 7. 2.
dwelt in Mesopotamia, accepted for believing, that Genesis 12. 1, 2.
God would give him another land, wherein he should grow to be a great nation.
But that was, when in virtue of that belief, at God's command he left his own
country, and obeyed to wander, not knowing whither he went, in search of that
Seat and Inheritance, which God had chosen for him, Heb. 11. 8. He was
especially justified for believing God, when he promised Genesis 15. 5, 6. etc.
21. 12.
to make his Son Isaac a numerous, and blessed people. But this was, as in
Power of that Faith he stuck at nothing, but at God's command readily offered
him up when he was tried, accounting that God was able to raise him up, even
from the dead, to verify that Promise to him, Heb. 11. 17, 18, 19. His
offering up Isaac in virtue of that Faith, fulfilled that Scripture, which
says, Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for Righteousness, as S.
James says, Jam. 2. 21, 23.

Quest. I see plainly from these instances, that Faith when it had these
suitable effects, was the thing God imputed for Righteousness to the Old
Testament Worthies. They were all Righteous through Faith, not whilst Faith was
only an idle belief, and speculative Notion, but when they feared, and acted,
as any rational and considerate Man would do under such persuasions. What have
you to add more, to show the same of us Christians?

Ans. The Faith that will avail and save us, we are plainly told, is a Faith
that

1. Affects our Hearts, and renews all within us. It must beget Hope and Trust
in God, the Devils faith being rejected, because they only tremble at God's
Word, and dare not trust it will do them any good, Jam. 2. 19. It must produce
Charity, which, says S. Paul, Romans 13. 10.
fulfils the Law of the Second Table, and leads into every other Duty. For
Charity is the end of the Law, out of faith unfeigned, 1 Timothy 1. 5. and the
Faith which avails to the hope of righteousness, is a Faith which works by
love, Gal. 5. 5, 6. In sum, lastly, it must cleanse the Heart, whence, as our
Savior observes, Matthew. 15. 18, 19.
all evil does proceed, purging out the Old Man of Pride, Anger, Envy, Lust,
etc. and planting therein the New Man of Humble, Pious, Pure, and Virtuous
Tempers in its stead: purifying the heart, as S. Peter says, Act. 15. 9. and 1
Pet. 1. 21, 22.

2. Reforms our Practice. The Numbers that believed acceptably, turned unto the
Lord, says S. Luke, Act. 11. 21. The Faith which avails, works by love,
says S. Paul, Gal 5. 6* it overcomes the world, says S. John, 1 Jo. 5. 4. it
makes us free from sin, says our Savior, Jo. 8. 32. It must carry us on to
good deeds, as it did Abraham to leave his country, Heb. 11. 8. and to
sacrifice his son, Jam. 2. 21, 22. and as it did Rahab to receive the spies,
verse 25. A working Faith is the only Faith that lives; for faith without works
is dead, Jam. 2. 20. as the body without the spirit is dead, so is faith
without works dead, verse 26. It is the only Faith that profits; for if a man
say he has faith, and have not works, what does it profit? verse 14. It is the
only Faith that saves, and justifies. If a man shows faith without works, can
faith save him? Abraham was justified by works, verse 21. and Rahab was
justified by works, verse 25. ye see then, how that by works a man is justified
together with Faith; and not by faith only, verse 24.

Quest. If there is no Justification by any Faith, but what reforms the heart
and practice, I perceive in the question of Justification, we must no longer
oppose Faith and Obedience, but take care to secure both, it being, as S. Paul
says, a working faith, or, as S. James, faith and works together, that
justifies us.

Ans. Very right.

Quest. But does not S Paul, when he speaks of our justification, say it is by
says without the deeds of the law? Romans 3. 28.

Ans. Those deeds, are the deeds of the Jewish Law, chiefly such distinguishing
ones, as Circumcision, Sacrifices, Jewish Holy Days, and observing the Mosaic
differences of clean and unclean Meats. These, some Zelots for Moses pressed
upon the Gentile-Converts in many Churches, saying, Except ye be circumcised
after the manner of Moses, ye cannot be saved, Act. 15. 1. And when some
started up at Rome, to press the necessity of the same to Justification there,
S. Paul opposes all such deeds, and tells them they must not seek to be
justified as Jews, but as Christians. So what he rejects, are Mosaic deeds, or
any others under such qualifications, as the Jews obtruded, and cried up for
Righteousness.

Quest. Pray what are those?

Ans. First, They set up a mere Humane Righteousness, in outward Acts. This is
Righteousness in Civil Courts, where the Judges are Men, that cannot see the
Heart, but judge and pronounce according to Overt-Actions. And the Law of Moses
being the Law of their Commonwealth, whose Breaches were triable in their own
Courts; they esteemed themselves Righteous in the eye of their Law, as the
World does in case of other Political and State Laws, when they are not liable
to be brought in Trouble, or Indicted upon them before any of their own
Tribunals. This sense of their Legal Righteousness, was current Vid. Grot. on
Matthew. 5. 20.
among the Doctors. And Josephus, a learned Jew, who lived and flourished in
the Apostles own Days, asserts it in no less an instance, than that of
Sacrilege: Antiq. l. 12. c. 13.
wondering at Polybius, an otherwise Praiseworthy Writer, as he says, for
ascribing God's exemplary Vengeance on Antiochus Epiphanes, to his Sacrilege
only designed upon the Temple at Elymais. Whereas, says he, If he only
intended, but did not execute and effect it, he did not deserve to be punished
for it. And accordingly, in S. Paul's accounts of the Jewish Righteousness, he
is careful still to call it a Romans 4. 2, 6. and c. 9* 31, 32. Gal. 2. 16.
Justification, or Righteousness of works, as consisting only in things brought
on to act and practice. And measuring themselves thus only by External acts, as
cognizable before Humane Courts; the orderly Livers among them, made no more
scruple of asserting their Righteousness in the Eye of their Law, than any good
Subjects do in pleading their innocence as to the Laws of them several
Countries. As we find the young man did to our Savior, when he posed him upon
the Ten Commandments, saying, all these things have I kept from my youth up,
Matthew. 19. 18, 19, 20. And as S. Paul did, in setting off his Jewish
Confidences, saying, That touching the Righteousness, which is in the Law, he
was blameless, i. e. not to be blamed before any of their Tribunals, Phil. 3. 6.

Quest. But did not some things in the Jewish Law, extend to Men's Hearts and
Spirits. Particularly among the Ten Commandments, is there not One, viz. the
Tenth, which forbids all inward coveting of what is our Neighbors?

Ans. Yes, but there being no notice taken of these, nor punishments inflicted
for them in their Courts, the Doctors, as may appear from what I have said,
looked on them rather as Counsels of Perfection, than strict Laws of
Righteousness. Or if as Laws, yet such, the Breaches whereof were sufficiently
atoned by their Daily, or Annual Sacrifices: which sanctified, as S. Paul
says, to the purging of the flesh; i. e. to indemnifie them before Men as to
their Carnal, Secular Interests; though not to clear them before God, or make
them perfect as pertaining to the conscience, Heb. 9. 9, 13.

Quest. What other Qualifications did the Jews cry up in those Works, which
they depended on to make them Righteous?

Ans* Secondly, Their merits. For they set up a proud, boastful Righteousness,
which should challenge the reward by way of merit and equivalence: not being
content to reap all the Benefit, unless they could also arrogate all the Glory
and Honor of it to themselves.

Quest. Whereon could they pretend to erect this?

Ans. On two Foundations. First, The Power of natural free will, affirming
their good deeds to be wrought in virtue of their own strength, without which,
whatever Glory there might be in them, it could be none of theirs. They thought
they had Ability enough, for all the Righteous works they were to do, upon the
stock of Nature: and needed no inward and enlivening Grace, but a mere external
Revelation, or dead Letter, as their Law is styled in 2 Cor. 3. 6.
Scripture. And all this Power, they ascribe to Natural free will since the
fall. For the good, which Adam did before it, See Mr. Smith's Discourse on
Legal Righteousness, c. 2.
say they, was as a pure intelligence, out of necessity of Nature. But his
eating of the forbidden tree, of the Knowledge of good and ill, brought him,
and his Posterity, down to free will, or an indifferency to either. Which
liberty, they make most absolute ever since: and accordingly interpret that
common saying among them, All things are in the Hand of God, but the fear of
God, to note such absoluteness of our free will to good, as has nothing to
control it.

Secondly, On the intrinsic worth and value of their own deeds, making them to
deserve Heaven by way of equivalence. They were the great affecters, and
aspirers after merits, See Mr. Smith, ibid.
saying, That happiness by way of reward, is far greater, and more magnificent,
than by way of mercy. And they were the great asserters of them, claiming the
reward on such deeds, as To. 11. 6.
excluded grace, and were aimed all for Ephesians. 2. 8, 9.
boasting, as S. Paul says of them. And several Rules of estimate and valuation
they had, to secure this to themselves: Mr. Smith, ib. c. 3.
one was, from the number and tale of their good deeds, if they had but done
one more good, than bad actions, to make their merits preponderate their
demerits. Another was, from their weight and importance, if they had either the
Skill, or good Fortune, to make choice of such, as God set most by, which might
be put in the Scale against several others. Nay, such in their account was the
desert of every good work, if they continued to keep any one of their Sixteen
hundred and thirteen Precepts, out of Love to it, and not from any worldly
respect, though at the same time the rest were neglected. Or if, when they had
nothing else to produce, they could but say they were the natural Seed of
Abraham, (a ground of Jewish confidence taxed by Mat. 3. 7, 8, 9.
S. John the Baptist) and were literally circumcised, they thought there was
enough in them to merit the future reward. And being thus liberal in
undervaluing what came from God; and over-valuing what they did for him: whilst
they thus set their own rates, they were sure not to want desert enough for the
greatest recompenses. Yea, so far, as to make out their common saying, that all
Israelites shall have a portion in the world to come. And for all these things,
sufficient testimonies are produced by learned Men out of their own Writings.

Quest. So that I perceive the Jewish deeds, set up for Righteousness by their
Doctors, were the deeds of their own Law, especially those distinguishing Laws,
which were peculiar to themselves. And those not any secret and spiritual, but
only external acts, such as fell under the cognizance of their own Courts of
Justice. Which were cried up for Righteousness, as performed in virtue of their
own strength, and meriting the reward by their own worth and excellence.

Ans. Very right. And the asserters of such works, must needs be under a great
surprise, to hear of Justification by Gospelduties. Extending not only to
Overt-Acts, but their Hearts, and Spirits; which were to be performed by the
help of God's inward Grace; and rewarded through Christ's merits, and God's
merciful acceptance. And their way of meriting acceptance, by mere external
Mosaic works, performed in virtue of their own free will and Humane strength,
being in all its points a way of their own setting up, but disowned and
rejected by God, S. Paul calls their own Righteousness: and opposes to the
other, of being esteemed Righteous through Christ's merits, and God's merciful
acceptance, on Faith and Obedience to the Gospel, wrought by the help of God's
Grace; which he calls God's Righteousness, and the Righteousness of faith,
Phil. 3. 9. and Romans 10. 3, 5, 6.

Quest. Do the Apostles, in their disputes of Justification with the Jews, set
themselves to beat down these points?

Ans. Yes, and more especially S. Paul, both at Rome, and Galatia, and other
places. For in this matter they declare, how Romans 3. 20. Gal. 2. 14, 15, 16.
by the works of the Law, shall no flesh be justified, so that the Gentiles
must not live like Jews: but only by faith and obedience of Christ, or Gal. 5.
6.
faith working by love, so that the natural Jews must live as Christians. That
this Obedience avails, when it is not only with the outward, but also with the
inward Man, containing together with the external Practice, a Romans 12. 1, 2.
renewal of the mind, a Romans 2. 28, 29.
circumcision of the heart and spirit, and a Gal. 6. 15.
new creature. That it is wrought in us, not through mere humane strength, but
the internal grace of God, so as to be truly the Gal. 5. 22.
fruit of ^he Spirit, and the Tit. 3. 5.
renewal of the Holy Ghost. And that the Gospel offering such inward Grace is
thereupon a 2 Cor. 3. 6, 7, 8, 9.
ministry of the Spirit, and a ministration of Righteousness: but that the Law
wanting it, is therefore only an external Revelation, a ministration of the
letter, of death, and condemnation, which seeing it Gal. 3. 21, 22. etc. 5. 5.
could not give the life it required, but only an outward direction how to lead
it, therefore Righteousness could not come by it. That this is counted
Righteousness, only in virtue of Redemption by Christ, and of the merit of his
Sacrifice, first purchasing the Romans 4. 6, 7, 8. and 3. 25.
pardon of our sins, and then the acceptance of our services: Romans 10. 4.
Christ being the end of the law for Righteousness, and we Romans 3. 24, 25.
being justified through the redemption that is in Jesus, whose blood is a
propitiation for our sins, and 1 Cor. 1. 30.
who is made to us of God redemption, and righteousness. That in him, God
accepts and rewards it, not for its own merits, but out of his mere bounty and
free grace, without, and infinitely beyond its deserts. We To. 3. 24.
being justified freely, by his grace. And that this way, as God's free Grace
is exalted, so all Jewish To. 3 27. Ephesians. 2. 8, 9.
boasts are excluded. Lastly, instead of the Jewish barter and exchange, in
weighing out good against bad actions, or merits against demerits; they tell
us, that he who continues to Jam. 2. 10.
offend in one point, is as liable to be condemned, though not to so sore a
punishment, as he that is guilty of all. And that he, who sincerely endeavors
to keep all, after Luke 17, 10.
he has done the most, must say he has done no more than his duty, and is still
an unprofitable servant. All which, with sundry others, every where observable
by any careful peruser of the Apostolical Writings, are directly levelled
against the foresaid Jewish Tenets.

Quest. And such Jewish Deeds, you say, are the deeds of the law, which S. Paul
opposes, Romans 3. 28.

Ans. Yes.

Quest. Indeed the Apostles Disputation there of Justification, is evidently
against the Jews.

Ans. Yes, and the way whereby they sought to be justified, was by the Law of
Moses. That they cried up, as the great Rule, and Dispensation of
Righteousness, and Perfection: they stumbled, as he declares, at that stumbling
stone, Romans 9. 31, 32. And they looked to be justified by it, in virtue and
merit of their own works, as I have showed, not through the merit of Christ's
Sacrifice, and the Grace of God pardoning their offenses: which made S. Paul
declare to all, who would be justified by the Law, that Christ was become of
none effect to them, and that they were fallen from grace, Gal. 5. 2, 4.

Quest. But is it clear he speaks of such Jewish deeds?

Ans. Yes, because, as I say, such were set up by the Jews, against whom he
argues. Nay, as he adds, they were such, as would make it necessary for all Men
to turn Jews. For that way, says he, God would be the God of the Jews only, and
not of the Gentiles, verse 29. Besides, they are such works, as are a ground of
Ephesians. 2. 8, 9.
boasting, verse 27. and make the reward reckoned out of debt or desert,
without grace, or being beholden for it, Romans 4. 4. excluding grace, as being
inconsistent with it, Romans 11. 6. And so the Jews believed, and taught of
theirs, accounting Heaven a just and deserved Wages for their works, without
any need of Redemption by Christ's Sacrifice, as I have already showed.

Quest. And S. Paul, though he denies such Jewish works, asserts works after
the Christian Faith, wrought in us by God's Grace, and accepted through
Christ's Sacrifice, to justify and make us Righteous?

Ans. Yes, in the very same Verse, wherein he rejects the Law of works; that
is, Jewish works, he declares we are justified by another Law, viz. the Law of
Faith, in performing what it imposes, Romans 3. 27. And the Faith, which avails
to Righteousness in Christ Jesus, he says, is a working Faith, Gal. 5. 6. And
the same S. Paul speaking of the Faith, which justified the Ancient Worthies,
particularly notes those correspondent Affections and Practices, which it
produced in them to make them Righteous. As Noah's holy fear, and obedience in
building of the Ark, though all the while he was laughed at for his pains, by a
merry and secure World; and Moses's quitting the highest hopes and honors of
Egypt, to associate with the persecuted People of God; and Abraham's leaving
his Country, and sacrificing his Son at God's command; and all the other
instances abovementioned.

Quest. By what you have said, I plainly perceive, that a working Faith, or a
Faith that suitably influences and affects us, is the Faith that always did,
and always must recommend Men to Almighty God* Which, when the Scripture
contents it self barely to imply the effects, it simply calls Faith; when it
would speak out, and express both, it calls Faith and Repentance.

Ans. Very right.

Quest. But since all Faith does not atchieve these noble feats, and all Graces
do not grow upon this single stock in all Believers; Pray what are the great
properties, that fit Faith for these effects, and distinguish the Faith of
those that show these Fruits, from the Faith of those that want them?

Ans. They are reducible, I think, to these Two, the sincerity, and the
strength of it.

Quest. What mean you by the sincerity of this Faith?

Ans. First, That it be real and unfeigned. Not a mere pretense of Faith, under
which Infidels may disguise themselves among Christians, to be trusted or
employed. Nor a mere outside profession, which unthinking Men may choose and put
on, as they do their Clothes, without looking for any further reason, than to
be in the fashion, and which they can as easily and readily alter again, as
they do their Habit, when the Mode shall turn. But a real, inward belief and
persuasion. It is an unfeigned Faith, that S. Paul commends in Timothy, 2 Timothy
1. 5. and an unfeigned Faith, out of which flows charity, 1 Timothy 1. 5. and the
Faith or Wisdom, which makes Men pure and peaceable, etc. says S. James, is
without Hypocrisy, Jam. 3. 17. So that they are never like to be fruitful
Believers, who follow Jesus, as some Jews did, only to run in with the Crowd,
or for the sake of the Loaves, more than out of inward Convictions.

Secondly, That it be Hearty and Affectionate. Not a mere speculative Opinion,
and careless Notion, as of things wherein we are not much interested: but a
moving and influencing persuasion, wherewith all the powers of the Soul are
affected. Our Opinions must form our Passions, and advance into Love, Desire,
Hope, Fear, Care, Endeavor, and the like, according to the different nature
and power of the things believed. The Belief that saves, says S. Paul, is a
Belief with the heart, as well as with the head, Romans 10. 9. And the Faith,
which avails to Righteousness, works by love, Gal. 5* 5, 6. And therefore they
are never like to prove fruitful Believers, who read and credit the Story of
Jesus, and the things of Christianity, as they would the Story of Caesar or
Alexander, of the Assyrian or Persian Empire, as things, that are very remote
in Place, or Time, and, being of little concern to them, do not much either
delight, or afflict them. Such indifferent and unconcerned Believers, are like
to make no better than Christian News-mongers, whose Christian Faith furnishes
them only to talk and tell stories.

Quest. Besides this sincerity, is it necessary to a saving and effective
Faith, that there be moreover a good degree of strength and firmness in it?

Ans. Yes, for such a strong Faith it was, that made Abraham, and other Holy
Men, obey God, whereupon they were accepted. Abraham, says the Scripture, was
not weak or sickly, but strong in Faith, whereby he gave glory unto God, Romans
4. 19, 20. the Faith that fits us for Christian Privileges, and the Blessings
of Baptism, as Philip told the Eunuch, is a belief with all the heart, Act. 8.
37. If good Fruits do not spring from Faith, it is because there is but little
of it; why take ye thought, O ye of little faith? Matthew. 6. 30. and 8. 26. or
because there is very small, or no life in it, Faith being as dead, as the body
is without the spirit, when it stands alone, and no vital motions or effects
stream from it, Jam. 2. 17, 20, 26.

Quest. I perceive this strength of Faith, is necessary to enable it to do its
work and conquer all that does oppose it. But in what does this strength
consist?

Ans. In three things especially. 1. That it be assured and confident. 2. That
it be honest, or seated in one that makes conscience of being just to his word.
3. That it be resolute.

Quest. Must the Faith, that produces these suitable effects, be assured and
confident?

Ans. Yes, for a wavering Opinion will not accomplish its work. It must make us
forego many grateful things, and undergo many ungrateful ones, and attempt many
that are very difficult and laborious. And Men will not run these ventures, and
bear these losses, on uncertain hopes, but only on firm and certain
expectations. And therefore right and acceptable Believers are exhorted to draw
near to God with full assurance of faith, and to hold fast their profession
without wavering, Heb. 10. 22, 23. and to show diligence, to the full assurance
of hope t^ the end, Heb. 6. 11. And half Faith, makes such Believers to be like
King Agrippa, only half and almost Christians, Act. 26. 28.

Quest. Must it also be honest, that is, have a ^^^d Conscience accompanying
it, and be seated in one, who is careful to be just to his word?

Ans. Yes, as it implies the owning of Doctrines and Propositions, so it leads
to engage in Promises and Undertakings, the good performance whereof includes
not only Understanding and Knowledge, but also Honesty and good Conscience. So
that a fruitful Faith must not be a bare skilfulness in Opinion, but also a
trustiness and integrity in discharging a Profession. It effects Obedience only
in just and upright tempers, that make Conscience to perform their promises, to
fulfill their pretenses, and answer all just expectations. Among all those
several sorts of hearers, by whom it was received, the word believed brought
forth fruit only in an honest and good heart, as our Lord himself notes, Luke
8. 15. And to draw us near to God, with a full assurance of faith, we must join
a true heart, and a clean conscience, Heb. 10. 22. and the charity, which the
Law requires, flows then only from an unfeigned faith, when it is accompanied
with a pure heart, and a good conscience, 1 Timothy 1. 5. And therefore in Simon
Magus it bore no Fruit, because his heart was not right in the sight of God,
Act. 8. 13, 21. So that we must not wonder, if we see a crew Faith prove
barren, and producing no obedience, in a dishonest, and false Man. Since it is
not Faith alone, but Honesty that must make a Man careful to remember, and
perform his undertaking, and false unjust Persons, how right soever they may be
in their belief and apprehensions, will be as like to break their word with
God, as they are with their Neighbors.

Quest. Must it also, lastly, be resolute, and fully fixed after all things are
well considered: That so, when any hardships arise in the way of Faith, we may
not be soon staggered in mind, and put to deliberate anew, whether or no to go
on in it?

Ans. Yes, when they want this resolvedness, Men are not like to hold on in a
way of difficulties, and such as do every where occur in Faiths race. Every
true Believer must have cast up all the cost, and pains of his way beforehand,
as our Savior tells us in the Parables of the wise builder, and of the king
going to war, Luke 14. 28, 31. They must stand prepared to run all hazards, and
sustain all losses, setting Faith above all things else, and resolving to stick
to it, whatever prove its trials and discouragements. And such Believers as
these, the Scripture calls grounded, and settled in the faith, Col. 1. 23. and
rooted, built up, and established in it, Col. 2. 7. And the believers, or
receivers of the word, who fell off in tribulation, are said to have had no
root in themselves, Matthew. 13. 21. A deliberate resolution is a sure
Groundwork, and what is built on that may be like to stand a Storm, and after
all the Assaults that are made upon it, remain unshaken.

Quest. So that the Faith, whereon all the forementioned Fruits are like to
grow, must not be a mere pretense of Faith, but sincere and undissembled; it
must not be ^n empty profession, and formal outside, out inward in the
apprehension of the mind; ^t must not be a wavering Opinion, but confident, and
well assured; it must not ^e a speculative, cool, and unmoving Notion, but
hearty, concerning, and affectionate; it must not be in a careless, forgetful,
and failing, but in a conscientiously careful, just, and performing Man; it
must not act on an irresolute heart, which will be easily daunted, or soon
staggered, but one, that upon good reason, and after due deliberation, is fully
fixed, and resolved to follow it.

Ans. Yes, the Faith that influences the Heart and Life, and stands in all
times and trials, must be thus qualified. And the Faith, which is either
dissembled, formal, wavering, unaffecting, careless, or irresolute, some one or
other of which the Faith of all Sinners is, is like to have no such Blessed
Fruits proceeding from it: As Simon Magus's had not, whose heart was not right;
^or Agrippa's, whose Faith was but almost; ^or the Temporary Believers, whose
faith ^ell away because it wanted root. So that these different attendants, and
various qualifications of Faith, make the difference in its Fruits and Effects,
and distinguish the Faith of Saints from the Faith of Sinners.

Quest. It has been often said of Faith by some, that it is an act of
Recumbency, or leaning and rolling our selves on Christ for Salvation. Are such
Phrases applicable to Faith in a literal, and common understanding of them?

Ans. No, for Faith is an act of our Spirits, and though Bodies lean and rest
on Bodies, yet Spirits have none of these Bodily Gestures, and Affections. When
such words are used in expressing mental acts, they are Metaphors, which are
applied to them on account of some Similitude and Resemblance?

Quest. What acts can the Faith of a Man's mind exert about a Person, which may
answer these forms of recumbing, or leaning upon him?

Ans. Either Believing some Doctrine which he teaches, or relying on some
Promise which he makes. These may be set off by the acts of recumbing, leaning,
and rolling. For as these are ways of Bodies resting, and depending; so are
those of a Man's mind's doing the same upon any Person. They acquiesce and rest
on his Judgment, in what he says; and on his Fidelity, in what he promises:
which gives them the same ease and settlement, as the acts of rolling, leaning,
and recumbing do to Bodies.

Quest. Faith is also called by some, the hand of the Soul, that reaches at,
and apprehends and applies Christ's Merits. What is there in this Spiritual
Grace, that can answer these expressions?

Ans. Reaching at them, is assenting to some Propositions about them. And
laying hold of and applying them, is consenting and complying with some
Overtures, or fulfilling some terms and conditions, whereby they become our
own. Putting out these mental acts has the same effect and use to our Souls, as
stretching out the hand to apprehend and apply things has to our Bodies, that
is, to bring the thing desired down to our selves.

Quest. So that to roll and lean upon Jesus Christ, is in plain English only to
believe what he says, and to rely upon what he promises. And to apprehend, or
lay hold on Christ, and apply his Merits, in clearer and more intelligible
Language, is only to fulfill the Gospel-terms, or to have Faith with its
forecited effects, that is, to believe and repent, whereby his benefits become
ours.

Quest. Yes, that I take to be the true meaning and explication of these
obscure Phrases. I confess I am a great lover of plain, and intelligible
Speech. And above all things else, I love to hear Men speak plain in the great
Truths of Religion, and Points of Salvation, wherein there is the most need of
all to inform, and edify Men's understandings. And therefore I heartily wish
these dark, and intricate words were less used, or wholly laid aside in these
important matters, they being words of Men's invention, which the Holy Scripture
no where uses about them, and such words too, as I am sure do more amuse, than
instruct those that hear them. But if any think fit still to use them, or meet
with Faith set off by them in Books or Discourses, this, and no more, in a true
sense, and in plain intelligible English, I think is the meaning of them.

Quest. If Faith in Christ be a Faith in his Word, then is it no part of Faith
for any Man to believe his sins are pardoned, nor of Infidelity to doubt of it,
because particular Men have no word of his for that?

Ans. Very right. He tells us in the general he will pardon Penitents, but in
his Word he has not descended to tell particular Men they are truly Penitent,
having reserved that to be declared at the last judgment. Besides, every Man
must have true Faith before he can be pardoned, Faith and Repentance being the
conditions of Pardon. But no Man must believe his sins are pardoned before they
are pardoned, since that were plainly to believe a falsehood.

Quest. But since all doubting of the Pardon of our Sins, and the Favor of
God, implies distrust, how will it stand with Faith in God?

Ans. The belief that our Sins are pardoned, implies our trust and confidence
of two things. One is, of God's Power and Fidelity, in fulfilling his Promises.
The other is, of sufficiency of our own care, in performing his Terms. Now
Faith implies trust, and confidence, only in the former of these.

Quest. Is Faith only a confidence, and trust in God, not in our selves, and
implies a good opinion only of his Power and Faithfulness, but not of our own
fitness?

Ans. Yes, and so of Abraham it is said, when he believed, That he gave glory
to God, Romans 4. 20. His Faith consisted, as the Apostle notes, in what regarded
him: he being counted righteous for believing, that what God had promised, he
was fully able to perform, verse 21. When once Men have the greatest assurance
of those Divine Properties, they are said to have the greatest Faith, though at
the same time they think meanly, and are most distrustful of themselves. So the
good Centurion was, having such confidence in Christ's Power, that he thought a
word of his mouth would recover his Son, without giving him the trouble to come
in person: and at the same time thinking so meanly of himself, that he judged
his house unworthy to receive him. And of this Christ declares, I have not
found so great faith, no not in Israel, Matthew. 8. 8, 10.

Quest. I perceive it is no part of any Man's Faith, to believe his sins are
pardoned, nor of Infidelity to doubt of it. But though such doubts are not the
sin of Infidelity against God, yet are they not always sinful, and blameworthy
upon some other account?

Ans. No, but oft-times expressions of virtue, and serve to recommend us the
more to God; as being acts of humility and self-abasement, of modesty and
poverty of Spirit, which set no Man further off, but bring him nearer, and
interest him the more in his favor. The fearful humble Publican, who durst not
presume on any favor, but with dejected eyes stood afar off, went home
justified of God, rather than the proud Pharisee, who justified himself. Upon
which our Savior adds, that every one, who exalts himself, shall be abased;
and every one, that humbles himself, shall be exalted, Luke 18. 10. to 15. God
is nigh, says the Psalmist, to the broken of heart, and contrite of spirit,
Psalm. 34. 18. He dwells with the contrite, and humble spirit, to revive the
spirit of the humble, and revive the heart of the contrite ones, Isaiah 57. 15.
He looks to him that is poor, and of a contrite spirit, and trembles at his
word, Isaiah 66. 2. to lift up those, that humble themselves in his sight,
James 4. 10. and to bless the poor in spirit, Matthew. 5. 3. Indeed, dejection,
sadness, and tormenting fears, are a backner of good endeavors; and accuse
God, as if he were an hard, uncomfortable Master, very difficult to please; and
Religion, as if it were a sour, melancholy service: so that faithful hearts
must not affect, or harbor fear to these degrees. But when they maintain a
comfortable hope, it is generally more commendable to lean to the side of humble
fear, than of arrogant self-flattery, to be too lowly and modest, rather than
too presumptuous and boasting.

Quest. And is it not more safe too?

Ans. Yes, fear begets care, whereas security slackens watchfulness, and abates
endeavor. And therefore the Apostle advises those, who would expect to stand,
not to think highly, but fear, Romans 11* 20. and to work out their salvation
with fear, Phil. 2. 12, 13. And he was a wise Man that said, Happy is he that
fears always, but he that hardneth his heart against fear, shall fall into
mischief, Prove. 28. 14. The wisest, and the best way generally is, to be fully
assured of what concerns God, but fearful and jealous of what depends upon our
selves.

Quest. But have not some good Men, great confidence of God's favor? And since
that is the privilege of the most consummate Saints, and gives the greatest
Gal. 5. 22. Psalm. 37. 37.
peace and Romans 15. 13.
joy in God, and comfort in believing, which the Scripture speaks of: must it
not be a most justifiable, as it is really a most blessed and desirable thing?

Ans. Yes, if their confidence is not beyond their grounds, and under this
comfortable assurance of their present claim to Happiness, they preserve an
humble sense of their own defects and unworthiness, and a fear of their falling
from it by afterfailures. And this comfortable assurance is vouchsafed to some
extraordinary good Souls, as their special privilege; as fears and doubts are
continued to others, for their exercise. And different Persons are either
indulged more happy enjoyment from God, or so exercised as to make them more
acceptable and dear to him, both these ways.

Quest. You have said enough to explain the nature, and to set off the
excellency and usefulness of Faith. But lest after we have taken the pains to
walk by it, it should fail all our expectations in the end; pray show me
something of the certainty of it.

Ans. That depends on the Authority of Jesus Christ, who is the Author of our
Faith. And all must needs be true that he Says, and sure that he Promises;
because he is the true Messiah, or the Christ of God, who was to come as his
Great Prophet, to make known his mind unto the World.

CHAP. II. That Jesus is the Christ, from Ancient Prophecies.
The Contents.
Among those Prophecies, which prove Jesus to be the Christ, First, Some
prescribe the time of his coming. This they mark out by the nearness of such
notable Occurrences, and Revolutions, as would fall under all Men's observation.
And by fixing the very Year he should appear in. Accordingly there was a
general expectation of him at that time. His coming not put off beyond the time
appointed, for the sins of the People. An account, why the Jews, who read these
clear Notes of the time in their own Prophets, are not convinced by them.
Secondly, Others assign man* peculiar, and visible Notes, whereby he may be
demonstratively pointed out from all other Men. As, 1. His being born of a
Virgin. This in some sense spoken of a Virgin of that time, but principally of
Messiah, and then only fully accomplished, when Jesus came. This cleared from
exceptions. 2. His having the Spirit of Miracles, resting on him. 3. His Death,
with the particular manner, and circumstances of it. And his returning to Life
again. 4. His putting an end to the Jewish Sacrifices and Mosaic Covenant, and
bringing in a New one, and a better, to supply its defects. 5. His erecting an
Universal Empire, and appearing as a mighty King. This not a Secular, but
Spiritual Kingdom. 6. His converting the Heathen World, from their
Idol-worship. Jesus silenced the Oracles, and cast the impure Spirits out of
their Temples. This an Argument for him, not only as accomplishing a
Prediction, but also as it is plainly a Divine thing. The Prophecies of an
Universal Probity, and Peace under Messiah, cleared up, by an account both of
their meaning, and accomplishment. The forecited Prophecies understood of
Messiah by the Ancient Jews, though denied by some later in hatred to our Jesus.

Question. HOW does it appear, that Jesus, who was born of Mary, and suffered
under Pontius Pilate, is the Christ?

Ans. First, From ancient Prophecies. Secondly, From undoubted Divine
Testimonies other ways.

Quest. Does this appear from ancient Prophecies?

Ans. Yes, and by these S. Paul endeavored to convince the Jews at Rome,
persuading them concerning Jesus, both out of the Law of Moses, and out of the
Prophets, Act. 28. 23.

Quest. How do these Prophecies demonstrate him?

Ans. Two ways. 1. By prescribing the exact time of his coming. 2. By assigning
many peculiar, and most visible Notes, whereby he may be demonstratively
pointed out from all other Men.

Quest. How do they prefix the exact time for Messiah's coming?

Ans. By sundry notable, and public turns and occurrences, which would be
remarked by all, and in judging whereof they could not be mistaken.

Quest. I pray you name them.

Ans. 1. They say he shall come before the People of the Jews cease to be a
Nation, and a Body Politic: which now they are ceased to be, having no
Country, or Commonwealth, which they can call their own, but for above 1600
years, ever since the destruction of Jerusalem, living scattered, and dispersed
in every Country and Kingdom. And this notable alteration, which all the World
must observe, because thereby it lost a Nation that bore a great name, and, by
using most appropriate and separate rites, made a peculiar Figure among them,
is expressly set out by the Patriarch Jacob, as a sign to follow the coming of
Messiah. The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between
his feet, that is, the Nation of the Jews denominated from Judah, shall not
cease to have Government among them as a Civil State, and the Benefit of their
own Laws, till Shil^ come, Genesis 49. 10.

Quest. What other notable sign do they give of this time?

Ans. Secondly, They say his coming shall be, whilst the second Temple is yet
standing; which has been ruinated and demolished, ever since the City was
destroyed by Titus Vespasian. The Lord whom you seek, the messenger of the
covenant, shall suddenly come to his temple, says God by Malachi, Mal. 3. 1.
And of the second Temple, says he again by Haggai, I will shake all nations,
and the desire of all Nations shall come, and fill this house with glory, that
is, with the Glory of his Presence, Hag. 2. 7. This presence of Messiah in
resorting to it, was that, which was to make the glory of this later house,
greater than the glory of the former house, verse 9. It was much inferior to
it, in respect of the Magnificence of Building: Is it not in your eyes, who
have seen the glory of the former house, says God, in comparison of it, as
nothing? verse 3. And when the Priests, and Levites, and Fathers, that were
ancient Men, and had seen the first house, saw the Foundation of it laid,
whilst others, who had not seen the former, shouted for joy, they wept,
remembering the disproportion, Ezra 3. 12. And under it Five noble privileges,
viz. the Ark of the Covenant, whence God gave Exodus 25. 21, 22.
Responses by audible Voices; the Number. ^7. 21.
Urim and Thummim, that Oracle for the miraculous Instruction of the
High Priest, when he consulted God on any State-concern; the Lev. 9. 23, 24.
fire from heaven upon the altar, to consume the Sacrifice; the 1 King. 8. 11.
and Ps. 80. 1.
Schechinah, or Divine Presence in the Holy of Holies, by a visible Glory and
appearance upon the Lev. 16. 2.
mercy-seat; and the Holy Ghost in the Spirit of Prophecy, which, though it did
many under the former, inspired none under this House; as the Jewish Writers
observe, were all withdrawn. But notwithstanding it ^^d the disadvantage in all
these eminent respects, yet the presence of Messiah in it, was to give such a
luster to it, as in the Judgment of God himself would make it more Glorious.

Quest. Do they mention any other Sign, that visibly marks out this time?

Ans. Yes, Thirdly, That it shall be shortly before the destruction of the
Temple, and of the City Jerusalem, and the utter desolation of the Jewish
Nation. For so the Prophet Daniel declares, that at the end of a set number of
weeks, Messiah shall be cut off, and then the people of the prince that shall
come, that is, the Romans who should invade them, shall destroy the city, and
the sanctuary, and the end thereof shall be with a flood, viz. of Romans over
powering them, and unto the end of the war desolations are determined, that is,
by that time this War ends, the desolation of the miserable Jews shall be
consummated, Dan. 9. 26. Yea, to this he adds another most conspicuous sign,
viz. that after Messiah was once come, the Sacrifices of the Law should all
cease among them. Seventy weeks* says the Angel, are determined upon thy
people, to anoint the most holy, and to finish the transgression, and to make
an end of sins, that is, in the Lev. 4. 3, 25, 29. and 5. 6. and Psalm. 40. 6.
in all which for sin-offering the Septuagint use (...). and 2 Cor. 5. 21.
usual Phrase of Scripture, and of the Jows, of sin offerings or sacrifices for
sins, which were to pass off when once Messiah, by the Sacrifice of himself,
had fulfilled all that was typified by them, verse 24. And this has been most
notoriously verified upon them. For by their Law, they were to have but one
Altar, and were to Deuteronomy. 12. 11, 13, 14.
bring all their sacrifices from all places of the Land, to the temple in
Jerusalem; and so were never to worship God with Sacrifice, when they were out
of their own Nation. And accordingly, they have never sacrificed at all since
they were driven out of their own Country, and both the Temple, and City were
laid waste by Titus Vespasian, which happened within forty Years after the
offering up of our Savior Christ in his Crucifixion.

Quest. All these signs are so public and conspicuous, as must needs force
themselves upon all Men's observation. And being all near the time, they
sufficiently direct Men when about to look for this Great Person. But are there
no Predictions more punctual in point of Time still, and that prefix the exact
Year of his coming?

Ans. Yes, the Prophet Daniel foretells the very Year, both of his
Manifestation, and of his Death and Passion: that the former should happen 483.
and the latter 486 Years after the issuing out of the Decree to rebuild, not
the Temple, but the city and the walls of Jerusalem. Know therefore, and
understand, says the Angel, that from the going forth of the commandment to
restore and build Jerusalem, unto Messiah the Prince, that is, to his
manifestation, which begun at his Baptism, when he first drew Disciples after
him, shall be seven weeks, and threescore and two weeks, in all sixty nine
Weeks or Septenaries of Years, opposite to weeks of days mentioned Dan. 10. 2.
which makes Four hundred eighty three Years, at the expiration whereof he
should come among them, Dan. 9. 25. This punctually marks out the Year 484. for
the Year of his manifestation. And then as for his Passion, that he says shall
fall out in the week following, nay, in the middle of the week, that is about
three Years and a half after, or in the fourth Year from the manifestation,
which will be the Four hundred eighty seventh Year from the granting out the
Decree to rebuild Jerusalem. And after the seven weeks, and the threescore and
two weeks, that is the sixty nine weeks, are ended, and so the seventieth Week
or Septenary of Years is begun, shall Messiah be cut off, verse 26. Yea, he
shall be cut off in the middle of that Week. For he shall confirm the covenant
with many for one week, that is in the seventieth Week, when he begun his
Preaching, whereby many were converted; and in the midst of the week, he shall
cause the sacrifice and oblation to cease, that is, put an end to all the
Jewish Sacrifices, by the Sacrifice of himself, verse 27.

Quest. These Predictions are as express, and determinate in point of time, as
can be spoken; but did the Manifestation, and Crucifixion of Jesus, fall out
punctually according to this time?

Ans. Yes, as some Lydiat Emend. temp. etc. An account of whose method, and
reasons, may be seen in Dr. More's Expos. of Daniel's Visions, on Vis. 4. p.
1^0, etc.
learned examiners of time do note, to a Year in both of them. For the command
to rebuild Jerusalem, not only the temple, but the street and the wall, as the
Prophet specifies it, verse 25. was in the twentieth year of A^taxerxes, as
Nehemiah relates, Neh. 2. 1, 5, 6, 7, 8. There was a Decree, indeed, to rebuild
the Temple, given before by Ezra 1. 1, 2, 3.
Cyrus, and another by Ezra 6. 1, etc.
Darius Hystaspis, and so again by Ezra 7. 1, 8, 12, 13, etc.
Artaxerxes Longimanus in the seventh Year of his Reign, as appears by the Book
of Ezra. But that for rebuilding the city and wall, which the Prophet is
careful to specify here, was not, as Nehemiah expressly says, till the
twentieth year of Artaxerxes. Which, after the likeliest, and best grounded
Lydiat Emend. temp. p. 69, etc. and Canon. Chron. p. 54, etc.
computation, as I think, that begins his Reign in the second Year of the 77
Olympiad, fell out in the Year of the World according to In Mr. Lydiat's
Calculation of the Worlds Age, a point differently fixed by most Chonologers,
whilst they agree in the other Calculations, the twentieth year from the second
Ol. 77. is made A. M. 3553.
Helvicus 3498. Now beginning with this Year, and reckoning 69 Weeks, or 483
Years, the time predicted to expire before Messiah's manifestation, the Year
ensuing for him to appear in, makes the fourth Year of the 202 Olympiad, which
is the Year of the World 3981. and the nineteenth Year of Tiberius. And this
falls to be the thirtieth Year of Christ's Age, according to what I judge the Sea Lydiat Emend. Temp. p. 134. and seq.
fairest Account of his Birth (viz. that which fixes it in the third Year of
the 195th. Olympiad, which fell upon the According to the Era Hispan. in Tom.
Council. though according to the common computation it is 45.
41st. Year of Augustus, and the Year of the World 3952.) and is that very Year
of his Life, wherein, after the manner of the Levites, who at Number. 4. 3.
thirty years old begun their Service, S. Luke says our Lord was For Christ's
Baptism in the 19. Tib. see Lydiat Emend. Temp. p. 168. and seq.
Baptized, and begun his Preaching, Luke 3. 21, 23. And reckoning to the 487th.
Year, the time prefixed for his Passion, it makes the third Year of the 203d.
Olympiad, and the 22d. of Tiberius, the very Year, according to the seemingly
Lydiat, ib. p. 176. and seq. And of all these particulars more largely in his
Recensio and Explicat. Argum. Lib. Emend. Temp.
exactest calculation of times, of our Savior's Crucifixion. So that the
Apostles had the greatest reason to declare of Christ's coming, that it was
when the fullness of time was come, Gal. 4. 4 thereby denoting, not only the
most proper Season, but the exact Time and Year, which was predicted of him.

Quest. This is a wonderful exactness in prefixing the time of Messiah's
coming, which being so punctually fulfilled in Jesus Christ, must needs
conclude undeniably for him, unless some other pretender appeared in that Year
to contest it with him. But since they were so particularly informed about the
time, how came it, that as it drew on, the Jews were not daily looking for him?

Ans. They were all full of expectation, about the time our Savior came. For
at his Birth, Simeon was waiting for the consolation of Israel, Luke 2. 25.
Anna also at the same time, when she saw him, spoke of him to all those, that
looked for redemption in Jerusalem, verse 38. So full of expectation were the
People in those days, that they were ready to give ear to every pretender,
running after The^das, and Judas, as Gamaliel reports, Acts 5. 36, 37; and
after several others, as is related by Antiq. l. 20. ^. 6, 7.
Josephus. Nay, so near was their expectation, and so apt were they to fix that
Character on some; that if a Man were extraordinary, and of great Name, though
he did not pretend to be the Messiah, yet of themselves they were ready to
surmise it of him. And Luke 3. 15, 16.
thus they did of * John the Baptist: for when he appeared to be an
extraordinary Person, they sent Priests and Levites to him, to know whether he
was the Christ: and he confessed, and denied not; but confessed, I am ^ot the
Christ, John 1. 19, 20. Nay, this expectation they did not keep as a secret
among themselves, but boasted of it in all places where they lived, and filled
the Greeks, and Romans with it. An opinion had then prevailed over all the
East, grown up to be both old and constant, that God had decreed at that time
to raise up one out of Judea, to the empire Suet. in Vesp. c. 4.
of the world; says Suetonius in the * Life of Vespasian. So that as the Holy
Prophets had given them just reason, both Jews, and Gentiles were in full
expectation of Messiah, and then it was that our Savior Christ came. He was
manifested ere the Scepter was departed, for in his days, and for some time
after, the Jewish Nation were a Body Politic, and lived under a form of
Government: and while the second Temple stood, for he daily conversed, and
taught in it: and ere the City and Temple were destroyed, and thereby their
Sacrifices all at an end, which was not till the destruction of Jerusalem,
almost forty Years after he was Crucified. In sum, he was manifested exactly
at the end of the sixty nine Weeks, in the 19th. of Tiberius, and suffered in
the midst of the 70th. Week, which fell out in the 22d. of Tiberius, as the
Prophet L'aniel had punctually fore told of him. And the days of Messiah
falling so exactly upon him, and upon no other Person, it is undeniably clear
that he is the Man.

Quest. But though God expressly promised to send Messiah at that prefix^d time,
yet might he not put it off for the sins of the People, which rendered them
utterly unworthy of so great a Blessing?

Ans. No, for those sins were foretold at the same time, and yet his coming
promised notwithstanding them. Isa. ^3. 1, 3.
Isaiab represents the Men of Messiab's Age, as an Infidel and hard-hearted
Generation, that would not believe his report, but hide their faces from him in
the extremity of his affliction; Jer. 31. 31, 32, 33.
Jeremy, as having made void God's former covenant, and therefore needing a
second to be introduced by him; Mal. 4. 5, 6.
Mal^^hi, as having lost even natural affection between Parents and Children,
which Elias must go before to restore among them; Dan. 9. ^6, 27.
Daniel, as persevering under his appearance to sin on, and provoke God to that
height, as would cause him shortly after to cut them off, and destroy both the
City, and the Sanctuary, by a most just and terrible judgment. Nay, so far were
the sins of the People, from being an hindrance to his coming in the sight of
God, that, as the Prophets plainly declare, they were to be the cause and
reason of it. The coming, or anointing of the most holy, says Daniel, is to
make an end of sins or sin offerings, and make reconciliation for iniquity,
Dan. 9. 24. to offer up his soul an offering for sin, to bear the iniquity of
us all, to be wounded for our transgressions, and bruised for our iniquities,
that through his stripes we may be healed, says Isaiah 53. 5, 6, 8, 10. His
coming was to be for the expiation of sin, to open a fountain to the house of
David, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, for sin, and for uncleanness, Zech.
13. 1. And coming thus to expiate, and cure sin; there is no more reason to
stay him beyond the time, because sin grows strong, than, in the increase of a
Disease, to delay the use of Remedies, or stop the coming of the Physician.

Quest. But does not God say, when he speaks of building up, or exalting any
^ation, if they do evil in his sight, he will repent of the good, wherewith he
said he would benefit them, Jer. 18. 9, 10.

Ans. Yes, and so he does in all those Promises, which he makes upon Men's
supposed virtues, and on condition of their good carriage. But the Promise of
Messiah was absolute, and intended, as appears, on no such prospect. For God
declared he should come among a People full of sin, and instead of being
de^erred by their wickedness, should be sent because of it, to atone and heal
it. Besides, if only the Fathers sins had stopped his coming, their Posterities
Repentance would have removed that impediment, and have brought him down; which
they see for above this 1600 Years, it has not done.

Quest. I see the ancient Prophecies declare Jesus to be the Christ, by
prefixing the exact time of his coming: wherein they are so particular, and
punctual, as might suffice in a History of things already passed. But I pray
before you leave this point, of the exactness of time, how can the Jews, who
believe all these Prophecies, shut their Eyes against them?

Ans. The elder Jews, who lived before Christ, did see them, as appears from
their general expectation of him about that time, and from what the learned De
Verit. l. 5. c. 14.
Grotius relates of Rabbi Nehumias, who living fifty Years before Jesus Christ
came, declared, that within fifty Years Messiah must come, because in that time
Daniel's Weeks prefixed for him were to determine. But as for the later Jews,
who lived since our Savior, they turn by all of them by one rule, whereby at
their pleasure they may turn by any thing, that is, by not meddling at all with
them, nor suffering any to interpret, or collect the time of his coming from
them. This is the meaning of that severe Anathema, which Vid. Episcop. Instit.
l. 3. c. 5.
some have noted from the Thalmud, Let his puffed up Bones burst, that shall
meddle in computing the periods of times. And accordingly the rule of the great
Maimonides, their second Moses, concerning the days of Messiah, is, to believe
surely that he will come, and if he prove slow, still to expect him, and never
to fix him any time, or so to explain any Texts of Scripture, as to infer the
time of his appearance from them.

Quest. That, indeed, is a clear reason; for the plainest words can never
convince those, that will not read, or understand them. But besides that the
ancient Prophecies prove Jesus to be Christ, by prescribing the exact time of
his coming, you said also, that they demonstrate it further, by assigning many
peculiar, and most visible notes, whereby he may be demonstratively pointed out
from all other Men. What are those peculiar, and notable marks, whereby they so
effectually describe him?

Ans. They are certain eminent, and most observable things, belonging to him,
or to be performed by him, which, as they were most visible in him, so were
peculiarly his, and never found in any other Man.

Quest. What things are those, which were so notable in him, and peculiarly
belonging to him?

Ans. Not only that he should be born of the lineage of David, Isaiah 11. 1,
10. and in the city Bethlehem, Mic. 5. 2. which, especially in conjunction with
the exact time before-described, are very discovering circumstances, to the
time when, adding the very Family, and Place where he should be born, that all
might know the very Town, and Kindred, amongst whom in that Year they were to
seek for him. But more particularly, that he should be set off by these signs
following.

Quest. What are they?

Ans. First, That he should be born of a Virgin, which was a thing never known
before, or since, and so was sure to point him out demonstratively from all
other Men. Behold, a virgin shall conceive, and bear a son, says God by the
Prophet Isaiah, and shall call his name Immanuel, Isaiah 7. 14.

Quest. But the word, which is there rendered Virgin, say the Jews, may signify
only a young Woman, denoting her Age, not Condition: and then this having in it
nothing peculiar, can be no proof to him?

Ans. It does not appear that it signifies any thing else in Scripture, but a
Virgin, the Prove. 30. 18, 19.
place alleged for a laxer sense, well admitting that interpretation. But if
it did, it must needs signify a Virgin, that is, one that has not known man,
in this place. For not only the Septuagint, that were all Jews, and lived long
before our Savior, translate it Virgin: but this conception is here given for
a sign, or a miraculous thing; which would be none at all, were it spoken only
of a young Woman; especially among the Jews, Vid Seld. ^x. Heb. l. 2. c. 3.
whose custom it was most early to contract their Daughters, and Marry them, as
soon as their Age would suffer them. When Achaz refused to tempt the Lord in
asking a sign, the Lord himself, says Isaiah, shall give you a sign. Behold! a
virgin shall conceive, etc. verse 12, 14.

Quest. This shows it was spoken of some Virgin. But yet may it not be
understood, as the Jews say, of some one, that only was a Virgin at the time of
the Prophet's speaking, who before she could lose her Virginity, conceive a
Son, and the Child come to any understanding, God would work the deliverance
which they desired of him, as the Prophet declares, verse 16.

Ans. There is cause to think it was spoken of some such Person, who was
present before the Prophet, and pointed out by him, at the time of this
Prediction. For in the Original, it is not Behold a Virgin, but that Virgin
shall conceive, as if he had particularly marked out the Person to them. And
before the child to be born of her, shall know how to refuse the evil, and
choose the good, the land that thou abhorrest, says he, shall be forsaken of
both her kings, that is, of Verse 1.
Rezin king of Syria, and Pekah king of Israel, who at that time were their
invaders. And this accordingly came to pass. For in the twentieth Year from the
beginning of Jotham's Reign, whereof sixteen were elapsed before Achaz came to
succeed him, and which therefore must fall within two, or three whole Years at
most from the time of this Prediction, in which space, the Child but then
conceived could not be grown up to Years of understanding, Tiglath-Pileser,
king of Assyria, slew Rezin, and Hoshea slew Pekah, as we read 2 Kings 15. 30,
32, 33. and 16. 9. But although, as I say, this Prophecy had some respect to a
Virgin of that time, yet did it look beyond her to a Virgin, that remaining
such, should conceive Messiah, and was never fulfilled till he came.

Quest. How does it appear, that it was not fulfilled in the Virgin pointed out
at that time?

Ans. Because the most noted things in that Prophecy, were left unaccomplished
then, particularly these following:

First, The conceiving of this Virgin, is made a miraculous conception, and is
given to the House of Judah for a sign, as I noted, verse 11, 12, 14. And this
must be meant of her conceiving, remaining still a Virgin. For, for one that is
now a Virgin, to Marry, and after that conceive, is no miraculous, nor strange
thing.

Secondly, The Child Immanuel, to be born of this Virgin, was to be Master of
the Land of Judah, which the Prophet therefore calls thy land, O Immanuel!
Isaiah 8. 8. And this was not fulfilled in the Virgins Child of that time. That
Child the Jews make to be Achaz's Son, viz. Hezekiah, who was afterward King
of Judah. But he was born several Years before this Prophecy, which cannot
therefore speak of conceiving him. For the Prophet is expressly said to come
with this Message to king Achaz, verse 1, 3. a clear evidence of its falling
some time in his Reign. Now he reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem, 2 Kings 16.
2. and then left Hezekiah his Son to succeed him. And Hezekiah, says the
Scripture, was twenty five years old, when he began to reign, 2 Kings 18. 2. So
that he must needs have been eight or nine Years old, when his Father Achaz
ascended to the Throne. The Child here promised then, could not be Hezekiah,
who was afterward King; but very probably was the Prophets own Son, who lived
and died a private Man: so that this part, of being Master of the Land of
Judah, could not be fulfilled in him.

Quest. Had the Prophet a Son born to him presently after that time?

Ans. Yes, and that, it is like, by a Virgin, whom, at the time of his
Prediction, he either had espoused, or designed to espouse to himself. I went
in unto the Prophetess, says he, proceeding on still in the same Prediction,
and she conceived, and bare a son, Isaiah 8. 3.

Quest. But how does this Son appear to be the same Immanuel, that was promised
to be born of a Virgin? Chap. 7.

Ans. First, Because he has the same Name. By which I do not mean, that he was
noted by the same word, but by one that implies what the other expressed, and
signifies the same with it, which is the same Name in Scripture account. For
the Virgins son, chap. 7. was to be called Immanuel, that is, God with us, to
note God's Favor and Presence, verse 14. And the Prophet is ordered to call
his Son Maher-shalal-hash-baz, that is* one born to speed on the spoil, and
hasten the prey, chap. 8. 3. And this, though a different word, has the same
virtue and effect with the other. For when a People are in any distress by
Invaders, as the Jews were at the Chap. 7. 1.
time of this Promise, the effect of God's Favor and Presence, is to give them
Conquest, and Spoil over their Enemies.* And this answering the virtue and
effect of a Name, is called the having that Name in Scripture. Thus it is
frequently in the Holy Prophets, as in Isa. 1. 26. and 62. 4.
Isaiah, Jer. 3. 17.
Jeremy, Ezekiel. 48. 35.
Ezekiel, Zec. 8. 3.
Zechary. And thus Christ's being called Immanuel, that is, God with us, was
fulfilled, says S. Matthew, when he was called Jesus, that is a Savior,
because God's Kindness and Presence, is most eminently shown and brought to
effect, in the Salvation and Deliverance of his Servants, Matthew. 1. 21, 22, 23.

Secondly, Because the Prophets Son was made a sign for the same thing, viz.
the deliverance of the Jews from these two invading Princes, in less time, than
would suffice him to attain to any understanding. Before the Virgins child,
says the Prophet, chap. 7. shall know to refuse the evil, and choose the good,
that is, before he can attain to distinguish between good and bad, the land
that thou abhorrest, viz. the Land of Verse 1.
Syria and Israel, now become hateful to the Jews for these their inrodes,
shall be forsaken or deprived of both her kings, verse 16. And before the
Prophets child, says the relation, chap. 8. shall have knowledge to cry my
Father, and my Mother, the riches of Damascus the metropolis of Syria, and the
spoil of Samaria the Chap. 7. 8, 9.
capital place of the King of Israel, shall be taken away before the king of
Assyria, verse 4. In both which places, there is an evident promise of the same
thing, viz. the destruction of these two Kings, and that within the same space
of time, viz. before the Child then promised could attain to the Age of any
understanding. So that the Virgins Child referred to in the Prophets time, was
most probably the Prophets own Son. And he not being of Royal Race, but living
and dying, as I said, a private Person, it is plain this part of the Prophecy,
viz. the child's being master of the land of Judah, could not be fulfilled in
him.

Quest. Have you any more things to instance in, which show this Prophecy was
not fulfilled in the Virgins Child of that time?

Ans. Yes, Thirdly, Because the Virgins Child in that promise is adorned with
the glorious Titles, and plain Characters of Messiah. For in further pursuit of
God's Promise in this Child, and the deliverance by him, in the ninth Chapter
the Prophet cries out triumphantly, Unto us a child is born, unto us a son is
given, and the government shall be upon his shoulder: and his Name shall be
called Wonderful, Counselor, The mighty God, The everlasting Father, The
Prince of Peace. Of the increase of his government, and peace, there shall be
no end, upon the throne of David, and upon his kingdom, to order, and to
establish it, with judgment and with justice, from henceforth even for ever,
verse 6, 7. Now this Person, whose Title and Character is Wonderful, The mighty
God, The everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace, and whose government on the
throne of David was to be perpetually increasing, is plainly no other but
Messiah. And he being the Person promised by Isaiah, to be born of a Virgin,
that Prophecy, however answered in some parts before, could never be fulfilled
and accomplished, but in him.

Quest. But you said before, it had respect to the Virgins Son of that time,
and was in part effected then. And if it must still be meant of Christ, and
made good in him again some hundreds of Years after, this makes the same words
to be designed for several meanings, yea, such as must be verified at far
distant times, which seems a strange thing?

Ans. This is most usual in the Scriptures, and especially in Prophecies, which
are often spoken of one Person next in view and near at hand, in whom they are
fulfilled in part; but of another further off, who, though he lies hid till he
is shown by the event, is yet the Person chiefly meant, whereof the other was
only a Figure or Type, and in whom they are fully to be accomplished. Thus
God's Promise to David, 2 Samuel 7. 12, etc. Of setting up his seed for ever
after him, and saying, I will be his Father, and he shall be my Son, though it
were spoken immediately, and in part of Solomon, as is most apparent, yet was
chiefly intended, and fully made good in Heb. 1. 5.
Christ. And the words of David, about God's not leaving his soul in hell, etc.
Psalm. 16. 8, 9, 10. though seemingly spoken, and in part verified of his own
Person, were yet meant, and fully accomplished in Christ's Resurrection,
whereto S. Peter applies them, Act. 2. 29, etc. And so when God said unto him,
Thou art my son, and I will give thee the Heathen, Psalm. 2. 7, 8. which had its
full effect in Christ, according to S. Paul's interpretation, Act. 13. 33. And
the same S. Matthew assures us of the Virgins Son, which though it might have
some regard to a Child of that time, yet was then only fulfilled, when Christ
came, Matthew. 1. 21, 22, 23.

Quest. But if this Virgins bearing a Son, be meant of Christ, How could it be
given to Achaz, and the House of Judah, for a sign, since he was then afar off,
and not to come till long after that Generation?

Ans. Because it was meant of another too, who was to be conceived at that very
time, and would prove a sign to them. And as this inferior accomplishment,
would be a sign of this answerable Deliverance in that Age: so would the
miraculous Birth of Christ, when it should more eminently fulfill this Prophecy,
be a much more illustrious sign, of an incomparably greater, to their
Successors. And this also answers the end of its being given here for a sign,
which is not limited to any Person, or Time, but indefinite, to the House of
David. Hear, says the Prophet, not O! Ahaz, but O! house of David, etc. verse
13, 14. Besides, in Ahaz's time, the Faith of Christ's being born of a Virgin
whilst only promised, would give it the virtue of a sign, as well as the sight
of it when performed. The end of it was to assure them, that the Kings of
Syria, and Israel, should not prevail against them, verse 4, 7, 9, 10. And
this, if they believed it, 'twas apt to do, as an argument from God's intending
for them a greater kindness, to his readiness in performing a less: for sending
Messiah to be born of a Virgin, and to be God with us, must argue a greater
power and kindness, than would suffice to work this deliverance from these
invading Princes. And after all, it is not unusual in the Scriptures, to beget
Faith and confidence, by such signs, as are remote and far off, as God did to
Moses, Exodus 3. 12. and to Hezekiah and the Jews, Isaiah 37. 30.

Quest. By this I perceive this Prophecy, of a Virgin bearing a Son, was
intended of Messiah. But was it fulfilled in Jesus when he came?

Ans. Yes, most miraculously. For his Mother that bare him, was a pure Virgin,
as appeared both from her own account, and Joseph's her reputed Husband, both
Persons of known Integrity, and unquestionable Credit. And when after her
espousal, Joseph doubted of her Chastity, because she was found with Child
before their coming together, an Angel is dispatched from Heaven to clear her
Honor, and to assure him, that what was conceived in her, was not any Humane
Production, but of the Holy Ghost, Matthew. 1. 18, 19, 20. The Holy Ghost, as
another Angel explained it to her self, coming upon her, and the power of the
Highest overshadowing her, when she objected the impossibility of her being a
Mother, because she was a pure maid, Luke 1. 34, 35. All which was so
unquestionable, and notoriously made out to the Apostles, and Primitive
Christians, their greatest Enemies finding no pretense to cavil, and start
doubts upon it, that they universally and firmly believed it, and thought it a
point of so great account, as to deserve a place, and make one Article, in that
short Summary and Abridgment of Christian Faith, called the Apostles Creed. For
in that, one thing we profess to believe concerning Jesus is, That being
conceived by the Holy Ghost, he was born of the Virgin Mary.

Quest. No wonder it found a place there, for it is a sign, not more strange
than convincing, being of it self alone sufficient to prove Jesus to be the
Christ, since in this he has no Competitors, the like, I think, being never
known, or pretended of any other Man. But besides this, are there not other
notable things set down by the Prophets, as belonging to him, which may serve
still further to discover him?

Ans. Yes, Secondly, That an extraordinary Spirit, not only of Wisdom and
Goodness, but also of Might or miraculous Power, should not only descend now
and then by fits, but make a settled abode, and rest upon him. Concerning the
branch, that shall grow out of the root of Jesse, says the Prophet, the Spirit
of the Lord shall rest upon him, the Spirit of wisdom and understanding, the
Spirit of counsel and might, the Spirit of knowledge, and of the fear of the
Lord, Isaiah 11. 1, 2. And when once the former Prophecies had pointed out the
exact Year, and place of his appearing, this sign of it self had been enough to
discover him. For being thus extraordinary, not only for Wisdom and Piety, but
also for Might and miraculous Power, when any would survey all the Men in
Bethlehem in search of Messiah at the prefixed time, he infinitely, above all
others, must needs draw all Men's Eyes to him.

Quest. Are there any more things still belonging to him, which confirm the
same?

Ans. Yes, Thirdly, That he should be cut off as a Malefactor by corrupt
Judgment, noting the main circumstances both previous and concomitant, and the
particular, and then unusual manner of his punishment. And that after his
Death, he should return from the Grave, and appear alive again. All this the
Psalmist, and the Holy Prophets, plainly foretell of him. When we shall see him,
says Isaiah, it will be without form, or comeliness: he is despised, and
rejected of men, Isaiah 53. 2, 3. He is to be betrayed, and sold to his
Adversaries for thirty pieces of silver, Zach. 11. 12. And when he is in their
Hands, he shall be judged as a prisoner, Isaiah 53. 8. his back shall be
scourged, and his face shall be spit on, Isaiah 50. 6. He shall be tried and
condemned, and cut off out of the land of the living, Isa. 53. 8. And as for
the manner of his Death, that shall be by the piercing of his hands and feet,
and keeping his Body between them so at stretch, says the Psalmist, that they
may tell all his bones; a plain description of a Death on the Cross, which
being a Roman punishment, and brought in among the Jews by their Conquest, must
needs be unknown in David's Age, and so more observable, to be foretold by him
so many hundred Years before, in describing the sufferings of Messiah. Besides,
under this Execution, they relate the very words, wherein he should express the
bitterness of his Sorrows, and wherein the starers on would vent their cruel
Scoffs, and how they should seek to sharpen his Pains by a draught of Ps. 69.
21.
vinegar, and pierce or thrust him through, as Zech. 12. 10.
Zechary declared in a Text, which the old Rabbis applied to Christ, and when
he was Dead, share his garment by casting Lots for it. They pierced my hands
and my feet, I may tell all my bones, they part my garments among them, and
cast lots upon my vesture: My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Whilst
they stare upon me, and laugh me to scorn, saying, He trusted in God that he
would deliver him, let him deliver him if he delight in him, says the Psalmist,
Psalm 22. 1, 7, 8, 16, 17, 18. Which Psalm, and these passages of it, according
to the Letter, never fully verified in the Story of David, after the Jews of
old, the New Testament applies to Christ, Matthew. 27. 35, 43, 46. and John 19.
24. These places evidently foretell the method of his Death and Humiliation. And
then after Death, the same Prophets as evidently foretell, that he should not
lie to Ps. 16. 10.
see corruption, but return from the grave, to a long, happy, and successful
Life. When he shall make his Soul an offering for Sin, he shall prolong his
days; so that after his dying as a Sacrifice, he was to be a live Man. Nay, the
pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand. He shall see of the travel of
his soul, and shall be satisfied; so that he was also to be an active,
undertaking, and successful Man, verse 10. yea, I will divide him a portion
with the great, and he shall divide the spoil with the strong; that is, be most
Wealthy, Potent, and Victorious amongst Men, verse 12. All which long, active,
and happy Life, was to be bestowed on him, not only after his Death, but as a
recompense and reward of it. He shall divide the spoil with the strong, because
he has poured out his soul unto death, and was numbered with the
transgressors, that is, was condemned and executed in the herd of Malefactors,
verse 12.

Quest. I see all this was plainly prophesied of Messiah, and was it fully made
good in Jesus Christ?

Ans. Yes, For he appeared in a poor and despicable condition, as a Matthew. 13.
55. Mar. 6. 3.
carpenter's son. He was sold by his own Servant Matthew. 26. 15.
for thirty pieces of silver, which did the Traitor no good, but by an
overruling Providence was cast to the Potter, or to Mat. 27. 7.
buy the Potters Field for a Burying place, as Zechary had foretold. He was put
in Bonds as a Prisoner, and led about before Luke 22. and chap. 23.
the highpriest, Herod, and the Roman Governor. They Jo. 19. 1.
scourged him, and Matthew. 26. 67.
spit upon him, they condemned and cut him off, according to the word of
Isaiah, not only as a Malefactor, but also in company with them, executing him
between two thieves, as the Evangelists * Mar. 15. 27, 28.
relate of him. And as for the manner of his Death, though Crucifixion was no
Jewish, but a Roman Punishment, and after the High Priest had pronounced him
guilty of Matthew. 26. 65.
Blasphemy, by the constitution of the Jews and the Lev. 24. 16.
Law of Moses, he should have been stoned: yet by the special ordering of God,
he suffered by the piercing of his hands and feet, and hanging so at stretch
upon the Tree, that his bones might be numbered, according* to the words of
David. In his extremities, though the custom of the Nation was to offer
stupefactives, as Wine and Myrrh, to benum the Sense, and ease the pains of
dying Persons; yet to verify the saying of the Psalmist, they brought him John
19. 28, 29. and Matthew 27. 34, 48.
Vinegar, to whet and sharpen his. The chief Priests, with the Scribes and
Elders, most inhumanly staring on him, said with cruel scorn, He Matthew. 27. 41,
43.
trusted in God, let him deliver him now if he will have him, the very words,
which the Holy Psalmist had so long before set down for them: and he himself
cried out, Matthew. 27. 46.
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? The very words again, which that
Holy Prophet spoke for him in his extremity. As he hung upon the Cross, a
Soldier John 19. 34.
pierced his side, and thrust him through, to fulfill the words of Zechary. And
when they saw he had expired, the four Soldiers that stood by, and were to
share his Clothes, would not divide his seamless coat, but John 19. 23, 24.
cast lots for it, according to the Prediction of the Psalmist. Amidst all
which strange congruities, he had one other qualifying circumstance, which the
Prophet Isaiah remarks, viz. to make his grave, as with the wicked, by dying
for a pretended crime, so with the rich in his death, Isaiah 53. 9 which was
verified, by his being wrapped in fine linen, and Entombed, as by his care, so in
Matthew. 27. 60.
Joseph of Arimathea's own Sepulcher, who was a Matthew. 27. 57.
rich man, and an Mark 15. 43.
honorable counselor. And then as for his return to life again, to be an
undertaking, successful, and most potent, happy Person: that has been most
notoriously, and eminently made good, in our Blessed Savior's Resurrection,
and in the unparalleled success of his Religion in all places since that time.
And this again, especially his Resurrection, is another note, which as it fits
Jesus to be the Messiah, so beyond dispute excludes all other Men. For though
Theudas, and Judas, as Gamaliel Act. 5. 36, 37.
observed, and other false Christ's, in just reward of their Impostures, have
been condemned and slain; yet was never any of them seen to return to life
again, to carry on their pretenses, and to prosper and thrive in them.

Quest. Have you any other notable, and appropriating marks to add from them,
to these already given?

Ans. Yes, Fourthly, That he should put an end to the Jewish Sacrifices, and to
the Covenant brought in by Moses, by reason of its imperfection; and instead
thereof, make a new, and more Gracious and Perfect Covenant, between God and
Men. And this being a most public change, and abolishing an Institution most
peculiarly distinguished, and universally eyed and taken notice of among Men,
it must needs be a convincing sign, and such, as all might easily see, and
observe when it came. When Messiah comes, says the Prophet Daniel, he shall
make an end of sin offerings, and cause the Mosaical Sacrifices and Oblations
to cease, Dan. 9. 24 27. Behold! the days come, says the Lord, by Jeremiah,
that I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel, and Judah, Jer. 31.
31. Which days are plainly the days of Messiah, noted verse 22. who was to be
the Messenger or Angel of the Covenant, answerable to the Angel of God's
Presence among the Jews, by whose Exodus 23. 20, 21. Gal. 3. 19.
ministry he established the Mosaic Covenant, as Malachy foretold, Mal. 3. 1.
And this Covenant was to offer more large Indulgence, and richer Overtures of
Grace, which would make it a Message of Joy, as Zech 9. 9.
Zechary; a publication of Peace, and Salvation, a bringing glad tidings of
good, a binding up of broken hearts, and proclaiming liberty to the Captives,
and preaching the acceptable year of the Lord, as Is. 52. 7. and 61. 1, 2.
Isaiah: it was to forgive iniquity, as Jer. 31. 34.
Jeremy; making reconciliation for it, as Dan. 9. 24
Daniel; opening a fountain to wash away sin and uncleanness, as Zech. 13. 1.
Zechary says.

Quest. And did Jesus fulfill all this?

Ans. Yes, he has taken off the yoke of Moses, and abolished all its
Ordinances, nailing them unto his Cross, Col. 2. 14. He has fulfilled all
former, and superseded all later Sacrifices, by once offering that one
Sacrifice of himself, Heb. 9. 25, 26. He has brought in a new Covenant, the
Laws whereof have more root in our own Reason, called their being Jer. 31. 33.
and Heb. 8. 10.
writ in our hearts and minds; which makes them the easier to be remembered, as
Moses is brought in saying Mr. Smith of a Legal Right. chapter 2. o^t of Breshith
Rabba.
the Laws of Messiah should be, according to an old Tradition of the Rabbis:
and the Mercy whereof extends to the forgiveness of more sins, as the Prophets
foretold, than could be hoped for by the Law of Moses. For Murder, or Adultery,
under that Law, God admitted of no Sacrifice to bear any persons iniquity, as
may be seen in Lev. 20. 10.
Leviticus, and as David declares in Uriah's case, Psalm. 51. 16. Nor for
Idolatry, Deuteronomy. 17. 2, 3, etc. nor for giving their seed to Moloch, nor for
seeking after Wizards, nor for cursing Parents, nor for Incest, or* Sodomy, or
Bestiality, all which were Surely to be put to death according to God's
Ordinance, Lev. 20. 2, 6, 9, 11, 12, 13, 15, 16. Nor in general, for any
presumptuous offense, the iniquity whereof, as the Law says, was not to be laid
upon any Sacrifice, but to rest upon themselves, and they to be utterly cut
off, Number. 15. 30, 31. and die without mercy, Heb. 10. 28. Nay, under it a curse
was pronounced, not only to those, who were guilty of some certain offenses,
but, what was more hard to be avoided, to all, who continued not in all points
written in the Law, to do them, Deuteronomy. 27. 26. and Gal. 3. 10. But for all these
sins, unpardonable by the Mosaic Covenant, our Savior, who, according to the
Holy Prophets, was to bring in a fuller Pardon and Oblivion of sins, than
before was offered, does proclaim Pardon, on Men's true Repentance, by his New
Covenant. By it, as S. Paul declares, all that believe, are justified from all
things from which they could not be justified by the law of Moses, Act. 13. 38,
39.

Quest. Was he to do any more things besides this?

Ans. Yes, Fifthly, To found a kingdom, and appear as a mighty Prince. The
Government, says Isaiah, shall be upon his shoulder, and it shall increase
without end upon the throne of David, and upon his kingdom, to order, and
establish it, with justice and judgment, for ever, Isaiah 9. 6, 7. And this
Principality, they say, shall be, not over the Jewish Nation alone, to whom the
Church of God had been confined aforetime: but over the Gentiles too, who
should all come in, and submit to him. The root of Jesse, which shall stand for
an Ensign of the People, shall set up an Ensign for the Nations, and unto it
shall the Mal. 1. 11.
Gentiles seek, Isa. 11. 10, 12. My servant shall bring forth judgment to the
Gentiles, I will give him for a covenant of the People, for a light of the
Gentiles, for salvation to the ends of the earth, Isaiah 42. 1, 6. and 49. 6.
To him whom man despises, Kings shall see and arise, Princes also shall
worship. I will lift up my hand to the Gentiles, and they shall bring thy sons
in their arms, and thy daughters shall be carried upon their shoulders. And
Kings shall be thy nursing-fathers, and their Queens thy nursing-mothers: they
shall bow down to thee, with their face toward the earth, and lick up the dust
of thy feet, Isa. 49. 7, 22, 23.

Quest. If Messiah were to come as such a Royal Prince, and erect an Universal
Monarchy over all Nations; by that he might easily be known, and no Man would
be at a loss to discern who is he, when once this is done.

Ans. No more, than they are at a loss to know who is the King of Great
Britain, the German Emperor, or the Grand Signior. Besides the dependancies,
that make so many concerned with them, the Quality and Greatness of such
Characters, is enough to make any Man known, and draw all Eyes upon him.

Quest. And did Jesus found such a Kingdom?

Ans. Yes, such Kingly Power he claimed before Pontius Pilate, John 18. 37. And
such he exercises in the World. His Dominion, praised be God, goes beyond the
Jews, and is spread far and wide among the Nations, whose Princes submit their
Scepters to his, and glory in being his Servants, and account being styled
Defenders of the Faith, most Christian, or Catholic Kings, the very Flower of
all their Titles.

Quest. But how did he appear like such a mighty Prince, since he made no
pompous Entrance, with splendid Retinues, and strong Guards; nor erected any
Courts, to judge of Properties; nor listed potent Armies, to repel Invaders;
nor came furnished, either with rich Manors and Preferments, to reward good
Services; or with visible and present Punishments, such as Confiscations,
Prisons, Gibbets, to avenge the Transgressions of his Followers?

Ans. This, indeed, was the thing, that of all others was a stumbling Block to
the Jews, who expected a Secular Savior, a Prince in worldly Power, Pomp, and
Greatness. But as to Messiah's outward appearance, the Prophets foretold quite
contrary things. So did Isaiah among others, calling Christ, him whom man
despises, whom the nation abhors, a servant of rulers, Isaiah 49. 7. He
shall grow up, says he in another place, as a tender plant out of a dry
ground, he has no form nor comeliness, there is no beauty that we should
desire him. He is despised, and rejected of men, a man of sorrows, and
acquainted with grief, and we hid as it were our faces from him, being ashamed
to own him, Isaiah 53. 2, 3. By these accounts, in outward appearance, he was
to come more like a Peasant, than a Prince. But his Kingdom so much cried up,
was to be Spiritual, giving Laws, not only to Overt-Acts, which are triable in
Secular Courts, but to Men's Hearts and Consciences; protecting, and aiding
them, by unseen Providence, and Spiritual Assistances; rewarding and
punishing, not with Temporal, but Eternal Recompenses; not meddling with a
Secular Domination, over Men's Persons, or Purses, in things relating to this
Life, but leaving that Power in the same hands, where it was lodged before. And
such a principality as this our Savior claimed, telling Pilate he was a King,
but that his kingdom was not of this world; for if it had, his servants would
have fought, to have delivered him from the Jews, John 18. 36.

Quest. Was Messiah to do any other notable thing, which would still be a
further manifestation of him?

Ans. Yes, Sixthly, He was to convert the Heathen world from their
Idol-worship, and make Pagan-Idolatry fall before him. In that day, says
Isaiah, describing Christ' s Kingdom both over Jews and Verse 2, 4*
Gentiles, the Lord alone shall be exalted, and the Idols shall he utterly
abolish, Isaiah 2. 17, 18. In that day, says God by Zechary, I will cut off the
names of the Idols out of the land, and they shall no more be remembered, Zech.
13. 2. All nations then shall serve him, all nations shall call him blessed,
says the Psalmist, Psalm. 72. 11, 17.

Quest. Did Jesus perform this when he came?

Ans. Yes, he drove the proud Spirits out of their Temples, and silenced them
in all their Oracles and other Divinations, and convinced the World, that those
they had hitherto worshipped for Gods, were Devils, and that those are no Gods,
which are made with hands. And of this, there were so many instances, as there
were of Heathen Men, and Heathen Nations, that turned Christians.

Quest. Those Converts, indeed, are so many plain proofs of the overthrow of
Idols, since the first step in Christianity is the renouncing of the Devil, and
of all Idol gods. But how does it appear that he put an end to their Oracles,
and other Divinations, which were the strongest argument of their Divinity
among their Worshippers?

Ans. As his Birth drew near, they all grew dumb: God stopping all their false
mouths against that time, that his own Eternal Word might be heard alone. The
famed Apollo was then so sparing of his Responses, that De Divinat. l. 2.
Cicero thought his renowned Oracle at Delphos had ceased in his days. And
though afterward he did speak sometimes, as I shall note in several instances:
yet by the Power and Spirit of our Lord, when his Religion had got footing in
the World, his Mouth was wholly stopped, and locked up with the Keys of never*
Divining silence, as he himself says in a Farewell Answer recorded by his
Champion Vid. Eusebius. Praep. Evang. l. 5. c. 16.
Porphyrius. And so were also the Mouths of Jupiter Ammon, and of all other
impure Spirits most famed for Oracles in other places. This their devout
Worshippers with grief beheld, and admired: and Plutarch, a learned Heathen,
who lived within an hundred Years after Christ, writ a (...).
Book about it still extant, wherein he inquires the best he can into the
causes of it.

Quest. I see their general silence is beyond question. But can you show that
Jesus silenced them?

Ans. Their own professed Advocates make him the cause of the Demons
withdrawing themselves from Men, both in this and in other effects of their
presence with them. For since Jesus began to be worshipped, says Vid. Eusebius.
Praep. Evang. l. 5. c. 1. and Th^^dor. de curand. Graec. Affect. l. 10.
Porphyry, the Gods are no longer conversant with Men, nor has any Man received
any public benefit by them. Nay, the vanquished Spirits themselves, who gave
so many Testimonies to him, when he drove them from before his personal
Presence here on Earth, in their Oracles, and other Divinations, confessed so.
For when Augustus, in whose time our Savior was born, inquired of Apollo who
should succeed him in the Empire, his Reply was, as Under (...).
Suidas reports, That an Hebrew Boy, who rules the blessed Gods, had commanded
him to pack away to Hell, and leave that place, so that he was like to give
them no more answers. Again, in the days of Diocletian, as Eusebius. de vit.
Constant. l. 2. c. 50, 51.
Constantine relates in his Edict to the Provincials of the East, he gave out
another Oracle, Declaring he could give no true Answers, because of the just
Persons upon the Earth. And when Diocletian asked, Who were those just Persons:
the Priest answered, They were the Christians. Which Constantine declares, and
calls God to witness, was said in his hearing, who, being a very Youth,
attended the Emperor at that time. Afterward, in the Reign of Julian Sozom.
Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 19. and Th^od. Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 10* and Chrysostom. Homil.
(...) S. Ba^.
, when his Temple at Daphne, celebrated for Oracles, was confronted by a
Christian Church, wherein were laid the Bones of the Martyr Babylas, he
presently grew speechless. And when Julian pressed him for an Answer, by
magnificent Gifts and Sacrifices, at last he told him, He was hindered from
giving Oracles by the dead Bodies in that place. Which the Emperor well
understanding, singled out the Coffin of Babylas, without disturbing the other
dead, whereof many lay there interred, and ordered the Christians to remove it.
Indeed, when the Heathens at any time consulted their Gods by Sacrifice, and
were to read their Answer painted upon the entrails, if any of their Christian
Servants happened to stand by, the wicked Spirits fled away without giving the
accustomed signs, and their deserted Prophets could make no Predictions. Which
being complained of to their wicked and superstitious Princes, was several
times the chief cause, as Instit. l. 4. c. 27.
Lactantius notes, which enraged them to persecute the Christians. In
particular, it inflamed Diocletian to begin his Persecution, the Bloodiest of
all others. For his madness against them, as the De M^r^. Persec. c. 10.
same Author reports, was because their presence, and profession of Faith in
Jesus, stopped the mouth of his Gods, and troubled all his Sacrifices. So that
whilst any of them was there, though he offered often, one time after another,
this superstitious Man, an insatiable inquirer into Futurities, could receive
no answer. Nay, to show further the Power, which, as I say, not only Christ
himself, but every common Christian had, to command and control these unclean
Demons, Apol. c. 23.
Tertullian desires the Emperors to make the Experiment, and bring any that is
vexed by a Demon, or any Prophet that is thought inspired by him, before the
Judgment Seat: and there set any poor Christian, to command that Demon to speak
who he is. And if, says he, not daring to lie to him, he does not as truly
there before you all confess himself a Devil, as he had falsely otherwhere
proclaimed himself a God, then let that malapert Christian be put to death, for
undertaking what he is not able to make good. And the same is alleged by
Minutius Felix in his Book against the Heathens. * De Idol. Van. p. 30.


Quest. This extirpation of Pagan Idolatry, being an effect so illustriously
great, and that would be so vehemently opposed, and wherein so many People and
Nations were concerned, it must needs be the observation, and astonishment of
all the World, and all Men must evidently see when it is brought about?

Ans. Yes, and so it happened. After our Savior's Death, it was the great
business, that took up Men's thoughts and discourse, that exercised the Pens of
the best Wits, and the Skill of Politicians, that unsheathed the Magistrates
Sword against the Godliest of his Subjects, and exposed the blessed Martyrs on
Theaters, to wild Beasts, and all sorts of Torments and Deaths, in all the
Roman Empire, and other places, for several Ages. This Triumph of Messiah over
Satan, that grand Enemy and Usurper, made a greater, and more universal and
lasting noise, and astonishment, than ever was made at the downfall of the
vastest, and most potent Empire.

Quest. But besides this evidence, as it accomplished a Prediction; was not
such wonderful prevalence of Christ's Religion, over all the Legal
Establishments and Idolatrous Religions of the World, a clear testimony of God
to him, as it was a most miraculous, and plainly Divine thing?

Ans. Yes, indisputably it was. When Religions prevail, that have been in
possession for several Ages; that shows the power of Custom, and Education.
When such, as are enforced by Laws and Arms, and which the Secular Power does
espouse, and propagate; that shows the might of Authority, and forcible
Violence. When such, as are agreeable to Men's Lusts, and gratify their natural
inclinations, that manifests how easily Men are persuaded to what they like,
and the mighty influence of natural Propensions. When such, as come fortified
with a general Vogue, and numerous Assertors; that shows the overawing
influence of Crowds, and Multitudes. But when a Religion is made up of
selfdenials, and runs in many things cross to Men's common sentiments, and in
more to their inclinations, and foretells sufferings to its followers, and
inrages evil Men, and evil Spirits. When it decries the assumed Divine Honors
of Emperors, and stints and controuls all their unjust, and impious commands.
When it lessens the credit of all Gentile Priests, who at that time had the
guidance of Men's Consciences, reproving their most extolled Opinions, as false,
or frivolous; and their most beloved Practices, as wicked, or superstitious.
When it enters against all authority of Laws, and craft of Politicians, and
subtilty of Philosophers, and power of Magistrates, and violence of Tumults,
and Prejudices and Lusts of all, and seeks to pull up all the firmest
establishments of former Ages, altering not only the public Constitution, but,
what usually men are more fond of, the approved Religion of Kingdoms, under
which God had made their Ancestors most flourishing and victorious, as was
plain in the case of the Romans. When it attempts all this by a few, and those
too unlearned, and unfriended, mean, and despicable Persons. And when they seek
to atchieve it, not by fraud, or indirect arts, or quaint speeches, or sly
allurements, but by meekly telling a plain story concerning Jesus, and hoping
to prevail and conquer all, not by Fighting, but Suffering for him. When a
Religion, I say, that teaches such hard and unwelcome Lessons, and is managed
by such Instruments, and meets with such oppositions, and has nothing humane
great, or promising about it, but all things great, and, to reason, insuperable
against it, does yet after all overspread the World, at the same time all
visible Powers seem thus combined to drive it out of it: it is plain it is
helped on by an invisible Hand, and that God interposes to make it victorious.
And I need not show, how this was the case of Christianity, in all these
particulars.

Quest. Those Prophecies, which prefixed the exact time of Messiah's coming, did
plainly prove Jesus to be the Man, because none started up at the time
appointed, to make any competition. But if there had, these other signs, which
you have given from them, are so great, so peculiar, and, so obvious, I will
not say, to be observed, but so hard, and almost impossible, when brought to
pass, to be overlooked, as must needs to the satisfaction of all reasonable
inquirers, demonstrate him to be the Person against all pretenders.

Ans. Most certainly they would, to all that knew his Story, what he was, and
did, and would take the pains to compare it with these distinguishing marks,
which the Holy Prophets several hundred Years before had given of him. For had
any false Christ appeared exactly in the fullness of time, (as through the care
of God's watchful Providence, no one then made any pretense besides him) yet
had it been easy to show such deceiver was not the Christ whom the Prophets
foretold, because he was not born of a pure Maid, whereto no Man but our
Savior ever pretended. Or because, if he did at some times show some feats of
Magic, as the Enchanters whom Josephus mentions, yet he was not withal eminent
for Piety, or had not the Spirit resting upon him, to do Cures on all
occasions, and of all sorts, or to cast out Devils of whatever kind, and
numbers, which no Man but Jesus ever enjoyed. Or because, though he might die
for his Imposture, as he justly deserved, yet his Death was not in that way
they had described, nor with those many notable circumstances they had prefixed
for it. Nor would any such false Christ's rise again from the Dead, as God
plainly promised Messiah should, and our Jesus did. Nor were they any of them
the Authors of a new Covenant, which supplied what the Covenant from Mount
Sinai wanted. Neither did they erect a Kingdom, taking in the Gentiles, as well
as the Jewish Nation: nor had Kings and Queens to come and worship, and pay
homage to them. Nor did they convert the Gentile World from the worship of
Idols, and drive the Devils out of all their Temples, as he did most gloriously
by his appearance.

Quest. But after all these instances, of a punctual, and exact accomplishment
of the ancient Prophecies in Jesus, does not Isaiah foretell, that in Messiah's
days, the Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard with the Kid, that
the sucking Child shall play safely on the hole of the Asp, and they shall not
hurt, nor destroy in all Gods ho^y mountain, Isaiah 11. 6, 7, 8, 9. That then
Men shall beat their swords into plow-shares, and their spears into
pruning hooks, nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall
they learn war any more, Isaiah 2. 4. By these, and such like Prophecies,
Messiah was to bring in a mavelous Probity, and universal Peace into the
World. And amidst all the injuries, the bitter Contentions, and bloody Wars
among Christians, how is this accomplished?

Ans. These Prophecies speak not this of all Persons in his days, but only of
all that will be his true followers, and govern themselves according to Prince
Messiah's Laws, and Practice. For that, which shall prevent all doing hurt
among them, says Isaiah, is the full knowledge of the Lord, which restrains
only such, as will practice what they understand, Isaiah 11. 9. And they, who
shall beat their swords into plow shares, says he again, are the many people,
whom Messiah shall rebuke, which, according to the usual Phrase of Scripture,
may imply their amending upon his rebuking them, Isaiah 2. 4. They were the
sincerely devout, and honestly obedient, who say to one another, Let us go up
to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us of his ways, and we will
walk in them, verse 3. But as for the inviolable maintenance of this Probity
and Peace, by those, who are only his nominal Servants, or by the universality
of Men in his days, that does not follow from these places; nor does it well
comport with the present state of human Nature, which is mixed with many angry;
and incroaching Passions; nor suit with other Prophecies beforementioned, that
speak of much wickedness after Messiah's coming, and of many still retaining
their old genius, which Predictions must all be accomplished, as well as these.

Quest. But if this Peace, and Probity are to be so limited, and conditionate
in the event, how come they to be expressed so generally, and absolutely in the
Prediction? Is it not odd to speak of an effect as universal under Messiah,
which shall not appear universally in all under him, but only in those that
will hearken to him?

Ans. No; for in an effect, wherein both he, and they are jointly concerned,
his saying all shall do it, implies they shall so far, as concerns his part,
and that he would do all* which behooves him toward it. And this Jesus has
done, giving a Law as apt to engender, and preserve Peace, as any Law can be,
and taking away all separating and dividing rites introduced by Moses, which
were apt to make difference between Jews and Gentiles. And to say all Men shall
do a thing, when God has done his part to make all do it, though, through their
obstinate wickedness, many of them will not do it in the event, is a form of
Speech usual in Holy Scripture. Thus it is particularly in Ezekiel, when God
foretells the taking away all detestable Idols; and yet in the same place speaks
of several, who would still retain them, and thereby incur his heavy
indignation, Ezekiel 11. 18, 21. And in Jeremy, when God foretells his peoples
living again in their own land after the captivity, most piously, and
peaceably, Jer. 32. 37, etc. although, through their stubborn wickedness, which
nothing would amend, things fell out contrary.

Quest. But though these Prophecies do not imply, that every Man shall live so
when Messiah comes, yet however they seem to note that many will, who would not
otherwise; and that Godliness, Peace, and Justice, shall mightily increase in
the World by his appearance. And has this been fulfilled by Jesus?

Ans. Yes, it was eminently verified in the first times. For then the
Christians were remarkably, as the most virtuous livers, and honest dealers, so
most kind, and friendly among themselves; See, Tertull. Apol. c. 39.
said the Gentiles, how the Christians love one another. They were absolutely
the best Neighbors, being so far from offering any injuries, that they durst
not requite them, but with Prayers and Kindnesses. They were indisputably the
most tame, and peaceable Subjects, overcoming all the outrageous violence, and
oppressions of their Persecutors, not by fighting their way through them, but
by Faith and Patience under them. And like effects, his Religion has produced
in all other times, upon all those, who were true followers both of him and
them, and were Christians in very deed, not only in name and profession. It has
improved all peaceable tempers, and sweetened many sour, and smoothed many
rough ones, and brought Men of the most different Complexions, Estates,
Interests, and Abilities, to live fairly and sociably together. Indeed, all Men
are not thereby made godly, just, and tame, as we must not expect they ever
will be in this World; for Men will be Men, and show human passions, and
errors, under any institution. But yet the common estate of the World is much
amended, and things generally much more fairly, and equitably managed, and the
true God more duly and devoutly worshipped, and all Virtue and Piety in greater
repute, and Injustice much curbed, and both private, and publi^ Quarrels, much
more frequently prevented, and more fairly and speedily composed since Christ's
coming amongst us, than they were before. So that although the improvement of
these Virtues among us, is little in respect of our aids, and opportunities;
yet is it great in comparison with the former face of the World, and may pass
for a New, Righteous, and reformed Stat^, in respect of what it was in days of
Heathen ignorance. And this is as much accomplishment, as it is reasonable to
require in such Prophecies; which being made of men, who have frail and corrupt
Natures, and converse in the midst of temptations, ought not to be strained
beyond what is consistent with the condition of this World, and with human
Nature, and Circumstances. But if the above cited Prophecies did really speak
of a more universal effect, than has been hitherto accomplished: there is time
enough still behind, ere Christ resign up the Kingdom to the Father, wherein to
make it good. For of the things predicted to fall out under Messiah, some came
to pass at first, and others, in the long flux of time ever since, have still
been successively fulfilled; but many are still behind, and to have no
accomplishment, till near the day of Judgment.

Quest. You have fully showed, how Jesus appears to be the Christ from ancient
Prophecies, whereby I plainly perceive how deserved (...), in the Revelations,
the Spirit of Prophecy is called the testimony of Jesus, Rev. 19. 10. But do
the Jews, to whom these Prophets all spoke, and who not only had the keeping,
but were also most diligent and careful in examining these Oracles, understand
these places as Predictions of Messiah, which appear to have had such clear,
and undeniable accomplishment in our Jesus?

Ans. The old Jews, who lived before Christ, generally did, as is plain from
Rabbi Nehumias, and others, and from their general expectation of him about the
time prescribed, according to those Prophecies. And so did numbers of their
earliest, and most renowned Doctors since, as learned Men have shown abundantly
from their Writings. But many of the later Rabbis, not daring to deny the
suitableness of the events in Jesus, have chose rather to wrest those places,
against their plain meaning, and the opinions of their Ancestors, to other
purposes, and deny them as spoken of Messiah. And what should make this
difference, and cause later Men to go off from ancient times, even from those,
who lived near to some of the Prophets themselves, who, if they gave any hints,
and interpretations of what they delivered in their own days, were most likely
to gather up, and understand such traditionary Explications? The reason of this
difference is pretty obvious. For those ancient Jews, living before Christ,
looked only to the Prophecies themselves, and the general sense and expectation
raised about them by the Prophets: But among the Jews since Christ, several
look also at personal prejudices, and had rather deny any thing, than own Jesus
to be Messiah, which they cannot well avoid doing, if those places are spoken
of him.

CHAP. III. Proving Jesus to be the Christ, from other Divine Testimonies.
The Contents.
Jesus proved to be the Christ, 2. From the testimony of John the Baptist. John
knew this by Revelation, and had it confirmed by a sign. He was an acknowledged
Prophet, and of most clear and current fame. And gave this testimony, before he
was personally acquainted with Jesus. 3. From the testimony of Jesus himself
several considerations showing the validity of this testimony, though it were
in his own case. This not impugned by Christ's words, John 5. 31. nor gives any
color or advantage to Fanatical Enthusiasts. 4. From his Miracles. These no
lying wonders, as may appear, because shown in several instances not imitable
by Demons. As, 1. Foretelling future Contingencies. An account of
Demon-Predictions among the Gentiles. 2. Discer^ing Hearts, and Thoughts. 3.
Raising the Dead. 4. Casting out Devils, of most stubborn ranks, and in
greatest numbers and combinations. It may also appear from their i^^ent and
design; and from their numbers, and the manner of working them. No opposing the
Miracles of Moses against Christ's Miracles because they were wrought to set
aside the Law of Moses. That Law was given with a design to be altered. An
account how for all that, several of its Precepts are justly called Statutes
for ever. 5. From the testimony of the Father, who declared Jesus to be the
Christ by audible voices. And by raising him from the dead, and showing him in
full possession of his pretenses.

Question. BUT besides this proof of Jesus being the Christ, from ancient
Prophecies, you said the same would be evidently made out, by several Divine
Testimonies other ways. Pray what are those Testimonies?

Ans. The Testimony of John the Baptist, who was sent into the World to give
Witness to it; the Testimony of Jesus himself, which very well deserves to be
trusted; the Testimony of his miraculous works, which are an evidence drawn up
by the Finger of God; and, to name no more, the Testimony of God the Father,
who himself became a Voucher of it. So that he must give the lie, both to
Heaven, and Earth, to God, and Men, who shall disbelieve, or gainsay it.

Ans. Did John the Baptist testify Jesus to be the Christ?

Ans. Yes, and that upon a most public occasion, when the great Council of the
Nation, the Sanhedrim, sent Priests and Levites to him on purpose, to know
whether he himself were the Christ, John 1. 19. For then his answer was, That
he was not the Christ, verse 20. but that the Christ was come, and was then
among them, verse 26, 27. Yea, the next day seeing Jesus coming to him, he
points at him, and declares to them all, that he is the Person. Behold, says
he, the Lamb of God, which takes away the sins of the world. This is he, of
whom I said, after ^e comes a man, which is preferred before me, verse 29, 30.
which Testimony he repeats again the next day, upon another occasion, verse 35,
36. And this Testimony Jesus alleged for himself when he reasoned with the
Jews, in vindication of his own Authority. Ye sent unto John, viz. in the
message from Jerusalem, and he bare witness unto the truth, John 5. 33.

Quest. But how came John to know it, and why in this case must we take his
word?

Ans. Because he was a Prophet, all the Jews, as the Scriptures testify, held
John for a Prophet, Matthew. 21. 26. Nay, as Christ says, he was one of the
greatest of Prophets, for of all that are born of women, there has not risen a
greater, than John the Baptist, Matthew. 11. 9, 11. And he declares, that the
Spirit revealed this to him: nay, that, for his greater confirmation, it gave
him a visible and most illustrious sign; saying unto him, Upon whom thou shall
see the Spirit descend, and remain on him, that same is he. And this Spirit,
John declares he did see descend in a bodily shape upon Jesus at his Baptism,
and at the same time, as S. Matthew Matthew. 3, 16, 17.
adds, heard a voice from God, calling him his beloved Son for his fuller
conviction, John 1. 32, 33. Yea, since, as the Nazarene Gospel relates it, upon
this descent, presently there shone a great light about the place; and a fire
was lighted in Jordan wherein John Baptized him, as Dial. cum Tryph.
Justin the Martyr testifies: what would still be a more assuring proof to John
in this case, this bodily descent of the Holy Ghost, was in a body of Light and
dazzling Splendour, the usual Glory wherein God himself was wont to appear, which
hovering over our Savior, as a Dove does when it lights, and darting forth its
bright Beams round about him, did plainly represent what the Jews call the
Schechinah, and proclaim him to be a Divine Person. Thus did John know Jesus to
be the Messiah, by an evidence infallible, and every way convincing. And this
he testifies of him, not as a thing by the bye, but says it was the very Errand
whereon he was sent, and for declaration whereof he was called out by God to be
a Prophet. That he should be made manifest to Israel, says he, therefore am I
come, John 1. 31.

Quest. Indeed, if John had such Revelations of this matter, as he declares,
it is plain he was not deceived about it himself, but spoke out of sober
knowledge, and certain grounds. So that if there is no cause to question his
honesty, there is no getting off from his Testimony. But what can you say to
show him a true and honest Man, who would not feign things to deceive others?

Ans. His Sanctity, and Integrity, were the honor, and admiration of his own
times. He led a most mortified, rigid Life, neither caring how hard his Fare
was, nor how coarse his Habit. He neither eat Bread, nor drank Wine, whence in
Scripture he is said to come, neither eating, nor drinking, i. e. not living
upon the usual Diet of other Men, Matthew. 11. 18. compared with Luke 7. 33. His
meat was locusts, and wild honey; and all his raiment of camels hair, girt about
him with a leathern girdle, Matthew. 3. 4. And thus voluntarily abandoning, I
will not say the pleasures, but even the ease, and common conveniences of the
Flesh, he was not capable to be tempted by them. He was eminently above all
affectation of Power, or Praise; insomuch, that when all were ready to receive
him for Messiah, he told them he John 1. 27.
was not worthy to unty his sho^s, and was glad when he could fix that Honor
on Jesus, whose right it was, declaring openly, he must increase, but I must
decrease, John. 3. 29, 30, 31. He was illustrious for Piety, and most bold and
zealous in reproving Vice, as he fully manifested by his undaunted freedom, in
censuring the sins of all states, and sorts of People, as they came to him for
Baptism, Matthew. 3. And as for his sincerity and plain-dealing, till Jesus came,
they could not in all that Age show such a downright, honest Man. When Herod
set his heart upon him, and loved to hear him, his growing great at Court did
not make him swerve in the least from his Country simplicity, or teach him how
to flatter, nor would he there so much as connive at his Prince's sin, though
he was to lose, not only his Favor, but his own Hearts Blood, for his plain
freedom in taxing and reproving it, Matthew. 14. 3, 4. 10.

Quest. These are signal proofs of an upright, honest Man. But did the Jews,
who lived in those days, see all this in him?

Ans. Yes, and honor and admire it too. He was, as Christ says, a burning and
a shining light among them, and for a while, till he had disgusted them by
testifying so fully for Jesus, they were willing to rejoice in him, John 5. 35.
They all held him for a Prophet, and so if they would be true to themselves,
ought surely to rely upon his word, Matthew. 21. 26. They thought it not enough
to Admire and Praise, but thronged in to become his Disciples, and Followers:
and those that did so, were not only the ignorant vulgar, but the most learned
and best reputed Sects, the Pharisees and Sadducees, who came, desiring to
receive Baptism at his hands, Matthew. 3. 7. Nay, they did not only repute him
for a Prophet, but fancied him the greatest of all Prophets, the Christ, whom
all desired, and expected. And this was not barely the surmize of some private
Men, but the opinion of the Sanhedrim, that Great Council and Representative of
the Jewish Nation. For they sent Deputies to him, a select number of Priests,
and Levites from Jerusalem, to ask him this Question, John 1. 19. Thus great,
and current was John's Fame in the Jewish Nation, as is declared also by Antiq.
l. 18. ^. 7.
Josephus a Jewish Historian; which, when they begun to value him less, out of
their hatred to Jesus to whom he bore witness, was yet of such awful Authority
and Account, that they, who would not receive durst not openly gainsay it; as
the Pharisees durst not, who, when Jesus pressed them with John's Testimony for
his Authority, pitifully sneaked, and openly refused to give any Answer to it,
Matthew. 21. 27.

Quest. But was not Jesus John's Friend? And though he was too mortified to be
tempted, and too honest to be gained by any thing else; yet might not affection
blind his Eyes, and he fancy more, and speak things greater, than were true of
Jesus, out of Friendship?

Ans. No, if he had been an old Friend, the grounds John gives are so clear and
full, as could not in any reason be questioned. But, what is still a further
circumstance in this Testimony, he is careful to tell us, that he declared this
of Jesus, before they were acquainted. For when he gives his Testimony to him,
after he had seen the Holy Ghost descend upon him at his Baptism, I knew him
not, says he, but he that sent me to baptize with water, the same said unto me,
Upon whom thou shall see the Spirit descending, and remaining on him, that same
is he that baptizeth with the Holy Ghost. And this I saw by him, and bare
record, John 1. 33, 34. It Is true, when he came to him for Baptism, which was
before he had seen this sign, or made this declaration, S. Matthew says, John
knew him, and thereupon would have put him by, as having more need to be
baptized of him, Matthew. 3. 14. But that was purely by Revelation, the same
Spirit then suggesting the presence of Messiah to John, that made him leap for
joy in the womb, at the salutation of the blessed Virgin, after She had
conceived him Luc. ^. 44. But till he gave this Testimony to him, he knew him
not as a Friend or Acquaintance, nor had any former Conversation, or
correspondence passed between them.

Quest. No wonder this Testimony should overawe the Jews, when Jesus urged it
for himself, though it could not convince them.

But besides this Testimony of John the Baptist, you mentioned also the
Testimony of Jesus himself, as deserving credit. Pray clear up that.

Ans. This also Jesus alleges for himself, and stands upon it. I am one that
bear witness of my self, and my record is true: for I know whence I came, and
whither I go, John 8. 14, 18.

Quest. But this is only his own word, in his own case. And Men are too apt to
say great, and undue things of themselves, out of a desire of Honor, or
Advantage. And if we believe all on their own sayings, we must believe all
deceivers: for the rankest Impostors are true Men, if we dare trust themselves.

Ans. True, indeed, it were as unreasonable to believe all, as to believe none.
But in these cases, we are to put a difference between Witnesses, and not to
trust the accounts given of themselves by all, but only by credible Persons. In
particular, if it appears of any Man, that he is not fanciful, false, or
designing; we should be very inclinable to believe his account: especially, if
God had set some extraordinary attesting marks upon him, or showed some
Miracles about him, or if he himself, which was the Deuteronomy. 18. 22.
Legal Test of Prophets, should give some extraordinary sign to gain credit.
All which most eminently concur in this Testimony, which Jesus gave of himself,
for his being the Christ.

Quest. Does it appear that Jesus was no fanciful Man, apt to take up Opinions
on slight grounds, or presume things, especially in favor of himself, without
reason?

Ans. Yes, for in all his carriage, as he appeared most humble, and
self-denying; so did he clearly manifest, not only a most quick and
penetrating, but also a most sober, and considerate Wisdom. In all his life, he
was never seen to be precipitate in any Counsels, nor presumptuous in any
Conceits, nor mistaken in any Opinions and Resolutions, but could solve clearly
all Questions, and show the true weight, and just validity of all Arguments.
Even they, who would not receive his Wisdom, could not but admire it, and the
very Officers sent to apprehend him, returned saying, Never man spoke like this
man, John 7. 46. Besides, the things whereon John 8. 14.
he builds his own Credit, are not any conjectural Speculations, or disputable
Opinions, but plain matters of Fact: such as his John 17. 5.
living, and conversing with God in Heaven, long before he came into the world;
his John 16. 28. and 8. 42.
coming out from him, and speaking what he John 8. 38.
saw, and heard him declare, whilst he lay from Eternal Ages in his Bosom. And
these, if they are untruths, cannot be fancies, but downright Forgeries, and
Impostures: they argue not so much an Enthusiastical, as a false and designing
Man, since no Person in his wits, as it is most evident he was, could fancy
himself into such persuasions. And thus, it seems, the Adversaries of Jesus
themselves believed. For they never once accused him, as being a deluded
Enthusiast, but always as a false Impostor, who crastily invented those
pretensions; which he sought to impose upon the world, Matthew. 27. 63. and John
7. 12.

Quest. Was he also as apparently honest, and undesigning?

Ans. Yes, for never Man sought so little for himself, or did so much for
others, making it his meat and drink to bring Glory unto God, and dispense
Blessings to the World. Whatsoever he claimed, or did, was in pursuit of those
public ends; not at all to greaten his own secular State and Power, or to
gratify his own Will and Humor. And on this score he calls upon all Men to
believe him, as one that visibly could have no temptation to deceive, and
plainly sought to serve no ends of his own upon them. My judgment is just,
says he, because I seek not mine own will, but the will of the Father, which
has sent me, John 5. 30.

Quest. Two great things there are, which Men may seek by such pretenses:
Interest, that ratifies the covetous; and Honor, that Idol of the ambitious,
and vain glorious. And does it plainly appear of Jesus, that in pursuing his
pretensions, he sought neither of these?

Ans. Yes, For as for Honor, though by his miraculous Power, he did every
where the most stupendous things: yet was he never tempted to do any one out
of vanity, to set on his own Praise; but only as occasion was given him by the
requests, or needs of Men; or as he saw they might serve to accomplish God's
ends. Yea, after the miraculous Cures were done, he several times imposed
silence on Matthew. 8. 4 and 9. 30. and 12. 16.
those he cured, or those who were privy to it, to stifle the spreading of his
own Fame. He gave the Honor of all he did to God, declaring, That John 5. 30.
and 14. 10.
of himself he could do nothing, but that his Luke 11. 20.
finger wrought all the works they so much admired, and directing them to
adore, and laud him for them, as accordingly they Matthew. 9. 8 and 15. 31. Luke
7. 16. and 18. 43.
did. And then, as for worldly interest, though he pretended to come as a
Prince and Shepherd, yet he declared that was not to serve himself of his
People but to serve them, and shed his Hearts Blood for them. And all Men must
needs say he seeks no private interest, or self design who comes among Men,
only to have the opportunity to die for them. And being thus apparently free
from all designs, or endeavors, of seeking his own interest, or applause; upon
this score he calls upon all reasonable Men to receive ^is Testimony. The good
Shepherd lays down his life for the sheep: I am the good Shepherd, for I lay
down my life for them, J^^n 10. 11, 15. I honor my father, says he again, and
seek not mine own glory. He that speaks of himself, seeks his own glory:
but he that seeks his glory that sent him, the same is true, and no
unrighteousness is in him, John 8. 49, 50. and 7. 18.

Quest. Indeed, such manifestations of sober Wisdom, and undesigning Integrity,
are enough to gain great regard to any Man's account. But, as you said, it
would be of more force still, if God, by extraordinary Providence, and
miraculous Events, brought to pass for, or about a Person, should prepossess
the World with a great Opinion, and raise in all Men some extraordinary
expectations from him. And was this done for Jesus, when he came?

Ans. Yes, for, besides that a confessed Prophet was sent in God's Name, as I
showed, on purpose to declare him; a Train of Revelations, and Miracles, was
laid by Almighty God, to prepare his way, and usher him in. One Angel is sent
to his Mother, then and afterward a Virgin, with the news of his Miraculous
Conception; another to clear her Honor, and satisfy her jealous Husband; and
a whole Luke 2.
Host of them are heard to sing Anthems of Joy and Praise at his Birth,
declaring to the Shepherds, that he was Christ the Lord. A prodigious Star, of
an irregular place and motion, is created to lead some great Men Matthew. 2.
of the East, to the place where he was. Who, coming by its guidance to
Jerusalem in search of him, put King Herod, and all the Jews, into an anxious
fear and consternation. And being led on farther by it, to Bethlehem, to the
very House where he lay, they most solemnly paid their Homage and Devotion,
offering him Gifts, Gold, Frankincense, and Myrrh. And to heighten the
observation, and perpetuate the memory of these things, a strange instance of
most lamentable, and unheard of cruelty accompanied them. For at the Wise Men's
report, Herod growing jealous of this new King, and not being able to learn
where he was, that, under pretense of going to Worship, he might seize and
devour him, they failing to bring him word according to their promise, through
God's warning them to the contrary in a Dream: in his Bloody Rage he slew all
the Children, under two years old, in Bethlehem, and all the coasts thereof,
assuredly concluding he should cut off him among them. Besides all which, at
the Luke 2. 22.
accomplishment of his Mothers days of Purification, when he was brought into
the Temple, Ver. 25, 26, etc.
Simeon (Son, as is supposed, to the Great Hillel, and Father to Gamaliel) and
Ver. 36, 37, 38, etc*
* Hannah, two Persons eminent for Piety and Holiness, and known, though not in
ordinary course, yet at some times to be acted by a Prophetic Spirit, which,
having ceased among the Jews for four hundred Years, ever since Zechary and
Malachy, begun then to revive again, did own him for the Christ of God, and
spoke of him to all that looked for Redemption in Jerusalem. All these, with a
number of other great Signs showed about him, were most publicly known among
the Jews, and were the wonder, and discourse of that time, and must needs raise
in Men's minds strange expectations from him. And seeing him thus visibly sent
of God, they would be the more prepared, when he declared himself, to give him
credit. Especially, when they knew him still more Gloriously set out, and all
the foregoing Signs advanced and confirmed, by the visible descent of the Holy
Ghost upon him, and the voice from Heaven accompanying it, at his Baptism, when
he begun his Preaching.

Quest. And to all this, did he also himself give them a Sign for his own
justification?

Ans. Yes, and the very same too, that Moses prescribed for a proof of any
Man's being sent of God as a Prophet, viz. his fore telling things to come,
Deuteronomy. 18. 22. For this Jesus did among them, and that too on this very score,
according to the rule of Moses to justify his Mission. His own Resurrection,
under the Type of Jonas, he gives to the Jews for a sign, Matthew. 12. 40. And
Judas's Treason he foretold to his Disciples before it happened, that thereby,
says he, when it is come to pass, you may believe that I am he, John 13. 19.
And this alone is a sufficient vindication of his Testimony, if he could
produce nothing else. For in a Legal Trial at the Bar of Moses, this would
prove him a true Prophet. And that being once made out, his Testimony is no
further to be questioned.

Quest. Indeed, such personal endowments, and so miraculous an entry, are
enough to gain credit to any Person, and make the World believe what he says,
though he wrought no Miracles for confirmation.

Ans. Very true, and so they did in John's case. For John, as the Scripture
says, wrought no miracle, John. 10. 41. But yet he was universally held for a
Prophet, because of his eminent Integrity and Wisdom, and because his
Conception was by a Mother barren and past Childbearing, and was first
revealed by the Message of an Angel, and his unbelieving Father struck dumb,
and his Tongue as miraculously loosed again upon the Child's Birth to Prophecy
concerning him; by all which he was notoriously known to be a Child of
Miracles, though he wrought none. And all these, as I have noted, were far more
eminent in Jesus, which therefore in all equity and reason should have gained
him credit, and make him pass for a Prophet, as John did. Besides, that Jesus
gave them Predictions, the Legal proof of true Prophets, which had been enough
to authorize and justify his Witness, had it come backed with no other
credentials.

Quest. You have shown reason enough, why Jesus's report of himself should be
trusted, since it came thus well fortified.

Ans. Yes, this shows him a most creditable Witness, whilst he appeared among
us, to testify for himself here on Earth. But besides that, he has moreover
showed himself several times since he went to Heaven, particularly to Stephen,
and Saul, giving them an ocular evidence, by appearing in actual Possession of
his Pretenses. And this exhibition of himself, in Glorious Majesty at God's own
Throne, does as convincingly speak him to be Christ the King, as any Man's
Personal appearance and presentation of himself, can prove him to be a live
Person. In doubt of a thing's existing in any condition, there is no such
satisfactory proof, as if the thing presents it self, and shows its state by
ocular demonstration.

Quest. But after all that you have said, about the validity of this Testimony
of Jesus in his own case, does not Jesus himself say the contrary, when he
tells the Jews, If I bear witness of my self, my witness is not true, John 5.
31.

Ans. By not true, he means not that it is no real Truth, nor that it is no
proof of Truth; for in another place he says expressly, though I bear record of
my self, my witness is true, John 8. 14. But only that it will not pass in Law
for a proof of Truth. And that, not for any defect in the kind, but only in the
tale and number of Evidence. For their Law, as he notes, required two
Witnesses. So that although his own Testimony were one good proof, yet being
but one, it was of it self alone no full proof, but wanted the Testimony of his
Father too to make it a Legal Evidence, John 8. 17, 18. And accordingly in the
place objected, when he says his own is no good Testimony, in the next words he
adds, there is another that bears witness of me, which making up the Legal
number if added to his own, would make an undeniable Testimony, John 5. 32.

Quest. But after all* will not this taking the word of Jesus in his own case,
give color and credit to designing Impostors, and Fanatical Enthusiasts?

Ans. It would, if he, or they were to be believed upon their bare sayings. But
there is do danger at all of that, if, to back them, they must produce such
Credentials, as I have set off in his case. For to be sure upon examination,
they will appear, either not to be Persons of sober and solid reason, or not
exempt from all just suspicion of vanity and self-design, or to want an
extraordinary and miraculous introduction. Not to mention moreover, that they
will have no acknowledged Prophet to bear Witness to them, and that they will
fail of giving a Sign and Prediction, which, according to the strictest Test of
Moses, was answered and made good by him. Which great differences, make their
words in their own case, to be only either a forged, or a Fanatical bold
Saying, which was sober Truth, and solid Evidence in him.

Quest. Besides these Testimonies, for Jesus being the Messiah, you mentioned a
third, viz. his miraculous works, which you called an Evidence drawn up by the
finger of God. I pray you declare that.

Ans. This Jesus often urges for himself, and that too as of greater validity,
than either his own, or John's Testimony. I have greater witness, than that of
John; for the works, which the Father has given me to finish, the same works
that I do bear witness of me, that the Father has sent me, John 5. 36. And if
I do the works of my Father, though you believe not me, believe the works, John
10. 37, 38.

Quest. Indeed, in pretense that any thing comes from God, Signs and Miracles
are a convi^cing argument. For being a visible effect, as our Savior said, of
the finger of God, they show evidently that God espouses the Person who is
empowered to work them, and will employ his Almighty Power to make his Sayings
good. But one great difficulty lies in the way of this Evidence, and that is,
that Miracles, or things seemingly as strange as they, which we cannot
distinguish from them, are ofttimes wrought by Satan and his Agents. As they
were by ^ Tim. 3. 8.
Jannes and Jambres, the Egyptian Magicians, in their contest with Moses: and
by false Christ's, and false Prophets, who, as our Savior foretold, should show
signs and wonders, Matthew. 24. 24. and by the great Antichrist and Man of sin,
whose coming, S. Paul declares, should be after the working of Satan, with all
power, and signs, and lying wonders, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9. And if Satan works
Miracles, or, which in effect is all one, what we shall take for such, to
credit false Impostors, as well as God does to justify true Prophets; how
shall we distinguish these, and know of the Signs which Jesus gave us, whether
they are Divine Miracles, that evidence a true Man, or only Feats of Magic,
which are shown by many false Men?

Ans. They are easily distinguished, by the whole kind of some, and by the
intent and design of all of them.

Quest. I pray you instance to me in some, where they are distinguished by the
whole kind. That is, of some sorts of Miracles done by Jesus, which are
peculiar to God, and which cannot be performed by any unclean Spirit.

Ans. One is foretelling future contingencies, which Jesus did several times.
Particularly he foretold his own Matthew. 16. 21.
death, and the strange kind of it, by hanging after the Roman way upon a
Matthew. 20. 19.
Cross; which was not only most accidental, but most improbable, since if he
was taken off at all, it was not like to be by Roman, but Jewish malice. He
foretold also that Judas, one of his own Disciples, should betray him, and that
before he was given up to Satan to enter into him, or Judas himself, it is like,
ever thought of any such thing: nay, he knew it, says S. John, from the very
beginning, John 6. 64, 70, 71. And that Peter should deny him, yea, and that
just thrice, before the Cock crew twice, Mark 14. 30. whereas, those three
occasions of his denial, were then not only in themselves most uncertain, but
at the same time Peter made so sure of his not denying him at all, that he
confidently said, he would rather die with him, than do it in any wise, Verse
31. To these I might add, his Prediction of the Bloody Matthew. 24 9, 10.
persecutions of his Disciples, the unhappy Matthew. 24. 11, 12.
success of false Prophets, the continuance of his Church and Religion, though
ever and anon groaning under most heavy Sufferings, to the Matthew. 28. 20. and
16. 18.
worlds end; with many others.

Quest. Is this Prediction of future Contingencies, a work peculiar to the
All-seeing God, and above the skill of all infernal Spirits?

Ans. Yes, and thence it is called Divination, as manifesting the Divinity of a
Being. And accordingly herein God challenges all the pretended Gods of the
Heathens; saying, Show the things that are to come hereafter, that we may know
that you are Gods, Isaiah 41. 23. And this the Devils plainly manifest
themselves unable to do, by the Ambiguity of their Oracles, when they are
consulted in these cases. For not knowing what will be the event of things,
they use artifice in words, and frame Responses of such doubtful construction,
as are liable to be turned both ways, and so equally capable of being verified
by all events. Such was the noted Answer of the Devil at ^ elphos, cited by De
Divinat. l. 2.
Cicero from Ennius, which he is said to have given to Pyrrhus King of Epirus,
when he consulted him about the issue of the War with the Romans:

Aio te AEacida Romanos vincere posse. Which, according to the different ways
Men should begin the construction, was equally good Latin, and would be equally
true, whether he should conquer the Romans, or they should conquer him. And
such also was that other Answer, which he cites from Herodotus, said to be
given to Croesus King of Lydia, when he went against Cyrus:

Croesus Halym penetrans magnam pervertet opum vim. That is, if he passed the
River Halys against Cyrus, he should consume a vast Wealth, and waste a great
Domination: which would be very true, whether it fell out to be theirs, or his
own. These studiously uncertain, and ambiguous Answers, are a plain sign the
Demon was at a nonplus. Besides, that future Contingencies are out of the
reach, and foresight of impure Spirits, is plain, because those causes are,
whereon such futurities depend. For they are wrapped up in the free will of Men,
which the Devils cannot force, but only tempt: and in the Counsel, and
Providence of Almighty God, whose early determinations are hid from them, and
are a secret locked up in his own Breast.

Quest. But have not Demons often foretold such futurities, as when Suet. in Jul.
c. 81.
Spurinna the Augur, by the Diabolical signs in the Sacrifice, could warn
Julius Caesar of his danger such a day, if he went into the Senate House?

Ans. That the Demon might easily foretell, when the time, and place, and
persons, and other circumstances of the Murder, had been resolved on among
themselves, and he had been present, and principally influenced their Debates
in all their Consults. Such Predictions are but like a seasonable discovery
made by some of the Conspirators.

Quest. But what say you to Predictions of more remote things, as yet
unconcerted among the immediate Actors, and to their foretelling the success of
attempts, or expeditions, or other futurities of contingent nature, which the
Demons often revealed to their Prophets, both by Oracles, entrails of
Sacrifices, feeding of Pullen, and other ways in use among Heathen Diviners.

Ans. When they ventured at these, it was not with certainty and assurance, as
infallible understandings; but only by guesses and conjectures, from the
appearances of things, their preparations, and probabilities, as politic
observers, wherein they can go far, by reason of their great knowledge and
experience. And when they were put to Answer on these points, if they were more
distrustful of the issue, they gave ambiguous and uncertain Answers, capable of
being verified by all events, which would be a sure reserve for their errors,
as in the case of Croesus, and Pyrrhus. But if the event seemed more likely,
and they were presuming and bold enough to Answer plainly; then, since the
effect would several times hit, as well as sometimes miss, they hoped all would
be expounded in their favor, and their mistakes salved, by the Candor and
Devotion of their Worshippers.

Quest. But do not you think Demons can speak of some such futurities in plain
Speech, and there too with certainty and assurance?

Ans. Yes, some events are put into their hands, when any Persons are delivered
to them, either for their trial, as Job, or for their punishment, as 1 King.
22. 22.
Ahab. And after such delivery, they may foretell these events, as depending
upon themselves Thus might Satan easily have foretold the Inva^ions of the Job
1. 12, 15, 1^.
Chaldeans, and Sabeans, upon Job's Oxen, and Camels, after he had gained God's
License: and Judas's Treason, after he was delivered up to him, to Luke 22. 3.
enter into him. And thus might they in the Gentile Divinations, foretell cures
of Diseases, whereof by God's Commission they had been the Inflictors, seeming
then to cure, where they only ceased to kill, as Apol. c. 22.
Tertullian says. To predict such things, as are left to their Power and
Ministry to accomplish, requires no more skill, than to know beforehand what
they intend to do, and what are their own Decrees and Purposes. But it is beyond
the foresight of any Demons to foretell such remote Contingencies, before the
abandoning of Persons; as God does frequently in the Holy Scriptures, declaring
the most accidental things, which shall Genesis 15. 13. ^
happen to Men yet Jer. 25. 12. etc. 29. 10.
unborn; or the most free and voluntary, which shall be 1 King. 13. 2. and Isa.
44. 28.
done by them. And as the Blessed Jesus did, and his Apostles after him by his
Spirit, foretelling what should befall the whole Nation of the Jews, both young
and old, after almost forty Years; and what should happen to his own Church, in
remote Ages; and what should be, not only the temptations and trials, but the
most contingent carriage and free actions of good Men, who were in God's
Protection, and whom the impure Spirits could only tempt, not govern, as is
plain among many others, in that of Peter's thrice denying, and the Apostles
forsaking him.

Quest. But the famed Oracles of the Sibyls, from which Eclog. 4.
Virgil transcribed some Predictions, and which startled De Divin. l. 2.
Cicero, when the Quindecemviri, who had the custody and exposition of them,
were bringing out thence the news of a King into the Senate, were spoke of
Christ, and fully verified in him, who was no abandoned Person. And did not
Demons here foresee, and foretell such futurities, as depend on God, and were
wrapped up, as you said, in his Counsel?

Ans. No, for very probably the Spirit that revealed those things to these
Heathen Sibyls, was not any infernal Spirit, but the Spirit of the true God,
which sometimes inspired Heathens, as it did Number. 24.
Balaam the Aramite, to Prophesy of several events, particularly of Messiah,
thereby even among the Gentile World, to raise an expectation of him, who was
to be the Hag. 2. 7.
desire of all Nations. Or, if they had it not from the Spirit of God at the
first hand, yet had they it thence at the second, viz. by reading it in the
Jewish Prophets, by whom God had before foretold these things: which is a thing
not improbable, since they express them sometimes in their very Forms, and
Allegories. The Demons revealed not these things to their Prophets, or, if they
did, the Prediction was not their own, but, as Apol. c. 22.
Tertullian says, they stole their Divination.

Quest. The powers of darkness then, can only guess at such futurities, whose
causes are at work, and whereof they see signs and appearances, like
Politicians; or discover things ready to take effect, when they have been in
the club of the Actors and Conspirators; or presignifie what they intend to do
with such, as God has delivered into their hands; or repeat Predictions, from
God's true Prophets in the Holy Scriptures: in some one, or other whereof, did
their foresight consist in Heathen Divinations. But as for the voluntary
actions of all under God's Protection, and all such remote and contingent
futurities, as are not determinable by natural causes, but depend upon Men's
free will, and God's free Providence, they are above their reach, so that we
are sure of the true God where we have such Predictions?

Ans. Yes, and therefore it is evident Jesus came from God, because he, as I
said, and his Apostles after him by his Spirit, did foretell such as these, as I
have shown in several instances.

Quest. What other Miracles did Jesus work, which are peculiar to God, and
above the power of a wicked Spirit?

Ans. Secondly, He saw into Men's hearts and secret thoughts: discovering,
before any outward proofs and manifestations, the fickleness of some Disciples,
John 2. 24. and the veiled falsehood of the Scribes and Pharisees, who stood as
insidious Spies upon him, Luke 6. 8. and adapting his Answers, and Discourses,
not only to Men's Questions, but also to their inward Thoughts and Surmizes,
before they expressed and proposed them to him, as he did with the Pharisees,
Matthew. 12. 25. and in several Luke 6. 8, 9. Matthew. 9. 4.
other places. And this is another work, which God claims as peculiar to
himself, stiling himself the searcher of hearts, and trier of reins; yea,
claiming the knowledge of them for this reason, which is peculiar to him,
because he is to judge, and recompense them. I the Lord search the heart, and
try the reins, to give every man according to his ways, and according to the
fruit of his doings, Jer. 17. 10. And thou, even thou only know the hearts
of all the children of men; says Solomon, 1 King. 8. 39.

Quest. Did Jesus any more Miracles, which are performable only by the finger
of God; and are above the force of Magic?

Ans. Yes, Thirdly, He raised the dead, as Mar. 5. 42.
Jairus's daughter; and the Luke 7. 12, 13, 14, 15.
widows son of Nain, when he was carried out to be buried; and John 11* 39, 44.
Lazarus, after he had been four days dead. And this again is peculiarly God's
work. For when once Souls are separated from their Bodies, they undergo God's
Sentence, and are secured in such places as he allots, whence they cannot
return, or be remanded, but by his License, and Power, that effects all things.
There is no God with me, for I kill, and I make alive, says God by Moses,
Deuteronomy. 32. 39. All separate Souls are under Locks and Keys, and it is a Divine
Hand, which holds the keys of hell and of death, Rev. 1. 18.

Quest. Have you any more instances?

Ans. Yes, Fourthly, Casting out Devils. And those not only where they were of
the most stubborn sorts, which had proved too Matthew. 17. 18, 21.
hard for his Disciples: but also where they were in greatest numbers, the
Devils ejected by him out of one Man, being called by themselves Legion; which
notes a Roman Army of six thousand Men, Mark 5. 9. Yea, not only expelling, but
as their awful Judge, whose Rod they dread, and at whose frown they tremble,
terrifying them, and forcing them often to cry out, Let us alone, thou Holy One
of God, thou Son of God: we beseech thee torment us not, art thou come to
torment us before the time? Mark 1. 24. Luke 8. 28. Nay, he empowered the
seventy Disciples, and afterward the very meanest of his followers, in virtue
of his dreadful Name, with like Triumph to eject them, Luke 10. 17. And what is
more, when some that did not adhere to him, would try to scare and control
them by his Sacred Name, the trembling Devils fled before them, Mark 9. 38. And
this is another work peculiar to God, which, whatsoever some Potent Demons can,
to be sure they never will imitate. Indeed, in some particular instances, the
higher Orders may command, and eject some particular inferior Spirits, and
thereby serve their own designs. But to go on ejecting all Ranks and Orders,
and those where they are in the greatest numbers and combinations, and that
with terrors, consternation, and torments; is plainly to commence an open War
among themselves, which, as our Savior argued, must needs destroy the Devil's
Kingdom; and therefore is a thing too foolish and absurd, to be imagined of
intelligent, subtle, and designing Spirits, Matthew. 12. 25, 26.

Quest. I see the Miracles of Jesus were evidently distinguished from the lying
wonders of Satan, by the very kind of them in these instances. Pray now show
also how they were as convincingly discriminated, by their intent and design in
all others?

Ans. Because all the Miracles of Jesus were apparently wrought to exalt the
honor, and service of the true God; and to promote the real good of Men; and
to plant Tempers, and Practices, diametrically opposite to the way and genius
of evil Spirits, aiming to root out all those Errors and Superstitions, which
they had cultivated with utmost care through all former Ages, to overthrow
their Altars, reduce their Worshippers, and utterly exclude them from all that
Domination, which they had so long usurped among Men. And it is certain, that a
worker of Miracles, for these Pious, Heavenly, and Charitable purposes, is not
acted, or directed by wicked Spirits. For if they cease to be God's Enemies,
and ours, they cease to be Devils. If they turn Preachers of Humility, Purity,
the Love of God* and of one another, What becomes of their Apostasy? If they
proclaim the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ to be the only true God,
whom we are to fear and worship, and themselves to be fallen Angels, who are no
longer to be adored in Temples, hearkened to in their suggestions, nor imitated
in their falsehood, pride, envy, hatred of God and Men, and other practices;
they turn Angels of Light, instead of being Powers of Darkness. The Devils can
work no Miracles for these ends, except they should first turn Saints, and
change their Natures. And therefore it was a most authentic, and assuring
mark, which Jesus gave of the truth of his own Miracles, when he called them
the works his Father had given him to finish, that is, which were not wrought
for any ill ends, nor out of vanity to exalt his own Praise, but to serve the
ends of God, and set on his Father's desires and purposes, John 5. 36.

Quest. Indeed, in such kinds, which seem more imitable by created powers,
these intents and designs would indisputably distinguish his signs, from all
Satanical Delusions.

Ans. Yes, and so I might add in the last place, would his manner of
performance too. For his usual way of working wonders, was not by any Magical
Rites, and Invocations, but merely by a Word of his Mouth. To the wind, and
sea, he said, Peace, and it was still, Mark 4. 39. to the deaf man's Ears, Be
opened, and instantly he heard, Mark 7. 34, 35. to the blind man, Go thy way,
thy faith has made thee see, and without more ado he saw again, Mark 10. 52.
to the leper, I will, Be thou cleansed, and his leprosy was cured, Luke 5. 13.
Which way of effecting things, by an all-commanding Word, is as plain an
evidence of a Divine Power, as Creating all things was at first: for then God
only said, Let there be light, and there was light, Genesis 1. 3. he only spoke,
and it was done, he commanded, and it stood fast, Psalm 33. 9. Not to mention
moreover, the vast number of his Miracles, which more assuredly inferred a
Divine Power in him, than in any, nay in all the Prophets put together, who
lived before him. For whereas the Jews, when, to exalt Moses and the Prophets,
they ambitiously make the most of their Miracles, after they have picked up all
they can, compute all his only at 76. and all theirs from the beginning of the
World to the destruction of the Temple only at 74. which both together make but
150. in above 3000 Years time: this single Jesus, in three Years wrought so
many, that were they all written, the world it self would not be able to
contain the Books, that should be written of them, John 21. 25. To all which I
might add, lastly, That he did not only show these great, and numerous signs
himself in Person; but transmitted the Power to Numbers to do the same in his
Name, and conferred this Power on Gentiles as well as Jews, which are things
utterly unknown among all the wonder-workers of former times.

Quest. But in this point one thing sticks still with the Jews, which is, that
Jesus and his Apostles, in credit of their Miracles, went about to overthrow
the Law of Moses. And may not they therefore confront all the Miracles wrought
in justification of that Law, against theirs?

Ans. They might, to one that accused that Law as forged or erroneous. Which
Jesus was so far from doing, that he all along makes Moses and the Prophets his
Vouchers, telling the Jews, had you believed Moses, you would have believed me,
for he wrote of me, John 5. 46* and search the Scriptures, for in them ye think
ye have eternal life, and they are they which testify of me, verse 39.

Quest. But did not those Miracles, when they proved that Law to come from God,
prove also that none should come in aftertime, to abrogate and annull it?

Ans. No, but on the contrary the Holy Prophets under that Law, declared it
should be changed, and all those things subverted, whereto it was adapted, and
which were the ground and foundation* of it.

Quest. To what things was the Jewish Law adapted?

Ans. Their Moral Laws, contained in the Ten Commandments, were adapted, not to
the particular state and circumstances of any place or People, but of the
common humane Nature, and therefore were unchangeable. And accordingly, when
our Savior comes to meddle with them, he declares it was not to destroy or
vacate, but fulfill and add what was wanting in them, Matthew. 5. 17, 18. But
their Judicial Laws, which prescribed the Rules of Courts and Judgments, were
fitted to their external Polity, as they were a civil State in Canaan. And as
for their Ceremonial, which ordered the Rules of their Religion and Worship, to
omit other specialties therein, that chief part of them about Sacrifices, was
all to be administered by one Family, viz. Exodus 28. 1. and 1 Chronicles. 23. 13.
Aaron's line, and was limited to one place, viz. the Deuteronomy. 12. 11, 13, 14. and
John 4. 20.
temple of Jerusalem.

Quest. And did the Holy Prophets under that Law, foretell any change in that
Priesthood, Temple-worship, and Civil State, or talk of any new settlement of
things, independent on, or inconsistent with them?

Ans. Yes, In the last days, a known Phrase for the days of Messiah, the
mountain of the Lord's house, says Isaiah, shall be established in the top of
the mountains, and all nations shall flow unto it, Isaiah 2. 2. God's Name
shall be great among the Gentiles, from the rising to the setting of the sun,
in every place shall incense be offered to his Name, and a pure offering: which
cannot consist with Worshipping still in one appropriate place, viz. the Jewish
Temple in Jerusalem, Mal. 1. 11. A new Priesthood shall be erected, says the
Psalmist, in the days of Christ, not after the order of Aaron, but
Melchisedech, Psalm 110. 4. and then shall God take to himself Priests and
Levites out of other nations, no longer confining his choice to Aaron, and his
Sons, Isaiah 66. 19, 20, 21. a plain sign the Law was to cease, when the
Priesthood was, which had the Ministration of it, Heb. 7. 12. About Messiah's
time, says the Prophet Daniel, shall God destroy the city, and make an utter
desolation, the Scepter too departing, as Genesis 49. ^0.
Jacob foretold, when once Shilo was come: and what place then for their
Judicial Laws, when they were no longer to be a Nation, nor have any
Established Polity, to administer, and judge by them? He shall also destroy the
Sanctuary; and what then becomes of all the Sacrifices, when once the place was
demolished, wherein the Law required they should all be offered? Dan. 9. 26,
27. In sum, they declare, as I noted before, that God would set aside the
Mosaic Covenant, by reason of its insufficiency, and give them a new, and
better Covenant in its place. And that he would make this change at that time,
when a woman should compass a Man, which plainly notes the days of Messiah,
Jeremiah 31. 22, 31, 32, etc.

Quest. Indeed, these are plain proofs, that the Law of Moses was designedly
subject unto change in Messiah's days. And if Jesus abrogates it, as they
foretold he should, it is evident he ought not to be looked upon as opposing the
Old Prophets, for accomplishing their own Predictions?

Ans. Most certainly, but is therein owned and vouched by them, as he was in
the event too by God himself, when by the confusion of Tribes, and destruction
of the Temple and Commonwealth, by Vespasian, he plainly set aside those Laws,
by rendering them impossible, and leaving no more place for them. Their Civil or
Judicial Laws, about Buying and Selling, Succession into Estates, Reparation of
Damages, Punishments of Offenses, and other things, are plainly now of no
force, having never since then had any standing Polity, or live-Power to put
them in Execution. The Laws fixing the Priesthood in Aaron's line, and
directing their Ministration, have been evidently superseded ever since that
Line was utterly undistinguishable, and irrecoverably unknown. The Laws and
Ceremonies about Sacrifices, which were all determined to the Temple at
Jerusalem, have been apparently out of doors, ever since the Temple was brought
to ruin. And those many other Laws observed by learned Men, to be made with a
limited Obligation to the Land of Canaan, are manifestly taken off, since God
has irreversibly banished them from thence, and scattered them abroad in every
Nation. So that all these Laws are visibly abrogated by God himself, and fallen
on course, with the loss of their Country, and of the distinction of Tribes,
and with the fall of the Civil State and Temple, which were their Foundation.

Quest. But do not some places speak the perpetui^y of some of those Laws, as
when the Exodus 12. 17.
Passover, and the Precept of Lev. 23. 14.
First fruits, and several others, are called a Statute for ever? And how can
these admit of such change?

Ans. Just as the Priesthood did, which was said to minister to God for ever,
Deuteronomy. 18. 5. and 1 Chronicles. 15. 2. And as the Temple, wherein God says he will
take up his rest for ever: which yet, we all know, for above Sixteen hundred
Years has been utterly destroyed, Psalm 132. 14. Perpetual Statutes, and
unalterable, are two things. Those are perpetual, which are made without an
express limitation of time, and which must last, till the same Power repeals
that enacted them. And thus some Statutes in Moses's Law are styled perpetual,
not to exclude all Power of Abrogation, but in opposition to some other Pendent
Statutes, that were not to oblige till after a certain time, as the Law of
Exodus 23 31. and Number. 33. 52.
driving out the Canaanites, which was not to be of force, till they came among
them. Or to some, that obliged only in some certain state and condition: as the
Statute for Deuteronomy. 23. 12.
going without the Camp, which related to their State of Pereg^ination; and the
Statutes about the Exodus 40.
Tabernacle, which was to last only till God chose out a place, where they
should build him a Temple. But among them, those things especially were said to
be for ever, which were to continue to the end of any thing, or last out the
whole course of any period of time, and till a new Revolution. Thus it is said
of Samuel, that he was brought to 1 Samuel 1. 22.
abide before the Lord for ever, that is, all his life time; as in the form of
our Law, an Estate is said to be granted and bequeathed to a Man for ever, when
it is given him for his life: and a Servant was said in the Exodus 21. 6.
Law to be for ever, who was to serve only till the next Lev. 25. 40, 41.
Jubilee, which was a time of general Release, and begun a new reckoning. And
thus the Law of Moses did last for ever, that is, it lasted to the end of that
State whereto it was adapted, continuing till Christ came, whose time was the
beginning of a new Age, commonly known and expressed in the Jewish Phrase, by
the Mic. 4. 1.
last days, and the 1 Pet. 1. 20.
last time, and the Heb. 2. 5.
world to come. Besides, all the Typical part of that Law, being only in the
Nature of an obscure Prophecy, which was a Gal. 3. 24.
Schoolmaster to bring us to Christ, by shadowing out the good things to come
by him; it was superseded of course by his fulfilling of them, as all
Predictions are by their Accomplishment and Consummation.

Quest. By this I perceive, there is no clashing in designs between our Jesus,
and Moses and the Prophets. And when he set aside that Law, it was only as they
hoped, and foretold he should, by consummating and fulfilling whatsoever it
prefigured, and clearing up what it obscured, and supplying what it omitted,
and by substituting a better Law in its place.

Ans. Very right. And therefore all the Old Testament Miracles do not in the
least oppose, but fortify and confirm his. So that, as he told the Jews, if
they really believed Moses, that would lead them to believe him; but if they
rejected him, that very Moses, in whom they trusted, would accuse them, John 5.
45, 46.

Quest. By what you have said, it is plainly evident, that the Miracles which
Jesus wrought, were done by the finger of God: and then, that naturally
follows, which he thereupon infers, therefore no doubt the kingdom of God is
come unto you, Matthew. 12. 28, 29.

But one Divine Testimony you mentioned besides all these, for proving Jesus to
be the Christ, and that was the Testimony of the Father: pray make that clear?

Ans. This Testimony Jesus alleges in his own behalf, as an additional
evidence to the former Testimony of his works. The same works that I do, bear
witness of me. And the Father also himself, which has sent me, has born
witness of me, John 5. 36, 37. and chap. 8. 17, 18.

Quest. But since we are upon Earth, and the Father in Heaven, and he does not
visibly appear to converse among Men, how did he give Testimony to him?

Ans. I shall mention two ways: First, by audible voices, ye have not at any
time heard his voice, says Jesus to the Jews, when he mentions his Father's
Witness, John 5. 37. Secondly, By raising him from the Dead, and showing him
openly in full possession of his pretenses.

Quest. Was God the Father ever heard to say, Jesus is the Christ, and declare
for him by audible Voices?

Ans. Yes, several times. He appeared clothed with Light and Brightness, the
usual visible Symbol of his presence, as he did of old to Moses at the Bush,
and thence gave a vocal Testimony to Jesus, in as plain and intelligible words,
as before he had used to Moses, or as we can use in giving Testimony to one
another. This he did first at his Baptism, before John the Baptist, saying,
This is my beloved son, in whom I am well pleased, Matthew. 3. 17. And again at
his Trans^^guration, before three of his Apostles, Peter, James, and John, when
out of the bright cloud a voice came, saying, This is my beloved son, in whom I
am well pleased; hear ye him, Matthew. 17. 1, 5. Which Voice, says S. Peter,
from the excellent Glory of God the Father, we heard, when we were with him in
the Holy mount, and were eyewitnesses of his Majesty, 2 Pet. 1. 16, 17, 18.
And the same he repeated again a third time before a Multitude, when Andrew and
Philip brought the Greeks to him. For before them all, Jesus Prayed, Father,
Glorify thy Name. And thereupon came a voice from heaven, saying, I have both
glorified it, and will glorify it again, John 12. 28. And this is a most
sensible, and satisfactory way of God's declaring himself, not merely by shows
and resemblances of things, which are impressed by Visions and Dreams upon Men's
imaginations, but by plain, proper, and significant words, such as he used in
conversing with Adam in paradise, Genesis 3. 8, 9. and with Moses at the bush,
Exodus 3. 4. when assuming a Glorious Light, the usual way of showing himself
particularly present, he spoke to Men out of it, in an audible Voice, as
sensibly, and intelligibly, as a Man can talk and discourse with his Friend.

Quest. Did the Father also testify Jesus to be the Christ by raising him from
the Dead, and showing him openly in full possession of his pretenses?

Ans. Yes, on the third day, he rose again, as we profess in the Creed. And
Almighty Act. 2. 24, 32.
God, as S. Peter says, raised him up. And hereby he did plainly testify, and
vouch for him. For after the Jews had done their worst, condemning, and cruelly
executing him: in raising him up again, God visibly reversed their Sentence,
and undid what they had done, and justified him as one that deserved not to
continue under the Power of Death, but to live again. He was put to Death in
the Flesh, but justified in the Spirit, viz. by that Divine Spirit, which
raised him from the Dead, 1 Timothy 3. 16. He was declared to be the Son of God
with power, by the resurrection from the dead, Romans 1. 4. Nay, after his
Resurrection, he set him in Heaven, at his own right Hand, surrounded with a
Divine Glory, the usual Symbol of God's Presence and Majesty. In which august
form, he showed him to Act. 7. 55.
Stephen, to prepare him for his Martyrdom; and to Act. 26. 13, 14, 16.
Saul, at his Conversion; Jesus appearing to them from God's right Hand, in a
Glory that surpassed the Brightness of the Sun. And having enthroned him there,
he entrusted him with the Holy Ghost, to dispose of it as he pleased; a plain
Evidence of his having all Power in Heaven, as well as on Earth, as he
pretended. Which Power he visibly manifested to all Men, not only by sending
down the Holy Spirit, in all variety of most stupendous Gifts, upon his own
Apostles; but enabling them, by imposition of Hands in his Name, to confer the
same upon innumerable Multitudes of his followers, as appears, from the Acts of
the Holy Apostles, and from other Scriptures.

Quest. I will not ask you for any more Evidence in this great point, of Jesus
being the Christ: such demonstrations, as you have insisted on, being
abundantly sufficient to gain belief from every honest mind, that is careful to
inquire, and willing to be informed. And as for others, who are wantonly
captious, or wilfully blind and incredulous, they are not to be convinced by
Reason and Arguments.

But building on this now, as most unquestionably sure, That Jesus is the
Christ, does not that undeniably prove the Divine Authority of the New
Testament, which is his Word?

Ans. Most certainly it does. For that contains only what he either spoke, or
acted himself in his Life; or ordered his Apostles to do, and teach in his
Name, after his Death. The same Proofs and Testimonies, which justify him, do
authorize it; since it only sets out to us all that Word, in declaration
whereof all the Evidences urged hitherto are to gain him credit.

Quest. I am fully satisfied of the certainty, and have heard enough to
convince me of the usefulness, and efficacy of Faith in Christ. I would desire
now to hear something more of the particular points of that Faith, whereof we
are to be thus firmly persuaded, and whereby such admirable things are to be
performed.

Ans. Those, as I hinted at first, are summed up in that short Creed, into the
profession whereof we are all Baptized. And that I shall next endeavor to
discourse on, and explain to you.

THE Knowledge of GOD* OR, AN EXPLICATION OF THE Divine Attributes, AND
PROVIDENCE.
The Knowledge of God: or, an Explication of the Divine Attributes, and
Providence.
CHAP. I. Of the Being, and Attributes of God.
The Contents.
The World declares there is a God. He is an eternal Spirit, on whom all things
depend. Of God's Holiness. Several things explained, which seem to infringe it:
as when God is said to harden Men's hearts. To inflict Spiritual blindness, and
a reprobate sense. To send a false Spirit to deceive Ahab: and strong delusion.
God often gives Men up to the delusion of evil Spirits. Cautions to prevent this.
To give Men a Spirit of slumber. An account, how notwithstanding God's
irreconcilable hatred of sin, it is still suffered in the World. Of God's
Goodness. Several false Notions of it. In what things it chiefly consists. Of
God's Justice, or Righteousness, This shown in giving Righteous Laws. And
passing Righteous Judgments according to them, without respect of Persons. His
Punitive Justice cleared from misplacing punishments, in punishing one for
another's sins. And from misproportioning them, in allotting eternal
punishments, to momentany sins. Some false aspersions on this just God wiped
off. Of God's Presence in all places. The effect of this. Of his Faithfulness.
This shown by inviolable performance of his Promises: And interpreting them
without evasion, or secret reserve, according to their plain meanings. And by
constant adherence to his Friends and Faithful Servants: which is no
encouragement for any to return to their former sins. Of God's Wisdom. This
shown in setting a just rate and estimate on all things; so that he is neither
gained, nor lost by worthless services. In discerning the just power and force
of all Means, and success of all Methods; which should beget the greatest
Reverence for all his Ordinances. In seeing the best times, and seasons, for
every purpose: so that we must never think any Deliverance too long delayed, or
Affliction too fast hastened. No reason to pretend to the Love of God, without
loving, and imitating these Divine Excellencies.

Question. WHat are the Articles of Christian Faith, or particular points,
which we Christians are to believe?

Answer. They are all contained in this Creed, commonly called the Apostles
Creed; I believe in God the Father Almighty, maker of Heaven and Earth. And in
Jesus Christ, his only Son, our Lord; who was conceived by the Holy Ghost, born
of the Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead, and
buried, he descended into Hell; the third day he rose again from the dead, he
ascended into Heaven, and sits at the right Hand of God the Father Almighty,
from thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead. I believe in the
Holy Ghost; the Holy Catholic Church; the Communion of Saints; the Forgiveness
of Sins; the Resurrection of the Body; and the Life Everlasting.

Amen.

Quest. Does this Creed contain all points of Doctrine, necessary to be
believed by every Christian?

Ans. Yes, for it was given for a Confession of Faith, that should fit Men for
Baptism, and show any Person to be a Christian: and they had better have made
no Rule, or Confession of Faith at all, than an imperfect one.

Quest. What do you make the first Article in this Creed?

Ans. I believe in God, the Father Almighty, maker of Heaven and Earth.

Quest. How does it appear that there is a God?

Ans. From this vast World, that he has made. Even as we are unquestionably
assured of the Being of a Skilful Architect, where we see a stately, and well
contrived House erected; or of a learned Author* from an excellent, and
well-penned Book; or of an Ingenious Artificer, from a Watch of exact, and
various Movements, or other elaborate, and curious piece of Workmanship. And
this shows us, not only that there is a God, on whom we, and all this created
World depend: but also that he is most Wise, Powerful, and Good; because the
greatest Power, Wisdom, and Goodness, are every where apparent in the
contrivance, and formation of it. For the invisible things of God, even his
eternal Power and Godhead, are clearly seen from the Creation of the World,
being understood by the things that are made, as S. Paul says, Romans ^. 20.

Quest. Indeed, nothing in reason seems more obvious, than that all this World
must have an Architect; and that we, and all the things about us, which every
where spring up and perish, could never make our selves; and that things of
such admirable Order, Harmony, and Usefulness, could not any one, and much less
all of them, be put together by blind and uncontriving chance. And therefore,
methinks, this proof of God's Being, from the voice of his Works, must needs
convince all his reasonable Creatures?

Ans. Yes, and ever since the World began, so it has. There is neither speech
nor language, where their voice is not heard: their ^i^e is gone out through
all the earth, and their words unto the end of the world, Psalm. 19. 3, 4. On
this, or other Arguments, all People, in every Age, and Nation, believed, and
acknowledged that there is a God, and delivered down that Belief to those who
followed them. And therefore no Person can ever oppose this, and pretend to
reason, since thereby, he sets up himself against all People of every place and
time, and against what passed for the plainest, and most uncontestable
Principle of humane reason, ever since there was any such thing. So that if
therein he has reason, he has it to himself alone, and all the present World
besides, yea, and all Ages too that went before him, had none.

Quest. What things are we to know, and believe concerning God?

Ans. First, His Godhead, and Divine Attributes. Secondly, His Providence.

Quest. There is nothing in all Religion more necessary, or useful for us, than
to have a right apprehension of Almighty God. Is he like any thing, which we
behold with our Eyes, or feel with our Hands, or discern by any Bodily Senses?

Ans. No; in Scripture, indeed, he is said to have Ears, and Eyes, and Hands,
and Feet. But therein, as the Jewish Rabbis say, the Law speaks of God with
the Tongue of the Children of Men. And we are to understand, not that he has
any such parts, but only that he has as full perceptions, and performs the same
things, as we do by them. The invisible God, whom no man has seen, or can see,
1 Timothy 6. 16. is a Spirit, says our Savior, John 4. 24. And this must teach us
in all our Services, which we pay to him, never to think of putting him off
with outward Shows, Gifts, and Ceremonies; but to be inwardly affected in all
we do, or say, and always to offer him our Hearts, and Spirits: For he being a
Spirit, must be worshipped, as Christ said, in spirit and in truth, John 4. 24.
And moreover, never to make any Bodily Images, and representations of him; or
fancy to give him Worship, and Honor by them: since a pure unbodied Spirit, is
not represented, but Romans 1. 23, 25. Is. 44. 20.
belyed; not honored; but debased by any such thing. Ye saw Is. 40. 18.
no manner of similitude of God, when he came and spoke to you, said Moses to
the Jews, therefore take good heed, left ye corrupt your selves in making any
of him, Deuteronomy. 4. 15, 16. And thou shall not make to thee any likeness, of any
thing, either in Heaven, or Earth, to bow down to them, said the Law, Exodus 20.
4, 5.

Quest. But although we cannot see him with our Eyes, yet we may apprehend
several things of him in our minds. And one, you say, is his Godhead: what
mean you by that?

Ans. His Sovereignty, or being the Supreme Being, that depends on none, and
that all other things depend upon. Particularly Men, who were at first made by
him, and still absolutely depend on him. In him we live, move, and have our
being, Act. 17. 28.

Quest. If he depends on none, he must be an eternal Being, which never had
beginning?

Ans. Yes, because there was nothing before him, to give beginning to him. So
that if he had not been from all Eternity, he could never have been at all.

Quest. And if all things else, but especially all Men, do absolutely depend on
him, that will make all careful to serve and please him, and found Religion?

Ans. Undoubtedly so it should. And where it is not only believed, but
seriously laid to heart, so it will.

Quest. What are the Divine Attributes, or Properties of God, which will show
us how he stands affected, and what will please him?

Ans. He is all Holiness, Goodness, Justice, Faithfulness, Wisdom, Almighty,
every where present, and can never change.

Quest. What is meant by God's Natural Purity and Holiness.

Ans. His absolute exemption from all sin in himself, and his perfect
aversation, and immutable hatred of it in all others. He can take no pleasure
in wickedness, he hates all workers of iniquity, and therefore evil shall not
dwell with him, Psalm. 5. 4, 5.

Quest. If this be his unalterable Nature, he can never be reconciled to Men's
sins, nor take delight in any Man, whilst he goes on to be a sinner?

Ans. No; as soon may we hope to bring Light and Darkness, Snow and Fire to
dwell together. So far is he from living with it, that he cannot endure to look
upon iniquity, Habak. 1. 13.

Quest. Since God's Holiness bespeaks such absolute abhorrence of all vice and
wickedness, I see it implies something more, than barely his affectation of
External Decency, or his hatred to be treated rudely and unmannerly.

Ans. Yes, so it does. It implies that too. For God's Holiness, Psalm. 89. 18.
Isa. 6. 3. Habak. 1. 12.
often notes his supereminent Power, and Greatness. And to use this peerless
Majesty, or any things appropriated to it, without that separate Honor, and
visible Reverence, which is due to them, is to unhallow and profane him; which
he says in Ezekiel the Priests did, when they put no difference between the
holy and profane, Ezekiel. 22. 26. Our great, and matchless Creator, must have a
distinguishing respect, and honor, visibly paid him in our outward behavior.
And when in Gifts and Presents, some would show visible neglect, and dishonor
of him; he complained they did not treat him as a Great, and Dreadful King:
adding, that herein their undutifulness might evidently appear, because they
durst not go so, to pay respect to any Temporal Governor or Superior, Mal. 1.
8, 13, 14. But, though this hatred of External irreverence, be one thing
implied in it; yet is it but the outside of God's Holiness. And therefore no
Man must ever think to content him, by Ceremonious Formalities, as being
extreme nice and scrupulously careful about the Place, the Garb, the Posture,
or other decent Dress, or circumstance of his Worship and Service; except at
the same time he shun all sin and wickedness, which affront him most of all,
and bear the directest opposition to his Holiness. As this without the other,
is Spiritual ill Breeding, and Clownish Rusticity: so is the other without it,
mere Form and Complement, and an empty unprofitable Ceremony.

Quest. If this Holy God is so irreconcileably set against sin, sure he can
never be the Author of it?

Ans. No; let no Man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God: for God
cannot be tempted with evil, neither does he tempt or incite any man to it,
James 1. 13. The Devil tempts us, who is called the Tempter in the Scriptures,
Matthew. 4. 3. And wicked men, who are his Instruments. And our own Lusts most of
all, when they draw us away, and entice us to evil, as S. James says, James 1.
14. But as for the most Holy God, the concern he has about our sins, is in no
wise to decree, or help them on, but only to forbid, and punish them. He has no
pleasure in wickedness, or, as the (...).
Septuagint translate it, he does not will it, Psalm. 5. 4.

Quest. But does not God himself say, That he had hardened Pharaoh's heart, and
the heart of his servants, Exodus 10. 1. and Chap. 14. 4, 17. and is it not also
said, that he moved David to number Israel, and Judah, 2 Samuel 24. 1.

Ans. Yes, but God did these, not by way of positive influence and efficiency,
as a concurrent cause; but only by withdrawing his Grace, and leaving Men to be
hardened by their own Lusts, and by evil Spirits. And thus of Pharaoh it is said,
that he hardened his own heart, Exodus 8. 15, 32. and of David, that Satan moved
him to number the people, 1 Chronicles. 21. 1.

Quest. But does not his withdrawing of his Grace, show a willingness to have
sin take place, and that although he is loath to do it himself, yet he is free,
Men should be hardened by others?

Ans. No; it is only when he is put to it as a Wise, and upright Judge, in way
of Justice. For he never withdraws his Grace, and thereby leaves Men to their
own Lusts, and malignant Spirits, till they have first made a forfeiture of it,
by reiterated repulses and affronts, or some high provocations. Thus in the
Story of Pharaoh in Exodus, (except what is said, Chap. 7: 13. he bardned
Pharaoh's heart, which, as the Dr. Hammond's Annot. on Romans 9. 18.
Learned note, may as well be rendered Pharaoh's heart was hardened, as the same
word is rendered verse 22. God is not said thus to harden Pharaoh's heart, and
send all his plagues upon his heart, chap. 9. 12, 14. till Pharaoh had several
times wickedly disobeyed, and wilfully hardened his own heart, chap. 8. 15, 32.
And when it is said, that God moved David to number the people, it is added, that
their sins had provoked him to Anger, which made him give him up to it, 2 Samuel
24. 1. God's Grace and Holy Spirit, is always repulsed and driven away, before
he recals it from Men, and thereby gives them up to an evil Lust, or an
infernal Spirit, to harden, and work in them.

Quest. What say you when God threatens Men with Spiritual Blindness, that they
shall look on without seeing, and hear without understanding, Isaiah 6. 9.
Which Judgment S. Paul testifies, was befallen the unbelieving Jews, Romans 11.
7, 25. As our Lord himself also noted, Matthew. 13. 14, 15.

Ans. Not that he instills into them any errors, or pushes and precipitates them
on to any wicked act, without opening their Eyes. But only that he leaves them
to their own violent and blind prejudices, which will neither let them hear,
nor see any thing, that makes against them: and withdraws clear means of
knowledge, after they have long slighted, and abused them; as our Savior did
from the blinded Jews, therefore, as he says, speaking to them in Paxables,
because seeing they saw not, and hearing they heard not, that is, they would
not be made to see, and hear, by plain Speeches, Matthew. 13. 13. This infliction
of Spiritual blindness, S. Paul, in the case of the Romans, calls giving up to
a reprobate sense, Romans 1. 28. Whereto God then gave them up, when, they of
themselves having already gone far in wickedness contracting it, he justly left
them to it. Whilst they knew God, they gave him no due glory and
acknowledgment; and thereupon he gave them over to a reprobate mind, verse 21,
28. Their reprobate sense, verse 28. was the woeful consequent of their own foul
lusts, and precontracted foolishness, noted verse 21, 23, 25, 26. God did not
leave them, till they had first, by false worship and filthy practices, not
only deserted, but driven him, and his enlightening Spirit, away from them.

Quest. But what say you to Ahab's case, did not God himself deceive him?

Ans. No; but only left him to be deceived by a wicked Spirit; and that not
till Ahab had sold himself to work wickedness, and thereby most justly deserved
to be deserted by him. The wicked Spirits, though they have will enough to hurt
us, yet are held in Chains and Fetters, and are not let loose, or in power to
work their wills, till they have God's License. And therefore when the good
Angels, from their several earthly charges, return back to God to make their
reports, some wicked ones, as it is represented in the Story of Job, still crowd
in among them, to gain Commissions, either for trial or punishment, and see who
will be delivered into their hands. Thus Satan did, when he obtained power
against Job, for a trial of his patience, Job 1. 6. And thus on another set
day, when God publicly decreed the fall of Ahab, an evil Spirit presents
himself, and voluntarily offers to be a lying Spirit in the mouth of all his
Prophets, to encourage him to his fall at Ramoth Gilead, in deserved punishment
of his wickedness. And God not only foretells, that Ahab would hear him; but
bids him go, and do so, as Joh. 13. 27.
Christ bid Judas when he went out to betray him, (as also the Matthew. 8. 32.
Devils, when they entered into the herd of swine,) not thereby commanding and
authorizing his Practice, but only taking off his restraint, and letting him
loose to his own wicked purposes, by way of permission and sufferance, 1 King
22. 19, 20, 21, 22.

Quest. And is that S. Paul's meaning, when under the great mystery of
iniquity, or Man of sin, he says, God shall send men, who loved not the truth,
but had pleasure in unrighteousness, strong delusion, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11.

Ans. Yes, that delusion was to be, by giving evil Spirits License to delude
them. It shall come with all deceivableness of power, and signs, and lying
wonders, after the working of Satan, verse 9, 10. So that God's sending strong
delusion in those days, is letting Satan loose, and permitting him to give
plausible proofs, and shows, to seduce Men. Which, with those that loved
unrighteousness, and had no love for the truth, but would be glad of any
pretense to embrace a pleasing error instead of it, would be like enough to
prevail.

Quest. Does God often give Men up thus to evil Spirits, to delude them?

Ans. Yes, evil Spirits have a general influence, in producing the errors, as
well as the sins and transgressions, of all Men. But they have often a more
especial License, and extraordinary power of delusion, in degree sometimes
greater, and sometimes less, according as any Persons, or Places, through their
own wickedness, their pride, and wantonness, are left more or less to
themselves, and thrown out of God's protection. Thus the darkness of the
Heathen World or (...).
Age, S. Paul ascribes to the spiritual wickednesses in high or (...).
heavenly places, or to the (...): or as the Syriack Version reads it, (...).
wicked Spirits in the Air called Heaven in the Jewish Books, who were the
Rulers of it, Ephesians. 6. 12. And in account of the deluded nations, we are told,
that the old Serpent, which is the Devil and Satan, had deceived them, Rev. 20.
2, 3, 8. And the general Apostasy and Delusion, by the Man of sin, is ascribed
by the Apostle, as I noted, to the working of Satan, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9, 10, 11. And
on the rising of any notable Heretics, and perverters of the truth, the crafty
and malignant Devil is usually said to stir, and rage, in the Ecclesiastical
Language. The great deceits and delusions of the World, are not owing only to
the darkness of Men's own minds, and hearts; but to the malignant fraud of
wicked Spirits, who by themselves, and their instruments, miserably blind and
mislead such, as are forsaken of God, and delivered into their hands. And
therefore it need not seem strange to us, if we see Men abused into such gross
absurdities, as are against the plainest Scriptures, Reason, and common Sense.
Nay, though they be as confident of them, as if they received them by immediate
inspiration, and a voice from Heaven; and think they have as sure Revelations,
for their senseless, and absurd dreams, as ever the blessed Apostles, and
Evangelists had, for the Holy Scriptures. For though several of these seem too
gross, for the natural folly of Men; yet are they not for the malignity of a
delusive Demon. When he has gained a License to besot, and abuse Men's minds,
we need not stand astonished at the most extravagantly senseless, or ridiculous
Opinions.

Quest. If this is one method of God's Justice, to give up those, who abuse the
Light, and the means thereof, to Satan's delusion; must not this make us all
exceeding careful, with Humility, and Reverence, to keep in his ways and
appointments, that so we may abide under his Protection?

Ans. Most certainly. And therefore by all means we must have a care, not to
set our selves above Ordinances, to vilify Prayers or Preaching, to despise
Sacraments, to disparage the Sacred Scriptures, to contemn superciliously and
outbrave our Ministers, making our selves wiser than our Teachers, to cast off
the Government of our Lawful Pastors, or break the Unity of the Church, or such
things. For this is breaking all God's Bounds, and discarding his Methods,
appointed to keep us all stable, in the knowledge, and practice of the Truth.
And if we thus leave him, and wantonly leap out of all his ways, we have just
cause to fear, lest he leave us: and then we are ready to become a prey to evil
Spirits, who, as they get leave in more or less degrees, will carry us away
with their delusions.

Quest. You think then, that there is less danger of these delusions, whilst
Men keep humbly, and awfully, in the Unity and Communion of Christ's Church,
than when they depart from it?

Ans. Yes, by breaking out thence, they are got into a place more insecure, and
more full of danger. As out-lying Deer, no more under the Eye and Care of the
Keeper, are ready to become a prey to every Hunter. Or, as Sheep without the
Fold, whilst they straggle from the Flock, and out of the compass of that
special Providence which protects it, are in danger by every hurtful Beast to
be made a prey, and picked up. Or, as near an Enemies Quarters, they who will
run abroad without the Camp, are in danger of being seized, or slain by
Adversaries: so are Men without the Church, by evil Spirits. For they are more
at liberty, and let loose in the World, though chained and fettered in the
Church; and if they find any leaped out thence, are more likely to seize them,
as straves in their own Dominions.

Quest. Indeed, that which restrains their malice, is the Protection of God,
which is called the Hedge, that fenced off Satan from Job, Job 1. 10. And since
all have not an equal share in the Guardianship of Almighty God, and of his
good Angels, it is obvious to infer, that these impure Spirits have more power
in some Places, and over some Persons, than over others.

Ans. Yes, and this the Demon in De Spectac. c. 26.
Tertullian urged for himself, who being charged by some, that in those days of
Miracles came to eject him, and rebuked for daring to attempt, and possess a
Christian Woman, who was listed under Christ's Protection; constantly pleaded,
his seizure was most just, because he found her in his own Precincts, viz. at
the lewd, bloody, and ungodly shows, in the Heathen Theaters. This Power of
evil Spirits, is greatest in the unhallowed World; as the Scripture
sufficiently intimates, when Satan is called by our Lord, the Prince of this
world, John 12. 31. and chap. 14. 30. and 16. 11. and by S. Paul, the God of
this world, 2 Cor. 4. 3. and when the Apostle ascribes the darkness of the
Heathen world, to wicked spirits, who had the rule and Empire of it, Ephesians. 6.
12. and wrought in those that were disobedient, or the (...).
unpersuadable part of Mankind, Ephesians. 2. 2. So that they are able to do most,
before Men are entered into the Covenant, and Church of God: as from the danger
Moses was in, before he had Circumcised his Son, the Jewish Doctors note the
Power of a destroying Angel on such, as have not received the initiatory Rite
of Circumcision; answerable whereto is that old Dr. Lightsoot's Hor. Heb. in
Joh. 12. 31.
tradition among them, that God exempted their Nation from the Power of the
Angel of death, to which he subjected the rest of the World, when he chose them
for his own People, and gave them the Law. Or when, being once entered, they
either burst out of it themselves, or by just excommunication, which, as our
Lord Matthew. 18. 17.
says, brings Men back into the state of the Heathen, are cast out into the
World again. For then, the Devils obtain more Power over them: as S. Paul
notes, saying of those that grow turbulent in the Church, and oppose
themselves, that they are taken captive by him, 2 Timothy 2. 25, 26. and calling
excommunication, a delivering over unto Satan, as it throws them out into his
Territory, and within the verge of his Dominion, 1 Cor. 5. 5. and 1 Timothy 1. 20.
Yea, probably, their attempts are more greedy, and violent upon those, who for
a while were rescued out of their hands, than on others, who were held always
under them. And accordingly, in the Parable of the unclean Spirit we are told,
that if, being once driven out of a man, he find him empty, and naked of
Guards, and so fit to be made a prey again; he takes with him seven Spirits
worse than himself, when he seeks to enter into him the second time, Matthew. 12.
43, 44, 45. and 2 Pet. 2. 20.

Quest. Would you note any thing else, that is like to provoke God to abandon,
and give us up to these deluding Spirits?

Ans. Yes, to omit others, buying and selling of the Truth, or acting for Gain,
against God, and a good Conscience. When Men forsake God, or a good way or
thing, not out of sincere convictions, but secular interests, and for worldly
gain: then does the Devil enter, and take possession of them. For his great way
is to open the Door by a golden Key, and by the offers of gain to get
admission. And thus he entered into Judas, taking possession of him by thirty
pieces of silver, which he preferred before his Master, Luke 22. 3, 4, 5. And
into Ananias, getting him into his Power, and filling his heart, by a desire of
keeping the price of his land to himself, Act. 5. 3. When Men once put
themselves into Satan's hands, by putting away a good conscience, and
professing, or acting against convictions; they are in the ready way, as S.
Paul says, to make shipwreck of the right Faith, and fall under a delusion of
their understandings, 2 Timothy 1. 19.

Quest. But does not God himself do more than suffer, and give way to sin, by
leaving them to their own Lusts, or to Satan, as you say, to push them on, when
he talks of giving men a spirit of slumber, Romans 11. 8, 10. and Isaiah 6. 10.
Is not that something positive of his inflicting?

Ans. It Is like it is a sending a sluggishness of thought, or a dullness and
drowsiness of apprehension on them. Not such, as makes them quite unable to
apprehend; but only, like a drowsy Man, more listless, heavy, and slow in it.
It Is eyes, wherewith they should not see; and ears, wherewith they should not
hear; that is, such wherewith they would not, because they could not do it
easily, Romans 11. 8. Such abatement of intellectual perspicacity, and power, God
sometimes threatens to obdurate sinners, saying, he will smite them with
madness, or blindness, or astonishment, and stupidity of heart, Deuteronomy. 28. 28.
And this is very just, thus to impair the perfection of our minds, as well as
the health and strength of our Bodies, in punishment of our sins. For both
these, being his gratuitous and undeserved gifts, are reversible in what
measure he pleases. And he never withdraws them in his wrath from contumacious
sinners, but on forfeiture and high provocations, when they have winked long
against the Light, and would not see with quick and clear senses. It is all in
way of Justice, and Judicial Process; so that there is nothing, but what shows
a Holy, a Just, and Good God too, in all this.

Quest. But if God so irreconcileably hates sin, why does he not employ his
Power to keep it out? Were it not easy for an Almighty God, to prevent sin in
the World, if he would?

Ans. It is not fit he should make it impossible, by putting it out of our
power to choose it. And as for such ways, as infer no force upon our wills, but
consist with our free and rewardable avoidance of sin, he has not been wanting
in them, which is all that is to be expected on his part.

Quest. Why, to ease both himself, and us, of the evil of sin, might not God
make it impossible, and put it out of our power to choose it?

Ans. Because that is inconsistent with our Natures, who, having Flesh as well
as Spirit, must needs be free to Evil, as well as Good. It would leave nothing
in us to be commended, or rewarded, when we do abstain from it; there being no
thanks due to any Man, for omitting what he was utterly incapable to act. To
make sin impossible, is to offer violence to our free and reasonable Natures,
and to set aside all Laws, all Censure, and reward of Actions. Which no reason
will expect a Holy God should do, who looks not only at his own Power and
Holiness, but at the displaying of his Governing-Justice too, and the Freedom
and Liberty of his Creatures, and will take such ways to keep out sin, as best
comport with all these. So that an utter incapacity for it, is no way of
hindering us free and rewardable Creatures, who are not to be irresistably
forced and compelled, but drawn and persuaded.

Quest. And has God done all, that can reasonably be expected that way, to
prevent sin?

Ans. Yes, he has given his own Son to die a cruel Death, thereby to purchase
Mercy for all that truly repent of their sins; he has plainly showed, and
forbid all sin, that no Person need be ignorant of it; he has threatened it with
the most insupportable punishments, that all may be afraid to come near it; he
offers the most incomparable rewards, to all that will overcome it; and
promises the aid of an unconquerable Spirit and Grace, to enable all, who will
strive as they ought, to prevail against it. In sum, having stupendiously
brought about, by the meritorious Death of his own Son, that Mercy should be
offered to all Men to pardon, and Grace to extirpate and abolish sin: he has
left nothing wanting, but their own wills, to perfect the conquest of it. And
he has done all that for them, and set all those things before them, which
should, not force their wills, indeed, but bend and persuade them to resolve
upon such conquest. And that is all, which ought to be done with free
Creatures, whose wills are not to be forced, but won and persuaded, toward its
exclusion. So that if after all, sin be in the World, God's Holiness, and, I
may add, his Goodness too, are not to be charged, as if they had not abundantly
done their part: but only the obstinacy of Men's own perverse wills, which are
not to be forced, and will not be dissuaded from it, by all that can be fitly
and reasonably offered to them. And therefore it may still be most justly said
of God, as the Scripture does, What could have been done more to my vineyard,
that I have not done in it? Isaiah 5. 4. The Lord is not willing that any
should perish, but that all should come to repentance, 2 Pet. 3. 9. As I live,
says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but had
rather that the wicked man would turn from his way, and live, Ezekiel. 33. 11.

Quest. Another of God's Attributes you mentioned, is his Goodness. Is God's
Goodness an undistinguishing Indulgence, that lights promiscuously on all
Persons?

Ans. No, it is a Wise and Holy Goodness, that respects qualifications. It Is the
Goodness of a just God, not of a fond Man, and so is prone to all tenderness,
that is consistent with Wise and Holy Ends, and Governing Justice. But
tenderness and indulgence to ill things, and for ill purposes and effects, is
not goodness, but dotage.

Quest. So that God's Goodness does not bespeak such tenderness, as relents at
the very sight of all miserable objects?

Ans. No, when Love and Kindness have been finally abused by them, affronted
Goodness gives way to inflamed Justice, and can see Men smart and suffer,
without being grieved for them.

Quest. Then we must not fancy God's Mercy is such an effeminate softness, and
fond pity, as starts at the thoughts of any severity, though most wholesome and
necessary?

Ans. No, it is Mercy to the Penitent, and Pitiable; but can well bear to see
tormenting Cures wrought, on diseased, and straying offenders; or Vengeance
executed, on obdurate Criminals.

Quest. Neither is his Goodness such easiness, as will be won or wearied out,
purely by the confidence in requests, and mere importunity of obdurate sinners?

Ans. No, this good and easy God can be inflexible to any impious, or
unreasonable request. And if they have been deaf to him in his time of calling,
he will show himself Just as well as Good, and requite them in their own kind,
and be deaf to them in theirs, yea, when the extremity of their distress makes
them cry to him with utmost importunity, and loudness. When their fear comes,
says he, as desolation to lay all waste, and destruction as a whirlwind to
sweep all before it: then, though they call, and seek me early, will I* instead
of relenting, laugh, and mock at their calamity, Prove. 1. 26, 27, etc.

Quest. But when this Goodness puts such difference between Objects, is it, as
some fancy, a blind and partial benevolence, that fixes by chance, or humor,
on some; and when once it is fixed, heaps all favors, and sees no faults in
them?

Ans. No, by no means. God's Goodness is not guided, as fond Man's often is, by
blind fancy, but always by highest discretion. He is infinite in Goodness, but
yet so, as at the same time, to be equal in Justice, and Wisdom too. So that he
will do good to all, that have not incapacitated themselves by their own fault,
but to none against just, and wise reason.

Quest. By this it seems, this good God has not more love of any Persons, as
they are his Creatures, or Favorites, than as they are endowed with certain
qualifications. And that his hatred is stronger against sin, than his Love is
for any Favorite, or created Being?

Ans. Yes, he never loves an evil work, out of favor to the workers; but, as
the Psalm. 5. 5. Prove. 21. 27. and chap. 28. 9.
Scripture often tells us, he hates the workers, for the sake of their evil
works. So that no Persons must ever fancy they are such Favorites of God, that
he will tolerate them in any wickedness. Or that, having once fixed his Love
upon them, or made Decrees in their favor, he will not see sin in them, nor
impute it to them, nor hate them for such things, as are most hateful to him in
others.

Quest. If it is none of these things, what is it we are to understand by God's
Goodness?

Ans. His perfect delight in doing good. Which I shall note especially in two
things, viz. his forwardness in rewarding good Services, and his great Patience
and Easiness in passing over offenses.

Quest. Is he mindful of his Servants, and careful to reward all their good
Services?

Ans. Yes, and that he would have all Men undoubtedly, to think by him, that so
they may be encouraged to serve him. For he that comes to God, must believe
that he is* and that he is a rewarder of those, that diligently seek him, Heb.
11. 6.

Quest. Is he also Patient and Merciful upon their Offenses, as well as
Bountiful upon their good Services?

Ans. Yes, when they repent, and turn from them. For he proclaims himself
longsuffering, keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgression,
and sin* Exodus 34. 6, 7. He shows wonderful Patience, in bearing with the sins
of Men; and Mercy in pardoning, when they truly repent of them.

Quest. And is not this Mercy some encouragement to those, who go on in their
sins?

Ans. No, because, as I said, he will have Mercy on those only, who repent of
them. His long-suffering with sinners, is only to give them time, and lead them
to repentance, Romans 2. 4. And his forgiving them, is only when they do repent.
For even there, where he proclaims his Mercy, he declares he will by no means
clear the guilty, Exodus 34. 7. If we are impenitent to the last, there is no
expectation of Mercy to forgive, but of Justice to punish us.

Quest. You say God shows this Goodness, in bountifully rewarding good
Services. Does he not also show the same, in estimating what Services are good,
and fit to be rewarded by him?

Ans. Yes, as far as is consistent with truth, and reason. He is by no means
captious, or exceptious, like one that studied to find faults, and make the
worst of our performances. Nor stiff, and rigid in standing upon the
extremities of things, but is ready to make all fair abatements, and
allowances, which are reasonably and justly pleadable in our case, as I shall
have occasion to observe afterward.

Quest. What mean you by God's Justice, or Righteousness?

Ans. His doing Right and Equity, both first, in giving Righteous Laws; and
secondly, in passing Righteous Judgments according to them, without respect of
Persons.

Quest. Is God Righteous as a Lawgiver, in imposing only just and Righteous
Laws?

Ans. Yes, The Gods of the Gentiles, indeed, which S. Paul 1 Cor. 10. 20.
says were Devils, enjoined their Worshippers, the most sinful, foul, and cruel
things. They served Bacchus in the Idol-Feasts called the Bacchanals, and other
of their Deities, with Revellings, and Drunkenness, and Profligate Uncleanness:
and so S. Peter says, whilst they wrought the will of the Gentiles, together
with their abominable Idolatries, they walked in lasciviousness, excess of
wine, revellings, 1 Pet. 4. 3. as the Israelites, joining themselves to the
Idol Baal* Peor, committed. whoredoms, Number. 25. 1, 2, 3. They served Moloch,
that is, Saturn, by most horrible and unnatural cruelties, dropping their own
Children into the Fire through the Hands of his Statue, and so burning them
alive to him; which the Scripture calls making them pass through the fire to
Moloch, as a burntoffering, Lev. 18. 21. and Jer. 19. 5. But the True God is
most utterly opposite to all such impositions. He commands nothing, but what is
pure, and virtuous, and for our own good and advantage; what is honorable, and
perfective of our Natures; nay, what is worthy, not only of Men, but of Angels,
and, when he would submit to any Laws, as he did when in Christ he became Man,
of God himself.

Quest. This shows the excellency of his Laws. But what say you to the equity
of them? Are they not rigorous and overburdensome, requiring more than we are
able to perform?

Ans. No, though he requires great things, yet together with that, he offers
such help and grace, as will render them, not only possible, but tolerably
easy to us. His commandments are not grievous, 1 John 5. 3. His yoke is easy,
and his burden light, Matthew. 11. 30.

Quest. Is God Righteous also as a Judge, that is, when he comes to Judgment,
will he impartially execute his Laws, without favor, or respect of Persons?

Ans. Yes. For in his Righteous Judgment, he will render to every Man,
according to his deeds. To those, who by continuance in welldoing, sought
Glory, eternal Life. But to all, that obey unrighteousness, and are impenitent
sinners, wrath and anguish, and that on every one, that does evil, without
respect of persons, Romans 2. 5. to 12.

Quest. What will become then of all those, that break his Laws?

Ans. Unless they make their peace by Repentance, they must be condemned to
that eternal Death, which his Law threatens.

Quest. But does not God sometimes punish one Man for another's sin, as the
Children for the Parents, or the Parents for the Children; whereas the rule of
Justice is to give every Man his own?

Ans. No, in all his allotments, he assures us the righteousness of the
righteous shall be upon him, and the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon
him. Behold, says he, all souls are mine, as the soul of the father, so also
the soul of the son: and one shall not suffer for another, but the soul that
sins, it shall die, Ezekiel. 18. 4, 19, 20. Indeed, if a Father shares in a
Child's fault, by setting an evil example to it, or by being too indulgent and
not seasonably correcting it; then he shall suffer, as 1 Samuel 2. 23, 24, 29.
and chap. 3. 13.
Eli did: but this is not for his Child's, but for his own sin, in as much as
he concurred to it. And if a Child follow his Father's sin, he shall partake in
his punishment, as is implied in Ezekiel, chap. 18. 14. but that is not because
his Father sinned, but because he imitated it. But if we do not communicate in
the sins of other Men, we shall not answer for their guilt; for every man shall
bear his own burden, Gal. 6. 5.

Quest. But what say you, when God punishes a wicked Parent with want, or an
infirm body; does not that transmit Diseases, or Poverty to his innocent
Posterity? Or, when he scourges a sinful Nation, with the Sword, Famine, or
Pestilence; do not those involve the innocent, in common with the Criminals?

Ans. Yes, but these not being directed by Almighty God upon themselves, but
seizing them through the necessity of second causes, and course of things, by
reason of their joint Interests and Relations; they are not vindictive strokes,
nor in the way of punishments, but only their calamities and misfortunes. It Is
their mixed Interests, not God's Justice, which brings these upon their heads.

Quest. But when Men have forfeited by their own sins, is not God, who would
otherwise spare, oft-times moved to exact the forfeiture for the sins of
others, who will be afflicted, and are intended to be punished in their
misfortunes.

Ans. Yes, and that, it is like, may be a reason, why, when God says in the
Second Commandment, he will punish the sins of Idolatrous Fathers, who are
particularly called haters of him, on the Children, he limits it to the third,
and fourth generation. For it is very possible the Parents may live so long to
see their Sufferings, and so be punished themselves, in beholding what their
unfortunate Posterities endure for their sakes. But since in this case, God
only takes just forfeitures, and withholds undue favors, and forbearance, when
he has great and wise reasons; it is no reflection at all on his Justice, or
other Attributes.

Quest. I see God does not misplace punishments, by punishing one for another's
offenses. But may he not seem to misproportion them, when he punishes momentany
sins with eternal torments? Is that consistent with Rules of Justice?

Ans. Yes, whatever punishments are justly proposed, may be justly exacted. For
what a just, and wise Lawgiver denounces, a just Judge may execute. And if Men
feel the smart of it, they can only blame themselves. For why would they
deserve it? The punishment was denounced to the sin, before they had made
themselves guilty of it. And this denunciation was intended to restrain them
from committing it. And if they would, by God's help they might have been
restrained by it. So that be their suffering hard, or their punishment what it
will, they have none to accuse but themselves, for having voluntarily called it
down upon their own heads.

Quest. But is it just, to propose and denounce such heavy punishments?

Ans. Yes, because there is need of them, and Mankind will not be restrained by
less. For so strong is the sinful bias and inclination of our Natures, so many
and great our temptations, and so much the advantage of sensible and present
pleasures above future and unseen recompenses; that Men would never forego the
pleasures of their sins on smaller Considerations. Not only the offers of all
temptations, but also the reluctancies of our own Natures are to be
out-weighed, and the great disadvantage of remote and unseen things is to be
compensated, by the immensity, and eternal duration of these punishments. So
that less than these, would not discourage any numbers in our circumstances.
Nay, alas, how few do these hinder and discourage, as the general wickedness of
those, who profess to believe them, is a lamentable and abundant evidence.

Quest. But between sin and punishment, as it is usually said, there should be
some proportion. Whereas sins, that are soon at an end, and sufferings, that
have no end, bear no proportion.

Ans. Since sins and sufferings are no material bodily things, they are not
capable of being proportioned to each other by weight, or measure, to be
weighed out equally in Scales, or measured by a Rule and Line, as Bodies are.
Their proportion, is not a natural proportion, on account of intrinsic weight
and size; but a moral proportion, in respect of ends and uses, which is to work
on Men's wills, and in their free choice to surmount all impediments, and
outweigh all temptations to disobedience. So that to proportion punishments to
sins, is not to equalize them in intrinsic weights and measures, there being
nothing in their Natures, which can ground such comparisons: but only to
proportion punishments to temptations, so as to make them outweigh them in our
choice and free-wills. And thus eternal punishments are proportionate to our
offenses; that is* they are no more, than are necessary to make us forego those
pleasures, or advantages, which recommend them. Nay, alas! with the greater
part of Men, they cannot do this, who are so bewitched with sins present
pleasures, that they will enjoy them, though for that they fall at last under
these eternal torments, as we see by sad experience.

Quest. Since God is thus exactly just, and equal in all his ways, it is great
Blasphemy in any to represent him as tyrannical, or imperious, that does good,
or hurt, out of mere will or humor, not in regard to the qualifications of his
Creatures?

Ans. So it is. Thus, indeed, the Indians thought of the Devils they
worshipped. And thus all superstitious Persons think of God, who seek to
appease him by vile flatteries, slavish tremblings, and forced submissions,
which are suited to such imperious and humoursome tempers. But the true God is
most just, and reasonable in all his ways, requiring to be served only in the
wisest things, and from willing hearts, and recompencing by a most unbiassed
and exact sentence. All is highest reason and unblemished Justice, nothing weak
humor or passion, which this Almighty Prince does.

Quest. God's punitive Justice then, is nothing like impotent Men's implacable
revenge, who cannot be at ease till their anger is sated with the smart of
their Enemies?

Ans. No, in no wise. He does not punish to gratify private passions, and
resentments. When he afflicts, it is not willingly, Lam. 3. 33. How shall I
give thee up? is his compassionate relenting, when a sinner is almost past
Mercy, Hos. 11. 8. But it is for wise, and public ends, to keep up Government,
to secure Goodness, and discourage Offenses. God's Justice is a wise
Resolution, not a weak Passion: and he takes pleasure in the pains inflicted by
it, as they are well and wisely done; not at all, as angry Men are wont to do,
because thereby they have wrecked their spite on those that vexed them.

Quest. Besides this Justice, in allotting future recompenses; does not God
also show himself just, in bestowing present, and suitable events to actions?

Ans. Yes, by him, as 1 Samuel 2. 3.
Hannah acknowledged, actions are weighed, before they are accomplished, to
bestow events; as well as after, to make retributions, according to Reason and
Justice. And this present Judicature, God discharges in the Administration of
his Providence. Which must make all Men extreme wary what designs, or attempts
they engage in, never despairing of his Blessing in a good way, nor presuming
on it in an ill one, as I shall note afterward.

Quest. Is God present in all places, to take notice of all the actions, both
of good and bad Men, which he will thus justly reward or punish?

Ans. Yes, for whither shall I flee from thy presence? Psalm. 139. 7. The eyes
of the Lord are in every place, beholding the evil, and the good, Prove. 15. 3.
He fills heaven and earth, so that no man may hide himself in secret places,
that he shall not see him, Jer. 23. 24. And the sense of this, as it will
induce us every where to pray to him, because, though unseen, he is every where
present to hear our Prayers; so would it be every where an effectual restraint,
and hinder us from venturing on any evil, or misbecoming thing. For what Man
would presume to do a rude thing, in his Sovereign's presence; or an
impertinent and trifling one, before any wise, and grave Persons; or a base and
filthy one, before even a Child, or Stranger, and much more before those, whose
care it is to rebuke, and punish such misdoings? So that in all Places and
Companies, we should demean our selves with decency and modesty, with
seriousness and gravity, with circumspection and care, purity and integrity, if
we bethought our selves that the Great and Holy God stands looking on, and
observes all our motions.

Quest. And will it not also quicken Men's diligence in good things, and make
them active in his Service?

Ans. Yes, it would do so even with eye servants, who put on a great show of
care, and diligence in their Master's presence. And besides, it would incite
Men to a great frequency in devout Ejaculations, and solemn Addresses to
Almighty God: it being most unseemly to stand mute and regardless before him,
without suitable expressions of Adoration and Reverence.

Quest. And does this Omnipresent God see even our hearts, and secret thoughts?

Ans. Yes, he is acquainted with all our ways, he understands our thoughts afar
off, and there is not a word in our tongue, but he knows it altogether, Psalm.
139. 2, 3, 4.

Quest. By this it seems, that God knows all that is done by us in this World,
and will be incorruptibly just in rewarding all that is good, and in punishing
all that is bad, except repentance prevents it?

Ans. Yes.

Quest. What mean you by God's Faithfulness, another of his Attributes?

Ans. I mean two things. First, his inviolable performance of his promises.
Secondly, his constant adherence to his Friends, and faithful Servants.

Quest. God has made most Gracious Promises to his Servants, both for this
Life, and the next. Will he be inviolably Faithful, and keep his Word?

Ans. Yes, for he is not as Man that can be overseen, and afterward see his
folly, and repent of it. He is not as man, that he should repent: has he
spoken, and shall he not make it good? Number. 23. 19.

Quest. But when he Promises, or makes Gracious Invitations, or Declarations to
sinners, as he 1 Timothy 2. 4. 2 Pet. 3. 9. Ezekiel. 33. 11.
often does, does he deal plainly, and mean as he says?

Ans. God forbid we should think otherwise. For he is essential, unmixt Truth,
as incapable of all insincere arts and double dealings, as he is of downright
falsehoods. He never salves his Sincerity or Faithfulness, by secret reserves,
or evasive interpretations, being absolutely above all need of, or temptation
to such unworthy Artifices. So that whatsoever we have reason to believe, or
expect from his Word, is plain Truth, and shall be most honestly and punctually
made good. Especially, if, as in Ezekiel. 33. 11.
these cases, we have not only his Word, but also his Oath, which the Apostle
calls two immutable things, wherein it is impossible for God to lie, that is, to
delude our expectations, Heb. 6. 18. And therefore when God calls, and invites
Men, to accept of his Mercy, and return to him; let not any Person harbor the
least thought, as if he were not in earnest, or that his secret Will does
contradict his Word, or that when he calls for their return he does not desire
it, or has set some impregnable Decrees as a bar against them, or will
substract that aid which is necessary to them, and without which it is
impossible for them ever to return to him. These, and such like, are ungodly
and profane suspicions, which stain and blemish the spotless, and absolute
sincerity of the most true God, with the faults and falsehoods of wicked and
deceitful Men. And where is Men's Reason, or Reverence, when they question
whether God means as he says; who yet are ready to resent it as a great
affront, if, on their most serious assertions, any Person shall make the same
doubt and question of themselves?

Quest. And is he as able to make good his Word, as he is sincere in passing it?

Ans. Yes, he is the Almighty God, that does whatsoever he pleases, both in
heaven, and earth, the sea, and in all deep places, Psalm. 135. 6. But as for
the Explication, and Remarques upon this Attribute, I shall reserve them, till
it comes to be considered in its own place in the Creed.

Quest. But when God promises, he ofttimes drives long ere he accomplishes.

Ans. Though he delays, yet he never forgets, or alters. Neither multitude of
affairs, nor length of time, nor after-thoughts, can either wear it out of his
Memory, or change his Purpose. He will ever be mindful of his covenant, Psalm.
111. 5. He is the faithful God, who keeps covenant to a thousand generations,
Deuteronomy. 7. 9. who keeps truth for ever, Psalm. 146. 6. And being sure of God's
Promises at last, we may well have patience in waiting for them: as Abraham
had, who received not the Child of promise, till he was very old; and his seed
after him, who entered not into the promised land, till above Genesis 13. 13. Exodus
12. 41.
400 Years after God had made him the promise of it.

Quest. But, if in hopes of his promised rewards, and dread of his just
punishments, we should take the pains to be Holy as he is Holy, to make him our
Friend: is he never inconstant to his Friends, and are we in no danger of
losing him?

Ans. No.

Quest. One thing we may be sure of, that he will live as long as we shall do,
to stand in need of him.

Ans. Yes, for he is Eternal, from everlasting to everlasting, he is God, Psalm.
90. 2. and when the heavens, and the earth shall be changed, he is the same,
and his years shall have no end, Psalm. 102. 25, 26, 27.

Quest. And when once he loves, and takes complacence in us, will he be
constant, and not alter his affection?

Ans. Yes, if we continue to love, and serve him. For he is the same yesterday,
and to day, and for evermore, Heb. 13. 8. with him is no variableness, nor so
much as shadow of turning, Jam. 1. 17.

Quest. But what, if, after we are the Friends of God, we should return to live
in sin?

Ans. Then we should lose his Love. For the constancy of his Affection, lies
not in loving and hating always the same Men, but in loving and hating always
for the same reason. It Is an immovable fixedness, not upon the same Persons,
but upon the same carriage and qualities. For if the wicked, whom God hates,
turn from his wickedness; he shall surely live, and not die. And if the
righteous, whom God loves, turn from his righteousness, and does according to
the ways of the wicked, all his former righteousness shall be forgotten, and in
his sins, that he has since committed, shall he die, Ezekiel. 18. 21, 22, 24.

Quest. Another Attribute abovementioned, is the Wisdom of God. What mean you
by God's Wisdom.

Ans. His most absolute Understanding, which clearly sees through all things,
and knows what means are most proper, and what seasons best to move in, to
bring about every purpose,

Quest. Is it one part of God's Wisdom, to set the justest rate and estimate on
all things, not only clearly apprehending the truth, but proportionably valuing
the worth of them, never magnifying a little, or undervaluing a great and
weighty matter?

Ans. Yes, to be fond of worthless things, is no property of the Wise, but of
Children and simple Persons; for such only are apt to be taken with Toys, and
Trifles. Little things may greatly delight, or disturb little Spirits: but the
Great and All-wise God, is most Wise and Great in all his resentments, never
setting more by any things, than is really in them, or valuing them without, or
beyond just cause. As all ill things he hates, so all empty ones he slights:
proportioning all his resentments to the true weight and worth of Objects, that
they may be always wise, and worthy of himself. And therefore no Men must ever
fancy to gain God, or fear to lose him, by such little things, and trivial
indifferencies, as have little or nothing in them, but are below the resentment
of any intelligent, and prudent Man.

Quest. Indeed, a small indifferent matter, is not fit to bear a great
resentment, either on one side, or other. So that frequent Crossings, or
Sprinkling our selves with Holy Water, or Visiting certain Shrines, or putting
on some Religious Habits, or other empty and uncommanded Ceremonies, are no
more fit to gain the good presence, and protection of God; than the sight of a
Surplice, a Posture, a Place, or other unforbidden Ceremony, are to forfeit and
drive them from us.

Ans. Very right; but what does either the one, or the other, must always be
things of weight and moment. In particular, his own Laws, which are all about
the most important matters, contain the things he likes. So that we gain, and
please him, by obedience; and offend, and lose him, by disobeying. And
therefore no Men must build on uncommanded abstinencies or severities, or on
any affected singularities; nor, in general, must we ever seek the favor, or
shun the displeasure of Almighty God, by arbitrary fancies and inventions of
our own, but always according to what is written.

Quest. If this All-wise God sees through all things, he perfectly understands
our Natures?

Ans. Yes, he made our hearts, and all our faculties, and so thoroughly
understands them, seeing clearly into all their turnings and windings, tempers
and inclinations, what things will incite and draw them on, and what again will
effectually restrain, and divert them from any purpose.

Quest. If he can tell how far every thing will work upon us, he can foresee
the issue and effect of all means and methods; and, in particular, what force
Preaching, Persuasion, Reproof, Discipline, Promises, Threatenings, or other
means of Grace, will have upon Mankind at large, and what upon all particular
Men, of every genius, interest, and temptation?

Ans. Yes, he knew assuredly that Pharaoh would not let the Israelites go, no
not for all his plagues, Exodus 3. 19. And that the elders of Israel, would
hearken to the voice of Moses, verse 18. And that Tire, and Sydon, would have
repented at the sight of Christ's great, and wonderful works, Matthew. 11. 21.
And this must beget in us the greatest Opinion, and Reverence for all God's
Ordinances. So that no Persons must ever ask, as some profanely do, what good
it does to go so often to Prayers; or say they can benefit as much by reading at
home, when they are called upon to go to Church, and hear a Sermon; or
slightfully neglect, or undervalue any other means of God's appointing. Since
God has prescribed Prayers, and Sacraments, and Preaching, and the Authority of
Spiritual Guides, and the Unity of the Church, etc. as perpetual, and powerful
means of Faith and good Life; who shall dare to accuse any of them of weakness,
or unfitness; and pretend better to understand their efficacy, than he that
understands all things; or put down his, and set up their own Wisdom, by
neglecting the old, and beating out new ways for themselves?

Quest. Does God also see the best times, and the fittest seasons for every
purpose?

Ans. Yes, so exactly, as never in the least degree either to precipitate any
business, or stay so long, till the fittest minute for it has over-passed him.
And this must teach us never to think any Mercies too long delaied, or any
Afflictions from his hand too fast hastened. Though in case of good desired, the
present generally seems best to Flesh and Blood; yet in truth God's own time is
always fittest. So that whether any things sent by him, come too soon, or too
slow, in respect of our wishes, they come just when they should, neither too
early, nor too late, in respect of exactness of season, and usefulness.

Quest. If the Character of the Great God, be to be so Holy, and Just, and
True, and Faithful, and Good, and Patient, etc. as you have showed, then no
Man, who considers what he says, can reasonably pretend to love God, if he
loves not these excellencies?

Ans. Very right. He can only have a blind love, as one that is fond of he
knows not what: Or a mistaken love, as one that fancies God to be what he is
not. But he has no intelligent, rational* love of God, unless he love those
excellencies, that make up the Godhead. And if Men would worthily love these in
God, they must seek to attain, and transcribe them out in themselves too.

Quest. At this rate no ungodly evil Man, who is an enemy of these Divine
Tempers, can love God.

Ans. No; they may love some things in God, when taken asunder: as his Wisdom,
which will move their admiration; or his Power, whilst he employs it for them;
or his Goodness, so long as they feel its bountiful effects. But, if they
seriously consider, they cannot love the Godhead, where all these properties
are put together. For therein is an Holiness, that is irreconcilable to their
sins; and a Justice, that will be inexorable in punishing them; a Faithfulness,
that will execute Threatenings, as well as fulfill Promises; and an Almighty
Power, to be employed in Eternally tormenting those that offend, as well as in
Eternally rewarding all that truly serve him. And a God of this Character, is
all terror unto them. If they considerately view him, they may soon see enough
to make against them, which will keep them from being truly in love with, or
desirous of him. No Man can freely, and intelligently be in love with God, but
he that is, or desires to be like him: and accordingly in Scripture, the love
of God does ordinarily include Obedience to him.

Quest. If these excellencies make up God's Character, then when any Persons by
his Grace have once attained them, they are like God, and partakers of the
Divine Nature.

Ans. Yes, his Image consists in righteousness, and true holiness, Ephesians. 4. 24.
So that whosoever are endowed with these, are truly good, and Godlike Persons.

CHAP. II. Of God's Providence.
The Contents.
God preserves all things he has made. And governs them. He observes all our
actions. And all our temptations. He disposes of all good events. For he gives
the fruits of the Earth. And Children. And success in business. How this should
influence us in any enterprise, shown in sundry particulars. He gives
promotion. And the favor of Men. And life and health to enjoy all other
Blessings. And all Spiritual Mercies. He disposes also of ill events. As death
of Friends. Unfortunate accidents, that afflict us in our Bodies, or Goods.
Crosses, and obstructions, in our designs and business. Sufferings from ill
Men. How God stints, and governs these. No excuse of their unjust violence, to
say they are God's Instruments, and follow Providence. He sends also
miscarriages of State, and Government: and presides in the most tumultuary, and
distressed times. In these, still have. Faith in Providence. But God must not
be called the Author, or sender of those evils, which we bring down upon our
selves, by our own faults, or follies.

Question. YOU have already showed what we are to believe of the Being, and
Attributes of God. But another thing to be known of him, you said, is his
Providence. What mean you by that?

Ans. His Preserving, and Governing us, and all things which he has made.

Quest. Does God preserve all that he has made?

Ans. Yes, both in their Beings, and in their Powers and Perfections. He
preserves man, and beast, Psalm 36* 6. He gives to all their life, and breath,
and all things: for in him we live, move, and have our being, Acts 17. 25, 28.
In particular, he preserves Men in their Persons, and Faculties. So that no Man
loses, either his Memory, or Understanding, or the use of any of his Senses* or
any other bodily Powers and Perfections, but only when, and so far as God
orders, or permits. And this must teach all Persons, under any apprehension of
diminution, or loss of their Senses, or Intellectuals, or other Powers and
Perfections, not to distract and afflict their hearts, by fearing and fancying
the worst. For God that gave these Powers, is still the continuer and preserver
of them, and it is very hard if he may not be trusted with them. Let us commit
them cheerfully to him, and he will either continue the use of them, or supply
the defect, and repair the detriment, that shall come by their loss, or
diminution.

Quest. Must it not teach us the same, in all prospects of dangerous, or
tormenting distempers too?

Ans. Yes, for he is the preserver of our health, and strength, as well as
other faculties. And therefore when any Persons are entering under any bodily
Pains, or Diseases, let them endeavor to bear the present burden with
patience. But not make it heavier, by painful anticipations of futurities;
fancying what they shall do, if their Distemper grows up to the greatest
extremities; or, if some other cross Distemper, should at the same time
incapacitate, and deprive them of those helps, which yield them their greatest
ease and support under this; or, if their Pain and Sickness be prolonged to
such a distance, as will outlast both their strength, and patience. For if God
is their preserver, is not the timing, and stinting of all these in his hands?
And will not he order all, in compassionate proportion to our strength and
necessities, and the supplies of his own Grace? Besides, it is great folly, as
well as distrust, to anticipate distant maladies, by precipitate fears, and
tormenting fancies. When all the while, God's Providence may prove as kind, as
our melancholy imagination is cruel, and preserve all that by a tender care,
which we throw away in an overhasty fear, by fancying to our selves very
dreadful futurities, wherewith he never intends to try us.

Quest. Does God also govern all, that he has made?

Ans. Yes.

Quest. Wherein is that shown?

Ans. In two things. First, In observing all actions. Secondly, In ordering,
and disposing all events.

Quest. Does God observe all our actions?

Ans. Yes, for the eyes of the Lord are in every place, beholding both the
evil, and the good, Prove. 15. 3. And this should engage us in every thing to
keep Innocence, and a clear Conscience, since he stands always looking on, to
see how we acquit our selves.

Quest. The belief of this present Providence, in observing all actions, is
necessary to all expectation of future recompenses.

Ans. Very right. For if here God takes no cognizance, he can afterward make
no retributions, not knowing what Men have done, for him to reward, or punish.
And therefore, as to Religion, it is all one to deny the Being of a God, as to
deny his Providence; and Epicureans, in this respect, are as bad as Atheists.

Quest. As God is most watchful in observing all our actions, is he not equally
so, in marking all our trials and temptations?

Ans. Yes, he not only sees, but sends, and sets bounds to them, and
proportions answerable succors, to prevent their prevailing over us. God is
faithful, who will not suffer us to be tempted above what we are able, but
will, with the temptation, make a way to escape what is over-hard, that we may
be able to bear the rest of it, 1 Cor. 10. 13. And therefore whenever we fall
under any great trials, or fear them, we must neither trust to our own strength
without God, nor despair of conquering them by his help. But seeking to him
with earnest Prayers, and watching against the temptation with much
heedfulness, have Faith in his Spirit and Providence, assuredly believing, that
he will either put by and break its strength, or increase ours.

Quest. And does God order, and dispose of all events?

Ans. Yes, even those that befall the meanest Creatures. For not a Sparrow falls
to the ground, without our heavenly Father, Matthew. 10. 29. But especially
those, which befall Men, for whom his care extends to things so minute, that
even the hairs of their head are all numbered, verse 30. He sends all the good,
and evil, that happens to us in this World; so that we meet him at all turns,
and must discern his Hand in all that happens.

Quest. Does God order for us all the good events we meet with?

Ans. Yes, both all those, which come upon us by accident; for though they are
accidents, and unexpected things to us, they are Providence and designed
favors in God; and likewise all which come by our own care and pains, since
when we labor and contrive for any thing, it is his Blessing that gives success
to us.

Quest. What must this teach us?

Ans. Both to be thankful to him for every good thing, whilst we have them; and
to live upon Providence, when we want them; considering, that God has the Gift
and Donation of all those things, which we need, and that he has taken the care
of us, and will bestow them when they are fit for us. This dependence upon God,
or living upon Providence, is the constant Character of Religious Men in the
Scriptures. Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and Joseph, and all other Holy Men
in all times, always attributed all the good they enjoyed to God, and trusted
in him for the supply of all they wanted. And this Life of Faith, or confidence
in him, is the great mark of their Religion. The just shall live or be
sustained by Faith, that is, in God's care, and kindness, and especial
promises, Habak. 2. 4.

Quest. Is it God, who gives us all the Fruits of the Earth, and plentiful
Seasons?

Ans. Yes, he visits the earth, and waters it, he makes it soft with
showers, and blesses the springing thereof. He crowns the year with his
goodness, and his paths drop fatness, Psalm 65. 9, 10, 11. He causes the grass
to gr^w for the cattle, and herb for the service of man: that he may bring
forth food out of the earth, and wine that makes glad the heart of man, and
oil to make him a cheerful countenance, and bread to strengthen man's heart,
Psalm 104. 14, 15.

Quest. What must this teach us?

Ans. Before the Fruits of the Earth are grown up, it must make us Till the
Ground, and Plow in hope that God will give a Blessing to it. Nay, in a hard
Seed-time, or discouraging Season, or under any seemingly approaching scarcity,
it must quiet the Husbandman's heart, and the hearts of all others, with trust
in God's Providence, who can open his Hand, and push on what he had kept back
when he pleases, and proportion his supplies to our necessities. The eyes of
all, says the Psalmist, must wait upon God, for he gives them their meat, and
that in due season. He opens his hand, and satisfies the desire of every
living thing, Psalm 145. 15, 16.

Quest. And what must it teach us, after we have reaped them?

Ans. With cheerful, and thankful hearts, to give, not only the Priest his just
due, but likewise the Poor, who is another of God's receivers, his portion.
Which is most necessary, not only to express our thanks to God, who has sent
us all these Fruits, but also to increase our own store, and bring down God's
Blessing upon our Fields, which will multiply the Seed sown, and bring in more.
This, Solomon says, will be the effect of giving to the Poor. There is that
scatters, and yet increases: the liberal soul shall be made fat, and he that
waters, shall be watered also himself, Prove. 11. 24, 25. And the same
increase we may hope to reap from paying the Priest all his just dues also.
Honor the Lord with thy substance, and with the first fruits of all thine
increase: so shall thy barns be filled with plenty, and thy presses shall burst
out with new wine: that is, God will give thee for this, both a plentiful
Harvest, and a rich Vintage, Prove. 3. 9, 10.

Quest. Indeed, if God's Blessing makes Rich, it is obvious to infer, that
being just to the Priest, and charitable to the Poor, who are both under God's
especial care, is like to gain him, and so is the truest way of thriving?

Ans. Yes, he that thinks Providence gives the increase, will readily believe
it; and he who tries, if he is not wanting to it on other accounts, will
experimentally find, that this is not the way to diminish, but to increase an
estate. This, Azariah the chief Priest told King Hezekiah, was the cause of
that surplusage of plenty, which God bestowed upon the Jews, 2 Chronicles. 31. The
King had commanded all the people, to pay justly all their Tithes and
Offerings, which had been fraudulently withheld, to the Priests and Levites,
for their encouragement in the Law of the Lord: beginning the Practice with his
own example, paying all his dues to the Church, verse 3, 4. And as soon as this
commandment came abroad, the people brought in all their Tithes and Oblations,
as they fell due in abundance, the first fruits of corn, of wine, and oil, and
honey, and all the increase of the field, the tithe of oxen, and sheep, and the
tithe of holy things which were consecrated unto the Lord their God, the tithe
of all things brought they in abundantly, and laid them heaps by heaps, verse
5, 6. And when Hezekiah, and the Princes, came and saw the heaps, and thereby
understood the vast increase the People had received, which yielded such
abundance of Dues to the Priests, he blessed God for it, and asked Azariah
concerning the cause of this mighty surplusage, verse 8, 9. And Azariah the
chief Priest answered him, and said, Since the people began to bring the
offerings into the house of the Lord, we have had enough to eat, and have left
plenty: for the Lord has blessed his people, and that which is left, is this
great store. That is, since out of their Fruits, which are the Gift of God,
they have faithfully paid their Dues to God, he has so increased their store,
that our share comes to so much we know not how to dispose of it, but have left
all these heaps thou see, after we, and our Families, have eaten, and are
satisfied, verse 10.

Quest. I see it teaches us, both in Duty, and prudence, to give willingly, and
cheerfully, the Poors Dole, and the Priests Dues: but does it not also teach us
how to enjoy, and spend the rest, which remains to our selves?

Ans. Yes, for coming from the free Bounty of God, we must enjoy it with a
thankful and cheerful heart, not with murmuring, envy, or discontent, like Men
that are proner to spy faults than to own favors, and are never pleased.
Besides, since it is God's gift, we must take care that God be honored by it,
and never dishonor him, or abuse our selves, by spending it upon vice, or
vanity, but own his Gift in a temperate, and sober use of it. Yea, I add, in a
charitable use too. For these Fruits God gives to us, not as Proprietors, but 1
Pet 4. 10.
Stewards, to distribute abroad to the necessities of others, after we have
served our selves. So that not only temperance and thankful hearts, but Alms
and Charity also, are necessary to hallow our enjoyments. Give alms of such
things, as you have, and behold all things are clean unto you, Luke 11. 41.

Quest. Is it God also that gives us Children?

Ans. Yes, Children, or the Fruit of the Womb, are a reward, and heritage, that
comes of the Lord: that is, he disposes of them to whom he pleases, as a
Parent does of his Estate, Psalm 127. 3. And therefore, as we must rest
satisfied whilst we have none, because it is God that withholds them: so must
we trust in God when we have many of them, believing, that, since, as our
Savior says, Matthew. 6. 25.
the life is more than meat, he that sent Mouths will send Meat; and that, as
they were at first his Gift, they will be still his Care; and that he, who
provides for the Ravens, will much more provide for them, Luke 12. 24.

Quest. Is it the same Providence of God, that makes us thrive in our Trades,
and gives a prosperous success to us in any business?

Ans. Yes, the horse is provided against the day of Battle, but safety is of
the Lord, Prove. 21. 31. Though a man's heart devises his way, that is, Men
hammer out a project, yet the Lord directs his steps, that is, God determines
the event, and orders such an issue, as, perhaps, he never intended, Prove. 16.
9. Men may contrive, and pursue methods; but God still must give events. The
way of man is not in himself, it is not in man that walks to direct his own
steps, that is, to fix and determine them on any final issues, Jer. 10. 23.

Quest. Must not this teach us, whenever we begin any business, or set upon
any attempts, to recommend them first to God, by Prayers or Pious Ejaculations,
and to place our chiefest confidence in his Blessing?

Ans. Yes, In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths,
Prove. 3. 6. commit thy works unto the Lord, and thy thoughts shall be
established, that is, shall take effect, Prove. 16. 3. And I think there is
little question to be made, but that Men miscarry far oftener, than otherwise
they would, in their designs and business, because they trust too much to their
own care, and skill, and human aids, and seek no more to God, to engage the
furtherance of his good Providence.

Quest. Must Men seek thus to God, even in things wherein they are best skilled
themselves, and when they are confident they take the surest methods?

Ans. Yes, for the surest means without a good Providence, will not secure the
issues. The race, as Solomon observed, is not always to the swift, nor the
battle to the strong, nor favor to men of skill, Eccles. 9. 11. So that when
Men are in the wisest courses, or most probable preparations, they have need
still to look up to God, who must consummate all by his assistance. Trust in
the Lord with all thine heart, and lean not to thine own understanding. In all
thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths, Prove. 3. 5, 6. There
is very much indeed, lies in wise management, every purpose, as Solomon says,
being established by counsel, Prove. 20. 18. But when wise managers show a
Religious dependence, and trust in God too, that is the way to assure the
event. He that handles a matter wisely, shall find good: but if, together with
that, he trust in the Lord more than his own skill, happy is he, Prove. 16. 20.

Quest. But if the event depends thus on God, till we see what way he will
take, we cannot be sure of it. And must not this teach us not to be too
positive, but modest in these expectations, and promise the desired issue to
our selves, still with this reserve, if God sees it fit for us?

Ans. Yes, for man's goings are of the Lord, how can a man then understand his
own way? that is, foresee the event of it, since God oftentimes overrules
their motions, to ends far distant from their thoughts, Prove. 20. 24. And this,
as it will keep us from being too confident of gaining any good things, will
preserve us also from desponding under the apparent danger of any bad ones:
since, when they are nearest to us, God can turn them off by a thousand ways,
nay, make them serve as means to accomplish our advantage.

Quest. Since he is to give the end of all actions, may we not safely trust him
with that, and do what we ought to do, though thereby we foresee danger of
displeasing others, or of prejudicing our worldly interests?

Ans. Yes, we must be careful to do our duty, that is our part: and trust him
with events, for that is his. God often surprises us with issues; so that a Man
cannot foresee the end of his own way, which frequently will be better than he
expects it. And this in the most perilous and threatening times, should teach
all Men to be more thoughtful, and concerned for the exact doing of their duty,
than for escaping the cross, which may seem to accompany it. For if then they
can be so happy, as to consider wisely, and perform what they ought, they may
leave Providence to give it a good effect, and take care they be no losers by
it.

Quest. And since we can bring no business about, but by God's Blessing, must
not this teach us never to seek to gain our end by any sin?

Ans. Most certainly, for that is the way to offend God, and move him, not to
bless, but to blast our design. If we hope to succeed, as I have observed from
Solomon, we must commit our work to him, and that can be only in well-doing: we
must acknowledge him, and then not seek help from any sin, since that were to
renounce him. Let thine eyes look straight on, so as to aim only at just ends,
and ponder the way of thy feet, so as to take none but lawful methods, and then
thy paths shall be established, Prove. 4. 25, 26.

Quest. And the same you will say of driving Trade, by false Weights and
Measures, or by belying Wares, or setting exacting Prices, or otherwise using
indirect Arts, or deceitful Speeches and Pretenses?

Ans. Yes, for all these in God's Eyes are an abomination, and so can never
bring down, but may well stop a Blessing. Which every Man ought seriously to
consider, who believes a good Trade to be of God's sending.

Quest. If we are to have all the good effect of our pains, and projects, from
God, we must have it at his time. And ought we not to think his the best Season?

Ans. Yes, he sees what opportunities are fittest, and brings about a good
event with most advantage, to those that wait his time, and trust him with it:
as he did to Joseph, the rule over his brethren; and to David, the possession
of the kingdom. I the Lord will hasten it in its time, Isaiah 60. 22. He will
arise, and have mercy upon Sion, when the time of favor, yea, the set time is
come, Psalm. 102. 13. And this must teach all Men, in any hopes, or pursuits of
good, never to be too hasty, or, by any indirect or evil ways of their own, to
take the matter out of God's hand, but patiently to wait his time, and stay
till he sees fit to fulfill their expectation. He that believes, will not make
haste, Isaiah 28. 16.

Quest. But when Providence is slow in bringing longing desires to pass, and
lays fair opportunities in their way, may not Men turn aside a little to
anticipate, and prevent God's orderings?

Ans. No, for that is to take the matter out of God's hand, where it must needs
succeed to best advantage, and thereby endanger, both the loss of God's favor,
and all the concurrent Mercies depending on those methods, whereby in his own
time he has determined to promote, or save us. Joseph, when the keeper of the
prison had Genesis 39. 22, 23.
put the keys into his hand, might very probably have made his own escape. But
had he impatiently catched at that opportunity before God's time, he had not
been preferred, as he was when God delivered him. And his Father Jacob, when he
would hastily Genesis 27.
snatch the promised birthright by a falsehood, underwent therefore great
hazards, and a long banishment; all which would probably have been saved, had
he patiently stayed, till God's Wisdom had found a way for it.

Quest. If God must thus give success to all means, then no design can take
effect, though never so wisely laid, or powerfully backed, if it crosses the
designs of his Providence?

Ans. No; neither such, as are managed by the deepest Counsel and Advice; for
there is no wisdom, nor counsel, nor understanding against the Lord, Prove. 21.
30. Nor such, as are pushed on by the most violent, and Psalm. 66. 3, 7.
powerful force. For though the horse is provided against the day of battle,
yet safety is from the Lord, verse 31. And therefore let Men always take care
wisely to fix their hearts, and hopes on such things, as they have reason to
believe God will support, and then be confident, that, though to try their
Faith and Patience, he may suffer them to be endangered, or distressed for a
while, as he suffered Joseph to be imprisoned, and David to be persecuted, and
the Church in the * Revelations to be obscured Chap. 12.
and driven from places of habitation and resort into the wilderness, yet at
last he will visibly stand by the things he does espouse, and make them prove
too hard for the most Politic, or Puissant adversaries.

Quest. If no work can take effect without God, then no work of our Enemies.
And may not this comfort us to think, that whilst he designs well for us, no
contrivance, or power, of Men, or Devils, can harm us?

Ans. It may most justly. As it did holy David, who when his Enemies devised to
take away his life, made this his support, that whatever they contrived, his
times were in God's hand, Psalm. 31. 13, 15. This, says Isaiah, is the heritage
of God's servants, no weapon shall prosper, that is formed against them; and
every tongue, that shall implead them in judgment, shall they condemn, Isaiah
54. 17. So that no craft, or cruelty can destroy, whilst God is minded to
preserve us.

Quest. I perceive we must acknowledge God, the Donor of success to every work,
or design: but is it he also that gives promotion?

Ans. Yes, both riches, and honor come of him, in his hand is power and might,
and in him it is to make great, and to give strength to all, 1 Chronicles. 29. 12.
Promotion comes neither from the east, nor from the west, nor from the south.
But God is the judge; he puts down one, and sets up another, Psalm. 75. 6, 7.
And therefore no Man must ever seek to exalt himself by any sinful, or indirect
means, as vile flatteries, and sinful compliances, and serving wicked turns,
and undermining others, and the like. For if promotion is not wholly in the
will of sinful Man, but depends on the overruling Providence of God, these
certainly are not the way to make an interest.

Quest. When a Man is a rising then, I perceive it is in no wise safe to step
aside, or take up the least sin, though it seem to lie in the ready way to make
his fortune?

Ans. No; when all is done, prudent integrity is the best counselor, and the
surest way to maintain a present station, or advance higher, or to have a good
support, and such a kind Providence, as will make amends, when thereby we miss
of either. He that walks uprightly, walks surely, says Solomon, Prove. 10.
9. The integrity of the upright, says he again, shall guide, and direct them:
yea, in any dangers, it shall deliver them. But if by wicked craft, and ungodly
policy, Men shall choose to do ill to serve a turn, the perverseness of such
transgressors shall destroy them: And instead of being saved, or advanced, they
shall fall by their own wickedness, and be taken in their own naughtiness,
Prove. 11. 3. 5, 6. Whilst righteousness keeps him that is upright in the way,
by God's usual and just Judgment, wickedness overthrows the sinner, Prove. 13. 6.

Quest. Since God gives promotion, is not this enough to make all Men contented
and satisfied, when they rest in a lower state, and see others exalted?

Ans. Yes, because their lower state is what God allots, who can easily exalt
them, if he sees it convenient for his own Glory, and their good, against
which, no wise Person would desire it. And it is not only the highest duty, but
the truest interest of all Men, to let God choose for them every estate; because
he alone knows perfectly all the troubles and temptations of it, and their
fitness for it. He understands us all far better, than the wisest of us
understand our selves: and therefore best sees what condition is proper for us.
Besides, if he give us less here, the day of Judgment will make up all the
seemingly unequal distributions of this World, so that we may hope for the more
hereafter. Lazarus, though a very good Man, was extreme poor, and full of
sores, and in this World received his evil things. But his more than ordinary
wants in this present life, were abundantly made up by the surplusage of bliss
in Abraham's bosom, Luke 16. 20, 21, 22, 25. And when Persons of equal
goodness, have not equal encouragements of Providence allotted them in this
life, they have the more in reversion, and greater things to expect afterward.

Quest. Does God also give all that favor, we find in the Eyes of Men?

Ans. Yes, the Lord gave Joseph favor in the sight of the keeper of the
prison, Genesis 39. 21. and gave him favor in the sight of Pharaoh, Act. 7. 10.
and Israel favor in the sight of the Egyptians, Exodus 3. 21. and Daniel
favor, and tender love, with the prince of the Eunuchs, Dan. 1. 9. The skill,
and goodness, of some excellent and useful Persons, may deserve to be favored:
but favor is not always to men of skill, but only where God bends the hearts
of Men, and bestows it, Eccles. 9. 11. All the favor, which any Men show us,
is our good God's, who conveys it to us through their hearts, and hands.

Quest. When we come to them for any favors, is it God that helps us to
address with moving Speech, and with clear and persuasive Reason, and Arguments?

Ans. Yes, and inclines them too to hearken to it, and return us soft, and
gracious Answers. As the preparation of the heart, in him that pleads and
craves favor; so the answer of the tongue, in him that grants it, is from the
Lord, Prove. 16. 1. And therefore in all our suits, and dependances on Men, we
must first seek to, and place our trust in God. For if our suit please him, he
will help us so to deliver our requests, and to prefer them at such times, that
they shall be sure to receive, and be pleased with them too.

Quest. And will they be sure to do this, though at the same time they are
solicited, and inclined very different ways, and have in their Eye and
Intention many other projects, which are ready to oppose, and justle out ours?

Ans. Yes, for when there are many devices in a man's heart, nevertheless the
counsel of the Lord, or that device among them all which God espouses, it shall
stand, Prove. 19. 21. And therefore in any matters, which God loves and
espouses, let no good Men despond, because of the instability and
unsettledness, or because of the number, interest, or oppositeness of other
Counsels, whereby he is exercised, who has the disposal of them. For God can
quickly alter his measures, and turn his deliberations as he will, and fix the
determination where he pleases.

Quest. If we cannot have the favor of Men, but by the gift and blessing of
God, must not this teach us never to commit any sin to please Men, nor do the
least offense to him, in hopes thereby to ingratiate our selves with them,
either to gain their favor, or to keep and retain it?

Ans. Yes, it must teach us this. For if we fall out with God, he can quickly
spoil our credit, and favor with Men too. But if we keep favor with him, by
holding punctually to well-doing, he rules the hearts of all Men, and can
either preserve us in their favor, or protect us from their displeasure. Nay,
in all likelihood, he both can, and will, not only continue to us our old
Friends, who must needs secretly approve our upright dealings, though we comply
not with their own private ends; but also add more. For when a man's ways
please the Lord, he makes even his enemies to be at peace with him, Prove. 16.
7. So that Men must never neglect their own duty, or commit any sin, to please
great Persons, or to keep peace with their violent, or malicious Neighbors.
Let them adhere strictly to their duty, which will secure the favor of God:
and then his Providence will add the favor of Men, where he sees that will do
them good, or make their lives competently happy, and comfortable without it;
or however, make good the want thereof to them abundantly in another World.

Quest. I see it is Providence that gives us Children, to recompense our cares,
and perpetuate our memories, and success to our honest labors, and wealth, and
honor, and favor: and is it not the same God still, that gives us both life,
and health to enjoy them?

Ans. Yes, for in him we live, move, and have our being, Act. 17. 28. When he
hides his face, all things are troubled: he takes away their breath, and they
die, and are turned to their dust, Psalm. 104. 29. And for this we are not only
thankfully to own his gift, but since we every minute live upon him, we ought
by all means continually to live to him, and not lay out our health, and
strength, in vice, or vanities. For whenever these are shamefully misspent,
it is but for him to hold his hand, and we are in sickness, pains, or death the
next moment.

Quest. If God is thus the giver, and the restorer of health, then, when Men
are in sickness, fervent Prayer is one step to a cure. And when they send for a
Physician, and follow his prescriptions, they must look up to God as well as to
him, and trust he will work their recovery, by what the other orders for them.

Ans. Yes, they must depend on him as the chief Physician. Men must not presume
God will work without means, which were to put him to work Miracles. But when
they have used the likeliest means, and taken the best ways they can, they must
perfect all by Prayer and dependence on God, hoping he will give a Blessing to
them. The Prayer of the Minister, as well as the prescription of the Doctor, is
a proper means to recover an infirm, or sick Person. And accordingly S. James
directs any that are sick, to send for the elders of the Church, that they may
pray over him, Jam. 5. 14.

Quest. From what you have said, it is plain that God's providence allots for us
all the good things of this life. And is it not he too, that orders for us all
Spiritual advantages; not only virtuous endowments, but also all outward means
and opportunities of Virtue and Religion, which must fit us for a better life?

Ans. Yes, most certainly. And therefore, as we must thankfully enjoy, and make
the best use we can of those means, and opportunities God has given us: so,
when they are meaner, since they are of his ordering, we must keep his way, and
do no evil thing, particularly not break the Order and Unity of the Church, to
find better.

Quest. I see God is the giver of every good thing, and therefore we must own
all that comes well to us any way, as his Gift and Blessing.

Ans. Yes, both when we receive, and as often as we speak of them. We should
not forget to thank God on all good occurrences, though coming to us from
seeming accidents, or the hands of our Neighbors. Nor should we forget to do
the same, on all relations of them unto others; but in speaking of any
Blessings, or comfortable Enjoyments, think a serious God be thanked, most
seemly and savory in all Pious Persons mouths.

Quest. But as God's Providence orders for us all good events, does he likewise
order for us all evil ones?

Ans. Yes, whether those that come upon us by accident, or by ill Men, that are
either private to our selves, or public and common to the whole Church or
Nation. Out of the mouth of the most high, proceeds not evil, and good? Lam.
3. 38. And shall there be evil in a city, and the Lord has not done it? Amos
3. 6.

Quest. When our Friends die, is that through Providence, and does God take
them?

Ans. Yes, albeit they are snatched away untimely by evil accidents, which,
though casual to us, are foreseen and ordered by him. In his hand are life and
death, so that whenever our Friends die, he calls them. And this must teach
us patiently to bear their loss; yea, moreover, to trust him to make up the
want of them some other ways, though their life seemed not only very useful,
but almost necessary to us. For let our Friends be as useful, as they will;
they are only his instruments. It is he that gives them, both the inclination,
the skill, and the opportunity to help us. And he, that supplied us by them,
can supply us without them: he can, when he pleases, raise up others, or put us
into a way and capacity to provide for our selves. So that no Person can be
Friendless, but is rich in Friends, who has a Friend of God, and is under a
good Providence. And one of the surest ways to make him a Friend, when others
are gone, is to trust him.

Quest. This is satisfactory, as to the loss, but oh! the misfortune of the
time. For they were taken away just then, when we promised our selves most
pleasure in them, which made us most desirous to keep, and loath to part with
them.

Ans. If we believe, that a most Wise God took them, in all modesty we should
believe too, that he knows what are the most convenient, and fittest Seasons,
for Friends to part in.

Quest. I see when God takes a Friend from us, we must submit, and trust him.
But does it not show he is angry with us, when he tears a Friend from our sides?

Ans. No, perhaps, it is only because he is pleased with them, and would take
them to himself. And we ought not to judge he hates us, for loving those that
we love.

Quest. When we suffer by mischances, or ill accidents, in our Bodies, or
Goods, are those sufferings from Providence?

Ans. Yes, it not only foresees, but times the evils to be ready when we are in
the way, and orders, and directs them for us. If the lot fall against us, when
it is cast into the lap, the whole disposal thereof is from the Lord, Prove. 16.
33. If a Man is accidentally maimed, or murdered, it is chance-medly and
accident in him that hurt, or slew him, but design in God, who, says the
Scripture in this case, delivered the man into his hand, Exodus 21. 13. And this
must teach Men in all unlucky chances, and unfortunate accidents, not to vent
themselves in wrath and foolish passion, against the immediate occasions,
whether inanimate things that could not, or undesigning Persons that did not
intend any ill to them: but to look up to God, with humility and patience under
what they feel, and thankfulness for all they have escaped. For in him only the
evil accident was design; and against him, who justly can, or dare complain?

Quest. This is well as to unfortunate accidents. But what if our hopes or
happiness are damped, or our maladies made worse, yea, perhaps, irremediable,
by gross heedlesness, or unkindness and hard-heartedness, or other exasperating
faultiness or over-sights, of our seeming Friends, or Servants, or others that
are concerned about us? It Is easier to bear, when we are made miserable by
God's Providence; but it grates hard when their faultiness makes us so, of whom
we might well expect better things?

Ans. Though they are the actors, God's Providence is the orderer of these
misfortunes: which therefore are to be undergone with the same patience. For as
a good Wife or Husband, so a wise and good Servant, or Friend, is God's gift.
And when God chastises and smites us, by such as are exasperatingly unkind, or
mischievously careless, we must own his Justice in their neglects, and submit
to them as we do to a Disease, that is, reckon them among that burden, or share
of suffering, which God has allotted for us in this life.

Quest. Is it Providence still, that sends us any crosses, and obstructions, in
our designs and business?

Ans. Yes, those crosses come from him, to exercise our Faith, where he
approves of our pursuits; or to disappoint and put us by, where he dislikes
them. And this must teach us patience, as often as we meet with them.

Quest. It Is enough, indeed, to stop all complaints, that any thing is of his
doing. But can you say moreover, that these crosses are for ends both of Grace,
and Wisdom?

Ans. Yes, to all those that love him. If they come to defeat their projects,
they shall see at last that is in favor to them: or if only to backen them,
that is, but to respite them for a more advantageous issue at a fitter season;
nay, perhaps, these seeming backners, will at last appear the truest promoters
to help them on. If Men will have patience till all is done, their crosses and
misadventures will appear most orderly, proper, and beautiful in their time,
when they have seen on to the end of the chain, and viewed the whole frame and
dependence of God's ordering. And therefore upon any cross occurrences, Men
must not be hasty in judging, to discourage and discontent their hearts: but
wait God's time with Patience, Hope, and implicit Faith, till the end of
things discovers his most Wise, and Gracious Purpose.

Quest. But what if in the height of our hopes, and probabilities, some cross
accident starts up, that is like to break all our measures?

Ans. If God sees good to make our hopes take place, he can make our crosses
carry on our desires to advantage. For it is his Prerogative to bring light out
of darkness; to make use of weak things to worst the strong, and of foolish
things to confound the wise, 1 Cor. 1. 27. And he has declared, that all things
shall work together for good, to those that love God, Romans 8. 28. But then they
must commit their case to his conduct, and trust him with it.

Quest. But the evil accident happens at that very time, which of all others
seems most unseasonable, and fit to pull down all they have been so long a
building up?

Ans. Though it does, to God the easiness of accomplishing his Gracious
Purposes, is still the same. It only gets him the greater Glory, in making the
crossest events serve such turns, as are beside all expectation, and he chooses
to work by such improbable means, to show his overruling Wisdom. What, in
appearance, could be worse timed, than the dissension of Paul and Barnabas, two
chief Ministers, in an Infant-Church. Yet this God turned to the furtherance of
the Gospel, by dividing them, like two great Streams, for the watering of more
Countries; Paul going through Syria and Cilicia, and Barnabas to Cyprus, Act.
15. 39, 40, 41. And therefore we must never be immoderately troubled, or
dejected, at private, or public mischances, falling out most unseasonably to
cross our hopes, either for our particular Interests, or for God's Holy Church.
For when God is engaged for us, he overrules, as the greatest evils, so the
crossest seasons too to serve his own purpose.

Quest. Sickness, loss of friends, and crosses and mischances, that could not
be foreseen, I see plainly are the Hand of God. But when we suffer from ill
Men, are those evils also of God's sending?

Ans. Yes, for the wicked are God's sword, Psalm. 17. 13. He overrules the most
troublesome, and ungodly Men, to serve his own turn: the Lord has made, or
disposed all things for himself* yea, even the wicked for the day of evil, that
is, to vent themselves there, where he sees fit to send evil, Prove. 16. 4. They
are his instruments, whereby he either exercises our patience, or corrects our
disobedience.

Quest. If it is God that afflicts us by them, and they are but as a Rod or
Instrument in his Hand; when they design to vex, and hurt us, he can put by
their design?

Ans. Yes, and often does; as he put by Abimelech from committing wickedness,
by a terrifying dream, Genesis 20. 3, 6. and Pharaoh, by sending great plagues
upon him, Genesis 12. 17. His Providence can at any time throw in their way a
discouraging reason, a diverting fear, an inward relenting, or expose some
other object to their hurtful passion, and divert it from him it fixed first
upon. Even the heart of kings, says Solomon, who, having no Superiors here,
seem most of all left to their own wills, are in God's hand to derive into any
channels or courses, as the rivers of water are in the Husbandman's, to bring
them over what part of his Ground he pleases, Prove. 21. 1. whereof we have
abundant instances, both in Holy Scripture, and Experience.

Quest. And when they are fully fixed to do us hurt, yet since they are under
his conduct and direction, let them desire, and endeavor it as much as they
will, they cannot do us any hurt before his time?

Ans. That is very right. And this was plain in the wicked Jews, who, though
they sought with all their might to kill Christ: yet either he secretly
withdrew himself, at the very point of time, when they thought to lay hands on
him, Luke 4. 29, 30. or the officers hearts relented, who were sent to
apprehend him, John 7. 32, 44, 45, 46. or they were providentially struck with
a startling fear, that the People, who held him for a Prophet, would rise upon
them, Matthew. 21. 46. Some thing, or other, stood always ready to put them by,
because his hour was not yet come, John 7. 30. But when God's own time drew on,
his Providence, which was a Wall of Brass about him before, laid him open to
their spite, and then they wrought their wills upon him: this is your hour, and
the power of darkness, Luke 22. 53. And so it was also in Job's case. Whilst
God set an hedge about him, no Enemy could annoy him: and till God had said,
all he has is in thine hand, Satan himself could not bring his mischievous
instruments, the Sabaans, and Chaldaeans upon him, Job 1. 10, 12, 15, 17.

Quest. And when that time is come, can they exceed his bounds, or afflict
further than he has allowed them?

Ans. No; for though the Jews, to increase Christ's pain, designed to break his
legs, as well as the Legs of the other Malefactors, as he hung upon the cross:
yet, by the speediness of his death, God prevented them, to fulfill the
Scripture, which says, a bone of him shall not be broken, John 19. 33, 36. And
when the Corinthians were full of fears, and apprehensive of great trials. S.
Paul tells them, God is faithful, and will not suffer you to be tempted above
what ye are able, but will make a way to escape so much of the temptation, as
would prove over hard for you, 1 Cor. 10. 13. And this has been the general
experience of God's Servants, who, as S. Paul speaks, might be troubled on
every side, but not distressed; perplexed, but not in despair; persecuted, but
not forsaken; cast down, but not destroyed, 2 Cor. 4. 8, 9.

Quest. And as God stints the measure, as well as appoints the season, does he
also fix the length and duration of our sufferings from evil Men?

Ans. Yes, that is not left to their malice, but as soon as our sufferings have
accomplished God's ends, he will take care to alter the counsels, and course of
things. The Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of temptation, and to
reserve the unjust to the day of judgment to be punished, 2 Pet. 2. 9. And in
proportioning this continuance, he uses great care, and tenderness to his
Servants, that their sufferings may not outlast their patience, or wear out
their hope in him. The rod of the wicked shall not rest, or make a fixed abode,
and stay too long upon the lot of the righteous, lest it put them upon
desperate counsels, and the righteous put forth their hands unto iniquity,
Psalm. 125. 3.

Quest. If wicked Men are thus an instrument in God's Hand, then whatever evils
we suffer from them, we must not look only at the immediate actors, but see
beyond them to Almighty God, and own his Providence.

Ans. Yes, and that will not only teach us to please him, and to apply our
selves to him for redress; but teach us patience too, because how undeserved
soever they may be from others, yet we have deserved a thousand times worse at
his hands. Let him curse, says David of wicked Shim^i, and would return no ill
again, for the Lord has bidden him, 2 Samuel 16. 10, 11. and I was dumb, and
opened not my mouth, because thou did it, Psalm. 39. 9. nay, it will teach us
willingness in submission. For be the Cup untoothsome, and bitter as Gall and
Wormwood: yet he is both our God, and our Father, that offers it, and we should
not suspect any hurt, in what comes from his Hand. The cup, which my Father
has given me, shall I not drink it? said our Blessed Lord of the unparallelled
injuries he suffered, John 18. 11.

Quest. But if, when Men wickedly afflict us, you say, God sends these
afflictions; will it not excuse them to say, God gives them success against us,
and they follow Providence?

Ans. No, in no wise. For God does not excite, or tempt them to injure us. But
when they are injurious of themselves, his Providence sets us in their way,
that their wickedness may spend it self upon us, to exercise our Faith and
Patience, or to chastise our disobedience. So that they are accountable for
their own wickedness, and when they will be wicked, all he does is to overruled
it to serve his own designs: as he did in the murder of our Blessed Savior,
which he ordered for the Salvation of the World, though the Jews slew him by
wicked hands, Act. 2. 23. When we suffer by other Men's sins, God, who punishes
us by them, will punish them for them, as he declared of the Assyrian, the rod
of his indignation, Is. 10. 5, 12, 17. and as all wicked Slanderers,
Oppressors, Thieves, Rebels, and Murderers, shall find to their cost in the
end. It is not acting successfully, but acting according to our Duty, which
will justify what we do, when God comes to judge us.

Quest. But if it is Providence, that sends wicked and violent Oppressors, since
it is the Patron of Justice, as well as the Chastiser of Undutifulness, sure
God will not continue to such Men the Power to oppress always?

Ans. No; the more violent and boisterous any wicked Oppressor is, the sooner
will his Power fail him, and spend it self. The wicked Oppressor, says Solomon,
passes as a whirlwind, which may for a while storm terribly, and bluster, but
is quickly over, Prove. 10. 25. The rod of his anger shall fail; that is, the
Might, or even the Authority whereby he scourges, shall not bear him out, or
preserve him in unjust violence: but by abusing Power, he shall soon lose it,
and then reap that trouble he has justly deserved, Prove. 22. 8. And therefore
when any are oppressed by Potent Neighbors, or Men of Violence, they may
support themselves to think, that God sees all their wrongs, and in due time
will give them ease.

Quest. I see, those evils, which befall our selves in our own particulars, are
the allotment of Providence. But if there be any miscarriages of State and
Government, must the People look upon these too to be of God's sending?

Ans. Yes, and generally as a punishment for the wickedness, and provocations
of a Nation. For the transgressions of a land, many are the princes thereof,
Prove. 28. 2. And through the anger of the Lord being kindled against Israel,
God moved David, that is, left him to be won by 1 Chronicles. 21. 1.
Satan moving him, to number the people, 2 Samuel 24. 1. So that in any public
miscarriages, we must not spend our selves in exclaiming against Ministers of
State, and the Instruments concerned therein: but look up to the Justice of
Almighty God, and reflect with patience, and penitent hearts, upon our own
sins, which are punished in them.

Quest. But must we think God's Providence directs and disposes, when Public
Affairs are most tumultuary and irregular, and seem to show forth fewest
footsteps of his perfections?

Ans. Yes, the Lord reigns, though the people tremble through convulsive and
distracting fears; he sits between the cherubims, though the earth be moved
with the violence of stirs and tumults, Psalm 99. 1. And this must support all
good Men in the most dangerous, and distracted times, because even then they
are still under God, and are not at the Mercy of all the ill chances and
threatening evils, that fly round about them, which, how loose soever they may
seem to fly abroad, are yet all bound up in God's Hand.

Quest. If it is God, that sends all these evils, then whenever any of them
threaten and hang over us, we must look up to him, and have Faith in his
Providence.

Ans. Yes, and that too, though we seem reduced almost to irremediable
extremities. For God loves to delay deliverance to the last, that our Faith and
dependence, may be more thoroughly tried; and then shows himself nearest to us,
when we have no more hope left in our selves, or in any humane means. Thus he
appeared not to save Isaac's life, till Abraham's hand was stretched out to
take it away, Genesis 22. 10, 11. And then God comes as a present help, when we
are in the very time of need, Psalm 46. 1. and Heb. 4. 16. He chooses the time
of our distress, to give us a more affecting sense of our deliverance. And then
too he often works it, by those very things, which seem not only unprofitable,
but opposite, and apt to hinder it: that no part of the honor of it may go to
humane means, but that the whole of it may be ascribed to himself.

Quest. You have shown that God orders all those ill events, which cross
accidents, or ill Men bring upon us. But what say you to those, which we bring
upon our selves, by our own gross faults, or follies? Must they be ascribed to
God's Providence?

Ans. No; this Solomon taxes* in fond sinners, that when the foolishness of man
perverteth his way, and he falls because he is Ignorant, or rash and hasty with
his feet: yet for all this, his heart fretteth against the Lord, as if not his
own pure folly, but God had brought him to it, Prove. 19. 2, 3. The most Holy
God forbids all our faults, and the most Wise God disclaims all our follies,
which we must not ascribe to him, but take to our selves. As all Persons must
do, when they throw away themselves in foolish Marriages, or throw away their
Estates by extravagance, and foolish projects, or are any other ways the direct
Authors of their own miseries, which they bring upon themselves by going
against his will, either in such sins as he forbids, or in such follies as he
disapproves. When our calamities are thus of our own seeking, we must not
remove the blame from off our selves by casting it on God, and say they are of
his sending. Say not thou, as the wise son of Sirach most piously and justly
cautions, it is through the Lord that I fell away; for thou ought not to do
the things, that he hates. Say not thou, he has caused me to err: for he has
no need of the sinful man, Ecclus. 15. 11, 12.

Quest. By this I perceive, when any Persons have made a foolish Marriage, or
otherwise done foolishly for themselves; you would not have them say, as too
ordinarily they do, that such match was made in Heaven, and is what God had
decreed for them.

Ans. No, by no means. For that is only to make God accountable for their
faults. And is it fit, when they are ashamed of a thing, to lay it upon God to
excuse themselves? God bids no Man do foolishly, or wickedly; nor tempts him to
it. Let no man say, when he is tempted, I am tempted of God. For God cannot be
tempted with evil, neither does he tempt any man, James 1. 13.

Quest. But does God no way allot these for us?

Ans. Yes, he allots the miseries as a punishment, after we have been so
faulty, or foolish: but he does not allot that foolish miscarriage, whereby we
bring the misery upon our heads. For God is not the Author, either of the sins,
or follies of Men, being in himself all Holiness, and Wisdom. What is well done
by us, we must ascribe to him, but all that is ill, we must take to our own
selves.

Quest. But is he not sometimes concerned in sending Men's faults and follies
too, as well as the miseries, in punishment of former provocations? For when
Men have been great sinners, he is often provoked, as you noted above, to
withdraw his Grace in just Judgment, and leave them to themselves, whence they
fall still into more folly, and wickedness.

Ans. Yes, by way of punishment, God sometimes gives Men up thus to sin, and
folly. Not that he tempts, or inclines Men, to be either foolish, or wicked, as
I said: but that, when they are thoroughly prepared of themselves to be so, in
his just Judgment he withdraws his abused Grace, the continuance whereof might
help to prevent it, and leaves them to themselves, and the incitation of evil
Spirits, as I have before declared.

Quest. So that if any Persons would ascribe any share in their miscarriages to
God, it must only be in owning his Justice, and taking shame to themselves,
confessing he Righteously gave them up to them, in punishment of former sins?

Ans. Yes.

Quest. You have instanced in foolish Marriages: and I see we must not impute
them to Destiny, and God's irresistible Decrees, which is only a throwing the
blame on God to clear our selves. But do not you think, that the Providence of
God, which numbers even the Hairs of our Heads, is more than ordinarily
concerned in making Marriages, which are an affair of highest importance?

Ans. I make no doubt of it. Houses, and lands, are the inheritance of fathers;
but a prudent wife is from the Lord, Prove. 19. 14. and 18. 22. But when God's
Providence orders, and accomplishes Marriages, it is not by fate, and
irresistible ways; but only by affording such opportunities and inducements,
as, though oft-times they may very potently induce, yet leave a liberty in the
Persons themselves, I suppose, especially ere they are suffered to proceed too
far, to refuse. When God brings them about, it is in a way agreeable to free
Creatures, who have a liberty to refuse, and voluntarily of themselves take
hold of these offers and facilitating turns of Providence, to bring about their
own Marriages; whence, being a matter of their own doing, they are accountable
for them, and deserve Praise when they bestow themselves wisely, and blame when
they do foolishly.

Quest. As for all the actions, which we do then, I perceive we must believe
that God observes them. And as for all the good or ill events, which we meet
with, we must believe he orders and allots them for us, and be accordingly
affected with them?

Ans. Yes, and that is walking before God, as Abraham was bid to do, Genesis 17.
1. and owning Providence, which is the ground of all Religion, and the great
Character through all the Scriptures of good Men: and is not only the
perfection of our affection, and service to Almighty God; but the only ground
of solid comfort and tranquillity of mind, under all the various accidents of
this World.

Quest. Is this Great, and Good God, that made, and still preserves, and
carefully provides for us, not only our Friend, but also our Father?

Ans. Yes, he is the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and, for his sake, he is
our Father too. And so he has taught us to call him, and pray, Our Father which
art in Heaven, etc.

Quest. What must this teach us?

Ans. Not only to take the freedom of access, and the confidence; but withal to
pay the Reverence, and dutiful Obedience of Children. If I be a father, where
is mine honor? Mal. 1. 6. To imitate the ways and virtues of our Heavenly
Father, and turn followers of God as dear children, Ephesians. 5. 1. this being a
Natural Fruit of Spiritual, as it usually is of Secular Relation. It must
engender noble thoughts and pursuits, worthy of this high Alliance, and not
suffer us to debase our selves, and dishonor our Race, by sinking into
sensuality, or doting on, and taking up with any vain and perishing goods of
this life. In sum, it must cause us to depend on him, with trust and affiance;
to receive what he sends, with submission, and cheerfulness, and an opinion
that it proceeds from kindness; with other such like, which are filial tempers.

Quest. And this God, and Father, the Creed says, is Almighty, and the maker of
Heaven and Earth.

Ans. Yes, that is added, and is next in course to be explained.

CHAP. III. Of God's Almightiness.
The Contents.

God's Almightiness implies, 1. God's Might and Strength to effect all things,
viz. all that are the object of any Power. And that are not repugnant to his
own Nature. The exerting this Power creates God no labor. He can do,
whatsoever any things of the World can do. This an encouragement to all
generous Enterprises. And to build on Providence, especially where we have a
Promise. The value and acceptance of this trust, in a seemingly most improbable
case. And whatsoever any things of the World are inclined, or wont to do, he
can hinder them from doing. This also a ground of trust in God. And to keep us
in any distress, from flying to unlawful aids. How God will use this Power. 2.
His Sovereignty and Power, to command, and order all things. This includes, 1.
Empire, as a Sovereign Ruler. What things God may command. The unalterableness
of some commands. 2. Dominion, as a Sovereign Proprietor. In what cases God
allots good and ill, out of his Power of Prerogative, not according to Men's
pre-dispositions. Where he dispenses Arbitrarily, he does it always most
Wisely, and Reasonably. Saving Grace he allots, not in way of Arbitrary
Prerogative, but according to Covenant Rules. And Heaven and Hell, in way of
Legal Trials. A brief account of the Rectitude of God's Nature, which limits
his Sovereign Will, from the Scriptures. This Sovereign Lord and Proprietor an
All-sufficient, so no selfish Being. Several good uses of God's Sovereign
Dominion. God's Majesty and Almightiness, must beget fear and reverence.

Question. THE Almighty Power of God, is one thing particularly professed in
the Creed, and when God would give a Character of himself, he told Abraham he
was the Almighty God, Genesis 17. 1. Is this Attribute of so great account, that
in so short a Summary it should be singled out, and particularly mentioned?

Ans. Yes, for since God has an Almighty Power over all, all must fear and
submit to him. Since he is able to do all things, his Friends and Servants have
cause to trust in him, and depend on him, and in all their wants to seek and
address to him for convenient supplies. So that his Almighty Power, is a main
ground of all Religious Service, of Fear, and Faith, or Trust in God, and all
Devotion.

Quest. What is meant by God's Almightiness?

Ans. Two things: 1. That he has Might and Strength, to effect and do. And, 2.
That he has Sovereignty and Power, to command and order all things.

Quest. Has God all Might and Strength, to effect and do all things?

Ans. Yes, all that are the object of any Power, and all that are not repugnant
to his own Nature. He made all this World, and can at his Will make more; and
nothing shall be impossible with God, Luke 1. 37.

Quest. Why do you say all that are the object of any Power?

Ans. Because contradictions are the object of no Power: and though an Almighty
Arm must be sufficient for one part of them, as who, by his bare Word, can at
his Will speak all things, either out of, or into nothing; yet it is no way
concerned to fulfill both at the same time. Thus is it diminution to the Power
of God, that it cannot make twice two cease to be four, or that which is past
not to have been, or one and the same Body to be at once in many and far
distant places, and yet under all this multiplicity to be but one, because they
all imply a contradiction, that is, that a thing should be somewhat, and withal
that it should not be it, at the same time.

Quest. And why do you add* All that are not Repugnant to his own Nature?

Ans. Because, as God's power is infinite, foe is every other Attribute, and
one must not destroy, or weaken another, but all must consist together. Thus,
though, as Christ said, to God all things are possible, Matthew. 19. 26. yet, as
St. Paul says, it is impossible for God to lie, Heb. 6. 18. He cannot be sick,
or weary, or sleepy. He cannot be unjust, or cruel, or unfaithful, or delight
in ill, or be ignorant of any thing, or change any of his excellencies, or
cease to be himself, or make other Gods besides himself, or be any other ways
imperfect, more than he can be weak and impotent. The properties, and
perfections of the Divine Nature, are unalterable by the Divine Power: and it
is no more a matter of God's Power, to hinder himself from being Pure, or Just,
or Good; than it is in the power of the Sun, to restrain it self from giving
Light; or of the Fire, from giving heat; or of any other thing, from doing what
is natural, and necessary to it. Whatsoever the Divine Pleasure can will, that
the Divine Power can execute: but God's Will that controuls all things else,
does never contradict his own Nature, but is always suited to, and ruled by it.

Quest. And when God exerts this Power in doing things, does it create him any
labor and pains?

Ans. No, he makes, or unmakes every thing, with a bare word of his mouth, as
he did at the Creation. We, indeed, are imperfect Natures, and activity spends
our Powers; and the things we go to alter and act upon, are stubborn in
sticking to their own Natures, and make resistance: on which accounts, our
actings cause trouble and weariness. But all things obey every inclination, and
tendency of God, with an entire submission; and his Power is Absolute and
Infinite, so that if he does but will any thing, immediately it is done. And
therefore it is a vain fancy, and ignorant complement of the Epicureans of old,
and of all the Enemies of Providence in later times, who would exclude God from
the Inspection, Ordering, and Government of the World, in pretense thereby to
secure his ease and self-enjoyment, and to keep back trouble and toil from him.

Quest. Can God do, whatsoever any things in the World can do?

Ans. Yes, for he gave them all their Power of doing it. And retaining still
the same Power in himself, which he communicated to them, as he ordinarily does
things by them, so, when he pleases, can he do the same without them. Thus can
he preserve Life without Meat, as he did to Moses, Elias, and our Savior
Christ, in their forty days fast; and restore Health, without the help of
Physic; and give Children to those who are past Childbearing, as he did to
Sarah; and make a Maid a Mother without the help of a Father, as in the
Generation of our Savior; and give us Bodies without all help of Parents, as
he did out of the dust of the earth at first to Adam, and as he will do at last
to all in the general Resurrection.

Quest. What must this teach us?

Ans. Not only to believe him in those Articles of Religion, which seem hardest
in Nature to be brought to pass, as Christ' being born of a virgin, and the
general resurrection: but also to take heart and courage, in all honest and
prudent enterprises, and not suddenly to desist, or despair of success, through
the number, and greatness of discouragements. All virtuous, public, and
generous undertakings, are both acceptable and honorable to God, and so more
like to have a sure Friend of Providence. And when God espouses any cause,
though there be little probability, and preparation for it in Natural
appearance, yet will it surely come to pass, since he has the Power and
Probability of all his Creatures in himself.

Quest. Indeed, Men so backed, must needs speed designs, where there are fewer
visible preparations, and find success beyond appearances.

Ans. Yes, and the prospect of that animated the Apostles to go on courageously
in converting the World, an attempt impossible in all human judgment. And all
Ancient, and Modern Worthies, to set on any Public Reformations in evil times,
and do the World good against their wills. And all honest Men, whose cause was
good, and dear to God, to hope he would stand by it, and restore it, even when
they saw it reduced to the last extremities. In sum, in licentious times, it
has heretofore, and must still strengthen Magistrates, in asserting Laws and
Justice; and Ministers, in preaching down prevailing errors, and reigning
vices; and all Public Spirits, in pursuing Pious, or Charitable Projects; and
all Good Men, in supporting the oppressed; in curbing vice, in breaking wicked
customs, in setting on any great honor of God, or good Men, in their several
stations. They must not hastily think they shall not be able to effect, what
they have cause to hope God will set forward: but believe, as S. Paul said,
that they can do all things, through Christ strengthening them, Phil. 4. 13.
But then their hope and confidence must still be fixed in God, not in
themselves, or outward aids: and when they go to meet difficulties, it must be
as David did to meet Goliath, only in the Name of the Lord of hosts, 1 Samuel 17.
45.

Quest. Must this consideration, of God's having in him the Power of all his
Creatures, teach us any thing else?

Ans. Yes, to trust his Providence for the supply of any wants, especially
where he has given us any Word and Promise. Nay, then to hold on trusting* even
in the most destitute cases, and against all probabilities. For all things,
even the hardest and most improbable, are equally easy unto God, so that
nothing must seem improbable, which he declares he will bring about. When Faith
and Trust is in Man, or any Earthly thing, it is ruled by probability. But when
it is in a Power Almighty, it makes no difference of likely, or unlikely. As
Abraham's Faith did not, when he believed Gods Promise to send him a son,
though at that time, both Sarah, and he, were too old in course of Nature to
have one: and to make that Son a numerous seed, which he firmly believed at the
same time he was commanded to offer him up, and so could have no Son by him,
unless he were first restored to him from the dead.

Quest. This, indeed, shows a high esteem, and confidence in God, to rely upon
his Word when there is not the least sign of its taking effect, but things
look, as if there were no way for it to be effected.

Ans. Yes, so it does. And therefore among all acts of Religion, there is none
that does more endear Men to God. This our Father Abraham found, it being upon
this account, that he became so dear to God, as to be called the friend of God,
Jam. 2. 23. and the father of the faithful, Romans 4. 11. 16. and that his bosom
should be made the receptacle of the blessed, Luke 16. 22. For his Faith, says
the Apostle, above all his other virtues, was imputed to him for righteousness,
Romans 4. 3, 9. And among all his acts of Faith, those God was pleased to impute
to him, as the most notable, which were shown in these two difficult instances.
He staggered not at the unlikelihood of his having a son, but was fully
persuaded, that what God had promised, he was able to perform: and therefore,
says S. Paul, it was imputed unto him for righteousness, Romans 4. 19, 20, 21,
22. And when he offered Isaac his son upon the altar, says S. James, then the
Scripture was fulfilled, which says, Abraham believed God, and it was imputed
to him for righteousness: and he was called the friend of God, Jam. 2. 21, 23.
Such is the extraordinary value, and recompense, of trusting God in a seemingly
most improbable, and desperate case, where it is visibly put to a push of
Omnipotence to make good his Promise.

Quest. I see God can do, whatsoever any things in the World can do. But can he
also hinder any things in the World, from doing whatsoever they are naturally
bent, or wont to do?

Ans. Yes, for as by him they were all made, so, as the Apostle Act. 17. 28.
says, in him they still subsist, and move, and operate: and therefore
whenever he pleases to suspend, or withdraw their Power, they have no longer
use of it. Thus the Dan. 3. 27.
fire could not consume, nor singe Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego; nor the
Dan. 6. 22.
hungry Lions fasten on the Prophet Daniel; nor the Act. 28. 5.
venomous Beast sting the Holy Apostle; nor the Exodus 12. 13, 23.
destroying Angel touch an Israelite; nor the Psalm. 91. 1, 6, 7, 8.
Plague, or Pestilence, or other contagious Disease, infect or seize the
Psalmist; nor the John 7. 30.
wicked Jews act their spite on our Savior Christ; nor the Job 1. 12. and 2. 6.
Infernal Spirits touch Job, or try his Patience, whilst God was pleased to
withhold them. He suspends the Operations of all hurtful Creatures, evil Men,
and wicked Spirits, at his Will: so that they invade no Person, and act at no
time, but only when, and so far as he allows them.

Quest. And what must this teach us?

Ans. Not hastily to conclude any case of good Men desperate, and incapable of
cure, or ease. For when dangers, or disasters, from the most hurtful things, or
Persons, threaten most, it is but for God to interpose, and either divert, or
suspend their power, and then the most fierce and mischievous things become
tame and harmless, and the dangers from them little, or none at all. And thus
he is wont to interpose for good Men; rescuing them, as he did Holy David
frequently, out of the very jaws of Death; and saving them, as he did S. Paul,
after he had the sentence of death in himself, 2 Cor. 1. 9.

Quest. But what if we are at the last extremities? must we hope still, when
evil is fastening upon us, or at the very door?

Ans. Yes, if we have any express promise of deliverance: for God, as I noted
formerly, never forgets his Word, though sometimes he may delay the performance
of it to the last. Or, if we have an express command for the work, wherein the
danger meets us, as S. Peter had for coming to Christ upon the water. For since
Christ bid him do the thing, he should have hoped to the end that he would
stand by him, and therefore was rebuked for doubting and staggering in Faith,
though it were when the wind was boistrous, ready to bury him in every Wave,
and he already began to sink, Matthew. 14. 29, 30, 31. Or, lastly, if we have no
other claim for relief, but only from God's Providence, whose Protection we may
generally presume on in his own ways, and in pursuit of all good and prudent
enterprises: as our Lord intimates, when he rebukes the Apostles for want of
Faith in fearing Shipwreck, though they neither had any particular command to
Sail, nor express promise of a safe Voyage, but were to ground this Faith on
being under his Protection, and going on lawful Errands, Matthew. 8. 24, 25, 26.
God very commonly suffers good Men's dangers, which at last he designs to
remove, to go on first to the greatest extremities, that their Faith and Trust
may pass through a more full trial, and illustrious exercise.

Quest. Must it teach us any thing else?

Ans. Yes, Secondly, in no case to forsake God, and fly to any Foreign and
unlawful Aids. For if we stick to him, this overruling Power, when things are
at the worst, can with a Word put all the evil by, and rescue us. And if we
forsake him, he can as easily turn that Power against us, and make us fall by
our own succors. For as this Almighty Arm, is able to bring all things about
for us; so, when it pleases, can it also bring them about against us, in spite
of all probabilities.

Quest. This is a stupendous height of Power: how will God employ it?

Ans. In making good all his Promises, and executing all his Threatenings,
heaping Favors on his Friends and faithful Servants, and Judgments on his
Enemies. So that all Holy Men shall taste the sweetness of it, in endearing
Providence in this World, as Jacob, Joseph, David, and the Patriarchs, and
pious Men of old did: and in Glorious, and endless Rewards in the next. And
wicked Men shall feel the smart of it, in all the crosses, and penal
inflictions of this Life, and in the everlasting torments of the Life to come.

Quest. If this irresistible Power, were not to be thus justly, and kindly
used, though we should basely fear and dread, yet should we not love and value
him that has it.

Ans. No, for nothing is so hateful, as power in the hands of malice, which
makes us have such an utter hatred of the powers of darkness. And this must
teach all ambitious Men, never to covet; and all Potent Men, never to employ
their Power, to oppress, or tyrannize, to accomplish unlawful Lusts, or to work
their wills on others. But only to encourage Virtue, and reward it, to protect
the innocent, relieve the oppressed, curb the vicious, or some way or other to
do good with it.

Quest. Another Branch of God's Almightiness, you said, is his Sovereignty and
Power, to command, and order all things. What mean you by God's Sovereignty?

Ans. His Supreme Authority, being accountable to none, but having Power to
order, and enjoin all things, as seems fittest to his own Wisdom.

Quest. What does this imply?

Ans. Two things: both Empire, that is, a Power to enjoin and command as a
Ruler; and Dominion, that is, a Power to allot and dispose as a Proprietor. God
may give any Commands, and exact them of any Persons, as an absolute Governor:
and make any distributions of Things, or allotment of States and Conditions, as
an absolute Lord and Proprietor. And he is Sovereign in both these, being bound
to please none, but only to order as seems best to himself.

Quest. Does God exercise over the World a Sovereign Empire?

Ans. Yes, all other Rulers, as the Apostle says, are but his ministers, Romans
13. 4. but he still keeps the controlling Power, and the Reins of Government in
his own Hands, being the blessed, and only Potentate, King of kings, and Lord
of lords, 1 Timothy 6. 15. He has prepared his throne in heaven, and his kingdom
rules over all, Psalm 103. 19. And this Empire he exercises, in giving and
exacting all Commands, and guiding and directing all Actions, and turns in the
World, as he pleases.

Quest Has God an absolute, and unlimited Power, to command all things?

Ans. Yes, all that his Creatures, by his Grace, are capable of doing; and all
that his most Holy, and Perfect Nature, is capable of injoyning.

Quest. Why do you say, all his Creatures, by his Grace, are capable of doing?

Ans. Because his most just, and equitable Government, cannot impose an
impossible thing. His Laws, indeed, might be impossible to us, considered naked
in our own strength, but not as considered under those assistances, and that
strength, which he is ready to afford us. He does not reap where he has not
sown, and whatsoever his Laws require, his Spirit will assist Men to perform,
His commandments are not grievous, 1 John 5. 3. and his yoke is easy, and its
burden light, Matthew. 11. 30.

Quest. Why do you add also, all that his most Holy, and Perfect Nature, is
capable of injoyning?

Ans. To show he does not give Commands out of unlimited Will, and
Arbitrariness; but does all according to unalterable Principles of Goodness,
and Justice. He may command whatsoever he will: but then he cannot will all
that we may fancy, but only all that is like himself, i. e. all that is Wise,
and Good. He never Wills against the Perfection of his Nature, because he will
do it.

Quest. I perceive then, that God having commanded Holiness, and Justice, and
Mercifulness, and Truth, and Faithfulness, and the like, which are his own
Natural Perfections, there is no possibility of his reversing these Commands to
show unlimitedness of Will, and commanding their contraries.

Ans. No; in commanding these Virtues, he only commands us to be like himself:
to be holy as he is holy, perfect in kindness as he is perfect, as the 1 Pet.
1. 16. Matthew. 5. 48.
Scripture says. And being Transcripts of his own Perfections, these Virtues
are a limitation to his Will, and whilst he is himself, he can never will them
to be otherwise. Indeed, it is his Command, which makes them become duties to
us, and instances of our obedience: but that, which made him command them, was
the Goodness they had antecedent to his Command, as being Draughts of his own
Perfections. He willed them, because they were Good, and like himself. And he
being unchangeable, they must be always like him, and upon that account he must
always will them; whence they are said to be duties of Essential, and Eternal
Goodness and Obligation.

Quest. Does God exercise this Empire also in guiding, and directing all
Actions, and Turns in the World, as he pleases?

Ans. Yes, he does according to his will in the army of heaven, and among the
inhabitants of the earth: and none can stay his hand, or say unto him, What
do thou? as Nebuchadnezzar most justly acknowledged, when he returned to
himself, Dan. 4. 35. He presides in all Councils, and directs, and overrules
all Actions and Events. I form the light, and create darkness, I make peace,
and create evil: I the Lord do all these things, Isaiah 45. 7. And this
Administration of things, is called his Providence, which has already been
discoursed of.

Quest. Has God also a Sovereign Dominion, to dispose of all things, and allot
all their different states and conditions, as a Supreme Proprietor?

Ans. Yes, his Hand made all things, bestowing upon them both the Workmanship
and the Materials, and his Power still preserves them, and all this for what
uses he pleases. Thou have created all things, and for thy pleasure they are,
and were created, Rev. 4. 11. As the clay is in the potters hand, to form it
into a Vessel either honorable; or base, so are ye in my hand, says the Lord,
Jer. 18. 6. The heaven is his, and the heaven of heavens, Deuteronomy. 10. 14. the
earth, and all the fullness thereof; the world, and they that dwell therein,
Psalm. 24. 1. And being thus absolute, and universal a Proprietor, he places and
alters, grants and resumes all things at pleasure. And when he takes away, says
Job, who can hinder him, or say unto him, What do thou? Job 9. 12.

Quest. I see that all the good and evil, both of this World, and of the next,
are in God's Hand, to allot as he sees fit. Does he allot them according to any
rules, and in recompense of Men's predispositions: or Arbitrarily, out of
Sovereign Will, according as he pleases?

Ans. In allotting the principal things, particularly the Eternal pains and
pleasures of another life, and, in general, all rewards and punishments, he has
graciously bounded his own unlimited Power, by Laws and Compacts. But as for
all good and evil things, which are not under Promises or Covenants, he
dispenses them Arbitrarily, as he sees fit. And as those allotments of good and
evil, which he makes in recompense to Men's Deeds, and according to the
direction of his own Laws and Promises, may be called the Legal Distributions,
and Covenant-Justice: so may those, wherein he has not limited himself by any
such Contracts, be called the Prerogative Power, and Arbitrary Will of this
Almighty Potentate.

Quest. In what things does God act with us, out of his Power of Prerogative,
allotting good or evil things, or states of life, according to his own
unlimited Will, and not according to Men's qualities and predispositions?

Ans. I do not say he acts constantly so: but oft-times he does.

1. In allotting Men's different state, and worldly circumstances: as that one
should be born of Noble Parents, to great Fortunes, or honorable Employments,
with a wellshaped healthy Body, or pregnant parts; and another should be born
mean, or servile, or sickly, or mis-shaped, or poor, or foolish. Thus, when the
Jews asked the reason of a man's being born blind, whether for his parents sin,
or his own; our Savior told them there was no need for that, to seek out for
such precedent desert, either in him, or them, but it is enough to say it was,
that the works of God might be made manifest in him, John 9. 2, 3.

2. In allotting their different outward helps for Religion, and Spiritual
opportunities; as that one should be born of Christian Parents, trained up in
an Orthodox Belief, and pure Worship, in the Eyes of good Examples, and under
the care of skilful Pastors; and that another should be deprived of some, or,
perhaps, of all these. Thus, the difference, both in Secular, and
Ecclesiastical Privileges, which God put between the Jews and Edomites, (the
elder serving the younger, not being intended, or verified of Jacob and Esau's
Persons, Jacob rather serving Esau, than Esau him, Genesis 33. 3. but of their
Posterities, of whom God expressly speaks it, when he first declared it to
Rebekah, Genesis 25. 23. and to whom Malachy, from whom also S. Paul cites this
passage, does apply it, Mal. 1. 2, 3.) this difference, says the Apostle, was
an allotment out of God's Sovereign Will, and not out of their precedent
deserts; God declaring that to Rebekkah, while the children were yet unborn,
and had neither done good nor ill, to prepare them for this discrimination,
Romans 9. 11, 12, 13. These different allotments, of National Privileges to Jews
above Edomites, and afterward, as he Ver. 23, 24, 25, 26, 30.
there notes, to Gentiles above Jews, when the Jews were cast off, and the
Gentiles taken into the Church in their place, was no unrighteousness in God,
who has mercy on whom he will have mercy, verse 14, 15.

Lastly, to name no more, when he offers what is sufficient to all, to enable
them to do his will if they are not wanting to themselves, which renders all
without excuse; yet allotting more eminent, and efficacious degrees of Grace to
some Persons, and showing more respite and forbearance toward some offenders,
than he does to others, whom he strikes with a swifter vengeance, cutting them
off, it may be, in their very first attempts. Thus his sparing Pharaoh, and
still raising him up again to a new trial after numerous repulses, S. Paul
ascribes to God's Sovereignty, who has mercy on whom he will have mercy, Romans
9. 17, 18.

In allotting these different worldly Circumstances, and external Privileges
and Opportunities, and more eminent degrees of inward Grace, and showing this
different forbearance, God uses the same Prerogative Power, and absolute
Sovereignty over his Creatures, which the potter does over the clay, as S. Paul
says, forming one vessel to honor, and another to dishonor, not because of
any different fineness of the matter, but, taking both out of the same lump,
out of his own will and pleasure, Romans 9. 21.

Quest. But in these allotments, where God dispenses Arbitrarily, does he not
always dispense Wisely, and Reasonably?

Ans. Yes, most certainly. Man's will is too often a blind, precipitate
resolution. But God's Will is never without Reason, and the highest Counsel
directs him, where he seems most Arbitrary in acting. He works all things,
according to the counsel of his own will, Ephesians. 1. 11. So that he is said to act
out of Will, not as if he did not Will upon good Reason, but because that
Reason is not his being directed so by any of his Laws or Covenants, or to
recompense any pre dispositions of his Creatures. It Is Arbitrary, because
uncovenanted, and left to himself. But whatsoever is left to him, is sure to be
managed with the highest Equity, Wisdom, and Goodness, as will appear to all,
when we shall be let in to behold the Counsel of God's actings.

Quest. Does God use this Prerogative-Power, in allotting Saving Grace, so that
one shall have the help of his Spirit in a good way, and another shall be
denied it, though he seeks it earnestly and sincerely, only because God pleases?

Ans. No, this is under Promises and Compacts, and is to be dispensed and
measured out to Men, according to their readiness to comply with, and their
care to seek, and make use of it. If any man lack wisdom, let him ask of God,
who gives to all men liberally, Jam. 1. 5. God will give the holy spirit to
those that ask him, Luke 11. 13. and to every one that has, that is, improves
his talents, shall be given, Matthew. 25. 29. These are the Covenant-Rules, for
allotting Saving Graces.

Quest. Or does he use it in allotting Heaven and Hell, and dispensing Eternal
Rewards and Punishments?

Ans. No, these are not given in way of Arbitrary Dispensations, but of Legal
Trials. At the last day, men must all appear before Christ, to receive
according to what they have done in the body, whether it be good, or bad, 2
Cor. 5. 10. they must all be judged according to their works, Rev. 20. 12, 13.

Quest. So that no Man who lives ill, must think that God, to show his
Sovereignty, may save him if he will; nor any Man, that lives well, fear lest
God, to show his Sovereignty, may damn him if he will; nor if any Person
seriously sets himself to be good, must he harbor any jealousy of
Prerogative-Power, and Arbitrary decrees against him, whereby he should be shut
out from that Grace, which is necessary to help him to be so.

Ans. No, there were not the least danger of that, had we nothing else to trust
to, but the absolute Holiness, Justice, and Goodness, of the Divine Nature. But
moreover, in these most important disposals, God acts not out of Arbitrary,
unlimited Power, but as he has made himself a Legal, Covenanting Governor,
that is graciously pleased to rule the World by Laws and Compacts, and will
distribute rewards and punishments according to them. So that in expecting any
of these from him, we must not have recourse to any fancied secret Decrees, but
only to revealed Promises, and Covenant-Declarations. And these, as I have
shown, pronounce Mercy on the good, and Vengeance on the bad, and the Spirit
and Grace of God, to all that sincerely and carefully seek after it. In
relation to future recompenses, says S. John, God is just, 1 John 1. 9. And in
relation to present assistances, says S. Paul, God is faithful, 1 Cor. 10. 13.
And in relation to both, says he again, God is not unrighteous, Heb. 6. 10. So
making, not absolute Will and Prerogative-Arbitrariness, but Moral Honesty and
Covenant-Justice, the ground of Men's expectation from him in these matters.

Quest. You have several times mentioned the rectitude of God's Nature, as well
as the voluntary addition of his Laws and Compacts, for the limitation of his
Sovereign Will and Power. And the Divine Nature you have particularly explained
before: but I should be glad to have a brief account, of his ways and temper,
from the Holy Scripture.

Ans. Thus they represent him. That it is impossible for God to lie, Heb. 6. 18.
that he is faithful, and cannot deny himself, 2 Timothy 2. 13. He is of purer
eyes, than to behold iniquity, Hab. 1. 13. he hates all workers of it, Psalm 5.
5. He cannot be tempted with evil, nor tempt any man to it, James 1. 13. All
his ways are judgment, a God of Truth, and without iniquity, just and right is
he, Deuteronomy. 32. 4. He regards not persons, nor takes rewards, Deuteronomy. 10. 17. He
loves righteousness, and beholds the upright, Psalm 11. 7. He is merciful,
and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth, keeping mercy
for thousands, Exodus 34. 6, 7. God is love, 1 John 4. 8, 16. And as he will by
no means clear the guilty, Exodus 34. 7. so has he no pleasure in the death of
the wicked, but that the wicked man turn from his way, and live, Ezekiel. 33. 11.
These are the Almighty Deities fixed, and immutable Ways, and Principles, which
he never thwarts, or contradicts, to show absoluteness of Power and Wilfulness.

Quest. If Almighty God is the Proprietor of all things, and can do what he
pleases, he must be All-sufficient in himself, and need no accessions from any
Body to his Happiness?

Ans. So he is. My goodness, says David, extends not to thee, Psalm 16. 2.
He needs nothing, that any Creatures can offer to him; and if he did, he could
supply himself with them, since all the World can present him with nothing, but
what they have from him.

Quest. If we are so poor, that we can give, and he so full, that he can
receive nothing; it is plain he is no selfish Being, nor seeks any separate
Interests of his own, by any services we are to pay him.

Ans. Very true. His ends are only to communicate Happiness, not to gain it.
And this may show Men how unnecessary their scruple is, who fear they are not
sincere in God's Service, if they seek thereby to benefit themselves. For in
that, their end is not different, but the same with his. They seek his Glory,
in pursuing their own truest good, for in giving, not receiving it is, that he
seeks to be glorified.

Quest. What must God's Sovereignty, and absolute Dominion teach us?

Ans. First, since all we possess, is held under him, never to compass any
worldly thing by fraud, or falsehood, or any deceitful and dishonest dealing.
For since God never allows of such, whosoever come into Possessions that way,
have no consent, or grant from him. So that whatever they hold, it is not by
any Title of Right and Lawful Claim, but only by unjust Usurpation.

Quest. What do we learn from this absolute Dominion besides?

Ans. Secondly, to be content with that state and condition, and that portion
of Goods and Accommodation, which God allots us. For be our part what it will,
and other Men's never so much above it, as most are apt to fancy all their own
burdens heaviest, and their own enjoyments least: yet, God having as absolute
Propriety to make one Rich, and another Poor, as the Jer. 18. 6. Romans 9. 21.
Potter has, out of the same lump, to frame one vessel to honor, and another
to dishonor, they must needs be most rightfully disposed. Yea, moreover,
whatever little any of us enjoy, in comparison with others, yet is that little
wholly undeserved; and if from the same bounty, which grants us our share, any
other Men have more, our eye must not be evil, because God's is good, Matthew.
20. 15.

Quest. Must it teach us any thing else?

Ans. Yes, Thirdly, to be content when he resumes his own allotments. For when
he grants us things, he still keeps the Propriety in himself. He makes no
Tenants in Fee, no, nor so much as Tenants for Life: Whatsoever outward things
we hold under him, it is all as Tenants at Will, to be disseiz'd when he
pleases. And therefore whenever God lends us Health, or Wealth, or Honor, or
Friends, or Children, we must enjoy them with an apprehension of their being
only Loans for a time, and with a readiness to resign them up, when called for
again. As good old Eli did, who upon an irreparable degradation of his Family,
from a state of highest Power and dignity, to the greatest want and meanness,
only said, it is the Lord, let him do what seems him good, 1 Samuel 3. 18. And
as Job, who upon his sudden and amazing change of fortune, when from the most
rich and happy, in a few minutes time he was made the most poor and miserable
of all the Men in the East, said only, the Lord gave, and the Lord has taken
away, blessed be the name of the Lord, Job 1. 21.

Quest. Must it teach us any thing more?

Ans. Yes, Fourthly, to use all his allotments to his Honor, whilst he spares
them to us. He makes no Proprietors, but only Stewards, 1 Pet. 4. 9, 10. And in
stewards it is required, that they prove faithful, 1 Cor. 4. 2. employing what
is under their charge, to their Masters ends, use, and interest. And therefore
no Persons, to whom God has given Estates, must think them a privilege, for
being idle, and careless; or for spending them wholly upon sports and pastimes,
as if wealthy Persons were made for no other business, but diversions; and much
less for laying them out in ostentation of Pride, and Vanity; or in ministering
to Vice and Luxury. Health, and Wit, and Wealth, and other Temporal advantages,
being only Loans of God, are to be Faithfully stewarded, and laid out, not
slothfully neglected, wasted, embezelled, or abused.

Quest. Are we to learn from it any thing further?

Ans. Yes, Fifthly, to be humble, and think modestly and soberly of our selves,
under any preeminence of Body, or Parts, Power, or Possessions. When these
advantages puff Men up with pride, and vain fondness, and self-conceit, they
arrogate all the fancied honor and estimation of them to themselves, as if
they were Proprietors. But when they own them as God's Gifts, and Trusts, and
themselves as holding them only during Pleasure by uncertain Tenures, they will
ascribe all the Honor of them to him, and learn Modesty, Care, Dependence, and
Thankfulness. And withal, never insult, or deride the want of them in others:
remembering, that he who mocketh the poor, (and the case is the same in all
other Natural Defects, or Calamities,) reproacheth his Maker, who disposed of
him in that condition, as Solomon says Prove. 17. 5.

Quest. By this I see God Almighty is an immensly Great Being. How must the
thoughts of such an irresistible Might, and absolute Sovereignty affect us?

Ans. With the greatest submission of Humility, and Reverence. For such immense
Greatness and Majesty, should strike us with holy fear and submission in the
highest degree, every time we think, or speak of this Great God, especially in
all acts of Adoration and Worship, which we pay to him. Thou must fear this
glorious, and fearful name, the Lord thy God, Deuteronomy. 28. 58. He is the
excellency of Jacob, Amos 8. 7. the most high over all the earth, Psalm. 83. 18.
a great God, a mighty, and terrible, Deuteronomy. 10. 17. glorious in holiness,
fearful in praises, doing wonders, Exodus 15. 11. Holy, and reverend is his
name, Psalm 111. 9.

Quest. By this Almighty Power, it is easy to believe God made the World.

Ans. Yes, thereby in the beginning God created the heaven and the earth, Genesis
1. 1. And by the same Power he still Governs and Preserves it, as I have before
explained.

The End of the First Part.
Imprimatur Liber cui Titulus, The Practical Believer, Part II.

Guil. Needham, R. R. in Christo P. ac D. D. Wilhelmo Archiep. Cant. a Sacr.
Domest. June 28. 1688.
THE Practical Believer.

PART II.

OR, THE KNOWLEDGE OF JESUS CHRIST.

By John Kettlewell, Minister of Coles-Hill in Warwickshire.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Kettlewell, and are to be sold by R. Clavell at the
Peacock in St. Paul's Churchyard, and W. Rogers at the Sun in Fleetstreet,
1689.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. OF the Office, and Natures of Jesus Christ. In what Salvation by
Christ consists. Being Christ, notes his being, 1. A Prophet, to teach his
Church. We must hear and learn of him in the Holy Scriptures; and at the mouths
of his Ministers. 2. A Priest, to Redeem, and Intercede for it. 3. A King, to
Govern it by his Laws. And by his Officers, whom we are to submit to in his
place. Also to Protect it against all visible and invisible Enemies. Jesus
Christ is the Son of God, as having received from the Father the Nature of God.
And the Power of God. On both these Accounts, and others, he is our Lord. And
to be worshipped. What we learn from his being our Lord. Of Christ's being
Conceived of the Holy Ghost, and Born of a Virgin. He was truly Man. And why he
was so. CHAP. II. OF the Sufferings of Christ. An Account of what Christ
suffered, and from whom. Both he, and God the Father were consenting to it.
What he suffered, was for our sins, to save us from suffering for them, when we
truly repent of them. Pardon on Repentance, the design of his Satisfaction, and
the Merit of his Death. This is a free Grace, which implies that it is not
given in Recompense of our Deserts, not that it requires no Conditions. An
Account why God would not grant this Grace of Pardon to Penitents, without
Christ's dying to satisfy for them. And how his Death served all the designs
of God's Justice, full as well, as their own would have done. Christ's
Sacrifice but once offered, but daily commemorated. Several useful inferences
from Christ's dying for us. Christ's dead Body was Buried. Of his descent into
Hell. CHAP. III. OF the Resurrection of Christ, and his sitting at God's
Right Hand. An Account how Christ may be said to have been three days in the
Earth. His Resurrection proved. The necessity of it. He ascended to Heaven.
What is meant by his sitting at the Right Hand of God. There he, 1. Intercedes
for us, as our Priest. This intercession not vocal, by Words and formal Pleas,
but by presenting himself, and his own meritorious Sacrifice. He intercedes
only for Covenant-Mercies, and on Covenant-Terms. He is an Intercessor of
absolute Power with God, and truest Affection for us. One part of his
intercession, is to hand and present our Prayers to God. Therefore whenever
we pray for any thing, it is both our duty, and wisdom to apply by him. 2.
Governs his Church, as a King. In what Acts this consists. 3. Instructs his
Church, as a Prophet, by sending to it the Holy Ghost. Christ's Body having now
taken up its fixed abode at God's Right Hand, we are not in any Ordinances to
expect his Bodily Presence, but only a Presence by his Spirit, which is more to
be desired. Some Inferences from Christ's sitting at God's Right Hand. CHAP.
IV. OF the Future Judgment. The necessity of the Future Judgment. All men are
judged, and made happy or miserable, at their Deaths. But not so fully then, as
they will be afterward. The Complete and General Judgment, is at the end of
the World. In that, Jesus Christ is to be the Judge. Who are to be Judged. In
that Judgment no Condemnation, but for breaking God's Laws: So not for
indifferent things. Men shall be tried and sentenced for all their sinful
Actions, with regard to their lasting Effects. For their most secret ones. And
such ill deeds as were disguised under the fairest Pretenses. For their sinful
Omissions. And Neglecting to employ, and improve their Talents. For sinful
Words. And Thoughts and Desires. For all these Men shall be judged impartially,
without respect of Persons. But with Equity and Candor, not in Rigor. The
Benign Judge will be very ready to observe what makes for us, and make the best
of our Performances. And interpret the seemingly Rigorous Expressions of his
own Laws, with great condescension to Humane Measures. He will allow for
involuntary Failings. And judge Heartily and Favorably of that
involuntariness. And for Natural Infirmities. And for Providential
disadvantages, as Multiplicity of Business, greatness of Temptations, Bodily
Indispositions. For Pitiable Defects of Degrees in Duties. Great Latitude on
the side of Bliss, and all not required to be of the same Size. He will Reward
Good Things, though done with Difficulty and Reluctance, yea, when Pitiably
stained with impure mixtures. Our Judge will show all this Candor, and would
have us expect it. In Recompencing good Men, he will consider the Difficulties
and Oppositions. And the hazard, and cost of their Services. And the hardships
of Providence, allotted to exercise good Men in this Life. Of the Condemnation
of ill Men. The Fire, which is to torment them, shall burn up and dissolve the
World. Practical Inferences from the last judgment. Through a Mistake there is
neither 5th. 6th. nor 7th. Chapters. But though in the numbering of the Chapters
there is this mistake, yet there is no omission of matter.

CHAP. VIII. OF the Holy Ghost. The Holy Ghost is God. What he has done for
our Salvation. Of his extraordinary Gifts bestowed on Apostles and Evangelists,
which were for the Planting, and Propagating Christ's Religion. 1. The gift of
inspiration, in Revelations. This bestowed upon the Apostles. These Revelations
they have fully set down in the Holy Scriptures, after which we are not to look
for any others. This Gift, of knowing Religion by immediate Revelation,
necessary only in Apostles, and Evangelists. And designed for the Infancy of
the Church. Other Rules, whereby to examine new Lights and Revelations in
Religion. As, try them by the Scriptures. Call for their Miracles, wherewith
God still empowered men, when he sent them to reveal new Things. No need of
Miracles, when men pretend only to revive old, and acknowledged Revelations. If
they show Miracles, for things plainly against Scripture, they must work more,
than were wrought to confirm the Scripture. An account of Joel. 2. 28, 29.
Which seems to foretell the commonness of Revelations among Christians. The
first Inspirations were not only in Doctrinal Points, but also in Devotions.
And about Temporal matters. Subservient to this Gift of Revelations, was the
Gift of discerning Spirits. This done afterward by ordinary Rules. And the
Gift of utterance and boldness. Their minds not influenced by this constantly,
and at all Times. But ordinarily they were, and especially when they had most
need of it. 2. Of the Gift of Miracles. Miracles a Proof of Divine Revelation.
How discernible from Lying Wonders, by the Doctrines built on them. By their
ends and usefulness, and being wrought on needful Occasions. Of the miraculous
Gift of healing Diseases. This sometimes by anointing with Oil. And Prayers.
Of casting out Devils, and other Miracles. Of delivering to Satan, what it was,
and why so called. Of Joy in Tribulations, and what was extraordinary in that
of the Apostles. To the working these Miracles, there was always required Faith
in him that wrought them. And sometimes Faith in him that received them. 3. of
the Gift of Strange Tongues. The ends of this. And of the Gift of Interpreting
such Strange Tongues. What is meant by the Holy Ghost being a Comforter. The
Sin against the Holy Ghost, is a Sin against these extraordinary Gifts. Why
Blasphemy against him more irremisable, than against the Father or the Son.
Extraordinary Gifts no mark of a justified State. Of Offices appointed by the
Holy Ghost. Some of these Temporary, others to continue through all Times, the
present Officers ordaining Successors of the Holy Ghost's ordinary Graces. By
these we may know he dwells in us. Our care required toward these. Of
Preventing Grace in outward advantages, and inward good motions. Directions how
we are to endeavor after saving Graces, in six Particulars. How God gives
them, though we are thus to acquire them. The Holy Ghost works also in us
Spiritual Joys and Comforts. This he does not in all the minds he sanctifies,
because some are unfit for them through intrinsic impediments. But they are
withheld from none, through his Arbitrary withdrawing, which some count
Spiritual Desertion. CHAP. IX. OF the Holy Catholic Church, and the Communion
of Saints. No assurance of Salvation by Christ, but in his Church. This Church
Holy. And Catholic. Admission into it by Baptism; when regularly performed in
any one, valid in all Churches. Excommunication is so too. This Church is one
Body, by external visible unity. Of the Communion of Saints in this Church. Of
their visible Union in Faith or Doctrine. And in Prayers and Devotion. Of
communicating in Public Prayers. A Sin to separate without just cause.
Imposing Sins, or Errors, as Conditions of Communion is a just cause. Not
Lawful to separate for Things indifferent. Nor for better means of edification.
Just to separate from a Church, that does not impose her Corruptions, when her
Errors in Faith overthrow the Foundation. That is, when she ceases to own the
one true God. Or denis Jesus to be the Christ, or Salvation by his Merits and
Mediation. Owning Jesus to be the Christ, implies, owning the Articles of the
Apostles Creed, which contains all Fundamentals. Whilst any Churches hold to
this Creed, which is the Foundation, Errors in other things do not unchurch
them. But such Erroneous are in a worse state, than Orthodox Christians. Nor is
her Communion to be deserted merely for such Errors, though very gross, if she
does not impose them. Just to separate from a Church of a corrupt Worship, when
sinful things pollute her Public Offices. Or when good Devotions are put up in
a strange Language* not for Rites and Customs about indifferent matters. Nor
just to separate for scandalous Members, where a Churches constitution is
faultless. Nor though it neglect Discipline, which should reform them. Of keeping
Fellowship with the Apostles, by submitting to our lawful Bishops their
Successors. Christians to communicate in Affections, in Alms, and Temporal good
Things. CHAP. X. OF the Forgiveness of Sins. What Sin is. Of wilful sins. Of
sins of Ignorance, Surreption, Passion. Forgiveness of sin, is the Release of
its Punishment. When Eternal Punishments are remitted, Present and Temporal are
often exacted. What is the Time of Relaxing these Punishments. Remission of all
Sins, but Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost. And wilful Apostasy from
Christianity. Wilful sins forgiven, when we Repent, and forgive others. Sins of
Ignorance and inadvertence, upon our Charity to others. This forgiveness
outwardly dispensed in Baptism. The Eucharist. And Sacerdotal Absolution. The
Power of the Keys lies in Retaining as well as Absolving, which ought to beget
a just dread of Excommunication. What is meant by our Forgiving sins. What use
we are to make of the Forgiveness of Sins. CHAP. XI. OF the Resurrection of the
Body, and the Life Everlasting. The Resurrection not merely of our Spirits from
sin, but of our Bodies from the Grave. This to be brought about by the Almighty
Power of God. The Perfections of Glorified Bodies, viz. Immortality,
Spirituality, and Glory. The Bodies of the Wicked Immortal. And exquisitely
sensible. Some Inferences from the Resurrection of our Bodies. Good Souls
carried straightway into a Place of Bliss. Of Eternal Life, wherein there is
Full and unmixed Happiness. Of the satisfaction of their Senses. Their clear
and distinct Knowledge. Perfect Holiness. And without Reluctance. Blissful
Companions. Perfection of Love and Kindness. Honor, and Eminence of Place. All
these to be enjoyed in the Highest Heavens, without satiety, or weariness. For
evermore. Of the miseries of the Damned, in Tormenting Passions. The worm of
Conscience. Fire and Flames. Disgrace. Under all which, no favor of God. No
company, but of Tormenting Devils, and damned Spirits. None to condole, when
they cannot relieve. No rest and sleep, for Recruit of Spirits. No end of their
miseries. The Use of this.
The Practical Believer. PART II. Of the Knowledge of Jesus Christ.
CHAP. I. Of the Office, and Natures of Jesus Christ.
The Contents.
In what Salvation by Christ consists. Being Christ, notes his being, 1. A
Prophet, to teach his Church. We must hear and learn of him in the Holy
Scriptures; and at the mouths of his Ministers. 2. A Priest, to Redeem, and
Intercede for it. 3. A King, to Govern it by his Laws. And by his Officers,
whom we are to submit to in his place. Also to Protect it against all visible
and invisible Enemies. Jesus Christ is the Son of God, as having received from
the Father the Nature of God. And the Power of God. On both these Accounts, and
others, he is our Lord. And to be worshipped. What we learn from his being our
Lord. Of Christ's being Conceived of the Holy Ghost, and Born of a Virgin. He
was truly Man. And why he was so.

Quest. WHat is the Second Article of the Creed?

Answ. And in Jesus Christ, his only Son, our Lord.

Quest. Jesus signifies a Savior, from what does Christ save us?

Answ. From two things. 1. Our sins. 2. Those eternal Torments, which are the
Punishment of them.

Quest. If he prove a Savior to us, must he Reform, and save us from our sins?

Answ. Yes; for this is the main Reason, why that Name was given him. Thou
shall call his Name Jesus, for he shall save his People from their sins, Mat.
1. 21.

Quest. Will he save none from the Punishment, but whom he saves from the sins
first?

Answ. No; for except ye Repent, ye shall all perish, Luke 13. 3. and at last
he will say, Depart from me ye workers of iniquity, Mat. 7. 23.

Quest. But when once they are delivered from their sins, they may make sure of
being freed by him from Eternal Death too?

Answ. Yes; for there is now no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus,
who walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit, Romans 8. 1.

Quest. Christ, signifies anointed among the Greeks, as Messiah does among the
Hebrews; Messiah, if interpreted, being the Christ, or anointed, as St. Andrew
said, John 1. 41. But what mean you, when you call Jesus the Messiah or Christ,
that is, the anointed?

Answ. His being invested with the Office of a Prophet, to teach his Church; of
a Priest, to make Reconciliation, and intercede for it; and of a King, to
Govern and Protect it.

Quest. Why do you call such Investiture, his Anointing?

Answ. Because anciently Investitures into these Offices, were, according to
the Eastern Custom, by pouring Oil upon them: as in the case of the
Arch-Prophet Elisha, 1 Kings 19. 16. and High Priest Aaron, Lev. 8. 12. And in
Kings, as the Jewish Doctors note, when they received not their Office and
Authority by Succession, but by extraordinary Designation; as in the case of
King Saul, 1 Samuel 9. 16. and 10. 1. and King David, 1 Samuel 16. 13. Answerable
to which, Messiah's Designation to his Office, which was to include all these,
is called his being Anointed, Isa. 61. 1, 2, 3.

Quest. Was Christ invested in these Offices, by pouring Oil upon him?

Answ. No, but by pouring a nobler thing, the miraculous Powers and Gifts of
the Holy Ghost, which installed him, and answered to their anointing. God
anointed Jesus with the Holy Ghost, and with Power, Acts 10. 38.

Quest. Was Christ in the Office and Quality of a Prophet, to teach his Church?

Answ. Yes, he was a Teacher sent from God, John 3. 2. What he said, he spoke
not of himself, but as the Father gave him Commandment, so he spoke, John 12.
49, 50. So that the People spoke a great truth, when they said, This is of a
truth that Prophet, who was to come into the World, John 6. 14. Nay, he was not
in the rank of an ordinary Prophet, but in a pitch of Eminence, far above all
others. For he not only had a Prophetic Spirit resting always on him, which
the best of them enjoyed but on certain times and occasions; but he knew the
will of God by Personal Acquaintance, and immediate intuition, not barely at
second hand, by the Message of an Angel, or by a Vision, or a Dream, as they
all did. The only begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, he has
declared him, John 1. 18. And on this account, among others, of all Prophets
and Interpreters of God's mind, he alone is called the Word; because, lying in
God's Bosom, he had his mind without any thing intervening, as immediately, as
a word expresses ones meaning.

Quest. What must this teach us?

Answ. Whenever we would know the mind of God, to seek only unto him; and
never to hearken to any other New Lights, or Enthusiastical Pretenders. In all
times, both in the Apostles days, and ours, several Impostors, and false
Prophets, have come with pretended Messages, to show men the will of God, and
the way to Happiness. But we are to give ear to none of these, this work of
communicating God's mind to men, not being left at random, but peculiarly
entrusted with Jesus Christ, that great Prophet of the Church, who is
especially constituted by God, and anointed for this purpose. This is my
beloved Son, said God in the voice from the bright Cloud, in whom I am well
pleased, hear ye him, Mat. 17. 5.

Quest. But how shall we do to learn of him, since now he is no more among us
here on Earth, but is gone to Heaven?

Answ. Two ways he exercises his Prophetic Office to communicate the mind of
God to us.

1. By the Scriptures. What God told him, he first by Personal Converse, and
afterward by Joh. 16. 13.
his Spirit leading them into all truth, told the Apostles and Evangelists: and
they put it in writing, in the Book called the Holy Scriptures, to be preached
and published to all others, through all times. So that when we hear them read,
we must think we hear Christ our great Prophet speaking to us. And to be
debarred, or debar our selves of the use of them, what is it, but to be
debarred of this great Prophet's free Communication?

2. By his Ministers, whom he has left and appointed to declare God's mind to
the People in his place. Thus the Priests were appointed among the Jews: The
Priests lips should preserve Knowledge, and the People should seek the Law at
his mouth; for he is the Messenger of the Lord of Hosts, Mal. 2. 7. And so are
the Ministers of Christ, among us Christians. Lo! I am with you, teaching them
all things whatsoever I have commanded, and that always, even to the end of the
World. That is, with you during your own lives, and the Pastors and Teachers
your Successors, for ever after your deaths, Mat. 28. 20. So that if we would
give ear to Christ, and own him for the Prophet of the Church, we must seek the
mind of God from the Holy Scriptures, and from the mouths of our Bishops and
Pastors, who are his established Ministers, to inculcate and explain those
Scriptures.

Quest. Another Office you say he was designed and anointed to, was the Office
of a Priest. Wherein does that consist?

Answ. In two things. 1. The payment of a Price, to make Reconciliation, and
expiate men's sins with God. And 2. Interceding for ever after, that they should
have the benefit and blessing of it. A Prophet is employed from God to men, to
declare his will and pleasure to them. But a Priest is employed from men to
God, ordained, as St. Paul says, for men in things pertaining to God, Heb. 5.
1. So that a Priest stands for the Church, to make Reconciliation, and
intercede for it.

Quest. And did Christ act the part of a Priest for the Church, paying a Price
to make Reconciliation with God, and in virtue of that to intercede for it?

Answ. Yes, he reconciled us to God, by dying in our stead. We are reconciled
to God, by the death of his Son: Romans 5. 10. And being now raised from the
Dead, he is entered into Heaven, where he ever lives to make intercession for
us: Heb. 7. 25.

Quest. Does he intercede, that men may have this Reconciliation, whilst they
go on in sin?

Answ. No, but only when they forsake it, and Repent, that their sins may be
blotted out, Act. 3. 19. So that till they amend, they must never expect that
he should move for them.

Quest. What does the consideration of Christ's Priesthood teach us?

Answ. To hope for the Mercy of God for our sins, upon our true Repentance. If
any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous,
who is the Propitiation for our sins, 1 John 2. 1, 2. And having him our
High Priest, we may draw near with full assurance of Faith, if once our Hearts
are sprinkled, and cleansed from an evil Conscience, Heb. 10. 21, 22. And in
general, it teaches us, whenever we want any Mercy or Favor from God, to
apply to him by Jesus Christ, who is anointed to be the sole Intercessor, or
Great Master of Requests, from whom he will receive our Prayers.

Quest. You said, thirdly, that Christ was invested with the Office of a King
to his Church, what does that imply?

Answ. Two things. 1. That he govern it by his Laws, and Officers, the Bishops
and Pastors. 2. That he protect it from all visible and invisible Enemies, by
his Spirit and Providence. And both these Parts of Regal Power, Christ
exercises over his Church. He is our Lord to command, the Head over all things
to his Body, which is the Church, Ephesians. 1. 22, 23. and sits now as a Protector
at God's Right Hand, till his Enemies be made his Footstool, Psalm. 110. 1.

Quest. It Is plain he exercises his Kingly Power of Governing us, by his Laws,
which are contained in the holy Scriptures. But does he also govern his Church
by his Officers, viz. the Bishops and Ministers, making them his Deputies here
on Earth?

Answ. Yes, for they are called his Pastors, Ephesians. 4. 8, 11. which is the
Scriptural word for Governors, to feed, and to rule, being used promiscuously
in the holy Language. That says of Cyrus, he is my Shepherd; that is, my
Deputy in Power, or Substitute in Government Isa 44. 28. And God brought David
to feed Jacob his people, and Israel his inheritance; that is, to Rule them: So
he fed them according to the Integrity of his Heart, and guided them according
to the skilfulness of his Hand. Psalm 78. 71, 72. His Ministers are his
Substitutes in Government, whom we are to hearken to, and obey in his place.
Know them that are over you in the Lord, and admonish you; 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12, 13.
and obey those that have the rule you, for they watch for your Souls; Heb. 13.
17.

Quest. What must this teach us?

Answ. To submit to our own Bishops and Ministers, acting for, and under him,
as we would to Christ himself, if we would own him to be King over us. For they
are his Deputies, to Rule the Church in his place. And whilst they act
according to his Commission, he Decrees and Sentences, Binds and Looses, Speaks
and Acts by them; as every Royal Prince does by his Representatives and
Ministers, in all Authoritative Acts, whereto they are commissioned by him,
which, when done by them, have the same Authority and Force, as if performed by
himself in Person. And therefore if we reject them in such cases, we show that
we will not have him to Reign over us, He that hears you, hears me: and he
that despises you, despises me, Luke 10. 16. And accordingly St Paul, both in
binding and loosing, declares, he acted in the person of Christ, 2 Cor. 2. 10.
and commends the Galatians, for receiving him as Christ Jesus, Gal. 4. 14.

Quest. And wherein must we show this Submission?

Answ. In uniting with them in Prayers, and Sacraments; they having the charge
of ministering in his Worship and Service, and what he solemnly and openly
receives in his Princely Dependancies, being from the Mouths and Mediation of
his own Stewards and Officers. In hearkening to their Godly Admonitions,
because he has left them to instruct, and rebuke Sinners. In meekly undergoing
their deserved Censures, and seeking again the Peace of the Church by true
Repentance. And, lastly, in cheerfully conforming to all their Church-Laws and
Constitutions, when they do not thwart, or oppose his. Christ himself, our
Sovereign Lord and King, has given Laws for all necessary things; but has left
them to regulate Rites and Ceremonies, which are variable matters, and to take
care of the Order and Decency of Worship, in the public Assemblies. Let every
thing be done decently, and in order in the Church, 1 Cor. 14. 40; is a Precept
given to Church Governors, for they have the care of God's Public Service.
And when they make any innocent, or useful Appointments in these things, we
must cheerfully obey and conform our selves. Obey them that have the Rule or
Guidance over you, for they watch for your Souls, Heb. 13. 17.

Quest. Is it another part of his Kingly Power, to protect his Church from all
visible and invisible Enemies?

Answ. Yes, he guards it against all inward, and invisible Enemies, by his
Spirit; and from all outward, and visible Enemies, by his Providence. But the
security he gives against these, is not that it shall never be eclipsed and
persecuted, but only that it shall never be destroyed by them. The Promise is,
That the Gates of Hell, that is, the Powers of Satan, and all his wicked
instruments, shall not prevail against the Church, Matt. 16. 18.

Quest. What must Christ's protecting his Church teach us?

Answ. To trust him with Religion, and not sin to save it in the most perilous
times. He is more concerned for his Church, than any of us are, or can be; and
he knows how to protect it, without the help of our sins, or our acting
wickedly for it. So that in all such times, we are to practice Religion, and do
our duty; and then recommend, and trust the Preservation of it to his care.

Quest. If we would own Christ as our King, then, I perceive, we must obey his
Laws and Ministers, and commit our selves to him in well-doing, as the
Protector of his Church?

Answ. Yes.

Quest. And will none partake of the Reconciliation of his Priesthood, but they
who thus believe him as their Prophet, and obey him as their Lord?

Answ. No, for Faith and Obedience are necessary to our Peace with God; and
there is no enjoying the benefit of one, without embracing him in all his
Offices.

Quest. To believe in Christ then, or to acknowledge Jesus to be the Christ, is
to own him for the Prophet of the Church, by harkening to his Word and
Ministers; for the Priest of God, by hoping in him, and applying to God by him,
for Reconciliation, and all other mercies; and for the King of his Church, by
obeying both his Laws and Officers, and in a course of welldoing, trusting both
our selves and our Religion, to his Protection here on Earth.

Answ. Yes.

Quest. What is meant by that, which follows in the Creed, his being God's only
Son?

Answ. Our meaning is, in respect of his Nature, that God begat him, as a
Father does a Son, of like nature with himself, so that he is God as well as
Man. For he is equal with God, Phil. 2. 6. The true God; 1 John 5. 20. and over
all, God blessed for ever, Romans 9. 5. Which last was the special Character and
Title of the true God, in the common style and expression of the Jews. Who,
from their Custom, when the Priest in the Sanctuary rehearsed the Name of God,
of answering, Blessed be his name for ever, came in their common speech to call
him, The Blessed One; which phrase, the Scriptures often denote him, as in Mar.
14. 61. 2 Cor. 11. 31. Romans 1. 25. And, agreeable to his having this Divine
Nature, we find the Divine Works, as Jo. 1. 3.
Creating, and Heb. 1. 3.
Sustaining; and Divine Honors, as Heb. 1. 6.
Worship, and 1 Cor. 1. 2.
Prayers, and Mat. 28. 16.
Baptism in the Name of the Son, as well as of the Father, ascribed to him in
Holy Scripture.

Quest. Why was it requisite our Redeemer should be God?

Answ. 1. To give Merit to his Sacrifice, which was infinitely advanced, in
regard his Blood was the Blood of God, Act. 20. 28. How much more shall the
Blood of Christ purge your Consciences, who offered himself through the eternal
Spirit, Heb. 9. 14. As its being committed against God, was the extreme
aggravation of our sin: So must its being performed by God, be equally an
enhansement of his Reparation. 2. To several other purposes, as to his having
Power enough to conquer Death and Hell, and save us from all our Spiritual
Enemies, to fit him for a capable and competent Judge of all men, seeing into
their Hearts and Thoughts, which is one of God's Prerogatives. To recommend
Virtue as much as was possible by an example since in him it appears, that all
the things required of us, are worthy of the most excellent Natures; yea, are
not below the practice of God himself.

Quest. What other meaning is there of it?

Answ. Another is in respect of his Power, because he is invested with all the
Authority and Power of God. For Son of God, signifies sometimes the same as the
Christ; that is, one whom God has commissioned to act in his stead. He shall
be great, and the Son of the Highest, and God shall give him the Throne of his
Father David, Luke 1. 32. And thus Jesus Christ is God's Son; for he has given
him all Power, both in Heaven and Earth, Matt. 28. 18. and committed all
Authority to the Son, that all should honor the Son, as they honor the
Father, Joh. 5. 22, 23.

Quest. And being the Son of God in this sense; that is, having Sovereign Power
from him, he is our Lord?

Answ. Yes, in respect of this derived Power, and of his own Sovereign Divine
Nature, of his invaluable Merit and Purchase, and of our voluntary Compacts and
Submissions: on all accounts, that can found a just Dominion, and Lordship over
us: God has given him a Name above every Name, that every Tongue should
confess, Jesus Christ is Lord, Phil. 2. 9, 11. To us there is one Lord, 1 Cor.
8. 6.

Quest. And being God, not only in Power, but also in Nature, must we not all
worship him, and pray to him, and trust in him as God?

Answ. Yes, for at the Name of Jesus every Knee shall bow, Phil. 2. 10: and all
must honor the Son, as they honor the Father, Joh. 5. 23. This is done by all
good Christians, and Saints on Earth, who are styled, They that call upon the
Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 1. 2. And also by those, who are
glorified in Heaven, who sing their Hallelujah's, as to God the Father, so also
to the Lamb, Rev. 5. 11, 12, 13, 14. Yea, by the Angels too, for when he
brings his firstbegotten into the world, he says, and let all the Angels of
God worship him, Heb. 1. 6. And this Divine Honor, if he were not a God in
Nature, as well as in Power, he could never claim, nor receive from them.

Quest. If Christ is our Rightful, Sovereign Lord, then we must give up our
Wills to his, and perform faithfully whatsoever he orders?

Answ. Yes, Why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things that I say, Luke
6. 46. Nay, since he is our Lord, and we are his Houshold-Servants, we must
not, as he says, be the Servants of Men; that is, so wholly given up to their
Service, as that we cannot mind his; or serve their pleasure, when it
interferes with his Laws; or comply with their Mien and Customs, when they are
contrary unto his; or sooth and flatter their weak Minds, and feed their sickly
Humors, like timorous or mercenary Slaves. No man, says our Savior, can thus
serve two Masters, Matt. 6. 24. Ye are bought with a price, says St. Paul, be
not ye therefore the Servants of men, 1 Cor. 7. 23. And if I yet pleased or
soothed up men, I should not be the Servant of Christ, Gal. 1. 10.

Quest. Since he is our Lord, we should not think any thing too mean, or ill
for us, which he thought not so for him, but compose our selves to his
Behavior, willingly following where he has gone before; it being a shame for a
Servant to be more nice and delicate, and more hard to please, than his Master?

Answ. Very right. And accordingly he presses us on to those Duties, which
otherwise we should be most like to disdain and grumble at, by putting us in
mind, how he has done, or undergone the same himself. If I, your Lord and
Master, have washed your feet, ye ought also to wash one another feet, Joh.
13. 14. If men give you hard names, be content, they have done the same to me;
and the Disciple is not above his Master, nor the Servant above his Lord; it is
enough for the Disciple, that he be as his Master, and the Servant as his Lord,
Matt. 10. 24, 25. He that would be greatest amongst you, says he again, let*
him minister most, and strive to be most useful, as he that serves; for I am
among you as he that serves, Luke 22. 26, 27. Be patient, when you are
persecuted, remembering what I said unto you, that the Servant is not greater
than his Lord. Joh. 15. 20. Thus must we spurn at no condescensions, or labors
of Love and Service: no, nor at Reproaches for welldoing, or suffering in God's
Cause; since thereby we only wear our Lord's Livery, nay, are made like to him,
and follow his steps, where he has led the way before us.

Quest. Since he is the common Lord, both of Masters and Servants, must not
this teach us great Moderation and Equity toward our Servants and Dependants,
who, however inferior and subject they may be in Humane Respects, are yet
equally near to him, and Brethren and Fellow Servants in respect of his
Dominion?

Answ. Yes. God would not permit the Jews, to make any of their Brethren
Slaves, though they might use them as Fellow Servants, because they were all his
Servants. They are my Servants, which I brought forth out of the Land of Egypt,
they shall not be sold as Bondmen, Lev. 25. 42. And give unto your Servants
that which is just and equal, says St. Paul, knowing, that ye also have a
Master in Heaven, Col. 4. 1.

Quest. What is the third Article of the Creed?

Answ. Who was conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary.

Quest. Why must Christ, out of the Natural Course of Generation, be born of a
Virgin? And why must the Holy Ghost beget him?

Answ. Because he was to be undefiled from the Womb, and fit to satisfy for
the sins of others, having none of his own. For such an High Priest became us,
as was Holy, Undefiled, separate from Sinners; Heb. 7. 26.

Quest. Was Christ truly man?

Answ. Yes, he underwent all the wants of our Natures, for he was hungry,
weary, and sleepy, as we are. And all the Infirmities, for he wept, and was
sorrowful, troubled, and sore amazed; He was in all points tempted as we are,
only without sin, Heb. 4. 15.

Quest. Having felt them thus in himself, will he not be apt to sympathize, and
have compassion on all our weaknesses?

Answ. Yes, thereupon the Apostle argues him to be soon touched with the
feeling of our infirmities, Heb. 4. 15.

Quest. Why was it requisite, that to redeem us, the Son of God should become
Man?

Answ. To fit him, 1. To atone and appease God, that Man might gain what Man
had lost, and that by his performing Obedience, he might be capable to restore
what Disobedience had forfeited. As by one man's Disobedience many were made
Sinners, so by the Obedience of one, were many to be made Righteous, Romans 5.
19. And we having Flesh and Blood, he also took part of the same, that through
death, he might destroy him that had the power of death, that is, the Devil,
Heb. 2. 14.

2. To be Gentle and Compassionate toward us, affectionately interceding for
us, and reasonably bearing with our infirmities. It behoved him in all things
to be like unto his Brethren, that he might be a merciful, and faithful
High Priest, Heb. 2. 17.

Quest. How was his becoming man, necessary to give him a knowledge and
compassionate sense of our infirmities; was he not God before? And does not
God, who made our Frame, know our infirmities better, than we who feel them?

Answ. Yes, he does, but on other accounts, as the appeasing God, because not
God, but only Man could suffer, and satisfy; and man's Obedience was fittest
to regain what man's Disobedience had lost; and it would be most easy, and
favorable to us, that he, who should give Laws to us, and judge us at the
last, should be a man like our selves; it was requisite the Mediator should be
man. And when he was so, to make not only his Divinity, that made our Frame,
but his Humane Nature too, in which he transacts with us, compassionate to the
utmost of our infirmities, 'twas requisite he should feel them in himself;
since there is no way to make men so sensible of any infirmities, as their
feeling them by sorrowful experience.

Quest. What must we learn from this Condescension of the Son of God?

Answ. To be humble, and not contemn the poorest and meanest state, since he
has dignified it with his Appearance in it. To be Charitable, and
Condescensive, and think nothing below us, whereby we may do good. To be
content in any state, which God allots for us, thinking the greatest measure of
his Love and Tenderness, consistent with the greatest meanness of our outward
state and circumstances, as it plainly was in his Son's case. Lastly, To think
all wickedness, utterly unworthy of our Nature, since now God has so
marvellously united it to his own. These, and such like things, we must learn
and practice from it, if we would be his followers, and show the same mind to
be in us, which was before in Christ Jesus, Phil. 2. 3, 4, 5.

Quest. Why must he be both God and Man, in one Person?

Answ. To fit him for the Office of a Mediator, and Reconciler: who was to go
between them, and make them both one. For it was fit he should be nearly allied
to each Party, and have interest in both of them.

CHAP. II. Of the Sufferings of Christ.
The Contents.
An Account of what Christ suffered, and from whom. Both he, and God the Father
were consenting to it. What he suffered, was for our sins, to save us from
suffering for them, when we truly repent of them. Pardon on Repentance, the
design of his Satisfaction, and the Merit of his Death. This is a Free Grace,
which implies that it is not given in Recompense of our Deserts, not that it
requires no Conditions. An Account why God would not grant this Grace of Pardon
to Penitents, without Christ's dying to satisfy for them. And how his Death
served all the designs of God's Justice, full as well, as their own would have
done. Christ's Sacrifice but once offered, but daily commemorated. Several
useful inferences from Christ's dying for us. Christ's dead Body was buried. Of
his descent into Hell.

Quest. WHat is the Fourth Article in the Creed?

Answ. Suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead, and buried; he
descended into Hell.

Quest. What did Christ suffer?

Answ. Besides his previous Sufferings, particularly in the Garden, where the
wrath of God was strongly represented, and Hell let loose upon him, under which
it is said, he was exceeding sorrowful, even unto death, Mat. 26. 37, 38. and
thrown into an Agony, wherein he sweat great drops of Blood, Luke 22. 44.
Besides these previous Sufferings, I say, he suffered also after his
Apprehension all manner of rudeness from the enraged Rabble and Soldiery, who
mocked him, Mat. 27. 26. 30, 31.
spit upon him, buffeted, and scourged him; bound his Head about with a ver. 29.
wreath of sharp Thorns, which every where like Darts pierced his tender flesh;
and at last, nailed his Hands and Feet to a Cross, a most acute and lingering
Death: and to make that most ignominious Suffering more ignominious still, hung
him in the midst between Luke 23. 33.
two Thieves.

Quest. Who were the Executioners of all these Cruelties?

Answ. The Jewish Rulers and People went as far in it as they could. But
because the Romans, who had conquered them, had not left among them, as they
say, any Power and Authority to put any man to death, Joh. 18. 31. they drew in
Pontius Pilate, the Roman Governor, to sentence his Crucifixion, against his
Conscience.

Quest. Did not Pilate believe Christ to deserve all this?

Answ. No; he knew they had delivered him for envy, and malice, Matt. 27. 18.
He declared he was a just person, Matt. 27. 24. and that upon examination, he
found no fault at all in him, Luke 23. 4, 14. No, nor yet Herod, when he sent
him to be judged by him, v. 15. But because by their importunity a tumult was
made, he yielded to pass sentence against him for his own quiet, Matt. 27. 24.
and to content the people, whom he durst not offend, Mar. 15. 15. Luke 23. 23,
24.

Quest. What need had he to fear them, that such an abject fear should betray
him into so unjust, and vile an Action?

Answ He had incensed them, and made himself obnoxious to be articled against,
by his former violences, being a man very Cruel and Tyrannical, for which, on
the complaint of the Samaritan Jews, he was presently after removed, as Antiqu.
l. 18. 5.
Josephus reports. And in this case, they terrified him moreover, by threatening
to accuse him to his jealous Governor, Tiberius Caesar, as no friend to him,
for letting Christ go, who called himself a King, which, they said, was
speaking against Caesar, Joh. 19. 12.

Quest. Christ did testify, indeed, before Pilate, that he was a King, and that
for this end he came into the World, that he should bear witness of this Truth,
Joh. 18. 37. And did not this give Caesar just cause to be afraid of him?

Answ. No, because, as he declared, his Kingdom was not of this World, neither
should his Servants fight for him, as the Subjects of worldly Princes do for
them, Joh. 18. 36. so that he would take nothing from the Emperor, nor pretend
to thwart him, or resist his just Power. But his Kingdom was in relation to
another World, a Spiritual Kingdom, set up in men's Hearts, and administered by
the expectation of future Rewards and Punishments, leaving Princes still to
govern as they did in all the Affairs of this life. And this did not entrench
any thing upon the Prerogatives of the present Powers, whom he left all in the
same Authority, and their Subjects under the same Duty, as he found them. As
Pilate plainly perceived by Christ's Answer, wherewith he was satisfied, and
pronounced him innocent upon it.

Quest. These Sufferings of Christ you mention, were most barbarous and
horrible things. But amidst all these bodily Tortures, had he not ease within,
and great support of inward spiritual Comforts; as he afforded the Martyrs and
Confessors afterward in theirs?

Answ. No, the Horrors of his Mind were beyond the Anguish of his Body, as if
he were designed to suffer the extremity of what Nature could bear. His Soul
was troubled, Joh. 12. 27. very heavy, Mat. 26. 37. Sore amazed, Mark 14. 33.
Exceeding sorrowful, even unto death, Mat. 26. 38. and in such an Agony, as I
noted, at the apprehension of the Divine Wrath he was conflicting with, as put
a most unwonted force upon Nature, and made him sweat as it were great drops of
Blood, Luke 22. 44. Under all which, he was so overborn with the Burden, that
he needed an Angel to be sent to strengthen him, v. 43.

Quest. Could Christ have avoided these Sufferings, if he would?

Answ. Yes, he could have had Legions of Angels for his Rescue, Matt. 26. 53.
But for our sakes, he voluntarily submitted to them. I have power to lay down
my life, and to take it again. No man takes it from me, but I lay it down of
my self, Joh. 10. 18.

Quest. And was God consenting to them?

Answ. Yes, they came about, not only by his Permission, but by his Counsel and
Determination. He did no ways excite the Jews to this abominable Act; but left
them to their own envy and malice, which were more than enough to push them
forward. But when they of themselves were wicked enough to do it, he, by his
infinite Wisdom, accomplishes what his Son and he had before agreed, viz. the
working our Redemption by it. He suffered according to what was determined,
Luke 22. 22. He was delivered to them, by the determinate Counsel and
Foreknowledge of God, Acts 2. 23. Herod and Pontius Pilate did only what his
Hand, and Counsel had determined before to be done, Act. 4. 28. And he was a
Lamb fore-ordain'd to be slain, before the foundation of the World, 1 Pet. 1.
19, 20. His death, and his exaltation therefore to be a Mediatory King, and our
Redeemer, was a Bargain driven, and a Matter concerted long before betwixt him,
and his heavenly Father. My Father has appointed, (the word is (...).
covenanted) to me a Kingdom, that is, in the everlasting agreement between God
and him, it was promised as the Reward of his undertaking, Luke 22. 29. And on
this account, his Servants are said to be given to him as a Retribution: He
gave himself for them; that is, to purchase them, Tit. 2. 14. Thine they were,
says he to his Father, and thou gave them me; that is, on this consideration,
Joh. 17. 4, 6.

Quest. But since the things he endured, were the absolute perfection of shame
and sorrow, why should Christ submit, or God bring Christ to that end? was it
to punish his own sins?

Answ. No, he did no sin, 1 Pet. 2. 22. He was tempted in all points of Natural
Infirmities as we are, but yet without sin, Heb. 4. 15.

Quest. For whose sins was it then; for all death is the wages of sin, Romans 6.
23?

Answ. For ours, for we had sinned, and were all to die; but he comes by the
Allowance of God, and bears our iniquity, by dying in our place. God laid on
him the iniquities of us all, Isa. 53. 6. He tasted death for every man, Heb.
2. 9. He died for our sins, 1 Cor. 15. 3. He poured out his Soul a
Sin-Offering, Isa. 53. 5, 10.

Quest. What are we the better for his dying for them?

Answ. Infinitely the better every way; but particularly, his death will save
us from dying for them, if we truly repent of them. He has redeemed us from
the Curse of the Law, by being made a Curse; that is, enduring a cursed death,
for us, Gal. 3. 13. 2 Cor. 5. 21. He bought us off from death by dying for us;
whence he is called our Redeemer, and our Ransom, 1 Timothy 2. 6.

Quest. But has not his death bought us off from the Punishment of our Sins,
till we repent of them?

Answ. No, for we must Repent, and be converted, that our sins may be blotted
out for his sake, Acts 3. 19. and being made perfect; that is, inaugurated into
his Princely Power, by suffering, he became the Author of Eternal Salvation to
all them that obey him, Heb. 5. 9.

Quest. If men remain impenitent then, they must die for their own sins, I
perceive, notwithstanding?

Answ. Yes, Except they repent, they must all perish, Luke 13. 3.

Quest. But since Christ has died for them once already, will not that be
dying twice, and so being twice punished for the same sin?

Answ. No, for he proffered, and God accepted his death, not as an unlimited
exchange for all Sinners, but only for those, who will leave their sins, and
repent of them. He died, indeed, for all men: but he died as their Sacrifice,
Ephesians. 5. 2. and Sacrifices were accepted in lieu only of Penitent Offenders; and
as God still told the Jews, would never put away sins, without the Repentance
of those they were offered for. To what purpose is the number of your
Sacrifices? said he to those who went on still in their wickedness, Isa. 1. 11.
The Sacrifice of God is a broken Spirit; that is, the Sacrifice God accepts
must be accompanied with it; a broken, and a contrite heart, O God, thou will
not despise, Psalm. 51. 17.

Quest. But was not his death a satisfaction for sins? And if he has satisfied
for them already, what need we do more? must we satisfy for them again?

Answ. All the fruit, and estimate of his Satisfaction, must be taken from the
Argument between God and him. His death, who was an innocent man, would have
signified nothing at all toward our release, unless God had been graciously
pleased to admit of him in commutation, and exchange for our Suffering. It
avails, and operates nothing by it self alone, but only so far, as God accepted
him. And the nature and effect of his Satisfaction, as it was jointly designed
and concerted between his Father and him, was not, that no sinner whatsoever
should be accountable for his own sins, but only that none should, who had
repented of them.

Quest. What then were his merits, or that which he deserved, and obtained of
God for us, by his death?

Answ. The Grace and Favor of. Repentance, or, that if we truly repent, we
shall not die for our selves. So St. Peter expresses that benefit, the Gentiles
had received, in being admitted Christians: then has God also to the Gentiles,
granted Repentance unto life, Acts 11. 18. And again, God exalted him to be a
Savior, to give Repentance unto Israel, and remission of sins, Acts 5. 31. So
that the merit of Christ's death is the Pardon of all our sins on true
Repentance, and likewise the Grace to enable us thus to repent of them.

Quest. Is this Pardon on Repentance a Grace and Favor, which we needed him to
purchase for us?

Answ. Yes, for the Law of Works, which condemned us all, was, Do this, and
live; not, as through Christ the Gospel is, either do it, or repent where you
fail. So that God was not bound to pardon Sinners, when they did repent. Nay,
the Honor of his Holiness and Justice, the maintaining the Authority of his
Laws, and the seriousness and veracity of his threatenings, were ready to
interpose, and hinder him from doing it. But when Christ came to die in our
stead, and pay his own Blood, as a price to induce God pardon Penitents: Then,
since he does it not without such a valuable Recompense, he might pardon them,
without any Reflection on those glorious Attributes. And this is the fruit of
his Satisfaction, and the Merit and Purchase of his Death, viz. the Favor of
Pardon of sin upon Repentance.

Quest. Is there no other Merit, and Fruit of Christ's Death?

Answ. Yes, besides the forgiveness of sin, and the gift of Eternal Life
thereupon, he has also merited, as I said, the Grace to cure it. But this is so
much favor and indulgence, as he ever sought, or has procured of God, toward
the pardon of it.

Quest. But if we cannot partake of the benefit of his death, but upon these
terms, how is all the favor we receive by it, said to come freely, and to be
of free Grace?

Answ. Grace may be called Free, on two accounts; either, as it is not given us
for our deserts; or, as it is not given upon any conditions.

Quest. Is the Grace of God free, in the first sense, as that excludes all
Merits, or so free, as not to be given us for our deserts?

Answ. Yes, and this is the Scripture-sense of Free Grace; for there Free Grace
is the same as Undeserved-Grace.

Quest. How does that appear?

Answ. Because Free Grace is there opposed to Boasting, which has place only on
the Plea of Merit or desert. We are justified freely by his Grace, then where
is Boasting? it is thereby excluded, Romans 3. 24, 27. And by Grace ye are saved,
not of works, i. e. by the desert of any works, lest any man should boast, Ephesians.
2. 8, 9.

Quest. If the Scripture had been silent, it is easy to apprehend this Grace
must needs be undeserved by us, because all we can do, is by the help of his
Spirit, and is but his just due, which we do not give, but pay as Debtors; and
were it our own, it is yet defective and mean, and utterly unw^rthy of so vast
a Recompense. But though it be thus absolutely undeserved by us, yet has not
Christ fully merited and deserved it for us?

Answ. Yes, he was bound to nothing, but voluntarily subjected himself to the
Law, and took our Nature upon him. All the perfect Obedience he showed, either
in doing or suffering the Will of God, was his free and gratuitous Offering;
and was good in the highest degree and perfection; and received an infinite
estimate, from the Divinity of his Person; and gratified the Father, in his
greatest designs, for his own Glory, and men's Salvation. So that by his
Services, so free and gratuitous in themselves, and so worthy of the most
infinite Recompense, he has justly merited all that Grace, which, for his sake,
God bestows on us.

Quest. The Grace of the Gospel, I see, is absolutely free to us in the first
sense; that is, it comes to us without the least of our deserts. But it is also
free in the second, so as not to require in us any Terms or Conditions?

Answ. No, for the main instances of God's Grace; that is, of his gratuitous,
and undeserved Gifts, are the forgiveness of sins, the saving assistances of
his Spirit, and Eternal Life: And all these are given, though not for any of our
Deserts, yet upon Conditions.

Quest. Is forgiveness of sins, one instance of God's Free Grace?

Answ. Yes, we are justified, that is, acquitted in judgment, or have our sins
pardoned, freely by his Grace, Romans 3. 24. and we have forgiveness, according
to the riches of his Grace, Ephesians. 1. 7.

Quest. And this Grace of Forgiveness, you say, is granted to us on Conditions?

Answ. Yes, on Condition of our true Repentance. For we are to Repent, that our
sins may be blotted out, Act. 3. 19. And Christ was exalted to be a Savior, to
give Repentance and Remission of sins, Act. 5. 31. And when he sends out his
Apostles to publish this Grace, he orders them to preach Repentance, and
Remission of sins in his Name, to all Nations, Luk 24. 47.

Quest. The saving Assistance of God's holy Spirit, is another eminent instance
of Grace, and is most commonly called so in common speech; but is that given
too upon Conditions?

Answ. Yes, on condition of our own care, and concurrent endeavors. For though
the first motions and suggestions of the Spirit, which make the first step in
our Conversion, may prevent our endeavors: yet the continuance of them on our
Hearts, and their increase to a saving pitch, that will govern our Lives, and
guard us against Temptations, depends upon our own Concurrence. To him that
has; that is, improves what God bestows, shall more be given: but from him
that has not, i. e. does not profit with it, as the wicked Servant did not,
who went, and hid his Talent, shall be taken away even what he has, Mat. 25.
25, 29. And when St. Paul tells us, God works in us both to will and to do; he
tells us withal, that we must be Fellow-workers, and work out our own
Salvation, Phil 2. 12, 13.

Quest. Is Eternal Life another instance of Free Grace?

Answ. Yes, it is an instance of it, and the Crown, and consummation of all the
rest. It is called the Gift of God, Romans 6. 23. and the Free gift of God, Romans
5. 15, 16, 18.

Quest. And is it also bestowed upon Conditions?

Answ. Yes, upon condition of our Obedience to the Laws of God. Being made
perfect through Suffering, Christ became the Author of Eternal Salvation, to
those that obey him, Heb. 5. 9. And blessed are they that do his Commandments,
that they may have right to the Tree of Life, Rev. 22. 14.

Quest. The Grace we have by the death of Christ then is free, as you say, only
as that excludes all our Deserts, but not as it excludes all Terms and
Conditions.

Answ. Very right. And this is plain by that way wherein God makes over all
that Grace to us, which is by the New Covenant. For what is given by way of
Covenant, is given upon Terms; because Covenants differ from absolute Grants,
and imply Articles on both sides. And thus the Benefits of the Gospel are given
to us. For Christ's sake, we shall receive Remission of sins, the Assistance of
the Spirit, and Eternal Life, though we never deserved them: but we shall not
receive them, unless we Repent, and obey in order to them.

Quest. By this I perceive, the Grace of Christ is no encouragement to sin, or
slothfulness, and that his dying for our sins, will not save us from dying for
them our selves, unless we repent of them?

Answ. Undoubtedly it will not.

Quest. But as soon as ever we repent, we may believe, and trust, that we shall
be saved by it?

Answ. Yes; and this is the true Faith in his Blood, that is, a Faith that our
Life shall be spared, and we reconciled to God, for the sake of it. God has
set forth Christ a Propitiation, for the Remission of sins that are passed,
through Faith in his Blood, Romans 3. 25. But this Faith belongs not to any, whilst
they continue in sin, and are wicked men, but only when they begin to obey, and
serve him.

Quest. From what you have said, it appears, that Christ's great aim in dying
for us, was to reclaim us from our sins, and make us holy and good men: and
that he purchased Reconciliation, and the favor of God, only to show us it
would not be in vain, and to encourage us to become so.

Answ. Yes, so it was. For he gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from
all iniquity, and purify to himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works,
Tit. 2. 14. And he bare our sins in his own Body upon the Tree, that we being
dead to sin, should live unto righteousness, 1 Pet. 2. 24.

Quest. You say Christ died to atone, and satisfy for sins, that God might
pardon us when we repent of them. But why did he not think Repentance enough
without a Ransom? Why would he not pardon Penitents, unless Christ would die to
make satisfaction for them?

Answ. Because the requiring such a satisfaction, showed his perfect hatred of
sin, which is for the Honor of his Holiness; and the strict care of his Laws,
which maintains the Reputation of his Justice; and took off all hope of
impunity, if men shall go on still to transgress, and so was the greatest
discouragement to future offenses. All which would have been otherwise, had he
been easy in forgiving, and admitted of a Reconciliation without a Ransom.

Quest. How does the requiring such a satisfaction, show his perfect hatred of
sin, for the Honor of his Holiness?

Answ. Because he would not remit the Punishment of it, but upon the highest
Ransom; and because, when he undertook to answer for it, he would not spare it
in his own Son, so that his hatred to it could not be overcome even by his love
to him. Nay, moreover, because when, in consideration of his infinite Merits,
and their Repentance, he returns into favor with them; yet, to show his
absolute detestation of their former sins, he will not receive even the Prayers
and Devotions of Penitent Sinners at their own Hands, or treat with them in
person, but requires a Mediator to offer up, and transact all for them. And
withal, admitting no other, either in Heaven or Earth, for that Advocate, but
only his own eternal, and most dearly beloved Son: To show, that when they
offered the greatest Consideration, yet, in indignation at their former
Provocations, he would have no deangs with them by any person, less great, and
dear than him.

Quest. How does it show his strict care of his Laws, for the Honor of his
Justice?

Answ. Because he would not dispense with the threatenings of those Laws, where
he had no less a Reason, than the Salvation of all men, the greatest and most
considerable part of the visible Creation, without a valuable recompense.

Quest. How does it cut off all hopes of impunity, and utterly discourage all
future offenders?

Answ. Because God has no more Sons to die for us, and when he was solicited
to remit the punishment of our sins, he would not do it upon a less exchange.
When man sinned against the Law of unerring Obedience, upon the Merits and
Death of his Son, God pardoned that, and admitted them to favor again upon
their Repentance. But if they shall offend against this Law too, and be finally
impenitent, there are no Sons of God to suffer again, to purchase their
Forgiveness.

Quest. So that Christ's Suffering for us, salved all the Honor of God's
Attributes, and served all the Purposes of his Justice, that would have been
served by our suffering for our selves?

Answ. It did so, and to the full as well too; the punishing of his own Son,
when he answered for Sinners, showing a more implacable hatred of sin, and
inexorable Justice, than he could have shown, by punishing all the World, who
were Sinners themselves. And therefore his death was a satisfaction to God, for
the sins of the whole World. Not only a satisfaction to Benevolence, and
yielding Goodness; as when easy and indulgent Natures, are appeased by any
small returns, and incompetent Recompenses: but a Satisfaction to Justice, by
way of full Compensation and Equivalence; Christ, by his one suffering
displaying the Honor of all God's* Attributes as much as God could have
displayed them, by punishing the whole Humane Race.

Quest. If the Death and Sacrifice of Christ, were so full a satisfaction at
first, there is no more now to be paid, and it need never be repeated?

Answ. No, nor ever must it. The Jewish Sacrifices, needed constantly to be
repeated; because, being of little worth, and very imperfect, their virtue was
soon spent; so that year by year they were continually offered, Heb. 9. 25. and
10. 1, 3. But his being full and perfect from the first, and leaving nothing to
be added, He is not to be offered often, but at once has he put away sin, by
the Sacrifice of himself, Heb. 9. 25, 26. and 10. 14. But although his Sacrifice
is no more to be really acted, as it needs not, the whole effect of it being as
fresh and full now, as it was at first; yet is it daily still commemorated, and
the virtue thereof applied, in every good Prayer, but especially in every
Sacrament.

Quest. What learn you from Christ's dying a Ransom for our sins?

Answ. 1. To abhor sin, since it is so odio^^ to God, that he can spare it in
no person, no not in his own Son, when he took other men's sins upon him. And
if he spared not him, when he would bear the punishment for us; how can we hope
he will in the least spare us, when we come to undergo it for our selves. If
these things were done in the green Tree, what shall be done in the dry, Luke
23. 31.

2 To give our selves up to the service of Christ, who has bought us for his
own property, at so dear a rate. This is the least we can do, in Equity and
Justice. Ye are bought with a price, therefore glorify God in your Bodies and
Spirits, which are God's, by such costly purchase, 1 Cor. 6. 20. And if there
is any spark of Love and Gratitude in our Hearts, we can do no less in
Resentment of such stupendous kindness. For the Love of Christ constrains us,
because we thus judge, that if Christ died for all, they which live, should not
henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him that died for them, 2 Cor. 5. 14,
15.

Quest. Ought it not also to teach us Faith in God, and to beget in us a firm
Trust, that he will perform whatsoever he has promised?

Answ. Yes; as plainly showing, that nothing is too great for his love to make
good. He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how
shall he not with him freely give us all things? Romans 8. 32.

Quest. Must not his Patience, and Charity in his Sufferings, not reviling
again, but praying for his Enemies, teach us the same, when we are called to
suffer?

Answ. Yes; for in suffering thus, without threatening, and when he was reviled,
not reviling again, he has left us an example, that we should follow his
steps, 1 Pet. 2. 21. 23.

Quest. Should not God's imposing so many, and great secular hardships and
sufferings on his own most dear Son, make us have easier thoughts of these
things than others have, and reconcile us to Affliction?

Answ. In all Reason it should. For it shows how inconsiderable worldly Goods
and Glories are in Gods Eyes; how temporal evils are allotted to the dearest
persons, how proper they are to Discipline, and improve the most virtuous, how
they perfect Piety, and what a step they are to Felicity and Glory. Jesus
himself, though he were a Son, yet learned obedience by the things which he
suffered, Heb. 5. 8. He was made perfect through suffering, Heb. 2. 10. He
ought to suffer, and so enter into his Glory, Luke 24. 26. We see him for
suffering death, crowned with Glory and Honor, Heb. 2. 9. And seeing
Sufferings, not only thus providentially allotted, but also thus profitably
undergone, and highly recompensed in him; the blessed Apostles and primitive
Saints, whose Ambition it was to be in all things his true followers, did not
repine and mourn, but rejoice and glory in them.

Quest. And since in dying for us, he has showed us such stupendous Love, must
not that mutually endear us, and teach us if we would be his followers, most
tenderly to love one another?

Answ. Yes; if God so loved us, we ought also to love one another, 1 John 4.
11. Nay, since hereby we perceive the love of God to us, because he laid down
his life for us; we ought, upon just occasion, to lay down our lives for the
Brethren, 1 John 3. 16.

Quest. In the Creed, you say dead and buried. When Christ expired upon the
Cross, was his Body taken down, and buried?

Answ. Yes, it was laid in a Tomb, and a great Stone rolled before its mouth,
according to the Jewish Custom. And for fear his Disciples should come by
night, and steal him away, the Jewish Rulers, when they had sealed the Stone,
got a Guard from the Governor to watch it, Mat. 27. 64, 66.

Quest. What mean you by Christ's descent into Hell?

Answ. His abode in that state of Death and Separation, or his Soul's being in
the place of Separate Souls, till it was united again to his Body, at his
Resurrection; as it is written, Thou shall not leave my Soul in Hell, Acts 2.
27. which St. Peter there says, was fulfilled in the Resurrection of Christ,
when he ceased to continue under the power of death, and gloriously arose to
triumph over it, v. 30, 31.

Quest. Does the word Hell, sometimes signify only the state of the Dead, or
the place of Souls departed?

Answ. Yes, as David says of all men, What man is he that lives, and shall not
see death, and shall he deliver his Soul from the hand of Hell? Psalm. 89. 48.
And as Jacob talked of going down to Hell to Joseph, when he thought some evil
Beast had devoured him, Genesis 37. 33, 35. In both which places, the word
translated Grave in our Bibles, in the Greek is Hades, the very word that
stands for Hell here in the Creed. Ofttimes, indeed, especially in the New
Testament, Hell fignifies, not in general, the state of the Dead, but
particularly the state of the Wicked, and the place of Torment. In which sense
it is not likely that Christ descended into Hell after his death, because in
his dying hour he told the Penitent Thief, This day shall thou be with me in
Paradise, Luke 23. 43.

CHAP. III. Of the Resurrection of Christ, and his sitting at God's Right Hand.
The Contents.
An Account how Christ may be said to have been three days in the Earth. His
Resurrection proved. The necessity of it. He ascended to Heaven. What is meant
by his sitting at the Right Hand of God. There he, 1. Intercedes for us, as our
Priest. This intercession not vocal, by Words and formal Pleas, but by
presenting himself, and his own meritorious Sacrifice. He intercedes only for
Covenant-Mercies, and on Covenant-Terms. He is an Intercessor of absolute Power
with God, and truest Affection for us. One part of his intercession, is to hand
and present our Prayers to God. Therefore whenever we pray for any thing,
it is both our duty, and wisdom to apply by him. 2. Governs his Church, as a
King. In what Acts this consists. 3. Instructs his Church, as a Prophet, by
sending to it the Holy Ghost. Christ's Body having now taken up its fixed abode
at God's Right Hand, we are not in any Ordinances to expect his Bodily
Presence, but only a Presence by his Spirit, which is more to be desired. Some
Inferences from Christ's sitting at God's Right Hand.

Quest. How long did Jesus Christ abide in the state of the Dead; till his Body
was corrupted?

Answ. No, he staid not so long. God did not suffer his Holy one to see
Corruption, Acts 13. 35, 36, 37. but reunited his Soul and Body, and raised him
from the dead on the third day, before the time* Corruption usually seizes the
Bodies of dead men.

Quest. Christ said of himself, as the Jews told Pilate, That after three days
he would rise again, Mat. 27. 63. And as Jonas was three days, and three
nights, in the Whales Belly: so, says he, shall the Son of Man be three days,
and three nights, in the heart of the Earth, Mat. 12. 40. But if he died as we
commemorate his death, upon Good Friday, and rose Mar. 16. 1, 2.
early on Easter Day in the morning, there were only part of two days, and one
entire day between.

Answ. That is, three days, according to common computation of days, both
Ancient and Modern, and particularly in Scripture reckoning. Thus Lazarus is
said four days dead, though the fourth day, whereon Jesus raised him up, was
one of them, Joh. 11. 39. And eight days are said to be accomplished, for
Christ's Circumcision; but the day of his Birth, and Circumcision too, went
both in to that Reckoning, Luke 2. 21. And the Priests in their courses were
appointed, and Joseph. Antiqu. l. 7. c. 11.
reputed, to Minister before the Lord eight days, though the time of Entrance,
and Release, was 2 King. 11. 5 7. and 2 Chronicles. 23. 4.
every Sabbath day morning. And accordingly, what in the current way of
expression, is thus sometimes termed three days, our Savior speaking more
exactly at other times, expresses by on the third, or within three days. Jesus
showed his Disciples, he should rise again the third day, Mat. 16. 21. and 17.
23. and 20. 19. And, destroy this Temple, and in three days I will raise it up,
Joh. 2. 19. or, within three days, as the Jews, who otherwhere call it after
three days, related it, Mark 14. 58.

Quest. How does it appear, that Christ was raised again from the dead?

Answ. It might appear to any, who had the curiosity to look into the
Sepulcher; for they would see he was gone.

Quest. What said the Watch, who stood to guard him?

Answ. They knew it full well, for when the Angel, with a Countenance like
Lightning, descended in an Earthquake, to roll back the Stone, the Keepers saw
it, and shaked, and became as dead men, Mat. 28. 2, 3, 4. But the Jewish Rulers
bribed them, to say, his Disciples came by night, and stole him away while they
slept, v. 11, 12, 13, 14. which was a foolish lie, and bore along with it its
own Confutation.

Quest. How so?

Answ. Because, if they were asleep, how could they tell any one stole him? If
they had any thoughts of what others did then, it could be only in a Dream;
unless they would pretend to sleep with their Senses awake, and their Eyes open.

Quest. But this saying, says St. Matthew, is commonly reported among the
Jews, and passes for a Truth with them, Mat. 28. 15. And by what other ways can
you convince them, that Christ is risen?

Answ. By those that saw him, and conversed with him after his Resurrection.
For he appeared for the space of Act. 1. 3.
forty days to his Apostles, and to satisfy them he had a real Body, eat and
drank with them after he was risen, Acts 10. 41. Luke 24. 43. He appeared to
Thomas, who searched the holes the Nails had made in his Hands, and thrust his
Finger into his Side, where the Spear had pierced it, before he would believe
him, Joh. 20. 27, 28. To five hundred Brethren all at one time, 1 Cor. 15. 6.
To Stephen in a bright Glory from Heaven, at his Martyrdom, Acts 7. 56. and to
Saul, at his Conversion, Acts 9. 3, 4. Yea, after he was risen, and gone to
Heaven, he sent down the Holy Ghost upon his Apostles and followers, which
showed, not only that he is alive again, but also that he lives in Power.

Quest. The Apostles seem extraordinary careful, to confirm the Resurrection of
Christ, and call the ordaining one to be an Apostle, ordaining him to be a
witness of it, Acts 1. 22. Was it necessary that Christ should rise from the
dead?

Answ. Yes, to show the debt he died for was discharged, and that his
satisfaction was accepted. He died as a Sacrifice, to satisfy for our sins;
and till God raised him up again, it did not appear that he was satisfied with
what Christ had done for us. If Christ be not risen, ye are yet in your sins, 1
Cor. 15. 17.

Quest. But was not his death a full payment, and, on the Cross, did he not
relate to that, when he said it is finished, Joh. 19. 30?

Answ. It was so indeed, the price of Redemption then was fully paid. But till
he raised him up again, God had given no public Acquitrance, nor done any open
Act, to show we were discharged by it. So that by his Resurrection, we are said
to be justified, that is, declared to be so. He died for our sins, and rose
again for our Justification, Romans 4. 25. and who is he that condemns? it is
Christ that died, yea rather, that is risen again, Romans 8. 34.

Quest. Was his Resurrection necessary on any other Accounts?

Answ. Yes; for, 2. In virtue of his death, he was to be our Mediator, to
intercede with God for us; and our Savior and Deliverer, to protect and rescue
us from our Spiritual Enemies: And these great works suppose a live man, and
are not to be performed by a dead person. And being thus necessary to discharge
his continual care of us; it must be equally so, to support our Faith and Trust
in him. When men are dead, we expect no service, or succor from them: And
therefore were he still in the Grave, we should not fix our Hope and Trust in,
or make our Addresses to him.

Quest. Was it necessary, to show him to be the Messiah, and to prove his
Religion?

Answ. Yes, for he had appealed to it, as a sign of his being a true Prophet,
Mat. 12* 38, 39, 40. And therefore by the way of trial which God Deuteronomy. 18. 18,
21, 22.
prescribed the Jews, viz. the accomplishment of predictions, he had appeared
to be a false Prophet, had he failed in it. So that if Christ be not risen,
says St. Paul, your Faith is vain, 1 Cor. 15. 14.

Quest. In his Death and Resurrection, methinks we have a plain and palpable
instance of the immortality of Humane Souls, and of a future Life beyond the
Grave, where God may reward or punish us?

Answ. So we have. For his Soul manifestly did exist apart from his Body,
during the time of their Separation, till on the third day it was reunited
again. So that men's Souls can subsist without, as well as in their Bodies, and
when they depart hence, go into another place, where they are capable of being
called to account for all they have done in this life. On which account, as
well as others, St. Paul might well say, That God has given assurance of a
future Life and Judgment, by raising Christ from the dead, Acts 17. 31. And St.
Peter, That God has begotten us to the hope of an Eternal Inheritance, through
the Resurrection of Christ from the Dead, 1 Pet. 1. 3, 4.

Quest. We read of several others, that rose from the Dead, as well as Christ;
had he any thing singular in his Resurrection above them?

Answ. Yes, he raised himself by his own power, but they were all raised by
him; he was not only the first that rose, but as the First Fruits, and all the
World besides rise as the ensuing Crop, which depends upon him. Destroy this
Temple, says he, and in three days I will raise it up, Joh. 2. 19, 21. I lay
down my life, and take it up again, Joh. 10. 18. He is the firstborn from the
Dead, Col. 1. 18. Rev. 1. 5. As in Adam all die, so in Christ shall all be made
alive: but every man in his own order, Christ the Firstfruits, afterward they
that are Christ's at his coming, 1 Cor. 15. 22, 23.

Quest. But did not Lazarus rise before Christ, John 11. 44. and Jairus's
Daughter, Luke 8. 55. and the Widows Son of Nain, Luke 7. 12, 14, 15. and how
then is he said to be the first of the Dead, that returned?

Answ. They returned to die again; but he was the first that rose to life
everlasting. He being raised, dies no more, death has no more dominion over
him, Romans 6. 9.

Quest. By his Resurrection, Christ got Glory and Happiness to himself, even
that Joy, for which St. Paul says, he endured the Cross, Heb. 12. 2. But did he
thereby acquire any Power over us?

Answ. Yes, his Death purchased, and his Resurrection invested him with an
absolute Power and Dominion over us. For this end, Christ both died, and rose,
and revived, that he might be Lord, both of the Dead and Living, Romans 14. 9.
And after his Resurrection, says he, All Power is given to me, both in Heaven,
and in Earth, Mat. 28. 18.

Quest. If so, his Resurrection lays an obligation upon us to obey him?

Answ. Yes; like as he rose from the dead, so must we rise to newness of life,
Romans 6. 4.

Quest How long stayed he upon Earth, after he was risen again?

Answ. For the space of forty days, discoursing, and speaking of the things
concerning the Kingdom of God, Acts 1. 3.

Quest. Whither went he when he left it?

Answ. To Heaven, whither he was taken up in a bright Cloud, all the Apostles
looking up after him, till he was taken up out of their sight, Acts 1. 3, 9.
And now he is there, he sits at the right hand of God.

Quest. What mean you by his sitting at the right hand of God?

Answ. His advancement to the height of Dignity and Authority, in the presence
of God. The Right Hand of a Prince, is the place of peculiar Favor, and of
highest Honor and Respect: as Solomon, when he would do Honor to his Mother
Bathsheba, set her at his Right Hand, 1 King. 2. 19. To be placed at hand, by
the privilege of nearness, gives opportunity for Conference and Address: And
to be placed at the Right Hand, the Hand of use and business, is to be in the
way, both of presenting all Offers, and receiving of Returns; whence it is a
known mark of special Favor and Honor, with all Potentates. And so by
Christ's sitting at God's Right Hand, is expressed his Sovereign Honor and
Power, in the presence of God. Or, perhaps, moreover his sitting in his humane
shape, on the Right Hand of that Bright Throne, or Resplendant Glory, which
visibly accompanies, and manifests some extraordinary presence of God: as he
appeared to Stephen in his Vision, who saw the Glory of God, and Jesus standing
on the Right Hand of God; that is, I suppose, at the Right Hand of that visible
Glory, wherewith God appeared, Acts 7. 55. And this, probably, is what the
Scripture means, by his sitting at the Right Hand of Power, Mat. 26. 64. and on
the Right hand of Majesty, Heb. 1. 3. That is, on the Right Hand of such Exodus
24. 16, 17. Ezekiel. 1. 27, 28.
Glory, or bright Appearance, which is the usual Symbol of God's Power and
Majesty, which at other times is expressed, by his sitting on the Right Hand of
the Throne of God, Heb. 12. 2. or, on the Right Hand of the Throne of the
Majesty in the Heavens, Heb. 8. 1.

Quest. It was most just that he should be exalted thither in recompense of his
meritorious sufferings, as the Apostle notes, Phil. 2. 8, 9. and Heb. 12. 2.
But is he gone thither, to carry on any Designs for us?

Answ. Yes, and those of the greatest importance. For there, in the highest
manner and to the fullest effect, he exercises all his Offices in our behalf.

Quest. I pray you explain the Designs he carries on for us there?

Answ. First, The work of Intercession, as our Priest. For he stands before God
to mediate on our behalf, and to obtain* for us, whatsoever God has promised,
or he has purchased, or we stand in need of. He is entered into Heaven it self,
now to appear in the presence of God for us, Heb. 9. 24.

Quest. Does he then plead with God, and move and Petition him, for all the
things we gain from him?

Answ. His Intercession is not by Words, and formal Pleas, and Supplications;
but by Actions; that is, by presenting of himself, and showing his own
Sacrificed Body before God. He intercedes, by showing of himself, and therefore
St. Paul calls his Intercession, his appearance in the presence of God for us,
Heb. 9. 24.

Quest. And is this way as effectual, as by forming Vocal Pleas?

Answ. Yes undoubtedly. The Blood of his Sacrifice, as St. Paul says, speaks,
Heb. 12. 24. It does not only breathe out Prayers, but prefers Claims and
Demands; and those too, not only in virtue of Gods Promise, but also of his own
Merits and dear-bought Purchase, which is a way of moving with Power and
Prevalence, beyond all expressions.

Quest. Did the High Priest among the Jews, intercede thus?

Answ. Yes; when he went in to intercede with God in the Holy of Holies, after
he had slain the Sacrifice, he was not directed to make any set Speeches, and
vocal Supplications, but only to carry in the Blood of Expiation, and present
it to God, by sprinkling it upon, and before the Mercyseat, Lev. 16. 14, 15.
which real exhibition of the thing it self, that was to plead for them, was
more moving and effectual, than any Verbal Speech, or Vocal Prayer, he could
have put up for them.

Quest. And will Christ continue thus to intercede for us; that is, to show
himself, and exhibit his Sacrifice before God in our behalf, always?

Answ. Yes, he ever lives to make intercession for us, which renders him able
to save to the uttermost, them that come to God by him, Heb. 7. 25. And
therefore the Heavens must receive him, till the restitution of all things,
Acts 3. 21. It was enough for the Sacrificing part of his Priesthood, which
made the Purchase to be once done. But the Interceding part, which brings down
the purchased Blessings to all men, in all times and places, must still be a
doing. And therefore he continues in the presence of God, to show himself, and
intercede, to the end of the World; which will be so long, as he will exercise
his Mediatory Power, or we shall stand in need of his Intercession.

Quest. What things will he move, and intercede with God for, which therefore
we may make sure to speed in?

Answ. For all the Benefits he has purchased, and God has promised, which are
all contained in the New Covenant. His intercession in virtue of his Blood, is
only to apply the Merits and Purchase of it. So that as at first he shed it, so
now he shows his Blood, for Covenant-Mercies, and on Covenant-Terms; but he
never moves that any Person should obtain them otherwise.

Quest. Then he will never move for wicked and obdurate Sinners, that God would
relax the severity of his Laws for their sakes. Nor, for slothful and careless
ones, that by an over-powering and irresistible Grace, he would do all for
them, and work his Will in them, and so save all their Pains. Since the New
Covenant offers no Pardon, but to the Penitent; nor saving Grace, but to the
Sincere and Industrious?

Answ. Very Right.

Quest. By this I see, we must by no means look upon Christ at God's
Right Hand, as a Biased, Partial Advocate, that seeks to wring what he can
from God, and gain all for our side. But as an Equal and Impartial Mediator,
who has a just Regard to both sides, and will show himself as careful of God's
Authority and Honor, by securing him of our Duty, as of our welfare, by
obtaining for us his Mercy?

Answ. Most certainly. For this cause, says St. Paul, of purging our
Consciences from dead Works to God's Service, as well, as that they who are
called, may receive the Promise of the Eternal Inheritance, he is the Mediator
of the New Testament, Heb. 9. 14, 15. In discharging this Trust, we may be
sure, in the height of all his care for us, he will be just to God. Nay, being
God's own Son, and both intimately nearer Related to, and better pleased with
him, than he is with us, were he any ways capable of being biased, we cannot
imagine it should be on ours, but on his side. So that in all the Part he acts
as our Intercessor, we must not imagine, that he will in the least dishonor
God to oblige us, or ever once aim, or attempt to make us secure, in any
undutifulness, and contempt of his, and our Heavenly Father.

Quest. Surely, being the most dearly Beloved Son of God, he must needs be an
Intercessor of Great Power?

Answ. Yes, of Absolute Power, and infallibly sure to gain whatsoever he moves
for. For, besides his Relation and Filial nearness, he continually Represents
his own infinite Merits, which can claim any Favors. Nay, for the sake of
those Merits, on this Appearance to plead them before God, he is made a Royal
Priest, and has all Power given unto him as a King, so that he can grant what
he pleases. Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my Name, that will I do, that
the Father may be glorified in the Son. If ye ask any thing in my Name, I will
do it. Joh. 14. 13, 14.

Quest. This shows how able he is to Succeed, but is he willing, and ready to
use all his Interest, and move for us?

Answ. No doubt of that. For his Love has made him shed for us his own
Hearts-Blood, and therefore it can never stick at any other Service, or
procuring for us any Blessings from Almighty God. He is a Merciful, and
Faithful High Priest, both true to our Interests, and tender of our
Infirmities, having felt them in himself, Heb. 2. 17. and 4. 15. and therefore
is as willing and ready, as he is able to intercede for us.

Quest. Is it particularly any part of his Intercession, to hand and present
our Prayers?

Answ. Yes. This was the Business of the Jewish Priests. One part of their
Priesthood was to burn Incense, which was to perfume the Peoples Prayers, who,
as St. Luke notes, prayed without, in the time of Incense, Luke 1. 10.
presenting their Prayers to God in these sweet Smells; whence the Psalmist begs
his Prayers may be set forth before God as the Incense, Plal. 141. 2. And the
Vials of Odors, or Incense, in the Revelations, St. John says, are the Prayers
of the Saints, Rev. 5. 8. And this accordingly, Christ our Intercessor in
Heaven does for us: for he is the Angel in the Revelations, who on the golden
Altar before the Throne, offers the Incense, with the Prayers of all Saints,
Rev. 8. 3. By him it is we must present all our Prayers; whence we are said,
through him to have access to the Father, Ephesians. 2. 18. and in him to have
boldness, and access with confidence, Ephesians. 3. 12. Nay, since the Prayers we put
up, have many sinful Defects adhering to them, they are fit to come to a most
holy God from the Hand of no other Mediator, but him, who has not only the
acceptableness of his Person to prefer, but the Merit of his Sacrifice too to
atone for them.

Quest. By this it should seem, that whenever we pray for any thing to
Almighty God, we should not seek after other Mediators, but apply by him. And
since he is so Powerful in Mediation, this is not only our bounden Duty, but
our truest Wisdom?

Answ. So it is: For, he is our Advocate with the Father, 1 John 2. 1. the one
Mediator between God and Man, 1 Timothy 2. 5. Whatsoever, says he, you shall ask
the Father in my Name, he will give it you, John 16. 23. We are sure he is now
in the immediate Presence of God, to prefer any Suit; but we are not sure that
Departed Saints are there, who, for ought we know, may be kept till the last
Day in some inferior Place of Comfort and Refreshment; Good Souls, as I shall
note hereafter, not receiving their Consummation before the last Judgment. When
we address by him, we only take that way of Application God himself has
prescribed; and in all Justice, and Reason, we should allow God the Direction
how we shall seek his Favors, since he is the most Free and Sovereign Disposer
of them. Nay, since the Prayers we put up are uttered by sinful Lips, and
mingled with our own Frailties and Defects, they can come worthy and pure to
God from him alone, whose Blood, as I said, has Merit enough to purge, as well
as his Person Favor enough to prefer them. Tho a perfect Prayer, had not God
otherwise ordered it, might in it self be presented, especially from a perfect
Man, by an acceptable Mediator; yet a sinful Prayer, from sinful Men, does
plainly need such a Mediator, as in the same Person is both Intercessor and
Redeemer. Thus the Altar of Incense among the Jews, which stood without the
Vail, before the Mercy-seat, daily to perfume and present the Peoples Prayers,
was once a year to be sprinkled with the Blood of Atonement, plainly
intimating, that the Means of presenting Prayers, must be endowed withal with a
Power of expiating them, Exodus 30. 6, 7, 8, 10. And accordingly, the Apostle
mentions Christ's Mediation, as joined to, and founded on his Redemption. One
Mediator between God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a Ransom
for all, 1 Timothy 2. 5, 6. And, If any Man sin, we have an Advocate with the
Father, who is also the Propitiation for our Sins, 1 John 2. 1, 2.

Quest. What other Design does Christ carry on for us in Heaven?

Answ. 2. The Care of Governing his Church as a King. He is at the Right Hand
of God; Angels, and Authorities, and Powers, being subject unto him, 1 Pet. 3.
22. and all Authority in Heaven, and Earth, being put into his Hand, Mat. 28.
18. This Power he purchased by his Death; but was put in full Possession of it,
when he came to claim it by his Intercession.

Quest. Wherein does he exercise this Plenitude of Power?

Answ. In Giving Laws to his Church: For he is the one Lawgiver, that is able
either to save, or to destroy, Jam. 4. 12. And since he is the Legislator in
Religion, it is an Usurpation upon his Prerogative, for any to form to
themselves a newfangled Worship, and beat out other Paths to Heaven of their
own devising.

In Protecting it from all, both outward and intestine Enemies, whether the
World, the Flesh, or Men, or Devils. For he sits at God's Right Hand, till his
Enemies be made his Foot-stooll, Psalm. 110. 1. and Heb. 10. 12, 13. and he must
reign till he has put all Enemies under his Feet, 1 Cor. 15. 25.

And, lastly, in judging all the World, to their present Portion of the Eternal
State when they leave the Body, and to the full Consummation of it at the last
Day. For now, the Father judges no Man, but has committed all Judgment to the
Son, Joh. 5. 22. 27. Which, as it makes for the unspeakable Comfort of all his
Faithful Servants, since they are to be judged by their own Advocate, who has
preferred their Ease and Happiness to his own Life; so will it be to the
eternal Terror of all those his Enemies, who would not have him to reign over
them, Luke 19. 27. And all this Power he exercises himself from Heaven, besides
what he does by his Bishops and Pastors, who are the Officers of his Kingdom,
and his Deputies and Substitutes here on Earth.

Quest. Has he any other Business to do for us at God's Right Hand, as our King?

Answ. Yes, to prepare a Place for us, and allot us Royal Habitations with
himself. I go to prepare a Place for you, and I will come again, and receive
you to my self, that where I am, there ye may be also, Joh. 14. 2, 3. The First
Adam lost Paradise, and the Second Adam was to restore us to it: Who, after he
had merited it for us by his Cross, ascended into Heaven, to instal our Nature
there, and claim his Purchase. And, discharging the mighty Angel, whose flaming
Sword, after the Fall, was set to guard the Passage to it from our Intrusions,
opened the Kingdom of Heaven to all Believers.

Quest. What further Concern did he transact for us, by going to Heaven?

Answ. 3. As a Prophet, he sent down the Holy Ghost, to instruct his Church in
his Absence, and to be with us in his stead. It is expedient for you, that I go
away: For if I go not away, the Comforter will not come to you; but if I
depart, I will send him unto you, Joh. 16. 7. Being by the Right Hand of God
exalted, he received the Promise of the Holy Ghost, Act. 2. 33. and sent him on
his Apostles, to abide with them for ever, Joh. 14. 16.

Quest. How did the Holy-Spirit supply his Absence?

Answ. By endowing them with such miraculous Gifts, as enabled them to
propagate his Religion through the World as effectually, as if he had staid with
them; and with such inward Graces, as would fit themselves for those Mansions
he had provided for them. Of both which, I shall say more in their proper place.

Quest. And these Gifts, you say, he ascended to bestow upon his Church?

Answ. Yes; the Holy Ghost was not to be given, till after Jesus was glorified,
Joh. 7. 39. but when he ascended up on high, he received Gifts for Men, that
the Lord might dwell among them, Psalm. 68. 18. and Ephesians. 4. 8.

Quest. Now our Savior Christ is Ascended, is not his Glorified Body to take
up its Mansion, and fixed Abode at God's Righthand?

Answ. Yes; as St. Peter told the Jews, the Heavens must receive him, unto the
Times of Restitution of all things, Act. 3. 21. And then, as the Angel told his
Apostles, he shall so come again to judge the World from Heaven, in like manner
as* they then saw him go into Heaven, Act. 1. 1^.

Quest. If his Bodily Presence and Local Abode be at the Right Hand of God's
Throne in Heaven, then we are not to expect any thing of a Bodily Presence in
any Ordinances here on Earth?

Answ. No; as to his Bodily Presence, it is expressly said, that he parted from
his Disciples, Luke 24. 51. that he left the World, Joh. 16. 28. and is no more
in the World, Joh. 17. 11. and, tho the Poor we should, yet him we should not
have always with us, Mat. 26. 11. that whilst we are in the Body, we are absent
from him, 2 Cor. 5. 6. and are not to be with him, till we depart hence, Phil.
1. 23. that his Bodily Abode is in Heaven, where he is to remain till the
Consummation, Act. 3. 21. and without ascending to Heaven to fetch him, there
is no bringing him back to Earth again, Romans 10. 6. and when he comes to judge
the World, it shall be from thence by Change of Place and Local Motion, called
his Descending from Heaven, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16. and coming in the Clouds of Heaven,
Mat. 26. 64. and the Saints are to be called up from the Earth into the Air to
meet him, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17. All which plainly imply his Bodily Presence to be
circumscribed, and limited to God's Right Hand, and no longer in this World.
But the way of Christ's Presence with his Church, is by his Spirit, which works
the same Effects, and confers the same Graces, that he himself would, were he
personally upon Earth. His Spirit is his Advocate, who was to succeed in his
Place, to maintain his Cause, Joh. 15. 26. and to stay with us all the time of
his absence, he shall abide with you for ever, Joh. 14. 16. And this Presence
of his Spirit, in all compleatness of Virtue and real. Effects, he himself
judges preferable to all Ocular Manifestations of his Person or Sensible
Presence; which, tho it might serve more to delight our Eyes, and entertain our
Fancies, yet would signify less to real and desirable Purposes. It Is expedient
for you, says he, that I go away, speaking to his Disciples of his Bodily
Absence: For if I go not away, the Comforter will not come; but if I depart, I
will send him, Joh. 16. 7. And, It is the Spirit that quickneth, but the Flesh
profits nothing, said he at another time to the gross Capernaites, upon a like
Competition of these two ways of his Presence with us, Joh. 6. 63.

Quest. What must we learn from Christ's being exalted to such Sovereign and
Supereminent Authority, at God's Right Hand?

Answ. To render him the Reverence, and Obedience, due to so High a Majesty.
For since God has thus highly exalted him, at his Name every Knee must bow, and
every Tongue confess, that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the
Father, Phil. 2. 9, 10, 11.

Quest. What from his being so Compassionate, and Powerful an Advocate?

Answ. To come to him in every Want or Distress, with Confidence and Assurance
of Faith; being fully persuaded, both of his Kindness for us, and of his
Interest with God, to obtain whatsoever is necessary, or convenient for us.
Having such an High Priest, let us come boldly unto the Throne of Grace, that
we may obtain Mercy, and find Grace to help in time of need, Heb. 4. 14, 16.
But particularly, to come with sure Hope and Expectation of the Pardon of our
Sins, when we truly repent of them; and of his Good Spirit and Grace, when we
are careful to make a Diligent and Right use of them. If any Man Sin, we have
an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous, who is a Propitiation
for our Sins, 1 John 2. 1, 2. And, who is he that condemns? It is Christ that
dyed, yea rather that is risen again, who also makes intercession for us. Romans
3. 34.

Quest. What learn we from his Power to Subdue all his Enemies?

Answ. To trust him, as I noted above, with the care of our selves, and of his
Church, and not suffer our selves to be cast into any anxious Fears, or forced
upon the use of any unlawful means, by any Streights. But to believe, (let
Dangers and Disorders be what they will,) that the Lord Reigns, and that we and
all his faithful People, are safest whilst we are doing our Duty, and are in
his hands. That indeed, is the true way to yield present security, but
especially, if thereby we happen to suffer, to make sure a surpassing
Recompense of Glory. For this is a Faithful saying, if we be dead with him,
that is to Sin, we shall also live with him, that is in Glory: If we suffer and
endure, that is, persevere in obeying, chiefly when we obey with Loss and
Difficulty, we shall also Reign with him. 2 Timothy 2. 11, 12.

Quest. Since Christ is now in Heaven, and we profess to fix all our Hopes in
him: Should not that make us think much of that Place where he is, and of the
way to come thither?

Answ. Without Question it should. If ye be risen with Christ, seek those
Things which are above, where Christ sits at the Right Hand of God, Col. 3.
1. Here in the Body, we sojourn from the Lord, 2 Cor. 5. 6. In this World we
are strangers and Pilgrims, 1 Pet. 2. 11. But God above is our Father, and
Jesus Christ, at God's Right Hand, is our Lord, and the Glorified Saints are
our Fellow-Citizens, Ephesians. 2. 19. And being thus Gods Family or Domestics, our
Conversation should be, where our Civil Relation and Society is, that is in
Heaven, whence also we look for the Lord Jesus, Phil. 3. 20. Since our Treasure
is with him in Heaven, there should our Hearts be also, Mat. 6. 21. So that
although in passing through this World, we cannot quite neglect the things of
it, yet must we always heedfully mind, and carefully seek the things above it.

CHAP. IV. Of the Future Judgment.
The Contents.
The necessity of the Future Judgment. All men are judged, and made happy or
miserable, at their Deaths. But not so fully then, as they will be afterward.
The Complete and General Judgment, is at the end of the World. In that, Jesus
Christ is to be the Judge. Who are to be judged. In that Judgment no
Condemnation, but for breaking Gods Laws: So not for indifferent things. Men
shall be tried and sentenced for all their sinful Actions, with regard to their
lasting Effects. For their most secret ones. And such ill deeds as were
disguised under the fairest Pretenses. For their sinful Omissions. And
Neglecting to Employ, and improve their Talents. For sinful Words. And Thoughts
and Desires. For all these Men shall be judged impartially, without Respect of
Persons. But with Equity and Candor, not in Rigor. The Benign Judge will be
very ready to observe what makes for us, and make the best of our Performances.
And interpret the seemingly Rigorous Expressions of his own Laws, with great
condescension to Humane Measures. He will allow for involuntary Failings. And
judge Heartily and Favorably of that involuntariness. And for Natural
Infirmities. And for Providential disadvantages, as Multiplicity of Business,
greatness of Temptations, Bodily Indispositions. For Pitiable Defects of
Degrees in Duties. Great Latitude on the side of Bliss, and all not required to
be of the same Size. He will Reward Good Things, though done with Difficulty and
Reluctance, yea when Pitiably stained with impure mixtures. Our Judge will show
all this Candor, and would have us expect it. In Recompencing good Men, he will
consider the Difficulties and Oppositions. And the hazard, and cost of their
Services. And the hardships of Providence, allotted to exercise good Men in
this Life. Of the Condemnation of ill Men. The Fire, which is to torment them,
shall burn up and dissolve the World^ Practical Inferences from the last
judgment.

Quest. THE Seventh Article is, That, from Gods Right Hand, Jesus Christ shall
come to judge both the quick and the dead. Is there any Necessity of a Future
Judgment?

Answ. Yes, upon many Accounts. As, 1st. For an exact Discrimination, to
distinguish Persons. Numbers of ill Men are Hypocrites, or Good only in outward
appearance; and these pass here for Saints. But at the last Day, God will make
them manifest, and put them into Separate Companies, Dividing, as Christ
foretold, the Sheep from the Goats, Mal. 25. 32.

2. For the clearing of Gods Justice, which seems in this World oftentimes, to
misplace Rewards and Punishments, afflicting the Righteous, and making Sinners
Prosperous: and therefore will surly be manifested in allotting more suitable
Retributions, visibly Rewarding the good, and Punishing the wicked afterward.
Thus St. Paul told the Thessalonians, that their Present Sufferings, who were
Gods good Servants, was a Token and Pledge of Gods Future Rewards on them, and
of his ^unishments upon their Persecutors. The Persecutions, and Tribulations
you endure, are ^ manifest Token of the Righteous Judgment ^f God, i. e. a
token and engagement, that God will hereafter manifest his Righteous Judgment,
in their Punishment, and ^our Reward* Seeing it is a Righteous Thing ^ith God,
to recompense Tribulation to them that trouble you; and to you, who are
troubled, ^est with us, when the Lord Jesus shall be re^ealed from Heaven, with
his mighty Angels, ^ These. 1. 4, 5, 6, 7. And that Day, St. Paul ^alls the
Revelation of the Righteous Judgment ^f God, when, however here they might ^eem
connived at, God will render to every Man according to his Deeds, Romans 2. 5, 6.

3. For Reversing the Error of all Humane Judgments. All Humane Courts are
under God, who is the Supreme Dispenser of Justice, and Protector of injured
Inno^ence. And therefore if Humane Courts, who are his Substitutes, through
Corruption, ^r Mistake, Condemn the Innocent; it may ^eseem him, whose Care
comprehends, and whose Justice will do Right to all, ^o Reverse the Error, and
clear them again to all the World.

4. For the support of Religion, which ^as no sufficient encouragement, without
Hope of future Rewards. He that comes to God in Religion, must believe he is a
Rewarder of those that diligently seek him, Heb. 11. ^. Moses, and the
Patriarchs, served God, out of a Respect to the Recompense of a Reward. v. 26.
And this Reward was not present here, but Future in another World. They dyed,
not having received the Promises, but only having seen them afar off,
confessing themselves here to be Strangers and Pilgrims, and to seek a Country
in a better place. v. 13, 14, 16. So that they were Religious, from an eye to
future Judgment and Retributions.

Quest. From these Reasons, it may seem fit and necessary, God should have a
Future Judgment; but are we sure he will have it?

Answ. Yes; he has given assurance unto all men, that he will judge the World
by Jesus Christ, by raising him from the Dead. Act. 17. 31.

Quest. How does this assure it?

Answ. Both as an Instance of it, since thereby he most justly rewarded our
Savior Christ, who had done and suffered so much for him in this World. And
also as it was Gods owning, and irrefragable Testimony to his Doctrine, which
declares the Future Judgment as a Principal Part of it.

Quest. When is this Judgment to be?

Answ. At the end of the World, when there shall be no more Days of Labor and
Trial, but all of Recompense, in Punishment or Reward.

Quest. If it be so far off, men will be the less afraid of it, they being very
apt to overlook Dangers that lie remote; as indeed, when any things are far
distant, to look upon Great ones as little, and little ones as none at all. And
will none be judged, till the end of the World?

Answ. Yes: That is only for the General Judgment of all men. But every
particular Man is sentenced at his Death, either to a State of Bliss, or Misery.

Quest. But if a man be condemned in the First Judgment, since there is so
great a Distance betwixt it and the Second, may he not have time to make his
Peace, and either by doing or suffering something himself, or by the Care and
Kindness of his Friends, offering Sacrifices, Prayers or Alms for him, get the
Sentence reversed, and his State altered, and come off clear at the last
Judgment?

Answ. No: Betwixt the Place of Rewards and Punishments, in the other World,
there is an unpassable Gulf fixed, so that they who would pass from you to us,
cannot; as Abraham, told the Rich Man in Torment Luke 16. 26.
. There is neither Repentance nor Reconciliation in the Grave. When once the
Night is come, says our Savior, no Man can Work, Joh. 9. 4. Now, in this Life,
says St. Paul, is the accepted Time, now is the Day of Salvation, 2 Cor. 6. 2.
And at the last Day, Men shall all be tried, not for what they have done, or
suffered since they were separate Spirits, but for what they did when they were
Clothed with their Bodies; giving account for every thing done in the Body, 2
Cor. 5. 10. And those deeds, are not what others have done for us, but what,
through the Grace of God, and the Benifit of their Prayers, we have been
enabled to do for our selves. Every Man shall receive for things done in his
Body, according to what he has done, says St. Paul. And every Man's cause of
rejoicing, must be in himself alone, and not in another, by passing over his
Neighbors Prayers, or Merits to him. For every man shall bear his own Burden,
Gal. 6. 4, 5. As a just God will not punish one for another Sin; so neither
will he accept one for another Well-doing, Ezekiel. 18. 20.

Quest. If Sentence is so quickly passed upon them, the Souls of good men are
not in a deep sleep, and insensible State, but enter upon Happiness, as the
Souls of ill men do upon misery, as soon as they leave this world?

Answ. Yes, they do so. For this day, says our Savior to the Penitent Thief,
thou shall be with me in Paradise, i. e. in a place of Happiness, Luke 23. 43.
And for me to dye is gain, says S. Paul, whereas an insensible State would
have brought him no Advantage, Phil. 1. 21. And when we are absent from the
Body, we are present with the Lord, which presence notes happy enjoyment, 2
Cor. 5. 68. And Lazarus, when he dyed, was carried into Abraham's bosom, and
Dives lift up his eyes in Hell, being in Torment, Luke 16. 22, 23. All which
show, the Deceased Righteous to be Happy, (as the Wicked Wretched,) not only in
expectation, but present enjoyment.

Quest. You speak this of all the Righteous?

Answ. Yes, for the Scripture makes no Difference. This Day shall thou be with
me in Paradise, said Christ to the Penitent Thief, though he had been a very
great Sinner, and was but a very young Convert. And the usual way of expressing
the Death of good Men, is by their 1 Cor. 15. 6, 8, 20, 51. and 1 These. 3. 13,
14, 15.
falling asleep, which notes Ease and Refreshment. And in general it is said of
these that dye in the Lord, that from henceforth they are blessed, and rest
from their Labors, Rev. 14. 13. So that this Present Life, as our Lord notes
in the Luke 16. 25.
Story of Lazarus, is the Time of their receiving evil things: And they are no
longer exercised with Torments, but, what is inconsistant with them, enter upon
ease and comfort, in degree more or less, according to the difference of their
virtuous Seize, immediately upon their Deaths.

Quest. But is the Happiness of the one, or the Misery of the other, so full
then, as it shall be after the last Judgment?

Answ. No; for now their Souls only are Happy, but then their Bodies shall be
raised too, and the Bliss of the whole man, both Soul and Body, shall be
complete. And then they shall be happy in a fuller degree, and have a more
perfect measure of it. This increase of Happiness they shall receive at the
last Judgment; and therefore it is Luke 14. 14. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 6, 7.
called the Time of their being crowned, or rewarded, 2 Timothy 4. 8. and they are
represented as desiring it. So the Souls under the Altar, slain for the
Testimony of Jesus, do in the Revelations, asking how long God would delay to
judge the World, for the Consummation of their Reward, and of their Persecutors
Punishment, Rev. 6. 9, 10, 11. And so it is with the damned Spirits too, the
heaviest part of their Doom being still to come, and their present Miseries,
though very great, being but Foretastes and Beginnings of what they are to be
consigned to at the last Day. Thus the Devils are said to be reserved in
Chains, against the Judgment of the Great Day; their present State, it seems,
in comparison of it, being no more than the Misery of a Prison, compared to
that of the Day of Execution, 2 Pet. 2. 4. and Jude 6. And the Devils ask
Christ, if he were come to torment them before the time; plainly intimating,
that the Fullness of their Torment was not to be, till the Great Day comes, Mat.
8. 29.

Quest. These Private Judgments then are much short of the Last Judgment,
because then is the Consummation of Reward and Punishment?

Answ. Yes. And also, because that Judgment shall be Solemn and Public, in
full Audience and open Court, before Angels and all the World, Luke 12. 8, 9.
and General, whereat all, both Angels and Men, shall be Convened and Tried.

Quest. And must not this be, till the End of the World?

Answ. No; for it is Christ's last Act in Discharging his Mediatory Office, and
therefore must not be concluded, till all Things are at an End. All the Time
before the Judgment, is a State of Trial, for proving Persons; wherein Christ
gives Laws to direct us, and sufficient Opportunities, and inward Grace, to
help us to perform them. But all the Time after it, is a State of irreversible
Recompenses, in sharing and dispensing promised Rewards, and Penal Executions.
After the last Sentence is once passed, there is no more place for
Intercessions, and making Friends; but a New and Unalterable State, of Eternal
Joys or Miseries, commences. And thus Christ, having consummated his Trust as
Mediator, will surrender up his Power, and deliver the Kingdom to God the
Father, 1 Cor. 15. 24.

Quest. The General Judgment, you say, is at the End of the World: Has God
decreed a set Time, and fixed a Day for it?

Answ. Yes; he has appointed a Day, in which he will judge the World in
Righteousness, Act. 17. 31. Which Day is called the Coming of Christ, 1 Cor.
15. 23. and the Day of the Lord, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 2. and 2 Thessalonians. 2. 2.

Quest. If every Man's Case must then be fully scanned, and all Actions inquired
into, and Pleas heard; methinks, that should be more than one Days Work?

Answ. So I suppose it will, the continuance perhaps of a thousand Days, nay,
it may be, of a great number of Years. For Day, in Scripture, is any
Continuance of Time, which is allotted for any Business. As the Time of Isreal's
forty Years Travel in the Wilderness, is called the Day of Temptation, Heb. 3.
8, 9. and the Time of God's scourging and correcting, the Day of Visitation,
Isa. 10. 3. and 1 Pet. 2. 12. and the Time of the Gospel, is the Day of
Salvation, 2 Cor. 6. 2. And so the Day of Judgment, is not the Space of twenty
four Hours, but all that Time which Christ shall spend upon it.

Quest. It seems, God has fixed the Day within himself; but is that determinate
Day known to any besides himself?

Answ. No: For of that determinate Day knows no Man, no not the Angels in
Heaven, nor the Son himself as Man, but the Father only, Mat. 24. 36. Mar. 13.
32. It shall surprise the World, and its coming shall be sudden and unexpected,
as a Thief in the Night, or Travel upon a Woman with Child, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 2, 3.

Quest. Who shall be the Judge at that Great Day, by whom all Men shall be
tried, and sentenced?

Answ. Jesus Christ. For God will judge the World in Righteousness, by that Man
whom he has ordained; and he has assured them of it, by raising him from the
dead, Acts 17. 31. He only is able to discharge this transcendent Trust, having
an Authority Paramount, which none can question, or appeal from; an Infinite
Understanding, that can search the Hearts, and discover the naked Truth of
every Man's Case, and the just Validity of their Pleas; an incorruptible
Integrity, that cannot in the least be biased by any Flatteries, Offers,
Intercessions, or Entreaties; and an Almighty Power, that can reward the
greatest Services, and punish the most high and haughty, as well as the meanest
Criminals. And as he alone is qualified to Discharge, so he is also to sustain
the Honor of it. For who is fit to sit as Judge of Princes and Potentates, Men
and Angels; but he, who made and governs them, who is over all in Power, and
next in Dignity to the Father, even the Son of God himself. All Judgment is
committed to the Son, that all should honor the Son, even as they honor the
Father, Joh. 5. 22, 23.

Quest. Who, at that Day, are to be judged?

Answ. All Men, that shall either be found alive at his coming, or were dead
before. For we must all appear before the Judgmentseat of Christ, that every
one may receive for the things done in the Body, 2 Cor. 5. 10. yea, and the
lost Angels too; for know you not that we shall judge Angels? i. e. sit with
Christ, and approve of his Sentence, when he condemns them? 1 Cor. 6. 3.

Quest. What Proof will there be of Crimes, and who shall be the Witnesses?

Answ. The Devils are the Accusers of the Brethren, Rev. 12. 10. and they will
call for Justice: But there needs no Testimony at that Day, from the Father of
Lies; for God, in his Omniscience, keeps a Register and Record of all Men's
Actions, and that Book shall be opened, and the Dead shall be judged by that
unerring Book of his Remembrance, Rev. 20. 12. Nay, indeed, there is no need of
any Witnesses at all, because the Guilty shall confess their Crimes, and bear
witness against themselves: Their Consciences shall bear witness, and their own
Thoughts accuse, or excuse one another, in the Day when God shall judge the
Secrets of Men, by Jesus Christ, according to my Gospel, Romans 2. 15, 16.

Quest. Shall all this be acted in great Solemnity, with Pomp and Splendor?

Answ. Yes, as much as may be. For Christ will translate his Royal Court from
Heaven to Earth, and come at the Righthand of that Glory, by which he now sits
in peerless Splendour and Majesty, having all the Holy Angels glittering in
their utmost Brightness, to attend this Triumph. He shall come in his own
Glory, and in his Fathers, and of all the Holy Angels, Luke 9. 26. and Mat. 25.
31. He shall descend from Heaven with a Shout, with the Voice of the Archangel,
and the Trump of God, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16. And when that sounds, all that are in the
Graves shall hear his Voice, and shall come forth, Joh. 5. 28, 29. and there
shall be a Resurrection both of the Just and Unjust, Acts 24. 15. All these
shall stand before his Throne: And, after an exact Scrutiny, and fair Trial of
all Persons, he will separate them one from another, into two Companies, as a
Shepherd divides the Sheep from the Goats; and as the Jews were wont to do in
their Courts, setting such as were to be Absolved, together upon the Right; and
such as were to be Condemned, upon the Left Hand of their Tribunals: And then,
with great Solemnity, pass Sentence; bidding the Righteous, Come, ye Blessed of
my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you: But saying to the Wicked,
Depart from me, ye Cursed, into everlasting Fire, Mat. 25. 31, 32, 34, 41.

Quest. Where shall this Glorious Appearance be?

Answ. In the Air, says St. Paul, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17. In the Clouds of Heaven,
says our Savior, Mat. 26. 64. Somewhere it will be near the Earth; but in what
particular Part, it little concerns us to inquire, or advantages us to
understand.

Quest. When this Great Judge has passed Sentence, shall all Parties concerned
acquiesce in it?

Answ. Yes; he is the last Judge, from whom there can be no Appeal. And there
will be no need of any: For all shall acknowledge the Perfect and
irreprehensible Justice of what he determines. The Righteous, being tried
first, and called up to surround him in Glorious Circles whilst he tries the
rest, shall approve and praise his Justice. The Saints shall judge the World,
i. e. as his Assessors, and the Comprobators of his Judgment, 1 Cor. 6. 2, 3.
And the Mouth of all Wicked, who suffer under it, shall be stopped, and they
shall be convinced of it within themselves. For he will then convince all that
are ungodly, of all their ungodly Deeds, which they have ungodly committed, and
of all the hard Speeches which ungodly Sinners have spoken against him, Jude 15.

Quest. For what shall we be judged, and condemned in this Judgment?

Answ. For all Transgressions of the Laws of his Gospel, and for those only. He
will not judge Arbitrarily, or condemn any for unforbidden Things, or for no
Cause but only because he pleases: But the Laws of his Gospel are the Rule he
will try, and judge all Christians by. God shall judge Men by Jesus Christ,
according to my Gospel, Romans 2. 16. and the Word that I have spoken, the same
shall judge Men at the last Day, Joh. 12. 48.

Quest. If we shall be condemned only by God's Laws, then to be sure
unforbidden Things, which are not threatened in the Word of God, and which there
is no Law against, will never condemn any?

Answ. Most certainly they will not; and there is no Sin in them to be
condemned. For where there is no Law, there is no Transgression, Romans 4. 15.
And whosoever commits Sin, transgresses also the Law; for Sin is the
Transgression of the Law, 1 John 3. 4. And Sin is not imputed, when there is no
Law, Romans 5. 13. So that it is a vain Fear, either in Religion, or in Common
Life, when Men's Consciences scruple Things, which they confess to be
Indifferent, i. e. forbid by no Laws; as using a Form of Prayers, Kneeling,
Standing, or other Rites and Ceremonies no where forbidden in the Worship of
God. In the last Judgment, they shall answer only for the Breach of Laws, and
therefore are sure not to endanger their Souls, or become accountable for such
as these, since there is no Law against them.

Quest. You say Men shall be judged for all their Transgressions of Gods Laws;
then, to be sure, for all their Sinful Actions?

Answ. Yes: For we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that
every one may receive according to that he has done in the Body, whether it be
good, or bad, 2 Cor. 5. 10. And the Dead are judged every Man according to
their Works, Rev. 20. 13.

Quest. So that then we must answer for all the Actions of our Lives, and
receive Reward if they have been good, or Punishment if they have been ill ones?

Answ. Yes.

Quest. The Actions of Men are quickly done, and when they are over, they are
wont to think there is an end of them: But do not the good or ill Effects of
several survive, and last long, and make for a great while after, as if the
Action were still a doing?

Answ. Yes, they do, both in good and bad Actions. So that Men may be sinning,
and serving God, no^ only whilst they live, but when they are in their Graves.

Quest. I pray you instance to me, how it is so in good Actions?

Answ. If a Man gains Proselytes to God, this good Fruit will last, and they
will serve him when he is dead. If he promotes Pious Truths, or gives good
Advice, or shows an holy Example in this World; the Truths may be remembered,
and the Advice followed, and the Example copied out and imitated, when he is
gone out of it. If he endows Churches, or builds Hospitals, or the like; his
Piety will be Active when he is at Rest, and he may be doing Good to the Worlds
End. Of these, and all such Good Works of permanent Effects, it may be said, as
St. Paul did of Abel's Faith, whereto God gave witness, that by it, he being
dead, yet speaks, Heb. 11. 4.

Quest. And is it thus also in bad Actions?

Answ. Yes. For thus the wicked Opinions a Man broaches, may infect after-Ages;
or, his corrupt Example, or Advice, live in his Posterity and Acquaintance. Or,
if he corrupt and seduce others into any Sins, they may persist in them, after
he is reclaimed from them. But then he will sin most of all in his Grave, if he
has introduced wicked and irreligious Laws and Customs, which are hardly
altered, even where there is the plainest, and greatest Reason for it; or
abused the Laws, to possess himself of other Men's Rights, which derives down
the Crime and Curse of Detaining ill-gotten Goods, on all his Posterity; or
writ Pestilential Books; or established any ungodly or injurious Thing, the
Mischief whereof no one knows when it may determine.

Quest. And when God comes to judge us, will he take notice, and have respect
to these continued and multiplied Effects of our Actions?

Answ. It Is just he should, they being all imputable to us, and reasonable to
believe he will. For Jeroboam is taxed for sinning long after he was dead,
because other Men's Sins were owing to him, he having established Iniquity by a
Law, and formed an Idolatrous Schism, and 1 Kings 15. 29, 30, 34.
made Israel to sin, 2 Kings 10. 29. And to this, I suppose, we may, in part at
least, ascribe the Trouble and Concern of Ghosts, and their sometimes appearing
to make Satisfaction, after any great Injuries have been done, and not repaired
in their Lifetime: Which may show, not only God's Care, in doing Justice; but
their own, in lessening their Account too. On which Inducement, I believe,
Dives was sollicitous to have his Brethren advertised of the Place of Torment,
by one sent from the other World, Luke 16. 27, 28. For he being the Head of his
Family, and a vicious Man, might have done much in corrupting his Kindred and
Acquaintance, that resorted to him. And they being made the worse by his
Example and Influence; the Growth of their Guilt, and Fructification of the ill
Seed he had sown, would accumulate and increase his Sufferings. Which Principle
of Self-Love, I take to be a better Reason of that Care of his, than any
Charity for others, for which we have cause to think there is no Room in that
Place. For God is Love, and he that dwells in Love, dwells in God; which
certainly they do not, who are excluded from his Presence into that State of
Torment, 1 John 4. 16. And this should make all Men careful how they broach any
ill Opinions, or give others any evil Example or Advice: But especially, how
they introduce, or revive, or any ways support Irreligious Customs, or enrich
themselves and Families by Injustice, or establish any Wickedness, lest thereby
they sin in their Graves, and have Power to offend God, when they have no Power
to serve him; and continue daily adding Sin to Sin, when they can no longer
repent of them. And, on the other hand, it should as much encourage them in any
good and useful Deeds; whose Effects, when they spread beyond their
Expectations, or last beyond their Times, they may reasonably hope that God,
who is more ready to reward than punish, will impute to them.

Quest. I see at the last Day Men shall be judged for the Actions of their
Lives: But shall they be judged not only for their more Open and Public, but
also for their most Secret Deeds, that were committed under Concealment, and in
the Dark?

Answ. Yes; for God shall bring every Work into Judgment, with every Secret
Thing, whether it be Good, or whether it be Evil, Eccl. 12. 14. And therefore
all Men are infinitely concerned, not to commit any Wickedness under the
fancied Security of Privacy, or act shamefully even in the Dark; since all
those Secret Works shall then be exposed to Public View, and they shall be put
to shame, and condemned for them, before Angels and Men, all looking on.

Quest. This is most terrible to all impenitent Sinners, who will then be
punished for these Sins. But is it not discouraging to the Righteous too, who
have repented of them, and are forgiven? For their Secret Sins, which cost them
so much Sorrow here, will then renew their Grief, and put them to an open
Shame, if there must be such Public Mention and Exposal of them?

Answ. No; they are in no danger of any more trouble from them: For when they
are brought to light, as Solomon says, God will bring every Work into Judgment,
whether it be good or bad, Eccl. 12. 14. that shall be only to set off the
Impartiality of this Scrutiny, and the Riches of Gods pardoning Mercy; but they
shall not be upbraided with them, or lessened in the esteem, either of
Glorified Angels, or of Men. For as God himself does, so do they esteem of
Penitents, as if they had always lived innocent; and when once they have left
them, forget all their former Offenses, as if they had never been done. So that
as to all real Effects, of their suffering from them, either in their own
Persons, or in the Estimation of others, the Sins of the Righteous at that Day,
are as if they were not mentioned, but concealed. And this will make out those
Expressions of the Scriptures, which speak of the Romans 4. 7, 8.
Lord's not imputing Sin to them* and, of their Sins being covered; and of Heb.
8. 12.
God's remembering their Sins and Iniquities no more. They will not be mentioned
so as to make them either afraid, or ashamed; which is as good as if they were
wholly hid, and never mentioned at all.

Quest. Among the Deeds of Men, all those are not really Good, which are so in
outward Appearance, and which the World takes for such?

Answ. No: Several good Actions, Hypocritical Men put on only in Disguise. As
the Pharisee seemed to be devout in making long Prayers, when that was not to
serve God, but to get Trust among Men, that he might be able to devour Widows
Houses without suspicion, Mat. 23. 14. And when the Precious Ointment was
poured on Christ's Head, Judas pretended great Care of the Poor, and cried out
of the Waste on that pretense; when, in truth, that which made him speak, was
not his Charity, but his Covetousness, John 12. 5, 6. Absalom pretends the
Payment of a Vow in Hebron; but the Design was to execute a fore-laid
Rebellion, 2 Samuel 15. 7, 10. Many Men pretend Kindness, only for Self Ends;
Religion, for Secular Interests; the Public Good, when they only seek to
satisfy their own By-ends, or private Resentments.

Quest. But when under this Hypocritical Mask, Men commit ill Deeds under fair
Colors, will Christ at that Day bring this Hypocrisy to Light, and condemn
these Actions, which the Authors justified to the World by these Pretenses?

Answ. Yes: For when the Lord comes, he will bring to light the hidden things
of darkness, and will make manifest the Counsels of the Hearts, 1 Cor. 4. 5. He
shall be of quick Understanding, in the Fear of the Lord, and shall not judge
after the sight of his Eyes, nor reprove after the hearing of his Ears; i. e.
barely from outward Appearances; but with Righteousness shall he judge the
Poor, and reprove with Equity even the Meek upon Earth, where they are
Trespassers, Isa. 11. 3, 4. And therefore it nearly concerns us to be sincere
in all the Goodness we make show of, and to be the same to God, as we appear to
be to Men: For if we dissemble in any thing, he will pluck off the Disguise,
and show us openly to be Hypocritical Pretenders, and disguised Sinners to all
the World.

Quest. I see we shall be judged then for all our sinful Actions. But shall we
judged too, for all our sinful Omissions?

Answ. Yes; for we are as much bound to do what God injoyns, as to forbear
doing what he forbids: and at that Day, he will call us to an account for both.
Go ye Cursed into everlasting Fire, for in my poor Members, I felt Hunger, and
ye gave me no Meat; I was Thirsty, and ye gave me no Drink; a Stranger and ye
took me not in; Naked, and ye Clothed me not; Sick, and in Prison, and ye
visited me not. All which are omissions of Duty, and for them they are
Sentenced. Mat. 25. 41, 42, 43.

Quest. I perceive we shall be sentenced for neglecting to fulfill Laws. But
will Judgment also pass upon us, for neglecting to employ, or improve our
Talents?

Answ. Yes; for the Lord orders the unprofitable Servant, who had hoarded up
his Talent, and made no gain with it, to be cast into utter Darkness, Mat. 25,
25, 30. And therefore it concerns all men, to whom God has given Leisure, or
Power, or Wealth, or Credit, or Wit and Parts, to look upon all these as
Trusts; and not to squander them away on Vice, or Vanities, Sports and
Pastimes; but, as Wise and Faithful Stewards, to employ them all for God's
service, remembering that all these were ^ommitted to them for their Master's
^se; and that at the last Day, they shall be called to give an account how they
have spent them.

Quest. What say you to our words, shall we be judged at the last Day for them
too?

Answ. Yes; for by thy words thou shall be Justified, and by thy words thou
shall be Condemned, Mat. 12. 37. And this should make all men careful, to
Govern their Tongues, since they must give so strict an account for the abuse
of them.

Quest. Christ there says, Men shall give account in the Day of Judgment, for
every idle word, v. 26. what then will become of most men in this world? For is
not any man, that Discourses with freedom, liable to utter something that is
Idle, that is, works no good, or makes none the better for it?

Answ. By Idle word there, is to be understood every False and Slanderous word,
such as the Jews had then cast out against him, when they said he wrought
Miracles through Beelzebub, v. 24.

Quest. But in this strict Judgment, for all our sinful Actions, and sinful
Words, will there be any account still further required, for our inward
Thoughts and Desires of ill, which were never come to act?

Answ. Yes; for at that Day, God will Judge the Secrets of men, Romans 2. 16. And
when the Lord comes to Judgment, he will make manifest the Counsels of the
Heart, 1 Cor. 4. 5.

Quest. But is not every man troubled, more or less, with ill Thoughts, and
unlawful Desires, and like to be so, whilst we bear these Bodies about us?

Answ. Yes; for in the Regenerate themselves, the Flesh Lusts against the
Spirit, Gal. 5. 17.

Quest. How then can any man stand in the Judgment, if for these they shall be
Condemned?

Answ. If the bare sudden Thoughts and Desires were Damnable, they could not.
But that, for which God will then Condemn men, is not all stirring of them, but
only all yielding to fulfill them. Make no Provision for the Flesh, to fulfill
the Lusts thereof, Romans 13. 14. And this the Righteous do not commit, or, when
they do, before their Death they Repent of it, and amend it.

Quest. What will be judged yielding to fulfill them?

Answ. 1. All inward Consent to the fulfilling of them in our hearts, tho, it
may be, we cannot do it for want of opportunity. For, when Lust has thus
Conceived, it brings forth Sin, Jam. 1. 15. And, our Savior says, Adultery
may be committed in the Heart, Mat. 5. 28.

2. All Contrivance for the acting and Fulfilling of them, after we have
consented to them. He that Devises to do evil, shall be called, and dealt with
as a mischievous Person, Prove. 24. 8. And evil Thoughts, that is, Murderous
Machinations and Contrivances, are ranked in Guilt and Punishment with Murders
themselves, Mat. 15. 19.

3. All Actual accomplishment of them, in Deed and Practice; which is,
fulfilling the Lusts of the Flesh, Gal. 5. 16. And this is more provoking
still, if it be in a settled Custom, and constant Tenor of action, which is
walking or living after the Flesh, Romans 8. 1. 4. 13.

Quest. I perceive then, when Christ comes to Judgment, we shall all be called
to Account, for all the sinful Deeds we have done, and all the sinful Words we
have spoken, and all the evil Thoughts or Desires we have consented, or
endeavored to fulfill; and Condemned for them, unless we have sincerely
repented of them.

Answ. Yes.

Quest. But how will Christ proceed in Judging us for these Things? Will he
pass Sentence impartially, without respect of Persons?

Answ. Yes. All that are equal in Guilt, shall be sure to have equal
Punishment. For the Judge is not capable of being Biased, by Fear or Favor,
by any Fondness or Indulgence toward any Criminals, by any of their Flatter^^
(...) Complements, Gifts or Services, their Crafty insinuations, or tiresom
importunities, by their Kindred or Families, Sects and Opinions. But absolutely
setting aside all byRespects, he will regard only the Merit of Causes, and what
does really influence the Case, and Sentence every Man according to the
Evidence that lies against him. At that Revelation of his Righteous Judgment,
there is no Respect of Persons with God. They that have sinned without Law,
shall Perish without Law; and as many as have sinned under the Law, shall be
Judged by the Law. God will render to every man, according to his Deeds;
Eternal Life, to those that have continued in well-doing; but Wrath, and
Anguish, on every Soul that does evil, whether Jew, or Gentile, Romans 2. 5. to
13. God without respect of Persons, judges as every Man's work shall be, 1 Pet.
1. 17.

Quest. But in judging upon all these Points, will Christ do it in Rigor,
pressing all the Punctilio's, and taking all the Advantages of Law: or will he
do it with Equity and Candor, as one plainly inclined to show all reasonable
favor?

Answ. He will be the most Fair, Equitable, and Candid Judge, our Hearts can
wish for. He is our Judge who is our Advocate, and has all along espoused our
Cause: our Friend, that Loved us better than his Life, and shed his Blood for
us. So that when we are brought before him, we may promise our selves all the
Favor that is consistent with Justice.

Quest. Will he favorably interpret our Performances when they come before
him, and make the best of every thing, that it can justly bear, and be as ready
to note what may make for us, as what may make against us?

Answ. Yes; for in the Description of the last Judgment, Mat. 25. he assigns
good deeds to those on his Right Hand, viz. the Feeding, and Clothing, and
Visiting him, which in strict Truth they had not done, having never seen him,
but only by a favorable interpretation, from their having done so to his
Brethren for his sake, which shows, had they seen him in that want, they would
much more have done it to himself. Come, ye Blessed of my Father, for I was an
hungered, and ye gave me Meat; thirsty, and ye gave me Drink, etc. And when they
shall answer, Lord, when saw we thee, to do any of these things for thee? He
tells us he will reply, in as much as ye have done it to the least of these my
Brethren, ye have done it unto me, v. 34. to 41. Nay, to assure us further of
his extraordinary Favor, in Censuring of his Friends; behold his mavelous
Candor, in judging of the worst Actions of his Enemies; and that too at a Time,
when, if ever, he should have been prone to pass a hard Construction. For,
representing the most Barbarous Murder of himself to God, as he hung upon the
Cross, and had a most pungent sense of it, he imputes it to the most Pardonable
Principles, and says, they acted so through Ignorance, (the only possible thing
that could be suggested for their excuse,) censuring that horrid Act, which he
of all Men had cause to make the worst of, not as an Accuser, but rather like a
retained Advocate, Luke 23. 34. Thus, in that Day, will the most benign Judge
be of Counsel for all the Prisoners, and spy all their Virtues, and make the
best he reasonably can of every bad Case. And, as for good Men, he will impute
their Failures to the most pardonable Causes, and Remember their good Services
when they have forgot them, setting them off by a kind interpretation, and
thinking better of them, than their own Humility and Modesty would allow
themselves to do.

Quest. But what say you, to the seeming Rigor of his own Laws, which require
us to Deuteronomy. 6. 5. Mat. 22. 37.
Love and serve him, with all our Heart and strength? And if this be drawn out
to a full stretch, and strained to mean our utmost Possibilities, no Candor to
our Performances, can construe them to come up to this pitch.

Answ. The seeming Rigor of that Expression, he will interpret with great
condescension to the Measures of Men. He will reasonably allow, and abate, for
our many Temptations and Distracting Thoughts, our Natural Backwardness, and
Forgetfulness, and other Frailties so incident to our present State and
Circumstances. And when all that is heartily deducted, the rest, which in our
Circumstances we are honestly and fairly able to Do, will pass for serving him
with all the heart and strength, according to the Commandment.

Quest. How will you make that out?

Answ. Because the Scripture Declares, he will bear in Reason with our
Infirmities, Heb. 5. 2. And because he has done so in several judged Cases,
expressly declaring of several, that they have kept this Commandment, when they
needed these abatements. Thus, of Asa it is said, that his Heart was Perfect
before God, 1* King. 15. 14. And of David, that he followed God with his whole
Heart: Yea, that he turned not aside from any thing he commanded him, all his
days, except in the matter of Uriah. 1 King. 14 8. and c. 15. 5. And of Josiah,
that he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, neither declining to
the Right Hand, nor to the left, 2 King. 22. 2. And of Zachariah and Elizabeth,
that they walked before God, in all the Ordinances of the Law, Blameless, Luke
1. 6. Now all these were Persons of our own Frailties, and Infirmities. They
were defective in their Care, as we are; and, though they went beyond the pitch
of others, yet fell below the utmost of their possibilities, as the Scriptures
have recorded of them, in 2 Chronicles. 16. ver. 1, 10, 13.
several instances. They served God, indeed, with all their Souls, in one sense
of the Precept, as that notes their adhering only to his 1 Samuel 21 1, 2. 2 Samuel
19. 29. 2 Chronicles. 35 21, 22, 23.
Worship, and allowing no part of their Heart to any Idol God. But, as it note^
the intireness of Degrees in serving him: Such failings, as were pardonable
under humane Circumstances and infirmities, were first taken out, and so much
as they were able to do after that abatement, was judged their serving God with
all their Heart, according to the Commandment.

Quest. Will Christ then after he has thus made the most of their good
Performances, make reasonable Allowances also for men's Slips and Failures,
either in committing ill, or in omitting Good things?

Answ. Yes; when they fail in either, through some innocent, and well meant
Error, or Ignorance: Or when they slip through pure haste and unadvisedness,
and are surprised into some ill Thoughts, or sudden Passions, or rash words,
but correct themselves as soon as they consider what they have done, and do not
continue in it with Observation. He will then have Compassion on these, when he
comes as our Judge; as now he has, when he acts as our Priest, and intercedes
for us. For as the Jewish Priests had, so can he have compassion on the
Ignorant, and Erroneous, or, as the (...).
word notes, he can Suffer in moderation, or reasonably bear with them, Heb. 5.
2.

Quest. But what if men are Ignorant, because they neglect to learn their Duty,
nay, perhaps stop their Eyes and Ears, and Refuse to see, or be told of it?

Answ. Then that will be no excuse to them, where they fail of performing it,
they being, as St. Peter says, willingly Ignorant, 2 Pet. 3. 5.

Quest. I perceive he will show Favor toward our involuntary Failures. But
this will not avail us, if he be Strict and Rigorous in judging of that
Involuntariness. For, alas! what man does all that is Possible, to prevent
Ignorance, or Surprise? And if we do not all we can against them, he may say
they come through our own wills and sufferance, if he will judge in Srictness.
Will he therefore show Candor, in judging any escapes to be Pitiable, and
unwill'd Miscarriages; without which, all his Candor in other Things will not
support us in his Presence?

Answ. Yes. He will show all Reasonable Favor, in admitting Actions for
involuntary, that a Child could expect from a Wise and Tender Father, or we
experiment from one another. A mavelous Instance we have of his Proneness to
make the best of ill Actions, in ascribing his own Crucifixion, as is noted, to
the Jews Ignorance, which seemed so liable to be imputed to Envy, Malice, and
such other more inexcusable Principles. Thus benign he was upon the Cross, and
he will be no less so when he appears in Court. He will only have more Glory
and Power, not less Benignity and Candor there also.

Quest. Christ our Judge, it seems, will very graciously bear with our
involuntary failings. But will he bear also with any willful Sins, when we
transgress wittingly, or against our Consciences?

Answ. No; for whatever ill proceeds out of the Heart of man, defiles the man,
Mat. 15. 18. And tho innocent Ignorance plead some excuse; yet when a man knows
to do good, and does it not, to him it is Sin, Jam. 4. 17. But if they truly
Repent of these, and amend them before their Death, they shall not be Condemned
for them at that great Day.

Quest. O! how happy are we in this mavelous Clemency and Candor of our
Judge, who will be so ready to make the most of our Good Deeds, and to connive
at our ignorant and involuntary Failings, and to pass over all our wilful Sins
themselves, upon our true Repentance. But besides these ignorant and
inconsiderate Failings, have we not many other Natural Infirmities, that will
need his Clemency and Favor toward us?

Answ. Yes; the Natural Uncertainty of our Tempers; our Dullness in any Duties,
more especially at some times; our Distractions and wandering Thoughts in
Prayers; our Desires of Praise, and other indirect Aims, intruding into our
best Actions; our Natural Backwardness to Good; our Remisness and Faintness in
performing it, and our being soon wearied with it; our Weakness of Faith, in
believing the unseen Things God has promised; our great Adherence to Worldly
and Sensible Things; and our Unaffectedness with Spiritual and Divine Objects,
and the like. These are Infirmities incident to the best Men, and will cling to
us more or less, as long as we bear these Bodies about us, and converse with
the Things of this World.

Quest. And will our Equitable and Benign Judge, show favor to these
infirmities, which are so inseparable from our Natures?

Answ. Yes. Were he only God, we might be more prone to fear, he would look
more at the just Demand of God's Laws, and be little touched with our
Infirmities, which hinder us from fully answering them. But for this very end
he took our Nature upon him, submitting to our infirmities, and conflicting
with our Temptations, that having felt and experimented them in himself, he
might be more feelingly tender, and Compassionate toward them in us. He is
such an High Priest, says the Apostle, as is touched with the feeling of our
infirmities, having been tempted as we are in all Points, though without Sin.
Therefore let us come with Boldness to the Throne of Grace, Heb. 4. 15, 16. It
behoved him, says he again, to be made like unto his Brethren in all things,
that he might be, as Faithful to God, so merciful to us, and having been
Tempted himself, be the readier to Consider, and Succor our infirmities and
Temptations, Heb. 2. 17, 18. This sense of our infirmities, makes him, now he
acts in Heaven as our High Priest, most compassionately to recommend them to
God's mercy. And the same sense he will have of them, when he sits upon us as
our Judge, and then we may be sure, he will Graciously Dispense that mercy
toward them which before he interceded for.

Quest. Besides these Natural infirmities, we are sorely kept back by many
supervening Disadvantages. Particularly, by multiplicity of Business; which
causes much distraction of Thoughts, and Haste in Dispatch, whence arise many
Errors. By the greatness of Temptations; as when we are hastily driven to do
ill, through some great and sudden Terrors, or urgent necessities, to secure
our Lives, or sustenance. And by our Bodily indispositions; as when Sickness,
or habitual Pain and uneasiness, or a continual succession of cross Accidents
and Provocations, make us Pevish and impatient, or betray us into other rash
miscarriages. And will our Candid favorable Judge, make abatements for these
Providential disadvantages?

Answ. Yes; all just and reasonable abatements he will exactly consider, and
fairly and equitably allow for them. They that sinned without Law, says S.
Paul, shall be judged without Law, that is, with such abatements, as are
allowable to those, who wanted the Law; not according to such stricter Terms,
as are reasonably exacted of all, who enjoyed it, Romans 2. 12. The time of
Heathen ignorance, says he again, God winked at: expecting less from those,
who had the great disadvantage of walking in the dark, Act. 17. 30. Where these
disadvantages betray men into haste, and inadvertence, and a pitiable
involuntariness, he will graciously connive at them, as he did at Act. 23. 2,
3, 5.
St. Paul's undutifulness to Ananias, upon a sudden provocation; and Job's many
fretful expostulations, under a most uneasy Body, and heavy Afflictions; and
where they bring guilt, by drawing us in to yield, and consent to those sins,
whereto they expose us; on their account he will exact the less, and such sins
will be sooner expiated, and the Judge easilier satisfied, with a more moderate
Repentance.

Quest. That which through the merits of Christ, must gain us acceptance, is
our good deeds. But may not the best of us all find defects enough even in these?

Answ. Yes. Our Zeal for God is not all Flame, and inexhaustible activity, as
St. Paul's was. We are not so prompt and forward in any act of Love to our dear
Lord, as St. Peter; so slow to Anger, as Moses; so persevering in Patience, as
Job; so entirely affected with Divine Things, and formed after Gods own Heart,
as David. When we attain to be submissive under Crosses, perhaps we do not
arrive, with any great affectionateness, to thank God for them: though we
contentedly bear reproaches for Christ; yet, it may be, we cannot take pleasure
in them, nor Count Poverty for his sake, the truest Riches; or Labor and
Travel, an ease; or Stripes and Imprisonments, a Triumph; or the Cross, a
Crown; like the Holy Apostles. When we do God's will, we are not so intent upon
it, nor so sensibly delighted with it, as with our meat and drink, like our
Blessed Savior: we want that pitch of contempt for worldly things, and of
command over our own Appetites; that height of Abstinence and Self-denial; that
ease, delight, and watchfulness in Prayer; that Assiduity and Pleasure in
Divine Meditations; that depth of Humility, and poverty of Spirit; that fervor
of Charity; that promptness to show kindnesses, and gladness in doing them;
that backwardness to admit of Provocation; that easiness in forgetting, and
remitting injuries, which some of God's Saints have happily enjoyed, and for
which they have been most highly Rewarded.

Quest And will not this failure of Degrees in good things, need a like
Indulgence from this compassionate and benign Judge?

Answ. Yes, and find it too. For these heighths and eminent degrees of Virtue,
he proposes to all, with more resplendant Crowns of Glory to recompense them,
and noble examples that lead on to them; but not as indispensable Articles of
Salvation. They are required as Things, which are hard for any to attain,
praise worthy to attempt, and pardonable to miss of them. They are Gems, that
adorn and set off; or Radiant Crowns, which surround the brightest Stars; but
Stars they are still, which want these Glories.

Quest. By this, there must be a great Latitude in virtuous seize on the
side of Bliss, and Christ will not screw up all he saves to the same certain
Standard of perfection, or require them all to be of the same size?

Answ. No; the Tenor of the Law it self, is only to obey God with Luke 10. 27.
all our strength: but that strength is more in some, than it is in others.
There are weak, as well as strong, among Christ's accepted Servants. And as
different Magnitudes among the Glorified Saints, as there are among the Sun,
Moon, and Stars, in the Prophet Dan. 12. 3.
Daniels, and St. 1 Cor. 15 41, 4^.
Paul's; or the different Rooms and Mansions of a Stately Palace, in our Blessed
Joh. 14. 2.
Lords resemblance. Nay, St. Paul could say, he labored more abundantly than
they all, even among the Blessed Apostles themselves, 1 Cor. 15. 10. Thus do
very widely distant, and unequal virtues, all meet in the place of Bliss, and
are each Beatified in their several Proportions. He that sows much, shall
reap much; and he that sows little shall reap little, says the Apostle, but
both are to reap something, 2 Cor. 9. 6. And in the Parable Mat. 25. 15.
according to their several Abilities, one Servant improved his Pound to ten
Pounds, Luk 19. 16. another his, to five Pounds, v. 18. and a third, only
doubled his, Mat. 25. 22. But yet all these were welcomed, with a well done,
thou Good and Faithful Servant. And as he that gained Ten Pounds, had the Rule
over ten Cities; and he who gained five, had Authority over five Cities: so he,
that only doubled his Talents, was recompensed with a proportionable Reward,
Luke 19. 17, 19. and Mat. 25. 22, 23.

Quest. I see Christ will not require us all, to be as tall in Spiritual
stature as Apostles, but will graciously accept of inferior virtues, and
encourage them with proportionable Recompenses. But what will you say, if even
these small and slender things, are performed with much Difficulty and
Reluctance? It may be, in the little good we do, we are not forward to catch at
good motions, nor presently yield to a virtuous Discourse, or good Advice, but
adhere a while to our own self-will, chiefly in cases against our own humor,
inclinations or former opinions, though we do the thing at last, after some
disputings with our selves. And will this gracious Judge accept of such slow,
and backward services?

Answ. Yes; he that stood out at first, and said he would not go work in the
Vineyard, but after he had better considered of it, repented, and went, is
judged by our Savior to be of the number of those, that do the will of his
Father, Mat. 21. 29, 31. Easiness, and alacrity in closing with good, is a
perfection of virtue, and shall receive a greater Recompense. But if we obey at
all, though it be with Reluctance and Disputings, we shall be in the List of
Servants, and not of Rebels, and receive rewards still, though in smaller
Proportions. Albeit the Flesh lust against the Spirit, yet if we do not fulfill
its Lusts, but the Spirit prevails, we walk in the Spirit, and are truly
Regenerate, as St. Paul says, Gal. 5. 16, 17.

Quest. But, alas! the little good we do is not only thus defective in degrees,
but is oft-times polluted by impure mixtures. When we do an act of honor to
God, for instance, we are too apt, perhaps, to make it serve our own vanity
more or less, and to seek thereby our own Praise. In censuring and reproving
others Vices, it may be, in some degree, we gratify our own peevishness, or
other corrupt passions. And so in other Cases. And can we expect any reward at
the hands of this Benign Judge, for such impure Services?

Answ. Yes; through his infinite mercy and goodness. He is so Candid, and
inclined to make the most of what is good, that he is ready to overlook some
compassionable and lesser ill, which is twisted with it; passing by the ill,
when they are humbled and sorry for it; and not throwing away the good for the
evil's sake. Thus in the mixed action of the Egyptian Midwives; he commends, and
rewards their Pious Charity, and passes over their Officious falseness, Exodus
1. 19, 20, 21. And in Rahab's case, he recompenses her Faith in the true God,
and friendship for the Spies, and winks at the insincerity of her feigned
excuse, Jam. 2. 25. and Josh. 2. 4, 5, 9. yea, in censuring, not only the
virtues, but the liberties of men, when they are justifiable in the main, but
culpable in some pitiable circumstance, he is apt to observe in the Action what
may bear it out, and when they are humbled for the rest, to draw a vail over
what may pitiably be connived at: as our Lord did in mentioning David's eating
of the Shewbread, vindicating him on account of that necessity which
authorized, not censuring him on account of that falsehood whereby he procured
it, Mat. 12. 3, 4.

Quest. But is it not said, that if we Pray, or give Alms, or Fast, for the
Praise of men, we shall lose our reward, Mat. 6. 2, 5, 16.

Answ. Yes; when the main design of our Prayers, or Alms, or other good Deeds,
is to be commended, and we should not do them but in hopes of that. For in
Acting Principally for commendations sake, we serve our own Pride and Vanity,
but do not serve God. But when our chief aim in it, is to please God, he
accepts a Good work, though some pitiable defect adhere, or pardonable
faultiness be unwarily let in and combined with it.

Quest. But in contemplating all this Indulgence of our Judge, we must not
think his favor will pass into fondness, which will bear with all we do, and
spy no faults in us?

Answ. No; as he is a good and candid, so, as I noted before, is he a most
Righteous and just Judge. What he will give to our infirmities, St. Paul calls
(...)
moderate and reasonable allowance, Heb. 5. 2. He bears in him the most exact
temperament of Mercy, and Severity: being most prone to Mercy, in every
compassionable Case; and as inexorably bent on Justice, where it is reasonable,
and fit ^o inflict Vengeance.

Quest. You have shown me, that Christ will use all this Candor in
constructions, and make these favorable Allowances when we are brought to his
Bar upon our Trials. Would he not have us in the mean time, to promise to our
selves, and expect all this?

Answ. Yes; or else considering the infirmities and defects of most, if not of
all his Followers, we could never have any comfortable hope in him; much less
so great, as to desire, and Pray for his Appearance. And yet the Apostles give
this, as the Character of good and acceptable Christians, who may therefore
hope to be made happy, when they are qualified for it according to Humane
measures. The Crown of Righteousness is for me, and all that love his
appearing, says St. Paul, 2 Timothy 4. 8. Look for, and, by your Prayers, haste
on the coming of the great Day of God, says St. Peter, 2 Pet. 3. 12. Come,
Lord Jesus, come quickly, says St. John, Rev. 22. 20. And in our daily
Prayers, our Lord himself has taught us, every day to say, thy Kingdom come.

Quest. Are we not indebted for all this indulgence, to the merit of his Death?

Answ. Yes; for we are accepted in the Beloved, in whom we have Redemption
through his Blood, Ephesians. 1, 6. 7. And owing all to him, we must both Pray, and
give thanks for it in his Name, Joh. 14. 13. and Ephesians. 5. 20.

Quest. All these acts of favor you have recited, are mavelous instances of
Gods clemency to all his faithful Servants; and the Gospel, I see encourages us
to expect them at his hands. But are we sure at that Day, God will stand to
these Gospel Terms?

Answ. Yes; most sure. For he never repents of his promises, nor can deny
himself. Besides, the same Jesus, who once came from God to make us these
gracious offers, is then to come and Judge us according to them, and make good
his own Proposals. Nay, since there may seem the same Reason, for his retaining
them on to the consummation, as for his resuming them at the Resurrection, he
may probably come, as some of the Ancients have thought, with the Glorious
Scars of the Spear and Nails, and the signs of his Meritorious wounds, which
purchased all this Grace, about him. And then, as all the Wicked Rev. 1. 7.
shall look on him whom they have pierced, with horror and consternation: so
shall the Righteous, with unspeakable comfort, most joyfully beholding in his
wounds, both the height of their most dear and compassionate Judge's Love, and
the Price and assurance of their own Salvation.

Quest. This indulgence of our Almighty Judge, will be an inexhaustible
Fountain of ravishing joy and comfort, to all serious and considerate minds.
And, indeed, without such clemency as you have described, the thoughts of the
future judgment, must needs be a very melancholy consideration to the best
Persons. But expecting so much Candor and Benignity from him, they have cause
enough, not only to look for, but to love and desire his appearing. But what
shall be the effect of all this to good men?

Answ. They shall be sentenced to an Everlasting Life, and Rewarded with all
the Glory, and Happiness of an Eternal Kingdom. For having fairly, and
impartially heard their Cause, and made all these Allowances, and found them
Righteous, he will say to them, Come ye Blessed Children of my Father, inherit
the Kingdom prepared for you, from the Beginning of the World, Mat. 25. 34.

Quest. And in that Allotment, and Proportioning of Rewards, will he consider
the Difficulties, and Oppositions in Doing Good, which some Men meet withal
above others?

Answ. Yes. As these Trials and Temptations, are Proofs of a greater Love, they
will in proportion be a Ground of a Greater Reward. Thus St, Paul says, the
adding of Affliction to his Bonds, or Multiplying his Trouble in preaching of
the Word, would surely turn to his greater Salvation in the End, Phil. 1. 16,
19.

Quest. Will he also consider the Costliness of it, as when it is done, with
hazard, or Loss of their Friends or Estates, or, it may be, of their Lives?

Answ. Yes; one single Act under such hazards, may show as much Religious Love
and Zeal, as would suffice to great Numbers, when they are free from such
encumbrances. When we obey God with present Damage, he will not only consider
our Services, but our Loss in his Cause; and recompense abundantly, not only
all we did, but likewise all we suffered for him. For every one that forsakes
Houses, or Brethren, or Sisters, or Father, or Mother, or Wife, or Children, or
Lands, for my Name's sake, says our Savior, shall receive therefore an hundred
fold, Mat 19. 29. And the Martyrs that were beheaded for the Witness of Jesus,
shall rise first, and Reign with Christ a thousand years; but the Rest of the
Dead, not till the thousand years are finished, Rev. 20. 4, 5. And therefore
whenever God calls Men to suffer for Righteousness, they must not look upon
it as a Calamitous Scourge; but as a Favor and Privilege, such Suffering
being sent, in Truth, as opportunities of accumulating Bliss, and securing to
themselves, not only more ample, but, when their Sufferings proceed to Blood,
more early shares of the Future Glories. To you it is given, says St. Paul, in
the behalf of Christ, not only to believe on him, but also to suffer for his
sake, Phil. 1. 29. Count it all joy, says St. James, when you fall into
diverse Temptations, Jam. 1. 2. When you are Reviled, and Slandered, and
Persecuted for Righteousness sake, says our Savior, then think your selves
Blessed, and Rejoice, and be exceeding glad, for your Reward in Heaven shall be
great for it, Mat. 5. 10, 11, 12. As the Apostles did, who, when the Council
had beaten them, departed from their Presence, rejoicing that they were counted
worthy to suffer shame for Christ's Name, Act. 5. 40, 41. And the Hebrews, who
took joyfully the spoiling of their Goods, as knowing they had in Heaven a
better and more Durable Substance, Heb. 10. 34.

Quest. But numbers of the Evils we endure, come not on us for keeping God's
Commandments, but only as our share of that Misery and Trouble, which God has
allotted for us in this Life. And will he at that Day Rate these, and consider
any persons having endured more Poverty, Oppression, Shame, or Sickness in this
World, than other good Persons, who yet are no better, nor Dearer to God, than
themselves?

Answ. I suppose he will; for he is no Respecter of Persons. And therefore when
Persons of equal, or higher Goodness, through the present ordering of his
Providence, want much of their Brethrens Temporal Encouragements, they may hope
for a more Liberal share in a better place. For his extraordinary Measure of
Evil things, in this present time, Lazarus had a proportionable surplusage of
Good, in Abraham's Bosom, Luke 16. 24. Blessed are ye that live in Poverty, and
Hunger now, says our Savior, for ye shall be filled. Blessed are ye that weep
now, for ye shall laugh. Noteing thereby, such an ample Recompense for these
present Evils in the next World, as would render them to all good Men, not the
Miseries, as this World esteems them, but the truest Favors, and Gainful
Blessings of their Lives, Luke 6. 20, 21. This seeming inequality of Gods
present Distributions, which lies upon Providence, will then be cleared up by a
full and Liberal Amends. For then, God's Righteousness in Judgment, that in
great part lay hid before, will be fully Revealed and made manifest, Romans 2. 5.

Quest. But when he deals thus graciously with all the good, how will he
proceed with ill Men?

Answ. In all the equity of a fair Trial, but yet to a just Condemnation. When
he bears with all Natural Infirmities, and reasonably abates for outward
Impediments, and connives at involuntary Failings, and forgives all the sins of
the Penitents; he will avenge the willful Sins of all impenitent Persons,
according to their Deserts. For he will judge the World in Righteousness, Act.
17. 31. To the wicked, he will say, Depart from me ye workers of iniquity, Mat.
7. 23. And when they, that have done Good, come forth to the Resurrection of
Life; they that have done Evil, shall come to the Resurrection of Damnation,
Joh. 5. 29.

Quest. What Punishment shall these Miserable Men be condemned to?

Answ. All the Plagues of Hell, where their Spirits shall always be gnawed and
preyed upon, by the Worm of Conscience; and their Bodies scorched with Fire and
Flames. Go ye cursed into everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his
Angels, Mat. 25. 41. Yea, they shall have all the smart of Fire, where it is the
hottest: being cast into a Furnace of Fire, Mat. 13. 42. and into a Lake of
Fire, burning with Brimstone, Rev. 19. 20. And there, as the Fire is not
quenched, so their Worm of Conscience Dies not, Mar. 9. 44.

Quest. And when shall all these Dreadful Miseries seize them?

Answ. So soon as this Terrible Sentence, of Go ye Cursed into everlasting
Fire, is solemnly passed upon them. For this way of Effecting things, is by his
Omnipotent Word. When he said, let there be Light, or Earth, immediately there
was so at first, Gen, 1. 3, 9. And when he shall say, go ye Cursed into
everlasting Fire, in obedience to that all-powerful Word, streight-way a Fire
shall come forth from his Presence, and shall seize on the whole Earth, and
Air, where his Adversaries Abode is, and set it all on fire about them, turning
all this lower World, which probably thenceforwards is to serve for no other
use, into one entire Globe of Fire, or Flaming Furnace. The Fire that shall
Torment and Scorch the Damned, at the coming of our Lord, shall burn up the
Earth, and melt the Elements, and Crack the Heavens, making them dissolve, and
pass away with a Great Noise, says St. Peter, 2 Pet. 3. 10, 12. The Heavens,
and Earth that are now, says he again, are kept in store, and reserved unto
Fire, against the Day of Judgment, and Perdition of Ungodly Men; the Fire that
shall break out from God upon the Ungodly, being, it seems, to seize and
dissolve them, ver. 7. And the Fire that comes down from God, to devour and
torment the Devil, and all he has deceived, Day and Night, for ever; shall make
the Earth and Heaven that now is, flee away, as may seem from St. John, and
leave nothing, but a devouring Hell, or a World of never Dying Fire and Flame,
in its place, Rev. 20. 9, 10, 11, 14. and c. 21. 1. And when once this is
kindled, those forelorn Wretches may Rev. 6. 15 16.
cry in vain to the Hills to fall on them, and to the Rocks to cover them. For
every Cave is then a Furnace, and every high Hill a Flaming Mountain: a Fervent
Heat has melted all the World, and nothing is to be felt or seen, but boiling
Element, and scorching Fire all about them.

Quest. Oh! the wonder of God's Mercy, which shall then be displayed toward
all his Saints, and the Terror of his Judgments, which shall then be inflicted
on all incorrigible Offenders! Must not this expectation of Christ's future
Judgment of us, for all our Actions, make us very careful how we lead our Lives?

Answ. Yes; it should do it above all things. We must account for all our
Thoughts, Words, and Actions. And an Eternity of highest Bliss, or Woe, depends
upon the account we make. And therefore we had need to do all things here with
such care, that when we are taken to task at that Great Day, we may give in a
good, and comfortable account of them. Seeing God will be more terrible in
punishing all ungodly Sinners, what manner of Persons ought we to be, in all
holy Conversation, and Godliness, 2 Pet. 3. 11, 12.

Quest. That day, you say, will surprise the World, as a Thief in the Night,
and it is most uncertain to every Man, when he shall be called to it. Ought not
that to make us every day secure our Peace with God, and watch always to be in
a readiness, and preparation for that great Account?

Answ. Yes; there is no room for preparation afterward, if we are unprepared
when he calls, as the Foolish Virgins experienced to their cost. Watch
therefore, for ye know neither the Day, nor the Hour, wherein the Son of Man
comes, Mat. 25. 11, 12, 13.

Quest. Since Christ has reserved the judgment of all Men to himself, who best
knows, and who alone is able unerringly to judge of them: Must not this make us
wary, not to judge and censure one another?

Answ. Yes, by all means; for this Judgment he esteems an usurpation upon his
Office. Why do thou judge thy Brother, or why do thou set at naught thy
Brother? We shall all stand at the Judgment Seat of Christ, Romans 14. 10. Who
art thou that Judge another Man's Servant? To his own Master he stands, or
falls, ver. 4. Nay, he tells us, as we have no Authority to do it, so we are
unfit for it, because we cannot see each others Hearts; and so, in many
Censures we pass, can have no true Judgment of Men, and Actions, as he has.
Judge nothing before the Time, until the Lord come, who will bring to Light the
hidden things of Darkness, and make manifest the Counsels of the Hearts, 1 Cor.
4. 5.

Quest. And since God will clear the Innocent, before Men and Angels, and in
his judgment set all right at last: Is not this a support to us, under all the
unjust Slanders, and wrongful Judgments we meet with here in this World?

Answ. Yes; for it shows all will be fully wiped off, if we can have a little
patience. Our Innocence shall shine the brighter, for the Vail that was drawn
before it, as the Sun does when he recovers from a Cloud: For then God shall
bring forth our Righteousness as the Light, and our Judgment as the Noonday,
Psalm. 37. 6. So that in such Cases, we may all say, as St. Paul, it is a very
small thing with me, that I should be judged of Man's Judgment, because he that
judges me i^ the Lord, who will shortly reverse all the Errors of Men's
Censures, and show them Publicly to all the World, 1 Cor. 4. 3, 4.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Holy Ghost.
The Contents.
The Holy Ghost is God. What he has done for our Salvation. Of his
extraordinary Gifts bestowed on Apostles and Evangelists, which were for the
Planting, and Propagating Christ's Religion. 1. The gift of inspiration, in
Revelations. This bestowed upon the Apostles. These Revelations they have fully
set down in the Holy Scriptures, after which we are not to look for any others.
This Gift, of knowing Religion by immediate Revelation, necessary only in
Apostles, and Evangelists. And designed for the Infancy of the Church. Other
Rules, whereby to examine new Lights and Revelations in Religion. As, try them
by the Scriptures. Call for their Miracles, wherewith God still empowered men,
when he sent them to reveal new Things. No need of Miracles, when men pretend
only to revive old, and acknowledged Revelations. If they show Miracles, for
things plainly against Scripture, they must work more, than were wrought to
confirm the Scripture. An account of Joel 2. 28, 29. Which seems to foretell
the commonness of Revelations among Christians. The first Inspirations were not
only in Doctrinal Points, but also in Devotions. And about Temporal matters.
Subservient to this Gift of Revelations, was the Gift of discerning Spirits.
This done afterward by ordinary Rules. And the Gift of utterance and boldness.
Their minds not influenced by this constantly, and at all Times. But ordinarily
they were, and especially when they had most need of it. 2. Of the Gift of
Miracles. Miraracles a Proof of Divine Revelation. How discernible from Lying
Wonders, by the Doctrines built on them. By their ends and usefulness, and
being wrought on needful Occasions. Of the miraculous Gift of healing Diseases.
This sometimes by anointing with Oil. And Prayers. Of casting out Devils, and
other Miracles. Of delivering to Satan, what it was, and why so called. Of Joy
in Tribulations, and what was extraordinary in that of the Apostles. To the
working these Miracles, there was always required Faith in him that wrought
them. And sometimes Faith in him that received them. 3. of the Gift of Strange
Tongues. The ends of this. And of the Gift of Interpreting such Strange
Tongues. What is meant by the Holy Ghost being a Comforter. The Sin against the
Holy Ghost, is a Sin against these extraordinary Gifts. Why Blasphemy against
him more irremisable, than against the Father or the Son. Extraordinary Gifts
no mark, of a justified State. Of Offices appointed by the Holy Ghost. Some of
these Temporary, others to continue through all Times, the present Officers
ordaining Successors of the Holy Ghost's ordinary Graces. By these we may know
he dwells in us. Our care required toward these. Of Preventing Grace in
outward advantages, and inward good motions. Directions how we are to endeavor
after saving Graces, in six Particulars. How God gives them, though we are thus
to acquire them. The Holy Ghost works also in us Spiritual Joys and Comforts.
This he does not in all the minds he sanctifies, because some are unfit for
them through intrinsic impediments. But they are withheld from none, through
his Arbitrary withdrawing, which some count Spiritual Desertion.

Quest. WHat is the eighth Article of the Creed?

Answ. I Believe in the Holy Ghost.

Quest. Is the Holy Ghost very God?

Answ. Yes. For Lying to the Holy Ghost, is called Lying to God, Act. 5. 3, 4.
And because Christians are the Temple of the Holy Ghost, they are said to be
the Temple of God, 1 Cor. 3. 16. And all the Properties of Divinity are
ascribed to him; as, 1 Cor. 2. 10, 11.
knowing all things; ubiquity, or Ps. 139. 7.
Presence in all Places; Heb. 9. 14.
Eternity, or duration through all Times; Genesis 1. 2. Job 26. 13.
Creating the World, being joined with God, who will not Isa. 42. 8. and 48. 11.
impart his Glory to another, as an Object of Faith and Worship, in Mat. 28. 19.
Baptism, and the 2 Cor. 13, 14.
Apostolical Benediction, and the like.

Quest. But if both the Father and the Son, and the Holy Ghost be God, are
there not three Gods?

Answ. No; because these three are One, that is* one in Nature, or (...).
one Thing; 1 John 5. 7. There is a Trinity of Persons* but these three are
mysteriously united in Nature, and dependence: which makes but one Godhead,
not three Gods.

Quest. But why is he called Holy, more than the Father, or the Son? Since
Holiness was reckoned one of the Divine Attributes, are not all the three
Persons, who are equally God, equal also in Holiness?

Answ. Yes. But though they are equally Holy, in Nature, or Essence: yet is he
particularly styled so, in respect of his Operations. For as God the Father
particularly undertook for the Creation of men; and God the Son, for the
Redemption of them; so did God the Holy Ghost, for their Sanctification, being
always ready to work holiness in those, who set themselves to fear God, and to
serve our Lord Jesus Christ. We are saved, by the renewal of the Holy Ghost,
Tit. 3. 5, 6. And purified through the Spirit, 1 Pet. 1. 22.

Quest. Why do we profess Faith, and trust in him?

Answ. Because we are to receive all our Graces, and preparations for Eternal
Glory from him. For after Christ had Redeemed us with his Blood, and ascended
into Heaven; the Rest, which was to be done further for our Salvation here on
Earth, was left to the care of the Holy Spirit, whom Christ sent down as his
substitute, to supply his absence, and minister whatsoever he left wanting to
his Body, which is the Church, to perfect it in Faith and Holiness.

Quest. By this I perceive, a great part of Christian Knowledge, lies in
understanding what the Holy Spirit has done, and is still to do for us. Pray
what has he bestowed, for the effecting of this great work?

Answ. Gifts of two sorts. 1. Extraordinary, bestowed upon the Apostles and
Evangelists* for the Planting and Establishing Christ's Church and Religion. 2.
Ordinary, that are given in common to all oothers, for every particular man's
Salvation.

Quest. What are his extraordinary Gifts bestowed upon the Holy Apostles, for
the Planting and Establishing of Christ's Church and Religion?

Answ. They consist not only of Gifts, but likewise of Offices, which he is the
Author of.

Quest. What are the Extraordinary Gifts he gave them to this end?

Answ. I shall reduce them to three. The Gift of Inspiration, which revealed
Christianity to themselves; of Miracles, which enabled them to prove it
undeniable unto others; and of Tongues, whereby they could publish it over all
the World, and be understood by men of every Language.

Quest. When were these extraordinary Gifts bestowed?

Answ. First, at the Feast of Pentecost upon the Twelve, when the Spirit
descended on each of them, in the shape of Cloven Tongues, Act. 2. 3. And
afterward, generally upon others, at the imposition of their hands, as
abundantly appears, from St. Luke's account of the Acts of the Holy Apostles.

Quest. And all these you say, were to enable them to Plant and Propagate their
Religion?

Answ. Yes; for by these Gifts, which are called the Promise of the Father,
Act. 1. 4. (that is, that Spirit, which Christ had promised to send them from
the Father, Joh. 15. 26.) the Holy Ghost was to act the Part of an Advocate,
(as the (...).
word Paraclete signifies, and is accordingly rendered, 1 John 2. 1.) which was
to plead his Cause to the unbelieving World. For when this Comforter, or
Advocate is come, says our Lord, he will reprove, or convince, the world of
these three Things. Of Sin, because they believe not on me, i. e. of the
sinfulness of infidelity. Of Righteousness, because I go to the Father; i. e.
of my being a Righteous Person, and of Gods owning me for such, though the Jews
condemned me as a Malefactor. And of Judgment, because the Prince of this World
is judged. i. e. of the downfall of Idolatry and Demon-worship, because the
Devil is to be cast out of the Heathen Temples by this Almighty Advocate, and
all his Oracles silenced, Joh. 16. 8, 9, 10, 11.

Quest. The first of these Gifts bestowed upon the Apostles, you say was the
Gift of Inspiration, which revealed Christ's Religion fully to themselves. Did
the Apostles receive their Religion from God, and were they inspired by the
Holy Ghost in what they Taught?

Answ. Yes; all Scripture is given by the inspiration of God, 2 Timothy 3. 16.
Thus God inspired Moses, and the Holy Prophets of old: for no Prophecy of the
Scripture is of any private interpretation, nor came by the will of man, i. e.
therein the Prophets did not speak their own sense, and reason: but Holy men of
God spoke, as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1. 20, 21. And after
the same manner, Christ promises the Apostles, that the Holy Ghost should teach
them. The Holy Ghost, when he shall come, shall teach you all things, and bring
all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you, Joh. 14. 26.
And when the Spirit of Truth is come, he will guide you into all Truth, Joh.
16. 13.

Quest. But had not Christ been their Teacher for several years together? and
then what need was there for the Holy Ghost to come after him, for a further
Instructor?

Answ. Christ taught them by outward, and humane means, as one man does
another. And in this way, though he took care abundantly to propose Things to
them, yet after all, they being Persons of slow and rustic understandings,
were very liable to forget, or misconceive them: as it is plain they did the
Nature of his Kingdom, the Reasons of his Death, and his Resurrection. But when
the Holy Ghost came upon them, he inwardly enlightened their minds, and filled
them with all variety of Heavenly Truth, bringing to their remembrance
whatsoever Christ had said, and supplying whatsoever he designedly John 16. 12,
13.
omitted, till they were better able to bear it. And though he did not teach
them all things at once, they being ignorant for some time after his descent,
of Acts 10. and Chapter 11.
the calling of the Gentiles: yet in a moment he made a strange progress with
them, and so far illuminated their minds, that immediately upon his coming
down, they understand, and apply Scriptures, and expound Prophecies, and set up
for Teachers of other men, Act. 2.

Quest. And what knowledge they had of their Religion, you say was of his
inspiring?

Answ. Yes; after once he took the conduct of them. Their way of knowing all
things, as St. John told the Church in their Age, was by an unction from the
Holy one, 1 John 2. 20, 27. And the Gospel which was preached by me, says St.
Paul, is not after Men, i. e. of Man's devising. For I neither received it of
Man, neither was I taught it, but by the Revelation of Jesus Christ, Gal. 1.
11, 12. And of all Holy Scripture, it is declared, that it is given by
inspiration of God, 2 Timothy 3. 16.

Quest. It Is plain, indeed, they say they are inspired, and taught of God. But
have we any more than these Testimonies of Scripture, that is their own word
and saying for it?

Answ. Yes, the Miracles they wrought in confirmation of it. They preached
every where, the Lord working with them, and confirming the word with Signs
following, Mar. 16. 20.

Quest. I perceive the Holy Ghost did reveal God's will to them, and in the
Holy Scriptures they have revealed it unto us. But in those Scriptures, have
they done it fully?

Answ. Yes; for in that Epistle, which St. Paul sent last to Timothy, before
which, the greatest Part of his other Epistles, and of the Gospel-Canon was
writ, he Declares of all the Scriptures then extant, that they are able to make
us wise unto Salvation, being Profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for
Correction, for instruction in Righteousness. That the Man of God may be
Perfect, thoroughly furnished out of them unto all Good works, 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16,
17. Nay some single Books of Scripture, as the Particular Gospels are full
enough to this end. And accordingly St. Luke testifies of his Gospel, that it
contains those Things which all Christians most surely believed, and wherein
Theophilus, an Excellent Person, and no way Defective in saving Knowledge, had
been Principled and instructed Luk, 1. 1, 3, 4. and all that Jesus began to do
and teach, till he was taken up, Act. 1. 1, 2. All necessary Christianity was
Faithfully preached by Jesus Christ, and they Faithfully set out his Life, and
Preaching. And what St. Luke added afterward, in the Acts of the Holy
Apostles, was only an Historical Account of the Method they took, what they
suffered, and how they succeeded in Preaching this Doctrine. And as for the
Epistles of the several Apostles, which were accidentally, and occasionally
writ, for the Emergent Benefit of the Churches, they either repeat and press
the same Things, or Comment upon them in fuller Explications, or Determine some
Controversies started in the Church about them, or confute some unchristian
Opinions and Heretical corruptions of Gospel Truths, as is obvious to any
careful, and intelligent comparer of them.

Quest. Having therefore these Scriptures Faithfully conveyed to us, by God's
Blessing, we must not look for, or listen to any New Revelation?

Answ. No, not of the Way to please God, and go to Heaven. Christ, our Great
Prophet, who was to Dan. 9. 24.
Seal up Vision and Prophecy, having inspired his Apostles, and fully Revealed
all these things to us once already by them, it is a vain thing to fancy he
should do it over again.

Quest. The Gift of Inspiration then, or of having Religion immediately
Revealed to them, was necessary only to Apostles and Evangelists, who were the
first Publishers of it from God?

Answ. It Is very true. And accordingly, in Suiting the Gifts, and Ministries,
reckned up 1 Cor. 12. to the word of Wisdom, or Gospel Revelation, which is the
First, and Chiefest in the List of Gifts, v. 8. St. Paul adapts the Order of
Apostles, as its Correspondent, and the first and chiefest in the Number of
Ministries, ver. 28. Inspiration of Religion was only to fit and Qualify them
for that Office. Hence it is, probably, that it is by St. John called 1 John 2.
20.
their Unction, that is, I suppose, their investiture in their Office: For,
it is well known, the common way of investing Men in Offices, especially in the
Priesthood, and Prophetic Office, was by anointing. And St. Paul infers his
Authority in the Apostolical Office, from his inspiration, because his Gospel
was not after Man, but he was sent out by God, and had it immediately Revealed
to him by him, Gal. 1. 11, 12, 15, 16, 17. And the Promise, that the John 14.
26.
Holy Ghost should teach them all things, and John 16. 13.
guide them into all Truth, was not made to any Christian of succeeding Times,
but particularly to the Holy Apostles, with whom it is our Blessed Lord there
Discourses. And the Unction among them, whereby they knew all things, that St.
John 2. 20. 17.
John speaks of, was whilst he himself was alive, and other Evangelists; not to
add, moreover, that his Epistle seems writ among the latest of the Books of the
New Testament. So that then, probably, they had among them the inspirations of
almost all the other Apostles.

Quest. So that inspiration of Religion was designed only for the Infancy of
the Church, whilst it was a Planting, and Religion a Publishing, but was to
cease when that was done?

Answ. Yes; it was so. Knowledge, i. e. inspired Knowledge, Prophecy, and
Tongues, were fitted, as St. Paul notes, only for the Childhood of the Church,
for that is the Similitude he uses, in expressing the transitoriness of these
Gifts, 1 Cor. 13. 9. whilst I was a Child, I spoke as a Child, I understood as
a Child, etc. But these Helps of the Infant State, were to vanish, as it took
Root, and grew up to Manhood. When I became a Man, I put away Childish Things,
v. 11. We know, says he again, in part, and we prophecy in part: i. e. at
present this inspiration is imperfect, this Epistle being one of the earliest
Writ, and the Scripture-Canon at that Time not being finished, and generally
come abroad. But when that which is perfect is come, i. e. as I conceive, not
only the Perfection of the other World, but a more Perfect State of the present
Church, when the Canon shall be consummated, and commonly given out, then that
which is in part, shall be superseded and Done away, v. 9, 10. As for Charity,
that bright Gem among saving Graces, it indeed never fails. But whether there
be Prophesies, they shall fail; whether there be Tongues they shall cease;
whether there be Knowledge, i. e. inspired Knowledge, it shall vanish away, v.
8.

Quest. In Christianity then, I see we must take up with the Holy Scriptures,
and not look for new Revelations, except we would look also for a new Religion,
and new Apostles?

Answ. Very right.

Quest. This is enough against any man, who pretends to new Lights and
Revelations in Religion. But since there are many such in the World, can you
give me any further Direction how to try them?

Answ. Yes; examine them First by the Scriptures, bringing those New
Revelations to the Old, and then be sure, they are either inventions of Men, or
Delusions of Satan, if they contradict it. Tho we, or an Angel from Heaven,
preach any other Gospel unto you, than that which we have already preached unto
you, and which is set forth in Scripture, let him be accursed. As we said
before, so say I now again, if any, pretending never so much Revelation, preach
any other Gospel unto you, than that you have received, let him be accursed,
Gal. 1. 8, 9.

Quest. What other way would you direct me to, for the Trial of such Pretenders?

Answ. Secondly, call for their signs, or Miracles, as God's Token, to manifest
that he speaks by them. For when God sends Men on new Messages, and
Revelations, to testify they come from him, and gain them credit, he empowers
them to work Miracles, or give Signs, because else they would go upon vain
Errands. Thus, when God sent Moses to the Israelites, and he objected, that
they would disbelieve him, and say, God had not appeared unto him, Exodus 4. 1.
God owns the reasonableness of the Objection, and impowers him to turn his Rod
into a Serpent, and work other Signs from him, to gain Credit with them. Which
he did, as he himself told Moses, that they may believe, that the Lord God of
their Fathers has appeared unto thee. And it shall come to pass, if they will
not believe thee after the first sign, that they will believe thee after the
latter sign. Or, if they disbelieve after that too, thou shall work another
Sign, ver. 5. to ver. 10.

Quest. Have you any further Evidence of this?

Answ. Yes; in Christ himself. For without Miracles, he did not require all Men
to believe him, when he came in God's name; and then sure, without them, they
are not bound to believe any other pretender to new Revelation. If I had n^^
done among them the Works which no other Man did, they had not had sin in
disbelieving, John 15. 24.

Quest. And this was still the way of Prophets, when God sent them?

Answ. Yes; when he sent them to reveal any New Thing. Indeed, when Prophets
came only to press old Revelations, that stood confirmed by former Miracles,
they needed not always to come with a New Sign. And this was the case of many
Ordinary Prophets among the Jews, whom God specially sent and stirred up, to
enforce some neglected Precepts, and chiefly the Moral and Spiritual Parts of
the Law of Moses. But when any pretended to any extraordinary Commission, for
reversing of some Old, or setting up some New Rule, or Doctrine, as it was
reasonable to expect they should, they were always empowred to give a Sign, or
work a Miracle, in Confirmation. And this is the Test God himself gives,
whereby to know when he had sent any one. If thou say in thine Heart, how shall
we know the Word, which the Lord has not spoken? When a Prophet speaks in
the Name of the Lord, if the thing follow not, nor come to pass, that is the
thing which the Lord has not spoken, but the Prophet has spoken
presumptuously, thou shall not be afraid of him, Deuteronomy. 18. 21, 22.

Quest. So that no Prophet, pretending to New Revelation, was to be believed
barely on his own word, till some sign from God gave witness to it?

Answ. No; the great Prophet of the Church, Jesus Christ himself, did not
expect it. If I bear Witness of my self, my Witness is not true, i. e. ought
not to pass for true. But there is another that bears Witness of me, for the
Works which the Father has given me to finish, the same Works that I do, bear
witness of me, that the Father has sent me, John 5. 31, 32, 36. And this is
necessary, to prevent our being deceived. For many false Prophets are gone out
into the World, 1 John 4. 1. And these come all in God's Name, though what they
declare, is not his Revelation, but their own invention, or some Satanical
Delusion. And if we were to believe a Man inspired, barely upon his own Word,
since they all say they are, we should believe all of them. So that to prevent
being deceived, we must not take a Man's own Word for his being sent thus of
God, till he shows some Sign from him to attest it.

Quest. You say they are miraculously assisted, when they are sent to reveal
any New thing. Is there not a like necessity of Signs and Miracles then, when
they only come to Remove Corruptions, and revive such former acknowledged
Revelations, as had Miracles to confirm them?

Answ. No; to Persons that own he spoke it, God's Word has as much Authority as
his Work Whilst they have his clear Word to show for themselves, they are
sufficiently qualified to use his Name, to reprove and convince, on the score
and credit of ordinary Ministers, without producing any new and extraordinary
Credentials. Besides, for these things, they may appeal to all the old Miracles
wrought to testify these Revelations. And accordingly, a great part of the old
Prophets, under the Jewesh State, coming to reduce men to the obedience of
Moses, to reprove sins, and to reform abuses, wrought no Miracles, it being
enough for them to produce the Holy Scriptures, who only sought to bring those
back to them, who had swerved from them. And this also was the Case of our
first Reformers. They studied no new ways, but only endeavored to restore
Religion, which was much depraved in these Parts of the world, to that Form,
which was at first most miraculously confirmed by Christ and his Apostles. And
therefore their Proofs were not to be fetched from signs and wonders, as Men
that introduced new, and unattested Tenets, but from the Holy Scriptures.

Quest. But are we not told of False Rev. 13. 13, 14. and 16. 14.
Prophets showing Signs, Mat. 24. 24? And what shall we say to them, if they
allege Miracles for false Things?

Answ. If they teach things contrary to the Scriptures, they must not only work
Miracles for their contrary Opinions, but more, and greater than were wrought
by Christ and his Apostles to confirm the Scriptures. For here, all the
Miracles wrought for the Scripture, are against them; since their pretended
Miracles, are brought for a contrary Thing. And when our Faith is solicited by
a competition of Miracles, as the Faith of the Jews was, between the Miracles
of Moses and those of the Magicians, Exodus 7. 11, 22. and when any Seducer gave
signs, to draw them to Idolatry, Deuteronomy. 13. 1, 2. we must believe that side
which has the greatest, and the most of them. And this will secure us against
all the Errors and feigned Miracles of new Lights and Pretenders. For it is
certain, they will never show the tenth part of those Miracles, to confute any
Doctrine contained in Scripture, that Christ and his Apostles have done, to
confirm it.

Quest. I confess, it is very clear from what you say, that the Scripture is the
only Revelation we must stick to; and that in matters of Religion, we must not
hearken to any other Pretenders to new Light and inspiration. But does not the
Prophet Joel say, Revelations should be common things among Christians? I will
pour out my Spirit in those days upon all Flesh, and your Sons and Daughters
shall Prophecy; your young men shall see Visions, and your old men shall dream
Dreams, Joel 2. 28, 29.

Answ. Yes; but by those days, he means not all the days of Christianity, but
only the days of the Apostles, when such Revelations were common Things. For in
those same days, as it follows in Joel, I will show Wonders in Heaven, and in
Earth, says God, Blood, and Fire, and Pillars of Smoke. And the Sun shall be
turned into darkness, and the Moon into Blood, before the Great and Terrible
day of the Lord come, i. e. before the destruction of Jerusalem, whereof our
Savior interprets this passage, Mat. 24. 29. which destruction fell out in the
Apostolical Age, before the death of St. John, Joel 2. 30, 31. And St. Peter
says, these inspirations foretold by Joel, were fulfilled, when the Holy Ghost
at Pentecost descended upon them. This is that which was spoken of by the
Prophet Joel, it shall come to pass in the last days, I will pour out my Spirit
upon all Flesh, and your Sons and your Daughters shall Prophecy, etc. Act. 2.
16, 17, 18. So that Joel's Prophecy of inspirations does not remain now to be
fulfilled, but, as Joel himself foretold, and as St. Peter declared, was long
since accomplished.

Quest. But God gave these Revelations in the Apostles Age, and is not he the
same God still in ours?

Answ. Yes; he is always the same God, but he does not always do the same
things. He came down before the Jews, in Thunder and Fire upon Mount Sinai
Exodus 19. 16, 18.
once, but he did not do so in aftertimes. He shed abroad the Gift of Tongues,
and Miracles, upon the generality of Christians in the Apostles days, but he
has not done so in any others since. He is the same God, and has the same care
and kindness for his Church, in all Times: but he does not always work the same
effects, but only according to our occasions and necessities. And immediate
Revelation was necessary to the Apostles in their circumstances, and as
unnecessary to us in ours.

Quest. Were these inspirations merely about Doctrinal Things, and declaring
the will of God, only in points of Faith, or manners?

Answ. No; but sometimes, in those days of Revelation, they were inspired also
in their Devotions, with Prayers and Hymns, which was a blessing they were more
sensible of in that Age, because as yet they had no formed and established
Liturgies. Thus St. Paul tells the Corinthians, every one in their Assemblies
had an inspired Psalm, as well as an inspired Doctrine, Praying and Praising,
as well as Preaching by Revelation, 1. Cor. 14. 26. And when they spoke by the
Gift of Tongues, it was often in inspired Hymns and Devotions: for he that
speaks in an unknown Tongue, says he, speaks unto God, v. 2. he Prays to
God, or Praises him in that strange Gift of the Spirit, v. 14, 15, 16. And in
the Enthusiasms of Tongues, which fell on Cornelius and his Gentile Friends,
they magnified God, Act. 10. 40.

Quest. Besides these Revelations about Religion, and the way to Happiness, had
they not also Prophecy, or Revelation about other Things?

Answ. Yes; they had Revelations of future events, concerning either
themselves, their Friends, or the whole Church. Thus Agabus foretold the
Famine, Acts 11. 28. and St. Paul's imprisonment at Jerusalem, Act. 21. 10, 11.
And Paul foretold to his Company in the Ship, that they should all be saved,
and none of them perish in the Shipwreck, Act. 27. 22, 23, 24, etc. And St.
John foretold, not only what was to befall particular Persons, but the whole
Church in succeeding Ages, in his Book of the Revelations.

Quest. I remember you said, we are not now to expect any more Revelations in
Religion, to show us the way to please God, and go to Heaven. But do you
suppose, that some may still be Prophets, and have Revelations about other
things?

Answ. Perhaps they may, about Particular accidents to particular Persons, or
Families; or about great Revolutions, to States, or Empires. As to these
Matters, it is not for me to stint the kindness and care of God, or to
determine what intimations he may sometimes vouchsafe from the other World. And
if any wise, sober, and good men, by the forcibleness of the impression on
their minds, after the Prophetic way, which convinces and satisfies
themselves, and by the correspondence of events, which may satisfy others,
find they have any such thing, I shall not withstand them; and so long as they
do not offer these, to innovate in Religion, the Revelations of the Scripture
are no bar against them.

Quest. You have fully explained this first miraculous Gift of the Holy Ghost,
the Gift of inspirations. Were there any other miraculous Gifts subservient to
it, which you would explain to me under this Head?

Answ. Yes; First the Gift of discerning Spirits, i. e. among all the
Pretenders to inspiration, who spoke true inspirations, and who mere pretenses
of it, or Satanical delusions. We have received the Spirit of God, says St.
Paul, which reveals to us the Things of God. And he that is Spiritual, judges
all Things, that are pretended by others; yet he himself is judged of no man,
i. e. they who want his Spirit, cannot judge of him. For who, i. e. of those
who want this Spirit, has known the mind of the Lord, to discern when another
merely pretends to it? 1 Cor. 10. 12, 15, 16. And this Gift of Discerning
Spirits, was very necessary in that Age, to warn the Church against False
Prophets. For when there was such a commonness of true Revelations, it gave the
greatest opportunity to Diabolical Enthusiasts, or wicked Impostors, to obtrude
their inventions, or delusions upon the Church, hoping they should pass for
inspirations among the crowd of others. Now are there many False Phrophets gone
out into the World, says St. John, which makes it necessary not to believe
every Spirit, 1 John 4. 1.

Quest. This Gift indeed, was necessary to discover them, before the Scriptures
were written: but when once they had them, could not any Christians thereby
detect Impostors, without the Gift of discerning Spirits?

Answ. Yes; and so St. John, and the other Apostles in their Epistles, gave
ordinary Rules for this purpose. One of these Rules was, confessing Christ to
be come in the Flesh. Try the Spirits, says he, whether they be of God: and
hereby know ye the Spirit of God: every Spirit that confesses Jesus Christ is
come in the Flesh, is of God; and every one that denis it, is not of God, 1 John 4. 1, 2, 3. and 2 John 7. Another Rule was, their submission to the
Apostles, and Governors of the Church, since God would inspire no man to break
Unity, and make needless Schisms. We are of God. He that knows God, hears
us; he that is not of God, hears not us: hereby know we the Spirit of Truth,
and the Spirit of Error, 1 John 4. 6. But the most comprehensive Rule of all,
was their agreement, or dissonancy with the Holy Scriptures, as I noted before,
and the Revelations of the undoubted Apostles. If any man think himself to be a
Prophet, or Spiritual, let him acknowledge that the Things which I write unto
you, are the Commandments of the Lord, 1 Cor. 14. 37. But if any Man, or Angel
from Heaven, preach unto you any other Gospel, than that you have received
already, let him be accursed, Gal. 1. 8, 9.

Quest. What other miraculous Gifts, besides this of Discerning Spirits, were
subservlent to this Gift of inspirations?

Answ. Secondly, the Gift of utterance, i. e. of assurance, fluency, and
volubility of speech, whereby they were enabled to declare, and make known
their Revelations to advantage. This St. Paul desired the Colossians, to beg of
God for him; Praying for us, that God* would open to us a Door of utterance, to
speak the mystery of Christ, that I may make it manifest, as I ought to speak,
Col. 4. 3, 4. Under which is comprehended that miraculous boldness, which these
poor men showed to admiration, in asserting undauntedly a most exploded Cause,
in the face of their numerous and potent Adversaries. That utterance may be
given to me, that I may open my mouth boldly, to make known the mystery of the
Gospel: that therein I may speak boldly, as I ought to speak, Ephesians. 6. 19, 20.

Quest. Was this miraculous Boldness, a Gift bestowed upon the Old Prophets?

Answ. Yes; it was a part of that Spirit of Fortitude the Jewish Writers speak
of, wherewith God armed a Prophet, before he sent him with a difficult and
perilous Message, in which he might foresee the greatest terror, and dread of
men, to stop his Mouth. Thus God told Ezekiel, when he sent him to the
impudent, and hard-hearted Israelites. Behold, I have made thy face strong
against their faces, and thy forehead strong against their foreheads. As an
Adamant, harder than Flint, have I made thy Forehead: Fear them not, neither
be dismayed at their Looks, though they be a Rebellious House, Ezekiel. 3. 8, 9.
Thus also he bid Jeremiah, speak, and not be dismayed at their Faces; for he
had that Day made him a defenced City, an Iron Pillar, and Brazen Walls,
against the whole Land, against the Kings of Judah, the Princes, the Priests,
and the People thereof, Jer. 1. 8, 17, 18, 19.

Quest. And did the Holy Ghost, give this miraculous Boldness to the Apostles?

Answ. Yes; in a wonderful measure. They were all filled with the Holy Ghost,
and spoke the word of God with Boldness, Act. 4. 31. And when the Jewish Rulers
saw the Boldness of Peter and John, asserting freely the Power and Authority of
Jesus, and taxing them openly as his wicked Murderers, to their very Faces,
they marvelled, ver. 10, 11, 12, 13.

Quest. Had they this boldness of Spirit at all times?

Answ. No. For at Corinth St. Paul says of himself, that he was with them in
Weakness and Fear, and much Trembling, 1 Cor. 2. 3. In some great Dangers, and
pressing Necessities, their Natural Fears would return upon them, to trouble
them for some time. Thus it sometimes happened to St. Paul, where he expected
the most perilous opposition: for, after the hardships, and hazards he had run
through at Act. 16. 12, 22, 23 24.
Philippi, and at Act. 17. 5, 6, 10.
Thessalonica, expecting the like at Corinth too, he was with them, as he says,
in much trembling, and so discouraged, that he needed a Revelation to embolden
him, Act. 18. 1, 9, 10. And thus it did especially, if at such time he were
alone, and had not his Companions with him. When he came into Macedonia, whilst
he was by himself, his Flesh had no Rest, but he was troubled on every side,
without were fightings, and within were fears. But as soon as his Coadjutor
Titus came to him, he took heart, and God, who comfort those who are cast
down, comforted him by the coming of Titus, 2 Cor. 7. 5, 6. And when he came to
Troas, where a Door was opened to him, he had no Rest in his Spirit, because he
found not Titus his Brother, as he expected, to stand by him, 2 Cor. 2. 12, 13.
And at Corinth, whilst he was alone, he was the more afraid; but when Silas and
Timotheus were come, he was pressed in Spirit, i. e. vigorously put forward,
and emboldened by their Presence, Act. 18. 5.

Quest. By this I see the Apostles were Men, and had some Returns of Humane
Fears, and Infirmities, and this miraculous boldness did not actuate and
invigorate them at all times?

Answ. It Is true indeed. But ordinarily they enjoyed it, and particularly at
those very instants, when they had the greatest need of it. As St. Paul did
before Nero, where the Lord stood with him, and strengthened him, i. e. with a
mind undaunted, 2 Timothy 4. 16, 17. And as Peter and John did before the
Sanhedrim, where they were so bold, that the Rulers marvelled, Act. 4. 6, 7, 8,
10, 13. And as Christ promised they should all do, when they were brought
before Governors, and Kings, for his sake. For then, says he, take no thought
beforehand, how, or what ye shall speak; for it shall be given you in that same
Hour, what you shall speak, i. e. both matter, and Presence of Mind to utter
it, For it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father that speaks in
you, Mat. 10. 18, 19, 20.

Quest. What is the second of those Extraordinary Gifts, which the Holy Ghost
bestowed upon the Apostles, for the Planting and establishing of Christ's
Church and Religion?

Answ. The Gift of Miracles, which enabled them to prove those things
undeniably unto others, which God had revealed to themselves.

Quest. Is working a Miracle for any Doctrine, a Proof it comes from God?

Answ. Yes, if the Doctrine tends to Holiness, and be worthy of God. For a
Miracle, is not the work of Man, but of God's and shows that God stands on his
side that works it. So that Miracles are God's Witness, and way of proving
Things. The Works that I do in my Father's Name, bear witness of me, Joh. 10.
24, 25. If I do not the works of my Father, believe me not. But If I do, though
you believe not me, believe the Works, ver. 37, 38. And God bore the Apostles
witness, with signs and wonders, and diverse Miracles, and Gifts of the Holy
Ghost, Heb, 2. 4. and confirmed the Word with signs following, Mar. 16. 20. The
Power of Miracles, is the Spirits Proof, or Demonstration. My Speech was in
Demonstration of the Spirit, and of Power, 1 Cor. 2. 4.

Quest. But does not Satan himself sometimes work a Miracle, or such a lying
Wonder, as will pass for a Miracle?

Answ. Yes, for Doctrines that serve his own ends; but never for a Doctrine
that plainly opposes and overthrows them. For so Satan, as Christ argues
undeniably, would be divided against Satan, and then how could his Kingdom
stand? Mat. 12. 25, 26. If a Doctrine therefore tends to Holiness, as I said,
and is worthy of God, as Christianity does most eminently, a Miracle is a sure
proof of it, and it is certain the evil Spirits have no hand in working it. Not
to mention those other most demonstrative marks of the Miracles wrought for
Christianity, whereof I have already discoursed in Part. 1. c. 3.
another Place.

Quest. In any Miracles then which are proposed to us, we are to look not only
at the works, but also at their end, and usefulness?

Answ. Yes. For if they are for impious, and impure Ends, it is plain they come
from impious, and unclean Spirits; if only for Ostentation and Praise, from
vainglorious and proud ones; if merely to gratify idle Curiosity of
Spectators, like Feats of Juglers, from Ludicrous and Vain Spirits, who delight
to amuse with Toys and Trifles. All Miracles, being the effect of intelligent
Agents, by their Design show the Temper and Genius of the Actors. And
therefore, when any are pretended to come from God, that must be shown in their
gravity, grandeur, pious heavenly fruits, or important usefulness. But we must
not put his Hand to any that serve only to vicious ends, or ridiculous
impertinence.

Quest. And as God works them only for important and needful ends, Does he not
also only on needful occasions?

Answ. Very right; either of succouring his Servants, or Crediting his
Messengers, especially when he sends them out at first to promulge a Law, or
sometimes, though in this more seldom, when he sends them to revive it after
some great and general Defection from it; and accordingly, the most Miracles
that were wrought all the time of the Jewish State, were either by Moses, who
first published the Law, or by Elias and Elisha to restore it, after Jeroboam's
Calves had made ten Tribes of twelve, most grossly to swerve from it. And
therefore it is a vain thing, for any of those to listen after new Miracles,
who pretend to Rule their Faith by the Holy Scriptures, which stand attested by
all the old ones, as if there were some Defects in the Miracles of Christ and
his Apostles, which need to be supplied by their Followers. But it is more
especially vain to pretend, as the Church of Rome does, to work such Miracles
only among themselves, who believe without them, but never before us, who have
more need to be convinced by them. Moses, and our Savior Christ, and his
blessed Apostles, showed their Miracles among those they designed to make
Converts, or such young and unsettled Followers, as needed to be confirmed and
established in the Faith. And in Testimony to the Man of God, Jeroboam's hand
is miraculously withered, and as miraculously restored before the Altar at
Bethel, the very Seat of the Schismatics, 1 King. 13. 4, 5, 6. And if Tongues
are used for a sign, it is not to those, says St. Paul, who believe, but to
those who believe not, 1 Cor. 14. 22. To show signs where they are not needed,
and withhold them where they are more needful, is not the way and method of h^s
Almighty Power, who is neither wanting in necessaries, nor Liberal in
superfluities.

Quest. Was this Gift of Miracles bestowed upon the Apostles?

Answ. Yes; God bore them witness, with Signs, and Wonders, and diverse
Miracles, Heb. 2. 4. and confirmed the word with Signs following, Mar. 16. 20.

Quest. What Miracles had they the Gift of?

Answ. They had the Gift of Healing, without the help of Medicine. To one is
given, by the Spirit, the Gift of healing, 1 Cor. 12. 9. And thus by the Holy
Ghost, Pet^^ and John healed the Lame Man, Act. 3. 2, 6. In working these
Cures, when our Savior sent them out at First, they used the Ceremony of
anointing with Oil. They anointed with Oil many that were sick, and healed
them* Mar. 6. 13. And this Ceremony of anointting, was held on afterward,
whilst this miraculous Gift of Healing lasted, and Prayer was added to it. Is
any Sick among you, says St. James, let him call for the Elders of the Church,
and let them Pray over him, anointing him with Oil in the Name of the Lord, for
in Christ's Name all their Miracles were wrought: And the Prayer of Faith, i.
e. put up in Faith of the miraculous cure, shall save the sick, viz. from his
Disease, and the Lord shall raise him up; and if he have committed Sins, i. e.
if any Sins brought this sickness, they shall be forgiven him in the cure of
it, Jam. 5. 14, 15.

Quest. By saving of the Sick here, indeed, may seem to be meant saving of him
from his Disease; because it follows; and the Lord shall raise him up. But the
Prayer of Faith, and forgiveness of Sins, seem to note something else?

Answ. As for the Prayer of Faith, that Agrees very well: for a Faith, or
belief that God will enable him to do it, is necessary in every one that works
a Miracle. And as for the Forgiving of his Sins; you must know, that the
Punishment of Sin, is not only eternal Death, but Present Diseases: and
therefore that the sin is forgiven, at least in part, when either of these is
taken off. And thus the Scripture speaks of it. For when any sickness, or
infirmities, come for sin, our Savior makes it the same thing to say, thy sins
are forgiven, as to say, arise and walk: and accordingly, when he designed to
work a Cure, he would say, thy sins are pardoned, Mat. 9. 2, 5.

Quest. What other Miracles, had they the gift of?

Answ. Of casting out Devils, as the Apostles did out of Multitudes, Act. 5.
16. Of Raising the Dead, as Peter raised Dorcas, Act. 9. 39, 40. and Paul,
Eutichus, Act. 20. 9, 10, 12. Of inflicting Bodily Diseases, and Torments, as
well as Spiritual Horrors, and Supernatural Agonies, on contumacious sinners,
as Paul did on Elymas the Sorcerer, striking him with blindness, Act. 13. 8, 9,
11. and on the incestuous Corinthian, whom he thus punished for the destruction
of the Flesh, 1 Cor. 5. 5. Which Corporal inflictions, he seems plainly to
threaten the Back-sliders at Corinth withal, when he tells them of coming to
them with a Rod, 1 Cor. 4. 21. Of using sharpness, 2 Cor. 13. 10. Of Revenging
all Disobedience, 2 Cor. 10. 6. Yea, of such sharpness, as would overawe, and
humble the most carnal minds, and contemptuous Opposers of Church Authority and
Censures: bringing down the Flesh, as he said of the Incestuous Persons, and
making them afraid to Blaspheme, as he said of Hymeneus and Alexander, who were
most contemptuous and stubborn in their Heretical Opinion, 1 Timothy 19. 20. And
this infliction of smart, and Bodily Diseases, upon obstinate Sinners, is
called Delivering over unto Satan, as the Apostle says he had done in these
last mentioned Cases.

Quest. Why was this infliction of Bodily smart and punishment upon them,
called Delivering over to Satan?

Answ. Because these Pains were to be the Effect of God's immediate Justice,
and Satan should be the Tormentor, and Executioner of God's Vengeance: And
therefore, when these Offenders were given up to God's Justice, they were said
to be delivered into his Hands. When God in a more immediate, and extraordinary
way, sends present heavy Plagues upon Men, especially as a Punishment for sin,
Satan is often said to inflict them. Readiness Melancholy, is called an Evil
Spirit from the Lord upon him, 1 Samuel 18. 10. God's Plagueing the Egyptians,
sending evil Angels among them, Ps. 78. 49. The Woman, who had been bowed
together eighteen years, one whom Satan had bound, Luke 13. 11, 16. The
Lunatic, a Demoniack, or one vexed with an unclean Spirit, Mat. 17. 15, 18.
and Luke 9. 39, 42. And thus, when the Apostles gave up offenders to God to
punish them, because the Devil executes the Punishment which God decrees, it is
called Delivering them over unto Satan.

Quest. This delivering to Satan then was an Act of Divine Justice upon these
Criminals; and God commanded Satan thus to afflict them, as formerly he
afflicted Job, at the instance of the Apostles?

Answ. Yes; and therefore, as it is not improbable, it was done with Prayer to
God to take vengeance. For so the Apostle may seem to express himself, on his
Delivering up Alexander. Alexander the Copper-Smith did me much Evil, the Lord
reward him according to his Works, 2 Timothy 4. 14. In this he Acted as a
Spiritual Judge, delivering up to Justice, and Prayed God to exact the Penalty
according to his Sentence.

Quest. Had they the Gift of any other Miracles?

Answ. Yes; for such I reckon was their Joy in Tribulations, and Glorying even
in the very Hour of their sufferings. When the Council had beaten them, they
departed from their Presence, rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer
shame for Christ's Name, Acts 5. 40, 41. Whilst their Stripes were yet sore,
and they were pinched in the Stocks, in the Dark Dungeon, Paul and Silas sang
Praises to God, and triumphed rejoicing, Act. 16. 23, 24, 25. And upon their
Persecution at Antioch, the Disciples were filled with Joy, and with the Holy
Ghost, Act. 13. 50, 52. Thus, as if they were not of the same Mold, nor had
Bodies like other Men, did they Glory in their Shame for Christ, and rejoice in
Tribulation.

Quest. But is not Joy an ordinary Fruit of the Spirit? And why then do you
think this rejoicing of theirs, had something Miraculous in it?

Answ. A secret Joy in the sense of God's Love, is common among Good Men, and
an ordinary Fruit of the Spirit, and so it is reckoned, Gal. 5. 22. Yea, and Joy
in Tribulation, after the Tribulation is past; for afterward it yields the
Peaceable Fruits of Righteousness, to those that are exercised with it, Heb.
12. 11. But to rejoice in the very midst of it, and under the Stroke, as they
did, I think has an extraordinary Gift, and miraculous Aid in it: For under the
ordinary Assistance of the Spirit, the Bodily Pain hinders rejoicing at the
very instant. For the Present, no chastening seems to be joyous, but
grievous, Heb. 12. 11.

Quest. What say you then to the Words of Christ, Rejoice and be exceeding
glad, when you are Persecuted for my sake, Mat. 5. 11, 12.

Answ. I think they do not so much express a Duty, that he strictly exacts, as
a Gift and Privilege, which he sometimes bestows upon his Martyrs and
Confessors: As was visible in the Apostles days, and among the Primitive
Martyrs. For their minds were sometimes so ravished, and transported, with
Spiritual Consolations, as to seize all the Powers of their Souls, and not
suffer them to attend to the most Exquisite Bodily Tortures. So as they could
smile upon Racks, and sing under their Executioners, and be so far intranced in
Spiritual Comforts, as to declare under the most Bloody Butcheries, that they
were not sensible of any Pain. And the same stupendous supports, God has
sometimes vouchsafed in later, and modern Persecutions.

Quest. I see the Holy Ghost endowed the Apostles, with strange Gifts of
Miracles. But could they work these Miracles, at any instant of time when they
would; or were some Preparations required to them?

Answ. There was required to them, 1. Always Faith in him that wrought them.
And 2. sometimes, particularly in miraculous Cures, Faith in the Person that
received them, or whom they were wrought upon.

Quest. What was the Faith required in him that wrought them?

Answ. A Persuasion that God's Power would assist him, and perform the Miracle
by him. For that they might never offer at this in vain, which would have
exposed both themselves, and their Religion, whenever God would enable them
to work a Miracle, he first possessed their minds with a firm Belief and
Assurance of it. And this is the Faith, so often required of Wonder-workers in
the Scriptures. Though I have all Faith, so that I could remove Mountains, 1
Cor. 13. 2. And, if ye have Faith as a Grane of Mustard Seed, ye shall say to
this Mountain, Remove hence to yonder Place* and it shall Remove, and nothing
shall be unpossible unto you, Mat. 17. 20. And this Faith is reckoned as one of
the extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit. To another Faith, by the same Spirit, 1
Cor. 12. 9.

Quest. What was the Faith that sometimes, but more especially in the cure of
Diseases, was required on him that received a Miracle, or the Person it was to
be wrought upon?

Answ. A Persuasion that God would enable the Wonder-worker to do the cure for,
or show the Miracle upon him. This also was another Requisite. For Paul
steadfastly beholding the Creeple, and perceiving he had faith to be healed,
said to him, stand upright, Act. 14. 9, 10. Believe ye that I am able to do
this, said Christ to the blind Men? according to your Faith, so be it unto you,
Mat. 9. 28, 29. If thou can do any thing* said the Father of the Demoniack,
have Compassion on us, and help us. Jesus said unto him, if thou can believe
I can, all miraculous Things are possible to be done to him that believes,
Mar. 9. 22, 23. And in his own Country, it is said, Christ did not many
Miracles, because of their unbelief, Mat. 13. 58. or, as St. Mark* he could not
do them, God, it seems, suspending this miraculous aid, in the case of such,
whose unbelief rendered them unworthy of it, Mark 6. 4, 5.

Quest. What is the third, and last of those extraordinary Gifts which the Holy
Ghost bestowed upon the Apostles?

Answ. The Gift of strange Tongues, whereby they, who were all Jews, were able
in an instant to Publish that Religion God had revealed to them, over all the
world, and be understood by men of every Language.

Quest. Was this given to the Apostles?

Answ. Yes; visibly at the day of Pentecost, when the Holy Ghost descended upon
each of them, in the shape of Cloven Tongues, like as of Fire, and they spoke
with other Tongues, as the Spirit gave them utterance, and talked to Parthians,
and Romans, Cretes, and Arabians, and to the devout men from every Nation under
Heaven at that time gathered together to Jerusalem, to every man in the Tongue
wherein he was born, Acts. 2. 1. to 12. And at the imposition of the Apostles
hands, it was generally bestowed on others afterward. As on the Disciples at
Ephesus, at the imposition of Paul's hands, Acts 19. 2, 6. on Cornelius, and
his Gentile Friends, at Peter's Preaching; for while he yet spoke to them, the
Holy Ghost fell on all them that heard the word, and they spoke with Tongues,
and magnified God, Acts 10. 44, 45, 46. And so on others in great numbers,
particularly in the Church of Corinth.

Quest. To what end were they thus endowed with all Languages?

Answ. To enable them to Preach to all Nations, for they were Commissioned to
teach all Nations, Mat. 28. 19. And they could not teach them, without speaking
to every man in his own Language. And therefore wheresoever they came, the
Spirit immediately made them as perfect in the Language of the Place, as they
were in their own Mother Tongue.

Quest. Had not some the Gift of Tongues, who were not sent out to men of*
another Language?

Answ. Yes; as particularly in the Church of Corinth, for there many would
speak in the Assemblies, where all, or most were Greeks, in Strange Tongues;
which, because the Church did not understand, St. Paul directs such gifted
*Linguists, to Pray for another Gift of interpreting Tongues, to make such
enthusiasms intelligible to their Hearers, 1 Cor. 14. 2, 5, 13. In these
strange Tongues they Preached, v. 6. and Prayed to God, v. 14. And this, being
an offering up both inspired Prayers, and in inspired Tongues, which are both
his extraordinary Gifts, is called Praying, and Singing, by, or with the
Spirit, v. 14, 15.

Quest. To what end then served these strange Tongues, in such Churches all of
one Tongue?

Answ. Not to make known Religion indeed, because the hearers did not
understand them. But they served to express the Speakers Devotion, and so
edified himself, 1 Cor. 14. 4. and as a Sign, to confirm our Religion, and so
were an argument, as all other Miracles were, to prove it true to Infidels.
Tongues are for a sign, not to them that believe, but to them that believe not,
v. 22.

Quest. Was there any Guilt subservient to this, of speaking with strange
Tongues?

Answ. Yes; the Gift of interpreting those strange Tongues, when spoken either
by themselves, or others.

Quest. But I pray you what need of that? did not they that spoke these strange
Tongues understand themselves?

Answ. Yes; he that spoke in an unknown Tongue, edified himself, 1 Cor. 14. 4.
and he that gave Thanks in it, gave Thanks well, as St. Paul says, v. 17. But
in this exercise of strange Tongues, the heat of Enthusiasm and Divine Rapture,
was sometimes so great, that the Speaker could not interpret himself as he
spoke, nor remember it after that heat was over, so as to give an explication
to those that heard it. And this defect, the Gift of interpreting Tongues
supplied; which Gift, St* Paul directs those who had the other of speaking with
strange Tongues, to beg of God, in order to their greater usefulness. Let him
that speaks in an unknown Tongue, pray also that he may interpret, i. e. do
it with such consistency, and moderation of mind, as to be able afterward to
give the same, in other more intelligible words, v. 13. and orders, that when
any spoke with Tongues, who were not thus qualified to explain themselves, they
should speak, not all at a time, as they sometimes did, but by course, and have
one still to second them, to interpret their strange speech, v. 27.

Quest. By this I see what are the extraordinary Gifts, which the Holy Ghost
bestowed upon the Apostles, viz. the Gift of inspiration, whereby they should
be infallibly instructed in their Religion; of Tongues, and utterance, whereby
they should intelligibly, and undauntedly express and declare it; and of
Miracles, whereby they should undoubtedly prove and demonstrate it to all the
World.

Answ. Yes.

Quest. When Christ promised the Holy Ghost to his Apostles, he calls him by
the Name of Comforter, Joh. 16. 7. What is meant by that?

Answ. First, that he should be an Advocate, which is one sense of the word
Paraclete, to plead the Cause of Christ and his Religion, against all that
opposed them. This he did most convincingly, in the miraculous Gifts already
mentioned. And in this sense, Christ says of him, that when he is come, he will
reprove, or convince the world of Sin, of Righteousness, and of Judgment, Joh.
16. 8.

Secondly, a Comforter, which is another sense of it, to support them under all
that troubled them. This is plainly another sense, since he tells them of
sending the Comforter, because sorrow had filled their hearts, v. 6. And this
Office he fulfilled, by assuring them their Lord, whose death they lamented,
was now alive again; by supplying his Place, in making their defense, and
giving them assistance and direction; and by showing them an happy end of all
their Troubles, and preparing them for the Kingdom of Heaven.

Quest. Is the unpardonable Sin against the Holy Ghost, a Sin against these
miraculous Gifts of his?

Answ. Yes; for it was against the Gift of Miracles, and casting out Devils,
the Pharisees sinned, when he cautions them against this dreadful sin, saying,
the sin against the Holy Ghost shall never be forgiven, Mat. 12. 24, 32.

Quest. And what is the unpardonable sin against them?

Answ. Slandering, or Blaspheming them, as the Pharisees there did, when they
attributed them to Magic, and said, he cast out Devils by Beelzebub, v. 24.
for it is expressly called speaking against the Holy Ghost, v. 32. and Blasphemy
against the Holy Ghost, v. 31. And this he said, says St. Mark, because they
said he has an unclean Spirit, Mar. 3. 30.

Quest. What is meant, by never forgiven in this world, nor in the world to
come?

Answ. Not being pardonable under any dispensation or Religion, either Jewish,
or Christian, for the Jews looked on the days of Messiah, as a later state and
dispensation of the Church, to succeed their own: on which account, it is
called the last* days, Is. 2. 2. and Heb. 1. 2. and the last time, 1 John 2.
18. and the World to come, Heb. 6. 5. And See Part 1. Chapter 2.
some sins were to be atoneable among Christians, for which there was no
atonement among the Jews, since by Christ they were to be justified from those
Things, from which they could not be justified by the Law of Moses, Acts 13.
39. And therefore when Christ says, this Blasphemy shall not be forgiven in
this World, nor the World to come, that is the same, as neither to be forgiven
in the Jewish State while it lasted, nor the Christian; neither Moses, nor He,
having provided any Sacrifice or expiation for it.

Quest. Is Blaspheming God the Father, or the Son unpardonable?

Answ. No; whosoever speaks a word against the Son of man, it shall be
forgiven him, Mat. 12. 32. yea, all manner of other Sin, and Blasphemy, shall
be forgiven unto Men, v. 31.

Quest. Why then will the Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost never be forgiven?
Is he more worthy than either the Father, or the Son?

Answ. No; that is not the reason. But these his Gifts, are the last means of
begetting Belief in men; and without Faith, and Repentance wrought by Faith,
there is no Pardon. If men would not believe, but revile the Son, when he was
among them; after he was taken up, the Holy Ghost was to come, and be his
Advocate, and, by all the miraculous Gifts I have mentioned, gain credit from
them. But if, instead of believing him, they shall go to Blaspheme and Revile
him, and slanderously call all his stupendous Gifts magical Tricks, and works
of Satan; God is resolved to endeavor no more with them, nor ever to bring
them to Believe, and Repent, without which there is no Pardon. So that it is
unpardonable, because after it, God has decreed that Faith, and Repentance,
shall be impossible. Of Apostates, says St. Paul, who committed this sin, it is
impossible to renew them again to Repentance, Heb. 6. 6.

Quest. These miraculous Gifts were wonderful vouchsafements: did not they
evidence all that enjoyed them, to be in Favor with God, and in a justified
state?

Answ No; for they were bestowed promiscuously, on good and bad. Balaam loved
the wages of unrighteousness; yet he was a Prophet, 2. Pet. 2. 15, 16. Judas
was the Son of Perdition; but he wrought Miracles, as well as the other
Apostles, Mat. 10. 1, 4, 5, 8. And at the last Day, many will plead, that in
Christ's Name they Prophesied, and cast out Devils, and did Wonders: and yet he
will bid them depart from him, because they wrought iniquity, Mat. 7. 22, 23.
It Is obedience, not miracles, that will save our Souls, it being not the
workers of wonders, but workers of Righteousness, that God accepts of. And
thereupon our Savior bid his Disciples rejoice, not for that the Devils were
subject to them, but rather because their Names were written in Heaven, Luke
10. 17, 18, 19, 20.

Quest. Thus much may suffice, for the understanding of the extraordinary Gifts
of the Holy Ghost. But besides his bestowing these Gifts, you said he has
appointed several Offices, for the Planting, and Establishing Christ's Church
and Religion, what are those Offices, which he is the Author of?

Answ. He gave some Apostles, the highest, and most extensive power in the
Church; and some Prophets, who foretold future Things, Expounded old, and
uttered new Prophesies; and some Evangelists, who writ the Gospels, or preached
the Word in unconverted Places, where it was never heard before; and some
Pastors and Teachers, or Bishops and Presbyters, to govern and instruct the
Church: All which he gave for the perfecting of the Saints, the Work of the
Ministry, and the edifying of the Body of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 8, 11, 12. And God
has set in the Church, first Apostles, secondarily Prophets, thirdly Teachers,
after that Miracles, Governments, etc. 1 Cor. 12. 28.

Quest. For what end were these Offices appointed?

Answ. For the Government and Edification of the Church, and the Work of the
Ministry, in the Word, and Sacraments, and Prayers. They were given, says St.
Paul, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the Work of the Ministry, and for
the edifying of the Body of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 12.

Quest. And were all these Offices to last through all Ages of the Church?

Answ. No; Apostles, Evangelists, and Prophets were Temporary Offices, which
lay in founding of the Church, and revealing Christ's Religion by Inspiration
from himself. And this Church being once founded and built, and this Revelation
being once committed to Writing, it remains a lasting Thing, and so needs not
to be repeated a second time. And therefore, when once they had performed this
Work, in all after Ages there was no further need of them: But as for Pastors
and Teachers, to govern the Church, and ordain Successors, and to minister the
Word, and Prayers, and Sacraments, they will be equally wanted in every Age,
and therefore the Holy Ghost has appointed them to continue always. Go, Baptize
all Nations, teaching them to observe all my Commandments. And lo! in such
Teaching and Baptising, I am with you always, even to the end of the World,
Mat. 28. 19, 20. And tho, as I say, some of the Offices mentioned by St. Paul
were necessary only in the first Age; yet others, which are equally necessary
to the edifying of the Church, and the Work of the Ministry, in every Age, are
to continue, as he says, ti^ we all, i. e. all Christians that are, and a^ that
shall be, come in the Unity of the Faith, and of the Knowledge of the Son of
God, unt^ a perfect Man, unto the Measure of the St^ture of the Fullness of
Christ. So that the Church is to enjoy the Benefit of them to the Worlds end,
Ephesians. 4. 12, 13.

Quest. Since all that are at any time in these Offices die in one Age, how are
they to be continued in the next?

Answ. The Bishops or Governors are stil^ to Ordain others, to remedy their
ow^ Mortality, and supply the Necessities of the Church, through all Times.
Thus Christ told his Apostles, As my Father sent me, viz* with a Power of
Commissioning you to succeed in this Ministry when I am gone; s^ send I you, i.
e. with Power of Ordaining others, in like manner of Succession, John 20. 21.
Pursuant to this, they Ordained Bishops in all Churches, as St. Paul did Titus
at Crete, and Timothy at Ephesus. And these, in a constant Succession, were to
Ordain others; as Paul bid Timothy give Commissions, as he had been
Commissioned himself, or commit what he had heard of him, to faithful Men, who
should be able to teach others also, 2 Timothy 1. 14. and 2. 2. And with these, in
their Work of the Ministry, God would be present and assistant in all after
Times, as he had been with the Apostles in the First Age. In thus Preaching and
Baptizing, lo! I am with ^ou always, even to the end of the World, Mat. 28. 20.
With you, that is, with your selves during your own Lives, and your Successors
in all after* times; which is the only way that in this Work he could be with
them to the Worlds end, who were all to die in that Age.

Quest. Is the Holy Ghost the Author of these Offices?

Answ. Yes. God has set these Officers in the Church, says St. Paul, 1 Cor.
12. 28. and Christ gave them as a Gift, after he was ascended, Ephesians. 4. 8, 11.
That is, God gave them, and Christ gave them, by the Holy Ghost, who now, since
Christ is gone to the Right Hand of God, is come down to his Church as his Jo.
16. 7. and c. 14. 16, 18.
Substitute, from whom both the Authority and Ability of all these Officers is
derived. Feed the Flock, says the Apostle, over which the Holy Ghost has made
you Overseers, Acts 20. 28. And when Christ ordained his Apostles, giving them
Power to send others, as the Father gave him, and to remit and retain Sins, he
breathed on them, and said; Receive ye the Holy Ghost, Joh. 20. 21, 22, 23. And
accordingly, to show from whom these Powers are derived, in Ordinations of
these Officers, whether Bishops or Priests, the Power is to this day conferred
by saying, Receive thou the Holy Ghost.

Quest. What shall we think then of those who reject the Ministry, and cast off
all Church Officers and Ordinances, and yet pretend in all this to be guided by
the Spirit?

Answ. You may be sure it is not by that Spirit which Christ sent down upon the
Apostles, and which indicted the holy Scriptures. For that Spirit gave these
Offices, as the most necessary and greatest Blessing to the Church: Whereas
this Spirit of theirs, plucks up what he planted, and endeavors to abolish and
overthrow them.

Quest. From what you have said, I perceive how infinitely we are obliged to
the Holy Ghost, for that care he has taken, in Planting and Propagating
Christ's Church and Religion, both in the miraculous Gifts he bestowed upon his
Church so amply in the First Age, and in the Offices and Governments he has
appointed to Feed and Rule it in all succeeding Ages. But besides these
extraordinary Gifts, bestowed only on some, for the Propagation and
Establishment of Christ's Church and Religion, you mentioned another sort of
Gifts for the effecting this Great Work of our Salvation, which the Holy Ghost
bestows ordinarily, on Persons of all Times and Places. What Gifts are those?

Answ. All the inward Graces and virtuous Endowments, which are necessary to
the Salvation of all particular Persons, such as the Apostle reckons up, Gal.
5. The Fruits of the Spirit are Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness,
Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance, and such like, v. 22, 23. Particularly,
he excites Devotion, and helps to raise in us holy Desires, and Life and
Quickness in our Prayers. There, says the Apostle, the Spirit helps our
Infirmities, making Intercession for the Saints, according to the Will of God,
by inspiring them with such Desires and Groanings as cannot be uttered, Romans 8.
26, 27.

Quest. Is the Holy Ghost the Author of all these inward Graces in us, and can
we not have them without his Gift?

Answ. No; for the Renewing of our Nature is ascribed to the Holy Ghost, Tit.
3. 5. And St. Paul calls all the recited Virtues, Fruits of the Spirit, Gal. 5.
22. And no Man can come to me, says Christ, i. e. believe on me, and obey me,
except the Father, which has sent me, draw him, John 6. 44. All our Graces
come from God, and must be sought of him. And because we are daily in want of
them, we are taught by our Lord himself to pray, Hallowed be thy Name, Thy
Kingdom come, Thy Will be done, Deliver us from Evil, etc. as constantly as we
say, Give us this Day our Daily Bread.

Quest. If the Holy Spirit gives these, then any Man, that has them, may know
he has Grace, and that the Holy Ghost dwells and acts in him?

Answ. Yes; if he is affected and influenced not only by some few, but by all
of them. For they are the Fruits of the Spirit, as I noted; and where we see
the genuine Fruit, we may make sure of the Principle that gives Birth to it; as
our Savior said, the Tree is known by its Fruit, Luke 6. 43, 44. Mat. 7. 16,
20. And accordingly, they are given as Marks of Grace, and a sure Proof that
Men belong to God, in the Scriptures. Hereby know we that we know him, and that
we are in him, if we keep his Commandments, 1 John 2. 3, 5. We know that we
have passed from Death unto Life, because we love the Brethren, 1 John 3. 14.
He that does Righteousness is righteous; in this the Children of God are
manifest, 1 John 3. 7, 10.

Quest. But may not an ill Man have some Good in him? And have not several
practiced some Virtues, who yet were void of the Spirit, and saving Grace?

Answ. Yes: For Herod, an ill Man, heard John Baptist gladly, and did many
things, Mark 6. 20. And the Foolish Virgins kept pace in some Points with the
Wise, Mat. 25. 1, 2. Either that general Grace, which is common to all Persons,
or their particular Inclination, or Interest, or Natural Conscience, can carry
on Men, who are Enemies to God in the main, to the Performance of some Duties.
And therefore I said these Virtues are a Sign of the Spirit, and of Saving
Grace, not when some few or more of them meet by chance in an otherwise evil
Man; but only in those who have a general Care, and Conscientious Regard to all
of them.

Quest. You have shown how these Graces are the Fruits of the Spirit, and the
Gift of God. But since God's Spirit is thus to work them in us, may we not
leave God's Work to himself, and think our selves free from any Care or Pains
about them?

Answ. No, by no means: For he that made us Men, will not also make us Saints,
without our selves. He created us by himself alone, but will renew and save us
only through our Concurrence with him.

Quest. In carrying on this Work of God, what must we do toward it?

Answ. Our Heart and Will must go along with it, and our Care and Endeavor
toot.

Quest. When God's Spirit begins any Grace or Virtue in us, must our Heart go
along with it, and are we readily to embrace and make choice of it?

Answ. Yes; for he will not force an unwilling Mind into Goodness. And
therefore our own Wills are called upon, when we are pressed to become Good. I
have set before you Life and Good, Death and Evil: Choose Life, Deuteronomy. 30. 15,
19. And when we obey such Calls, some good Tempers of our Wills are noted as
the Cause of it. The Word, and Grace accompanying it, brought forth Fruit,
because it wat received in an honest and good Heart, Luke 8. 15. And if we
refuse them, and continue Bad, our own Wills still are charged with it. Ye will
not come to me, that ye might have Life, Joh. 5. 40. and, Why will ye die, O
House of Israel? Ezekiel. 18. 31, 32.

Quest. And when our Heart is thus bent upon any Graces and Good Things, must
our Care and Endeavor also be put forth in attainment of them?

Answ. Yes; for God gives these Graces as a Blessing upon our own Care and
Pains, and works them in us, when we work with him: So that they are to be the
Fruit of our Industry, as well as of his Bounty. God calls to us, Make you
clean, Isa. 1. 16. Turn your selves, Ezekiel. 18. 30, 32. as well as we pray to
him, Turn thou us, Jer. 31. 18. and, Give us clean Hearts, Psalm. 51. 10.

Quest. But is not God beforehand with us, and gives us some Grace, before we
endeavor any thing? I was found of them that sought me not, says the Prophet,
Isa. 65. 1.

Answ. Yes; the Grace of outward Revelations and Opportunities. These prevent
our Care, and are given before we ask them. In this Kingdom, for Instance, we
have the Light of the Holy Scriptures, the Guidance and Care of Pastors, the
Benefit of Public Assemblies, and the Protection of Laws for Christianity,
which is not so in Heathen Countries. And we have the Scriptures in our own
Language, and Purity of Doctrine, and a truly Primitive, Edifying way of
Worship, which is not so in many Christian Nations. And all these, with other
Advantages, came to us unasked; we did not seek them, but were born to them.
And of these Isaiah speaks, who is not treating of inward Assistances, but of
outward Revelations, which God would make to the Gentiles, who made no inquiry
after them, but had the Revelations brought to them. For the Heathen World did
not seek out to the Apostles, but the Apostles sought them.

Quest. And does not he prevent us too, with good Desires, and inward Motions?

Answ. Yes, he does, with the First Motions and* Beginnings of his Grace. But
as for the Ripening of these, and our growing up to a Mastery over our Lusts,
and a Saving Pitch; that requires our own Care and Endeavors, which these
First Stirrings of Grace must awaken in us. And when we do so endeavor after
them, God will still give more Grace, and, by his Spirit, effect in us such
Virtues as we labor after; but he will withdraw what he has already given, if
we are idle, and labor not at all. For concerning this Improvement of God's
Grace, by our own Care and Pains, our Savior says, To him that has, shall be
given, and he shall have abundance: but from him that has not, i. e. has not
improved what God bestowed, shall be taken away even what he has, Mat. 25. 29.

Quest. God's Giving then is only an Encouragement for our Seeking; since he
gives those Graces, as he gives our Food and Maintenance, not to idle, careless
Men, but only to such as diligently and wisely labor after them?

Answ. Very true; and therefore we are pressed to work them out our selves, by
that very Reason work out your own Salvation, for it is God that works in
you, both to will, and to do, Phil. 2. 12, 13.

Quest. What way should we seek these Graces of the Spirit, that by God's
Blessing we may attain them?

Answ. First, Pray for them. If any man lack Wisdom, let him ask of God, who
gives to all Men Liberally, and upbraideth not, and it shall be given him,
Jam. 1. 5. And God will give the Holy Spirit to those that ask him, Luke 11. 13.

Quest. And must we pray in Faith, that is, ask with an expectation to Receive
them?

Answ. Yes; for God cannot bear to see us question his kindness, or distrust
his Promise. Our distrust is enough to make him deny us any thing; but we are
sure to receive the Graces he has promised, if we dare confide in him.
Whatsoever ye shall ask, Believing, you shall receive, Mat. 21. 22. And if any
man lack Wisdom, let him ask of God. But let him ask in Faith, nothing
wavering, Jam. 1. 5, 6.

Quest. What other ways of seeking these Graces, would you direct to?

Answ. Secondly, a frequent, and serious use of the Holy Sacrament. That is no
unfruitful Ordinance, but conveys Spiritual strength into our Souls, as Bread
does to our Bodies. This the Scripture intimates, when Christ's Eucharistical
Body is called Bread, Joh. 6. 51, 55. And when the eating Bread, and drinking
Wine, is called the Communion of his Body and Blood, that is, the Communication
of all those Graces, and Benefits to us, which were purchased by them, 1 Cor.
10. 16.

Quest. Have you any other Rules?

Answ. Yes. Thirdly, with Prayers, and Sacraments we must join a Diligent use
of wise and likely means of attaining the Desired Graces. When we seek to God
for Daily Bread and maintenance, it must be in following our Callings, with
Prudent Care, and Diligence. And in like sort, when we seek to him for any
Virtues, it must be in the use of such Probable, and Discreet ways, as are like
to make us Masters of them.

Quest. Would you add any thing further, about the use of these means?

Answ. Yes. Fourthly, that it be with a Faith in God's Power and Spirit, and a
confidence of success through that Assistance. God has promised his Grace and
Spirit, to make us Good; as well as his Mercy to Pardon us, when we are so. And
we must eye this Promise of his Powerful assistance, when we set about any
Virtue and Goodness. A Faith in his Power, is as necessary to make us Good; as
Faith in his Mercy toward all good Men, is to make us desirous of being Good.
And to this Faith, the Scripture Directs us in working out our Obedience. Work
out your own Salvation, for it is God that works in you, and so strengthen
your Hands in that expectation, Phil. 2. 12, 13. And we are kept by the Power
of God, through Faith, viz. in that Power unto Salvation, 1 Pet. 1. 5.

Quest. Is there any other Rule to be observed, in seeking these Graces of the
Holy Spirit?

Answ. Yes. Fifthly, that in all the Time we are endeavoring after them, we do
nothing to Grieve, or annoy him. It Is with him, as it is with every ingenious
Person, he grows weary of staying, where he finds he is not welcome, and where
men are still taking occasion to displease, and pass Affronts upon him. And
therefore, when we are warned against several sins, to conclude all, we are
cautioned not to grieve the Holy Spirit of God, which is to restrain us from
them, Ephesians. 4. 30.

Quest. What things will grieve him?

Answ. The Apostle there particularly mentions obscene Talk, and corrupt
Communication, ver. 29. But he is grieved by our consenting to all sorts of
Sin, for he is a declared Enemy to all of them. Especially, if we commit any,
against many of his suggestions, and checks of Conscience: As David did in the
Murder of Uriah, after which he was sore afraid, lest God should take his Holy
Spirit from him, Ps. 51. 11. or if we have sinned our selves up to a Custom; or
take delight in sinning.

Quest. Does it offend him knowingly to Neglect, and Slight his good
suggestions?

Answ. Yes; for he is concerned to have them take Place, since he suggests
nothing to us, but what is most agreeable to his own most Holy Inclinations, the
Honor of God, and our Eternal Happiness. Let us have, that is, use Grace, that
we may serve God acceptably, Heb. 12. 28. And therefore let this pass for a
Sixth Rule of obtaining his saving Graces, to cherish the Good Suggestions he
inspires, and always improve the Grace he has already given, to bring down more
from him. For, to him that has, shall be given, and he shall have abundance,
Mat. 25. 29. In things of Trust, this is the way of all Discreet Persons, and
so it is his.

Quest. If we idely neglect, and fail to cultivate our Present Grace then, he
will withhold such further Measures, as he Designed us?

Answ. Yes; and after long Patience, at last withdraw the former too. For, from
him that has not, shall be taken away, even that which he has, Mat. 25. 29.
Thus Felix, when he trembled at St. Paul's Sermon, not fomenting that Fear, nor
proceeding to improve, and penitently resolve upon it, fell back, and as we
have cause to think, heard no more of it, Act. 24. 25.

Quest. These seem Good and plain Rules, for the attainment of these Graces of
the Spirit. And when we are careful to use them, may we be confident of his
Gift, and promise our selves that he will bestow them?

Answ. Yes; for therein he fulf^ls the Design of Christ that sent him, and
gratifies his own inclination. And this God has promised, and ordered us to
expect from him. Bidding us seek, and we shall find, Mat. 7. 7. and declaring,
how to him that has, shall be given: and God will give the Holy Spirit to
those that ask him.

Quest. You have showed me, how we are to attain the Graces of the Spirit. But
if they are thus to be our own Attainment; how are they God's Gift? And if, as
you said before, God gives them, what need we take all this care, and Pains, to
acquire them?

Answ. If they were an absolute Gift, indeed, we should not need to do it. For
when a Gift is absolute, no Conditions are required on our part: And then, no
defects in us can hinder, nor any dispositions of ours further, and make way
for it. It depends not on any thing in us, but is purely God's Act: So that
nothing is left for us to do toward it. But these Graces, are not an absolute,
but conditional Grant: before the Spirit gives them, he requires something
toward them, and works them not in all Men, but only in those who are prepared
for them. Some things hinder them, and they are to be carefully avoided: Others
further them, and they are to be diligently pursued. So that we are not to
expect them, from God's Grace and Spirit alone, unless we our selves also, in
such sort as I have described, concur and join with him.

Quest. By what you have said, I perceive how careful the Holy Ghost is, to
fill our Souls with gracious dispositions. Does he not also refresh them, with
such Spiritual Joy and Comforts, as are apt to result from them?

Answ. Yes. For St. Paul reckons joy, and Peace, as well as Meekness and
Tempera^ce, for Fruits of the Spirit, Gal. 5. 22, 23. and Prays, that the God
of Hope, would fill them with all Joy, and Peace in Believing, and that they
may abound in Hope, through the Power of the Holy Ghost, Romans 15. 13. And St
Luke says, the Churches walked in the Comfort of the Holy Ghost, Act. 9. 31.
And St. Peter of the Dispersed Strangers, that in believing, they rejoiced with
Joy unspeakable, 1 Pet. 1. 8. And therefore good Christians must not affect
Scruples, or think it any sign of Spirituality, to be of a Down-looked and
Melancholy Religion: Since Joy and Peace, a Filial Hope and ingenious
cheerfulness, are Fruits that he loves to produce in them.

Quest. But does the Holy Ghost inspire these comforts into all minds, wherein
he displays his saving Graces, which are the Ground of them?

Answ. He is inclined to do it in all* And does it in one degree, or other; not
always producing Raptures, and Transports of Mind, indeed, but ease and
quietness, an inward complacency and comfortable Hope, if they themselves do
not put a Bar against him. But some minds he sanctifies, are of a Melancholy
Temper, that is, prone to sadness and suspicions, especially of themselves. Or
are frighted by undue-thoughts of God, as if he were Stern and Rigorous, soon
offended, but very difficult to be reconciled. Or mistake the Gospel Terms, as
if they were overrigid, and exacted more than can possibly, or at least
ordinarily, be performed. Or labor under some other cloudy, and afflicting
Error, or distemper of mind, which hinders a most comfortable Religion, and
peaceful Piety, from creating any Joy or Comfort, in them.

Quest. But when there are none of these intrinsic impediments, to interpose
betwixt his Joy and them, does not he sometimes Arbitrarily, and without any
provocation, withdraw himself, and hide his Face, as if he were displeased with
them? Which withdrawing, is often given as the cause of many Good men's Grief and
Dejection, and is what some call Spiritual Desertion.

Answ. At this rate, indeed, all Spiritual Comfort must needs be most variable
and uncertain, as depending, not on any Constancy of good and comfortable
Dispositions in themselves, but on the Arbitrariness of such unprovoked
withdrawings, to try Experiments upon Men. But this, I think, is all humane
invention; the Scripture, on the contrary, teaching us, that when Sinners
purify their hearts, and draw nigh to him, God does not withdraw himself, and
shrink away, but draws nigh to them, Jam. 4. 8. It is an imputation on this
good Spirit, not at all agreeing with his inclination, which is to be an
immutable lover of goodness, and of good men, to be unalterably pleased with
them, whilst they do what is pleasing to him, and to delight in having them
take pleasure and joy in him. It seems very opposite to his Office and
Undertaking. For his Work and Office, as I have shown, is to engender Peace and
Comfort, as well as Goodness, in the hearts of his Servants. And since that is
his business, he will be as constant in pursuing it, and no more withdraw his
Comforts, than he does his Graces from them, without being justly provoked
thereto by some act of their own. Nay, on the contrary, when their own
melancholy humors, or mispersuasions, have intercepted his joyful presence
from good men, he is ready with the light of his Countenance to break through
that darkness, and, in great pity, very often restores that Comfort to their
minds, which their own error, or distemper, had driven from it. So that these
arbitrary and unprovoked desertions, whether in Grace, or Comforts, as they
have no foundation in Scripture, but there meet with opposition; so are they
not suitable to the Holy and good Spirit's natural Genius, or his Undertaking
and Office. He always loves and delights in good men, and never voluntarily
withdraws himself, but is always driven from them.

CHAP. IX. Of the Holy Catholic Church, and the Communion of Saints.
The Contents.
No assurance of Salvation by Christ, but in his Church. This Church Holy. And
Catholic. Admission into it by Baptism; when regularly performed in any one,
valid in all Churches. Excommunication is so too. This Church is one Body, by
external visible unity. Of the Communion of Saints in this Church. Of their
visible union in Faith or Doctrine. And in Pray^rs and Devotion. Of
communicating in Public Prayers. A Sin to separate without just cause.
Imposing Sins, or Errors, as Conditions of Communion, is a just cause. Not
Lawful to separate for Things indifferent. Nor for better means of edification.
Just to separate from a Church, that does not impose her Corruptions, when her
Errors in Faith overthrow the Foundation. That is, when she ceases to own the
one true God. Or denis Jesus to be the Christ, or Salvation by his Merits and
Mediation. Owning Jesus to be the Christ, implies, owning the Articles of the
Apostles Creed, which contains all Fundamentals. Whilst any Churches hold to
this Creed, which is the Foundation, Errors in other things do not unchurch
them. But such Erroneous are in a worse state, than Orthodox Christians. Nor is
her Communion to be deserted merely for such Errors, though very gross, if she
does not impose them. Just to separate from a Church of a corrupt Worship, when
sinful things pollute her Public Offices. Or when good Devotions are put up in
a strange Language. Not for Rites and Customs about indifferent Matters. Nor
just to separate for scandalous Members, where a Churches constitution is
faultless. Nor though it neglect Discipline, which should reform them. Of keeping
Fellowship with the Apostles, by submitting to our lawful Bishops their
Successors. Christians to communicate in Affections, in Alms, and Temporal good
Things.

Quest. WHat is the Ninth Article in the Creed?

Answ. The Holy Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints?

Quest. Is there no assurance of Salvation by Christ, but in his Church?

Answ. No; for Baptism, whereby we are made members of the Church, is compared
to Noah's Ark, whereinto all were to enter, that would not perish with the
World, 1 Pet. 3. 20, 21. Christ is represented to us, as the Head of his
Church, and the Savior of the body, Ephesians. 5. 23. And God daily added to the
Church such as should be saved, says St. Luke, Act. 2. 47. In the Church, all
good men have a sure claim to God's favor, by Promises and Compacts, which
engage him in Faithfulness. But out of it, they stand to courtesy, and can
build, at best, only on presumptions, and uncovenanted mercies; the Covenant
which God seals with us, respecting his Church, and being proposed and ratified
in the Word which it preaches, and in the Sacraments which it dispences.

Quest. Must not this make all careful to be Members of this Body, and keep in
Comm^nion with Christ's Church, who profess Christianity?

Answ. Most certainly, as without which, by their Religion, there is not only a
want of the set means and opportunities, but also of all express Contracts and
Promises of Salvation. Our Savior Christ has appointed not only the Christian
Religion, which all are to believe and practice: but the Christian Church too,
wherein they are to profess that Faith, and Communicate as Members. And the
same Baptism, that lists us Professors of his Religion, makes us Members of his
Church also.

Quest. Why is the Church called Holy?

Answ. Because it is a Body of men that is Holy, that is, separated from the
rest of the World, and dedicated to A^mighty God. Ye are a chosen Generation,
an Holy Nation, a Peculiar People, 1 Pet. 2. 9. And because, whatever they
prove in reality, their Religion is a Profession of Holiness, as their
Baptismal Vow, which is made at their entrance on Christianity, sufficiently
declares. To the Church at Corinth, called to be Saints, 1 Cor. 1. 2.

Quest. Why is it called Catholic?

Answ. To show its Universality, and that it is not confined to one Nation or
Place, as the Jewish Church was. And the Catholic Church notes the whole Body
of Christians, diffused through all places, and enduring through all times. The
Church is also called Catholic, in relation to the Faith it holds, which ought
to be the same in all Places. And in this sense, particular Churches are
sometimes styled Catholic, meaning thereby, that they are Orthodox, and live
in the Faith and Communion of the Catholic Church, not of any Heretical
Combinations.

Quest. The Church is Catholic, as containing all Places and Persons: but it
is not universal as to some Acts, which being done any where, are valid, and
equally bind every where?

Answ. Yes; it is Catholic in the Admission into its Baptism, which being duly
administered in one Church, makes a man free of the whole Christian Society, and
gives him a Right to all Christian Privileges in all other Churches. So that
go where he will, every Church shall own him for a Christian, and admit him to
Communion, without requiring him to be Baptized over again.

Quest. So that a true member* of Christ, who is allowed to Pray, and receive
the Sacrament in one Church, ought to be allowed the same in every Church?

Answ. Yes; and so they were in ancient times, when upon producing their
Certificates, and Commendatory Letters from their own Churches, Strangers and
Travelers were owned as Brethren, and admitted to Communion in the remotest
Places.

Quest. And is it not fit they should seek this Communion, wheresoever they
pass?

Answ. Yes; very fit, to show themselves true Catholics, and that they own the
Christians of all other places, as Brethren, and Fellow Members. But this must
be only where they may be admitted to Communion upon lawful terms. For when
Churches will suffer none to Pray, or Communicate with them, without professing
some Errors, or joining in some forbidden Practice, there is no seeking to
associate with such Assemblies.

Quest. Can you show this Catholic efficacy in other Acts?

Answ. Yes; not to insist on others; secondly, in excluding Persons out of the
Church by Excommunication. For if a man is justly excommunicated in one Place,
the Church, as I shall show, being but one, that is valid and ought to stand,
till he is duly loosed and reconciled again, in all places. He is cast out by
Christ, who, for any unchristian Practices, is regularly and justly bound, or
excommunicated by the Church of Christ, for whatsoever you bind or retain on
Earth, says he, shall be bound and retained in Heaven, Joh. 20. 23. and Mat.
18. 18. And whilst Christ himself rejects, it is not for any other Church of
Christ to receive him. And thus it was in the Ancient Church: where, if any for
Heretical stubbornness, or lewd Lives, were cut off from Christ by their own
Church, no Canon. Apost. 10. 12. 32. Et Council. Nicen. prim. Cap. 5. and Ep.
Cler. Romans ad Cypr. Ep. 30. ed. Oxon.
other Churches would admit them, 'till they had made their peace again. And to
prevent any oversight, and unwary Communion with an Excommunicate Person; when
any Strangers and Travelers, especially whom they had ground to suspect, came
to them from Foreign parts, they would not admit them to join in their
Church-Offices, till they produced their Canon. Apost. 12. vid. Zonar. in loc.
and Cap. 33.
Communicatory Letters, to certify their being in Communion with their own
Churches. And this must make all good Christians extremely careful, by all
innocent ways, to keep the peace of their own Church; and never contumaciously
provoke, or proudly slight it, presuming, if it casts them out, they may do as
well, by being let in, and harbored by others. Which if all Christ's Members
really believed, Church Discipline would not be so precarious a thing; nor
would any think, as I fear too many do, that a Church is beholding to them, for
sticking to her, and keeping in her Communion.

Quest. What is it to Believe the Holy Catholic Church?

Answ. Not only to believe there is such a Church, but also, agreeable to that
belief, in all those Acts which declare our Union with it, to adhere to it as
its Members, against all Factious Innovators, and Dividers.

Quest. Is this Church but one Body?

Answ. No. For we are called to peace in one Body, Col. 3. 15. and there is but
one Body, as one Spirit, one Lord, one Baptism, Ephesians 4. 4, 5.

Quest. And is it to be one, by an External, Visible Unity?

Answ. Yes; for an external Union, in the common Offices and Advantages of the
Society, must show it to be, what the Sripture calls it, one Body. It must have
such an Union, as may be taken notice of by Men, and from whence they will say,
Christians, are all of one Religion. I pray not for these alone, but for all
that shall believe on me, through their word: That they may all be one, and
that so visibly, that the World may see it, and thereby know and believe, that
thou have sent me, and have loved them, as thou have loved me, Joh. 17. 20, 21,
22, 23. And this visible union, is their maintaining one Communion, and
Church Fellowship, i. e. their readiness to Pray, and Communicate together, and
join in all Acts of Christian Worship, Faith, and Charity with each other. By
this shall all Men know, that you are my Disciples, if ye love one another. If
ye Love one another, i. e. if ye love so as to unite, not only in Faith and
Affection, but in Worship too, and pray and communicate together. For a
readiness to worship God together, must show as much as any thing their unity
in Discipleship, and that they are all Servants of one and the same Lord and
Master, Joh. 13. 35. And accordingly, Prayers and Sacraments, are set down
among the Bonds of Union, which compact together the Members of this one
Church. Of the Eucharist, says St. Paul, we being many are made one Body, by
being all partakers of that one Bread, 1 Cor. 10. 17. And of Baptism, we are
all Baptized into one Body, 1 Cor. 12. 13. and as many as have been Baptized
into Christ, are all one in Christ Jesus, Gal. 3. 27, 28. And among those
various ways, whereby the Church becomes one Body, he lays down, as one Faith,
which they all Profess: So one Baptism, whereof they all partake; one God, and
Father of all, whom they all invocate with one Hope; and one Lord, whom they
all serve and worship, Ephesians. 4. 4, 5, 6.

Quest. Does this visible union imply a professed subjection of the whole Church,
to one visible Head, the Bishop of Rome?

Answ. No; that is a Title too haughty to be assumed, and a Power too extensive
to be managed by any one Person. Besides, in Scripture, there is not the least
mention of this universal Headship. No, not in the 1 Cor. 12. 28. Ephesians. 4. 11.
Lists of Church-Powers, and Ministrations, where this, which is the highest of
all others, could not be left out. Nor, in Silencing any Heresies, or deciding
any Controversies and Disputes, of which there was great number then in the
Church; and for determination whereof, as it ought to have been used, so it is
not conceivable, had it then been owned, but the Apostles would have directed
and sent men to it, or the Litigants themselves would have appealed to its
sentence. Among the Apostles, our Blessed Lord precludes all pretense to such
Power, telling the ver. 14.
Twelve, when they were at Strife who should be highest in Empire and Lordship,
that one of them should not bear Rule, and exercise Authority over the rest,
Luke 22. 24, 25, 26. And as for St. Peter, in particular, he set up no claim of
Power over the other Apostles, but bore himself in all things toward them, and
was correspondently treated by them as a Brother. In any common Debates, and
particularly in the Council of Jerusalem, he did not so much as preside, as St.
James there ver. 19.
seems rather to have done, but as an Equal, gave his Reasons, and his Voice
among them, Act. 15. 7. When his actings seemed very Novel and Doubtful, as his
going in to Cornelius, and his Gentile Friends, the Brethren of the
Circumcision freely required an Account thereof, and stiffly contended with him,
Act. 11. 2. And when they were really Blameworthy, as his dissimulation was at
Antioch, St Paul, like his Com-Peer Apostle, openly withstood, and rebuked him,
Gal. 2. 11, 12, 13, 14. These, with sundry other like Passages, show how
unknown such Universal Headship was in the Apostles time. And the same may be
made appear of the Church, in the Ages following. But that visible Unity, which
all Christians were obliged to endeavor after in the Church, was preserved, as
I say, by their joint readiness to communicate externally as Brethren, not by a
professed subjection of all Churches to one Visible Head, and submitting to his
Authority and Jurisdiction.

Quest. In this one Church, indeed, as it follows in the Creed, there must be a
Communion of Saints; what is meant by Saints?

Answ. Christians. By their Enemies, they were styled Act. 24. 5. 14.
Heretics, or Nazarenes. But the Names they gave themselves, were the Col. 3.
12 Tit. 1. 1.
Elect, the Act. 9. 30 and 14. 2.
Brethren, the Act. 11. 26.
Christians, or many times the Romans 1. 7. 1 Cor. 14. 33. Jude 3.
Saints, as is very commonly seen in the inscriptions, or salutations, of the
Epistles writ to them, by the holy Apostles.

Quest. And what is the Communion of these Saints, or Christians?

Answ. Their joining in common in those things, which make them Christians, or
in the common Offices and concerns of Christianity. There must be Communion,
because of their Unity as one Body. And this Communion must be in something
sensible, to show a visible Unity, which the World shall see, and reflect upon,
as I noted from our Savior.

Quest. In what does this Communion consist?

Answ. In adhering to the same Doctrine, Government, and Worship, both in
Prayers, and Sacraments. For in these St. Luke places the Communion of the
Primitive Church. They continued steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine, and
Fellowship, and breaking of Bread, and in Prayers, Act. 2. 42.

Quest. How must they keep to the same Faith, and Doctrine?

Answ. By adhering to the Holy Scriptures, which ought to be every where the
same Rule of it. And this Unity of Faith requiring, not only that they inwardly
believe the same things, but also that they outwardly profess that Belief; to
make Unity in this Profession, in the first days there is mention of its being
drawn up into a Form of Sound words, 2 Timothy 1. 13. This Form was, as some
think, the Apostles Creed, which contains all that Catholic Doctrine, that is
necessary to make any Man a Good Christian, and which accordingly has been
always received as the Form in Baptism, the most learned, not professing more
thereat, nor the most ignorant, less, through all Ages of the Church.

Quest. This united Adherence to the same Rule and Form, will keep up a visible
Union in Faith, or Doctrine. But how can they all be thus united in Prayers and
Devotions, not having one and the same Forms of Prayer and Liturgies?

Answ. By making them all according to the same Rules, and for the same intents
and purposes. For all their Prayers are put up to one and the same God, for one
and the same common mercies, on the same common terms and expectations, through
the same common Merits and Mediation, and with the same common Affection and
Brotherly concern for each other. Which make them in Substance the same Worship
and Devotions, though put up in far distant places, or in different Forms of
expression, or Languages.

Quest. According to what you said before of the Unity of the Church, the
Members of this one Body, must not only worship, and pray like each other, but
be ready to worship and pray together. But how can we communicate, or join in
the use of Prayers, and Sacraments, with all Christians, who are so far spread,
and widely distant in their Habitations?

Answ. With Foreigners, we are bound to join only as we meet with them. When we
happen to be amongst them, or they amongst us, to show we are all of the same
Body, and that the Church is one, we must mutually Associate in worship, and
receive each other to Communion, not sticking at any different Rites, and
usages we find in other Churches, whilst there is no Sin in them. And as for
the Christians of our own Country there is no difficulty of joining thus in
Worship, yea, and Government too with them, because we are all under the same
Laws and spiritual Guides, and live among them.

Quest. Do you lay much weight upon Public Prayers, and think the People ought
to place much in attending the Churches Service, and Praying along with the
Minister?

Answ. Yes. For though God is ready to hear any Good man, by himself alone:
Yet, for the Countenance of the Public Worship, and the maintenance of good
order, he sets particular marks of Favor on those Prayers which are offered to
him in Public, in concurrence with his Minister. Thus, in the Jewish Law, he
appointed the Priests to Offer, and burn incense Exodus 30 7, 8.
twice a Day, for a Daily Service: the end whereof was, to present those
Prayers, which the Luke 1. 10.
People offered up during this Ministration, as a sweet smell to God in these
Perfumes. And David, when he would desire a great Recommendation to his
Prayers, begs they may come fortified with this advantage, to be set forth in
God's sight like Incense, Psalm. 141. 2. In like manner, the four and twenty
Elders in the Revelations, that is, the Bishops or Pastors of the Church, are
represented as having every one, like the Jewish Priests, Golden Vials full of
Odors, which are the Prayers of the Saints, Rev. 5. 8. And when any Persons in
sickness, would have Recourse to Prayers, St. James directs them to present
them by their Pastors, and send for the Elders of the Church, Jam. 5* 14. And
Jesus Christ, that Angel, who at the Golden Altar, offers up the Prayers of all
Saints, is set out particularly as presenting those Prayers of theirs, which
came up with the smoke of incense, Rev. 8. 3, 4. Not to mention the many other
Advantages of Public Prayer, as its being an addressing to God in a Body, and
united Number, which in all Addresses, is confessedly a way of most Force and
Power; and among them, perhaps, in conjunction with some of the best Souls, and
very likely, with several more Holy, and dearer to him, than our selves, for
whose Genesis 20. 7.
sake he may be more like to hear our joint supplications, as he would hear Job
for his Friends, when he would not accept either their Prayer, or Sacrifice, at
their own hands, Job 42. 7, 8. And therefore it is a most fond and prejudicial,
as well as Criminal and inexcusable carelessness, for Men so sloathfully and
irreligiously, to neglect the daily opportunities of Public Prayers, as, God
knows, the generality do; yea, though under this neglect they do serve God at
home, and have Prayers daily in their own Families.

Quest. You speak of Communicating in Prayers, though there be no Sermon.

Answ. Yes; for certainly no man, that comes to Church to serve God, if he
understand what that is, can come more for Sermons, than for Prayers sake. It Is
for Prayers principally, that we are to come to the House of God, for my House
is the House of Prayer, says God, Isa. 56. 7. and Mat. 21. 13. In these it is,
that God's Worship does chiefly consist. And by these especially, the Saints of
all Times, and Places, thought to worship God. And these, above all our other
Services, our Mediator is careful to offer up to God from us, that, which he is
represented, as presenting at the Golden Altar from the Public Assemblies,
being the Prayers of the Saints, Rev. 8. 3, 4. And therefore it shows a very
untaught and ignorant, as well as an Irreligious and Profane Objector, to
pretend he will not go to Church, because there is nothing but Prayers: for
that is one of the chief things for which he should go thither, and the very
Life and Spirit of our Service and Performance there.

Quest. But if we are bound thus, not only to Unity of Doctrine, but likewise
to preserve Unity of Public Worship and Communion, what shall we think of
Schism, that is, rending and dividing the Church, either the whole Church, or
that part where we live, and thereby making two Churches out of one? Is it a
Sin to Erect new Churches, and separate in these Acts of Prayers and
Sacraments, from the Body of a Church, or Nation?

Answ. Yes most certainly, and a very great one, except there be a just Cause
of Separation. For so at Corinth, St. Paul told them, whilst one was for Paul,
and another for Apollos, and there were Divisions among them, they were Carnal,
and walked as men, 1 Cor. 3. 3, 4. And at Rome, he bids them mark those who
cause Divisions and Offenses, and not adhere and associate with, but avoid
them, Romans 16. 17. And this he spoke of Schism, whilst it was only an imperfect
Birth, not gone on to open Separation, but only to such unquiet practices, and
making of Parties, as would shortly end therein. For so, under all the
Corinthian Sidings and Divisions, he declares that they came together still in
the same Church, and met to partake in the same Worship, yea, and Supper of our
Lord, 1 Cor. 11. 18, 20.

Quest. What is a just Cause of Separation?

Answ. A Necessity of sinning, if we join with them. Which always is, when some
sinful things are imposed by any Society of Christians, as (...) Conditions of
their Communion. We are to maintain the Churches Peace, only Romans 12. 18.
so far as lies in us; but we have no Power, or Liberty, to sin for it. The
Church it self is called Holy, and therefore we must not think to show our
selves its true Members, by acting unholily. When without sinning we cannot
continue with them, the voice of the Scripture is, come out from among them,
and be ye separate, and touch not the unclean thing, 2 Cor. 6. 17.

Quest. And when does a Church impose such sinful things?

Answ. When it will not allow us to be of its Communion, without Believing, or
Professing, Errors of Faith; or committing sins in Practice. As the Church of
Rome does, by casting all out of its Communion, who will not believe that
Churches Infallibility, and Transubstantiation, which are Errors in Faith; nor
Adore the Host, Worship Images, Pray to Saints and AnAngels, and the like,
which are sins in Practice.

Quest. It is no breach of Church-Unity then, nor Act of sin, to separate from
such Imposers of unlawful things?

Answ. No; but an adhering to Christ and his Apostles, and the Universal Church
of all Ages, who disclaim these Corruptions. In these Particulars, the imposing
Church separates her self from Christ, and the Catholic Church, and therefore
we keep the Unity of the Catholic Church* in adhering to it against her, who
makes (...) upstart Combination, and proves a Schismatical Divider.

Quest. If there is no just Cause of Separating, but when we must needs commit
some sin in joining with a Church, then it is never just to Separate for things
indifferent?

Answ. No; because they lawfully may be done, and have no sin in them. For all
sin is the transgression of a Law, 1 John 3. 4. and therefore there can be no
sin in indifferent things, since they would be no longer indifferent, but
unlawful, if there were any Law against them. We are to keep Peace as much as
lies in us; and indifferent things certainly do, since they are no where
forbidden to us. Nay, in these things, a good Christian should be easy, not
only in submitting to Church-Laws, but in complying with Innocent
Church-Customs; St. Paul thinking it Argument sufficient in a little Case, to
say, we have no such Custom, nor the Churches of God, 1 Cor. 11. 16.

Quest. Is it unjust also to Separate from a Church, on pretense the
Established Means there are less Edifying?

Answ. Yes; for the Means were less Edifying in the Assemblies at Corinth. Many
spoke confusedly at once, which was not a doing Things to edifying, 1 Cor. 14.
26, 27. And many spoke in strange Tongues, which could not Edify their
Hearers, because they did not understand them, v. 16, 17. But under this less
Edifying State, it was not lawful to divide. Whilst there are Divisions among
you, are you not Carnal, 1 Cor. 3. 3. All Christians must seek to Edify the
Church, as well as themselves; and the Church is Edified by Unity and Peace.
Follow after the things, which make for Peace, for with them we must Edify one
another, Romans 14. 19.

Quest. I see there is a just Cause of Separation, when a Church imposes any
Sins, or Errors as Conditions of her Communion. But what if a Church, that is
Defiled with these, is yet so Moderate, as not to impose them; may she not, for
all that, be so far corrupted with them, that on account thereof all Good Men,
who would take due care of their own Souls, ought to leave her Communion?

Answ. Yes, if she errs so foully*in Faith, as to overthrow, or go off from the
Foundation. Or, if her Corruptions have so overspread, and poisoned all the
necessary Parts of her Worship, that there is no joining in her Prayers and
Sacraments, without joining in the Corruptions too, that are Embodied with
them. In these cases, be ye Separate, says the Scripture, and touch not the
unclean thing, 2 Cor. 6. 17. and come out of her, my People, that ye be not
Partakers of her Sins, and that ye receive not of her Plagues. Rev. 18. 4.

Quest. One Case, you say, is in Errors of Faith, which overthrow the
Foundation. What mean you by the Foundation of Faith?

Answ. Such points of it, as are the very Bottom and Groundwork of the
Christian Covenant, whereinto we are all Baptized, and whereon the Church is
Erected. They are such Articles, as are the Root of all that Worship, and
Obedience, we are to pay to God; of all that Submission, Trust, and Adoration,
we are to show toward Jesus Christ; and of all that Labor, and Success, we
are called to here in the Prosecution of an Holy Life. All the Points of our
Christian Faith, are a-like True: but all Truths, are not a-like useful; nor
all useful Truths, a-like necessary. It Is necessary for us to believe all, when
we are sufficiently showed that Christ has taught them. But it is moreover
necessary for us all to see he has taught some, which are not only to be
Believed, because they were Revealed; but were therefore Revealed, because
necessary to be Learned, and Believed, of all that retain to him. And these
Points, which are not only Profitable, but necessary to the Worship and Service
of God by Jesus Christ, and to the maintenance of the Christian Covenant, and
of the Church which is Built upon it, are called Fundamentals.

Quest. Can you show me, what points are such?

Answ. One is the common foundation of all true Religion, Mosaical, and
Natural, as well as Christian; and that is, the Belief of the one True God, not
only of his Being, but also of his Providence and Care to Reward those that
seek him. Thus St. Paul sets down Faith toward God, as one Article to be first
laid, Heb. 6* 1. For he that comes to God in any way, says he, must believe
that he is; and that he is a Rewarder of them that diligently seek him, Heb.
11. 6. This Faith in the one true God, is overthrown, not only when Men
overlook, or deny him; but also when they join, any Gentile Gods, who were
Apostate Spirits, in Copartnership with him. For every true Church, must have
Repentance from Idols toward God, as well as Faith toward our Lord Jesus
Christ, Act 20. 20, 21. And this is Life eternal, says our Savior, to know
thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent, Joh. 17. 3. And
he is Antichrist, says St. John, that denies the Father and the Son, 1 John 2.
22. If she cast off the Belief of the one true God, the common Principle of all
true Religion, she is the Congregation of some Fallen Spirits, which set up for
false Gods, and not the Church of the Great God of Heaven. As well, as if she
have not Faith in Christ, she is no longer Christian.

Quest. But when a Church professes Faith in the one true God, the common
Groundwork of all true Religion: What is the Particular Foundation of the
Christian Religion?

Answ. Belief of Jesus being the Son of God, and the Christ, and of Salvation
by his Merits and Mediation. When Peter confessed Jesus to be the Christ, the
Son of the living God, our Savior said, upon this Rock will I build my Church,
Mat. 16. 16, 18. And St. Paul says, the Foundation which he had laid, and other
than which no Man can lay, is Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 3. 11. And the compass of
saving Knowledge, marked out by our Lord himself, as I noted, is, together with
the Knowledge of the one true God, to know Jesus Christ whom he has sent.
Whilst any Church retains this Faith in Christ, it is Christian, and has Right
to Baptism, as St. Philip declared to the Eunuch, who was Baptized upon his
making this Confession, Act. 8. 37, 38. But if it denis this Authority of
Christ, and its dependence upon him, for salvation; it is thereby unchurched,
and becomes unchristian, like Jewish, Mahometane, or Heathen Churches, and is
put out of the ordinary way of Salvation, there being no Name under Heaven
given among Men, whereby we may be saved, but his alone, Act. 4. 12.

Quest. But does not this Grand Article of Jesus being the Christ and Savior,
imply in it sundry other Articles?

Answ. Yes; if we Believe Jesus to be the Christ, we must believe all the Holy
Scriptures as his Word, and they contain all Articles. But it more especially
implies his Incarnation, Passion, Resurrection, and other great Articles of the
Creed, which must be expressly owned by every one that rightly understands it.
And accordingly, in the various Repetitions of this Grand Article, and
Representations of the saving Faith, one or other of these, is oft-times added,
and given as the instance of it. 1 John 4. 15. and c. 5. 1.
Believing Jesus to be the Christ, the Son of God, you may have Life through
his Name, says St. John, showing the necessity of this main Foundation, Joh.
20. 31. But St. Paul, speaking of this Grand Doctrine, says, I determined to
know nothing among you, but Jesus Christ and him Crucified; setting out the
knowledge of Christ, in the knowledge of his Passion, 1 Cor. 2. 2. And, if thou
confess the Lord Jesus, and believe God raised him from the Dead, thou shall be
saved; exemplifying the saving knowledge of Jesus, in the Belief of his
Resurrection, Romans 10. 9. And when he commanded us to preach him, says St.
Peter, he commanded us to preach, and testify, that it is he, who is ordained
of God, to be the Judge both of quick and dead; illustrating the Preaching
Christ, by preaching the Judgment to come, Act. 10. 42. Every Spirit that
confesses Jesus Christ is come in the Flesh, is of God: And every Spirit that
confesses it not, is Antichrist, and not of God, says St. John; explaining the
Confession of Jesus Christ, by the Confession of his Incarnation, 1 John 4. 2,
3. And speaking of the Record, or Witness, God had given to the Christian
Doctrine, he thus declares the matter attested by him, This is the Record, God
has given us Eternal Life, and this Life is in his Son. He that has the Son,
has Life; and he that has not the Son of God, has not Life: Setting off the
Christian Religion, and the Saving Faith, by the Belief of the Life
everlasting, 1 John 5. 10, 11, 12. And as for the Belief of the Holy Ghost, the
necessity of that, and of our Dependence on him, to make any man a Christian,
our Savior has sufficiently expressed, by ordering our very Baptism, which
initiates us into Christianity, to be into his Name, Mat. 28. 19. All these
Points, are the very Ground and Foundation, of our Subjection to the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, (the Parties we contract withal in the Christian
Covenant,) of all our Adoration, Trust, and Submission, to the Blessed Jesus;
of our worshipping, and serving God by him; and of all that Holiness of Life,
which must gain us the Divine Acceptance; on all which Accounts, they are
necessary and Groundwork Articles of Christian Faith, and properly called
Fundamentals.

Quest. By this it may seem, as if the Believing Jesus to be the Christ, were
in more explicit words, to believe the Apostles Creed, since that sets forth
all the Forecited Articles. But does it contain all Points of mere Belief, that
are necessary and Fundamental?

Answ. Yes. For it was made for a Badge of true Christians; and thereupon, we
may conclude, was designed to be no ways Defective, in any necessary Articles
of Christianity. It has ever been the Form of Faith at Baptism, and was all
which not only the Ignorant, but even the most Learned then professed: So that
it is sufficient to make any Person a Disciple and Member of Jesus Christ. It
was held, and Styled, as is well known, by the Ancient Fathers, as the Canon,
the Sum, the Perfect Sum of Faith; that Token, which was sufficient to show who
preached Christ according to the Doctrine of the Apostles, and to distinguish
Believers from Infidels; that wherein the Church Educated, and Catechized her
Children; and, in sum, which passed as the Test of common Christianity among
them. Lastly, since the Compilers of it, short as it is, gave room to some
things only Circumstantial, as the Judge under whom Christ suffered, and the
Time of his Rising from the Dead: It Is not to be thought they would omit any
thing essential, and of the Body of the Faith, which was necessary to be
inserted.

Quest. Whilst any Church then professes this Creed, which is the Foundation,
does it continue a Christian Church, though it tacks thereto many gross Errors,
and, as St. Paul says, builds Wood, Hay, and Stubble thereupon? 1 Cor. 3. 12.

Answ. Yes; for they, who profess this, may be Baptized, as I said; and Baptism
admits men into the Church, and makes them Christians. And some Churches, in
the Apostles days, had imbibed sundry great Errors. But retaining still their
Faith in Christ, they were owned, notwithstanding, as Churches of Christ, and
styled and treated so, in the Apostolical Epistles to them. And though it be a
most sad thing, to consider of the present divisions of Christendom: yet, God
be thanked, this Creed, which is the full foundation of Faith, is still
unanimously owned, and professed, by all Churches, which make any considerable
Figure and large spread, or have attained at this day to become National in the
Christian World. On account whereof, how wide soever their differences, or
great the errors, of many of them are in superstructures, we must still look
upon them as Churches of Christ; though some, alas! are very degenerate and
corrupt ones.

Quest. And may they be saved too?

Answ. Yes: if they have nothing else to hinder their Salvation, but such
Errors, and under them they sincerely fear God, and work Righteousness. For
Christ is the Savior of the Body: so that retaining so much truth as may
qualify them to be of the Church, and receive Baptism; they have so much, as
is indispensably requisite to Salvation. But, that they are saved
notwithstanding their great Errors, which imply unbelief of some weighty and
concerning Truths our Lord has revealed to us, is on the score of their well
meant and pityable ignorance, or of their unmasterable Prejudices and
Prepossessions. Whilst men hold the Foundation, and err only in
superstructures: though their corrupt superstructures, their Hay, and Stubble,
which they Build thereupon, as St. Paul says, shall be burnt, and suffer loss:
yet, for the Foundations sake, if they do not hold the errors through an evil
mind, nor are obstinate in them against convictive evidence, the Persons
themselves may be saved, who were such unskilful Builders, 1 Cor. 3. 15.

Quest. Are not such erroneous Christians or Churches then, in as good a state,
as more sound and Orthodox ones?

Answ. No; they are neither so sure of having any Reward, nor, if that falls
right, like to receive so much of it. For their errors make their passage at
the Day of Judgment to the side of the Blessed more hazardous; errors being
punishable in some, as well as pardonable in others, according as they have
more or less of willfulness. And if finally they do not hinder it, they will at
least render it more difficult, and painful to them; as the Apostle intimates,
in comparing men's escape from among such errors, to ones escaping out of a
House all on Fire about him. Yea, I add, as with much pain and trouble, so with
much harm and loss too. For their superstructed Works at that day, suffering
loss, instead of receiving recompense, their reward for the Foundations sake,
which they still hold, will be less than the reward of other Christians, who
not only hold to it, but also build thereon rewardable superstructures, void of
their Corruptions. This the Apostle sets off by Not the Purgatory Fire of the
Church of Rome, which is only for Sinners, whose Sins, not fully purged before,
are to be purged there, either by the Fire it self, or by the Application of
others merits, in Indulgences, or by the help of Masses, Prayers, or Alms done
for them, by their Friends on Earth. And all this, before the Day of judgment;
they themselves, after that is once passed, owning only Eternal Punishments.
Whereas, the Fire here spoken of, besides its liableness to metaphorical
interpretations, if it be litteral, is at the Day of judgment. The Day, viz.
That great signal Day, which tryes and manifests all Actions, and which shall
be revealed by Fire (the proper Character and Description of the Day of
judgment in Scriptute, 2 These. 1. 7, 8.) shall declare it, v. 13. as several
of the Fathers talk of a Purging Fire, viz. The great Fire at the end of the
World; which they fancied might prove all things else, when it refines the
Earth, and Heavens. And this Fire is further said, to be for the Trial of every
Man, and of every Work, Gold and Silver, as well as Wood, and Stubble: not only
for the punishment of evil Works, and unpurged evil Workers, as theirs is, v.
12, 13, 14, 15.
Fire, which, when it tryes solid Works, like as when it proves Gold, or
Silver, does no harm, but only makes them finer. But when it meets with corrupt
ones, like as when it seizes Hay, or Stubble, it feeds upon, and consumes them,
as combustible Matter. If a man's work, says he, abide the Fire, which tryes all
Works at that Day, he shall receive a reward for it. But if any Man's Work be
burnt, he shall suffer loss, yet he shall be saved, but so as by Fire; i. e.
snatched out of the midst of those superstructures, as are set all on Fire,
like a man rescued out of a House on Fire, where he lay encompassed with the
Flames: which is a way of escape full of damage, as well as difficulty and
danger, 1 Cor. 3. 13, 14, 15. So that the reward of the pityable misled, is
neither so considerable, nor so secure, as that of the Orthodox and well
directed.

Quest. And whilst a Church holds to this Foundation of Faith, are we not to
forsake her, merely for her building many gross Errors thereupon, if she does
not impose them?

Answ. No; for under such Errors, as I have shown, it still remains a Christian
Church: and among all true Christians, there should be the Communion of Saints,
i. e. a readiness to join mutually in the Worship, and Offices of our common
Christianity. Requiring no unlawful terms of Communion, we may unite with her
without sin; and then if we separate, it is without just cause; and it is
always blameworthy, to separate causelessly from any Church. And thus the
Apostles taught the Christians to practice, in their Days. For many great
Errors had then crept into the Churches. Some, indeed, struck at the very
Foundation, as that of denying Jesus Christ to be come in the Flesh, a Point,
the Profession whereof is necessary, to our having both the Father and the Son;
and accordingly the denial of it, is given as a sure mark of an Antichrist by
St. John, and all Christians warned not to have any Communion, or Society with
him, 2 John 7. 9, 10, 11. Such also was the error of those at Corinth, who
denied the Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15. 12. and that of the most rigorous sort of
Judaizers, who set up, not only the necessity of the Law of Moses, but its
sufficiency without any need of Christ's Sacrifice, so casting off all
dependence on his Blood for Salvation. Both which the Apostle loads with such
heavy consequences, Gal 5. 2, 4. and Chapter 1. 6, 7.
telling the Judaizers they were fallen from grace, and Christ would profit them
nothing, or be of none effect to them; and the 1 Cor. 15. 13, 14, 16, 17, 18.
etc.
Denyers of the Resurrection, that then is Christ not risen, they are yet in
their Sins, their Faith is vain, and so is the Apostles Preaching, etc. as give
us cause to think, had they prevailed, and become the common Profession in
those Churches, they would have rendered them Christians merely in Name, but in
Truth would have unchurched them. But other Churches, that kept true to the
Foundation, did in those days build many great errors thereupon. At Corinth,
they built Wood, Hay, and 1 Cor. 3. 12.
Stubble upon the Foundation; and fell to hold not only speculative Errors, but
some very dangerous Tenets in practice: such as the 1 Cor. 5.
lawfulness of incestuous Marriages, esteemed, as may seem, as a thing
indifferent, even by the Pastors themselves; and of 1 Cor. 8.
Communicating in Idol-Feasts, wherein they thought they did not sin, so long
as they believed an v. 4. and Chapter 10. 19.
Idol is nothing. At Colos, they were prone to superstition, to place Religion
in uncommanded Abstinencies, such as touch not, taste not, handle not, which
were the Doctrines and Devices of men, Col. 2. 20, 21, 22. At Ephesus St. Paul
foretold, that several would arise, speaking perverse Things, Act. 20. 30. And
at Rome, and abundance of Churches in the Provinces where the Jews had
Synagogues; besides those rigid Judaizers, who denied the Redemption by Christ,
and merit of his Sacrifice; there were others, who believed these, but yet
maintained together with them the necessity of the Mosaic Rites, observing the
Jewish difference of Meats and Days, and teaching the Gentiles to live as do
the Jews, To. 14. 2, 5. and Gal. 2. 14. But amidst all these errors, which were
held, sometimes by Parties and Factions, and sometimes by the greatest numbers
in the Churches, the Apostles preached to them, to own the erroneous as
Brethren, whom, upon the account of those great Truths they held, God had
received, Romans 14. 3. to beware of Schisms, and Divisions, as things that
showed Carnal Professors, 1 Cor. 3. 3. and to keep the Bond of Peace, Ephesians. 4.
3. And upon these Christian Grounds, and in correspondence to these Apostolical
Ordinances, it is, that the Protestants of the opposite Confessions, are ready
to Communicate with the Lutherans, notwithstanding their Errors of Ubiquity and
Consubstantiation. And that the Champions of our own Church, have sundry times
declared their readiness to Communicate, even with the Church of Rome, in any
truly Christian thing, notwithstanding the Errors that Church has added to the
Foundation: But that they have barred us all out, by imposing their Errors, and
so staining and polluting their Worship, that with a good Conscience we cannot
join with them. And accordingly, whilst they were free to come, and till the
Pope forbid them; the Romanists were Cambd. Eliz. ad An. 1570.
for many years admitted to our Public Service, and Sacraments,
notwithstanding their different apprehensions, in the first part of Queen
Elizabeth's Reign.

Quest. I suppose you speak this, of our uniting with them, only whilst their
Errors are mere Errors of Faith, and consist in Opinion?

Answ. Yes; for it is not so, when they found any corrupt Worship thereupon. But
if, together with such unfundamental Errors, they have a faultless Worship,
which they call us to join in; we must not separate for their Errors, whilst
they keep them to themselves, and we are under no necessity of sharing in them.
And that we never are, whilst they do not impose them, but leave us at liberty,
either to dissent, where their errors are in little Matters; or to gainsay and
confute them, where they are of more importance to Religion, and men's Souls.

Quest. I think I see, when a Church errs so foully in Faith, that we ought to
forsake her. But another ground of withdrawing our Communion, you said, is
Corruption of Worship. And when is a Church so far corrupted in her Worship,
that we ought not to join in it?

Answ. That may be, either in case of intrinsic impediments, in the matter of
her Offices. Or, when good Prayers and Devotions are put up to God, but in an
unknown Language.

Quest. When is she so far corrupted, in the very matter of her Worship, and
Public Services?

Answ. When she falls off, either from Worshipping the one true God; or by one
Mediator, Jesus Christ; or mixes Sin in all her Prayers, whereby Grace and
Mercy are to be sought; or in her Sacraments of Baptism, or the Lords Supper,
wherein that Grace and Mercy are sealed and conveyed. We cannot live
Religiously, without Prayers; nor pray to any but the true God, except we pray
like Idolatrous Heathens; nor Pray to him by any other, but by Jesus Christ;
the defective Prayers of Sinners needing to be expiated, as was observed, Chap.
3.
before they are preferred, and not being acceptable from any other hands; nor
claim the benefit of his intercession for our Prayers, 'till we are Baptized,
and made Members of his Church; nor show our selves worthy of such a Savior,
and assure, as much as may be, the Blessings we pray for, without partaking of
the Lords Supper. So that if any Church has embodied Sin into her Service in
these particulars, we cannot perform the necessary parts, and vital acts of
Worship in her Communion, with a good Conscience.

Quest. So that if the Public Offices of any Church, direct their Prayers and
Adorations, not only to God, but also to Creatures, either Rational Beings, or
senseless Images; or if they prefer not these Prayers to God, by Jesus Christ
alone, but make use of other Mediators, as Departed Saints, or Angels; or if
they pollute their Baptism, and the Lords Supper, by unlawful mixtures; the
twisting of these Corruptions into her Worship, without any further Imposition,
is enough to bar all good People from joining with her in these Offices?

Answ. Yes; For as we must be careful, publicly to Worship and serve God; so
must we be as careful, not to offer up any sinful and forbidden Thing in
service to him, which is not to honor and please, but affront and provoke him.
So that when any particular Office, is thus tainted in any Church, we must
separate from that, although at the same time, whilst that will be allowed, we
be ready to join in others. When it is generally corrupt, and sound and unsound
lie intermixed through all their service, we must separate from them in all Offices.

Quest. But what if the Devotions themselves are good, and directed only unto
God by Jesus Christ, but in a strange Language, which we do not understand.
Were it enough to desert a Churches service for that reason?

Answ. Yes; because God will have Prayers with the understanding, 1 Cor. 14,
15, 16. and God being a Spirit, receives such only, as Christ notes, who
Worship him in Spirit, which a man does not, whose Spirit is idle, and
understands not what he says to God, John 4. 23, 24. So that if any Church
locks up her Public Prayers and Offices in an unknown Tongue, good People must
seek out another, where they may offer up the same Services, in a Language
their Spirits can join in, and Worship, as the Scripture requires, to
Edification, 1 Cor. 14. 26. We must not separate, as I said, from a sound
Church, only because it seems less edifying. But we must separate, when there
is no Devotion, but what is directly contrary to Edification.

Quest. If we may not separate, where there are such real Faults in a Church;
then much less for the dislike of received Customs, Rites and Usages, when
confessedly, as you said, in indifferent matters?

Answ. Most certainly. To rend the Body, and make disturbance for light things,
shows an ill Member in all Societies. Not to yield to an innocent Custom, as I
noted before from St. Paul, shows a man to be no lover of peace, but a lover of
contention, 1 Cor. 11. 16. Nay, if any man would show himself a Catholic
Christian, he must not only readily comply with the indifferent Rites and
Usages of his own Church, which has Authority over him: but, as he has occasion
to pass by them, or converse among them, with the Usages of other Churches, or
Christians, though very different from his own, so long as there is no sin in
them. a Catholic Christian, must have a Catholic Spirit, and be ready to show
he owns all other Christians, 'till they are regularly cast out of Christ's
Church, for Brethren and fellowmembers: and never stick out from exercising
with them the common Christianity, whereby all Christians serve and honor
Christ, by reason of the particular Rites in any Church or Place, which are no
offense to him.

Quest. If we may not lawfully separate from a Church, whose Constitution has
some Faults, yea some great ones, as were among the Churches in the Apostles
times: I suppose we may much less separate, when the Church it self in its
constitution is faultless, merely for the ill and scandalous Lives of its
Members.

Answ. Most certainly. And accordingly St. Paul is most severe against the
Schisms at Corinth: though in the same Church, he complains of the horrible
profaneness of many among them, who came drunk to the Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 11.
21. and of the Wraths, Envyings, Strifes, Back-bitings, Swellings, Tumults,
unrepented Uncleanness, Laciviousness, and Fornication; for which he feared God
would humble him, when he came among them, 2 Cor. 12. 20, 21. The Church of God
in all times, under the Ancient Patriarchs, and afterward in the Nation of the
Jews, was a mixed Society of good and bad livers. And in Christianity it is
compared to a Mat. 13. 47.
Net, that catches Fish of every kind; and to a ver. 24, 25, 30.
Field, sown with Tares, as well as Wheat, and wherein both must grow together,
till the Great and General Harvest. It Is always its misfortune here, together
with some true Saints, to have some Hypocritical Professors. So that were we to
separate from a good Church for this Cause, we must separate from all Churches,
and could hold Communion with no Church on Earth. And therefore men must never
think of leaving a good Church, because it happens to have some corrupt People,
or scandalous Ministers. From the Sins we must separate, which give the
scandal, but unite, and adhere to the Church, which condemns them: the good
must not desert it, because the bad will not obey, and be ruled by it.

Quest. But what if it does not use the Rod of Discipline to correct them?

Answ. We are not to separate notwithstanding, as the Apostles told the
Churches, where the Sins were too strong* And the Sinners too numerous for
Discipline, or the Pastors too remiss in using it. Thus the Pastors were at
Corinth, who, instead of mourning over the incestuous Person, were rather
puffed up with him, 1 Cor. 5. 2. And yet for all this, St. Paul would not bear,
to hear of any tendenoies toward Schism among them, 1 Cor. 3. 3. Thus also it
was at Pergamus, where several were infected, with the scandalous Doctrines of
the Nicolaitans, Rev. 2. 15. and at Thyatira, where the followers of Jezabel
the False Prophetess, were suffered to go on in their Spiritual Fornication,
and Sacrificing to Idols, v. 20. And in other Churches, which either out of
necessity, or neglect, relaxed the reins of Discipline, and tolerated
scandalous Persons, in the Apostles own times. But yet no plea for separation,
would ever be admitted by them on this pretense. In these cases, the Church
must answer, for the neglect of its power; and scandalous Sinners, for the
scandals they give; but as for any private Christians, whilst they neither help
on their scandals, nor imitate them, their Consciences are not defiled with
them. Besides, the growth of Schism, has been one of the greatest weakners of
Discipline, one Congregation admitting and harboring men, when another rejects
them. And therefore, to pretend want of Discipline for separation, is not only
a most dis-ingenuous thing, but the way to bring Discipline, which they
complain of as too little already, to be none at all.

Quest. By what you have discoursed on this Point, I perceive we are never
Guilty of Schism, in separating from any Church, when we have just cause. But
that all breaking off, from any Part of Christ's Body, is Schismatical, which
is Causeless.

Answ. Yes. And so is all Driving others into Separation, by imposing sinful
Terms, as the Condition of their Communion. And then, which is the last thing I
shall note concerning it, Schism from any Churches is most complete, when we do
not only separate from their Religious Assemblies and Divine Offices, but
withal, deny them to be Members of Christ's Body, or Parts of the Catholic
Church. This is the Highest step in Separation, and leaves not the least Ground
for Church Communion. For it is only the Members of Christ's Body, that must
Communicate under him their Head, in the proper Offices of Christianity; and
the Communion of Saints professed in the Creed, is only within the compass of
the Catholic Church. So that if we cut off any Societies, from being Members
of Christ, and a true Church, we must have no more Communion with them, than if
they were professed Heathens. And this was the Sacrilegious, Breach of the
Donatists, and Novatians; the Consummation of whose Schism, was their confining
the Catholic Church to their own Party, and allowing no Church, no Sacraments,
or Promise of Salvation, but among themselves.

Quest. There remains yet one instance, of the Communion of the Primitive
Christians mentioned by St. Luke, viz. Continuing in the Apostles Fellowship,
Act. 2. 42. I pray you what is meant by that?

Answ. Owning their Authority, and continuing under their Government. They were
appointed by Christ, as his Deputies, to Govern his Church; and therefore
adhering to them, as the Delegates of Christ, is called living in their
Fellowship.

Quest. But how can we live in their Fellowship, and adhere to their
Government, now they are dead?

Answ. By adhering to, and owning the Authority of our own Bishops, who are
their Successors, and rule the Church in their stead. Christ told the Apostles,
he would be Present with them, to the end of the World, Mat. 28. 20. Being
present with their Successors, he calls being Present with them. And in like
sort, keeping Fellowship with our Lawful Bishops, who are their Successors, is
keeping Fellowship with them. He that one sends, says the Jews, is as himself.
And accordingly, when Christ had sent out his Apostles, he tells them, he that
receives you, receives me, Mat. 10. 40. and he that receives whomsoever I
send, receives me, Joh. 13. 20. And the Apostle commends the Galatians, that
that they received him, not only as an Angel of God, but as Christ Jesus, Gal.
4. 14. And St. Ignatius, that Blessed Martyr, and contemporary of the Apostles,
applauds the Trallians, that they were subject to their Bishop, as to Jesus
Christ, and to the Presbytery, as to the Apostles. In Scripture Account, and
Legal estimate, that is done to any Persons, which is done to their Substitutes
and Representatives. And thus keeping Fellowship and Subjection, to the Bishops
of the Church in all Ages, who were at first sent and commissioned by the
Apostles, and empowered to send and ordain others at all times, is holding
Fellowship, and paying subjection to the Apostles themselves, and by them to
Christ Jesus.

Quest. This then is one Part of the Communion of Saints, to live subject to
our own Bishops, not suffering our selves to be drawn away by such as would
seduce us, but adhering to them against all Schismatical Opposers?

Answ. Yes. Obey them that have the Rule over you, and submit your selves, Heb.
13. 17. And mark those that cause Divisions, and avoid them, Romans 16. 17. Be
their Pretenses, and Appearance, what they will, if they lead us into Schism,
and an unnecessary Rejecting of our Lawful Governors, God has not sent, nor
does his Spirit go along with them. That cannot lead to Schism, it is the
Author of Peace, not of Confusion, 1 Cor. 14. 33. It will not put us upon a
needless rejecting of our Spiritual Governors, since Adherance to them in the
Apostles Days, as I noted before, was made a Test of discerning True Spirits
from False ones. We are of God, he that knows God, hears us; he that is not
of God, hears not us: Hereby know we the Spirit of Truth, and the Spirit of
Error, 1 John 4. 6.

Quest. But if a Man is careful to Believe, and Practice Christ's own Laws and
Doctrines; is not that enough to make him a good Christian, except he likewise
submit to Church-Rulers, and peaceably conform to their innocent Constitutions,
and Rules of Discipline?

Answ. No. For this is one of his Laws, to obey those that have the Rule over
us, and watch for our Souls, and to submit our selves, Heb. 13. 17. He orders
them to take care, that all things in his Worship, be done decently, and to
Edification, 1 Cor. 14. 26, 40. And he requires us to obey, and submit to their
ordering. A good Christian, is not only one that believes and professes the
Christian Religion, but is also a Member of the Christian Church. And they
cannot be good Church Members, who will not submit so far as conscionably they
may, to Church Governors, nor Communicate in Church-Offices.

Quest. I see the Communion of Saints, implies their Communion in Christian
Doctrine, Worship, and Government. But does it not also imply Communicating,
not only in Affections, but in all Good Offices, in Alms and outward Things?

Answ. Yes; to do Good, and to Communicate, forget not, Heb. 13. 16. And the
Receiving their charitable Contributions, St. Paul calls taking upon him the
Gift, and Fellowship or Communion, of Ministering to the Saints, 2 Cor. 8. 4. In
the extreme distress of the Jerusalem Christians at first, this communication
of Alms was wonderful: For all that were Rich, sold their Pessessions, and put
them into a Common Stock, to be distributed by the Apostles, as every one had
need, Act. 2. 44, 45. and c. 4. 33, 34. And in other places, where they did not
take this course, yet was Communicating, as in all good Offices, so
particularly in outward Things with their poorer Brethren, the Profession of
all Christians. Their Rule was, as they had opportunity, to do Good unto all,
but especially to those of the Household of Faith, Gal. 6. 10. And to do good to
these more particularly, when they traveled about as Strangers, and fled from
place to place, for the Faith of Christ: which is the Charity and Romans 12* 13.
1 Pet. 4. 9. Heb. 13. 2.
Hospitality of the Scriptures, so much magnified.

Quest. When any Saints then of Foreign Countries, are forced to fly, and come
among us for Christ's sake, to entertain them in our Houses, and communicate to
them of our Substance, which is here professed, is of Great Account with God?

Answ. Yes, of high Account. For it is one of those Good Deeds, which Christ
will expressly mention in our behalf at the last Judgment. Come ye Blessed,
inherit the Kingdom: for I was a Stranger, and ye took me in, Mat. 25. 34, 35.
And therefore St. Paul, when he tells us of distributing to the necessities of
Saints, reminds us particularly, of being given to Hospitality, Romans 12. 13.

CHAP. X. Of the Forgiveness of Sins.
The Contents.
What Sin is. Of wilful sins. Of sins of Ignorance, Surreption, Passion.
Forgiveness of sin, is the Release of its Punishment. When Eternal Punishments
are remitted, Present and Temporal are often exacted. What is the Time of
Relaxing these Punishments. Remission of all sins, but Blasphemy against the
Holy Ghost. And wilful Apostasy from Christianity. Wilful sins forgiven, when
we Repent, and forgive others. Sins of Ignorance and inadvertence, upon our
Charity to others. This forgiveness outwardly dispensed in Baptism. The
Eucharist. And Sacerdotal Absolution. The Power of the Keys lies in Retaining
as well as Absolving, which ought to beget a just dread of Excommunication.
What is meant by our Forgiving sins. What use we are to make of the Forgiveness
of sins.

Quest. WHat is the Tenth Article of the Creed?

Answ. I Believe the Forgiveness of Sins.

Quest. What is Sin?

Answ. The Breach of a Commandment, or a Transgression of some Law of God,
committing what his Law forbids, or omitting what it injoins us. Sin is the
Transgession of the Law, 1 John 3. 4. And all the Laws of God, which we
transgress in sinning against him, are contained in Holy Scripture.

Quest. Then we never offend God, nor shall suffer for any thing, but what the
Scripture has forbid, and against which we can produce some Law out of it?

Answ. No; for Sin is not imputed, where there is no Law, Romans 5. 13. And it
must always be a Law that works Wrath, i. e. makes us liable to suffer it,
For where there is no Law, there is no Transgression, Romans 4. 15. The strength
of sin is the Law, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. 56. and the Law entered, e're
sin did abound, Romans 5. 20.

Quest. To prove any thing Sinless and Lawful then, it is not necessary to
produce a Law, or Example for it, since a Law commanding it, would render it
not barely Lawful, but necessary; but it is enough, that there be no Law
against it?

Answ. Very right; for till a Law forbids a thing, there is no sin in it.

Quest. What is a Wilful Sin?

Answ. A Sin against Knowledge, or, doing what we know to be displeasing to
God. And this, either, when we are aware of the Evil, at the Time we commit it;
or should have been so, but that we have accustomed our selves to it, which
makes us sin without observing that we do so.

Quest. If a Man by custom brings himself to Swear, or Lie, or the like,
without thinking of it, his Sin you say say is wilful, for all he does not
bethink himself in committing it?

Answ. No doubt of it; for he wilfully contracted this Custom and Habit, which
is so far from being an excuse for his Sin, that it is one of the greatest
aggravations of it. The Habit of Sin, is called the Law of sin, Romans 7. 23. and
the Body of Death, ver. 24.

Quest. What if a man has such a mind to a Sin, that he will not see it, but
checks and stifles all Thoughts that would arise in his mind against it? Nay,
perhaps endeavors to deceive himself, and come to a Persuasion, that there is
no Fault, or, it may be, some Praise in it?

Answ. He is a wilful Offender indeed, because his own Will makes him ignorant,
as it did the Pharisees and other Jews, who were wilfully Blind, Mat. 13. 15.

Quest. When is a wilful Sin against Conscience?

Answ. When it is acted against the present checks of our own minds, and under
Fears and Relentings.

Quest. And when is a Sin against Conscience, called Deliberate, which, I
suppose, is a higher pitch of Wilfulness?

Answ. When it is committed after Fears and Debates, and we considered and
disputed with our selves for some time, whether to do it or no, before we
ventured on it.

Quest. What is a sin of Ignorance?

Answ. When we do an Evil thing, not knowing it to be a sin, nor seeing its
sinfulness.

Quest. Does Ignorance excuse any Offenses?

Answ. Yes, when men are not ignorant through culpable Neglects, nor blinded by
wicked Lusts. For in this ease it is said, Christ can have compassion on the
Ignorant, and Erroneous, Heb. 5. 2. But when they have no mind to see a Thing,
nor care to find it out, that Ignorance is faulty, because chargeable on their
own wills.

Quest. What say you, when their Judgments are resolved on the wrong side, and
they act under Erroneous Opinions? Are they not excusable in any Actions, so
long as they only follow their Conscience?

Answ. No; except their Conscience Errs so pitiably, as to be reasonably
qualified for excuse. The Jews followed their Consciences, when they crucified
Christ, Act. 3. 17. and 1 Cor. 2. 8. but yet God esteemed them wicked
Murderers, Act. 7. 52. Paul verily thought, that he ought to Persecute the
Church, Act. 26. 9. But in that he declares, he was the greatest of sinners, 1 Timothy 1. 13, 15. The times are coming, says our Lord, that they who kill you,
will think therein they do God service, Joh. 16. 2. But yet God would take
vengeance on them, for the Blood of these Righteous Persons, Mat. 23. 35. It Is
no sufficient warranty in what a Man does, that he follows his Conscience,
except he take care to have a right Conscience, or when it is wrong, it err only
through misfortunes, not out of a wilful Neglect, a wicked Lust, or an
unteachable Temper.

Quest. What is a Sin of inadvertence?

Answ. When in the general we know a thing to be a sin, but are not free at the
time of acting it, to consider, and reflect upon its sinfulness. This generally
happens, because we do the evil suddenly, e're we can bethink our selves,
whence they are called sins of Surreption, i. e. which steal upon us unawares,
and sins of Surprise. And thus it falls out, in the many sudden envious,
lustful, repining, or otherwise ill thoughts, or Desires; the beginnings of
Anger, the rash Words and Censures, Good People are Guilty of. All which, till
they can come to observe them, if then they are careful to check and Repress
them, are pitiable inadvertences and surprises, which, because we are all apt
daily to fall into more or less, are called sins of Daily incursion.

Quest. What think you of sins of Passion, when either men's own Consciences, or
other Friendly Monitors, tell them they are doing ill, but they go on
notwithstanding, because Passion is strong, and Lust, or Anger, hurries them
away, being very high in them?

Answ. These are not perfectly wilful, because, when their Passions are at such
height, their Wills are captivated, and have little Power over them for that
time. But they are punishable, as wilful sins are, because it is Men's voluntary
Fault, if they do not mortify all such inordinate Passion; and they that
belong to Christ, must not suffer Passion to arise so high, that it can
captivate and reign in them. They that are Christ's, have Crucified the Flesh,
with the Affections, or Passsions, and Lusts, Gal. 5. 24.

Quest. From what you have said, I perceive what Sin is: but what is meant by
the Forgiveness of it?

Answ. A Release of the Punishment, which is due to it. For then God forgives a
sin, when he acquits Men of the Punishment of it. And because this is a passing
over sins, as if they had never been, and taking no notice of them: it is
called covering sins, and not imputing them, Romans 4. 7, 8.

Quest. What are the Punishments due to Sin?

Answ. Death, and Diseases, and all the Miseries of this World. But especially
the Eternal Torments of Hell Fire in the next.

Quest. The Eternal Pains of Hell, must needs be acquitted, when a Sinner is
pardoned. For we can never think any sin pardoned, whilst the Sinner is
eternally suffering for it. But when the everlasting Punishments of the other
Life are released, are all the Temporal Inflictions in this Life struck off too?

Answ. No, for Death is the Wages of sin; and that still is all Men's Portion.
And Romans 6. 23.
when Men by their sins have greatly dishonored God, or given great Scandal
unto others, to manifest the justice of his Providence, God oft-times here
chastises them by present Judgments, yea, even after they have Repented, and
he has thereupon remitted to them all eternal Pains. Thus, when Nathan told
Penitent David, that God seeing his Repentance, had put away his sin, so that
as to the last account, he would be acquitted: Yet, because thereby he had
given occasion to the Enemies of God to Blaspheme, he should be punished here,
and the Child should die for it, 2 Samuel 12. 13, 14. And at Corinth, several of
those who on the score of their Repentance, should not be condemned with the
Wicked World at last: Yet, for their Scandalous Prophanations of the Lords
Supper, were sickly, and weak, and fell asleep at present. 1 Cor. 11. 30, 32.
And the Man of God from Judah, being pitiably seduced by a Dissembling Prophet,
without any thing that appears of an Evil intent, and having first faithfully,
and boldly declared God's Message against Jeroboam's Altar, we may reasonably
hope, was mercifully spared as to the other World. But yet here God met him by
the way, and devoured him by a Lion, for yielding to a Seducer, to eat Bread
against the Word of the Lord, 1 King. 13. And this ought mightily to restrain
us all, from acting any great dishonor to God, or crying Offenses, for which
God may judge us in our Persons, Estates, or Families, in this World, when upon
our true Repentance, he acquits us in the next. Penitence is not so good a
Preservative against the sting of these, as innocence is. For such Offenses do
always justly expose us to Temporal Calamities, and sometimes make it necessary
for us that we should be severely corrected in this World. Which consideration
ought to restrain all, that regard either their own, or their Families welfare
in this World, from ever being guilty of them.

Quest. When are these punishments relaxed, and what is the time of Pardon?

Answ. The solemn, full, and irreversible declaration of it, is at the Day of
judgment. But before that, God pardons the sins of good Men in this life,
giving them a general pardon of all sins in Baptism, and of all particular
Failures afterward, as they repent of them. So on David's repentance, for the
matter of Uriah, Nathan told him, God had put away his Sin, 2 Samuel 12. 13.

Quest. Is this forgiveness in this World perfect, and irreversible, so that
when once any sins are struck off, they are never more placed to account?

Answ. No; but limited, and suspended on Terms, viz. men's perseverance in
repentance; for, if after their pardon they fall off, and relapse into the same
wickedness, they shall be unpardoned all again, and stand accountable for all
former Transgressions. If the Righteous man turn from his Righteousness, to
iniquity, says God in Ezekiel, all the Righteousness he has done, shall not
be mentioned to him, but in his Sins that he has sinned, shall he dye, Ezekiel.
18. 24. and 33. 12, 13. And when the Debtor, to whom his Lord had pardoned all
his great Sums, had rendered himself unworthy of that grace, by his merciless
usage of a small Debtor among his fellow Servants, his incensed Lord canceled
the Pardon, and exacted all the dispunged Accounts. And so, says Christ, will
my Heavenly Father do with you in like case, Mat. 18. 24, 27, 30, 34, 35.

Quest. Do we believe the forgiveness of all Sins?

Answ. Yes; except the Sin against the Holy Ghost, and willful Apostasy from
the Faith of Christ, for which there is no forgiveness.

Quest. I have seen already, that there is no Pardon for Blasphemy against the
Holy Ghost. But is there none also, for willful Apostasy from Christianity?

Answ. No; for if we sin wilfully, i. e. by willful Apostasy, after we have
received the knowledge of the Truth, there remains no more Sacrifice for Sin,
i. e. Christ's Sacrifice is not designed to expiate such offense, Heb. 10. 26.

Quest. Is that Sinning wilfully, willful Apostasy from Christianity?

Answ. Yes. For these Sinners, says the Apostle, tread under foot the Son of
God, i. e. affirm Christ to be still in the Grave, not risen from the Dead; and
count the blood of the Covenant, or Christ's Blood, an unholy Thing, i. e. as
the Blood of a Malefactor, and say it was justly shed; and do despite to the
Spirit of Grace, i. e. despite the Holy Ghost, which confirmed Christianity,
and reject all his Miracles as Satanical delusions, v. 29. So that these
Sinners were plainly Apostates, who ceased to own, and had begun to accuse
Christ, as the Jews and Heathens did. And the same Apostasy St. Paul speaks of
in another place, when he tells us, if Christians fall away, i. e. from their
Christianity, whereby they Crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, or join
in Condemning him with his Crucifiers, it is impossible to renew them again
unto repentance, Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6.

Quest. But all other Sins you say, we may believe, and trust to have the
pardon of?

Answ. Yes; through the merits of Christ, and the mercy of God. So Christ
Commissions his Apostles, to Preach Repentance, and Remission of Sins, to all
Nations, Luke 24. 47. And if any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father,
and he is the Propitiation for our Sins, 1 John 2. 1, 2. And all manner of Sin
and Blasphemy, shall be forgiven unto men, but that against the Holy Ghost,
which shall never be forgiven, Mat. 12. 31.

Quest. You would have no Sinners then to despair of Mercy, or think their Sins
greater, than Christ's merits, or God's grace, and too big to be forgiven?

Answ. No, by no means. For Christ, by his most precious death, has gained a
full Pardon for the greatest Sins, and sends out his Apostles to Proclaim it to
the greatest Sinners. David was guilty of Adultery* and Murder; Paul was a
cruel and bloody Persecutor, and Blasphemer; Peter was perjuriously false, and
denied his Master. But 2 Samuel 12, 13. 1 Timothy 1. 13 16. Mat. 26. 70.
all these were forgiven, and none need, or must despair, as if, when they
Repent, God had not pardon enough in store.

Quest. These, indeed, are instances of the greatest sins. But is there
forgiveness for them, when they are committed with the most aggravating
Circumstances?

Answ. Yes. For David's Murder, and Adultery, was with much 2 Samuel 11.
deliberation and contrivance, and against so many struglings and reluctances,
that thereby he became almost quite Ps. 51. 10, 11.
hardened, and of a seared Conscience. And Peter's denial, was repeated several
times, and those Luke 22. 56, 58, 59.
considerably distant, to allow space enough for remorse, and that too with
false Oaths, and bitter imprecations. But both these obtained mercy, on their
true repentance.

Quest. You say on true Repentance. Is all this forgiveness then, upon some
Terms and Conditions?

Answ. Yes; for God's grants of grace are, as in consideration of Christ's
Sacrifice, so also of our Faith and Repentance. And therefore neither to
Infidels, nor impenitent Persons.

Quest. Upon what terms must we believe God will forgive us any willful Sins?

Answ. When we repent of them, and forgive others.

Quest. Will he not pardon them, 'till we repent and amend them?

Answ. No; for to all the willful Sinners of the World, the Apostles were to
Preach Repentance, and Remission of Sins. And of these it is said, he that
confesses, and forsakes his Sins, shall find mercy, Prove. 28. 13.

Quest. But when we have repented, and left these Sins, will he not forgive us
still, unless we forgive others, that have trespassed against us?

Answ. No; there is no forgiveness, neither for impenitent, nor uncharitable
Persons. For if ye forgive men their Trespasses, your Heavenly Father will also
forgive you: But if ye forgive not men their Trespasses, neither will your
Heavenly Father forgive you, Mat. 6. 14, 15. And therefore when we pray for
forgiveness, our Lord allows us to do it only upon these terms. Forgive us our
Trespasses, as we forgive them that Trespass against us.

Quest. What if we have wronged any Persons? is it not enough toward
forgiveness to do so no more?

Answ. No, it is not; but withal, we must make Restitution and amends, for the
wrong we have done already. If thou bring thy Gift to the Altar, and there
remembrest thy Brother has ought against thee; leave there thy Gift before the
Altar, and go thy way, first be reconciled to thy Brother, and then come, and
offer thy Gift, Mat. 5. 23, 24.

Quest. I see we must hope to have forgiveness of our Sins of willfulness, and
also of our Sins of Passion, which you showed to be of like guilt with them,
only upon our true Repentance, and amendment of them. But upon what terms,
shall our*slips of ignorance, and inadvertence be pardoned, since they are
never perfectly amended, but hang about us more or less, as long as we are in
this World?

Answ. Upon our great Charity to other men, especially to their Souls, in
endeavoring their Conversion, and Salvation. And therefore that St. Peter
recommends above all other Virtues, and for this Reason. Above all things, have
fervent Charity among your selves, for Charity shall cover the multitude of
Sins, 1 Pet. 4. 8. And if any of you err, and one convert him, let him know,
that he, who converts a Sinner from the Error of his way, shall save a Soul
from Death, and shall hide a Multitude of sins, Jam. 5. 19, 20.

Quest. For whose sake does Almighty God allow us all this Benefit of
Forgiveness?

Answ. For Jesus Christ's, who, as you have seen, dyed for our Sins, and gave
his blood a Ransom, to purchase for us all this Pardon of them. He is set forth
a propitiation for the remission of Sins that are passed, through Faith in his
Blood, Romans 3. 25. And then for his sake we shall receive all this mercy, when,
with the dispositions before expressed, in his Name we devoutly pray to God for
it.

Quest. By the promises of the Gospel, I see this forgiveness is assured to all
Christians, upon the terms you have described. But is it in any Signs, and
Tokens, outwardly dispensed to them?

Answ. Yes; both in the Holy Sacraments, and in Sacerdotal Absolution. Which
ways of ministering this forgiveness, as well as the forgiveness it self, are
noted in some Ancient Creeds: This Article being thus professed in St. Ep. ad
Januar. etc. and Ep. ad Magnum. Ep. 69, 70. Ed. Oxon.
Cyprian's Form at Baptism, I believe the Remission of Sins by the Church.

Quest. Is this forgiveness dispensed to us in the Sacrament of Baptism?

Answ. Yes; and that most amply, the water of Baptism washing off the stain of
all former Sins. Be Baptized, and wash away thy Sins, said Ananias to Saul,
Acts 22. 16. Repent, and be Baptized for the Remission of Sins, said St. Peter
to the Jews, Acts 2. 38. And he has saved us by the Laver of Regeneration, i.
e. the water of Baptism, and the renewing of the Holy Ghost, Tit. 3 5. So that
whateve pollutions men had before upon them, if they come to Baptism, with true
Faith and Repentance, they are thereby made clean again.

Quest. Is it also dispensed in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper?

Answ. Yes; if after the Baptismal cleansing, they relapse, and contract new
guilt, in that they are admitted to renew the same Covenant of Grace again, and
seal the Pardon of it. For therein Christ gives us his own Blood, which, as he
says particularly, was shed for the Remission of Sins, Mat. 26. 28. He
entertains us there at his own Table, which is an open profession to all worthy
comers, that he is reconciled to them, and receives them again as Friends. And
therefore, when any Baptized Christians are startled, and terrified with the
Conscience of their Sins, let them repair to that Holy Sacrament, to seal, and
assure the forgiveness of them. But let them come with Faith, and Repentance,
and Reconciliation to their Brethren; which, as I said, are the Terms of our
being Forgiven. For the Holy Sacraments dispense this forgiveness to none, but
such as worthily receive them, and those they do cleanse from all former
Pollutions.

Quest. Is there also a dispensation of this Pardon, in Priestly Absolution?

Answ. Yes, for therein Christ has authorized his Ministers, that act in his
place and stead, to pronounce the Sentence of Pardon upon all true Penitents,
and bid them expect, that what they regularly thus declare on Earth, in his
Sovereign Court in Heaven he will make good. He breathed on them, and said,
receive ye the Holy Ghost. Whose soever Sins ye remit, they are remitted; and
whose soever Sins ye retain, they are retained, Joh. 20. 22, 23. And therefore
when a true Penitent hears his Pardon solemnly pronounced, by an Officer, whom
God has deputed and Commissioned for it, he may quiet his heart, as one whose
case is judged, and firmly hope God will pronounce the same at the last
Judgment. But this, I say, he must do only after true Repentance. For it is only
the Ministry of Reconciliation, says St. Paul, which God has committed unto
us, 2 Cor. 5. 18. but the direction, and ratification of it, he has reserved to
himself; and then only ratifies what his Ministers do, when they pronounce
according to his own Rules and Orders. So that if the Priest pronounce by
mistake, and absolve the impenitent, God will judge right, though he judge wrong,
and Condemn at last, whom he had before erroneously absolved in his Judgment.

Quest. Christ says, what they retain, shall be retained; as well, as what they
remit, shall be remitted. Ought not that to beget in all Christians, a great
dread of Excommunication, and Reverence for Church Censures?

Answ. Yes, questionless, when they proceed upon just Cause; for then Christ
will maintain the Honor of his Deputies, and make good their sentence. He that
hears you, hears me, and he that despises you despises me, Luke 10. 16.
If any Offender will not hear the Church, let him be unto thee as an Heathen
man, and a Publican, Mat. 18. 17. In these Acts, what his Ministers do
Regularly, and according to his Direction, they do it as representing him, by
virtue of his Commission and Authority, which, having given, to be sure he will
stand by. And accordingly St. Paul, and the Church Governors at Corinth under
him, exercising their Power by virtue of Christ's Commission, Declares, that
both in binding, and relaxing or forgiving, he acted with the Power, and in the
Person or place of Christ, 1 Cor. 5. 4, 5. and 2 Cor. 2. 10.

Quest. Do all Censures of the Church then, where the Truth is on its side, cut
men off, as from the Church, which is his Body, so from Jesus Christ, who is
the Head of it?

Answ. All those do, which are passed for such sins or errors, as are Damnable
by the Tenor of Christ's own Laws. For then, they only speak the Language of
Christ's own Rules, and, as Apolog. c. 39.
Tertullian says, are a true anticipation, or Fore-hand Draught of the great
Judgment. And when his Officers only pronounce, and say after him; there is no
doubt, but he will confirm what they have pronounced in his Name.

Quest. But from what you have formerly discoursed, I perceive that some things
in Religon, being against the Prime, and Fundamental Doctrines, are so Damnable
in themselves, as not to be capable of any Favor or Allowances. And that
others, being only against inferior Truths, are Damnable only as accompanied
with an Evil Mind, but capable withal of being incurred under Pardonable
circumstances. Now in these last Points, many Persons, that mean well, and
serve Christ sincerely, in the main and essentials of a Christian, may yet be
unhappily mislead into wrong Opinions, or Practices. And if for their
fixedness, and obstinacy in these, they happen to be cast out of any Church; do
you think they are always cut off from Christ too, and that he will Finally
Anathematise, and condemn them in his Sentence?

Answ. No. For the Church, as all humane Judges, being unable to see into Men's
Hearts, give sentence in these cases, according to outward Actions. But Christ
in his judgment of them, looks also at the mind and heart of the Actors:
Rateing exactly, not only the Punishableness of the Offenses; but also the
Degrees of voluntary and involuntary, which makes a Pardonableness or
Punishableness of the Offenders. And making these Allowances on such scores, as
fall not under their Notice; it is reasonable to believe, he will still own and
receive several compassionably mislead, who are cast out on these accounts by
the Churches Censures.

Quest. This validity and effect of Church Censures, you say, is when they
proceed according to Christ's own Rules, and upon just cause. But if they bind
where the Gospel says they should loose, and Excommunicate against Reason; I
suppose those Censures are mere Scare-crows, that may serve to make a show, but
bring no hurt with them?

Answ. Very true. Blessed are ye, says our Savior, when Men shall separate you
from their Company, and expunge or cast out your Name as evil, for the Son of
Man's sake: for so persecuted their Fathers the Prophets. Rejoice ye in that
day, and leap for joy, for your Reward is great in Heaven, Luke 6. 22, 23. If
good Christians are Excommunicated in any Church, for not going against the
Scriptures, and complying with it in ill things, as poor Protestants are by the
Romish Church, they lose nothing thereby with God, who will not ratify a wrong
sentence, but will increase their Reward, for having bravely suffered in his
Cause.

Quest. By what you have said, I see how God forgives Sins. But when they are
committed against us, we are bid to forgive them too, and that, as we our
selves hope to be forgiven. I pray you what does that imply?

Answ. Not our remitting Future punishments, which lie at God's mercy, not in
ours. Nor always that we sit still, without offering to defend our selves, when
we are assaulted; or to seek redress, when we are injured. But only that we
bear no malice to them in our hearts, and if the case require Redress, that we
seek it not in Spiteful ways, and that, beside the Reparation of our own Wrong,
we aim not at our Adversary's Prejudice, nor seek his hurt afterward, nor Pray
to God, or to the Magistrate for vengeance, as the Jews might to ease an angry
mind, when we are able to do no more against him our selves.

Quest. What use must we make of this Belief, of the Forgiveness of Sins?

Answ. Admire the mercy of God, who can forgive such Profligate, and Provoking
Offenders. And the wonderful love of Jesus Christ, who could dye to procure
this Forgiveness, for his utter Enemies. And not despair of mercy, but
steadfastly hope there is place of Pardon after any of our sins. And above all,
to show true Repentance, and forgive others, and perform all those things,
which are the condition and Terms of Forgiveness, thereby to secure it to our
selves.

Quest. And when we are once forgiven, may we embolden our selves, from God's
readiness to forgive, to Repeat our sins?

Answ. No, by no means. Shall we continue in Sin, that Grace may abound in
pardoning? God forbid, Romans 6. 1, 2. Now thou art made whole, sin no more, lest
a worse thing come upon thee, said our Savior, Joh. 5. 14. Such ingratitude,
and abuse of Grace, is not only most provoking to the Spirit, and tempts him to
withdraw from us: and calls down from God heavier, and surer Punishments: But
also it brings in force against us all the old scores, which were all struck
off, as I said, only on presumption of our Perseverance in repenting of them.

CHAP. XI. Of the Resurrection of the Body, and the Life everlasting.
The Contents.
The Resurrection not merely of our Spirits from sin, but of our Bodies from
the Grave. This to be brought about by the Almighty Power of God. The
Perfections of Glorified Bodies, viz. Immortality, Spirituality, and Glory. The
Bodies of the Wicked Immortal. And exquisitely sensible. Some Inferences from
the Resurrection of our Bodies. Good Souls carried straightway into a Place of
Bliss. Of Eternal Life, wherein there is Full and unmixed Happiness. Of the
satisfaction of their Senses. Their clear and distinct Knowledge. Perfect
Holiness. And without Reluctance. Blissful Companions. Perfection of Love and
Kindness. Honor, and Eminence of Place. All these to be enjoyed in the Highest
Heavens, without satiety, or weariness. For evermore. Of the miseries of the
Damned, in Tormenting Passions. The worm of Conscience. Fire and Flames.
Disgrace. Under all which, no favor of God. No company, but of Tormenting
Devils, and damned Spirits. None to condole, when they cannot relieve. No rest
and sleep, for Recruit of Spirits. No end of their miseries. The Use of this.

Quest. WHat is the Eleventh Article of the Creed?

Answ. I believe the Resurrection of the Body.

Quest. May not the Resurrection be interpreted, only of a Spiritual
Resurrection from sin?

Answ. So some taught of old, as St. Paul testifies, saying the Resurrection is
passed already, i. e. when Men rose from a State of sin, to the fear of God;
and these, says he, get credit, and overthrow the Faith of some, 2 Timothy 2. 18.
But the Resurrection we expect, is a Resurrection of the Body. Our Bodies,
after we have laid them down by Death, shall at the Day of Judgment, be
quickened, and raised up again. Then, all that are in the Graves shall hear
Christ's voice, and come forth, they that have done good, to the Resurrection
of Life, and they that have done evil, to the Resurrection of Damnation, Joh.
5. 28, 29. This mortal Body must put on immortality, and this corruptible must
put on Incorruption, that so all that being revived, which Death destroyed,
Death may be swallowed up in Victory, 1 Cor. 15. 53, 54.

Quest. The Resurrection of a Body which had been crumbled into Dust, seemed an
incredible thing when it was preached at first: When the Philosophers heard of
a Resurrection, some mocked, Act. 17. 32. What can make it credible, or fit to
be Believed?

Answ. The Omnipotent Power of God, when that is engaged for it. For no one can
think it impossible, for God to raise up a Body out of dust, that at first made
it out of dust, yea, that raised all things out of nothing. Ye err, says our
Savior to the Sadduces, about the Resurrection, not knowing the Power of God,
Mat. 22. 29. And this Power, he has given us a sensible proof of; by raising up
Christ. If Christ be preached, that he rose from the dead, how say some among
you, that there is no Resurrection of the Dead; i. e. in regard his Rising is
such an irrefragable instance, and example of it? 1 Cor. 15. 12.

Quest. Shall the Bodies of the Saints, be raised up by the Power of the Holy
Ghost?

Answ. Yes; he that now makes them his Temples, by displaying in them his
Holiness, shall at last display in them his Omnipotence, breathing into their
scattered dust the Breath of Life, as at first he breathed Life into all
things. If the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the Dead, dwell in you,
he shall at last also quicken your mortal Bodies, as he quickened his, Romans 8.
11.

Quest. The Rising of the Saints, will no doubt be very Glorious. But what
Perfections shall their Bodies receive at the Resurrection?

Answ. First, Immortality. Nothing after that shall ever be able to pain,
decay, or annoy them; they shall not be liable to suffer, nor to dye any more.
This corruptible must put on incorruption; and this mortal must put on
immortality, 1 Cor. 15. 53. They cannot dye any more, Luke 20. 36.

Secondly, Spirituality; it is sown a Natural Body, it is raised a Spiritual
Body, 1 Cor. 15. 44. Whereby is not meant, that it shall be a Spirit in
Substance; but that it shall have those Perfections of Spirits, wherein they
excel Bodies. As, 1. being above the gross Pleasures of Sense, such as Eating,
Drinking, and carnal Enjoyments. In the Resurrection, they neither Marry, nor
are given in Marriage, but are as the Angels, Mat. 22. 30. And Meats for the
Belly, and the Belly for Meats, but God shall shortly destroy both it, and
them, viz. in the Resurrection, when men shall live without them, 1 Cor. 6. 13.
2dly. Vigor and Activity, such as may answer and keep pace with the vehement
Transports, and quick Emotions of Glorified Souls, and be capable to support
their Joys, bear their Raptures, and express their Activities. And 3dly,
Agility, or Spriteliness in their motions, moveing toward all Points, upwards
1 Thessalonians. 4. 17.
into the Air and Clouds, as St. Paul notes of the Saints in their new Bodies;
as well as downwards: And to Places at any distance, with the quickness of
Spirits; whence they are able in a moment to appear, or disappear as the Soul
pleases, as our Savior's Body did after his Resurrestion, and Phil. 3. 21
our raised Bodies must be like his, being in this respect also equal to the
Angels, Luke 20. 36.

Quest. Shall they receive any more Perfections?

Answ. Yes, Thirdly, not only a perfect Beauty, instead of any Mishape or
Deformity, but also a mavelous Brightness, or Glory. It is sown in Dishonor,
but it is raised in Glory, 1 Cor, 15. 43. The Righteous shall shine forth as
the Sun, in the Kingdom of the Father, Mat. 13. 43. Christ shall change our
vile Body, that it may be like unto his Glorious Body, Phil. 3. 21. And that
was full of glittering Splendour. Whilst he conversed with his Disciples, after
his Resurrection here on Earth, he laid it aside, because fleshly eyes were not
able to behold it, as appeared by its Striking Saul blind, Acts 9. 3, 9. But in
Heaven he shines with a dazeling Luster. Thus he appeared from thence, to
Stephen, Acts 7. 55. and to Paul, who describes the light of his Presence to
have been above the brightness of the Sun, Acts 26. 13. And his head, and his
hairs were white like Wool, yea, as white as Snow, his Eyes as a Flame of
Fire, his Feet like fine Brass burning in a Furnace, and his Countenance as the
Sun, shining in its strength, in that Vision St. John had of him in the
Revelations, Rev. 1. 13, 14, 15, 16.

Quest. This will be a most happy Resurrection of the Just: But what kind of
Bodies shall the Wicked have? shall theirs be immortal too?

Answ. Yes; but to their cost, and for no other end, but that they may be
immortally punished. For when they always fry in Eternal Fire, they shall never
be consumed by it.

Quest. And shall their raised Bodies be sensible of Torment?

Answ. Yes; far more than their Bodies are now; and they shall always have the
smartest, and most terrible things in Nature to Torment them, viz. Eternal
Fire. Depart from me ye Cursed into everlasting Fire, Mat. 25. 41. There they
shall be tormented in the Flames, and not have so much, as a drop of Water, to
cool their parched Tongue, Luke 16. 23, 24.

Quest. If it be thus extreme violent, it will soon consume them, or, as
extremity of pain sometimes causes dictraction, so overpower their Souls, that
they shall not be able to mind, or attend to it?

Answ. No; as their sense of pains shall be most exquisite, and insensible, so
shall their Bodies be indissoluble, and their sense insuperable. As an Almighty
Vengeance shall ever inflict the most tormenting strokes upon them: so at the
same time, an Almighty Power shall continue their strength to bear, and an
exquisite sense or feeling, to be most piercingly affected with them.

Quest. Must not this Belief of the Resurrection of the Body, comfort us upon
the death of Friends, when we lay their Bodies in the Graves?

Answ. Yes; because those Bodies are not perished, but only fallen asleep, and
shall be infinitely more perfect, and glorious, and full of strength, when they
awake out of it. I would not have you ignorant, Brethren, concerning them that
are asleep, that ye sorrow not even as others which have no hope. For if we
believe, that Jesus dyed, and rose again: even so them also, that sleep in
Jesus, will God bring with him, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 13, 14.

Quest. And ought it not to arm us against the fear of our own death too?

Answ. Yes; for since, when our earthly House of this Tabernacle is dissolved,
we have a Building of God, Eternal in the Heavens: in this we groan earnestly,
desiring to be clothed upon, with our House which is from Heaven, 2 Cor. 5. 1,
2.

Quest. What is the Twelfth, and last Article of the Creed?

Answ. I Believe the Life Everlasting.

Quest. When good men's Souls leave their Bodies, what becomes of them?

Answ. They are carried into a place of Bliss and Refreshment, which Christ, in
his discourse to the Penitent Thief, called Luke 23. 43.
Paradise; and in the Parable of Dives and Lazarus, Luke 16. 22.
Abraham's Bosom. And the care of conducting them thither, as Christ noted in
the account of Lazarus, is committed to some good Angels. For some of these, as
ministering Spirits, always attend the deathbeds of God's Saints, and receive
the departed Soul into their care; to guard it from all frights and
molestations of envious Fiends, as it passes through the Regions of the Air,
which are the Ephesians 2. 2.
Principality or Territory of the Powers of Darkness; and to guide it in all
that long passage, of new and unknown ways, which lead to the Blessed
Receptacles of departed Spirits. Whereas the Souls of the Wicked, when they are
thrust out of their Bodies, are left naked and defenseless, to be seized by
those greedy and implacable Furies, and hurried away upon the award of their
most just Judge, in extreme anguish and despair, to their most wretched Prisons.

Quest. But at the Resurrection, I see both Good and Bad shall return to their
Bodies again. And shall that Life last for ever?

Answ. Yes; for after once they are reunited, their Souls and Bodies shall
never part any more; but the good shall continue in everlasting pleasure, and
the wicked in everlasting pain.

Quest. What happiness is there, in that Eternal Life of the Righteous?

Answ. All possible happiness their hearts can wish, or their Nature is capable
of. They shall see and enjoy God, who will give himself to them: and that
implies every thing that is Beatifying, all the Blessedness we can imagine, and
infinitely more, being contained in God, and communicated together with him.

Quest. And shall this Blessedness never be embittered to them, with any care,
or fear, or grief, or crosses, as all the happyness of this present Life is?

Answ. No; They shall neither hunger, nor thirst any more, Rev. 7. 16. God
shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, and there shall be no more Death,
nor sorrow, nor crying, nor Pain, for all those former things are passed away,
Rev. 21. 4.

Quest. Shall all their Senses be gratified with the most delightful, and
agreeable enjoyments?

Answ. Yes; such as the Scripture is wont to set off by Feasts, and Banquets,
and Marriage-Entertainments; by melodious Songs, and joyful Hallelujahs; by
transporting sights of all the Beauty, the Glory, and Magnificence of the
Heavenly Court; the Majesty of God's Throne, and the Splendour of all the
Heavenly Host that do surround it. Indeed, their exalted and refined Senses,
are above the gross delights of Eating, and Drinking, and giving in Marriage.
But such as these the Scripture uses, because our present state places so much
in them. And whatsoever delight, and satisfaction, they may express to our
present Capacities; that, and abundance more, shall the enjoyments of that life
yield to our glorified and improved Bodies.

Quest. It Is a great heappiness, to have clear, and distinct knowledge of
things, and not to be distracted with doubts, or posed with difficulties. Shall
the Righteous in that Eternal Life, have such clear and advanced understandings?

Answ. Yes; they shall get rid of all darkness, and doubtfulness of mind, and
know every thing they desire, without study, or pains. Now we see as in a
Glass, darkly, but then face to face: Now we know in part, but then shall we
know, even as also we are known, 1 Cor. 13. 12.

Quest. It Is a singular Point of Bliss, to be perfect in Holiness, which is one
of the most Blissful Attributes of God himself. Shall they also be such
perfectly Holy Persons?

Answ. Yes; they shall excel in every Virtue, and Grace, wherein Christ himself
does: for when he appears, we shall be like him, 1 John 3. 2. And those they
shall enjoy, free of all those weaknesses and defects, whereby their Virtues
are obscured, and lessened in this World. For in new Jerusalem, the Spirits of
just men are made perfect, Heb. 12. 23.

Quest. And shall they exercise all this Holiness without trouble and
reluctance, which makes the practice of it painful here on Earth?

Answ. Yes; for they shall neither have any inward Lusts to oppose it, nor
outward Temptations to draw them from it. They hear no advice, nor see any
example, but of what is good. Their inclinations are all rectified, and become
Holiness to the Lord. Their Nature is perfect in good, and duty is become their
delight, so that in conforming entirely to the will of God, they do in the
highest measure gratify their own wills too.

Quest. And with this height of knowledge, and of Holiness, shall they also be
inwardly pleased in their own minds, and think themselves happy; without which,
no man is happy?

Answ. Yes; they must needs be infinitely pleased in every thing they have, and
in every thing they do, for whatsoever comes to them, is pure happiness; and
whatsoever proceeds from them, is full of Wisdom and Goodness, without the
least word, or action, to repent of. Their State is all Joy, and Peace: enter
thou into the joy of thy Lord, Mat. 25. 21. It is not bid to enter into them,
being infinitely more than they can hold; but they into it, as into a vast
Ocean of Bliss, whereof they shall always drink to the full, but never empty or
exhaust it.

Quest. Indeed, such complete Knowledge, and perfect Holiness, must needs give
them cause of greatest satisfaction from themselves. But what sort of Company
must they keep? will they be equally happy in that too?

Answ. Yes; unimaginably happy. For they will live always in the presence of
God, who will ineffably Communicate himself to them; and of Jesus Christ, who
will infinitely rejoice to see how happy he has made them; and of the Holy
Ghost, who will eternally Congratulate the reward of his own Graces in them;
and converse with Angels, Apostles, and Glorified Saints, and all their Godly
dear Friends, whom they valued as their own Souls, and whom they clave so fast
to in their hearts, that they could have followed them into the other World,
when they were taken from them.

Quest. And all this God-like Society, are every way fitted to be the most
happy, and delightful Companions?

Answ. Yes; to be the most Blissful, that possibly can be thought of. For they
are all light, and quickness in their understandings; and all love, and
tenderness in their Affections; and most sweet, and obliging in their carriage,
being perfectly free from all Anger, Crossness, Scorn, or Contempt, and every
thing that may give offense. They all look pleased, and inviting in their
countenances; and are exquisitely wise, useful, and entertaining in all their
Discourses; and all agree in the same Opinions, and speak the same things, and
pursue the same ends, and are pleased in the same Objects, and have no strife
among them, but who shall love highest, and oblige most, and be most like to
God, and agreeable to each other for evermore.

Quest. You say there shall be no strife, but who shall love most. Indeed, a
state of love, which is not cooled by any unkindnesses, nor crossed by
Disappointments, nor made unfortunate by the Follies, or Sufferings of those we
dearly love, is absolutely the most agreeable, pleasant, and satisfactory
Employment in the World. And amidst all these Companions, shall the Righteous
be Perfect in this Love?

Answ. Yes, most Perfect. For God is Love, and he that dwells in God, dwells in
Love, 1 John 4. 16.

Quest. Will all that blessed Company entirely love us?

Answ. Yes, as they do their own Souls; they were full of Love, while they
lived here; loving even their Enemies, after Christ's Precept, and Example; but
especially the servants of God, in whom they discerned his Image. But in Heaven
they shall love us in Perfection, and be full Ripe and Complete in this, as
they are in all other Graces.

Quest. And shall we entirely Love all them?

Answ. Yes; they shall all be so absolute in all amiable excellencies, and
continually discover such a boundless Love for us, and our Natures will be so
wholly framed for Love and Kindness; that we cannot choose but love them, and
that with the greatest fervor, and intenseness of Affection. And this will be
all Pleasure, and no Pain, because they are incapable of doing any thing, that
may either shame, or disgust us. God is all in all in them, and therefore they
can do nothing, but what we, who entirely love God and them, may perfectly
delight in.

Quest. If we shall have such entire Love for all the Saints in Bliss, we
shall, as all true Friends do, partake in all their Joys, and all their
Happiness will be ours?

Answ. It will be so; for Love of Happy Persons, multiplies Happiness, as often
as it multiplies Objects. Because, when we entirely love them, we esteem and
are pleased with all their Happiness, as with our own. And this way, every
Saint will be as full, as if they had a Monopoly of Bliss, and draw all the
Happiness of Heaven to themselves.

Quest. But amidst all these inward excellencies, and happy Company, and
Blissful intercourse of kindness, shall they live in Honor, and be eminent in
Place?

Answ. Yes, as Kings and Princes. They shall Rev. 3. 21.
Sit on Thrones, and wear 1 Pet. 5. 4.
Crowns and Scepters, and be 1 Jo. 3. 1
Sons of God, and Brethren, and Romans 8. 17.
Joint-heirs with Christ, they shall Rev. 21. 7.
inherit all things, and not only have the Privilege to stand about Christ's
Throne, but what would surpass belief, if Truth it self had not assured us of
it, sit down with him thereon. To him that overcomes, will I grant to sit with
me in my Throne; even as I also overcame, and am set down with my Father in his
Throne, Rev. 3. 21. And besides this glory of their State, and eminence in
Place; their Bodies, as I observed, shall be clothed with the most Radiant
Light, and surpass even the Sun it self in Brightness.

Quest. In what place must they live, to wear these Glories, and Feast on all
this immense Happiness?

Answ. In the Heaven of Heavens, a Place situate on High, far above all
visible * Ephesians. 4. 10.
things, unspeakably vast in extent, and magnificent in structure, and
illustrious in Glory, the Presence Chamber of the great God, and King; where he
lives incircled with Luster, and 1 Timothy 6. 16.
Light inaccessible, which no mortal Eye can approach unto, for no Man, (as he
told Moses,) can see my Face and live, Exodus 33. 20. Here shall all Righteous
Persons, with their immortal Eyes, ever see God, and shine in his Glory, and
feast on all the forecited joys, and fullness of Pleasure, which is at his Right
hand for evermore, Psalm. 16. 11.

Quest. But if this happy enjoyment last long, will they not grow weary of it
in the end; since humane Appetites are wont to love change, and loath the best
things, if held constant to them?

Answ. No; as the enjoyments are, so is the desire and relish of them, always
the same. The Goods are pure, having no ungrateful mixtures to be discovered,
and tasted by time: and the Appetite and Relish perfect, subject to no ebbs or
flows, no weariness or alterations. So that we shall still desire, as well as
enjoy these pleasant things, and find an inexpressible sweetness, and
satisfaction in them.

Quest. And to Crown all, and render us secure in this Blessed State, shall the
happiness of it be no fading transitory Thing, as all worldly pleasure is, but
everlasting?

Answ. Yes; it will be always in its Spring, and look fresh, and flourish,
through Eternal Ages. The Pleasures at God's Right Hand, are for evermore, Ps.
16. 11. the weight of Glory is Eternal, 2 Cor. 4. 17. the Kingdom cannot be
moved, Heb. 12. 28. the Crown is incorruptible, 1 Cor. 9. 25. that fades not
away, 1 Pet. 5. 4. It Is not a limited happiness, held only for a term of years,
or Ages, but an Eternal Life, 1 John. 5. 11.

Quest. This is such a perfection of Bliss, as is enough to make all Righteous
men impatient of living here, and long to dye, as Phil. 1. 21, 23.
St. Paul did, thereby to be possessed of it?

Answ. It is so, indeed, if it contained no more than I have described. But
when they come to enjoy it, they will find infinitely more than I have said,
yea, than any Tongue can express, or heart imagine and apprehend. For Eye has
not seen, nor Ear heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man, to
conceive the Things God has prepared for those that love him, 1 Cor. 2. 9.

Quest. I perceive, how Blissful the Eternal Life of the Righteous is. But the
Wicked too shall be raised to an Eternal State, and what shall their Life be?

Answ. The most perfect misery, both of Body and Soul, whence in Scripture,
when by Life is meant, not only the continuance in being, but the happiness of
it, their state is called everlasting death, 2 These. 1. 8, 9. Rev. 2. 11.

Quest. What sorrow and torment shall the Wicked for ever endure in their Souls?

Answ. The torment of all vexatious Passions, being continually wracked with
Envy, Anger, Fruitless Cares, and Boundless Fears, utter despair of all relief,
and yet extreme desires of it. And the Sting of Conscience, which shall pierce
them through with bitter remorse, and gnaw perpetually like a Worm, upon their
Hearts and Vitals, their Worm dies not, Mark 9. 44.

Quest. Indeed, all these mentioned Passions, when at the height, are so many
Furies, especially distracting and amazing Fears, and Horrors. And shall
wretched Souls be wholly seized by these?

Answ. Yes; as much as we may imagine they can possibly, who are surrounded on
every side with the most mischievous and spiteful Enemies, and are left among
them in the Dark, which, were it possible, would magnify their Fears by fancy,
and make them infinite. To express which utter uncomfortableness, and
insecurity, they are said to be cast into utter Darkness, Mat. 22. 13. and
reserved unto Blackness of Darkness for ever, 2 Pet. 2. 17.

Quest. What is employed in the Worm of Conscience?

Answ. Bitter, and cutting remorse, for their own wretched folly, which has
called down upon them those intolerable miseries, and utter and horrid despair,
of ever removing or abating them.

Quest. Is this Sting of Conscience so extremely tormenting to men's Souls, that
it should be compared to a Worm, preying upon their vitals?

Answ. Yes; for they who feel it, and such only can tell the smart of it, think
it more exquisite and insupportable, than the pangs of death it self. And
therefore they run greedily after Death, and seek by any means to make away
themselves, in hopes thereby to get quit of it. The Spirit of a man will
sustain all other his infirmities, but a wounded Spirit who can bear? Prove. 18.
14. And if it is so intolerable here, where they have only some beginnings, and
small fore-tastes of it: what must it be, when horror is at the height, and
despair and anguish is consummate, and the rage of all infernal Spirits is let
loose, to represent at full the most formidable Phantasms, and imprint Anguish,
and all sorts of Agonies and painful Horrors, with the utmost activity of
Furious and powerful Spirits, as it will be in the next World.

Quest. But whilst their forlorn Souls are racked with all these horrible
pangs, what shall become of their Bodies?

Answ. They shall Frye in Flames, as I said, and endure all the Torment, which
men can feel in the hottest Fire. They shall be cast into a Furnace of Fire,
Mat. 13. 42. and have their part in the Lake, which burns with Fire and
Brimstone, which is the second death, Rev. 21. 8.

Quest. This must needs cause excessive pain. But shall they not have something
to mitigate, and make it easier?

Answ. No; not so much as a drop of water to cool their Tongue, when it is
parched and tormented in the Flame, Luke 16. 24. Nor, that poor relief of
those, who are extreme weary, and sore, to shift sides, or change their
posture. Bind him hand and foot, that he cannot stir, says our Lord, when he
Condemns the Sinner to this Lake of Fire, Mat. 22. 13.

Quest. And shall desperate shame, and disgrace, be added to all this?

Answ. Yes; For they are all as vile and hateful, to God, and all good men,
yea, and to themselves too, as they can be made; and it is purely their own
wilful and wretched Folly, and desperate wickedness, which has brought them to
it.

Quest. But will not God, the hope and comfort of all that are in utter
distress, look upon them, and show them countenance, in this wretched state?

Answ. No; they shall never see his face, nor receive the least glimpse of
favor from his Countenance. He will say to them, depart from me ye Cursed,
Mat. 25. 41. And they shall be punished with everlasting destruction, from the
Presence of the Lord, 2 These. 1. 9. He will not look upon them, but in wrath
and fury, and never think of them in mercy any more.

Quest. But when God deserts them, shall they be quite forsaken? or, will they
not be allowed some Company in this distress?

Answ. Yes; but that shall be the Company of Devils, and tormenting Spirits,
who thirst more after Blood, than ever the most starved Appetite did after
food: and who have no other way, to ease their own pains, but by the
satisfaction of augmenting theirs. Go into everlasting Fire, prepared for the
Devil, and his Angels, Mat. 25. 41.

Quest. But amidst all this horrid Crew, that take such pleasure to despite
them, shall there be none to help them, when they are unable to help
themselves, at least to pity, and condole with them?

Answ, No, there are none, but Partners in destruction, who are all too full of
their own miseries, to attend theirs. And all these in Nature are perfect
Furies, that have no love and tenderness for others. For Hell is no place for
pity and kindness: since he that dwells in Love, dwells in God, as St. John
says, 1 John 4. 16. So that there they shall have no Friend, either to help, or
hearten, or sympathize with them. But all about them shall spitefully vex and
reproach them, and add more to their burden, which is already heavier, by far,
than they can bear.

Quest. But there is one thing still, that, in the extremest Torments, gives
some ease and recruit of Spirits, though it cannot give a full deliverance, and
that is Rest and Sleep. And shall not miserable wretches have some rest from
these Torments?

Answ. No; for the smoke of their Torment ascends up for ever and ever, and
they have no rest, day nor night, Rev. 14. 11.

Quest. But if this Torment, be thus without all intermission, and thus
violent, sure it will not last long, but they will c^^^e in good time to an end
of it?

Answ. No, it shall never end. Their Bodies, as I noted, shall be made
indissoluble, and immortal, only that their pains may be immortal. Their worm
dies not, and their Fire never shall be quenched, Mark 9. 43, 44.

Quest. Good God! how intolerable, and irremediable is this State? will not
every man, that believes he shall unavoidably suffer all this for persisting
wicked, take any pains, and endure any hardships in Religion, and the amendment
of his Life, to prevent it?

Answ. Yes; most certainly, and this is the wise use we are to make of it.
Knowing the Terrors of the Lord, in executing the Wicked after the last
Judgment, we persuade men to live well here, without which there is no avoiding
them, 2 Cor. 5. 11.

Quest. And since the happiness of the Righteous, is so infinitely lasting, and
large; must not the belief of that, make us contemn all the short pleasures of
Sin, which would bereave us of it; and think all the sufferings of Virtue,
nothing in comparison of the reward, that does attend it?

Answ. Yes; for since the sufferings of this present Time, are not worthy to be
compared with the Glory that shall be revealed in us: neither Death, nor Life,
nor Things present, nor Things to come, nor any other Creature, ^^all be able
to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord, Romans 8.
18, 38, 39.

FINIS.
Books lately Printed for Robert Kettlewell.
1. THe Measures of Christian Obedidience. By John Kettlewell, Vicar of
Coles-Hill in Warwickshire. The second Edition. In Quarto, Price bound 8s. 2.
An Help and Exhortation to worthy Communicating. By John Kettlewell, Vicar of
Coles-Hill in Warwickshire. In Twelves, Price bound 2s. 6d. 3. A Discourse
Explaining the Nature of Edification. By John Kettlewell, Vicar of Coles-Hill
in Warwickshire. In Quarto, Price 6d. 4. A Funeral Sermon for the Right
Honorable, the Lady Frances Digby. By John Kettlewell, Vicar of Coles-Hill in
Warwickshire. In Quarto, Price 6d. 5. The Religious Loyalist: Or, A good
Christian taught how to be a Faithful Servant both to God and the King. By John
Kettlewell, Vicar of Coles-Hill in Warwickshire. 6. A Funeral Sermon for the
Right Honorable Simon Lord Digby. By John Kettlewell, Minister of Coles-Hill
in Warwickshire. 7. A Journey into Greece by Sir George Wheeler, in company of
Dr. Spon of Lions, in six Books. With Variety of Sculptures. In Folio, Price
bound 15s. 8. Two hundred Queries moderately propounded, concerning the
Doctrine of the Revolution of Humane Souls, and its conformity to the Truths of
Christianity. In Octavo, price bound 1s. 6d. 9. A Dissertation concerning the
Pre-existency of Souls: Being Originally written in the Lating Tongue. In
Twelves. Price 1s. 10. The Paradoxical Discourses of F. M. Van Helmont,
concerning the Macrocosm and Microcosm of the Greater and Lesser World, and
their Union. Price bound 3s. 6d. 11. A Spelling Book for Children. In Twenty
fours, Price bound 6d. 12. Animadversions on Dr. Burnet's History of the Rights
of Princes in the Disposing of Ecclesiastical Benefices and Church Lands. In a
Letter to a Friend. In Quarto, Price 3d. 13. A Discourse on Persecution, or
Suffering for Christ's sake. Clearing the Notion of it; and making a
Discrimination of Just from Unjust Pretensions to it. And passionately
recommending True Christian Suffering to all those who shall be called thereto.
14. An Answer to the Bishop of Condom, (now of Meaux) his Exposition of the
Catholic Faith, etc. Wherein the Doctrine of the Church of Rome is detected,
and that of the Church of England expressed, from the public Acts of both
Churches. To which are added, Reflections on his Pastoral Letter.
ERRATA.
Page 12. lin. 14. for our meaning, read one meaning. p. 27. l. 30. for from
the Argument, r. from the Agreement. p. 35. l. 32. for no Deangs, r. no
Dealings. p. 54. l. 1. for intimately nearer, r. infinitely nearer. p. 57. l.
4. for by an acceptable, r. by any acceptable. p. 113. l. 29. for be more
terible, r. be most terrible. p. 155. l. 11. for Guilt subservient. r. Gift
subservient. p. 172. l. 11. and p. 175. l. 24. for ingenious. r. ingenuous. p.
281. l. 28. for into its Baptism. r. into it by Baptism. p. 302. l. 16. for
their Faith in Christ, r. this Faith in Christ. p. 305. l. 2. for those
Superstructures, r. such Superstructures.


