THE CHARGE OF RICHARD, LORD BISHOP of Bath and Wells, TO THE CLERGY of his
DIOCESE, AT HIS Primary Visitation Begun at AXEBRIDGE, June 2. 1692.

LONDON, Printed by J. H. for Brab. Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons in Cornhill,
1693.

My Dear Brethren,
THE design of my calling you together at this time is, that I may, as much as
lies in me, set those things right that are amiss; and if you meet me here with
the same purpose I cannot but promise my self very good success from the
blessing of God and our united Endeavors.

It stands us very much in hand to improve the time we have for the good of
those Souls that Christ has purchased with his precious blood. There are many
considerations which may awaken us to the greatest diligence in this matter.
The care of Souls is of all things of the greatest weight; We must shortly give
a severe account of our discharge of this great duty; we have sins enough of
our own to account for, we had not need the addition of the guilt of others;
Those that miscarry through our negligence we must answer for; On the other
hand if we use due care, and win Souls to God, if we convert Sinners from the
evil of their ways how blessed a work will this be, and how great shall be our
reward? To be thus employed is a God-like work; It Is an imitation of God and
our Blessed Savior; It Is a work of the greatest charity, an instance of the
highest wisdom, an imitation of the most conspicuous example of our Lord and
Master. Besides, it is a work we stand obliged to, not only as we are
Christians, but more especially as we are the Ministers of Jesus Christ. we are
stewards of the mysteries of God, Ambassadors for Christ, we are appointed to
govern and oversee the flock of Christ, laborers in God's Vineyard; all which
expressions intimate to us the need of great circumspection and diligence.
Happy, most happy will those men be who do their utmost to gain Souls to God
and to righteousness. He that converteth a sinner from the Error of his ways
shall save a Soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of Sins, Jam. 5.20.
And they that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament, and they
that turn many to righteousness as the Stars for ever and ever. Dan. 12.3.

If we will take the pains to reflect upon the promises we made when we entered
into Holy Orders, and the Holy Sacrament that then we took upon those promises,
and whereby we bound ourselves to make them good, we shall find this of mighty
force to awaken us to the utmost care and circumspection. We professed then to
be inwardly moved by the Holy Ghost and truly called to that holy Office: That
we would diligently frame and fashion our own and families lives to the
doctrine of Christ: Diligently to minister the Doctrine and Sacraments and
Discipline of the Church: That we would banish all erroneous doctrines, and use
public and private monitions, and exhortations to the sick and the whole. That
we would be diligent in prayers and reading and studying the Scripture: That we
would set forward quietness, peace and love. Upon these terms we were admitted
into this Holy Office.

How far we have made these promises good we ought to consider. God will not be
mocked. If we have failed 'twill concern us highly to return to our duty, and
to take that diligent care of our flocks that we may both save our selves and
them that hear us.

And to this great end and purpose I commend to your care the following
particulars.

First, That ye would be Examples to your people. 1 Timothy 4.16.
Teach them not only by your Sermons but by your Lives. So live that they may
safely follow you. Tread out the steps before them that they are to take
toward Heaven. Let them see that you do that your selves which you persuade
them to do. This is the most compendious and powerful way of teaching and
persuasion. 2 This is the way that our great Lord and Master took. St. Luke
calls his Gospel a Treatise of all the things that Jesus began to Do and Teach.
Act. 1.1. He did not only instruct his followers by his Sermons, his Parables,
his Conferences, and wise Speeches, but by his actions and the whole course of
his life. They might from his life learn that Piety, that Charity, that
Righteousness, that Abstraction from, and Contempt of the world which he
commended to them from his Doctrine. He not only commanded but led them as
became the great Captain of their Salvation. His Example was instructive as
well as his Sermons. They might see in him that exemplifyed which he preached
to them. He scattered beams of light as he went along, and his disciples might
clearly see what they were to do by what he did. He taught them to believe in
God in all difficulties and straits, to love and honor him, to worship him and
be resigned to his will: But then all this might be learned from his Example
also. He trusted in him in the barren wilderness, and upon the troubled Sea,
and hanging on the Cross. He loved him above all, and sought not his own glory
but that of him that sent him. He was much in Prayer to God, frequently at the
Temple where he was worshipped, the zeal of his fathers house eat him up; to
him he resigned himself under the greatest agony, saying, not my will but thine
be done. Jesus taught his followers exact righteousness, and he practifed it
also. He taught them to love each other and to forgive their Enemies. And he
gave them a great example of it. For he went about doing good, he fed the
hungry, and taught the ignorant, and relieved the oppressed, and made joy and
gladness wherever he came: And for his bitter Enemies he with his last breath
prays for them, Father forgive them for they know not what they do. 'Twere
easy to show in a great number of instances, that Jesus did practice himself
what he taught us. He commends to us humility, and bids us learn of him for he
was lowly in heart: nor was there ever such a mirror of profound Humility in
the World. The same may be said of Patience, and Contempt of the World,
Fortitude and Courage, etc. Our Lord taught these lessons by his great Example.
And thus must we do: We must do as well as teach. This is the way to bring
Souls to God. Let Us hear St. Peter speak. The Elders which are among you I
exhort -- Feed the flock of God which is among you, taking the oversight
thereof, not by constraint but willingly, not for filthy lucre's sake but of a
ready mind, neither as being Lords over God's heritage but being Ensamples to
the flock. 1 Pet 5. 1, 2, 3. This way of example it seems is the sit method
and course; and so indeed it is. 'Twill do more good than violence and
compulsion; more than subtilty and dry reasoning. Let your light so shine
before men that they may see your Good works and glorify your father which is
in Heaven. Matt. 5.16. Again, In all things showing thy self a pattern of Good
works, etc. and that he that is of the contrary part may be ashamed. Tit. 11.7,
8. This St. Peter puts Christians upon as the best way to gain upon the Heathen
world: That they may (says he) by your Good works, which they shall behold
glorify God in the day of visitation. 1 Pet. 11.12.

By this means we shall demonstrate that our Religion is practicable: This is
of great consequence, for men are too apt to think Religion a yoke too heavy
for them to bear: Hence it is that they are discouraged. They attempt not to
take up a burden which they think they cannot bear. Practice your Religion and
you will confute this dangerous mistake, and they will follow that will not
lead the way. Jesus did thus, as ye have heard. He practiced his own rules, and
clothed with our flesh and natural infirmities, overcame the Devil and World
and obtained the Crown. By his Precepts he taught what we ought to do, and by
his Life what might be done. Si praecipientem sequi non potes, Lactant Instit.
l. 4, c. 24.
sequere antecedentem. Men are apt to follow example, and can never pretend
that impossible to be done which they see done before them.

Again; An examplary life will much tend to beget in men a belief of the truth
of our Religion. Every man cannot judge of the force of arguments and other
motives of Credibility. He that lives well is a good defender of his faith, and
will, if not Convert, yet, at least put to silence gainsayers. The people will
think sin a great evil and heaven a great relity when they see their teachers
eschew all appearance of evil and vigorously pursue heavenly things. Christian
Religion was propagated at first by miracles and an holy life: miracles are
ceased with the reason of them; an holy life has a mighty force still. And did
we live up to our Religion we should go far in convincing of unbelievers. An
example of virtue has a powerful influence.

Besides what has been said, an exemplary life would give the people an
excellent idea of the amiableness and glories of Religion. Certain it is that
Religion is the most excellent thing in the world. Did we discern its beauties,
and discover its perfections, we could not but be ravished with it. It Is the
highest perfection of our nature, the greatest instrument of peace and
happiness; our truest interest, and our glory, the greatest advancement that
our natures are capable of toward God, and eternal rest. Suppose a man to live
up to his Religion and how goodly a creature will he be? He will discover the
beauties of Godliness who leads a godly life; He that loves God above all, that
fears him only, prays earnestly to him, gives him continual thanks, and owns
him in all his ways: Such a man will commend Righteousness which does as he
would be done by, who is merciful to the poor and just to all: The modest and
temperate and humble man commends Sobriety to others most powerfully.

But on the other hand, how great are the mischiefs of a bad example,
especially in ministers, and the guides of Souls? who will practice that
Religion which they see disobeyed by the ministers thereof? The people will
question the truth of that Religion which you commend indeed in your Pulpits
but deny in your Lives: They will question a future state if they see you
neglect it. They will not be forward to mind heavenly things when they see you
mind earthly. They Will rather follow your practice than your Sermons. And will
entertain but a mean opinion of that Religion which you preach up and despise
at the same time. If you live amiss you may preach long enough and do no good:
Your bad example will do more hurt than ever your preaching will do good.

There is no man so vile as a profane Minister of Religion; He is of all the
most abject, the most self-condemned, and destitute of plea, and liable to the
heavyest plagues of another life. If the Religion he teaches be false why does
he commend it to his people? if good why does he not practice it? He must
answer for the souls he misleads; Their guilt will be required of him. Oh the
mischief of such an example! it wounds many Souls at once. It reproaches our
Religion, undermines our Church, breeds Dissenters, produces open Enemies to
our order, our function and constitution. These men are the Enemies of the
Church of England, these are its assassinates, from these men she has received
the most dangerous wounds and blemishes. Good God awaken us to a consideration
of our danger this way! That Church can never be secure whose pillars and
supporters are weak and rotten.

Secondly, we must take care that our families be exemplary also. We must see
that all under our roof be patterns of virtue and goodness, and that the people
may learn to govern their children and servants from what they see us do. Hence
it is required of a Bishop (who is highly concerned to reprove the faults of
those under his charge and influence) not only that he himself should be
blameless and of good behavior, Tit. 1.6, 9. 1 Timothy 3.4, 8, 11.
apt to teach, etc. but also that he should have a well ordered family and
obedient Children, and then it is added that he may be able to exhort, and
convince gainsayers; which he will not so successfully do who has the same
disorders within his own walls, which he ought not to allow in the Church of
God. And the same reason requires that the Deacons should not only themselves
be grave, but that their Wives should be grave, sober, not slanderers, but
faithful in all things. It stands you in hand to instruct your children and
servants in the principles of Religion, and the great difference between right
and wrong, good and evil. Possess them with the fear of the great God, with
sound principles of true Religion and Virtue. You must read the Scriptures
coustantly to them, pray constantly with them and for them: make your houses
nurseries of Piety: Teach your domestics to pray to God, and to give him
thanks: use such care that it may be difficult for any in your families to
miscarry; so order things that your houses may be such schools of virtue that
your people may discern in your children and servants the effects of your care
and discipline. Banish from your own houses all intemperance and profaneness,
all evil speaking, and such as are addicted to fraud and deceit. Take up the
Psalmist's resolution. Him that has an high look and proud heart will not I
suffer. Mine Eyes shall be upon the faithful of the land, that they may dwell
with me: He that walks in a perfect may be shall serve me: He that works
deceit shall not dwell in my house: He that tells lies shall not tarry in my
sight. Psalm 101.5, 6, 7. Endeavor to make your children and servants the
servants of God, and you will secure that duty and obedience which is owing to
your selves and much advance the interest of Religion. This is the duty of all,
but especially of you that are teachers of others. And this was the care of
those who were the servants of God of old, and will with God's blessing be
attended with great success. Abraham was a great example of this care, and
found the good effects of it in his lifetime. I know him (says the Lord) that
he will command his Children and his household after him, and they shall keep
the way of the Lord, to do justice and judgment. Genesis 18.19. We read of him
that he removed with Lot, and the Souls which they had gotten in Haran. chapter
12.5. And elsewhere it is said that he armed his trained, or instructed
Servants, born in his own house. chapter 14.14. There is an opinion among the
ancient Jews that these Souls were such as he had proselyted to the true
Religion, brought over from Paganism to the worship of the true and living God.

And we find great effects of Abraham's care, both in the submission of his Son
Isaac, chapter 22.6, 9. and the admirable fidelity of his Servant. chapter 24.

Thirdly, The next care must be in teaching and instructing your people. And
this you are greatly concerned in. I know there are several ways of teaching,
and therefore I shall consider them apart and speak of them distinctly.

1. By preaching the word of God, or public expounding the holy Scriptures to
our people. This is an unquestionable duty and incumbent upon every one that
has undertaken the cure of Souls. St. Paul lays a vehement charge upon Timothy
to discharge it. I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall
judge the quick and the dead at his appearing and his Kingdom. Preach the word,
be instant in Season, out of Season, reprove, rebuke, exhort with all
long-suffering and doctrine. 2 Timothy 4.1, 2. Let Us not deceive our selves: We
are strictly obliged to the discharge of this duty. No condition of life, no
circumstance can excuse us; where we are are able to do it we must do it by our
selves, and not shift off this labor upon others and neglect it our selves. We
think Mothers obliged (where they are able) to nurse their own children, and
shall we neglect our flocks and put them out to be nursed by Curates, and those
too, very often, unfit for that care? Our Savior and his holy Apostles gave us
another sort of Example. Shall we leave our Sheep, and hunting after fleeces
elsewhere neglect them of whom we have taken the charge? God forbid. Jesus
required something more when he put his disciples on feeding his sheep. God
will not be mocked: He requires a greater care and will bring us to a severe
account.

But for the better discharge of this duty I must commend to you the following
particulars. [1.] That you insist chiefly on the unquestionable and main things
of Religion; avoiding foolish questions (Tit. 3.3.) nice speculations and
amusing sing subtilties that have no tendency to make men better. acquaint your
people with the depraved and corrupt condition of lapsed mankind, of its
weakness and inability and obnoxiousness to God's displeasure. Acquaint them
with the method God used for our redemption by Jesus Christ; which the several
offices of Christ and how he discharged them; with the nature of the new
covenant or covenant of Grace; with the conditions of it on our part; with the
nature of a saving faith, and the motives of credibility with which the Gospel
is attended. Explain to them the nature and necessity of repentance, and the
danger of delaying it; the great necessity of an holy life, of piety, justice,
charity, temperance, humility, purity and mortification of our lusts and
headstrong passions. Preach frequently against the reigning sins of the time,
against drunkenness, common swearing, uncleanness, profanation of the Lord's
day, neglect of the public worship of God, of public prayers and sacraments.
Put them upon worshipping God in their families, upon praying with their
children and servants. If it be possible bring every family to it; press upon
them the absolute necessity of it, assist and direct them that they may do it
as they ought. Furnish them with books and helps, and where you cannot afford
to be at that expense get the help of those that are able and willing. Let them
know the worth of their Souls; the certainty of a future judgment, the vanity
of this world and uncertainty of life. [2.] Secure a good intention. Do what
you do for God's sake, and for the good of Souls. Be sincere and without guile.
Do nothing for ostentation of your wit or learning, nothing for low or mean
regards. St. Paul has put what I mean into a few words. Our Exhortation was
not of deceit, nor of uncleanness, nor in guile: But as we were allowed of God
to be put in trust with the Gospel, even so we speak, not as pleasing men but
God, who tries our hearts: For neither at any time used we flattering words,
as ye know; nor a cloak of covetousness, God is witness. Nor of men sought we
glory, neither of you, nor yet of others, when we might have been burdensome
as the Apostles of Christ. 1 Thessalonians. 2.3, 4, 5, 6. Be conscious to your self of
no other design but the good of Souls and facilitating your future account, and
you will not miss your reward hereafter whatever be your success here. [3.] You
must use great diligence also. Preach the word; be instant in season, out of
season. 2. Tim. 4.2. Till I come, give attendance to reading, to exhortation,
to doctrine. -- Meditate upon these things, give thy self wholly to them, that
thy profiting may appear to all. 1 Timothy 4.13, 15. If after all you take care
that your preaching [4.] be attended with an unblamable life you will render it
more effectual. These things command and teach: Let no man despise thy youth:
But be thou an example of the believers, in word, in conversation, in charity,
in spirit, in faith, in purity. 1 Timothy 4.11, 12. This was the course St. Paul
took himself. 1 Thessalonians. 2.10. And you must especially take care to carry your
selves with all gentleness, and charity toward your people. Let them see that
you have for them the compassions of a Father, and that you can bear with their
frowardness and infirmities. Let them see that you love their Souls, and seek
them and not theirs. If they be unkind be gentle toward them and overcome evil
with good. Let Us hear how St. Paul did. He was gentle as a nurse to her
children, content to dye for them, he had the tenderness of a Father. 1 Thessalonians.
2.7, 8, 11. The servant of God must not strive but be gentle unto all men, apt
to teach, patient. In meekness instructing those that oppose themselves, if God
peradventure will give them repentance to the acknowledging of the truth. 2 Timothy 2.24, 25.


II. Another way of teaching is by way of Catechizing; this, I fear, is too
much neglected. And yet nothing can be more necessary or of greater moment.
Can. LIX.
Our Church does by a Canon strictly oblige you to spend half an hour every
Sunday and Holyday in this exercise, and upon any neglect thereof directs that
the Minister be reproved sharply, and after this upon neglect to be suspended,
and then if he do it not to be excommunicated. You are also obliged by a law as
you may see in the Rubric at the end of the Catechism in the Common Prayer:
But you are obliged to it as it is a main part of your ministerial duty. And I
must put you upon the diligent discharge of it, and do require you to do it by
virtue of your canonical obedience. This is the way to build wisely, and
without it you build without a foundation. Your Sermons will be of little fruit
if you take not this course, and if you do they are like to be of great. Do
this as you ought and you will soon find it (I can say, I thank God I have
found if so) very advantageous. But then you must explain the Catechism to
them, and take such pains in it that they (who are thus taught) may not only
be able to say it without Book, but understand what they say, and express
themselves in other words, by which you may be assured that they do understand
it aright.

III. There is another way of teaching which I may call occasional that is not
to be neglected. When you visit your people, or they visit you, take all
occasions you can to instill into them principles of Religion and Virtue. Our
Savior taught frequently this way, and 'twill well become you to follow his
example. And you will do well not only to take but seek all occasions of doing
your people good.

Fourthly, You must also be much in Prayer that God would prosper the good Seed
which you sow. Paul may plant and Apollos water, but it is God which gives the
increase. And here I commend to you all prayer, private in your Closets, and
prayer in your Families, and the public prayers in your Churches. And for the
last of these I would have you very careful to omit no occasions of reading
them fully as they are appointed, and with great devotion and reverence. Do all
you can to bring your people to them, and to keep up the credit and reputation
of this public service of the Church. Labor much with your people to take off
their prejudices, and to bring them to a better sense of things. And have a
care to read those occasional prayers on the Fasting days, and other times
appointed, in behalf of the King and Queen and these Kingdoms: We have great
cause to keep these Fasts religiously, and to solicit the protection of Heaven:
Our all lies at stake, and our help is only in the name of the Lord, who made
Heaven and Earth.

Fifthly, You are also to administer the Sacraments as is appointed by the
Church.

Baptism is the Sacrament of Initiation: By this we are entered into the Church:
You are to take care (as directed in the Rubric) that this be not delayed, and
that it be done in the Church in the face of the Congregation. You are also to
explain in your Sermons the nature of this Sacrament, and the grounds of Infant
Baptism, and often to explain the Baptismal Vow, and call on your People to
reflect upon it, and to consider the obligation that arises thence to a life
of Virtue and Religion.

For the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper it is notoriously neglected by the
People to the great decay of Christian Piety. You are to take great pains in
this matter. Let you people know that they are not at Liberty to receive it or
omit it. That it is not only commanded but commanded by our dying Master, and
dying for us, and as a standing memorial of his death, and unparallelled love
to us. If they plead the danger of receiving amiss, lay before them the danger
also of not receiving at all. If they say they are not fit ask them when they
will, and whether or not they be fit to die? and die they must whether they be
fit or not. Take off all their pretenses. Show them how much frequent communion
would advance Piety and good Will. Make them sensible of the great danger of
neglecting this duty, and the great ingratitude to their dying Lord. But
mistake me not. I am not after all for admitting promiscuously all that may
offer themselves. The young must first be well instructed, the scandalous must
be warned, and kept back, as the Rubric directs, and those that have lived in
variance and enmity must be reconciled. Frequent communion and due care and
discipline would greatly amend this lower World.

Sixthly, You are diligently to visit the sick. The people indeed are obliged
to send for you, but if they do not 'twill well become you to go to them. This
visitation of the sick must by no means be neglected, though as the case may be
we have sometimes but a faint prospect of doing any good. There are many cases
that will exercise the greatest prudence and patience also. Perhaps you go to a
man that has lived a careless and profane life. You must have a care you do
not send him to another world with false hopes; have a care you do not speak
peace where God speaks none; awaken him to a sense of his Sin as well as
Danger. Show him the evil of irreligion and profaneness; show him the great
ingratitude of it with respect to the great God, the author of our breath and
being; Inquire strictly of him as to his past life; Whether he have injured
any, or be in enmity: Put him upon restitution and reconciliation forthwith.
Put him upon owning his wickedness to his shame, let him send for the
companions of his folly, and warn them to amend their lives, and to break off
the evil Course they are in. Let him be put upon all acts of charity and mercy
according to his ability, upon patience under his sickness, as that which is
but a just punishment of his Sins. Let him be made sensible of the danger of a
late repentance, as we call that sorrow which in our sickness we express on
account of our Sins. Whether it be after a Godly sort, and unto life God knows,
we cannot tell. We have cause to fear that such men's sorrow is like that of a
malefactors, not for his fault but for his being apprehended: The sinner is
perhaps sorry, not that he has been wicked but that God is just. Let us not
neglect such a sinner, if he die we must leave him to God: If he recover we had
need follow him, and put him upon paying his vows. We have seen many return to
their vomit, and have proved their former sorrow not to have been after a Godly
sort. You will find some others fearful beyond cause, and trembling lest they
should fall short of God's Kingdom. Some cases you will meet with of
considerable difficulty. In all which you are to use the greatest simplicity
and diligence and courage too that you may minister where you can to the
necessities of the sick: And to that purpose you are to pray for them with
great fervor, and for your selves also you must pray that God would give you
wisdom and courage to discharge your duty as ye ought.

Seventhly, You are with all your might to set forward quietness, peace, and
love, as ye promised before ye were ordained. And this must be part of your
study: Prevent as much as you can misunderstaning among your people, quarrels
and suits of Law. Make peace among those that are at variance, and live at
peace as much as lies in you. Do what you can to persuade to love and to good
works. And though there be among your people men of different opinions, yet let
them all know that that will not excuse their love to each other. This is of
the life and essence of Religion, it can never be without it. Press this hard
upon your people and let them all see you practice it. Be kind to all, do them
good offices, be so to them who do not attend your ministry as they should;
overcome them with kindness if it be possible, and let them see you do not want
compassion for them whatever their mistakes or prejudices may be. Widen not
differences but do what is possible to heal them, and to preserve the Unity of
the Spirit in the Bond of Peace.

Lastly, I commend to you great care of the poor and afflicted among your
people. Let the poor find you their Patrons. Relieve them as far as you can,
and stir up others to do it. Visit them in their Sickness as readily as ye do
the rich; get them instructed, and especially be kind to God's poor, i. e. to
those who are diligent in the worship of God, and are willing to be instructed.
And be greatly careful of the oppressed and afflicted of those that mourn for
the death of friends, of those who meet with great losses; comfort them and let
them see that you mourn with them. Take this occasion to awaken them to a
greater care to serve God, that they may not be miserable in both worlds. If
you watch these seasons and lay hold of them you may do very much good.

In a word, if you will take this course, and pursue it vigourously, and
constanly implore the Divine aid and assistance, I make no doubt at all but you
may do much, and that you will both save your selves and them that hear you.

There are besides what I put you in mind of, some other things which I think
my self obliged to lay before you. And though the things I have named already do
more immediately concern your office and function, yet the things I have still
to offer will be worthy of your regard and care. I have told you what you are
to do for the more succesfull discharge of your Holy Office: I will now put you
in mind of some things you are to be aware of: And

First, Have a care that you give not Certificates and Testimonials to those
who come for Orders or Institution unless you well know the persons whom you
commend. It stands me in hand not to lay hands suddenly on any man, and you
ought to be careful how you give your hands also. When you commend them, you
commend them to the service of God and the most holy function. I should be very
tender of commending a Servant (especially in a service of trust) to my friend
or equal lest he should deceive him by proving unfaithful: Does it not become
us then to take great care whom we commend to this service of God, and to be
stewards of his mysteries? The Canon requires the knowledge of the person
commended, three years before: Can. XXXIV.
I would have you keep to that rule; And take such care that I may have no
cause to suspect your testimonials.

Secondly, Have a care of the Titles you grant to those who come for Orders. We
cannot ordain without a title, nor is it fit we should. Can. XXXIII.
If we do we are justly liable to maintain the Clerk, and if we refuse that, to
be suspended. This is a most wholesome Law, and for the public good: But some
men have granted false Titles and supplanted a most excellent Constitution. The
Canon requires a true and undoubted Certificate of this Title: But many have
given such as are undoubtedly false. And by this means the Church has been
filled with supernumerary and very poor Ministers, who for want of bread have
been tempted to do mean and vile things to keep themselves from starving. And
these men must be unlearned of course being destitute of all means that tend to
their obtaining it. If you give them false titles you set them wrong at first.
When they are to be ordained they declare that they are inwardly moved to that
holy Office by the Holy Ghost, and truly called -- and that, according to the
order of this Church. And yet he that says this brings a lie in his right hand.
I will tell you what I expect from you for the future. I will accept no Title
from any of you unless you do, under your hands and seals, declare that you
will allow the person to be ordained such a Sum per annum for Supplying such a
place, and that you will not dismiss him without the consent of your Diocesan.

Thirdly, Have a great care that you do not present those young persons to be
confirmed by the Bishop, who cannot render an account of their Faith as the
Canon directs. Canon LXI. Rubr. after the Catechism.
The Rubric requires that the person to be confirmed should be of a competent
age, that he should have a Godfather or God-mother a present witness of the
confirmation, and that the fitness of the person to be confirmed be attested by
the Minister with the said person^ lives. I am most ready to confirm young
persons provided this preparation and provision be made. Otherwise, I shall
appoint some time for the solemn performance of this ancient and holy Action:
And I shall endeavor so to do it that it may gain its end, and serve to set us
forward toward the Kingdom of Heaven. The practice of Confirmation is both
ancient and of admirable use, and may be so managed (if it be not huddled over)
that it may be an excellent instrument of Religion. What the intention of
Confirmation is may be learned from the office our Church has appointed for
it. We then take upon our selves that vow of Baptism, which, when we were
young, we made by our sureties; we own that Religion our selves which, when we
were young, others professed on our behalf. This is the reason of the
institution. And therefore you that are to prepare persons for Confirmation may
hence understand what you are to aim at: You are to put them in mind of their
baptismal Vow, to explain the several parts of it, to instruct them in the
principles of that Religion which they profess, to put them upon owning it
publicly, and not to be ashamed of the Gospel and Cross of Christ. This is an
admirable institution and wonderfully fitted for the advancement of true
Religion. There was something like this practiced in the Jewish Church. He that
was circumcised in his Infancy, when he became of the age of 13 years, took
upon himself the Mosaical precepts, and then he was called, (...) a son of the
precept; If after this he broke the Law he himself was answerable for that
breach, and not his Parents or Sureties. We are in our office of Baptism to
mind the Sponsors for the baptized infant to take care that the child be
instructed; And that the children be minded of their baptismal vow, and taught
all the things which a Christian ought to know and believe to his Souls health.
And after this they are warned to bring them to the Bishop to be confirmed.
Your care then I must desire, and if that be not wanting you shall find me most
ready to do what belongs to me.

Fourthly, Beware of non-residence. You are obliged to reside by the Law. Upon
Vicaridges you are bound to reside by Virtue of the Oath you have taken. That
Oath obliges you unless you are dispensed with by the Bishop: That indeed is
the only way to secure the non-resident Vicar from Perjury. Nothing else but
that can do it. It Is nothing to this purpose what was the reason why all Vicars
are obliged to take this Oath. When they have taken it they are obliged; if
they reside not (unless dispensed with) they are foresworn. It Is certainly so,
whatever a late Author in his book of Pluralities has advanced to the
contrary. An Oath is not to be trifled with. For my part I cannot see how
non-residence can be justified, therefore I must and do require you to reside
upon your Cures. I hope I need say no more of the residence of Vicars, they are
obliged by Oath, and very obnoxious if they reside not. But there are other
non-residents that give great scandal. Some have two Livings and reside on
neither as they ought. Others that have but one reside not on that. They take a
Curacy, or pursue a Lecture elsewhere; They choose to live in a better air, or
among more fashionable persons than their poor neighbors are. They are for the
conversation of Gentlemen and Men of learning; others spend their time vainly
and foolishly and neglect those poor Souls which they have taken the charge of.
Did Jesus do thus, did the Apostles, did the ancient Holy Bishops and Martyrs
thus leave their Sheep? Did Jesus spend his time among Grandees and the Wits of
the age? He preached much in Galilee an obscure and mean Country. He conversed
with poor and weak, sickly and illiterate people. Good God awaken us to a just
sense of things, and grant that while we leave our flocks the Souls that in our
absence pass into another world do not carry thither just complaints against
us. We shall have the blood of those Souls to answer for whom we have neglected.

Fifthly, Neglect not those days of Fasting appointed by Authority, nor any of
those Prayers which are sent you, and required to be used during the present
state of affairs. I hope you need not to be put in mind of these things,
because you have taken an Oath to their present Majesty's, and are I hope,
sensible how much lies at stake. Our Religion, our Liberties and Properties,
our Lives, our All call for this at our hands. We have the strongest
obligations both from duty and interest. Besides we shall be self con-demned if
we are not hearty to that Government to which we have sworn, and to which we
stand obliged several ways. We are very vile if we be not true to that
Government which we have so solemnly owned: I am not willing to believe so hard
a thing of you. If there be any such I wish they may not know the difference
between a mild and gentle Government (under which we are) and the insolence of
a foreign Tyrant: I wish they may never know what arbitrary Power and
draggooning mean. Keep the days of Fasting with all manner of care; put your
people in mind of them and give them due warning of their approach. And make
the people sensible how much they are concerned in this matter.

Sixthly, You are also to take great care that you do not marry any without
Banns or License, and that in this matter you govern your selves by the Rubric
and Canon. The Minister that offends is liable to be suspended for three years.
Canon LXII.
And to the same penalty is he liable that marries those that are licensed at
unseasonable times, or in a private place. Nor may he do it with Banns without
the consent of Parents. And he that offends, though in an exempt Church, Canon
LXIII.
is liable to the same penalty. This is the penalty, and yet as great as it is
it has not proved sufficient to restrain bad men; Insomuch that other ways
have been thought upon by our Lawmakers to keep these bad men in awe. And
there was a Bill on foot in Parliament not long since to punish it with death.
I am sure the Fault is great whatever the punishment be. To steal a woman
without consent of Parents is no small sin. But as great as that is it is not to
be compared with that of the Minister. He cannot be supposed under the like
temptation, and ought to be of a virtue more conspicuous. The Minister has no
plea, unless he plead poverty: But the theif and highwayman may plead this as
justly as he. This plea ought not to save the robber from death, nor this
offender from the penalty of our constitution.

That Minister that takes the liberty of Clandestin marriages must needs be an
abandoned wretch. He does that which is most vile and unbecoming his function.
He prostitutes this holy State, and joins them together whom God has not
joined, and nature has separated. He knows not the mischief he does. For what
he knows he marries those that are married, or that ought not to marry: He may
bless the incestuous, and the most unclean mixtures which God abhors, and
nature it self forbids. What mischief to families, what horror to the minds of
the married persons, what confusion and guilt follows not from thence? There Is
hardly any punishment great enough for so great a sinner. And sure I am there
are less offenses than this which our Laws have made Capital. I cannot think
so hardly of any man that hears me as to suppose him guilty of so great a Crime.

Marriage is Honorable in all, it is an holy state, 'twas appointed in the
state of innocence, our Lord gave it credit by his presence and first miracle:
No wonder, for it is, though not strictly a Sacrament, yet, a mystery, a type of
the union betwixt Christ and his Church. So that whether we look to its
institution, or to its reference to Christ and his Church, it is an honorable
and holy state, and ought not to be contemned, much less prostituted. What has
been said is true of lawful marriages; But he that joins those together who
ought not to be joined, he defaces this sacred institution, he profanes this
holy Type of heavenly things, he destroys as much as he can the figure of that
Union which is betwixt Christ and his Church. We say all Marriages are made in
Heaven: In which common saying there may be an higher sense employed than is
commonly understood; but this can only be meant of lawful Marriages. For
others they are contrived by those that belong to another Kingdom. It will ill
become a Minister of Christ to have any hand in so detestable a practice.

Seventhly, You are to take great care to keep a Register of Christenings,
Weddings, and Burials. This is a matter of great moment, and that wherein the
estates and quiet of others is greatly concerned. You will learn what your duty
in this matter is from the Canon, and I beseech you neglect it not. Can. LXX.


These things last named require our care, and and our Canons and Constitutions
direct us in the whole matter. There are still some things behind which I must
also lay before you as things tending very much to the good of the whole, and
they are these that follow.

I shall as far as I am able Ordain at the usual times appointed by our Church.
And then as I must require the Archdeacons to attend and offer those who come
for Orders, so I desire you as you have occasion to give out for me that I do
expect that those who offer themselves for holy Orders should come to me some
time before, that I may have time to inquire carefully into their lives, as
well as examine them as to their faith and knowledge. It Is unreasonable to come
for Orders but a day or two before the ordination Sunday. I cannot allow of
such a practice as this unless I would lay hands suddenly, and be a partaker of
other men's sins. It Is a matter that requires greater care, and more time. He
that is to be ordained ought to spend some time in preparation for it, and the
holy Sacrament attending upon it. Some time in Fasting and holy Exercises, and
in such a course of devotion and abstraction from the world as that holy
function and sacred office requires at our hands.

I must also desire you so to contrive things that those of you who live near
to each other would sometimes meet together, and when you do so be useful in
your conversation with each other. Consult how you may do the most good to your
people, exhort one another to love and to good works. Resolve to be faithful
to each other, and if you see any thing amiss in any of your Brethren reproach
them not, but privately and gently tell them what you think may be reproveable.
Speak ill of no man, especially where you know no evil; and where you do, let
the offender have the first notice of his fault from you. It Is unreasonable to
publish a man's faults to another, and not tell him of them that is faulty.
Perhaps by this course he would desist. Endeavor in your Conversation to be so
exemplary that ye go away better than you came together. You that are wise and
more learned may on these occasions afford great help to the younger of the
Clergy, and less experienced. You may do them much good in directing their
studies, and acquainting them with the best method of discharging their Office.
Much good may be done this way: You may also consult together to assist the
widows and children of Clergymen deceased, and to make their sorrows as light
as you can.

Let it not be in the power of any man to sow discord among you. Live in
perfect peace with each other. If any difference arise end it among your
selves, or refer the matter to one of your Brethren. What mischief will your
differences produce among your people? They Will be apt enough to go to law when
they see you do it.

Be careful you do not exceed in your Funeral Sermons in the praises of the
dead. If you do the people will be apt to think themselves safe, if they follow
the Example which you commend. Have the greatest charity for the deceased, but
at the same time have a care of them who do survive. I doubt much mischief has
been done this way.

For the Dissenters among you treat them with humanity, and do all you lawfully
can to reduce them. Let them see you love their Souls, and that all the pains
you take about them proceeds from that principle. You may overcome them perhaps
by Gentleness and Goodness, and if you do 'twill be the noblest Victory, and of
the greatest import.

Abstain from all appearance of Evil. Shun any thing that looks like a fault.
Your reputation ought to be tender in your own Eyes as well as in those of
others. You ought to be free from suspicion as well as fault, as Caesar said his
wife ought to be. Avoid all occasions of evil, all tendencies, and temptations
to it. Go about, go about O Nazarite, and come not near a Vineyard. This was a
saying among the Jews to warn men that they might fly all occasions of evil.
The Nazarite that was not allowed to taste of the liquor of the grape was
advised not to go through a Vineyard. There are many things that perhaps are
not in themselves strictly unlawful, which yet a Divine ought not to allow
himself in. Where the thing is doubtful or of general ill fame it well
becomes you to forbear. There are some games, some forms of speech, some
fashionable modes of drinking, some garbs, some practices (allowable in other
men) which you will do well to forbear: It becomes us not to frequent public
houses, to be often seen in Fairs and Markets, or employed in secular matters
which yet are not things unlawful in themselves. The Priests under the Law
were not at liberty even where the people were. And that in them was reckoned a
defilement which in the people was not a fault. We are set apart to an holy
Office, and the ancient Canons of the Church laid great restraints upon that
Order of men.

Lastly, Let no man despise you. You Will say you cannot help that; honor and
fame be it never so great a good is in other men's keeping. And yet St. Paul
gives this advice both to Timothy and Titus, [1 Timothy 4.12. Tit. 2.15.] But then
he puts them upon the only course to place themselves beyond Contempt. To
Timothy thus. But be thou an example of the believers, in word, in
conversation, in charity, in spirit, in faith, in purity. Till I come give
attendance to reading, to exhortation, to doctrine: Neglect not the gift that
is in thee by prophecy, with laying on the hands of the Presbytery. Meditate
upon these things, give thy self wholly to them, that thy profiting may appear
to all. Take heed unto thy self and to thy doctrine; continue in them: for in
doing this thou shall save thy self and them that hear thee. [1 Timothy 4.12, 13,
14, 15, 16.] To Titus he had said, In all things showing thy self a pattern of
good works. In doctrine showing uncorruptness, gravity, sincerity; sound speech
that cannot be condemned, that he that is of the contrary part, may be ashamed
having no evil to say of you. [Tit. 2.7, 8.] This is the way not to be
despised. None that know you will despise you if you do thus. They may not love
you, but they cannot despise you. Do nothing that is mean, and that will expose
you to contempt. This is the way not to be despised. Reverence your selves and
your holy function, and let men despise you, that know you, if they can. The
truth is, this course will raise you above contempt. On the other hand, he that
does low and mean things will be despised. More still they will be despised by
evil men, by those who ar^ fond of their company, and partners in their folly.
A vicious Gentleman may embrace but cannot but despise a vicious Clergyman. And
he cannot but have a reverence for virtue and real goodness who is otherwise
none of its Votaries.

To conclude: Reflect upon your Holy Calling and on the Vows that are upon you.
Adorn your profession, and be examples to your flock. Vigorously pursue your
great end, and follow the steps of your great Master. Be instant in your
Calling, and diligently watch over your selves and people, and you shall save
your selves and them that hear you: And when your great Lord and Savior shall
appear, ye shall likewise appear with him in Glory.

FINIS.

