OF CHRISTIAN PRUDENCE, OR RELIGIOUS WISDOM; Not Degenerating into IRRELIGIOUS
CRAFTINESS, IN Trying Times.

LONDON, Printed for Jo. Hindmarsh, at the Golden Ball, over against the Royal
Exchange in Cornhil. 1691.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. Christian Prudence seen in choosing Right Ends.
ITS Ends are: 1. In every Particular to do our Duty. 2. In every Point, to
make us see what is our Duty. Both these are contrary in Fleshly Wisdom. 3. It
is alike for taking care of both Tables. And as ready to suffer for any Point
of Morality and Justice, as for Purity of Worship, and Orthodoxy of Faith.

CHAP. II. Other Ends of Christian Prudence.
4. A Fourth End is, as to perform the Duties, so to promote the Honor of
Religion. Of honoring it externally in our Carriage. Of Confession. Of not
changing Doctrines, as we change Interests. Nor being glad of any Temporal
Advantage by ill things.

CHAP. III. Christian Prudence, for Pleasing God and a good Conscience. Against
Popularity.
A Fifth End is to please God. This will take us of^ from Popularity. And to
please our own good Conscience. Of the contrary ways of worldly Wisdom.
Greatness of Numbers should not draw to an^ ill thing, nor want of Number drive
from a good one.

CHAP. IV. Of not Doing Evil, that Good may come.
This not justifiable, by Pretense of Serviceableness, to God. To the Public.
To our selves. As accomplishing by these ways some approved Predictions.

CHAP. V. Of the Plea of Necessity, Providence, or Prophecies, for doing ill.
Spiritual Prudence allows not of setting aside any Duty. 1. On Plea of
Necessity. 2. Nor justifies it, by Plea of Providence. 3. Nor by Plea of
Prophecy.

CHAP. VI. SECT. I. Of Christian Simplicity and Sincerity. And of not Deceiving
by Actions.
Simplicity sometimes notes Unwariness, which is no Virtue. The difference
between the Wariness of the Virtuously simple, and of the Fleshly wise.
Virtuous Simplicity implies, 1. Veracity, in opposition to Falsehood and Lies.
Against telling a Lie in Words. Or in Actions. Of Profession by Observance of
instituted Days for Religious Purposes. Of Breach of Simplicity herein, and in
other Actions, and by the Libellatici in the Primitive Church. 2. A double
Tongue. A double Practice. 3. Openness, opposite to Concealment and close
Reserves, and Plainness, opposite to misleading Dress. 4. Harmlesness, opposite
to Dolus Malus. The Ground of this Simplicity, Preservation of Equality. In
what Things especially to be shown, and by whom. Of the contrary Method of
worldly Wisdom.

CHAP. VI. SECT. II. Of Christian Simplicity and Sincerity.
A second thing implied in Simplicity, is Singleness, opposite to double
Dealing. Against a double Mind, and Heart.

CHAP. VII. Of not discharging Relative Duties, for Ends of Religion, or of our
own Ease.
No Discharge of Relative Duties when they grow burdensome, for Ends of
Religion, or of our own Ease. No such Discharge toward Relatives of different
Religions. Or that perform not their part toward us. Instead of putting by,
it is wont to accomplish Fears. This proved from remarkable Instances, and Rules
of Scripture. A Rule to prevent being entangled therein.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Imprudence of pursuing our Ends by unlawful Means.
The Prudence, as well as Religion, of not betaking our selves to unlawful
Means.

CHAP. IX. Of partaking in the Sins of others.
He partakes in an unlawful thing: 1. That Orders and Commands it. 2. Who, when
in place and station for it, does not duly show himself to stop and prevent it.
Thus Magistrates, and Parents partake. And Ministers, when they fail to warn
against a Sin, or mislead people therein, or teach it by corrupt Doctrine, or
inventing Salvo's for Sin. Instances of these among the Jews. The great Guilt,
and sad Consequences hereof. 3. Who under another, ministers in an unlawful
business. 4. Who as an Equal helps it forward. Several ways of doing this. 5.
Or, who approves it afterward; which set off in sundry particulars. 6. Who
caused others to sin, or gave Scandal by ill Example.

CHAP. X. Of Relyance on Providence, and the Benefit Religion makes by outward
Sufferings.
A third Rule of Christian Prudence about Means, is in compassing Effects, to
look more at Providence, than at Humane Appearances. A Fourth, is to see how
well it may compass the Ends of Christianity, by Sufferings. Christianity is a
passive Religion, and Christians are to have passive Spirits. Some Rules to
ingenerate passive Spirits.

CHAP. XI. Of Spiritual Prudence choosing Seasons, and tempering to
Circumstances.
1. It is for taking the most advantageous Seasons in its Prusuit. Three Rules
to prevent setting aside any Duties as out of Season, in compliance with carnal
Wisdom. 2. It is for tempering what we do to Circumstances. Three Rules to
prevent such tempering thereof, as would impair, or give it up, for our
external Quiet. 3. Of flight in Persecutions. Of Flight of Pastors. Some Rules
to keep off from doing harm to our Duty, in Caution to avoid harm to our selves.

CHAP. XII. Of Caution in preventing Harm by any Duties. and of Flight in
Persecutions.
3. It is for showing Caution to prevent ill Consequences. Of staying for a
Call, in persecuted Duties.

CHAP. XIII. Of Spiritual Prudence in Worldly Matters, or as overruling all
other inferior Prudence about things of this Life. And of Solicitude.
The Rules of Religion, are the truest Wisdom for the Ends of this Life. When
worldly Wisdom thwarts these Rules in pursuit of any Ends of this Life, it
overrules it in such Motions. Thus, when it is apt to transgress about Ends,
or about Means. Some Rules for this. The point of Solicitude stated. Of fleshly
Wisdom, are all so many Branches of Jesuits Morals, which are not to be taken
up to drive out Popist Superstitions.

CHAP. XIV. A Recommendation of Christian Prudence.
The Prudence and Simplicity hitherto described, recommended from St. Paul's
Practice, 2 Cor. 1.12. The contrary Rules.

ERRATA.
Page 16. lin. 22. dele the figure 1. p. 18. l. 14. for Equal read Equally, p.
24. l. 5. purly r. purely, p. 36. l. 16. drive r. drove, p. 41. l. 20.
necessity r. necessity, p. 55. Chapter 3. after the Title dele the first five
lines, and begin the Chapter Fifthly and lastly, p. 136. l. 11. p. 151. l. 5.
fool r. foot, p. 200. l. 3. dele Take, p. 207. l. 21. in justice r. injustice,
p. 264. l. 3. r. St. Peter, p. 320. ^27. far r. for.

OF GODLY WISDOM; OR, Religious Prudence, Not Degenerating into irreligious
Craftiness, in Trying Times.
MAnkind were formed, and placed by God in this World, but designed for
another. And the condition and employment of our Life here, is to be a passage
through this World, in pursuit of, and preparation for a better. And whilst we
are duly careful for the next, and omit nothing that is to bring us to the end
of our Stage; we may wisely provide for this too, and contrive for our
quietness and convenience by the way.

The way to the other World, of true and perfect Joys, are all the Duties and
Directions of Religion: which are those paths the Wisdom of God sees necessary
to perfect and spiritualize our Natures, and which the Goodness of God has
prescribed to lead us to himself, and to the Regions of eternal Life.
Whatsoever God in his holy Gospel, calls us to profess, or practice; that is
the way to the World above. And if we hope to arrive safe there, and attain the
Glory and Blessedness thereof; whatever hardships occur, or accidents befall us
therein, we must never go out of the way. When, upon any consideration, we turn
out thence, all our steps are wrong; and will never be right, till we return
into it again.

The way to make the most of this World, and secure to our selves the greatest
ease, advantage, and enjoyment in our passage; are the Rules of humane Prudence
and worldly Wisdom. And, as we are called upon, to hold on constantly in the
former, by the more still voice of Conscience, and the Laws of God: So are we
reminded, to make use of these later, as occasion serves, by the more
importunate cravings of our sensual Nature and Necessities, and the more loud
voice of Flesh and Blood.

Now, as our fleshy Nature and Necessities require: so does Religion allow us
to serve our selves of these Rules of Humane Prudence, so long as we keep
within a due compass. That is, whilst we betake our selves only to such ways of
external quiet and enjoyment in this World, as go not out of any way of
Religion, or path of Happiness, leading to another World. Whilst the Rule of
Wisdom, is only such, as affords ease, or comfort in our passage; but does not
carry us out of our way, or stop our progress. When be sent out his Disciples,
as sheep in the midst of wolves, be wise, says our Lord to them, as serpents,
so long as they took care first to keep as innocent, or simple and
plain-carriaged, as doves, Mat. 10.16.

But fleshly Nature, is glad of any way that affords ease here, however it
hinders, or misleads us, from the paths of those greater Joys, which we should
all seek to secure, and prepare for hereafter. It runs to them, and that with
greediness: So that, when any Duty of Religion gainsays it, and calls another
way; there is a trial of our Love and Affection for the two Worlds. When any
way of Righteousness, for instance, becomes burdened with the Cross, and a way
of worldly and unrighteous Wisdom can avoid it, or, it may be, lead to be, not
only safe and easy here, but seemingly happy and prosperous: then does God
make a trial, whether Religion, or Flesh and Blood, have most Force; whether
this, or the next World, are of greatest weight with us. Worldly Reproaches and
Persecutions upon a Duty, are the true Test of its worthy and faithful
Votaries, and discover who they are that set it above this World. And God is
careful in the course of Providence, still to annex worldly sufferings to some
Duties of Religion or other, to separate the impure dross from the pure Gold;
the light chaff that a storm of Persecution can drive away from the solid
Wheat; and, as a Touchstone, to make manifest, who are those truly worthy and
sincere minds, that will love and steadily practice any Duty, when left to it
self, and stripped of all external Bait of worldly inducement. There must be
Heresies, says St. Paul, which, as they increase, grow still into Factions and
Persecutions against the Orthodox, that they who are approved, may be made
manifest, 1 Cor. 11.19.

To be ready to approve our selves to him in such Trials, it highly concerns us
all, to understand clearly what are the ways of fleshly Wisdom, that, at such
times, we may take more care to keep back from them. There is the more need to
be clear in this beforehand, because the time of determining, and practicing,
is not the fittest for deliberating upon it. For Flesh and Blood, starts first,
and calls loudest on such occasions. It presents variety of these ways to our
minds. And tho the ways are wrong, yet through the biass of fleshly
inclinations, our minds are leaning, and very willing to believe them right.
The generality of Mankind are prone to see, and assent on that side, which
appears most safe, and consistent with this present World. They are apt to bid
a hearty welcome, and listen to any one that speaks for that way, and are
easily convinced by him: being willing to be Deceived; and it is well if not
active to Deceive themselves, into such a persuasion. And when Flesh and Blood
are like to be so busy and powerful on such occasions, to recommend such ways
of worldly Prudence; it is very necessary our Minds and Consciences should not
be without their Armor, but have clear convictions of their folly and
unlawfulness, to oppose against them.

To afford some Help in this Point, to such sincere Tempers, as would be
thankful to be showed a losing Truth, and glad to approve themselves to God on
such occasions: I shall offer something, tho imperfect, to set off the way of
true Wisdom, and to show what are the limitations of Religious Prudence, and
what the contrary liberties of fleshly Wisdom, or worldly Craftiness. That so,
they may not err for want of information, when, in course of Providence, they
are brought on such Trials.

CHAP. I. Of the Nature of Christian Prudence, and how seen in choosing Right
Ends.
WIsdom, or Prudence at large, is being wise for our selves; or seeing, and
following, what Reason sets off as best for us. It is Reason contemplating, not
the mere Truth of things, which is Science: but their Goodness and
Desirableness, or what are best for us to seek, or practice. And about this
Practice, it considers not only how to do things skilfully, which is the
consideration of Arts: but how to do them profitably, respecting either their
future accountableness for Rewards or Punishments, or implying moral good or
ill, and being directed by, or promotive of any Virtues; or their worldly
usefulness and advantage, to the end we are driving on, or have to serve in
this Life.

It notes Reason, not only contemplating these things, but influencing and
effecting them. For Prudence speaks the commendableness of several Powers. It
carries with it the virtue of our Wills, as well as of our Understandings; and
besides the skill to see what is good for us, includes also such influence over
our other Powers, as makes them follow it, and take up therewith. A man may be
a knowing man, that acts against the true Dictates of his own Reason. But he
only is a truly wise, and prudent Person, who follows, and is guided by them.
And accordingly the wicked, tho otherwise of never so much Knowledge, are
called Fools, in Solomon's Proverbs, and other Scriptures.

Thus is true Wisdom or Prudence the same, as Reason well applied to Practice;
or Reason directing, and influencing us, unto what is profitable, and best for
us in any case.

Now this takes in the greatest variety of matters, even all the managements
and concerns of this Life. And according to the difference of these, it comes
under different denominations. When it directs to most utility, in managing the
common course of our own Lives, and the ordinary affairs and accidents thereof,
it is common Prudence. When, to what is most reasonable, and equal, to be
exacted mutually, or allowed, in the course of Negotiation or worldly
intercourse, upon any dealings, or differences; it is the prudence of
Negotiators, or men of Business. When, to what is most decent and conversible
in our carriage, to befit our own condition and circumstances, and to keep up
fair Respect, Favor, and Society with, and procure the same from others; it is
the prudence of Conversation. When it is shown, in the government and conduct of
other men: if it Directs to what is best, and the way to compass it in War,
it is Military Prudence; if, to what makes most for common Safety, Order, and
Benefit, in the conduct of a Family, it is domestic or oeconomical; if, of a
State, it is civil or political Prudence. But in matters of Religion, which, as
they are to have some separate times, so are also to run through, direct, and
influence, all the other actions and affairs of this Life: when it shows us
what are the ways of Salvation, and how we may compass, and go on in them; it is
moral, religious, spiritual Prudence. By the other sorts, we may pass for
worldly wise, but this is to be wise to Salvation.

Now for the better understanding of true Religious Wisdom, or Christian
Prudence, I shall reduce what I have to say upon it, to these Heads.

Christian Prudence lies,

1. In seeing, and following, right Ends of Religion; and pursuing them only by
fit, and Christian ways.

2. In taking for these, the most advantageous seasons, in tempering them to
circumstances, and showing caution to prevent harm thereby, or ill consequences.

3. As for all other inferior, and worldly Prudence about things of this Life,
in so ordering the ends, and overruling the ways thereof, as to keep them
subservient to Religion, or as best becomes Christians.

1. Christian Prudence lies, in seeing, and following right Ends of Religion;
and pursuing them only by fit, and Christian ways.

1. It is to see, and set out to us right Ends. The first sign of Wisdom or
Prudence, is the choice of wise and fitting Ends. And the first care of
Christian Prudence, is always to propose such Ends, as are becoming Christians.
It is to propose such Ends, that we may aim at them: and to make us see, and
understand those Ends; that we may perceive and know, what we are to aim at.

These Ends, are the Glory of God, or what will bring in most Honor to him.
The Perfection and Advancement of our own Natures, or what will make us most
like to God, and afford us the fullest and truest enjoyment of him, and of our
selves, and of any thing else that is beatifying. The Good and Happiness of
others, or what makes most for common good, and the real benefit and
advancement of our Brethren. Now all these Ends are best served by Doing of our
Duty. We are in the best way of glorifying God, and perfecting our selves, and
benefitting our Neighbors, whilst we are in the way of holy Obedience. And
therefore to aim at these Ends, is in other words nothing else, but to aim to
observe the Rules, and seek the Honor of our Religion, and to do our Duty in
all points.

So far as concerns the End then, which it prescribes, Christian Prudence is,

1. In the first place, to propose in every point to Do our Duty. True Wisdom,
it Places in an entire obedience. And accordingly all wickedness is called
Folly, and wicked men Fools, in the holy Scriptures. We must never know any
wisdom, in doing unrighteously; nor set up for Prudence, by any breach of God's
Commandments. All the Rules of Duty, are the most pure and perfect Wisdom. They
are the wisdom of God: and who can think to show himself wise, by pretending to
correct God's Rules, or running counter unto them. When any breach of Duty
makes show of being Prudent, it is a mere show: it is only a false Light, that
may misguide any out of the real way of Happiness, but lead none into it. Let
it promise what it will, it is all fiction and flattery, and if we will trust
God before it, we must ever esteem such a breach, when offered or suggested to
us, only to have put on the mask of wisdom, but under that and in Truth to be
mere folly.

2. Next, in every point, to direct and make us see what is our Duty, that so
we may understand whether we Do it or no. This must go through all particular
Duties, and tell us what things are aimed at, and what offices are required of
us, by Each. What they ought to Do, for instance, who would approve themselves
to be resigned to God, to love or trust him, to be patient or devout toward
him: to be meek, humble, sober, and mortified to this world: to be true, and
just, peaceable, and charitable, among their Brethren. It Is the part of
Christian wisdom, to teach us what we must propose to our selves, that we may
discharge any of these, or any other Duties. To show what are the instances and
expressions of all particular Virtues, which should be the mark and aim of all
their Professors and Undertakers. Prudence is the directing Virtue; it is Eyes
to all the rest: All Virtue observing, as Ad Nicom. l. 2. c. 6.
Aristotle says, (...), as a prudent Man shall define. True and sincere
Prudence, De prospera and adversa Fortuna, and de Prudentia, Conc. 21. Tom. 3.
p. 582.
says S. Basil, lies in the knowledge of those things, which are to be done, or
which are not to be done. Whereto, whosoever adheres, will never desist from
the Actions of Virtue, or be left in the destruction of Wickedness. And being
to direct the Practice of each Virtue, it must imply the Skill, to see wherein
the Practice thereof lies: What is to be Done in any, that we may Deserve the
Name of just, humble, sober, etc. and what, in every case, or on any occasion,
is to be the Work of such a Person.

Now this is an admirable and most excellent Part of Spiritual Prudence, to
know what is to be done in any Duty, as we are called to discharge it by God's
Providence. And it is great shame a Professor of any Virtue, should not be able
to say wherein the Discharge of it lies, when he comes to need, and is called
out to make use thereof. This has all the reproach of being ignorant of what a
Man does profess, and of being to seek in his own Business; as if an Artist
were ignorant, and knows not, when he comes to set to it, what he has to do in
the way of his own Art; which in the estimate of all Persons, is one of the
most censureable and shameful sorts of Ignorance. Yea, it is extreme and
desperate Folly, considering, that as he is here called upon to practice each
of these Duties; so must he hereafter, to answer and be tried by them. Now
Christian Prudence is to prevent this, by storing up clear Notions of every
Duty, and of the Offices thereof, against such time as we shall have a call and
opportunity to discharge them. The Wisdom of the prudent, says Solomon, is to
understand his way, i. e. to know what he ought to do on all occasions. Prove.
14.8. And this the Scripture expresses, by having our Senses exercised, to
discern both good and evil, Heb. 5.14. and calls for, as a necessary
Preparative to our walking accurately or exactly. The walking (...)
circumspectly or accurately, which S. Paul requires, Ephesians. 5.15. he tells them
is to walk as (...), not as (...), not as fools, but as wise or prudent The
wise Servant made Ruler, (...), is the same as prudent (...), Mat. 24.45. As
the wise as serpents, (...), Mat. 10.16. and wise virgins, Mat. 25.2.
. Wherefore, adds he, be ye not (...) imprudent or unwise, but understanding
what the Will of the Lord is: Since if they did not understand it, they were
not like to be very exact in keeping it. v. 17.

Now opposite, in this matter, to both these, is the way of fleshly or worldly
Wisdom. For,

1. Instead of proposing in every Point, above all things to do our Duty: It
aims and Proposes in the first place, to secure our external Quiet, to serve
our worldly Peace, Prosperity, or Temporal Interests. It seeks not in all
things what is virtuous, but what is safe. And being for worldly Safety, it
never seeks to do what it is like to suffer by. Its Eye is first, for keeping or
increasing these worldly Emoluments and enjoyments for our selves, our Friends,
or Families, for the Church or State. It may fix upon Religion as well as the
things of this Life, and carry us out for the Church, as well as for the
Commonwealth. But then what it aims at, or seeks in the first place to secure
in these, is not the inward Excellence, but the outward Appendages; not their
integral Parts, and Spiritual Substance, but their worldly Accoutrements and
Advantages. If Religion is taken in among the Good things of this World, and
stands guarded and enriched by secular Laws and Privileges, Riches and Honors:
Worldly Wisdom will be carried out as far to secure these worldly Appendages,
when they are about Religion, as when they are about any thing else. But as for
the proper and essential Parts of Religion it self, which lies in doing our
Duty in every thing, or in the integrity of Faith and good Life; the Wisdom of
this World sets them only in the second place. It may show fair respect, and
carry Decently toward them, even where it will give it self no trouble about
them: As we see several that have no serious value for Religion, will yet be
Civil to it in point of good Breeding, and as sensible of the need there is,
however it is neglected by them, that it should be kept up in the esteem, yea,
and practice too, of other Men. Nay, worldly Wisdom, when it rightly
understands it self, will aim at it in most Cases; as serving its own wise
Purposes beyond any thing else: True Virtue being, for the most part, best
fitted, and conducing to the Happiness and Enjoyment of both Worlds. But where
it thus b^ars the best good Will to the inward and essential Ingredients of
Religion; it is only whilst they are subservient or consistent with its own
worldly Designs, being ready to thr^w them aside, when once they oppose it. On
such Competitions, The carnal mind is not subject to the law of God, neither
indeed can be, Romans 8.7. It considers then, not their intrinsic Goodness and
Excellence, but their Expedience; and will give them up for what it accounts
higher Ends, or dearer Interests. On such occasions, its Questions are not,
What will become of this Duty; or another, of Innocence and a clear Conscience;
but what will become of our Estates, our Liberties, our outward Peace, Powers,
Honors, Privileges, or other Enjoyments of this Life, by such, or such a
Course, when it is deliberated on.

2. Instead of seeing in every Case, what is our Duty; worldly Wisdom is for
continuing ignorant of, and not seeing a Losing Duty. It cares not for the
Knowledge of troublesome or afflicted Truths. It is ready to look upon, and let
in such as consist with worldly Ease and Interests; But afraid to understand,
because it is loath to practice others; Conviction of a Duty, serving only to
increase the Guilt, and disturb the Quiet of those who will not practice it.

Hence comes that sleightful Saying of fleshly Wisdom in these Cases, of
Leaving every Man to his own Persuasion, and not censuring any much, if he act
therein according to his own Conscience. They represent such Cases, as if it
mattered not much, which Side a Man takes, and there were no important
difference in the things themselves, but only in the different Opinions and
Belief of Men about them. So that, let a Man but have a Persuasion of that
Side, which is most easy and favorable to worldly Interest, as Men are ready
enough to have in trying Cases if that will Do, and nothing else will greatly
harm him in these matters.

Hence comes also, that backwardness of Conversing and Discoursing with those
of the other Opinion, who are both ready to practice, and able to plead for a
Duty, when it is oppressed, and has the Cross upon it. It Is a Rule of fleshly
Wisdom at such times, to look on such as dangerous Persons, whose Company is
not safe. Their Discourses, such Men imagine, can only serve to make them more
uneasy in the way they have a mind to go. They will start Scruples to
dissatisfie and unsettle a Mind that had no such Doubts before, but had easily
satisfied and settled it self upon the saving side. Or, if they come in the way
of such Discourses, especially when fit to do Right to Truth, by setting it off
to advantage, they receive them against their Wills, and meet them, not with a
religious Desire, but worldly Fear. They are not thankful for the offer of a
saving Truth, but sorry for, and troubled at it; and ready to say to the
Messengers thereof, as Ahab did to the Prophet, who still called upon them to
hear what they had no Will to understand, that he was his Enemy, and the
Troubler of Israel, 1 Kings 18.17. and Chapter 21.20. When they se^ worldly
Safeties above religious Innocence; they fear, and hate the Light, as our
Savior Joh. 3.20.
says, which reproves the secure ways they desire to take. Minding not to
follow it, they use care not to be hampered and troubled with it, and, as the
Scripture speaks, will not have the knowledge of his ways, Job 21.14.

Hence, lastly, when they allow themselves to enquire and examine the Truth,
comes that Hastiness and Partiality, in taking any thing for sufficient proof,
that makes for the safe side. Any serviceable, but ill grounded Presumptions
about Words or Things, shall hastily be taken up and pass for Truths, which a
little deliberation and enquiry would show to be Falsehoods. Former Tenets and
Opinions, which usually are so very tedious and difficult to be extirpated,
shall be laid aside upon much less Argument and offer of proof, than that
whereby they had before been maintained. Yea, the very same things shall be
offered as good Arguments, which, when offered by others, had been cast out and
confuted as false ones. Variety of Topics shall be started, to make up in
number what they lack in weight: And tho all are so uncertain, that they who
use them, keep themselves upon the reserve, and are afraid to stand or fall by
any one alone; yet they shall conclude, that some or other of them is right,
and sufficient to prove what they draw from it. Which I think, is not the way
of seeking Truth, but serving Interest. It Is to resolve upon the conclusion,
before one sees the Reason which can make it good: Worldly Wisdom says, this
must be held; and then, if one Topic that is pressed for proof, cannot make it
out, another must. Yea, confessedly weak and false Arguments, shall pass for
Evidence; and great Names, or Numbers, when they fall on this side, fleshly
Wisdom will call, in its own Case, a proof of Right. Tho, looking abroad every
where else in the World, where store of Opinions about other matters have these
same Supports, and yet are condemned by our selves; at the same time in our
Neighbors Case, it shall be ready to Declare, that Names and Number^ are no
sure Argument of Truth, but too commonly the false color, and fair show of
Error.

These, and such like, are the effects of that affected ignorance, which
worldly Wisdom would be held in of any Duties, which it is like to lose by. And
this is quite opposite to spiritual Prudence, and must never be yielded to by
any that would make sure their eternal concerns, or pass for truly religious,
honest, virtuous Dispositions.

In matters of Salvation, the best and truest security, is being in the right
way. And I know no relief for any man in the wrong, but a sincere willingness
to see and follow the right, when the Providence of God shall lay it
sufficiently before him. Which gives no relief at all to those, who for want of
love to a saving Truth, especially when persecuted, and through too much love
of this world, are afraid to come in the way thereof, and unwilling to let it
in.

1. It is not enough for one that seeks to approve himself a good man, that he
follow that Duty which he sees; but he must also take care to see every thing,
which is his Duty, that he may follow it. The Knowledge of our Duty must not
sure be ranked among indifferent things; for Faith, as well as Obedience, makes
up the Gospel-terms. To believe and know what Christianity makes necessary to
be known, is as requisite as to Do, what it makes necessary to be Done. Nay, to
know those things, which are necessary to be Done, is as necessary as to Do
them; since we cannot do them, till we know them.

Indeed, if the Ptovidence of God affords not an honest mind the opportunity of
such Knowledge, he will graciously connive, both at the want of Knowledge, and
Practice. But if we have no mind to know, what we might know, we shall suffer,
both for the want of Practice, and Knowledge. It Is plainly there, a want of
Virtue in the heart, that causes a want of Understanding in the head: such evil
doers, as our Lord says, love darkness, and hate the light, and will not come
to it, lest their deeds should be reproved, Joh. 3.19, 20. An honest mind must
never be unwilling, or afraid to see its Duty, no, not where it is most costly.
It must have a Love for it, when it is persecuted, as well as when it is
applauded, when, in the eye of the world, it is a losing, as well as when it is
a gaining Virtue. They must receive the love of the Truth, that they may
receive the belief thereof, and to keep off, as St. Paul says, from being of
their number, that perish in their unrighteousness, by believing lies, because
they received not the love of the Truth, that they might be saved thereby, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11, 12. This Love will not only make them to listen to it, but to
be inquisitive after it, where sufficient instruction is not voluntarily
offered; and thankfully to see, and receive the will of God, whether it be with
their worldly interest and fleshly inclination, or against them. And this is
true Docility, and Teachableness of Temper, which is what the Scripture calls
Mat. 13.9, 43. etc. 11.15.
the ear to hear, or the necessary Preparative profitably to hear a Religious,
or Moral Lecture. It Is necessary to Faith, especially of those Truths, or Laws
of God, which are more unsavory, and uneasy to flesh and blood. And being
such a previous Requisite of Faith, and implied in it, it is sometimes in
Scripture expressed thereby. Pray that I may be delivered from unreasonable
men, says St. Paul, for all men have not faith, 2 Thessalonians. 3.2. Noting those, who
receive, or reject what is tendered, only by Humor, or inclination of Flesh
and Blood, not by Reason, as men void of Faith, i. e. of a teachable Temper and
Disposition.

3. Thirdly, Christian Prudence, is alike for taking care of both Tables; or
for discharging faithfully, as all the Duties of Piety, so equal all others of
Justice and Morality. Since both are equally parts of God's will, they are
equally a matter of its care: and its constant aim and study is, how it may
inviolably observe both, and transgress neither, but never to set one against
the other. Both Tables it receives, as coming from one Authority, and claiming
one Obedience. Well knowing, that he that said, Thou shall not worship an Idol,
said also, Thou shall not kill, or steal. And if thou keep free from Idolatry,
yet if thou kill, as St. James argues in this case, thou art become a
Transgressor of the Law, Jam. 2.11. There is no transgressing of one, to save
another: nay, there is no breaking of one, to save all. For whosoever shall
keep the whole Law besides, says the same Apostle, and yet offend in one
point, he is guilty of all, v. 10. And if for breaking that one, he will be
punished as if he had broke all: there cannot be any room left, to think of
breaking one, tho it were upon pretense to save all. Which I call a Pretense,
because, indeed, it is a mere Pretense. For the Commandments never oppose one
another, and we can never reasonably pretend to break the latter, that we may
keep the former: since, if we please, we may at all times keep both, and as we
never can have any Authority, so neither can we be under any necessity of
breaking either.

The Effect and Consequence I shall observe from hence, is,

1. First, That we never oppose the first, to the second Table. As the
Pharisees, who, to keep the third Commandment, taught men to break the fifth:
not suffering a man to do any thing for his father and mother, after once he
had said, It is Corban, that is, a gift by whatsoever thou might be profited
by me, or, I interdict, what I have, by the vow Corban, from ever being helpful
unto thee; a Form, among the Jews, of forswearing to help others. Which,
instead of being an approved way, of keeping first Table-Duties, our Lord
charges, as setting up the Commandments of men for Doctrines, and making void
God's Law through their Traditions, Mat. 15.5, 6, 9. Mar. 7.11. We must not
suffer our selves to be carried on, to break the fifth, sixth, eighth, ninth,
tenth Commandments; i. e. to throw off Duty to our Parents, Natural or Civil,
or any Obligation of Morality, of Justice, Truth, or Gratitude toward men, for
the Honor and Glory of God, or for, either the new setting up and erection, or
the continuance and preservation, of a more Orthodox, pure, and spiritual way
of Worship and Devotion.

It is too common among the worldly wise, to consent to several violations of
Morality, for the Preservation, as they say, of God's Church, or Advancement of
his Glory. Meaning thereby, the Glory and Preservation of a true and Orthodox
Profession of Faith, and of a pure and Gospel Worship. And the Glory sought
thereby for these, is to make them externally glorious; to seat them in worldly
Sway, Power, or Privilege, that men may own the Confessions, and pay the
Worship, with external ease and encouragement to themselves, or without
Persecutions.

But is not God to be glorified and obeyed in his other Precepts, as well as in
these Confessions of Faith, and pure Devotions? And is it a way to glorify him
in one point, by disgracing him in others? Will he receive so much Glory and
Service, by the Orthodoxy, as Disservice and Dishonor, by the Immorality? Is
not God glorious in his Moral Attributes, of Justice, Faithfulness, and the
like, as well, as in the Unity, and Spirituality of his Nature? And is it not
as necessary for those, that would duly glorify him, to copy out and display
his Glory, in these Moral Excellencies, as to own and declare it in the other?
Nay, is he not particularly careful, to call us to an imitation and Transcript
of his Glory in these: to be merciful, as he is merciful, Luc. 6.36. and holy,
as he who has called us is holy, and that in all manner of conversation, 1
Pet. 1.15, 16? And to tell us, that to be created after his Image, the new man
must put away lying, and other immoralities, and be formed in Righteousness and
true Holiness, Ephesians. 4.24, 25, etc. And must not the Church be preserved, in
true ways of Justice, and Moral Duties, as well as of Worship, and Confessions
of Faith? Ought it not to be as much concerned, for good Practice, as for good
Prayers; and will it not get as much, by good Life, as by being Orthodox? Nay,
can immoral men be saved in any Religion; or will a good Worship recommend any
to God in evil-doing; or shall they enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, that call
Christ Lord, Lord, but do not obey him? There is no way of glorifying God, but
by being entire in our Duty, and performing all that he prescribes us. Nor of
advancing his Church, but by advancing the Practice of all those Duties, which
are to recommend, to save, and signalize his Church. We may confess the true
Faith, and Practice a pure and spiritual Worship, in keeping all the other
Commandments, and without the breach of any; yea, and that in Persecutions, if
we please, and dare run hazards. And so may all other persons, if they have the
heart to do like us. And it is not for us to transgress any of them, only as a
way to remove hard Trials from them, or from our selves. Which is not to
glorify God, or our Duty, or advance his Church; but to discredit and disserve
both, for our own carnal ease and advantage.

2. Secondly, That a true Christian be ready to suffer, for any point of
Morality and Justice, as well as for any point of Orthodoxy in Faith, or Purity
in Divine Worship. For upon which soever of these they suffer, the cause is
Religious, and they are alike Confessors.

The Duties of the first Table, indeed, have God, not only for their Author,
but likewise for their Object; and so are more particularly styled Piety, or
Duties toward God, on that account. As are likewise some Duties injoined in
the second Table, viz. those of the fifth Commandment, toward Parents and
Magistrates, who are in God's place, and, on that Account, are sometimes in
Scripture called Gods: Thou shall not revile the Gods, says the Law, meaning
thereby the Rulers, Exodus 22.28. And thus St. Paul calls it (...)
showing piety at home, when Children relieve and requite their Parents, 1 Timothy
5.4. And the undutiful, are styled 1 Samuel 10.27.
^ons of Belial, and impious; and Disloyalty, impiety, or Secundum Sacrilegium,
a Second Sacrilege, as Apol. c. 35.
Tertullian's Phrase is.

But all other Duties are injoined by God, and performed for his sake, and are
as truly Parts of Religion, and he accordingly stands upon them, as those,
which are more immediately referred to God himself. For Religion lies in
keeping of the Laws of God at large, or in all the Duties of Justice and
Morality, as well as in the Duties and Acts of Piety. The Grace of God, which
brings Salvation, that is, the Christian Religion, consists in living
soberly, and righteously, no less than in living godly in this present world,
according to St. Paul's distribution of Duties, Tit. 2.11, 12. And pure and
undefiled Religion, St. James describes by the moral Acts, of visiting the
fatherless and widows in their affliction, and keeping ones self unspotted from
the world, Jam. 1.27. And the Kingdom of God, or the Religion of Christ, the
Apostle makes to consist in Righteousness, and Peace, those second-Table and
moral Duties, as well as in joy in the Holy Ghost, Romans 14.17. So that to
suffer for any second Table-Duties, is to suffer for God's sake, since God
injoins them. And to suffer for Religion, since Religion implies them. Tho they
do not so immediately respect God, yet are they as much required by Religion,
and as truly parts thereof, as those that do.

Now it is suffering for Religion, that makes men Confessors and Martyrs. And
this they do, who suffer for the moral parts thereof.

What the Gospel declares blessed, is being persecuted for Righteousness sake.
Blessed are they, which are persecuted for Righteousness sake, Mat. 5.10. And
if ye suffer for Righteousness sake, happy are ye, 1 Pet. 3.14. And there is as
true, and acceptable Righteousness, in moral Duties, as in any Confessions of
Orthodoxy, or Purity of Worship and Devotions.

The Confession, which Christ requires of us, is to confess him and his words,
Luke 9.26. And the Martyrs in the Revelations, are expressed by suffering for
the Testimony of Jesus, and for the word of God, Rev. 20.4. And we have as good
word, and command for these, as we have for any others.

The Sufferers he respects, are those that suffer for his Name, Mat. 10.22. But
all the Duties required by his Gospel, are called by his Name. And all the Acts
of Morality, which stood before on Natural Obligation, now, since he has
injoined them, and his Spirit helps us to perform them, being practiced out of
Christian Principles, and through the Grace of Christ, are all become
Christian. And the Losses he recompenses, are Losses for his sake; he that
loses his life for my sake, shall find it, Mat. 10.39. Or, as it is in St. Mark,
For his sake, and the Gospels, Mark 8.35. And is it not purley for his sake,
and in regard to him, that we perform any second Table-Duties, when we are sure
to lose by them? And are not those Losses for the sake of the Gospel, which are
purely out of Conscience to Gospel-injunctions?

Thus are all the Comforts and Encouragements, the Approbation and Acceptance
of Gospel-Sufferers, common and alike to both Tables. And he is as true a
Confessor, that, in Peril of Suffering, gives his testimony against any Acts of
Unrighteousness and Immorality; as he that does the same, against any false
Articles of Faith, or Acts of false Worship and Idolatry. I know among Good
things, there is a difference in degrees. And especially he that suffers, for
owning Jesus to be the Christ, suffers for the whole of the Gospel, which is
more than some particular Duties thereof, whether relating to Faith, Worship,
or moral Practice. But sufferings for any, are all of the same kind and
quality; they are alike Religious, and the Sufferers alike Christ's Martyrs and
Confessors.

And suitable, is the received Judgment concerning Sufferers, in these cases.
John the Baptist was one of God's blessed Martyrs, tho the Cause he suffered
for, was that of the seventh Commandment, or declaring against an unlawful and
incestuous Marriage, Mat. 14.3, 4, 5, 10. The persecuted Prophets were brave
and Noble Confessors among the Jews. Tho what they suffered for, and sought to
revive, was not always, or only, a right Worship; but the Duties of Morality
and Justice, in Declaring freely and undauntedly, not only against Idols, or
Calves, and Groves and High Places; but against Falsehood, and Rapine, and
Violence, and Perversions of Justice, and other Grievous immoralities,
wherewith the Jewish State was overrun, in those Degenerate and Corrupt times.
Thus, the Holy Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. l. 8. c. 14. p. 312, 313.
Women and Virgins, were ranked in the List of Confessors and Martyrs, who
would Dye, or Disfigure themselves, rather than yield their Bodies to the Lusts
of Tyrants and Persecutors. And St. Dionysius of Alexandria Ap. Eusebius. Hist.
Eccl. l. 6. c. 45.
tells Novatus, It would be as Glorious a Martyrdom, nay, in my judgment, says
he, a Greater, for a man to suffer Death to prevent Schisms, and the rending
and tearing of the Church among themselves: as to suffer the same for
Profession of Christianity, at the Hands of Persecutors. So long as we are
suffering for any Duty of our holy Religion, be it of Piety, or of Justice and
Morality, the difference, as to this, is not much. To make a Martyr, or
Confessor, it matters not for which Table it is, so long as it is for either.
And accordingly, to be beheaded for the Word of God, which extends alike to
both, is the Character of the Martyrs, Rev. 20.4.

Now contrary to this, is the visible sense and carriage of too many persons.
For many, alas! even of those, who are free to expose themselves, and to suffer
in testifying against False Worship and Idolatry: seem much more indifferent
and unconcerned, about suffering or standing out, and Declaring against
Unrighteousness and Immorality. By Religion, they are wont to mean chiefly
Confession of Articles, and Purity of Worship. And to rate that, to be
suffering for Religion, when they suffer for them: or that to be acting for the
Glory of God, and the Good of Religion; when this acting is to serve them, Nay,
when it is only to serve and secure those worldly Interests and Privileges,
which are tacked to them. And tho, in Performance of this Service, they take a
greater Liberty, and make bold with Moral Duties, only that they may secure
such external Freedom and Encouragement, for such pure Worship and Confessions.
As if that God, who has commanded one, had not commanded the other as much. Or,
as if we could oblige him, by breaking some of his Commands, to save others.
Yea, when there is no need of, or help by any such Breach, to save any, but all
the intent and use thereof, is only to save our selves. Which, tho it be Right,
and Reasonable, in the Eye of the worldly Wise; is not sure the way to be wise
for God, or for his Glory, so far as that is made to lie in our Duty; nor must
ever pass for that Wisdom, which comes by Christ Jesus.

CHAP. II. Other Ends of Christian Prudence*
A Fourth End proposed by Christian Prudence, is, as to discharge the Duties,
so to serve, and promote the Honor of Religion. To be wise for God, is to be
wise for Religion, which is the only acceptable, and effectual way, of serving
and honoring him. And to contrive wisely for Religion, must always study and
seek the Honor of Religion. For, proportionably to the Honor and Esteem the
World has for it, is like to be their Acceptance, and Observance thereof.
Spiritual Prudence therefore, must ever take this care of Religion, by acting
so in all things where it is concerned, as may set it up highest in men's
Opinion, and gain it the most cordial Respect, and greatest Reverence from
them. They must consider in these matters, what serves best, to convince men of
the Truth and Sincerity, to manifest the Power and Efficacy, to set out the
Worth and Excellency thereof. And never take up with any ways, how promising
soever on other Accounts, that would afford considerate men a Ground in Reason,
to suspect Religion, as if it were a fictitious thing; and the Profession
thereof, as if it were Hypocrisy. Or to fancy all its magnified Power, to be
real weakness, and unable to carry men on, to the Practice of what before they
did profess, when, in any trying Case, they are brought to the push.

Such Reflections bring Religion under the greatest Dishonor and Disadvantage.
And therefore whosoever would act prudently for it, must have an especial Eye
to avoid any thing, that would make Religion evil spoken of. For this, God was
highly offended with the Jews, that through them, the Name of God was
blasphemed among the Gentiles, Romans 2.24. And for this, the Apostle had great
indignation against some False Christians, that through them the way of Truth
was evil spoken of, 2 Pet. 2.2. And to prevent any thing of this among
Christians, are those Commands of God, of walking worthy of the Gospel, Ephesians.
4.1. Phil. 1.27. So as becomes Saints, Ephesians. 5.3. Of adorning the Doctrine of
God our Savior in all things, Tit. 2.10. Of walking worthy of God, and those
high Privileges of his Kingdom and Glory, 1 Thessalonians. 2.12. and worthy of the
Lord, Col. 1.10. Thus, would Christ have it the care of all his Followers, not
meanly and sneakingly to serve Religion, but affectionately to espouse, and
industriously to answer and adorn, to magnify and do it Honor in the eyes of
men. To approve, in every thing, its Verity and Sincerity; to demonstrate its
Efficacy; to maintain its Dignity; and manifest its Worth and Excellency before
them. Whatever it receives at the Hands of other men, yet thus must Wisdom or
Religion be justified, i. e. declared just, and made victorious and triumphant,
by her own Children, Mat. 11.9. A prudent Christian, is to provide for good
Report, Phil. 4.8. for things honest in the sight of all men, 2 Cor. 8.21.

And from this I note, That the aim of Religious Prudence, (contrary to what
too often appears in Fleshly wisdom) is to own, and do Honor to any Duties:

1. Not only internally in our minds, but externally in our outward Carriage.
That must be made visible before others, which does Honor to it before others.
And this is what every Duty of Religion, or every necessary Point of Christian
Faith and Practice, claims at our hands. We owe it an external as well an
internal Service, and must not only pay our acknowledgments to it inwardly and
invisibly in our own minds, but, as we are called thereto, visibly and
apparently before others. Provide for honest things, says St. Paul, not only in
the sight of the Lord, who sees what is inward or in the heart, but also in the
sight of men, who see it not, till externally owned, and exposed to view in
Conversation, 2 Cor. 8.21. We must offer up, and present to God, our Bodies and
bodily appearances, as well as our Souls and their invisible motions, for a
living, holy, and acceptable Sacrifice, Romans 12.1. Glorifying God both with
Souls and Bodies, which are both his, 1 Cor. 6.20. Whatever ye do, let all be
done to the Glory of God, 1 Cor. 10.31. And by making our Good things visible,
he is most glorified. We please him by internals, which are secret, and which
will do him Glory at the last, when they come to be openly exposed. But what
Glory do they to him at present, if they are not externally manifest. Gloria
multorum indiciis constat, says Ep. 102.
Seneca. Est consentiens laus bonorum, incorrupta vox been judicantium de
excellenti virtute, says Tusc. Quaest. l. 3. sub initio.
Cicero. So, what does glorify, must be notified to many. And this appearing
externally honorable, or glorious in the eyes of men, is what God stands much
upon; having many times forborne, what otherwise he had resolved to do, lest his
Name should be polluted before the Heathen, among whom they were, and in whose
sight he had made himself known unto them, Ezekiel. 20.9, 14, 22.

Some Virtues, indeed, are not so observable by men: being more purely
Spiritual in their Natures, and less Public in their Use and Exercise. And
others, that fall more under view, good men will seek to keep as private as
they can, to preserve the greater Purity of intention, and prevent all by-ends
of worldly interest, or ostentation; as our Savior directs, about private
Devotion, Alms, and Fasting, Mat. 6.1, 5, 16. But what Duties are public, he
expects we should practice publicly; and, whenever we have a Call, to
profess, or perform them before others, that we should externally show them
forth, and not smother any. They must then, not only burn within us, but shine
out to others. Among ill men, and in a crooked Generation, we must shine as
Lights to guide them, Phil. 2.15. Our inward Wisdom, must be shown forth in our
works and good Conversation, Jam. 3.13. Our Light must shine before men, that
they may glorify our Father which is in Heaven, Mat. 5.16. We must be
blameless, and harmless, as the Sons of God, without rebuke, not only before
God, but likewise before them, Phil. 2.15. As Zachariah and Elizabeth, walked
in all the Ordinances of the Lord, blameless, or not to be taxed by the world,
for any apparent Breaches, Luke 1.6. On all such occasions, not content with an
inward, they are careful to manifest an outward Holiness: not neglecting any
Duties, or appearing like those, who either transgress, or omit a Virtue, when
they are called to an open Discharge thereof.

And this external owning of every Part of Religion, especially when we are
brought in danger for it, which is the great Temptation to conceal or dissemble
it, is the Virtue of Confession. This Christ himself did before Pilate, before
whom, as St. Paul says, he witnessed a good Confession, 1 Timothy 6.13. And this
he expects from all his Followers. He that confesses me before men, him will I
also confess before my Father which is in Heaven. But whosoever shall deny me
before men, him will I also deny before my Father which is in Heaven, Mat.
10.32, 33. The Faith of the heart, says the Comment. Authoris incerti in Matt.
inter opera Chrysostom*
Comment of an Ancient and Learned Author upon this Place, will no more avail,
without the Confession of the mouth, than the Confession of the mouth will,
without the Faith of the heart. And if it must be enough for Christ that we
know him, tho we confess him not before men: therefore it must be enough for
us, that he knows us, tho at the last he confess us not before men. It Is not
sufficient for any, to say, I withold the Truth in my heart, and in the mean
while disown it before the World. And therefore he says not, he that confesses
me in his heart, but he that confesses me before men. This Confession or
Denial of him, is the Confession, or Denial, of any Point of Faith or Practice,
or Part of his Doctrine. Whosoever shall be ashamed of me, and of my words,
says he in another Place, Mar. 8.38. Luc. 9.26. It Is not enough in heart
inwardly to receive these, unless, on just occasion, we are ready openly to
profess them. For with the Heart man believes unto Righteousness, and with the
mouth Confession is made unto Salvation, Romans 10.10.

This Confession is made, one way by words; as St. Paul speaks of Confession
with the mouth unto Salvation. And another way, by Actions: for a man may deny
a Duty in deed, as well as in word, as the Scripture speaks of those, who
profess God in words, but in works deny him, Tit. 1.16.

And a Duty is thus denied in deed, when, (...) any just and public Call to
Practice it, we (...) and dissemble it. It Is not enough in this case, (...)
pretend we adhere to it in our Minds, unless (...) show our selves to be among
its Adherents, by (...) Practice. Our Deeds, as well as our Words, (...) among
the necessary Acknowledgments. (...) every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord,
shall ente^ into the Kingdom of Heaven, but he that does (...) will of my
father which is in Heaven, Mat. 7.21, 2^ The manifestation of the Principle,
must be by (...) effects; and of the tree, by its fruits, for every tre^ is
known by its own fruits, Luke 6.44. When (...) Question arises, or a Test
comes, to try and dis^cover the true Adherents to any Duty; It Is (...) the
Heart which is unseen, but the visible Pra^ctice which must determine it. Show
me thy fait^ by thy works: It being our Works that must de^clare what our fixed
belief or opinion about it (...) Jam. 2.18. To Neglect it, or Conceal our
adhe^rence to it out of shame thereof, Christ account a Denying it. He that
shall be ashamed of my word of him will I be ashamed, Luke 9.26. And S. Paul
speaking of his Sufferings for the Gospel, oppose^ our Practice of a suffering
Duty, when we ar^ called to suffer for him, to our Denying him: If (...)
suffer, we shall reign with him, if we deny him, (...) also will deny us, 2 Timothy 2.12. When Men come to Search after the Retainers to any Duties, they
cannot judge by what is invisible, but only by what externally appears: So that
he, who does not practice when called to it, in human account is esteemed to
disclaim it.

But it is much more Denied in Deed, if, when put to the Trial, they do not only
neglect to Practice it, but deliberately practice what is directly opposite and
inconsistent with it. If any Christian, when called to the Test, would burn
Incense on the heathen Altars, and sacrifice to their gods; he did really, and
was esteemed thereby, to Disown his Christianity, and to Deny Christ and his
Words, as if he had renounced them with his Lips.

Now, opposite to this way, of Honoring all the Duties of Religion, by verbal
and real Confessions, and external Appearances, is the way of worldly Wisdom.
It is for such ways of owning them, as suits best with the Ends and
Conveniences of this World. It will outwardly Practice and Profess fashionable
Duties, such as are in vogue, and the World Honors and Speaks well of. But as
for those that are publicly Decry'd, or bear against the wicked Customs
received, or the Ends and Projects pursued and driven on in this World, which
expose to the Censure thereof; it is not for manifesting, but concealing them.
It is for owning there, only in the Mind, which can give the World no offense,
because the Mind is not under this Worlds notice; or, for owning and practicing
in private or out of sight: As Nicodemus did at first, who came to our Savior
by night, Joh. 3.2. and those many of the chief Rulers, who, tho they believed
on him, did not confess him, because of the Pharisees, loving the praise of men
more than the praise of God, John 12.42, 43. Not that worldly Wisdom is for
Heart Duties; being no more for inward than for outward Holiness, further than
it agre^s, or makes for worldly Ease and Interests. Nay, indeed, being less for
that, because it is harder to perform, and more uncouth and opposite to Flesh
and Blood. But what Duties it can Conform to and Comply withal, it is for
keeping up in the Heart, not exposing in open Practice, when that is like to
give the World offense, or cause hard Names and Censures. Or, what it cannot
comply with, it is for counterfeiting and Pretending to serve in Heart, which
lying out of sight, is more easy to be Pretended, and not so easy to be
Detected and Disproved.

2. This external owning of Religious Prudence, is not only in times of Peace,
but of Persecutions. It is confessing it under impendent Sufferings, as often
as we are called either to Profess or Practice an oppressed Duty before others.
To Confess it then, is truly to Do Honor to Religion. It shows it true and
unfeigned, and that the Pretenders to it believe themselves in what they say of
it, when they are ready to venture all thereupon: In suffering for Religion,
they give Testimony to it; it proves it strong and powerful, admirable in
Motives, and mighty in Effects, able to set men above this World, to outstand
the hardest Trial, and conquer all the World counts terrible. It Is to Honor it,
when the World explodes it, and seek to cast all the Disgrace they can upon it:
To own it, when its own Followers are ready to fall off and desert it. The Days
of Suffering for Righteousness, are worst times for Flesh and Blood; but the
best and most advantageous for serving Religion, and doing Honor unto God.
When you suffer as Christians, says St. Peter, and are reproached for the Name
of Christ, on your part he is glorified, 1 Pet. 4.14, 16. So that in the Eye of
Spiritual Prudence, whose aim is to be wise for Religion, and to see what
serves it, not what serves our selves; these times of Persecution, instead of
exempting from such Confessions, are their most proper seasons.

Accordingly, this Confession of any Duties, is particularly required of us,
and called for at such times. We are to be blameless, unrebukeable, as the Sons
of God, in the midst of a crooked and perverse Nation, Phil. 2.15. Be not
ashamed of me, and of my words, says our Savior, in this adulterous and sinful
Generation, which was wholly bent on Persecution, Mar. 8.38. When he calls for
Confession of him before men, Mat. 10.32. he puts the hardest Cases, and
confronts the Doing of our Duty with the Dearest worldly Interests: and there
bars all opposite influence and interposition of Fear of men, that would hinder
Confession; and strikes it down with the greater and more powerful Fear of God,
which will hinder Denying. Fear not them which kill the Body, but are not able
to kill the Soul: but rather fear him, who is able to destroy, both Soul, and
Body, in Hell, v. 28. He allows us not to be stopped of Confession, by regard to
Father or Mother, Son or Daughter: He that loves Father, or Mother, more than
me, is not worthy of me; and he that loves Son, or Daughter, more than me, is
not worthy of me, v. 37. Nay, nor in regard to our own Lives: He that finds his
life, viz. out of the way of confessing me and my wo^ds, shall lose it: and he
that loses his life for my sake, or for mine and the Gospel's, as St. Chapter 8.35.
Mark, shall find it, v. 39. The Cross on any Duties, must be no
Discouragement: the Cross must be taken up with the Duty, and not the Duty let
alone, or rejected for the Crosses sake: He that does not take his Cross, and
follow after me, is not worthy of me, v. 38. Nay, at some times, he must take
it up daily, and follow me, Luc. 9.23. And if then, when he must bear his
Cross, tho it be in Neglect of his Dearest Relations, yea of his own Life, he
does not for all that keep on in my way, and come after me; he cannot be my
Disciple, Luc. 14.26, 27.

Thus strict is our Blessed Lord, in Calling for this Christian (...), or
harmless Constancy and free owning of him and his Laws, even when beset with
the greatest worldly Perils. Very Frightful were these Perils, in the Apostles
days, which Drive many from this way of Courageous Confessors, to shifts of
Deserting Cowardice: tempting them sometimes to conceal themselves, and to
forsake the Public Assemblies, against both which St. Paul absolutely
declares, Romans 10.9, 10. and Heb. 10.23, 25; and sometimes to fall quite off
from the way of Christ, to that of their Persecutors. And what now, does he
that sits upon the Throne, say to such Persons? As he that continues constant,
or overcomes, shall inherit all things: So the fearful, or cowardly (...), and
the Unbelievers, or false and unfaithful, (...); i. e. the timorous and
mistrustful Deserters, who fell in their Trials for want of Faith and Pati^nce,
formerly held the Glory of Saints, tho now made the scoff and derision of
profane Spirits; these, says he, together with Murderers, and Whore-mongers,
and Idolaters, and all Liars, shall have their part in the Lake which burns
with Fire and Brimstone, which is the second Death, Rev. 21.7, 8. Among all
Reprobates, yea, before all, he first places these Cowardly Deserters for their
share, in this Lake of Fire and Brimstone, says Inter omnes Reprobos, imo ante
omnes; timidis autem, inquit, etc. Tert. Scorp. c. 12.
Tertullian.

The Foundation of this Confessorian Constancy and Freeness, is The Spirit of
the Martyrs was not broken or dismayed by all the Terrors of the Tormentors.
(...), because their Love was perf^ct, and had cast out Fear, says Phileas the
Martyr in his Epistle to his Church, ap. Eusebius. l. 8. c. 10.
Love to Christ, and to his Laws and Doctrines* For, when Love is perfect, as
St. John says, it casts out Fear, which, in time of Danger, is the Parent of
all Revolting tergiversations, or hypocritical and unlawful Compliances. And
herein, adds he, is our Love made perfect, that we may have Boldness, (...),
this Freeness and Fearlesness in Confession, which it is the Perfection of Love
to inspire us with, in the Day of Judgment, or when brought before any Tribunal
for the Cause of Christ: because, as he is, so are we in this world, viz. in a
Persecuted state, wherein we are to show this Constancy and Courage, as he did,
1 John 4^17, 18. And the Cure of Cowardice, or the Spirit of Fear, St. Paul
notes is by the Spirit of Love, which is the Spirit of Power, 2 Timothy 1.7. And
therefore the Spirit writing to the Church of Ephesus, which was, it seems, in
danger of falling into the Practices of the temporizing Gnostics, when he
calls them Vid. Hammond. Annot. in l^c.
back to their former Courage and Constancy in Trials, bids them return to
their first Love, Rev. 2.4. This Love to Christ, and the ways of Godliness,
when, in a great many, it is strong enough for times of Peace; is apt to be
much shaken, and impaired, in their hearts, in times of Trial and Persecutions.
Because iniquity, i. e. of Persecutors, as the Context shows, shall abound,
love of many, says our Savior, shall wax cold, Mat. 24.12. And as it decays,
so will the Confessorian Constancy and Courage, which is shown by virtue
thereof, and timorous Haltings, Compliances, and Revolts, will still succeed in
its place. But he that shall endure unto the end, or whose Love and Constancy
at such times shall both hold out, the same shall be saved, v. 13.

But now, quite contrary to this, is the way of worldly Prudence, which is
never for professing Persecuted Truths, or practicing Persecuted Duties. Its
care is, not how to confess, but how to conceal, or Dissemble its Sentiments,
at such times. Instead of looking then to the Duty, it looks to it self: and
considers, not what is Good, but what is safe. Distressed Virtue, at the best,
it neglects, or Disclaims in open view: which it thinks to make up, by
approving, or practicing it in Private. It divides it self, between God, and
the World, and seeks to content him by a Secret, or invisible Observance; and
to content it too, by open and visible Neglects, or Violations, of oppressed
Religion and Righteousness, on such Trials.

But now, instead of conscionable lawful Prudence, this is nothing but wicked
Subtilty, and mere carnal, or Satanical Suggestions. For to persuade, on any
trying Call, not to show forth an encumbered and afflicted Duty, but to let it
alone, is the Voice of Flesh and Blood, not of Religion; it never comes from
God, but from Satan. So Christ told Peter, when he counseled him to fly the
Obedience of the Cross, and, instead of that costly way of Doing the Will of
God, to look more to himself. Get thee behind me, Satan, says he, thou art an
offense unto me; for thou savourest not the things that be of God, but the
things that be of men, or mere carnal humane Wisdom, Mat. 16.23, 24. And
thereupon, he immediately repeats this Precept to his Disciples, telling them,
If any man will come after me, he must not hearken to Peter's Advice, to stand
still, or step out of the way, when the Cross is laid upon any Duty; but take
up his Cross, and follow me. And follow me, i. e. going on still, under the
Burden of the Cross, in the Duty whereto I call: and going on also therein
after my Example, as you see, notwithstanding the Cross now in my way, I do, v.
24.

It is a deceitful Shuffling on both sides, playing fast and loose, or Halting
between two Opinions: as those of Israel did, who, in their hearts, stood right
for God; but yet, to please Ahab and Jezabel, and for fear of the Times,
externally Complied in the Worship of Baal, and went to his Sacrifices. Whom
Elijah the Prophet reproved, saying, How long halt ye between two Opinions? If
the Lord be God, follow him; but if Baal, then follow him, 1 King. 18, 21. If
it were enough, thus to serve one invisibly in our Hearts, whilst we visibly
serve the other in external appearance, there would be no necessity of what our
Lord declared, that no man can serve two Masters, Mat. 6.24.

It is, at best, but to affect the Duty, whilst we plainly fly all the Scandal,
and Offense thereof. Which, if it be a lawful Prudence, there is no engagement
to preach up Persecuted Truths against Persecuting Errors, as St. Paul thought
there was for all the Cross that lay upon it, when he preached down
Circumcision so zealously set up by the Jews, Gal. 5.11. There will be an end
of the Scandal of the Cross, which, when tacked to any Duty, will be no longer
a Scandal, or an Occasion of Sin, if we may lawfully pass it by, and let the
Duty it is laid upon alone, without Sin. Especially, taking up the Cross, when
placed in the way of Confession, could never be the Condition of Worthiness in
Christ's Disciples, as our Lord declares it is, Mat. 10.32, 38. and afterward,
in opposition to Peter's Advice of ways to Prevent it, by forbearing the Duties
burdened with it, which he imputes, as I noted, to carnal Wisdom, and the
Suggestion of Satan, Mat. 16.23, 24. Men may bear the Cross, when it comes upon
them by Necessity, and they cannot help it. But then only they take it up, when
they might let it alone if they would, viz. by forbearing, or avoiding the
Duty, whereto it comes annexed. And if they may be worthy Disciples, in
shunning it, it can be no Condition of their Worthiness, to take it up. Lastly,
were it no Point of Duty and Religion, for which they were sure to be finally
rewarded, this taking up a Duty with the Cross upon it, could have nothing
inviting here, for them to Glory and Triumph in it. And yet this, our Savior,
and his Blessed Apostles, direct all good Christians to do at such times. If ye
be reproached for the Name of Christ, or for Righteousness sake, as Chapter 3.14.
happy are you, for the Spirit of Glory rests upon you, 1 Pet. 4.14. If any man
s^ffer as a Christian, let him glorify God on that behalf, v. 16.

3. In these Confessions, it is another Part of Spiritual Prudence, not to stay
till we are under an absolute Necessity, or Force, but to confess with
Freeness. I do not say, this is absolutely necessary in all cases. And when
there is utmost Peril, the Torture extreme, and Confession Capital; the case is
Pitiable, and to wait, in case of several Truths or Duties, for Proof from
Prosecutors, seems more excusable. But this is only connivence, and
Condescension to Humane weakness: and to be Free in owning any necessary
Articles* or part of Virtue and Godliness, on a just Call thereto, openly
preferring it to our own Lives, is the Praise of Confessors, and most excellent
and rewardable in it self. Interrogatus, vel ultro confitetur; Damnatus,
gratias agit, Tert. Apol. c. 1.
Being judicially asked, he voluntarily confesses it; being condemned, he gives
thanks for it, says Tertullian of the Primitive Confessors. This again, is for
the Honor of Duty and Religion, that its Followers are not driven by
Nenessity, but led to own it by Affection. It Is not for its Reputation, that
its own Servants would do no more for it, than they needs must; nor appear in
its Cause, so long as they can lie hid. This argues it to be little beloved by
its own Retainers; and that the acknowledgments it has from them at such Trying
times, is out of Fear, which needs to be driven; not from Love, much less from
Zeal, which would show forth, not only a free, but Forward Motion. Men may
serve the Duty, when they show not their Adherence, till they are necessitated
to it; but to Honor it, they must move of themselves, and be prompt and
forward to profess it.

And this Freeness, as it is requisite to the Honor of any Part of Duty, or
Religion: So, I think, is implied in the Nature of Confession. Conviction,
indeed, may be a forced thing, and we are at Liberty there to plead Not-Guilty,
and not own the Charge, till it is judicially proved upon us. And this may be
taken by all Malefactors, in what they are ashamed of, and acknowledge to be
ill things. But Confession, is to be our own, and the Praise of it lies in
being a voluntary and free thing: and of our selves we are to profess and own
there, on any just Call, when, in way of public Trial, or Private Usefulness,
we are put to the Question. And this is the way in any Duties, which we profess
to glory and triumph in. When we stay to have it Proved upon us, as if it were
a thing we would not own, but are ashamed of, we are Convicted as Criminals.
Or, if we come in as Confessors there, it is, as having before voluntarily and
freely chosen, to be or Do what we plainly saw would bring us into Danger: we
are Confessors, only in respect of what we practiced or Professed under
terrifying Prospects before, not in Respect of our present Answer. But when we
are ready to own it our selves, and to glory in what they accuse, that is a
further Degree, and then we answer as Confessors. And this Freedom and
Promptness, to own and profess such persecuted Truths or Duties, was most
eminently seen, and honorably discharged, as I noted from Tertullian; yea,
sometimes to Excess, in the Primitive Liberty or (...) of the Ancient
Confessors. The Zeal of Numbers, carrying them, under the greatest Hazards, and
amidst the most terrifying Examples, to profess before they were accused, and
P^blish in open Court their own Faith, whilst they saw their Brethren Tried and
Condemned for it, as we learn abundantly from the Story of those Times.

4. I shall add in the last Place, that it is for the Honor of Religion in
these Confessions, that they be divested of too scrupulous, and nice a Care, of
our worldly Interests.

I do not condemn all prudent Care of Confessors, for securing their worldly
Concerns, when their Duty is first secured, and they are not wanting, either by
Word or Deed, to assert and honor it, as they are called to it. When they have
taken care to save Religion, and a good Conscience first, they may be allowed a
just and reasonable Care for saving what they have in this World, next: it
being reasonable, that they should save what they well can, when it is against
Reason and Religion too, that they should lose any thing. And thus the Apostles
and Primitive Christians about Jerusalem, when they saw the Storm coming on,
sold their Lands and private Properties, putting the Prices into the hands of
the Church, in Preparation for the approaching Wants and Confiscations, Acts
4.34, etc. But I think they are most Honorable to Religion, when they are not
most Solicitous at such times, nor exact in all Arts and Methods, of
indemnifying themselves. Such Confessions are a Trial of the Spirituality of
our Minds, how able they are to contemn this World, and how far they are set
above it, and how strong their Faith and Trust in God is. And we acquit our
selves best, in manifesting this, when we only show a moderate Care, and take
the plainest and most reputabl^ ways of Saving: when we are not scrupulously
exact in things, or immoderately Solicitous, (...) stretch to the utmost
Lengths we dare in any indemnifying Arts, which may fully this Profession and
Proof of Spirituality, by a suspicion of Earthly-mindedness; and of Faith in
God's Providence* by signs of immoderate Care for our selves. O^^ Sufferings,
as well as our Service, is Honorable and Useful to God and Religion, at such
times* A Profane and Atheistical World, and an exploded Duty, need a suffering
Testimony. And when we may exalt, and advance our Duty by our Losses, as well
as by our Practice and Professions, godly Wisdom, looks more to serve God and
Goodness, than to secure our selves; bidding such Loss of Goods welcome, and
taking it joyfully, as the manner was of the Primitive Heb. 10.34.
Saints. And tho it will not rashly and unnecessarily, without a Call, throw
its worldly things away: yet, when it is called thereto, it will not be
over-careful, or scrupulously inquisitive how to keep them.

Now all this is contrary, in the aim of worldly Wisdom. Its great End, is to
be Free and forward in getting, but forced in losing worldly things; to move of
it self in any way of compassing, but to move no faster than it is driven, in
any way of parting with them. It will readily neglect any thing that will
occasion present Damage; but it knows not how to omit what promises any removal
or abatement of it. Worldly Wisdom is wise for worldly Goods, but wise against
worldly Evils: and never Free to serve (...) Spirit against the Flesh, to seek
the Honor ^f Religion by worldly Disgrace, or to Advance and enrich it by its
own Loss and Impoverish^ent.

4. In Pursuit of this End of the Honor of Re^igion, it is another Rule of
Spiritual Prudence, ^ot to change our Doctrines, as we change our Inte^ests, or
to do alike our selves, to what we have ^^udly condemned in others. To
maintain, for in^^ance. the indefeasible Power of Princes, whilst ^hey are of
our Religion; but of the People, ^hen Princes are of a contrary Religion. To
^reach up Toleration, and Temper, and Liberty ^f Conscience, whilst we are
under, and kept ^own; but as mere Hot-spurs, to decry all Tem^er, and screw up
all to our apprehension, shew^ng no tenderness to other men's Conscienc^s, ^hen
we are in place to Lord it over them. To Call any thing a Public Grievance in
Government, while our Rulers do it; but to pretend, and plead Necessity for it,
when the Power is got into our own hand.

For a Jew, to condemn a Heathen, that he robs God of his due Honor, by
Worship of Idols: and yet not condemn his own Robbery, in committing
S^criledge, Romans 2.22. For Christians to cry out of the Jews, for
distinguishing away the Commandments, and making void, as our Lord Mat. 15.
etc. 23.
says and shows they did in several instances, the Law of God through their
Traditions and Expositions: and yet, to justify and cry up themselves, whilst,
to all appearance, they seem to take the same Liberties, and are Doing the same
things. For any Protestants, to condemn the Papists, for Deposing Heretical
Princes; and yet to be for D^^throning their own, for his Zeal in a False
Re^ligion: To accuse them, for holding it lawful (...) do evil that good may
come; and yet be ready (...) Do the same themselves, when they think it
ne^cessary for the Church, or Nation: To blam^ their Liberties, in any Breach
of Faith, Justice, (...) Charity toward Heretics, and yet take Libe^^ty,
neither to keep Promise, nor do Justice, no^ show common Charity and Humanity,
to me^ of those Opinions, which are most displeasing (...) themselves: To
upbraid them, lastly, for think^ing to excuse their False appearances in Word,
(...) Practice, when that may save the things of thi^ World, by Aequivocations,
and Mental Reservations, i. e. inward Reserves of intention, and limitations in
their own minds, tho in their Practice they show none, but appear the same as
others; and yet, when they are brought in streights for their Consciences, to
use like deceitful Artifices, and take the same Liberties to bring themselves
off. This is saying and gainsaying, as it serves our Turns, and Doing what we
condemn in others; or, what is so like it, that the Bystanders are not able to
distinguish it: and making the same thing a Vice, when used in our Neighbors
case; but a Virtue, when used in our own.

But now this Change of Doctrines, as we change Interests, or doing the very
same, or like to what we Condemn, is apt mightily to reflect upon the Honor of
Religion. As if its Principles stood not upon intrinsic Truth, but external
Usefulness; as if we held things true, while we gain by them, and they make for
us; but begun to hold them False, confessing our eyes are open, and that we see
the Error of them, when once we are brought to lose thereby, and they make
against us. This is, as if gain were Godliness; and seems, as if what in these
Tenets we seek to set up, were not the Honor of God, but the Interest of this
World; not Truth, but our Selves. Which Reflections are such, that Religion
cannot fall under a sorer Disgrace, or a more hurtful Prejudice. And therefore
Spiritual Prudence, which professes to be wise for it, is especially careful,
to Prevent such turns of Doctrine and Practice, according to the turn of
worldly Interests, which would give men Ground or Occasion, to pass such
Reflections on it.

It Is true, good and wise men, may change their Opinions. And as they grow
Older, Mortal and Fallible Understandings, may be allowed to grow wiser. And
when we discover Errors, we must not after that obstinately adhere to them,
because we have formerly believed, and professed them. Constancy in former
Opinions, must not be obstinacy in former Errors: and when we Discover a New
Truth, we must not Deny it, because we condemned it before; but be glad to
profess it, now we see it, and sorry we saw it no sooner. Nay, if it happen to
make for our interest, we are, for all that, to receive and profess it. For
Truth is Truth, and will Challenge both our Belief and Profession, whether it
make for us, or against us. Our Interest must not make us take Falsehood for
Truth; but withal, it must not hinder us from owning, and embracing Truth it
self for Truth. It would be a strange Return to a Profitable and advantageou^
Truth, to be Foes to it, because it is a Friend to us; and therefore to Deny
it, because we are like to be the better by it. So that if it is a real Truth
we Profess now, good and wise men must Profes^ it, tho they gain by it, and tho
it be contrary to what they Professed formerly. And it is no Scandal to
Religion, but the Command and Credi^ thereof, to have men thus exchange their
Error^ for Truth; or that, which was not Religion, nor honorable to it, for
that which really is.

But then this Change must be made upon manifest Appearance, and sufficient
Evidence of Truth. It Is justifiable, and Honorable, when it is an Exchange for
Truth, not for Interest. And therefore that which justifies it, must be the
Evidence of Truth, being got by the Exchange. It Is the Suspicion of Interest,
that occasions all the dishonorable Reflections, and the Demonstration of
Truth must clear them. And therefore on such Changes, the Discoverers of the
New Truths, must discover new Reasons, and produce better Proofs for them, than
they had for their old Errors. They must bring new Arguments, which, whilst
they were of a contrary Belief, were not urged to themselves. Or, carry the old
ones further, than they had met them improved by others, and show the weakness
of those Answers, they were wont to give to them; or of the Arguments they used
to offer against that side, which they now take. And this, they are the more
obliged to do, with clearness of Argument and Reason, in apparently
advantageous Changes; because, in the Constant Sense and Experience of the wise
World, Interest is not held the best Inlightner of our Minds. Its Power is not
so much to make us knowing, as willing; not so fit to carry our Understandings
before our Wills, as to make our Wills outrun our Understandings: and in the
constant Experience of the World, both formerly, and at this day, is much more
successful in making the Minds of men to miss of Truth, than in carrying them
to find it.

Wise Care therefore, for the Honor of God and Religion, or Spiritual
Prudence, requires that we should not change our Doctrines on an apparent
Change of Interest, unless we make out before men, as plain an appearance of
Truth in the Exchange, as there is of Interest, that we may not seem to hold it
true, because it is for our Interest, or to be led more by Interest, than we
are by Truth.

And therefore, when once good men see their Errors, it highly concerns both
themselves and Religion, instantly to renounce them, not for Advantage, but for
the Truths sake. And not stay, till the Course of this World turns, and they
may hope to get as much by Disclaiming, as before they had by Professing them.
For otherwise, the World will be but too apt to judge them, not Religious and
Conscientious, but Secular and Self-ended Penitents; who will never see, and
repent of their Errors and Evil-doings, whilst they bring them in present
Advantage. Or, whom Reasons of Truth and Duty, could never bring to Repentance,
till Reasons of fleshly Interest struck in therewith; but who can readily
repent of any ways, as soon as once they turn to Loss, and they are evidently
called to suffer for them.

And, on the other hand, we must be wary how we censure others, when we see
them change from their former Judgments, and stay to hea^ their Reasons, before
we presume to tax their Sincerity in the Exchange. When the Interest is
apparent, the Bystanders have an appearance of Interest at first sight; but
have not the appearances for Truth, till the Person that made the Change, has
opportunity to make known to them, how the new Truth appeared to him. This,
indeed, is a Temptation, to those that take up with what comes next, and are
confident of the Evidence of their own, and the little appearance on the other
side, to be too often hasty, and hard in their Censures. But one man must not
be ras^ to judge of the Appearances of Truth to another, but wait to hear them
from himself. And after (...) has heard them, not presently conclude, a way
could not thereby appear true to him, because, on the same Evidence, it does
not, nor really ought to appear so to himself. That the thing is not true, he
may safely say, not that the other could not think it so. For all men's
Judgments are not equally wrought upon by the same things; and that may seem
good Proof to some, which does not so to others. So that, as to the Censure of
particular Persons, especially whilst they keep true to their New Principles,
not still, as necessity calls, out-running their own Pretenses; it is good and
safe ordinarily, to be slow in passing our Judgments, and leave them to their
own Judge, who sees their Hearts, and to whom each of them stands or falls.

But in General, when the Arguments of Truth are not as apparent, as those of
Interest in the Change; and the Parties, by all their Study, could never see
the Truth pretended, whilst they were like to lose by it; but see it clearly,
yea, and that, perhaps, without much Study, when once it makes for their
Profit: the World is very suspicious, that it is Interest, more than Evidence,
which opens their eyes, and a great Scandal comes upon Religion by such
Changes. Such men are wont to preach up, say the World, what stands them in
stead: not what they themselves really believe, and think. All color whereof,
St Paul was careful to remove from himself, when his Calumniators suggested
this of him to the Corinthians. For, having professed his Simplicity, and godly
Sincerity, without fleshly wisdom, more abundantly toward them: we write no
other things unto you, says he, than what you read or acknowledge, and I trust
you shall acknowledge, even to the end, 2 Cor. 1.12, 13. That is, as Theodoret
comments, We do not preach one thing to you, and think another, as some
endeavor to calumniate Quid enim vos praesens docui, ea and absens mitto, and
in omne quod deinceps secuturum est temp^ me praed caturum spero. Theod. in loc.
us. For what I taught when present, I write now being absent, and hope I shall
always be found preaching and saying the same to the end.

But now opposite to this, is the way of worldly Wisdom. It is still for seeing
Truth, in that which is advantageous and convenient for it. And willing to be
beat out of any Duty or Doctrine, when it comes to lose by it. It first
considers, the Gain, and Convenience, of a Case. When it sees what makes most
for that, it resolves that side is to be held, and then casts about, to find a
Reason or Pretense for it. And any thing is a good Reason for a Way to those,
who beforehand are resolved to take it. It blames or commends, condemns or
justifies, as a corrupt Party, not as a^ equal Judge. Self-Love steers all its
Determinations. And following all its windings, it is never true to the Reality
of the thing, but to its ow^ Concern therein. Which, being differently
affect^ed by any ways, at different times, it accordingly either applauds, or
decryes them, and has one Judgment of them, when they are in our ow^ Case; and
another, when they are in our Neighbors: Contrary to all good Reason, and tru^
Wisdom, which, if it come from above, is without Partiality, and without
Hypocrisy, as St. James say Chapter 3.17. Which therefore, if obeyed and followed,
would make us, as true and constant to (...) good things; so true and constant
to our selves, in loving, and commending them. Never to blame that in one,
which we cry up in another. Never to acquit that in our selves, which we accuse
in ou^ Neighbors. And when we advance any Tenets as true; or any things as
just, as reasonable, as religious; always to allow as much Truth to the Tenets,
and as much Justice, Reason, and Religion to the Things, when they happen to
serve our Brethrens Purpose, as we claimed to them before, when they served our
selves.

5. A Fifth Rule of Christian Prudence for this Purpose, is not to be glad of
any Temporal Advantage by ill things, and, whilst we reap the Profit, to be
content with the wickedness. By the ill done, Religion suffers: tho what is so
ill and dishonorable for Religion, happen to be useful for our Interest in
this World, and make us Gainers. And if we can be content for our own Gain, to
have it damnified, it shows we are not so much for it, as for our selves; but
are Free to have it truck'd away, and given up for our own advantage. Spiritual
Prudence therefore, which proposes the Honor and Interest of God and Religion,
in the first place, and sets (...) before our selves; will not be bribed by any
thing to enrich our selves by their Loss, or Glory in their Disgrace, or be
pleased in what is to their Prejudice.

Indeed, if a Good thing is Done, tho with an ill mind, he that is wise for God
and Religion, may rejoice in it. As St Paul did, and declared ^e would Do, that
Christ was Preached; tho they who preached him, did it not so much sincerely,
to promote the Gospel; as Factiously, out of Envy and ill Will, to make
themselves seem more considerable than he at Philippi, or to spite the
Apostle, Phil. 1.15, 18, It Is the thing that is Done, which in the eyes of men,
does Honor, or Dishonor to Religion. So that if a Good thing is Done, that
does Good to Religion, and may cause Joy to the Friends and Well-wishers of
Religion: tho, if it be Done with an evil mind, it be ill for him that does it,
and so may cause Sorrow in behalf of the Person. But, when an ill thing is
Done, that wounds Religion it self; and no man, who sets a just Price upon
Religion, can think any worldly Gain, a sufficient Recompense for that. And
therefore a Projector for Religion, or one who is Spiritually wise, can never,
for any worldly Expedience, be content with ill things, or seem Glad of any
wickedness.

Like to this, is another Point of Christian Pru^dence, not to be all Zeal in
matter of our own Right^ but all Indifference and Lukewarmness, in the Brea^ of
God's Rights. Nay, it may be, not only conten^ they should be broke by others;
but to break his o^^ selves, in the asserting of our own Rights. Now (...) is
Highly Dishonorable to God and Religion This Different sense, of what concerns
him an^ us, shows what things we are the most tender (...) The quickness, and
the vehemence of our Mot^^ons, in our own, and the coldness, and slowne^ of
them, in his case; speaks plainly, how little (...) value him, and how much we
value our selve^ And therefore Christian Prudence, whose (...) aim is to Do
Honor to God and Religion, (...) make us more tender of his Rights than ours,
an^ more careful of what makes for him, than of wh^^ makes for our selves. As
Moses, who was so em^^nently Patient, and hard to be Provoked in (...) own
Case: yet, when he saw the Dishonor (...) God in the Golden Calf, was so far
moved ther^ with, that in a Transport of Zeal he brake the T^^bles, for which
he had waited Fasting in the (...) Mount for forty days, Deuteronomy. 9.9, 11, 17.

But now these are quite otherwise in the (...) of Worldly Prudence. Worldly
things stand high^est in the accounts of worldly wise; and therefore they are
more affected with what touches them than with any thing else. To smite them
there, (...) to wound them in their most sensible Parts, o^ touch the very
Apple of their Eyes; it gives the quickest Sense, and creates the highest
Passion i^ them. But what does Preserve these, Preserve^ what they esteem of
most Worth; and so may recompense and over-balance any other Losses. Tho
Religion suffer in some Point, they are not so sensible of that. And so long as
they have no hand in making it suffer, they can be well enough content to see
it, and leave others to be sorry for their wickedness, who bring ill to it. And
if its Loss makes for their Temporal Profit and Advantage, they think they are
very well paid for it, and can be Glad thereof. Self-Love sways Fleshly
Prudence. And that always finds it self in our own Advantage, and takes that to
rejoice in for its share; leaving others to look to themselves, as it does, and
to mourn for the Prejudice it does them, or for the ill they have Done therein.

CHAP. III. Christian Prudence for Pleasing God, and a Good Conscience. And
against Popularity.
A Fifth End is, to please God. This will take us off from Popularity. And to
please our own Good Conscience. Of the contrary Ways of worldly Wisdom.
Greatness of Numbers should not Draw to any thing, nor want of Number Drive
from a Good One.

5. Fifthly and lastly, a fifth End, which Religious Prudence proposes to it
self, is to please God, and a Good Conscience, by Doing things in themselves
Good and Virtuous. Religion is not for Shows, but Realities: and God is for
Truth, not Appearances. And therefore Spiritual Prudence, which aims to be wise
for Religion, and for God, is for securing those solid and substantial Goods,
or those things Good in themselves, which Religion prescribes, and God
approves: not what passes for Good in the mistake of the World, or in men's
diseased Apprehensions.

These Good things it does, that it may please God. His Will is the Cause and
Rule of Duty, and Goodness; and his Approbation is the recompenc^ thereof. To
Do what is Good, for other Ends and Considerations, may be Fleshly Design, or
Human Discretion; but to Do it, that we may thereby please God, is Religion and
Spiritual Wisdom. The Great aim Religious men have in all these things, is that
God accept them. And they have enough, when he accepts a Service, tho here it
meets with nothing but Persecutions, instead of Recompenses. To be able to keep
up with this, and think pleasing God enough, whoever else be Displeased at us,
is to act like our Forerunners in the Faith, who did all things to be accepted
with him, 2 Cor. 5.9. to be praised and commended by him, or have him approve
them, 2 Cor. 10.18. Romans 2.29. to have our Eye single, or that Purity and
Sincerity of intentions, which must make the whole Body full of Light, or carry
us to a Discharge of Duty in the whole Compass of Conversation, as our Savior
says, Mat. 6.22.

This thinking is enough for our Practice thereof, that any way will please
God, tho it is most Displeasing, and utterly Decryed by men: will take us from
Popularity, or steering our selves by Public Fame, and the Applause of men.
And this is absolutely necessary, and one of the things to be first laid, in
the way of Religious Wisdom. He that enters in that way, must fix this as a
Rule, not to Do what men will commend, but what really Deserves to be
Commended. To please them, that will be pleased with their Duty, and with his
Doing of his Duty; but to please God, and a Good Conscience, tho for that all
the World should be Displeased with him. Had men stood in the state of
Innocence, we might safely have governed our selves by their Pleasure and
Applause, because then they would only have applauded Good things. But since
all are fallen from that, as the World now is, they are Generally most pleased
with what most offends God, and cry up ill ones. They commend things, not for
intrinsic Worth and Goodness, but for their Usefulness and Expedience, in
serving Ends and Purposes. Or, for their Suitableness, not to pure Reason and
Innocence, but to impure and corrupt Nature, and Fleshly Appetite. So that, as
the Case now stands, if we will have their Applause, we must ordinarily want
the Applause of God, and of a Good Conscience.

This being the state of all Times, always rendered Popularity, or a Resolution
to do or omit, what would Prevent offense, and Please the People, inconsistent
with Duty and true Goodness. How can ye believe, says our Savior, and it is the
same Case with all other discountenanced and exploded Duties, who receive
honor one of another, and seek not the honor, which comes from God only, Joh.
5.44. The chief Rulers, even when convinced in their Consciences, would not
confess Christ, because they loved the praise of men, more than the praise of
God, Joh. 12.42, 43. And, if I yet pleased men, says St. Paul, I should not be
the Servant of Christ, Gal. 1.10. He that will be Good therefore, and truly
wise for God, must arm against Censure, and be content, as Christ, and his
Apostles, and the best men in all times were, to hear himself called by hard
Names, and pass through good and ill Report, 2 Cor. 6.8. Nay, in trying Times,
especially if his Statio^ is any ways public, it is scarce possible to avoid
it; but in seeking to shun, he would, tho in a (...) measure, run upon it. For
whilst, for striking i^ with the Crowd, he is cried up by those, who ar^ in the
Wrong: he must expect t^ be cried dow^ by those who are in the Right; whose
applause tho it makes less Noise, yet ought to be of mo^^ Moment. We must not
be dismayed then, because the World is against a thing; but because there (...)
just Reason for it to be so. We must not begin (...) because it is commended:
nor give over a Dut^ or Good thing, because it is decryed. We mus^ resolve to
look, what pleases God, not what (...) please the Multitude: and then we are
wise for God, not foolish for the Company of Simpl^ men, and like to do what we
ought to do.

Next to this of Pleasing God, is Pleasing the^^ own Good Conscience. And this
is subordinate to the former, and a Consequent thereof; since we ca^ never in
Conscience be pleased with our Selves but when we think God is pleased with us.
Th^^ is a most wise End, and of mighty importance, (...) be satisfied with our
selves. Without this, we ca^ have no Happiness. If we are discontented (...)
our minds, whatever is without us, can never please us. Nothing makes us happy,
further tha^ we are pleased with it: and we can have no tru^ Relish of Pleasure
in other Things, whilst we (...) uneasy and displeased with our selves. Better
all the World should be angry with us, than God and our own Conscience. So that
the Wisdom, which would secure the Power and Honor, and afford us the Comfort
and Pleasure of Religion, must always propose to it self the Doing what will
Please God, and thereby our own Consciences.

And whether or no we have Done, what we know is pleasing to him, Spiritual
Prudence sends us to learn, not from others, but from within our selves. This
is our rejoicing, says S. Paul, the testimony of our Conscience, that in
Simplicity and Godly Sincerity, not with fleshly Wisdom, but the Grace of God,
we have had our Conversation in the World, 2 Cor. 1.12. And this is the great
happiness of all upright Walkers, that all their Comforts are from a Witness
within themselves. If our own Heart Condemn us not, then have we Confidence
toward God, 1 John 3.21. Our own heart, is near us: So that at any time, when
we please, we may ask it the Question. It is Privy to all our Actings: So that
whenever we enquire, it can answer us. And we are as privy to its Answers: So
that we need not go to learn of any, what return is made to us. Such is the
Advantage, of having this to learn, from the Testimony of our own Hearts and
Consciences. And to their Testimony, God, and Spiritual Wisdom, send us in this
case. For, when the Question is about our own Actings, the Things of a Man, as
the Scripture says, are best known to the Spirit of the Man himself, 1 Cor.
2.11. Tho we Do not know so much of others: Yet, under God, we are all able to
tell the most of our selves, and no one else can say so much as our own Bosoms.

So that we must not fetch our Rejoicing from the Censures and Commendations of
others; nor be Cheerful or Dejected, according as they surmise or think of us:
But according as we know, by our own selves. It may be they are rash and unjust
in their Censures, and judge us unheard; as, indeed, they are often aptest to
condemn us, who know least of us. But if all the while, our own Conscience can
testify it is otherwise; we may say with S. Paul, it is a very small thing with
me, that I should be judged of you, or of man's judgment, 1 Cor. 4.3. If all the
World speaks well, what is that, if we are accused in our own Consciences? And
if we are acquitted there, that is worth ten thousand Witnesses, and what
signify all their Accusations? Let us take care therefore to Live so, as that
we may be well Reported of in our own Breasts; and we need not look out for
Comforts, from the Opinions and Reports of others. To know what is in us, for
our Joy or Sorrow, we must not take our Account from Strangers, we are best
known to our own selves.

But now, quite contrary to all this, is the way of Fleshly Wisdom. Its care
and aim is, not how to please God, but how to come off among men. It is more
concerned, for what is like to anger and offend them, than for what will offend
him. As the Chief Rulers, who, believing in Christ, knew to own him was most
pleasing to God: But yet did not confess him, lest they should be put out of
the Synagogue, Jo. 12.42. It is for suiting its Carriage, not to the Reality of
things, but to their Diseased Opinions. Its Maxim, is not to side with the
Truth, but to swim with the Stream. It is for Doing what is in vogue, and
seeming to approve what is by most applauded, whether it be good or bad. It
will assert an ill Cause, when the Multitude are for it; and desert a good
Cause, when it is generally decryed. It will renounce any Duty, or Virtue, when
it is exploded: Strike in with the Oppressors of much envyed and hated Persons,
when they are trampled under foot; tho it happens to know they are innocent, or
knows not that they are in fault, or however faulty they are in other things,
tho it believes they are greatly wronged in the present Case, and suffer
against Justice; it will always run along with all the Violences of the time:
And that, as seeking, not what is really good, but what other men think and
call so; not, as studying to please God, but to Live at quiet, and please the
World, steering all its Course, not by Truth and Virtue, which are a certain
fixed thing, always one and the same; but by the uncertain Blast of Popularity,
or vulgar Opinion.

Agreeable to this, we may observe it is the Rule of worldly wise men, to stand
for Virtue and Duty, not when it has few Friends, and they must practice it
alone; but when they have Company enough, to back and stand by them. They are
for Truth and Goodness, when they have the strongest Parties, and the Cry of a
Crowd, to approve and justify them in that Cause: But not when the Cry goes
against them, and they see no Numbers to join with. So that it is not Spiritual
Truth and Goodness, but Worldly Strength and Number, which is highest in their
Opinion, and takes most with them.

We may likewise observe, from the same influence and interposition of Fleshly
Wisdom, even among well-disposed Men, the great Difference between Suffering
Duties, when cried up, and the sa^^ when decryed by the Multitude. Men find it
much easier, to suffer for a good thing, when the Shout of the People is for
them; but very hard, when it runs all against them. Nay, there is a Terror in
the Clamor of Rabbles, which frights many, tha^ dare even stand the face of
Regular Justice. Fleshly Wisdom, looks out still for some visible Support, and
a fleshly Arm; which when it cannot have from Authority, and the Higher Powers,
it would fain have from the Number of Partakers* Where it has inclination, it
needs moreover to b^ heartened, and commended in a good thing. It is not
mortifyed enough, to the Countenance and Cry of Men: Looking too much without
it self to their Applauses; and too little within, to the Commendations of God
and a Good Conscience*

Whereas, by all the Rules of God, and true Wisdom, if a way is bad, no
Authority of Numbers, or Press of the Multitude, must bear us along with it.
Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil, says the Law, Exodus 23.2. If
sinners entice thee, whether more or fewer, whether a Sinful Man or a Sinful
Nation, consent thou not, says Wisdom, Prove. 1.10. When ill Men list
themselves in Numbers, and Combine in Errors or ill things, they are ungodly
Conspiracies; and all that Love God, or themselves, must take care not to be
drawn in, or go along with them. Say not ye a Confederacy to all them, to whom
this people shall say a Confederacy; neither fear ye their fear, nor be afraid.
Sanctify the Lord of Hosts himself, and let him be your fear, Is. 8.12, 13.
Thus, must not we run in with their wrong Opinion, or fear what affrights them;
but instead thereof, what will offend him. When the World is bent upon ill
things, as it ordinarily is, Good Christians must not think it will excuse
them, to say they were born away in the same with the Torrent. But they must
remember, that in their Baptism, they renounced the World; that Christ, tho he
found his Followers in the World, yet has called or chosen them out of, or from
among the World, John 15.19. and that they must not be conformed to this World,
but transformed into a quite different Stamp, by the Renewal of their Mind,
Romans 12.2.

And on the contrary, if a way or thing is truly Virtuous and Good, no
smallness of Numbers on its side, or scarcity of Adherents, can warrant us to
forsake it. Our owning it at such times, instead of being excused, is more
highly requisite, and most of all needed. For then, under all the Attaques of
its Enemies, it is to be supported by its Followers, and can worst Dispense
with their Service. It is then in want of Adherents, and so can least of all
spare us. It is then like to be left Destitute, and without help in its
greatest need: which, instead of Releasing any, must incite every one, who
would approve himself its true Friend, a Friend being born for Adversity,
instead of flinching from, to appear for it, and put to his helping hand.

And accordingly the best Persons, have not Cowardly slunk away, but
Courageously stuck to God and their Duty, when they had the least Company, and
were left to own and stand to it by themselves. When Jesus Christ, that
absolute Patron and Advocate for Virtue, appeared in the World: He was (...), a
Sign spoken against, Luc. 2.34. When the Apostles after him, came to embarque
in its Cause and Interest, they were a Sect every where decryed, Acts 28.2. the
whole World in a manner stood at gaze, and they were made a gazing-stock to the
World, by Reproache^ and Afflictions, Heb. 10.33. being made a Spectacle, or
(...).
Theatrical Show, to the World, to Angels, and to men, 1 Cor. 4.9. Confessing
the Truth bravely and undauntedly, as did all the Primitive Saints, under all
the Discouraging Cries and Persecutions, of Popular 2 Cor. 6.5.
Tumults and Uproars, as well as of Courts and Judicatures. Noah was a Pattern,
and Preacher of Righteousness to the old World, when the whole Earth had
corrupted themselves, with one Voice Decrying his Virtue, and Deriding his
Preaching and Provision of the Ark, and were full ripe for Ruin by the Flood,
Genesis 7.1. 2 Pet. 2.5. Elias, was true to God and Religion, and jealous for
them, when he had none visibly to side with him, and take his part, all the
Prophets, as he complains to God, being slain with the Sword; and I, even I
only am left, and they seek my Life to take it away, 1 Kings 19.10. Jeremy
asserted the Truth, and way of God, when he alone was to be a Defenced City,
and a Brazen Wall, against the whole Land, Jerem. 1.18. when he was a Derision
to all his People, and their Song all the day, Lam. 3.14.

In the great Article, of the Divinity of our Lord, S. Athanasius was almost
left by himself, and there was, as it was said, Athanasius contra Mundum, or
Athanasius on one side, and the whole World on the other. And to those who then
objected the Non dubitandum est paucos Episcopos essepretiosos de merito
Confessionis and inviolabilisfidei* multos vero nullificari merito haereseos
vel praevaricationis, quia in causa very, maxim in causa Religionis and sacrae
Fidei, non numerus numerocomparandus est, sed pura illa Apostolica fides,
probata exiliis, probata cruciat^bus, licet unius, multorum insidelitatibu^
praeponenda est. Faustin. and Marcell. in Lib. Precum, p. 13.
Paucity of its Numbers, and measured the Authority of a Doctrine by the
multitude of Applauders; he suggests, that Christ chose twelve Apostles, and
armed these twelve, who were all simple, illiterate, and poor Men, with Truth
against the whole World, who, tho so many more in Number, were yet all in the
wrong. And these twelve, were not to follow ten Thousand: But the ten Thousand
were to Compose themselves to the Way and Belief of these Twelve. Who, as he
goes on, when St. Stephen stood alone, Derided by all, and Stoned to Death,
would not rather have been on the Side of this single oppressed Man, than of
the Numerous and Persecuting Vulgar? Or, on Phineas 's, who went out alone for
God among the Jews? Or, on Noah 's, to have been saved with those few Souls in
the Ark, when the universal World were destroyed by a Deluge? It Is Good, it is
Good, for a just Man, tho he be but one, and stands alone, to show a
Confessorian Liberty, and Profess the Truth boldly and freely, and this way to
break the Power of Error and Wickedness, tho standing on the united Votes, and
concurrent agreement and approbation of the Multitude. And as for the Weight of
Numbers, a Multitude without Demonstration, Proceeding only by Will, is fit to
imprint Fear, not to persuade Belief. Tho some Multitudes I also Reverence,
viz. that which corrects Fatherlike, and gives Demonstration, and keeps to the
old Way, not rejoicing in Innovation. Not that Multitude, which is hired by
Gifts and Flatteries, or hurryed aside by Ignorance and Unskilfulness, or which
is lapsed by Fear and Terror, or that prefers a Momentany Enjoyment of Sin to
eternal Life, Tom. Op 1. p. 293, 294.
says that Good Father, to those who took the judgment of the Multitude, for
(...) Proof and Evidence of Truth.

Thus has it been the care of Good Men in all times, and must be ours when God
shall call us to the Trial, if we will be their true followers, to stick firmly
to their Duty, whether with, or without Company. They were resolved to adhere
to it, tho all the World did Desert it. They had Determined beforehand, to
sacrifice every other Interest to that, and to stand or fall with it. And
therefore, wheresoever it called, they readily followed: not considering,
whether it were with the Cry, or against it; whether any body else went along
to back them, or all stayed behind. Wha^ the Poet said, in the Character of the
Good and Upright Man; that Non ardor Civium prava jubentium, non vultus
instantis tyrannimente quatit folida. Horat. Carm. l. 3. Od. 3.
neither the Madness and Heat of the Rabble, calling for an ill thing; nor the
Face of ^ Tyrant Menacing and Commanding it, can shake (...) virtuous
Stedfastness: is a Pitch, that, whilst other^ content themselves to talk of,
they still made visible in their Practice.

I add in the last place, concerning all the forecited Ends of Christian
Prudence, that tho, being Flesh as well as Spirit, we are allowed to have other
lower Ends: yet is it one of its Rules, when we cannot serve both, to give up
the inferior, to serve the main End. It will part with our Worldly Goods and
Convenience, to preserve all the foresaid Ends of Duty and Innocence, of the
Honor of Religion, and a good Conscience; and forego any Good of our Bodies
for the Greater Good of our Souls. This is employed, when this Prudence is
recommended and required by our Lord, under the Name of the wisdom of the
Serpent, Mat. 10.16. For his chiefest care, as has been commonly noted, is to
save his Head. And as the Serpent, says S. Homil. 34 in Mat.
Chrysostom, upon the Place, gives away all first, tho it be his Body it self
to be Cut in pieces, that he may thereby Preserve his Head safe: in like
manner, says our Lord, be thou ready to Surrender up all things, tho all thy
Possessions, tho thy Body, yea, tho thy Life it self, to preserve thy Faith.
For that is the Head, and Root of all. And so long as that is kept, tho thou
losest all the rest, yet shall thou recover all again with Greater Magnificence
at last. -- Requiring thee, to show the Wisdom of the Serpent, ^e warns thee
not to lose what is of most account, and when a Blow does come, never to
receive it in a Principal, or most Vital Part. And this is a Rule of Worldly
Wisdom too, to give up what is of less account, for the Preservation of what is
of more. But its Fault here is, to subject Spiritual to Temporal Ends, as may
be seen in all the Preceding Instances thereof, which, in all Right and Reason,
ought to be set above them.

CHAP. IV. Of not Doing Evil, that Good may come.
AS Christian Prudence, is in the first place to fix the Mark whereat we are to
aim, and to see, and set out to us, Right Ends: So is it

2. Secondly, to pursue those Ends, only by fit and Christian Ways. Prudence,
is most taken up in Choice of Means; appearing either in Sagacity and
Acuteness, by Discerning them instantly; or in Counsel, when it Discovers them
by Thought and Study.

And opposite to this, is Imprudence, which has no Due Understanding or
Consideration, about Ways and Methods; and does not either see, or stick to
those Means which are fittest for the Ends it aims at. Sometimes it misses
them, through inordinate Haste, not staying to take Counsel, or Deliberate
which Course is best. As it happens, when Men are pushed on rashly by their own
Will or Passion; not taking time and pains, first to reflect with themselves,
and call to mind former Experience and past Success of the same Course, or view
present things and Circumstances, or consider what may be the Effects and
Consequences, or Reason and Compare one thing with another, or, where there is
need thereof, show Docility and Regard to other Men's Skill, hearkening to a
good and wise Adviser: These, and such like, are the orderly and intermediate
Steps, whereby the Mind should proceed from Proposal of a thing to pursuit
thereof, and Guide it self as need requires, in consulting about the Fitness of
Ways and Methods. And, when without such orderly Process, in a Case that needs
it; it fixes on a wrong way in haste, at the impulse of its own Will or Humor,
or of some external impellent, without having taken Counsel about it: This
uncounsell'd Choice, or inordinate haste in fixing, is called Precipitancy. And
this, where it is not only a blind Festination, but bears with it a plain
Contempt of known Laws and Rules, which should have kept it in, or such an
headstrong Motion, as is a clear Effect of Pride and Presumption; is called
Temerity. At other times, when it stays to Consult about them, Imprudence
misses the right Way and Means, by not viewing sufficiently, but Contemning or
Neglecting the Circumstances of things; especially those that are necessary to
form a Right Judgment of them: Which act of Imprudence, is called
Inconsiderateness. Or, lastly, when it has done all in point of Deliberation, a
third Act of Imprudence about the means, is not to stick to what has been once
Resolved upon, or be steadfast in Right Purposes; which is Inconstancy.
Precipitancy, is a Fault and Defect in Consultation; Inconsiderateness in
Judging, and Inconstancy in point of Persisting, or Sticking to what had been
well fixed or judged before.

Now, as Prudence is thus taken up in Choice and Use of means, so is Christian
Prudence in the Choice and Use of such only, as are fit for Christians. As
Prudence, it must Direct to fitting Means. And as Christian, to such as are
agreeable to the holy Religion and Laws of Christ Jesus.

One part of this, and that of Great Wideness and Importance, is to see what
Ways and Means are fittest for the Attainment or Increase of all particular
Virtues. All Duties have their proper Means, which make way for their
Performance, and Hindrances, that do obstruct it. And it is the Part of
Prudence, in one that would be wise to Do his Duty, to Discern and Direct what
these Means are, in the Case of each; that seeking them always in wise and
right ways, he may labor after them with the more Success. To show what these
are, through all particular Virtues, what Means are best accommodate to their
several Natures, or to our Needs and Temptations in the Exercise or Discharge
thereof, is besides my prese^^ purpose, and may be learned, as occasion
require^ from those good Books, where the Duties themselves are Practically and
Particularly treated of.

But, besides this seeing what Means are fitte^^ for the Discharge of any
Duties: Another part o^ Prudence is, to see, in such Discharge, what way^ are
fittest for its or our own outward Encouragement; or that we may Do it with
most Ease, Convenience, and Safety to our selves. This Prudence looks at, in
all our Ways; whether the Discharge of Duty, or any others that are free, and
left to our selves. And this Prudence Christianity must moderate, that our Care
for our Safety never carry us against, or make us careless of our Duty. And
upon both these, viz. The ways of Securing both Religion and our selves, I
shall observe severa^ Limitations, which, in regard to the Nature and Rules of
Christianity, Spiritual Prudence lays on us, whilst a Latitude is given therein
by Fleshly Wisdom, and taken by the worldly Wise.

1. In the first place then, I observe of Spiritual Wisdom, that it is never
for doing Evil, that Good may come.

This Good is any Fleshly Convenience or Benefit of this World, that concerns
us, either as Men or Christians. And this, whose worldly Convenience soever it
serves, whether our own or our Friends and Relations; whether of few or many;
private or public; of Religion or Civil Government; Church or State. These
things are the main Care of the Wisdom of the Flesh; and the great Mark which
the Prudence of this World drives at. And Spiritual Prudence allows the seeking
thereof, so long as it is without Sin; but it gives no leave to Do ill, i. e.
to omit any Duty, or transgress any Commandment for them. I speak of
Commandments, that require things of a Natural or Moral Obligation. In mere
Positives, as Circumcision, Shewbread, and the Sabbatick-R^st; God sometimes
allows more Liberty, in case of Necessity or Great Convenience: As the Omission
of Circumcision* was Connived at for the extreme Burdensomness thereof, whilst
they were in a Traveling State in the Wilderness. But Natural or Moral
Obligations, are not to give way to any outward Convenience. In case of these,
Spiritual Prudence is not for Doing a Spiritual Ill, for any Worldly Good: It
will rather suffer any Ill, than Do it. It gets by the Ill it suffers, if it
can suffer with Patience and Innocence. But it always loses by the Ill it does.
Tho it get a worldly Convenience, it parts with what is incomparably better,
its Integrity, and a good Conscience. It will never yield to commit a Sin, no
not for the Worldly Convenience of the things of God and Religion; not owning
that corrupt and ungodly Maxim, of breaking Religion to preserve Religion. Be
wise as Serpents, but simple and innocent as Doves, says our Savior, Mat.
10.16. That is, says an Incerti Authoris in Mat. ap. Chrys^st.
old and learned Comment, to speak in a word, be wise as Serpents, that you may
understand, and shun what is ill: But be simple as Doves, that you may not Do
any thing that is ill.

It may seem needless, perhaps, to prove this to be a Rule and Precept of true
Spiritual Wisdom to Christians; or, indeed, to any Persons of Natural Honesty,
and good Moral Tempers. But yet we see by sad Experience, when they are brought
to the Pinch, and cannot have the Good they seek without Doi^g Ill for it: That
not only Christians, but Christians of all Persuasions, are ready to think and
profess it is otherwise. This is the General Effect of the Wisdom of the Flesh,
and in their Necessities, offers it self, and too often, God knows, with
overmuch Success to all that have Fleshly Natures, and is not confined to any
Sects or Parties. They that will blame it when they do not need it, and cry out
of it in others, are ready, alas! most shamefully many times to justify it in
their need, and practice by it themselves. But when they do thus, it is only at
the Incitation of Fleshly Wisdom; of that (...), or Craftiness that makes use
of any thing which will help on a Design, and which the Scripture notes and
taxes in VVorldly wise Men, Ephesians. 4.14. 1 Cor. 3.19. But is what Religion and
Christian Prudence, which contrives more for God and Goodness, than for
VVorldly Convenience, will never allow of.

This Doing a Spiritual Ill, that a Worldly Good or Convenience may come
thereby, is not to be justified,

1. First, by any Pretense of Serviceableness, or Ends of Piety toward God.
We must never Sin for him, or Transgress his Laws to please, or do him
Service. He has no need of our Sins; for it is only human Impotence, which has
no place in him, that is the Parent of, and puts upon all unlawful Expedients.
And he will never accept or be served by them. For our Service is not so much
to Do him Good, who being all Fullness, and perfectly happy in himself, stands
in no need of any thing from us: as to show our Obedience. And if the
acceptance of all our Services, lies in our Obedience; we cannot think he will
ever count himself served, by seeing his Laws broken, and himself therein
disobeyed. When Saul spared the Fat things, the best of the Sheep, and Oxen of
the Amalekites: it was, indeed, a Breach of Duty, God having v. 2, 3.
expressly commanded him to destroy all, and spare none; but it was upon a
Pretense of Piety. They were spared, as he pleads for himself, only for a
Sacrifice, which he thought was more for God's Glory and Service, 1 Samuel 15,
15. But what says God to Readiness committing this ill to do good to him, or
sinning for his Glory and Interest? Has the Lord as great delight in Sacrifice
and Burnt-offerings, as in obeying the Voice of the Lord? Behold, to obey is
better than Sacrifice, i. e. than to yield to an Act of Disobedience, that we
may have a Sacrifice, and to hearken, than the Fat of Rams, v. 22.

When well-meaning Uzzah, put forth his hand to the Ark of God, and took hold
of it to bear it up, when the Oxen shook it, and it tottered in the Cart: he
did ill, it is true, for he touched it with a forbidden hand; God having
ordered, on any Carriage of the Sanctuary, and of the Ark, that no unhallowed
hand of those that bare it, should touch any holy thing, lest they dye, Number.
4.5, 15. But this ill thing he did, in an apparent danger, and with a most
visible appearance of Good to come to the Things of God thereby. What, might
Uzzah think, may not I, especially in a seeming little thing, transgress one
Precept, when there is an apparent necessity for it, to save even the Ark of
God, that Glory and Strength of Israel, as Psalm. 78.61. and 132.8.
it is called, or to keep and Preserve a Church already tottering, from tumbling
to the Ground? But how does God receive this unlawful, indeed, but well meant
Course, of committing a seemingly little Sin to save the things of his own
House, which he himself had made of highest Dignity and Importance? The Anger
of the Lord was kindled against Uzzah, and God smote him there for his error,
and there he Dyed by the Ark of God, 2 Samuel 6.6, 7.

If God would accept of Wickedness for any Ends, certainly it must be for his
own Glory, which is worth all the World besides; and which has some Plea of
Compensating him for the Disobedience, and making him a Gainer by the Exchange.
And if he would allow of any Sin for his Glory; one would think it should be an
officious Lie: when his Servants and Well-wishers, think, and stretch beyond
the Truth, or traduce the opposite Parties, especially where they have some
Plausible Color in Pressing Consequences, merely because they think his Honor
needs it, and they know not how they can otherwise well defend his Cause. But
yet God will not accept of any Service, by any such Sin, or Breach of Duty, as
this.

For, what says the Scripture, to Job's Friends? Will ye speak wickedly for
God, and talk deceitfully for him? Will ye accept his Person in judging, as you
do between him and me, when he requires in Judgment to accept no Person? Job
13.7, 8. But now, all the Unrighteousness, or ill they did against Job, was
only thereby to clear God's Honor and Justice in Job's Sufferings. They were
Forgers of Lies against the innocent, as he tells them, v. 4. but all with a
design to justify the Proceedings of God. Eliphaz accuses him, that he had
plowed iniquity, and sowed wickedness, and now reaped the same, Job 4.8. But
this was, to make God juster than Job, in his Sufferings, v. 7.17, 18. Bildad
tells him, that his Children were wicked, and he himself an hypocrite, Chapter 8.4,
6, 13. But this he said, lest else in his Case, God should appear to pervert
Justice and Judgment, v. 3. Zophar charges him, that he had been wicked, and
that iniquity was still in his Tabernacles, Chapter 11.3.6, 14. But the design
hereof, was to justify God's dealings, and to show he exacted of him less,
than Job's iniquity deserved, v. 6. All these ill things, which Job's Friends
did, were well meant: their hard Judgments against Job, were only the effect of
their Respecting the Person of God, and taking his Part. This is Job's own
Construction of them: Will ye, says he, accept his Person? Chapter 13.8. Their
unjust Surmises and Accusations, were only pious Falsehoods; God's Proceedings
needing them, as they conceived. And yet for all the ill was done with so pious
an intention, will ye speak wickedly for God, and talk deceitfully for him? Was
a Report unanswerable, when Job objected it against them, Chapter 13.7.

God will never allow his Servants to go out of his own way, tho it be on
Pretense to serve himself. He will never think, and we must never say, he is
glorified, when he is disobeyed; or that he can ever get any Glory, by our
Transgressing of our Duty. We glorify his Power and Sovereignty, when we obey
it; his Wisdom, when we follow it; and Religion, when we keep and practice the
Rules thereof. We glorify him, as I formerly observed, by showing forth his
Glorious Attributes, and expressing them in our selves. Whereas all Sin, is
never the expression, but always the defacement of his Image; and therefore his
Glory can only be sought, as it is only compassed, by Obedience.

2. Nor is it to be justified, by any Pretense to serve the Public. However
the Good of the Public, is of more account, than any Private Good: yet is it
of less, than the Honor and Interest of Almighty God. And therefore, if we may
not be allowed to sin, to serve God; we can never be allowed to do more for the
Service of any other Master, or sin to serve the Public. This, indeed, is a
specious Cover for unlawful Expedients, and nothing is more ordinarily
pretended by those that use them, for their own Defense. For this is the way to
make all People Parties, to stop their mouths from branding it with just
Censures, nay, to bribe their Favor and Approbation of the Expedient, to
persuade the Public it is made use of only for their sakes.

But this will never pass, before an impartial and most just God; however it
may stop the mouths, of Partial, and Corrupt men. This Pretense the Jews had,
in the Murder committed upon our Blessed Savior. If we let this man alone, say
the Pharisees at their Council held about him, all men will run after him, and
the Romans will come, and take away both our Place and Nation, Joh. 11.48. It Is
expedient, said the High Priest Caiphas, for us, that one man should dye for
the People, and that the whole Nation perish not, v. 50. But yet for all this
Pretense, and Warranty of public Expedience, this was a Murder acted by most
wicked hands, Acts 2.23. The Public must be sought under God, not set up
against him; and it, as well as private Persons, must rule it self by ways of
Righteousness, not by ways of mere Expedience.

Indeed, nothing is so true, and serviceable an Expedient for the Public, as
an entire Practice of Religion, or Performance of Duty and Pleasing God. This
is the best Bottom, and firmest Security, of Common Good, or Public Interest.
It Is not thought so, I confess, by worldly men, who look only at sensible and
present things. But it will appear so to all raised and Spiritual Minds, who
know God has the most to do, or the greatest hand in bringing any Events about,
and rely on Providence. For to be sure, they that rest on Providence, more than
on Humane Provisions and Appearances, will never think they can serve the
Public Interest by Disobedience. Fiat Justitia, ruat Coelum, is their Maxim.
To do their Duty, is their Care: to govern the World, and see this do no hurt,
is God's. And when they have done their Duty, which is their Part; they can
cheerfully trust, and rely on him, for Events.

3. Nor by any Pretense, to serve our Friends or Relations; nay, or to serve
our selves, or our own Lives. If an unlawful Expedient may not be taken to
serve God, to be sure it may not be taken to serve us: for his interest is
infinitely of more account than ours; and he is not so like to dispense with
the Breach of any of his own Laws, for us, as for himself. If it may not be
done for the Public, sure it must not for any Private account: for the Public
Good contains that of Private Persons, and is worth more to God, than any
Private is.

Indeed, if Self-Love may be Judge, we might soonest take these Liberties in
our own Case, and stretch furthest to serve our selves. But Self-Love and
Religion, are two things: and as the Great Rule of that, is Self-pleasing; so
the Fundamental Principle of this, is Denying of our selves. It Is always
without Exception, for Denying of our Sins, and not doing the least ill, to get
out of the greatest Distress. Tho my Soul is continually in my hand, says the
Psalmist, yet do I not forget the Law. See Psalm. 44.17, 18, 19, 22. and Psalm.
119.51.
The wicked have laid a snare for me: (...) I erred not from thy Precepts,
Psalm. 119.109, 110^ They had almost consumed me upon Earth, but I forsook not
thy Precepts, v. 87. When there is no way to escape the Cross, but a Sin;
Religion is for taking up the Cross, not for escaping it. Tho we may Love our
Selves, and Love our Friends, and seek what is pleasing both to them and us:
ye^ must that be under God, not against him; and we must prefer our Duty, and
pleasing him, before both. If any man love Father, or Mother, or any thing
else, yea his own Life above me, says our Savior, he is not worthy of me, Mat.
10.37. Luke 14.26. And when St. Peter in this way of Selfish Expedience, out of
pure humane Love and Friendship, fell to dissuade Christ, from that last and
hardest part of Obedience, in his Sufferings; Get thee behind me, Satan, says
he to him, Mat. 16.22, 23. Such Counsels never come from God, nor are accepted
with him; but always have Satan and Selfish Natures at the Bottom, and are
pleasing to them alone.

Thus, upon no Pretense of Good to come, may we ever break a Commandment, or
venture on an evil Action. Expediency or Serviceableness, tho to the best
Purposes, will never hallow an unholy, or justify an unlawful Thing. When we
are proposing any Good, we must take a good way to it: Good Ends must be
compassed by good Means and Methods. To make a good Action, we must not only do
what is good, but do it with a good Design. For Bonum, as the Rule says, est ex
integra Causa, taking in the Goodness, both of the Act, and of the Intention.
But to render, what we do, an ill Action; it is enough if we either do an ill
thing, tho with the best Design; or a good thing, if we do it with an ill one.
For Malum, as the Rule of Morals says, est ex quolibet Defectu, and will come
in, either by the illness of the thing, or by the illness of the intention. An
ill thing, is still an ill thing, tho men do it with the best intention: and
the Actors are punishable in Religion, for the illness of the Action; not
justifiable, for the Goodness of the intention. Some, indeed, once laid this to
St. Paul's Charge, as if he taught them to do ill with a good intention, or to
do evil that good may come, Romans 3.8. But this, says the Apostle, was a
slanderous Report; and the Doctrine, was a Doctrine for loose Libertines, not
for holy Christians, such as he did by no means own, but abhor and throw out
with indignation. Some slanderously report that we say, let us do evil that
good may come, whose Damnation is just, Romans 3.8. (...) God has commanded no
man to do wickedly: So, be the Pretense what it will, neither has he, as the
wise Son of Sirach says, given any man license to sin, Ecclus. 15.20.

CHAP. V. Of the Plea of Necessity, Providence, or Prophecies, for Doing ill.
HAving said thus much, to show in general* how inviolable a Rule of Christian
Wisdom this is, not to do evil that good may come. I shall from hence observe
the vanity of some Palliations, whereby men fruitlesly endeavor to blanch over
the Deformity of this Practice, such as the Plea of Necessity, Providence, or
Prophecies. And after that, to tax and set off some of the most considerable
instances of doing ill, wherein tha^ Fleshly-wise are wont to think they may
bes^ take Liberty, in pursuit of any good Ends.

First, Spiritual Prudence will never allow us to set aside any Duty on
Pretense of Necessity.

It will never yield, that we offend against God or Man; that in any thing we
be false, undutiful, or unjust; that we dishonor our Parents, break our Oaths,
Promises and Engagements, covet other men's Goods, take what is not right, or
withold what is; or break any one or more of God's Commandments, on the Plea
of Necessity, or saying, it was necessary for us so to do. This, God knows, is
too much set up in the World. And when unjustifiable ways are taken, and things
practiced, which the very Actors are ready to own as otherwise ill done; yet is
this thought a sufficient Reason why they should be done, because they were
necessary, and they could not do without them.

But what were they necessary for? To please God, or to fulfill any Rule of his,
or Precept of Religion? No, sure, they are not necessary to these Ends, but
necessarily overthrow them. But they were unnecessary, for saving the things of
this World; to keep what is ill got, or maintain what is ill done. But now
these are not Religious, but Self Ends; not for the other World, but for this.
And these ways of supplying its Necessities, are not Spiritual, but Carnal; not
Religious, but Worldly Prudence. And if we give way to break God's Precepts,
for worldly Necessities: this is not to show Religion, but Self-Love; not to
set up God, but our Selves.

We are not to commit any Sin, as I have shown, when that seems the most
necessary, to procure the best, and most desirable Goods, either to God, the
Public, or our Selves. And if we might sin, rather than suffer, and take
Liberty to set aside any Religious Duties, to supply the Call of worldly
Necessities; what work would this make with the Commandments? And how are any
of them a Duty, longer than they stand with our Convenience? What becomes of
Patience, which is for dutifully bearing Hardships, not for removing them by
Undutifulness? What becomes of the Religion of taking up the Cross, and of
Suffering for Righteousness? We may bear the Cross, as I formerly observed,
when we cannot help it; but then properly we take it up, when a Sin might avoid
it. And it may be our misfortune sometimes, to suffer for Righteousness; as
having no way in righteous, more than in unrighteous Courses, always to avoid
Sufferings. But it cannot be our Duty to suffer for Righteousness, if without
Breach of Duty, we may leave off to be righteous, to save Sufferings. At this
rate, of forsaking the Commandment to stick to the World, or when a worldly
Necessity drives him to it; contrary to what our Blessed Lord, and his Apostles
taught, a man may serve both God and Mammon, Mat. 6.24. be a Friend of the
World, and not an Enemy of God, Jam. 4.4. They that are in the Flesh, this way
may please God. And if the Carnal mind cannot become subject to the Law of God,
as St. Paul says it cannot, the Law of God will by this Rule become Subject to
it, Romans 8.7, 8. In Sum, there would be no Necessity of being transformed from
this World, as St. Paul requires; but a Liberty of being conformed unto it,
which he forbids, Romans 12.2. Nor any need of Denying our Selves, as Christ
urges, if we would be his Disciples, Luke 9.23.

So that this Plea, of worldly Necessity setting aside our Duty in any Case, is
a Principle purely of this World, but not at all of Almighty God. It
overthrows, as all the Rules, so all the Design of Religion, and the Grounds of
good Practice. It can come into the Thoughts only of worldly-wise, not of truly
Religious Persons, who never urged a Temporal Necessity against a Spiritual
Duty, being not men of this World, but of a better. There can never be any
Necessity of Sinning to him that dare suffer. And he, who is resolved against
Suffering, may think himself a worldly-wise man; but God will account him no
good Christian.

But this now is otherwise, in the Wisdom of this World. Necessity, it thinks a
Reason, not to be argued or disputed. And what it calls Necessary, is what is
necessary to one, who is resolved to keep this World; not to one, who can part
with it. What is necessary, not to one that would set God and Religion above
the World, but that sets the World uppermost, and so makes a God of it. If it
talk of any thing, being necessary for the Interest of God and Religion: it
means only, for the worldly things about them. It looks not, what is necessary
to keep Innocence; for other things it accounts more necessary than that: but
what is necessary for carnal worldly Convenience. It is more for things
necessary to present Safety, than for those which are necessary to good Hopes
of Eternity. And to make men safe here, by affording visible Humane Securities;
not by engaging the Protection of God, and the Guard of an unseen Providence.

2. Secondly, Spiritual Prudence, will never allow us to justify any Breach of
Duty, by the Plea of Providence.

This is the way of worldly-wise men, who are ready to catch at any thing, as a
good Argument of a way's being approved by God, and pleasing to him, if it
profits them. If God give Success, when they use unlawful ways and Expedients;
especially, if in bringing that success about, there are any surprising or
remarkable Circumstances: they cry up the Hand of God, and think his prospering
it so signally, is his approbation. God himself here, say they, is willing to
become a Party, and such Success is his Testimony.

But Spiritual Wisdom teaches us to take the Morality of Actions, and the
goodness or illness of things, from Laws, not from Providence. It is the Laws
of God, in Nature or Scripture, that must teach us our Duty, and tell us what
will please God, or what will offend him. Sin, is the Transgression of a Law,
as St. 1 John 3.4.
John says; and Obedience is the keeping of them. And these Laws are published
in the Nature of things, and the Word of God; which are a plain, and sure
Promulgation of them.

But as for Providence, its Design is not to be a Publisher of Precepts. God's
Providence is not an Act of his Legislation, but of Judicature and Execution.
Its part is not first to show and promulge Laws; but, supposing those promulged
before, to supervise the Carriage of those, they were promulged to, and execute
their Sanctions; Or, to recompense Actions by suitable Events, according as
they have either transgressed, or kept them. The Judgments of God, according to
his Will before promulged, we may read in the Events and Issues of Providence.
But what his Will is, the Observance or Breach whereof Providence thus rewards
or punishes, we must read in the Moral Nature of Things, and the Holy
Scriptures.

It Is a bad Use therefore of Providence, to make it take off our Eyes from the
Morality of Things, and the plain Voice of Laws: and look for what is pleasing
to God, and according to his Will, only in the Events of Actions. Which is like
leaving the clear Light of the Sun, to go to read by that of a Glowworm. It Is
to go read our Duty, where it was not intended to be writ; and Neglect, or
overlook the perusal of that, where it is writ.

And it is worse, when we see both, to make Providence carry against plain Laws,
and the Moral Nature of Things: which is to turn the Signification of
Providence, not only against the Laws, but against it self. For the use of
Providence, is to be a Government according to those Laws, and the Morality of
Things. It is to be a Maintainer of them, by just Retribution: and so is only
to back and strengthen, but never to oppose them.

And therefore Providence must never be urged, in Favor of an ill and unlawful
thing. For since its right use, is to be a Retribution of Laws, and to reward
Dutifulness: all its right Signification, and all our right Remarks thereupon,
must be only for Encouragement to keep our Duty, but not to transgress it. It
must never be pressed against Laws, but always for them: and must only draw us
to trust, and depend upon God, in a good thing; but never in an ill one, which
Nature, or the Holy Scriptures have forbidden.

Indeed, as Providence is the Administration of God's Judicature here on Earth;
and he permits, or disposes of Events of things or Actions, in way of
Government and Justice: there is a Signification, of his Liking, or Disliking,
in these Disposals. But it is hard and unsure, to fix this on Persons and
Actions; to say, from these Issues of Providence alone, who, or what, he is
Pleased or Displeased withal.

For in the same Issues and Events, Providence is Concerned with a Number of
Persons, of the most contrary Qualifications: they are fatal to one, and
favorable to another. But yet since therein he has an Eye at both; from the
Event alone, we cannot say, which God likes, and which he dislikes; whether the
Success, is to Reward the Actors Righteousness, or to punish the Sufferers
Wickedness. Nay, oft-times in the Justice of Providence, God makes some Sinners
the Executioners of others, and punishes one by another Offenses, making them
Grind each other to Pieces. So that here, on which side soever the Show of
Favor or Success falls, it does not Signify, that God is pleased with either.
He will speed one, to punish another, when he is offended with both. The
Assyrians Success, was only as the Rod of God's Anger, to scourge the wicked
Nations. Which once done, he and his Ways, being no more pleasing to God than
the others were, he was to be broken himself, and fall under like Judgments.
Is. 10.5, 12, 16, etc. The wicked, who in their Course of Wickedness, are far
from being pleasing to him, yet, says the Psalmist, are a Sword of thine, and
so long find Success therein: Psalm. 17.13.

Yea, as the Thriving of some, is not always to show Favor: so the Sufferings
of others, in Events of Providence, is not always to show Displeasure. For many
times their Sufferings are not Designed to punish the Sufferers, but only to
try their Patience, and refine and manifest their Virtues, and rowze a sluggish
World with the Sight of brave Examples. Such was the meaning of David's
Sufferings and Persecutions under Saul. Such was the Signification of
Providence, in the Sufferings of Job, of the holy Prophets, of our Blessed Lord
and his Apostles, and of all the Noble and Heroic Spirits, the Martyrs and
Confessors, of all Ages; whose Sufferings came not from Providence in a penal
Way, but as a Privilege. Nay, sometimes, as in an useful, especially in a
public Person, they suffer so much, not altogether to prove or punish
themselves, as to perplex others, and punish the People thereby. For the Sins
and Transgressions of a People, many are the Changes of Princes, says Solomon,
Prove. 28.2. As, on the contrary, others Success, is oft-times only to complete
the time of their Respit, before they are Dragged to Punishment; or to allow
them their full Measure of good things, (which, as our Luc. 16.25.
Savior intimates, are more liberally proportioned out to them in this Life,
because they are to have none in the next,) till they have filled up the
Measu^e of their Sins, and so are Ripe for the Judgment of Providence. So that
as it is no Signification of God's Dislike, that one Suffers by Providence: for
what Son or beloved is it, the Father chasteneth not? says the Apostle, Heb.
12.7. So neither is it of his liking and Favor, that another succeeds by it,
there being, as to this, one Event, as the Wise Man says, both to the Righteous
and the wicked, Eccles. 9.2.

I add, lastly, that what Favor or Disfavor, the Event of Providence, in way of
Human Appearance, carries with it, is not to be soon Determined, till the whole
Train is seen, (the upshot whereof may, and often does, lie very Remote,) and
till it appears which Party is most Prosperous and Successful in the End. The
greatest present Unsuccessfulness, is most Ordinarily made use of by
Providence, as a Step to much more valuable future Successes. Its Method is, to
bring Light out of Darkness, and to compass Final Successes, by intermediate
Disappointments. And who then can say assuredly, that Providence is for one, or
against another, till they have run out the whole Length of the Chain of
Effects, and the End appears. And this often lies very far off, much further, it
may be, than we are like to live to see what it will prove. And till this is
seen, all judging of the Favor or Disfavor of Providence, from what Events went
before, is most uncertain; not Right Judgment, but Self-Flattery and Delusion:
whereof each Party serves, and wherewithal it pleases it self, according as its
turn comes, in the Ebbs and Flows, and various Vicissitudes, of the
intermediate Successes.

Thus, upon all these Accounts, to name no more, tho there is a Real Liking or
Disliking, in the Events of Providence, which is known to, and Designed by God
himself: Yet, is the Application of this, to things or Persons, so much all
Uncertainties, and the Favor or Disfavor of Issues, so promiscuous, as appears
to us, that from the Events of Providence alone, we cannot learn whom he loves
or whom he hates, what is Pleasing or Displeasing to him. No man, as Solomon
says in this case, can know either Love or Hatred, Good or Evil, by all that is
before him, Eccl. 9.1. To learn this from Providence, besides the visible
Events, we must weigh the Merit of Actions, from Laws; and stay the Final End
of Successes, which are the Recompense of them. And when those are seen, but
not before, from the Qualities of Persons and Attempts, we must read, whether
any Success, were for a just Encouragement of the Actors Righteousness, or
Punishment of the Sufferers Wickedness; whether it is for Proof and Trial, or
for Recompense. Always making the Voice of Providence, to assert and establish
the Moral Nature of things, and the Laws and Duties Revealed in Scripture; but
never in any wise, to Deny, or Gainsay them.

And therefore the Signification of Providence, is not to teach those that are
ignorant of their Duty, or of Good and Ill: but only those that already
understand it. It is no Expositor of the Will of God, to those who know it not;
but only an encourager of its Observance, to those who know what it is.

Hence Men ought never to Cry up the hand of God, or Call in Providence, to
Prove the Goodness of any Actions; but only to press those, which were Proved
before. It is not to instruct Men, what is their Duty; but to carry them on, to
the observance of those Duties, wherein they are otherwise already instructed.

Hence also, we must not think it enough in any Attempts, to say we follow
Providence, and go as God makes way for us. We are to follow Laws, not
Opportunities. For Providence affords us Opportunities to break Laws, as well
as to keep them. Power, and Opportunity, are among the necessary Causes of all
that is Done. And Providence puts things in Men's Power; and Gives them
Opportunity to Do them. But Opportunities for ill things, are not Warranties,
but only Trials and Temptations. All ill Men follow Providence, when they
accomplish ill things, which they could not Do without Providence Gave
Opportunities; and when Good Men, whom they are pursuing for ill Ends, fal^
into their Hands.

If any therefore are ignorant what their Duty is, and trust to learn it from
the Issues of Providence^ taking any Way for the Will and Command o^ God, when
they see the hand of God, or some remarkable Success attending it; this will
lead them into infinite Delusions. It will carry them to justify the most
wicked Actions, recorded in Scripture, or in Daily Experience, infinite Numbers
whereof in all Times and Places, God for wise Ends permits, or speeds, and
prospers; and tha^ against the most Beloved Persons, not excepting his own Son,
or the holy Church. Besides, as it is made to justify the Urgers of it, in
their Wa^ to Day; it may be, and ordinarily is, as well made to Shame and
Condemn them to Morrow: Successes usually running, as at one time remarkably
for, so at another time, as remarkably against them. It is no Rule for the wise
and well instructed, who never take it for a Rule of Duty, but always bring it
to the Rule, and expound the Liking or Disliking of God therein, by their known
Duty. It is only a Rule for the Ignorant to take up, and those, as it finds, so
it will leave ignorant of their Duty: nay, which is worse, it will mislead
them, as I say, into the Greatest Errors and Violations thereof, carrying them
into Sin, and Shame enough too, before they have Done. It is a way for Men,
that know, or may know, they are Doing ill, to flatter themselves, or abuse
others, with faint, but false Colors, of God's acceptance. And this may pass
among the Worldly Wise, who seek to be in Ease and Credit in their Worldly
Enjoyments. It Is a Part of Worldly Prudence, so to expound these Events of
Providence, not as may best serve their Duty, but their Worldly Ends. But he
who would be Spiritually Wise, or Wise for his Duty, must always fetch it from
the Laws of God, which are the Rule of Duty. And never make Providence, which
is to serve as the Motive and Encouragement of Dutifulness; to serve as a Plea
to justify the Breach thereof.

Thirdly, To this Plea of Providence, for justifying of ill Actions, I shall
annex another not unlike, viz. that of Prophecy. When Men think themselves
authorized to Do an unlawful and forbidden thing, by fancying it the
accomplishment of some Prediction, which God will applaud, and take Pleasure in.

I tax not here all Application of Scripture-Prophecies, in the Revelations, or
other Books. Albeit those Prophecies being made concerning the Future State of
Christ's Church, which reaches out both to such a Length of Time, and Latitude
of Places, must needs be very Difficult, and generally unsure, especially
before the Final Events have brought a full Light to them, to apply to
particular Times and Countries. And therefore it becomes Men not to be too
Positive and Peremptory, but to show Modesty therein, which, a little time
makes the most confident Interpreters and their Admirers, for the most Part, to
see, had been their best Security, and truest Wisdom.

But what I now blame, is the like use of antecedent Prophecies, as was before
of subsequent Providence and Events, viz. To take off Men's Eyes and Attention,
from the Morality of Actions; and instead thereof, to presume God's Approbation
of them, from their Fansied Fulfilling what the Scripture justifies and speaks
well of, in some Predictions. It Is of mighty use to Men, in any Great and
Daring Attempt, to have their Followers, and others, think there is Destiny in
their Behalf; that they are only accomplishing, what God has long before
Designed they should, and Doing his Business. This renders them, both most
violent in their Motions, and incurable, either by any Admonitions, or even
almost by any Unsuccessfulness and Discouragements; thinking themselves all the
while God's chosen Instruments for effecting what they have in hand, and sure
of Success, as having his immutable Decrees, and Predictions, on their side.
And the Serviceableness of such a Belief, to their wo^l^ly Projects and
Undertakings, tempts, as sometimes mistaken Zealots or Enthusiasts; so, at
others, Designing Men, to clap a Prophecy, especially a Scripture one, to what
they are Driving on, tho really it be a most unjust Thing. Well knowing, if
once it be Received, that God has foretold their Success; that by all Persons
of a strong Faith, (as Persons of most Devotion will most endeavor to be,)
their Work will be esteemed as sure, as if it were already Done.

The Law of God, and the Voice of Nature, pronounce most plainly and loudly,
Thou shall not forswear thy self, or falsify thine Oaths; Honor thy Father and
Mother, i. e. thy Civil as well as Natural Parents: Thou shall not Kill: Thou
shall not Steal: Thou shall not bear false Witness: Thou shall not covet thy
Neighbors Goods. But, when Men have been running headlong, and to the Greatest
Extremities, in the Breach of all these Moral Duties, as they were by Name in
our late Distractions and Civil Wars, in 41: they have Fancied themselves, and
been Cried up by others, as authorized to all this, by a confident Exposition
and Application of Prophecies, or, as the Accomplishers of Predictions.
Particularly, See Contin. of Friendly Debate, p. 64. to 73.
that of the two Witnesses, in the Revelalations, who were to shut the Heaven
that it should not rain, i. e. say they, to restrain the highest Powers in
Church and State, from their wonted Influence: and to turn the Waters into
Blood, or, as they explain it, a still Nation into War and Bloodshed, Rev.
11.6. Which, by making it a Prediction of what should fall out at that time in
Great Britain, they turned into a Call and Justification, of all that horrible
Violence, Injustice, Perfidiousness, and utter Breach of Moral Precepts, which
the Parliament and their Adherents, were most wickedly and ungodly Driving on
against the King and Church. Here, by settin^ aside the Morality of Actions,
and fetching the Approbation of God from fanciful Approbatio^ of Prophecy, they
made themselves God's chos^^ Witnesses, spoken of in the Revelations; not while
they are testifying for him as Martyrs, by the^^ own Blood and Sufferings; or
with Faith, an^ Patience, which is the Voice of his Precep^^ But whilst they
are doing it, as Rebels; (...) Arming against their Lawful Sovereigns, (...)
are God's Vicegerents; and running on (...) Murders, and Robberies, Committed
after (...) Liberties of War, without any Lawful Commi^^sion and Warranty, upon
the Persons and E^states, both of their Prince and Fellow Subjects which are
all out of the Way of Morality, an^ expressly against all those Precepts.

And this is leaving off to be Guided by Laws which are plain, and certain
Rules; for Prophe^cies, which Designing Projectors, and heat fanciful
Enthusiasts, will accommodate as the^ please. It is running boldly against
Gospel-Du^ties, and the Practice of Obedien^^ and Holines^ on Pretense we are
ministering under the Spirit of Prophecy, and serving Predictions. As if tha^
same Spirit, which is the Spirit of Prophecy, were not also the Spirit of
Obedience. Or had not Dicta^ted, all our Moral and Gospel Duties; as well (...)
Gospel Predictions. Or, as if he wanted Power, or Care, to Preserve one,
without Destroying (...) the other; and would not verify all his own
Predictions, without help of our Sins; nor could remain true, if we remain
innocent. It is not a thing incident, to any sober and obedient Christians: but
either to Designing and Hypocritical Impostors, or vain and wicked Enthusiasts.
Their Vanity soon appears in the Events, when they an^wer not their bold, and
confident Prenuncia^ions. And their Wickedness, in that they not only run
headlong under this Cover, into Immoralities, and wicked Courses: but profane
and ^^use the holy Scriptures to Patronize Ungodliness, Press and Wrest
Prophecies to Countenance Breach of Precepts, urge the Authority of God against
himself, and entitle him to their Abominations. And, indeed, a man must needs
be far forsaken of God, as he always is, that is fallen from moral Honesty and
an obedient Temper, before he can overlook the plainest moral Duties, and
boldly transgress them on such Fancies.

CHAP. VI.
SECT. I. Of Christian Simplicity and Sincerity. And of not Deceiving by
Actions.
FRom these Pleas, to Palliate Doing ill, I come now to tax some main and most
considerable Instances thereof; particularly the use of insincere Arts, and
throwing off of Relative Duties, to serve Public or Private Good, wherein
great Liberty is taken, and pleaded for, by the worldly Wise.

1. First, Christian Prudence is never for serving Ends by Deceit, but is
against all Use of Falsehood and Insincerity.

Deceit, is the great Art of worldly Wisdom. It has recourse to Tricks, when it
cannot compass its aim by Truth and Openness, and serves it self of Men, by
Imposture and Delusion. The Folly of Fools, says the wise Man, (so he calls
worldly Wisdom, which is mere Folly in the Account of God and Religion,) is
Deceit, i. e. it lies all in Cheating and Deceiving, what it cannot bring about
fairly, seeking to accomplish by Arts of Falsehood and Circumvention, Prove.
14.8. Their Counsels, says he again, are Deceit, Prove. 12.5: Sapientia hujus
mundi est cor machinationibus tegere, sensum verbis velare, quae falsa sunt
vera ostendere, quae vera sunt falsa demonstrare. Gregor. Magn. l. 10. c. 16.
Expos. Moral. in Job, upon Deridetur justi simplicitas, Job 12.4.
The Wisdom of this World, says S. Gregory, is to cover and conceal their
hearts by subtle Sleights and Devices, to Draw a Veil before their Meanings by
dark or deceitful Expressions, to mak^ Falsehoods appear as if they were Truths,
and Truth^ pass for Falsehoods. The general aim of worldly Wisdom, indeed, is to
compass its End by any means. And where it has Power and Confidence enough, it
will not stay perhaps, to go about and use Deceit, but serve it self by open
Violence. But in most Cases, it needs to serve its Ends, by keeping them
undiscerned. Or, when it does serve ill Ends, it would also save its Credit, by
not being thought to serve them* which is by Deceit. So that Deceit, is its
great, and usual Instrument.

But, contrary to this, Simplicity and Plain-Dealing, are the great Duty, and
inviolable Care, of Christian Wisdom. We have renounced the hidden things of
Dishonesty, says S. Paul, not walking i^ craftiness, 2 Cor. 4.2. There is
scarce any thing that makes us Degenerate so far from Spiritual Nobleness, as
Fraud and Deceit: and nothing does more hurt in the Church, than versute
Simulation, says S. On Diaconi non bilingues, 1 Timothy 3.8.
Chrysostom. Simplicity is what Christ requires of us, at the most pressing
Seasons, when we are put most to our Wits, and Driven to use any Arts or Double
Dealings, to save our selves. Behold, says he, to his Disciples, I send you
forth as Sheep in the midst of Wolves: be ye therefore wise as Serpents, but
innocent as Doves, Mat. 10.16. The Word is (...), which signifies Simplicity,
as well as Innocence. So it is rendered Romans 16.19. where (...) and (...), are
Translated, Wise concerning Good, and Simple concerning Evil. And accordingly,
in some Manuscripts, our Saviors Words are read, not (...), but (...), most
Simple (...) are the Doves. If any thing could excuse the Subtilty of Foxes,
their Doublings and Deceitful Turnings; it would be the Pressing Necessity of
such Times, when all their fallacious Arts are only Evasions, and they betake
themselves to ways of Delusion, and of begetting a wrong Belief or Expectation
in others, only to save themselves. Yet even then, will not Christ allow his
Followers, to use any more of the Serpentine Subtilty, than what consists with
the Doves Simplicity.

And accordingly S. Paul, when he speaks of his being pressed in Asia out of
measure, above strength; when they had the Sentence of Death, and no hope in
themselves: yet professes for all this, that he had held his Conversation in
the World, not with Fleshly Wisdom; but in Simplicity and Godly Sincerity, and
by the Grace of God, 2 Cor. 1.8, 9, 12. And it was amidst all the great Trials
and Perils, he run through in the Discharge of his Ministry, under which, says
he, we faint not, that, instead of ever having Recourse to, he Declares, as I
noted, how he had renounced the hidden things of Dishonestty or (...)*
Shame, never privately betaking himself to that, which he should be ashamed to
have known abroad; not walking in Craftiness, nor handling the Word of God
deceitfully, 2 Cor. 4* 1, 2. In such Trials, Faith in God, and Trust in
Providence, made all that up to them, which crafty Shifts do to carnal
Politicians, who can ground no Hope, but in humane Appearances. They would
never part from their Simplicity, for carnal Security. Whilst they were in
this, or any other discharge of Duty, which is God's way, they knew they were
in God's hand: and so long, they were not afraid of whatsoever could befall them.

In the Acceptance of the World, Simplicity has one Sense, wherein it is no
Virtue, viz. as it signifies Unwariness. A simple man, in the common way of
speaking, is the same as an unwise, or unwary man, that does not see before, or
look about him. And this is no Commendation of Goodness, but impeachment of
Discretion: it shows no Person to have a better Heart, but only a weaker
Understanding. It argues nothing, but that a Man either wants Understanding, or
neglects the use thereof, when he needs to show it; which is no Ornament in the
Eyes of God, more than it is in the Eyes of men. And instead of calling us to
Simplicity in this sense, true Spiritual Wisdom calls it; How long, ye simple
ones, will ye love simplicity, and ye Fools hate knowledge? Turn ye at my
reproof, says Wisdom, Prove. 1.22, 23.

But the Simplicity, which is a Virtue, and which Christian Wisdom injoyns, is
only Veracity and Plainness, in what it shows to others, not Improvidence, or
Unwariness, in what it either does to, or expects from them. It does not think
every Person it has to do withal, means honestly, because it means so it self;
nor, by heedless Security, or Short-sightedness, does expose it self without
any Guards against Dangers, or dishonest Actions. The virtuously simple, are
provident and wary, as well as the worldly crafty; but with this difference.

The Caution of the virtuously Simple, is first against Sin, and next to that
against Suffering. It is more concerned, how to keep true and innocent, than
how to keep safe and quiet. In seeking, either to obtain Good, or shun Loss,
its Eye and Care is in the first place, to do nothing that will offend God, or
is of ill Report and dishonorable to Religion: nor that will delude the
Opinion, or abuse the Faith and Expectation of men. And when this Consistency
with Religion and a good Conscience, is taken care for, but not before, it is
as wise and watchful to remove, or avoid all worldly Evil, as it can. It seeks
out the Subtility and Wisdom of the Serpent, when, according to our Lord's
Rule, it has first secured the innocence of the Dove. It first considers of the
Lawfulness, of the way it is about to take: and then is moved by the
Expedience, or Usefulness thereof; but never admits of the least thought, of
doing it self or others good, by the Breach of any Commandment.

But contrariwise, the Caution of the Crafty, or of the Wisdom of the Flesh, is
either all, or at least, in the first place, against Suffering; and none at
all, or only in the next place, against Sin. The Caution of this World, is for
the Ends, and things of this World. To save our worldly Interests, or serve our
fleshly Ease and Appetites; is that, which it would have first done. And that,
if it can, by ways of Innocence, Truth, and Openness; but yet so, as to take up
with unlawful means, with Arts of Falsehood, or things of ill Report, rather
than it should be left undone. And this, where it bears the most good will for
Religion; but too often the Caution of fleshly Wisdom or worldly Craft, is all
against Persecution, Loss, or Suffering; but none at all against Sin. So that
in any case, it only considers what is fit to be done for Interest in this
World. And if any means serve the Flesh, and be desirable upon that account; it
little troubles or concerns it self, whether it savor of Veracity or Deceit,
whether in the account of Conscience and Religion, it be good or bad.

Now this virtuous Simplicity, is an undisguised and invariable Tenor, of
Truth and Innocence. It excludes all doing hurt, and is especially opposite to
all the ways and Methods of Deceit. It speaks (...), and (...), as Orat. 19.
Tom. 1. p. 297. and p. 300.
Nazianzen marks of the (...), or Simplicity of his Father, i. e.
undisguisedness of Soul, and unfallaciousness of Manners or Conversation.
Whatever it seems, it is; and it never is, what will vex or harm others. It is
^eracity, without Lies; Singleness, without Double-dealings, or corrupt
Mixtures; Openness, without studied Concealment, and close Reserves, of what it
is called to profess; Plainness, without amusing or misleading Dress, of what
it professes; and Harmlesness, without doing any Wrong, or Hurt to others. Such
an uniform Veracity and Undeceitfulness, both of Mind and Carriage, is that
Simplicity, which Christian Prudence requires of us. And which God calls for,
when he bids us to throw out all Deceit, Mar. 7.22. to lay aside all Guile and
Hypocrisies, 1 Pet. 2.1. to be no Deceitful workers, 2 Cor. 1^.13. And declares
him only to be fit to stay in God's Tabernacle, and dwell in his holy Hill, who
speaks the Truth in his heart; or, whose words never go against the thoughts
and intents of his Heart, but always express and bear out what is there, Psalm.
15.1, 2.

1. The First thing implied in virtuous Simplicity, which Christian Prudence
injoyns, is Veracity, in opposition to Falsehood and Lies, (...) Hesychius
explains by (...)^ being sincere, by being true or veracious. Simplicity
bottoms all on Truth, which it never tempers or brews together, or daubs over
with Falsehood. He that is for Simplicity in Truth, must needs abhor Lies, never
speaking contrary to what he thinks, (which, sure, is not to speak the Truth in
his heart, as God requires;) nor giving in a False Testimony of Persons, or
Relation of things.

1. This will exclude all spontaneous use of False Speeches, when of themselves
men are ready to frame, or tell Lies, for Ends. Contrary to the Rule of
Spiritual Wisdom, which every where most plainly forbids Lying, and says, Lie
not one to another, Brethren, seeing ye have put off the Old man, Col. 3.9. and
tells us of the Lake of Fire, for those that love, and make Lies, Rev. 21.8, 27.

And also all speaking Lies, out of Fear or Compliance; when, for escaping
Rebuke, or soothing men, any Persons expressly assent to things against their
own Judgments, or say and unsay in different Companies. Thus, to the Deacons,
who, going about from house to house, were like to be under the Temptation to
say and unsay, or speak different things, as might best suit with different
Companies; St. Paul gives it as a particular Charge, not to be double-tongued,
1 Timothy 3.8. Not double-tongued, that is, says in loc.
Theophylact, (...) thinking one thing, and saying another, or saying (...),
one thing to one, and another thing to another. And to the Ephesians, that
putting away lying, they speak every man truth with his neighbor, as being
members one of another: forbidding Lies, not only in direct Assertions, but in
Soothing and Dissimulation; against those, as Grotius observes, who, to curry
Favor with Jews or Gentiles, were apt to speak contrary to what they thought,
Ephesians. 4.25.

It Is not for such virtuously simple Persons, to speak Lies in Officiousness,
or with intent to hurt none, but to do others a kindness. For ill is not to be
done, that good may come of it; and therefore to do others a kindness, they may
no more break this, than they may any other Precept. The Rule of Kindness to
our Neighbor, is to love him as our selves; but tell a Lie we dare not, for
the sake of our own Advantage, and so not for his. Nay, we must not tell a Lie,
in hopes to do good thereby to Religion, or for the sake of God himself. This
really was the Case of Job's Friends. They were forgers of lies against him,
Job 13.4. But all those were officious Lies, or out of their Officiousness, as
I before noted, to God himself. And yet Job's was a just Reproof against them,
Will ye speak wickedly for God, and deceitfully for him? v. 7.

Veracity, or speaking Truth, we must carefully practice, not only for its
Us^fulness, or doing Kindness, but for the Truth's sake. We must bear a
conscientious regard to it, as it bears the Image of God, wherein we were at
first formed, and whereto we are renewed in Christ. Put on the new man, says
the Apostle, which, after God, is created in true Holiness, or (...). Or, as in
some Readings, as Carcell. Lect. (...). In Holin^ss and Truth.
the holiness of Truth. Wherefore putting away lying, speak every man Truth,
etc. Ephesians. 4.24, 25. God is the God of Truth, and of Veracity or true speaking.
And the Devil, God's grand Enemy, is particularly noted, as the Father of Lies,
and a Spirit of Falsehood. And, as the Authors and Heads themselves are: so are
their Children distinguished by the same. They that love, and speak Truth; are
Children of the God of Truth; as they that love, and utter Lies, are Children
of the Father of Lies. For his Children they are, as our Savior told the Jews,
whose works and lusts they do. And he abode not in the Truth from the
beginning, because there is no Truth in him. When he speaks a Lie, he speaks it
of his own; for he is a Liar, and the Father of it, Joh. 8.39, 44. Veracity
then, or speaking Truth, is what we are bound to, not only as beneficial to our
Neighbors; but as resembling God, or bearing his Image, and being a Divine
Perfection. And accordingly, this is the injunction of the Scriptures, not to
lie one to another, whatever be the Pretense; to speak, as the Psalmist says,
that Truth which is in our heart, not that Falsehood which makes for our
Brother's convenience. To put away all guile, and hypocrisies; which admits not
of retaining any to serve turns, as St. Peter says, 1 Pet. 2.1.

Some, indeed, have fetched a Plea for Officious Lies, from the Case of the
Egyptian Midwives; or the Practice of David in his Distress, when he fled from
Saul; or other Scripture-instances. But the Practice of a Good Man, is no
Argument a thing is well done, if it be visibly against the Rule of Well-doing.
No, not tho it have encouragement from God; as in the Case of the Midwives,
whose houses God built, for their sparing the Israelitish infants. For in such
mixed Actions, a Gracious God is prone to reward the Good, which is predominant;
and overlook the ill, which is compassionably interwoven with it: as he did
with the Midwives, if they spoke falsely, recompensing their Charity, not their
officious Falseness. Not to dispute, whether what they said was really false or
no, as may be justly questioned in some instances usually alleged in this
case, particularly the Midwives Answer to Pharaoh.

2. But besides this Instance of Veracity, or not lying in Words: there is also
another Part of it, which Christian Simplicity takes care of too, and that is,
not to tell a Lie, or deceive in Actions.

There is a Signification in several Actions, as well as there is in Words and
Expressions. Some, it is true, are more arbitrary and unsettled in their
meanings, and may signify as men please. But others, are of more fixed and
stated Significations. I mean not only as Natural Signs and Indications, of our
Approbation, or Dislike, or other inward Sentiments. But there is also as good
Authority of Law, or Institution, or common and received Use and Custom, to
settle the Signification of some Actions, as there is for Words themselves. And
accordingly, in all reasonable Apprehension, men are as much understood, to
have professed or declared things by some Actions, and in all Courts shall
stand as firmly bound by them, as if they had uttered the same things with
their Mouths.

And being there is equally a settled Signification in Actions: there is also
room for our being true or false, for affirming or denying in them, as well as
there is in words themselves. Thus the Scripture mentions those, who deny God
in their works, Tit. 1.16. And if my mouth has kissed my hand (the known and
received Profession of Worship) to the Sun, or Moon, says Job, I should
therein have denied the God that is above. Yea, says he, it had been an
iniquity to be punished by the Judge: or as good a Declaration of his being an
Idolater, whereof the Judges then took Cognizance, as if he had professed so
with his Lips, Job 31.26.27, 28.

Thus they thought, and believed in the Primitive Church: teaching, that men
might confess or deny, with other Faculties, as well as with their Tongues; by
complying in Actions, as well as by verbal Declarations. If, In Mat. Hom. 25.
in c. 10. v. 32, 33. quicunque me confessus fuerit, etc. ap. Chrysostom.
says the Ancient and Learned Author of the Commentary on St. Matthew, whom,
for his Skill in expounding Scripture, Erasmus, in his Preface to the Reader,
Equals to St. Chrysostom himself. If any one, says he, shall say unto thee,
Thou shall not eat of things offered to the Idol, but only view and behold the
Idols, how beautiful they are. If thou look upon them on such a provocation,
thou have denied Christ with thine eyes. Not that it is any thing, to look on an
Idol; but herein is the Sin, to look on such an invitation. And if thou shall
refuse to look, by such Refusal thou confessest Christ. Therefore it is
written, Turn away thine eyes, lest they behold Vanity, Psalm. 118. But if he
shall say to thee, I ask not that thou should look upon the Idol; only listen
and give ear, how that Gentile blasphemes Christ, that he may glorify his own
Gods: if thou stand to hearken, with thine ears thou have denied Christ. If
he shall say to thee, I seek not to have thee hear Christ blasphemed: but lo!
how they are offering Incense to the Gods; only stand, and receive the Odor of
that Incense: if thou come near, and smellest it, by thy Smell thou have
offended Christ. Again, if he says to thee, Do not chew the flesh with thy
teeth, but only seem as if thou did, and feig^ thy self to eat of the
Sacrifice: if thou shall feign a Taste, tho thou do not taste it; by thy
Taste, thou have that way denied Christ. But if thou will not feign, thou have
therein confessed him: as Eleazar, who by eating flesh that was really of his
own provision, would not fallaciously make, as if he had eaten that of the
Sacrifice commanded by the King, 2 Macch. 6. If he shall say to thee, I would
not have thee feign thy self to eat of the Sacrifice, but only tou^h the Idol
with thine hand, or hold an (...) if thou touchest, or handlest it, by thy
touch thou have denied Christ; but if thou refusest, by thy Touch thou have
confessed him, as it is written, If there be any iniquity in my hands. For all
the Faculties and Members, either of thy Soul or Body, God has created, not
only with an Eye to thee for use, but also to himself for his own Glory.

And since men may thus affirm or deny in their Actions, as well as in their
Expressions; they may be alike true or false, show Veracity or Lying, in both.
We may do a Lie, as well as tell a Lie; and deceive by working, no less than by
speaking: as the Scripture Job 6.15. Isa. 24.16.
tells us, of working Deceit, Psalm. 101.7. and of Deceitful workers, 2 Cor.
11.13. calling those False Apostles. So, who, as in loc. Ed. Sav. p. 673.
Chrysostom notes, assuming only (...), the Person and outward appearance of
Truth, thus acting a Part, served the Purposes of Error, all their fair shows,
being only acting a Part to deceive men.

And as this is true of Facts, so likewise of Non-Facts or Omissions, in
things, which we are bound to do and profess. The not doing these, as I
formerly noted, when we are called to them, signifies our being ashamed of
them, or denying them; as the same would be signified by our Expression.
Confession of a Duty, may be by our Practice, as truly as by our Words; and
Denial thereof may be by the same. And therefore if we refuse to do it, when
God gives us a just Call thereto; in our visible Practice we disown, tho it may
be, at the same time, inwardly in our hearts, we joyfully embrace it.

Now Christian Simplicity, will not allow us to falsify any of these ways. As
we may not lie, concerning any of the Articles of Faith: So neither concerning
any of the Duties, or Laws of Practice. And as it is against the Duty, of
speaking the Truth in our heart, to speak against what we inwardly believe of
them, in Words: so likewise, to do against it, in Actions. Truth must be kept
in Doing, as well as in Speaking: the same Sincerity shown in the use of either
Sign; since both are of fixed, and instituted Signification.

Among significant Actions, there is more particularly a Signification in the
Observance of Days, which are known and plain Professions of what is aimed at
in such Observations. To observe a Day of Thanksgiving, for instance, for any
Event; is to profess that we are glad of that Event, and thankful to God for
it. To observe a Day of Fasting: if it be impetratory, or for obtaining
something future; is a Profession, that we are desirous of that future thing,
and would engage God to bring it about: Or, if it be chiefly penitentiary* and
for bewailing something past; that we are sorry for it, and seek to appease his
Wrath provoked thereby. Now, if men would deal with the Simplicity of
Christians in these Observances, unless in heart they are inwardly affected; as
the keeping of these Days testifies, and rejoice or desire, as such Observance
professes; they should not join, or go along in the keeping of them.

For the Signification of these, is most express. It is instituted and fixed
upon them, by Laws and Edicts. The same Authority, that calls men to meet
together at these times, appoints the Signification, and tells them the Reason
why. Here then is an instituted Signification in these Assemblies, that has
Authority and Law to stand upon. And whatever men inwardly intend, this is
externally professed, by their resorting to, and joining therein. And
accordingly, by such Resort, or Refusal of it; they are understood to testify
and declare their Concurrence, or standing off, from what is thereby signified
or professed, in the Account, both of their Rulers, and of all others. They
rate the Neglecters, not as profane or irreligious, but as disaffected
Persons. These Assemblies are a Test, not of Religion and Devotion, but of
Parties and Times. So Refusal speaks Dissent from the Signification appointed;
as assembling does Approbation and Concurrence therewith. And all People are
ready to say, such a Person is for the Design and Signification thereby carried
on, because he kept the Day, and met at the Assembly held thereupon:

Now the Authority of Laws or Edicts, and Custom or received Use, are among the
chief things, that fix and settle Significations. And since they fix such
Meanings in these Days and Assemblies: the Observance, or Refusal thereof in
us, are in the Nature of Professions, either as Affirmations or Denials. And,
according as they declare, either that Truth, which is in our Heart, or what is
contrary to it; our Profession thereby, is either true or false. If we meet at
the Assembly, which is to use the Sign, and, at the same time, have inwardly no
such Meaning: this is to signify and profess, what we do not mean; which is
not Sincerity, but Dissimulation. We profess to desire what is sought in the
Institution of the Day, by our outward Act, when in Heart we do not desire it;
or to be glad of an Event, when really, perhaps, we are sorry for it: which is
only to put on a false Person, and act a Part; to be an outside Complier, but
a real Hypocrite.

This Profession, by outward Observance of such Days and Assemblies, of what is
contrary, to our Heart and inward Sentiments;

1. Is contrary to the owning of Duties, which Go^ requires; or to the Part of
Confessors. If a thing is against any Rule of Religion, it is against Religion
to desire it. And if it is against Religion to desire a thing, it is a Duty of
Religion* not to desire it. And if it is our Duty not to desire it, we are
bound not to smother and conceal, but profess that Duty, when called thereto*
Now when an ill thing, or Breach of Duty, (...) upon us, our Confession is
testifying against the illness; either in Words, or in Practice, by ou^ Refusal
thereof. We betray the Cause of Dut^ in going along, which is to transgress it
in visible appearance, and seem to the World, as if we disbelieve, or have
thrown it off; but we assert it* by our refusing. Qui fallaces in excusatione
pra^stigias quaerit, negavit. He that seeks to bring himself off, by a
fallacious Slight or juggling Trick, and by seeming to comply with the
Persecutors when he di^ not, therein has denied Christ, say the Ap. Cypr. Ep.
30.
Clergy of the Church of Rome, speaking of the necessity of confessing him.
When the meaning of any Days or Assemblies therefore, is to profess desires, o^
affections, against any part of Duties, or Religion: if we could act like
carnal Complyers, we shall visibly Practice as others Do, and seem to desire
where we Do not. But if we would discharge the Part, both of Sincere
Christians, and of Right and Acceptable Confessors, we shall own the
unlawfulness of the thing, and give our Testimony against it, by openly
Refusing. We shall not pretend to Do, or make other men think we Do, what in
Conscience we dare not Do: but dare to Practice and Profess, what our Duty and
Conscience is.

2. It is judged insincere by our selves, in the like Observance of Days, or
Meetings on such Occasions. The Festival of Christmas, and Easter, for
instance, are appointed as Professions of Joy, for the Birth and Resurrection
of Christ. And would not the common Sense of Mankind say, he did greatly
Prevaricate, who would come to observe either of these, and yet did not believe
it? The Thirtieth of January, is a Profession of Shame and Sorrow, for the
Murder of our late Martyred Sovereign. And should we not call it Hypocrisy,
for any person to appear there, who did not in Heart condemn, but justify that
Murder, and think it well done? The Fifth of November, is a Profession of
Gladness, for the Discovery of the Powder Treason. And would not he dissemble
notably, in appearing at that Days Assembly, who is inwardly sorry for the
Miscarriage of it, and heartily wishes that Plot had gone on? Take it in any
Case then, where we have no Temptation to mislead, or particular Concern to
bias us: and this Compliance in outward Observance, where the Signification is
contrary to our inward Sentiments, is Dissimulation and Hypocrisy, our selves
being Judges. And how can we hope to clear our Sincerity and Simplicity
therein, before any just and indifferent Judge, when, mak^ us but once
indifferent, and no longer Parties, and we are all ready to condemn the
Falsenes^ of it our selves.

3. It was so judged and esteemed, in the Primi^tive Church; as appears by
their Dealing with the Observers of Jewish or Gentile Fasts, or Festivals*
Those Days, were of fixed and received Signifi^cations. And the Observance of
those Times* was a known Profession, of what was signifie^ by them. And
therefore when any Christian* who had nothing of the Jewish or Gentile
Ap^prehensions, did externally join, as several did* in their Observation; they
could only publi^^ their own Hypocrisy therein. The only way they had, to
bring themselves off from being A^postates, was to say they still retained
their own Faith; and, tho they might use the Jewish (...) Gentile Sign,
together with them, yet, they ha^ nothing of their meaning and intention. Which
is no better, than to say in other words, that whilst they believed one thing,
they professed a^nother. And accordingly, such Persons were censured, for their
scandalous and dissembling Compliances, by the Can. 70. and Can. 71.
Apostolical Canons; as they were also, by the Council of Can. 37, 38, 39.
Laodicea afterward.

For further Proof hereof, and also to set off by more Instances, this part of
Simplicity, of (...) Deceiving by Actions; I observe that,

4. It was rejected, as Deceitful and Dishonest Carriage, by the Pious and Good
People among the Jews. When old Eleazar was required, on Pain of Death, to eat
of unlawful Meats: his old Acquaintance, that had the Charge of that wicked
Feast, took him aside, and besought him, to bring Flesh of his own Provision,
such as was lawful for him to use; and make, as if he did eat of the Flesh,
taken from the Sacrifice commanded by the King. But what says the Good Old Man,
to this Deceitful way of Escaping, or seeming to do in outward show and
Pretense, what he durst not, and would not do, in Reality and Truth? It
^^cometh not our Age, says he, in any wise to disse^ble, whereby many young
persons might think, that Eleazar, being fourscore years old and ten, were n^w
gone to a strange Religion. And so they, through mine hypocrisy, and desire to
live a little time, should be deceived by me. Whereby, tho for the Present, I
should get a little Respite with Men: yet should I not escape the Hand of the
Almighty, neither alive nor dead, 2 Macch. 6.21, 22, 24, 25, 26. And of the
same Judgment, were the Fathers in the Council. Ancyr. Can. 7. and zo^. in Can.
Council of Ancyra, held before the first Council of Nice, who in the seventh
Canon, punish those, that go to the Heathen Idolatrous Feasts, in the usual and
appointed Places; thinking to clear themselves, by carrying along with them
their own Food, and ther^ eating thereof only, not of the other which is
polluted.

5. It was condemned so in like Cases, in the holy Scriptures. To withdraw from
the Tables of Heathens, was a thing of settled and received Signification among
the Jews; professing their Abh^rrence, or Belief of the Unlawfulness of such
Intercourse. Now, S. Peter had no such Belief, knowing that in Christianity,
God had made Jews and Gentiles both one: and therefore, when Jews were away, as
at Antioch, he could go in to Gentiles, and eat with them. Before certain
zealous Jews of Jerusalem, came from James, says S. Paul, he did eat with the
Gentiles, Gal. 2.12. But when the Jews were come, he, that had not their
Apprehension or Sentiments, would join in this external Profession thereof; and
withdrew himself, as they did, in Compliance, and for fear of offending them.
When they were come, he withdrew, and separated himself, as the Jews did,
Fearing them which were of the Circumcision. Here was an usage of the Sign of
Abhorrence, together with, and before them. But by one, that did not abhor a
Gentile Table, as this withdrawing signified, in common Jewish Construction,
and in the Opinion of those that withdrew with him. And what now, says S. Paul,
to this Action? He Declares, That he was to be blamed for it, Verse. 11* that it
was not upright walking, Verse. 14. that it was Dissimulation, the other Jews,
says he, dissembled with him; yea, Barnabas also was carried away with their
Dissimulation, Verse. 13.

The Feasting on Sacrifices in Gentile Temples, was of received and settled
Signification in those Days, and externally Professed the Worship of those
Idols. But when Refusal grew dangerous, several, whose heart did not go along
in the Worship, yet complied, for worldly Safety, in this outward Profession,
and met at the Feast. These Persons, in their Minds, thought C. 8. v. 4. A^.
10.19.
an Idol nothing: and when they came to Feast in the Idols-Temple, their Heart
was only to Feast, not to Worship; so they were not Worshipers in Heart and
Intention. But yet, joining in this known Profession of Worship, they would be
judged by their visible Professions, not invisible Intentions, and Condemned as
Worshipers. For they that are present, and join in these Feasts, says the
Apostle, have Fellowship with Idols, 1 Cor. 10.20, 21.

6. And Lastly, These False Appearances, and Deceitful Seeming to Do like
others in an ill thing, when in a Dangerous Time, that seems necessary to save
our Selves; was particularly Declared against, in the Condemnation of the
Libellatici. Against whose insincere Arts, the Good Fathers, and Holy Bishops,
showed so much honest Zeal and Christian Simplicity, at Rome, Carthage, and
other Places, in the Primitive Times.

What the Persecutors required of the Poor Christians, was to Curse Christ, and
Sacrifice to Idols. This, tho they could not bring themselves to do in Reality;
yet several, that were over-timorous, fell to make appearance, as if they had
done it, when in truth they had not, by Deceitful Shifts and Artifices. That
passing commonly for such as had sacrificed; they might, if Prisoners, get a
present Release, and stop the vulgar from informing against them, and bringing
them into further Troubles. And this was, Ep. Cleri Romans ap. Cyp. Ep 30.
per nefarios Libellos, by Libels, Certificates, or Tickets, Granted by the
Magistrate for that Purpose.

Some, tho they would not go and sacrifice openly, and in sight of the
Heathens; would subscribe a Profession, that they were Worshipers of Mars,
Jupiter, or other Heathen Deities; and offer, or send it themselves to the
Magistrate, thereby to obtain his Discharge. And these, -Quo non minus, quam si
ad nefarias aras accessissent* hoc ipso quod ipsum contestati fuerant,
tenerentur, ap. Cyp. Ep. 30. Ed. Ox.
say the Clergy of Rome, in their Epistle to S. Cyprian, a^^ as Guilty, and to
be censured as severely, as if they had indeed gone to the wicked Altars;
because, tho falsely, they professed and testified, that they did go thither.

Others, a little more tender, would not begin these Libels, and Promote them
themselves: but yet they would be willing to accept the Benefit thereof, if
sent in to them, either by the Favor of the Magistrate, or Procurement of their
Friends. And these also they condemn, having writ, as they Ibid.
tell Cyprian, against those also, that accepta fecissent, that is, as Annot.
in loc.
Rigaltius notes, had accepted of such false Libels, when sent in to them. By
which acceptance, adds he, they did ratify what was contained therein. Which
was, that on such a Day, such an one went into the Capitol, and burnt incense
to Jupiter.

Some of these, were concerned so far, as to give order for Procuring these
Certificates and Discharges: sending in sometimes, a Gentile Friend, or
Servant, to Sacrifice, and ejure Christ in their Place. Which being accepted,
by an indulgent, or corrupted Magistrate; they got a Certificate, or Libel,
from him in the others Name, to protect him against Informers, or if in
Custody, to procure his Release. But concerning these, Non est immunis a
scelere, qui ut fieret imperavit. ib.
he is not free from the Guilt, say they, that ordered the evil thing to be
committed. Licet Praesentes cum fierent non affuissent, cum praesentiam suam
utique ut sic scriberetur mandando fecissent. Ib. Ep. 30.
Tho he was not present in person, when his Friend subscribed for him; yet was
his ordering that Subscription, tantamount to his Presence at it. When the
other did it for him, says -- Fecisse se dixit, quicquid alius faciendo
commisit -- Et illa Professio Denegantis; Constellatio Christiani, quod fuerat,
abnuentis. Cyp. de Lapsis, p. 133. Ed. Ox.
S. Cyprian, he did therein Profess to Do it himself. That Libel is a
Profession of a Denyer; it is a Christians Testimony, that he renounces his
Christianity.

Others stuck at this Procurement. But yet, if either the forwardness of a
Friend, by Sacrificing for them, as I have hinted; or the Favor of a Feed and
Corrupted Magistrate, would procure them such a Libel and Certificate, without
their knowledge, or intermedling in it; they would Consent to take the Benefit
thereof, and to have it publicly read, and pleaded for their Discharge in
Court. But to these, says the forecited Epistle, N^c est alienus a Crimin^,
cujus Consensu, licet non a ^e admissum Crimen, tamen public legitur. ap. Cyp.
Ep. 30.
Neither is he free from the Crime, tho himself did not commit it, if he
Consent for his own Benefit, to have it pleaded in his Name, and Publicly read
in Court.

Thus early, did the Christians Fears and Necessities, put them upon feigned
Shows, and insincere Compliances, with ill things; making a false Show of
Doing, what really they neither did, nor durst do. And thus were their
hypocritical Appearances, and ungodly Evasions, rebuked and censured by the
holy Zeal, and downright Honesty and Simplicity, of the Primitive Fathers. To
appear to the World, as obeying an unlawful Edict, was equally scandalous to
Religion in the Eyes of Men, as if really they had been obedient to it. And
therefore they rated such external Seemers and Appearers, as Real Observers.
Qui vult videri propositis adversus Evangelium, vel Edictis* (...) Legibus
satisfeciss^, hoc ipso jam paruit, quod videri paruisse se voluit. ib.
He that would seem, say they, to have satisfied any Edict, that injoyns a
thing against Religion; in that very thing pays Obedience to it, that he
studies to be thought obedient. When called to own a Truth, by openly Refusing
what we hold a Sin to Practice: Ibid.
Qui fallaces in excusatione praestigias quaerit, negavit: He that seeks to
make the Imposer believe he does what is required, and falls to fallacious
Tricks, and cozening Compliances in Excuse, Denies his Duty, as if he had Done
what he required him, was their Judgment, as I noted before. And this must hold
alike, in all Duties. For if any thing is a real Wickedness; greater, or less,
alters the Case betwixt it and any other, only as to Degrees. But, if such
False Seemings, are really partaking in ill and hypocritical Shows, as appears
from the preceding Instances; we may no more Partake, or act an hypocritical
Part, in a less, than we may in a greater Wickedness.

By all which, I think it sufficiently appears, that all we can expect, in such
external Observances of Significant Days, or other things, is to pass for
Hypocrites and Dissemblers with God and men, if we say we do not mean what such
Meeting does, and as we thereby profess. Or, to be taken to Do the thing, which
we in heart Condemn, from our having Done that, which is the outward Profession
of it. We Do in Moral Estimate, what we Do visibly, and what we would be
thought to Do. So that how little soever the Heart goes along therewith; if we
appear among the Practisers of an ill thing, and Do as they, who are for it in
outward Profession and Observance; we shall be censured among them, and being
found in their way, must expect to share in their Condemnation.

I know it is said by some, when they do not answer the Signification of these
Assemblies, that they join only at the innocent Parts of the Service there
Performed, and pass over what comports not with their Consciences. Which
Palliation, and Excuse, for what is wrong; makes many innocent and well meaning
Minds, who would Neglect no opportunity of serving God, to resort thither, for
the sake of all that is Good and Right in the Service, on such Occasions. But
they consider not, that the things they are afraid to promote, or join in, are
Signified and Declared, by the very Meeting; and not only by some particular
Prayers, which are put up there. And in coming to such an Assembly, they
profess to have what it means, by their Appearance, as well as by some Passages
in the Prayers. The Edict that calls them thither, fixes a Signification, and
tells them for what purpose. And their coming upon that Summons, is a
Profession of setting on that Purpose. Thus it would be thought in any Case,
where Men are invited and called in by their Friends, to seek a Blessing from
God, on some Conspiracies, or hazardous Undertakings. Tho then, there would be
some good Confessions of Sin, and other ordinary Devotions, to fit them for
more Prevalence, and to accompany those Prayers which are more special for the
Design^ yet must all, who appear there on such an in^^mation, expect to be
judged, both by God an^ men, as Parties with them therein. And thus 'ti^, as I
have observed, in all the foregoing Instances: there is a Signification and
Profession, in the very Act or Observance it self.

And this, I think, makes the Case of joining in these Assemblies, Different,
as to this Point, viz. of professing contrary to our Sentiments; from that of
our joining in the Daily Service of the Church, tho that happen to have some
Passages which we cannot in Conscience join with, if those Passages are
otherwise tolerable, on account of their Unlawfulness. For the intent, and
signification of our Meeting in the daily Devotions, is not to profess a
determinate Approbation and Concurrence in these scrupled Passages; but for
Devotion at large^ We come to them, to do God Honor and Service, and to seek
Supplies for all our own, and others Necessities. So that our Presence there,
is to concur in the Religion of the Day, or Devotion in the just Latitude
thereof. And it cannot be gathered, merely from our being there, or Presence
alone, that we are for these scrupled Passages; since, were we against them, we
might still be there for so many other Purposes: but from some other external
sign, or saying Amen to them still as they come.

(...) as for these other Assemblies, the thing (...) is signified, not only by
some particula^ ^^ssages in the Form, but by the whole Meeting. And
accordingly, our Concurrence therein is professed, not only by our saying Amen
at such Passages, but by our Appearance at the Meeting. The Day it self is
instituted for that D^sign: it is the next or ultimate End of all that is then
done, which, first or last, is for speeding, and carrying of it on.

Indeed, it highly concerns men, to look to the Matter and End of their
Prayers; that they be for good things, and to set on none, but good Designs. To
pray for ill ones, is to make our selves Parties to them, and to partake in
Guilt and Punishment, with the Actors themselves. If any come, that brings not
this Doctrine, bid him not God speed, says St. John; for he that bids him
God speed, is partaker of his evil deeds, 2 John 10.11. Where we cannot with a
safe Conscience assist, we cannot pray; for Success is more from Providence,
than from humane Means; and therefore Prayers are among the highest and most
valuable Assistances. To lend Prayers to ill things, is not only to assist and
partake in the ill; but to profane and pollute those most Sacred things, our
Prayers themselves, and turn them into the rankest abominations. For any ill,
or forbidden thing, is never so abominable to God and all good men, as when it
is not only against God, but offered to him. When it creeps into our very
Prayers, and stains and pollutes them, which should be pure, as the God they
are offered to, and purge away all our other Pollutions. Which is, as much as
in us lies, not only to disobey and provoke, but to rifle God's own Holiness,
to tempt him to our Sins, to try if we can make him a Party to our Wickedness,
and draw him in to be as deep in any unjust, ungodly, or otherwise forbidden
thing, as our selves; than which it is not easy to conceive, what can be a
greater Abomination. Prayers, are among the plainest and greatest Expressions
of Piety, when put up for good things; but, when pressed to procure, or speed
on ill ones, they become themselves a grand Impiety, the vilest Prostitution of
the most Sacred things, and so many horrible Prophanations.

But the Effect of all this, must only be to make men consider well, the
lawfulness of the things, or ends, they set on by their Prayers, their
Fastings, or Thanksgivings. If they are appointed only for what is good, they
are an excellent means of Success, as well as Ministry of Religion. But if in
any Case, men see they are pressed to ill purposes; there they must not pretend
to comply with, or meet at them. The very Meeting, for what they cannot pray,
or assist in, is but in the Presence, and House of God, to mock both him and
their Brethren; and shows not so much of Devotion, as of sinful Fear,
Hypocrisy, or Dissimulation.

Thus, is it the Care of true Christian Simplicity, not to decieve, or tell a
Lie in Actions, more than by False Speeches and Expressions. It will neither
falsify in Words, nor Practice. It is not for declaring and professing that in
Deeds, which we never think of in our Hearts: being equally against that,
whether it be Word or Action, which is equally deluding. Deceit is the thing,
which it seeks to shun: as St. Paul intimates, when he opposes, speaking the
Word of God, as of Sincerity; to Corrupting, or, as it is in the Margin, Dealing
with it deceitfully, 2 Cor. 2.17. And, as S. Hom. 3. in 2 Ep. ad Cor. p. 557.
Ed. Savil.
Chrysostom notes, when he explains, not in worldly Wisdom, that is there
opposed to Simplicity and godly Sincerity, by (...), i. e. not deceitfully.
Chrysostom. in 2 Cor. 1.12. And Deceit, may be brought about as effectually by
Carriage, as by Words and Expressions, which therefore Simplicity takes care to
prevent in both.

I add, lastly, upon this Point, as it will not stoop, either by Word or Deed,
to utter Lies it self: So, neither will it make use of others Falsehoods, or
have the like done by them, for its Advantage. Under the sharp Trials, and
pressing Necessities of the Primitive Persecutions, the Libellatici had got a
Trick, as I observed, by bribing and corrupting the Officers of Courts, to buy
Certificates, of their having done Sacrifice to Idols, when, in truth, they had
not. This was a very false and wicked Artifice, against the Practice of Truth,
and the Spirit of Confessors, showing too little care of the Honor of God, and
Religion, or of their Brethrens Souls, and too much of their own Dangers. And
accordingly, as I have shown, fell under the just Censures of the Church, in
the Primitive Times.

CHAP. VI.
SECT. II. Of Christian Simplicity and Sincerity.
2. A Second thing, implied in that Christi^^ Simplicity, which Spiritual
Prudence injoyns, is Singleness, without double Dealings. This is one thing,
which the Scripture notes by Simplicity. Servants, says St. Paul, obey in all
things your Masters in the flesh; not with Eye-service, a men-pleasers; but
(...), in Simplicity of heart* i. e. as our Translation renders it, in
singleness of heart; not having one heart or mind to you^ work, whilst their
eye is over you, and another when it is off you, Col. 3.22. And accordingly,
Craftiness or worldly Wisdom, which is opposite to Simplicity, and made so by
St. Paul, 2 Cor. 1.12. is sometimes set off by Duplicity. Haec eadem
Duplicitas, this same Duplicity, says St. Exp^s. Mor. l. 10. c. 16. in cap. 12.
Job.
Gregory the Great, speaking of the Wisdom of this World, which he makes the
opposite to the Simplicity of the Just, Job 12.4. And non versantes in astutia^
not walking in Craftiness, 2 Cor. 4.2. St. In loc. Homil. 8. in 2 Cor. p. 593.
Ed. Savil.
Chrysostom explains by (...), i. e. being free from all Duplicity, and really
being such as we seem to be.

Truth is but one, and always the same; but Falsehood is various and multiform.
And as there is this Singleness in Truth it self: so should there always be, in
the exhibitions or appearances, which we make thereof. Our inward thoughts, and
outward appearance, betwixt which Moral Truth lies, must bear its Picture and
Character, (...) having but one stamp, or being all of a piece. and this,
Simplicity secures; preventing any ^iscrepancy between our Minds and
Expressions, (...) our having two Faces, more than Truth it self (...). It
allows us not to have one thing in our ^wn Breasts, and to make show of another
to ^ur Neighbor. To give out this for true at one ^ime; and, as that happens
to serve our Turn, (...) contrary to be as true at another. This is ^ot to be
the same man within and without; it is ^ot to be one and the same to morrow,
which it was to day; but is the sustaining of a twofold Person. Whereas
Singleness excludes all Duplicity; it can be but one. And accordingly
Simplicity, which lies in maintenance of such Singleness, must be and show but
one thing, and always say and seem the same. In the Question of true or false,
good or evil, it must not be va^ious, according to difference of times and
places; and Favor or Dislike, Desire or Fear, help or obstruct the same thing,
as a Truth or ^rrour, Vice or Virtue, as it differently serves, ^r hinders our
Convenience. This is not to show Simplicity to be and appear one, and always
the same, or of a single heart. But is plain^y to act a double Part; yea,
perhaps, innumerable Parts, such a man being like to change his Part, as often as
there is occasion for it.

This Singleness is much the same with Unmix^dness or Purity, which is another
thing the Scripture means by Simplicity. Thus St. Paul warning the Corinthians
against the false Apostles, expresses his Fear, lest by them their minds should
be corrupted from the Simplicity that is in Christ, 2 Co^^ 11.3. The Corruption
endeavored by the fals^ Apostles, was the bringing into Christianity F^^reign
Tenets, some Philosophical and Heathenis^ some Jewish Opinions. And so, to
preserve (...) Simplicity that is in Christ, against this; is to pre^serve the
Purity and Unmixedness of the G^^nuine Christian Doctrines. And this the
Apo^stle did, that having espoused them to him, as (...) Husband, he might be
able to present them a chaste Virgin to Christ, v. 2. He had espoused the^ to
him, to learn of him alone, as their sole M^^ster. And this Espousal, as a
chaste Bride, the^ would keep inviolate, in admitting of no opp^^site Doctrines
from a Foreign hand, or going (...) learn of any other. Thus also, when he bids
(...) that gives, to do it with Simplicity, i. e. with pur^ and unmixt
intention, merely for Charity, (...) for Self Ends or Vainglory, Romans 12.8.
(...) aliorum captans Gloriam, sed ejus qui indiget (...) subveniens. Not doing
it to win Glory, but to reliev^ his poor Brothers necessity, as in loc.
Theodoret comment^ Thus also is that of our Savior, If thine eye (...) single
or simple, (...), thy whole body shall be full (...) light: by the singleness
of the Eye, which guide and directs us, noting the Purity of Conscienc^ and
Intentions, not mixed or corrupted by im^pure Affections, Mat. 6.22. Luke
11.34. An^ St. Peter's (...).
sincere milk of the Word, is the sam^ unadulterate, or not having any thing
else mix^ with it, 1 Pet. 2.2. Agreeable to this, is St. B^^sil's Explication,
who to the Question, What (...) sincere? Answers, (...) Basil. in Reg. Brev.
Interrog. 264. p. 716.
I account that to be sincere which is unmixt, and perfectly purified from all
that is contrary to it. And that of Guidas, (...), or (...).
sincere, is that which is pure, and unmixt with any other. And Theophylact,
who on Phil. 1.10. expounds, that ye may be sincere Theoph. p. 581.
, by (...), etc. or, that ye may receive no spurious Tenet under the pretext of
Charity.

And this also is another Part of Simplicity, to be pure from all Adulteration,
or mixture of the contrary. It Is an expression of the singleness thereof, not
to have one end in Truth, but another in Appearance; and not to pretend much
concern in a thing to serve others, when really it is most to gratify and
serve our selves. And so it is too, to preserve our Thoughts and Affections
clean, and not to suffer them to be undermined, or corrupted, by their
Contraries. Not to have our Love of God, for instance, adulterated by the
intermixture of worldly Love, which, in any Competition, will secretly draw us
from his Service for this World's sake. Nor our Fear of him, twisted with our
Fear of men; or our Love of our Neighbor, with Love of our selves, and seeking
thereby our own Self Ends; or, our Designs of good Actions, with Designs of
Vanity and Applause; or our Pursuits of Public Good, with the Pursuit of
Private Passions; or our Pretenses for Religion, with intentions for our
selves. Under this mixture, of such opposite Passions and Intentions, we are
not single, and all of a Piece. And which is worse, that fair side, which is
uppermost, and openly given out, is weakest: and the contrary, which is mingled
therewith, and lurks under it, when it comes to the Trial, is like to prevail
over it. This is ha^ving, as one thing which appears, so another which appears
not: and so, not being single (...) what it shows, but divided or twofold.

Now, as for this Singleness, or Unmixednes^ of Simplicity, it excludes our
being of a doubl^ Heart or Mind, of a double Tongue, or of a doubl^ Practice.

1. First, It excludes our being of a double Mind, or Heart.

It allows not of a double Mind, or of a Duplicity of Thought, or Intention. We
must not profess (...) seem, for instance, to think what we do no^ think; or to
believe a thing, whilst we see no Reason to believe it, or much Cause to
believe otherwise; or not to see what is made plain to us, because it makes
against us; or to be ignorant of what we very well know, because w^ have no
mind to acquit our selves, or act according to our Knowledge. We must not put
(...) an appearance of Conscience for, or against any way, when it has no hold
upon our Consciences, and our Zeal, either for or against it, is no^ really on
account of Conscience, but of (...) and mere humane Affections; or pretend we
scruple a disgustful thing, only when we have no mind to do it; or are
satisfied in Conscience of a profitable or pleasing one, tho we cannot act it
without Regret, and till frequent, curbing has made it silent, without our
Conscience flying in our Faces. We must not give out Intentions, of what we
never design; or pretend one thing, whilst we intend another; seem to be acted
by Z^al for God, or Religion, when it is all, (...) most, for sensual Passion,
or Secular Design; (...) for the Public, when it is for some private End; or
for the Love of Goodness, when it is for the sake of Vanity, or the Love of
Applause; or for Fear of God, when it is only for fear of suf^^ring; or to serve
our Neighbor, when it is on^y to serve our selves of him. These, and such
(...), are not to preserve a Simplicity, or Singleness, of Thoughts and
Intentions; but to have them of two sorts, one within, and another without us.
To be (...), or of two Souls, as St. James ^^eaks, Jam. 1.8. who calls upon
such Double-minded, to purify their hearts, or to change those corrupt
Mixtures, for purity and singleness of Thoughts and Intentions, Chapter 4.8. And is
contrary to that Purity of Intention, our Savior and St. Paul require, when
they enjoin us, to have (...) Eye or Intention single, and to give with
Simplicity, i. e. a Design, not of Vainglory, but of Charity, as I noted
before.

Yea, it forbids, as being thus of two Forms, or double in our Thoughts and
Intentions of any thing, at the same time: So, of appearing double and divided,
in our Thoughts and Intentions, about true or false, good and evil, if taken at
different times. For Truth and Virtue, are unchangeable things, and the same at
all times. What they are to day, they will be to morrow, and every day; and not
chop and change, as our Humor, Interest, or Convenience does.

To preserve this Singleness then, we must add Constancy to Truth, and be the
same for it, at all times and places. Woe be to the Sinner, says the Son of
Sirach, threatening the impatient and unbelieving Temporizers, that go two ways,
Ecclus^ 2.12. If we see a thing to be true, when (...) makes for us; we must
see it as true, when (...) comes to make against us. If it is matter of
Conscience, when it advances; it must be matter o^ Conscience still, when it
afflicts or depresses us* If it was not plain, whilst we lost by it; it mu^^
not presently become plain, when we are to profit by it: if it were not to be
seen, whilst it served others; it must not be more manifest, and discernable to
our sight, when it comes to serve our selves. If it be our Intention to serve
God; we must intend to serve him, when we are called to suffer for him, as well
as when to reign by him. If to stick to the Rules of an holy Religion, and to
be the Lovers and Followers of any Virtue; then, when it is a losing, and
persecuted, as well as when it is a getting Virtue* when it is vulgarly decryed,
as well as when it i^ applauded and cried up. If to be just and charitable to
our Brethren: then, when we have, (...) well as when we want the opportunity,
of showing forth our Justice and Charity; when thereby we only serve them, as
well as when we serve our own Ends by serving theirs; when the Worl^ knows not,
as well as when it knows what we do, and when it can only serve the Purposes
(...) Cha^ity and Justice, as well as when, together with them, it serves also
the End of Credit and Popular Applause.

This Constancy, in the same true Thoughts, and good Purposes, is necessary to
maintain and keep up this Singleness of our Minds, not only at some one, but at
different times, and under the several Changes and Turns of worldly Temptation
and Convenience. Without this, when our mind is single at any time, and in the
right, it would not be stable and steadfast therein; but on any Change, of
Humor, or Advantage, put on a different Form, and appear quite another thing.
Which is to have two Minds, or two Consciences, Beliefs, and Intentions; suited
to two different times. And this Inconstancy and Instability, St. James
particularly taxes in the (...), or Double Souled Persons. A Double minded man,
says he, is unstable in all his ways, Jam. 1.8.

Again, this Singleness allows not, as of a Double mind, against Duplicity of
Thought and Intention: So neither of a Double heart, against Duplicity of Will
and Affection. It never seems to be pleased, with what is displeasing to it; or
to have a good Will to a thing, when it bears an ill Will against it; or to go
willingly and by Choice in a Business, where it goes against its Will, and
merely in Submission. It does not appear to love what it really hates; or to
admire what inwardly it slights and contemns: to be thankful or glad of that,
which truly gives it sorrow, and is a trouble to it; or to be sorry, and
afflict it self for a thing, when really it rejoices at it: to desire, or pray
for any Event, when its Heart is averse thereto, and flies from it; or to hope
for any issue, which within it self it fears; or to fear any, which in very
deed it covets. It is no Part or Proof of this Singleness, to pretend we have
given up our Wills to God's, when we will not rest under his Will in any
unpleasing Case, but make our own Wills take place of his; or our Heart to God
and Religion, when it is not so much to him, as to this World, nor is tied so
fast to the Duties of Religion, as to the worldly Conveniences and Advantages
about Religion. Or to pretend, that we love God above this World, when our
Hearts are ready to sin against God, to save the things of this World; or that
our chief Care and Concern, is for the Joys of Heaven, when we are ready to go
out of any way that leads thither, to keep what we have here on Earth; or that
our Heart is in the first place to keep Innocence, when it will choose rather to
sin than suffer, and is not so much for keeping innocent, as keeping safe. And
these, and such like, show not a single, but a double Heart. One, in Pretense
and Appearance, and another in Reality and Truth; one, that is for God and a
good thing, and another that can be as much against them: which are quite
opposite to Simplicity, and Singleness of Heart.

Or, if our Heart is truly affected to good and ill, as it shows, and but one
way at once; yet would it be a double Heart still, if it is not constant in
these Affections whilst there is the same Cause, but double and divided, now
one way, and anon another, if taken at different times. As it is, when we love
any virtuous ways or things, whilst they serve our Turn, and grow averse to
them, as soon as that Turn is served: set much by them, whilst they suit our
Ends, but are set as much against them, when once they begin to oppose them. In
a word, seem pleased or offended, love or hate, hope or fear, slight or admire,
desire or turn away from the same things; being now all for them, and then all
against them, according as they suit our uncertain Turns, or Interests. When we
do thus by any Truths, or Virtues, we have not one single Affection, for the
ways we would be thought to approve; but are sometimes on, and sometimes off.
Our Hearts are not at unity with themselves, nor true and constant to their own
Motions: So that no hold is to be taken of us, and men know not where they will
have, and where they will miss of our Hearts. And this is not to show
Simplicity, but Double heartedness. An Heart, as to love, so to hate the same
thing, at different times: that goes not all one way, but on different Turns,
not of the things, but of our own Convenience and Affairs, is contrarily
affected toward them. An Heart in show, that is set on the Goodness, or Truth,
of the things themselves; but in Reality, on our own Interests, under that
Cover, and serving of our selves by them. Which plainly is harboring of a
Double Heart: and betrays us unavoidably into the going two ways, threatened by
the Son of Sirach; and into that instability, which St. James condemns in the
Double-minded. Like as also the Scripture says of the men of Zebulun, who came
over to David without any hankering after, or Reserves for the House of Saul:
that they were not of a double heart, 1 Chronicles. 12.33. Or, as it is expressed v.
38. that they came to him to Hebron, with a perfect heart. And this Duplicity,
or Division of Heart in any Duties, is opposite to that Integrity of heart,
which God requires in his Service. Telling us, that in the way of his
Commandments, we must love and serve him with all our heart, Deuteronomy. 10.12. Mar.
12.30. and walk before him with a perfect heart, 1 King. 8.61. Isa. 38.3.

2. Secondly, This Singleness of Simplicity, excludes our being of a double
Tongue, against Duplicity of Talk and Expression. Neither at any time used we
flattering words, courting your Favor by speaking pleasing things, more
agreeable to your Humor, or Necessities, than to our own Sentiments, says St.
Paul, setting off his own Simplicity and sincere Dealing among the
Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians 2.5. It is not for speaking one thing to a man's Face,
and another behind his back; for talking one way in public, and the quite
contrary in private, or among those who are of the same Judgment; for talking
still as the Company does, owning all as right, and assenting to quite contrary
Discourses, as it falls in Company contrarily affected in the matters
discoursed of. It does not speak differently of the same things, only as that
differently happens best to suit our Purposes, as if there were nothing in the
celebrated Names, of true and false, good and ill; but our Convenience. It does
not commend a thing, for instance, when we are about to sell, and disparage it
when we come to buy it; or cry up a thing as a Virtue, when it serves our
selves, and condemn it as a Vice, when it serves others; or give out the same
thing, as mere Necessity, if done by us when we are over others, which we
accused as malicious infringement and intolerable Usurpation, when others did
it whilst over us. It will not magnify Moderation, when we are down, and stand
in need thereof; and speak against it as loathsome Lukewarmness, or Treacherous
Neutrality, when we get up, and are in Place to show it. Nor condemn justly all
Bloody, Persecuting, Injurious, and Despoiling Zeal in Papists; and yet not
condemn, but justify our selves, when we feel our Spirits fermenting with the
same Bitterness.

This, and such like, is to have two Tongues: one in our own Case, and another
in our Neighbors. One, behind a man's back, and another before his Face. One,
in this Company, and another in that, as may best please each. Which is the
Double Tongue, against which, as I noted, St. Paul cautions the Deacons: who,
especially if of complying Natures, would be in danger to say one thing to one,
and another thing to another, to please the different Affections of those they
talked withal, when employed, as they often were, to go from house to house, 1 Timothy 3.8. And is also the flattering Lip in the Psalmist, which, saying that to
ones Face which the heart never thinks, and which it would be ready to gainsay
in the next convenient place, he calls speaking with a double heart, Psalm.
12.2. It is to have one Tongue to the World, for Fear, to avoid Persecutions,
as the Gnostics had; and another in Truth, and privately toward God, or where
they might profess their Sentiments in Religion, without hazard. Which double
Dealing of theirs, St. James may not unlikely refer to, when he says, A double
minded man is unstable in all his ways, Jam. 1.8.

To this of a Double Tongue, I shall also refer, as speaking thus differently
in different Speeches; so likewise all Double meaning, or speaking Doubtfully
and Deceitfully, in the same Speech. Such are, all speaking with Mental
Reservations, when we only utter part of our Meaning in words, and secretly
Reserve the other part still unuttered in our Minds: which part of the Speech
reserved in our Minds, if added to what is expressed in words, would make it
quite a different thing, to what it sounds. And use of Aequivocations, which
design to delude by a Double sense of some words: or of Ambiguities, i. e. like
Double meaning, by the doubtful and uncertain Construction of whole Sentences,
which, without any violence to Rules of Grammar, may be expounded quite
different ways. And, lastly, all Craftiness, and ways of Trepaning in
Discourses; either by talking in the Clouds, and casting a Mist of words, to
make a thing unintelligibly obscure and dark, when we are afraid lest another
should see and understand it. Or, by contrived Circumlocution and Round of
Words, laying Trains by degrees, to draw those we talk withal imperceptibly
into wrong Apprehensions. For men use to go about, when they tell a Lie, and
yet would be thought to speak a Truth. They stand off at a distance from the
Point, and are not for answering plainly, and directly to it. They break the
Falsehood to pieces, and cast a multitude of Words, that in the Crowd something
wrong may get in among others that are right, without being seen or suspected.
So that what they could not put off by Wholesale, they retail out among other
Ware, and vent by Piecemeal, without being discovered by the abused Parties.
Nay, perhaps, by these Arts, they have ^ozen'd themselves first, and then their
Neighbors. They may have hid, or lost the Falsehood by this means, and not know
well in what part of the Discourse to find it themselves. And thus, the Lie
broken to pieces, and slurr'd off, is easily swallowed, and goes down without
Regret; which, had they uttered it plainly, would have almost choked them, and
bore too hard upon their Consciences.

Now all these ways, of Mental Reservations, Aequivocations, Ambiguities, and
crafty Speeches and Discourses; are using a Double Tongue. Their End is to
abuse the Apprehensions and Belief of men, by a deceitful Sign; against the
Faith of Society, and the End of all Discourse and Conversation. For Words, are
the Instrument of Faith and Confidence; and therefore should be so used, as
they may be relied on. But what St. James taxes in the Double-mind, is equally
true of this double Tongue: as that is so unstable in all its ways, so is this
in all its Meanings, that they are not to be built upon, Jam. 1.8. They are the
Instruments of Hypocrisy, or of men's dissembling their own Thoughts; and of
Guile, or of their beguiling and abusing other men's: and we are to lay aside
all guiles, and hypocrisies, 1 Pet. 2.1. to be, as our Lord testified Nathanael
was, such true Israelites, in whom is no guile, Joh. 1.47. or, as he himself
was, of whom it was said, that no guile was found in his mouth, 1 Pet. 2.22.
The Use they serve, and the End they propose, is not to inform, but to deceive
others: So they are the Ways and Expressions, not of a true, but of a deceitful
Tongue. They carry with them, not a single, but a double Meaning: and so bear
in them all the Force and Effect of a double Tongue, which speaks twice, and
two contrary things, at one time.

3. Thirdly, This Singleness of Simplicity, excludes a double Practice, against
Duplicity in Life and Carriage. It will not allow us to be open Saints, and
secret Sinners; to practice one thing before God, and another before the World;
to be one thing at Church, and another in our own Closets. It will not permit
us to worship God, and to worship Baal; to comply still with the Worship of the
Place, tho in things of direct Repugnance betwixt themselves, going one day,
with the Gnostics, to the Jewish Synagogues, and the next to the Heathen
Temples, and the third to the Christian Churches. Or, to be for a man in the
Crowd, and against him in a trusty Company; to profess we are for one, and yet
act against him; or wish and act for him, when in private, or left to our
selves, and yet turn over from him in the Eye of the World, and renounce him in
Profession; to appear among those, that meet to pray for a thing at Church,
which we cannot pray for, but, it may be, pray against when we are by our
selves; to go among the Rejoycers in Public, for what we mourn in Private; or
among those that afflict themselves, and mourn abroad, for what we rejoice at
home. It will not be for the Practice of Duty in the Sunshine, and against it
in Persecution, as the Gnostics, who, as St. James says, were unstable in
their ways, sticking to Christian Assemblies in opportunities of Peace, and
turning to those of Jews or Gentiles in Fear of Persecutions: Denying thus, as
the 2 Pet. 2.1.
Apostle says, the Lord that bought them, when they could not otherwise save
themselves, tho confessing him at other times. It does not use, when a Virtue
is cried up, to be at the top of those who stickle for it; but when cried down,
to hide its head among those that do not know it. To encourage and run up a
way, whilst it serves our selves; but to brow-beat and run it down, when it
disserves us, or serves others. To set off the obligation of Duty to Superiors,
whilst they go our way, and are for us; but to be silent of them, or shake off
Duty, when they go contrary: as if the Duties were not to go along with the
Relations, but with our Interests and fleshly Purposes. To be all Kindness,
whilst we get by men, or use them for our own Ends: but to cast them off, and
set nothing by them, when we have served our selves of them.

By all these, and such like ways, instead of leading a Life uniform, and all
of a Piece: we have two Lives, or a Life infinitely multiform and various,
according to all the Variety, and turns of Convenience. Having one Life in time
of Peace, and another in time of Persecution: one, when we come to get by a
Duty; another, when we are called to lose by it: one Duty toward a man, whilst
he pleases; but another, when he begins to displease us: one, at home; and
another, abroad: one, when the Vogue is for a way; and another, when it is
against it: one, whilst we have some Turns to serve; and another, when those
Turns are served.

Now this is not to lead single Lives, but double, or treble; nay, to change as
often, as Humor, Accident, Ends, or Convenience does. It Is to be true, and
constant, indeed, to our own Humor, or Interests; but to nothing else. It is
not to be true, to our own Professions and Pretenses, to make our Lives true to
themselves, or one part of them true to another. And as the Scripture calls
them, Lying and Deceitful Talkers, who speak Cord and Cord, with an heart and
an heart, as the Hebrew Phrase is: So are they equally Lying and Deceitful
Workers, who live Vita and Vita, with a Life and a Life, i. e. are Double
Livers. It is quite contrary to Simplicity; Eye-service, or having one Practice
whilst the Master's Eye is over them, and another when it is off them, being
directly contrary to Service with Singleness of Heart, as St. Paul notes in the
Case of Servants, Ephesians. 6.5, 6. It Is no show of single, but of double Dealing:
the instability in all his ways, or this Change and Mutability of Life and
Practice, being the Mark St. James gives, of a Double-minded man, Jam. 1.8.
It Is to expose our selves to the Woes, which belong to the Sinner that goes two
ways, as the Son of Sirach says, Ecclus. 2.12. And therefore this Duplicity of
Life and Manners, must never find place in the Simplicity of Christians. But is
that (...), or that wicked Versatility of manners, and Dex^erity in
accomodating it self to all Turns, whereby the Great St. Concione 21. De
Prospera and Adversa Fortuna. Et De Prudentia. Tom. 3. p. 582.
Basil sets off that evil sort of Prudence, which is most quick at espying what
is for its worldly Profit, and serves its Ends upon the Simple and Well-meaning
by Deceit.

3. A third Thing implied in Christian Simplicity, is Openness in what it
declares, or ought to profess, without Concealments, or close Reserves. This is
another thing, which the Scripture understands by, and calls for in, this
virtuous Simplicity. Thus, St. Paul opposes the Manifestation of the Truth, to
handling of the Word of God deceitfully, 2 Cor. 4.2. By Manifestation of the
Truth, i^ meant setting it forth with Openness, which would not suffer it any
longer to lie hid, but make it manifest and apparent, to those he had to deal
with. Yea, such Openness, as would c^^mend them to every man's Conscience in the
sight of God, i. e. such as every man must needs know was sufficient in his own
Conscience, which, although for Ends they may sometimes deny in this World, yet
their Conscience must needs own and give Testimony to, when they come to be
posed before God. Thus, when St. Paul alleges the Testimony of his Conscience,
for his having lived in Simplicity and godly Sincerity, 2 Cor. 1.12. St.
Chrysostom on the Place explains it, (...). Homil. 3. in 2 Cor. p. 558. Ed.
Savil. OEcumen.
by Living with all liberty, and having nothing covered or ^^umbrated. In
Simplicity, i. e. without any Hypocrisy, or Cover, says (...). In loc. ap. p.
599.
Photius. Thus, one thing, in the Description of the Simplicity of the Just
given by St. Lib. 10. c. 16. Expos. Moral. in Job, c. 12.
Gregory the Great, is Sensum verbis aperire, to make its Speech or Expression
lay open its meaning. According to all which, Cicero says homo simplex and
apertus, and aperta simplexque men's* setting off Simplicity by Openness. And
Hesychius explains, (...) sincere, by (...) manifest or open, as well as by
(...) undeceitful.

By this Openness, we must not understand, an obligation to tell all a man
knows, and to keep nothing secret. We must not disclose other men's Secrets,
when they are entrusted with us. And no Good Christian will inform against a
Good Man, or discover what he knows of him, to his Unrighteous Persecutors.
Nay, he will not tell all he knows, or publish the Vices of ill men, when it
serves no End, either of their own emendation, or giving others warning of
them, but only to work their Shame and Prejudice. We are not to Proclaim all
the Good we know by our selves, which would be Vanity and Ostentation. Nay, nor
all the ill, as our Faults or Imperfections; which would be the way in time, to
be regardless of Censure, and throw off all shame: and then, as the Scripture
says, we should only declare, or publish our Sin like Sodom, Isa. 3.9. We are
not to make every one acquainted with our Business, or to divulge our own
Projects and Designs, thereby to give them the trouble of our Cares, or to
provoke malevolent Censures and Oppositions, but only as we are led thereto, in
way of Friendship and Confidence, or to seek Advice, or for Information of
those we are concerned with, or other like reasonable and prudent Inducements.
In these, and a Number of other like Cases, it is not the Part, either of a Good
or wise man, to be open and divulge all he knows; but to hide many things, and
keep them secret. It Is a Fool, says the wise Son of Sirach, that travails with
a word, as a woman does with a child, till it be brought forth. Whereas wise
men, are for letting many things dye with them, never fearing, as the other
does, lest a word pent up in their b^easts, should burst them, Ecclus. 19.10,
11, 12. As it is a Virtue, to show openness of some things: So it is a Virtue,
to show taciturnity of others. There is a time to keep silence, as well (...) a
time to speak, says the Preacher, Eccles. 3.7. Indeed, it is a Part of great
Goodness, and Prudence, to know when to be silent, as well as when to speak;
and to know, not only what can be said, but also what may better be omitted and
left unsaid, in all Cases. So that to be open in every thing a man knows, and
able to hold nothing; is not the openness of Simplicity here mentioned, which
is a virtuous Disposition.

But this is, in what a man is bound and ought to profess, there to be open.
Or, where a man pretends or undertakes to inform others, and open his own
Thoughts, there to deal openly and frankly with them. Where we either
voluntarily undertake to declare our Minds, or have a just Call, and ought to
profess them: he that would lay Claim to this Virtue, must not hide his
Opinions or Practice, his Desires or Espousals, but appear what he is. He must
not use Subtilty in putting off, or concealing his inward Sentiments,
especially under any opposite shows; but openness in professing them. Truth is
naked, and not afraid to appear so. It shuns not to come into the Light, when
called to it: It seeks not then to hide it self, but is free to own it self. As
it always is, what it seems; so is it ready to seem, what it is. And such in
all Points, which we pretend to declare, or ought to profess, should we be too.

Near akin to this of Openness, is Plainness, opposite to amusing, or
misleading Dress, of what i^ professes. It sets off Truth, as it is in it self,
not daubing it over with made Colors. It seeks not to huddle it up in
intricacies, which would not lay it open, but hide it from men's Understandings.
It does not put things, or Actions, into any delusive, or fallacious Attire;
which would serve only to make men misapprehend, and take them for other, than
they are. It does not amplify things, to make them be thought larger; nor
aggravate, which is to make them seem faultier; nor palliate, which would have
them appear more soft and innocent; nor any way disguise, which is to make them
show other than they are in reality. For all these, and such like, are not ways
of Truth, but of Deception. They do not imprint on men, our own Apprehensions
of things, but mistakes of them. They are not for making that plain to them,
which we think; but that seem to them, which we think not; contrary to that
Singleness, whereof I have already treated. Whereas Simplicity, is for being
the same, as has been observed, both within, and without; in inward Sentiments,
and in outward Manifestations. It seeks to be taken, only for what it is; and
so never hides its own shape when called to make (...) thereof; or assumes a
borrowed one, in (...) it would better become it.

4 Fourthly and Lastly, A Fourth thing imply^^ in Christian Simplicity, and
prescribed by Spi^^^ual Prudence, is Harmlesness, or Innocence, (...) to all
intending, or effecting wrong, or (...) to any Person. Of all other sorts of
(...), it is most opposite to Dolus malus, or that ^^^ch works evil to other
men. It is a Simpli^^^y in Good, without any mixture of Evil in (...)* It
leaves us a Liberty, in fitting ways to def^^d our selves; and, whilst it is
without Sin, ^ Prejudice to Religion, to use all wise Methods of Caution and
Wariness. But it takes from us o^^^nsive Weapons, as Anger, Envy, Peevish^^^^*
Revenge, Vexatiousness, all Violence and I^^ustice. It casts out all hurtful,
and injurious ^^ssions, and Practices: and that at such times, (...) we are
most tempted, and provoked to them. For, when you are betrayed by Friends,
persecuted by Enemies, and hated by all, says our Lord, Mat. 10.17, 18, 21, 22.
When you are sent out, as L^mbs in the midst of ravenous Wolves, adds he,
p^ssing this Lesson of Prudent Simplicity, then be ye as innocent as Doves, a
Creature usually said to be without Gall or Bitterness, to put it upon working
or returning Mischief, v. 16. He commands thee, to use the Simplicity of the
Dove, says St. Homil. 34. in Mat.
Chrysostom upon the Place, to restrain thee from seeking Revenge when injured,
or drawing those that lay wait for thee, to Punishment. For all thy Prudence
will stand thee in no stead, unless this Simplicity be added to it. Be ye as
simple as Doves, to pardon injuries, Incerti Authoris ap. Chrysostom. in Mat.
says another Ancient Comment; be as Serpents, to avoid apprehension; but as
Doves, not to bite when once ye are apprehended. And the same, as both
Chrysostom and he note, is signified by their being sent out, among these
Wolves, as Sheep; thereby requiring of them a^ such times, as they say, ovium
mansuetudinem, the mildness of those most patient Creatures. Thus, when St.
Paul bids Servants to obey with simplicity, or singleness of heart, Ephesians. 6.5.
Col. 3.2^. Theodoret takes (...), as opposite to (...), making Simplicity
opposite to Malignity and Improbity. And St. Chrysostom expounds the Simplicity
and godly Sincerity, 2 Cor. 1.12. among other things, by (...), or a Will void
of all Mischievousness and Malignity.

Simplicity, is to be a patient Virtue, and to imply, as the Patience of
Persevering; so likewise the Patience of Suffering. It looks more at the Duty,
than the Danger, and is ready to take up the Cross, and bear it after Christ,
when called thereto. It notes fixedness in Truth and Goodness, and must be
accompanied with Fortitude or Fearlesness of Dangers, making Faith or Trust in
God, its Support, when it has nothing visible to trust to in this World. As St.
Paul did, still holding on his Simplicity, when he had the Sentence of Death in
himself, and could have no Trust or Hope of Deliverance in himself, but in God
who raises up the dead, 2 Cor. 1.8, 9, 10, 12.

Such is the Virtue of true Christian Simplicity, noting Veracity, without
doing, or speaking Lies; Singleness, without all counterfeit shows (...) double
Dealings; Openness, without studied Concealment; and Plainness, without
artificial (...) misleading Dress, of what we undertake to declare, or ought to
profess; and Harmlesness or Innocence, patiently suffering, and persevering^y
sustaining, what it receives from them, but not doing, or returning, the least
wrong or ^^olence to any Person. And all this is agree^^le to S. Chrysostom's
Description of it, who explaining those words of St. Paul, in godly Sincerity,
2 Cor. 1.12. sets it off thus. (...). Chrysostom. in loc. Homil. 3. in 2 Ep. ad
Cor. p. 558. Ed. Savil.
We have (...) nothing fraudulent, nothing by hypocrisy, or s^^^^lation, or
flattery or assentation, nothing by treachery, or imposture, or other such
like. But in all Liberty, in Simplicity, in Verity, in a heart pure and free
from all mischievousness and malignity, in a (...) void of all deceit, having
nothing covered up a shadowed over, nothing craftily varnished or rotten at
heart under a fair and promising outside.

Thus, is Simplicity, such plain and downright Honesty, as begets no wrong
belief of, or expectation from us; nor fails those, which it does beget. That,
as it does not speak any false thing; so neither will it speak, nor act, any
delusive thing; that makes no deceitful Reserves, nor seeks shifts or Evasions,
nor affects to hide what it ought to make manifest, or disguise what it does
set off. If this Virtue governs any man, he will put on no Appearances of what
he is not, nor make a show of what he does not intend, nor seem to say or do
what he does not mean, nor willingly deceive by a dark, or doubtful, or
delusive sign; nor seek to have any the worse by him, or mistaken in him, or to
expect other, than what they are like to find from him.

And this Simplicity, St. Paul calls Godly Sincerity, or (...).
the Sincerity of God, 2 Cor. 1.12. That is, such a Simplicity, as will pass
for Sincerity, in the sight of God. And such a Simplicity, (...) is like the
Simplicity of God himself: who is most true, without the least Falsehood, in
Word or Deed; Single, without Doubling and Cra^ty Winding; Open, without
artificial Reserve^, Shifts, or Evasions; Plain, without Disguise; Harmless, in
all he does or says; without the least Breach, of downright Honesty,
Innocence, and Truth, in every Word and Action. Such is the Simplicity of God
himself. And, when we take care, to show forth ours in the same ways; our
Simplicity is like God's, and bea^ his Image. And as the Scripture calls upon
us, 1 Pet. 1.16.
to be holy, as God is holy; and Luke 6.36.
to be merciful, as our heavenly Father is merciful: So is this way of
Simplicity, to be sincere as God himself is sincere, which may very well, on
that account, be styled the Sincerity of God.

The Ground and Reason of this Simplicity, is the Preservation of Equality. To
do as we would be done by, which, as our Mat. 7.^^
Savior says, is the Law and the Prophets, is the first Rule of Justice, and
settles this Equality between all Persons. This is to love our Neighbors as
our ^^lves, to let them stand on the same Bottom, and allow them, as being on
the same Level, in all Intercourse and Dealing, to expect the ^^ke from us, as
we do from them. And this Neigbour, is every man, wise or foolish, credu^ou^ or
suspicious, rash or wary, rich or poor, who must all stand upon the same Level
as to (...) matter.

Now, since all Communication and Inter^^urse, lies in signifying our minds to
one another, by Words or Action: in regard there must be (...) Equality kept
up, in the mutual Communi^^^ion of Minds; there is need of this Virtue (...)
Simplicity, which will do it equally to all ^ersons. Faith, is the Foundation
of all Society, and Communication. And in this, there ^ust be Equality, in the
Ground it goes upon; every man having the same Ground to (...) another, that
another has to believe (...). And this can be nothing, but Simplicity (...)
plain-Dealing, which will equally secure (...) Faith, of wise and unwise,
subtle and simple, quick and slow apprehensions. This Simplicity, is fit to
inform all Understandings. But if we go off from this, instead of informing
men's Minds and Belief, we shall abuse them. Or, if the subtle and wary, by
suspense, preserve themselves from being deceived; we shall abuse, and deceive
others. It Is only plain Dealing, that can secure any, and give the same
Security to all, that where all have an equal Right, they may also have an
equal Benefit. So that in Communication, we must use the same plainness toward
every man, the young and old, the unversed and experienced, the weak and
strong: seeking what is equal toward every one, and what is private and
unequal toward none; if we would keep to the Rule of Justice, and do Equity,
which speaks the Observation of Equality, to all those we deal or converse with.

This is employed in S. Paul's Reason for speaking the truth every Man with his
Neighbor, because we are members one of another, Ephesians. 4.25. For, tho the
Members be greater, or less than another, in point of Perception, Importance
and Honor: yet, a more intelligent and discerning Member, does not take Liberty
to deceive, and impose upon a less discerning, more than the other does of
imposing upon it; but they are all equal and alike, in true and Plain-Dealing
with each other. The Eye, as S. In loc. Hom. 14. in Ephesians.
Chrysostom notes upon those words, as also In loc.
Theodorit, and In loc.
Theophylact, when it sees some ill a coming, does not deceive the Foot, but
gives true warning, that it may compose it self to Flight. And if the Foot, by
Feeling, finds it is g^t on unsure Ground, it makes true Discovery, tho the Eye
saw it not. When the Smell has perceived the Quality of any Food, it does not
belie it to the Palate. And when the Tongue has discovered a Taste, it does not
misrepresent it to the Stomach. And so all the other Members, are as careful,
to represent things Right to their Fellow Members, as their Fellows are, to Do
the same to them. And one never seeks to deceive another, because, being
mutually Members, they must needs have joint Interests; and when one deceives,
or hurts another, it is Damnum commune, a common Damage, (...) Theodorit says;
and therein it damnifies and (...) it self. So that the rash and the wary, the
(...) and the foolish, being equally Members; (...) must no more impose upon
that, than the (...) Eye does upon the unseeing Fool. And, (...) their
Communication, the wise must be as far, (...) seeking to deceive the unwary; as
the un^ary are, from seeking to deceive them.

This Simplicity, should be observed in all Communications. Especially among
Christians, ^^ose Credit should be so good, that their Word (...) never be
questioned, but yea and nay, be (...) that need to pass among them, as our
Savior (...): their word always carrying their meaning, (...) their yea, being
yea: and their nay, nay; or (...) always doing as they say, which would make
(...) need of Swearing in their Communication, Matt. ^^37. And were this
Simplicity practiced accord^^^ly, none would ever need to question them;
^^cause none would ever be deceived by them. ^^th would be secured by their
Saying, and their Word might be safely built on. In their plain Words, Men
would have their Sense, and should (...) sure of suitable Performance.

But especially it should be observed in Promises, which make more Dependence,
and are a higher Bond of Faith. And most of all in Oaths, which appeal, for the
Conformity betwixt our Thoughts and Expressions, to the God of Truth and
Simplicity it self. No Man should have his Faith abused, or be deceived by us
in any Communication; but least of all in these. Thus God's Promise, and his
Oath, S. Paul calls two immutable things, by which it is impossible for God to
lie, i. e. to abuse and delude Faith, or to beget a wrong b^^lief, or
expectation, in any, Heb. 6.18.

And it should be observed in these Communi^cations, by all Persons, especially
by Men Sac^^^ in their Functions, as Bishops, and Priests, who (...) as the 2
Cor. 5.20.
mouth of God, and God's Ambassador^^* and Magistrates, who act in God's Place,
and are also, as the Scripture says, Romans 13.4.
God's Ministers. And especially, in things of Power and Authority, as Laws and
Edicts. There ought to be the greatest Simplicity and Plain-Dealing, in the
Words and Ways of Ministers, and Magistrates; who would not only, as others,
abuse the Faith of their Brethren, but desecrate their Station, and dishonor
that God of Simplicity and Truth, in whose Place they stand, by deceitful and
delusive Dealing. There ought also to be the same, in the Expressions of
Public Laws; which must always be meant and expounded, with Ingenuity and
Plainness. For Laws, are the Patrons, and the Guard of Faith and Innocence: and
so must be Patterns of what they Patronize, by their own Sincerity and
Fairness. They must never teach us how to cozen, or ensnare others. They must
never lie in Quirks and evasive Senses; which Deceitfulness of the Laws
themselves, will ungird and prostitute them, and only teach People how to cheat
in their Obedience. It will cut off the Simplicity of Obedience, and call
Subjects only to the invention of Subtleties, to out-wit Laws, instead of
observing them. For Laws are not kept, but cozened and abused, by evasive
Glosses. (...) that this Simplicity, as it must be most in ^^^mises, chiefly
when backed by solemn Oaths: (...) more especially, when these are made by
(...) or Magistrates, who are Sacred Persons: (...) most especially, when they
are made also in ^^^dience to Laws, and in Words prescribed by (...) ^aws
themselves.

(...) now, contrary to all these Ways and (...) of Simplicity, is the Way of
Worldly (...). It may sometimes be for taking things (...), and by barefaced
Violence, where it (...) ^ower enough. But its ordinary Method, is ^^^ctise
more covertly, and its great Instru^^^^ is Craft and Deceit. When there is need
(...), it is not apt to stick at forging a (...) Lie, and unpalliable Falsehood,
to bring its (...) about. But where it practices with more (...) facedness, it
will deceive as effectually, by (...) but deceitful Truths, which are only
(...) Truths, but real Falsehoods. Sometimes, (...) the end it may be mistaken,
it will hide it self (...) Mist of Words. At others, it will play upon (...)
Faith of Men, by Ambiguities of Words and ^^^^ences, expecting they will bite
at one mean^^^^ whilst it reserves another to it self. Or, if (...) does not
fall upon them to deceive directly; i^ will lead them about craftily, by a
Circle of Words or Circumlocutions, intermixing secretly (...) and false, and
laying Snares, till it has got them within the Compass of Deceit at last. It
will be open, in so much as shall serve its turn; and artificially conceal what
makes against it. It represents things, not as they are in themselves, but in
such Dress as best suits its own purpose amplifying, or detracting, palliating,
or disgui^sing, not so as sets off its own Thoughts, but (...) Convenience. Or,
if it is so nice, as to boggle at the Abuse of Words; it will more easily
swallow a like Juggle, and Deceit in Actions. It will give the outward
Appearances, without inward Realities; seem to be, what it is not; and not to
be, what it is: Do in all things like those that profess what it thinks not; or
that denies, what it really believes. The outward Shows, of its Belief or
Expectations, Mind and Judgment^ of its Desires or Affections, what pleases or
dislik^^ it: are not the true Draught of its inward Sentiments, but only of its
outward Interests. It pretends what it gets by, not what it really is, or
believes: and seeks it self, not what it shows; in all its Pretenses. Its
Appearances, are Hypocrisy; its secret end, still self-design; its Method, not
Truth, but Delusion; not harmlesness to others, but preventing, tho by any Loss
of theirs, all Harm, Dissatisfaction, or Disappointment to it self.

So that, instead of being true and single, plain and open, innocent and
undesigning: a worldly wise Man, is all Lies and Falsehood, Trick and Deceit,
full of Turnings and Windings, Shifts and Evasions, Mists and false Colors,
mere Shows and Pretenses; pretending and appearing one thing, but being and
intending another; and never true to what he seems, further than that happens
to run true, to his own self ends and carnal Convenience. He is not fixed, to
any just and ^^nest Principles; but is for (...), (...) for accommodating his
manners, to serve turns, (...) for being quick-sighted at serving his own
Ad^^^tage by Deceit, as I noted from S. Basil. By (...) which deceitful Shows,
and false Seemings, (...) the Injury to Truth, he violates Charity (...)
Justice; oftentimes drawing Men in thereby, (...) their Prejudice. And abuses
Confidence, (...), to an ingenuous Spirit, should lay on one (...) highest
Obligation, working their harm, by (...) very Faith and Trust, they repose in
him. (...) for the most part highly abuses good things (...); and that virtuous
forwardness well meaning (...) have to promote them, whilst, under a false
(...) and Show thereof, he steals away their ^^ncurrence, to his own unlawful
Purposes, or (...) Self-Designs.

CHAP VII. Of not discharging Relative Duties, for ends of Religion, or of our
own Ease.
THE other Instance which I mentioned, of Doing ill to bring about some Good
desired, in throwing off Relative Duties. And this is another Care of Spiritual
Prudence, viz. in the

Second Place, that in any Relations, when (...) grow burdensome to us, for
ends, either of Religi^^^ or of our own Ease, it does not admit of any
Discharge of Relative Duties. God, both in Nature and Scripture, has required
us, as to be just to all Men; so to be Grateful to our Benefactors, and Dutiful
to our Superiors, to honor, obey, and keep subject, to our Parents, our
Princes, and other Powers, whom he has placed over us.

1. And these Duties and Returns, he calls for toward them, whatever their
Religion be, whether true or false. Be they Christians or Heathens, Jews or
Mahometans, true Worshipers or Idolaters; Children must honor and obey, support
and succor their Parents, and Wives their Husbands, and Servants their Masters,
and Subjects their Sovereigns. These are among those things, which Nature it
self has writ in all Men's Hearts, and wherein, as S. Paul says, they that (...)
not the written Law, are a Law unto themselves, their own Consciences bearing
witness to them, without the need of any further Revelation, (...) their
thoughts accusing or excusing them, according as they have kept or transgressed
them: Romans ^ 14, 15. So that if the Relatives were all (...) yet their natural
Conscience, without the (...) of Scripture, would teach one to call for at this
Duty, and another to show and pay it; (...) accuse them, if they did it not.

Accordingly, when the Apostles went out to (...) among Heathens, and to
proselyte those, (...) Relations were Worshipers of false Gods, (...) set up
unclean Spirits, or Devils, for Gods: (...) do not in the least exempt them
from any ^^lative Duties toward such Idolaters; but (...) a greater Heartiness
and Conscientiousness, (...) the due Discharge thereof. Children obey your
(...) in all things, as what is well-pleasing to the (...), says S. Paul, Col.
3.20. And Servants, (...) in all things your Masters according to the Flesh,
(...) all things in singleness of Heart, as to the (...), as serving therein
the Lord Christ: Verse. 22. (...). Wives, be in subjection to your own (...),
says S. Peter, yea, to those that obey not the Word, but are to be won by the
Wives good Conversation, without the Word, 1 Pet. 3.1. Honor the King, says he
again, and Tit. 3.1.
submit your selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lord's sake, whether to
the King as supreme, or unto Governors, as sent by him; c. 2.13, 14, 17. Ye
must needs be subject, yea, every Soul, not only for wrath, but Conscience
sake, says S. Paul, Romans 13.1, 5. Whenas, at this time, as is notorious, Kings
and Soverei^^ Powers were Heathens.

Thus careful were they, not to seem in the least to set Men free, from any
Relative Duties and Obligations, toward their Heathen and Idolatrous
Relations. And this with the more exactness, to cut off from the Heathen World,
(who knew well enough the Dueness and Necessity of these things, and the Guilt
of the contrary, without the Preaching of the Apostles,) all color for
aspersing Christianity, as overthrowing Justi^^ and Morality; as pulling up
Foundations of Nature, and setting persons loose, from the Obligations of their
several Relations. Which would have been the greatest Scandal that could ha^^
been fixed upon Religion; and have made it to turn the Moral and Natural
Obligation, as well as the Heathen Superstition of the World, upside down.
Teach Wives, to be obedient to their own Husbands, and to take care of their
Children, that the Word of God be not blasphemed. And Servants, to be obedient,
showing all good Fidelity, that they may adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior,
in al^ things, says S. Paul, Tit. 2.4, 5, 9, 10. Submit (...) every Ordinance
of Man, says S. Peter, for so is the will of God, that with well doing, ye may
put to silence the Ignorance of foolish Men. 1 Pet. 2.13, 15.

Again,

2. He calls for these Relative Duties, and Performances toward Men of all
Religions, whatever their Performance, on their Part, be toward us. We must be
dutiful Children to hard, improvident, or careless Parents; and faithful
Servants, to (...) and unequal Masters; and obedient (...)* to bad Husbands;
and good, and true (...), to ill administering and unrighteous (...).

^^^vants, be subject with all fear, not only to the (...) and Gentle, but also
to the froward, says S. Pe^^^ not only whilst you receive Right, but when,
(...) good Conscience toward God, you suffer wrong^^ at their hands: 1 Pet.
2.18, 19.

(...) Pontius Pilate was far from discharging the (...) of a good Governor to
our Blessed Savior, Joh. 19* 4, 6, 15, 16.
(...) his Blood only to satisfy the Peoples Cla^^s, against the Conviction of
his own Conscience. (...) yet our Lord took care, to approve himself a (...)
Subject toward him, (as he had done be^^^ toward the Chief Priests, Jo. 1^*
11. Luc. 22.49, 50, 5^.
forbidding his Ser^^^^ to use the Sword against them in his own (...),) owning
even at that time, his Power (...) from above, Jo. 19.11.

Ananias the High Priest, did not sure perform (...) his part, when, sitting to
judge Paul by Law, commanded him to be smitten contrary to the Law, (...)*
23.2, 3. But yet, even under this Grievance, (...) ^aul confesses he ought him
all the same Duty, (...) he should have owed to a more just Judge, ^^d begs
pardon for having forgot himself, and not spoken so reverently toward him upon
that occasion, as the Law required toward the Ruler of the People, Verse. 5.

Saul, unquestionably was guilty of Maladministration in an high degree, and
far from discharging toward David, his Duty of Protection: yea, moreover, he
was reprobated by God, or rejected from being King, 1 Samuel 15.23. But yet, for
all that, David was still bound in Conscience, to perform his Duty of
Subjection toward this unrighteous Sovereign. As he did, when he had the
highest Temptation, and the most Providential opportunities, to rid himself of
him; owning him even then for the Lord Anointed, and saying, Who can lift up a
hand against him, and be guiltless? 1 Samuel 24.5, 6. and Chapter 26.9.

Lastly, No man will say the Emperors and Rulers in the Apostles Days,
performed the Part of Good Governors; Persecuting the true Religion, instead of
Protecting it; preying upon the Remains of Roman Liberties; instead of
preserving them; and Ruling by Blood, Injustice, and Oppression, instead of
just and regular Administration. But yet, toward these Non-Performers, and
Notorious Violaters of Princes Duties, the Apostles enjoin all the Subjects of
the Empire, most punctually and Conscientiously to discharge their Duties:
putting them in mind, to be subject to Principalities, and to obey Magistrates,
Tit. 3.1. not only for Wrath, but Conscience, Romans 13.5. as the Will of God,
and for the Lord's sake, 1 Pet. 2.13, 15. All which, God strictly exacted, and
Good Men in all times most Conscientiously performed, not daring to shake off
Subjection, and rise up against God's Vicegerents, when they proved the most
unjust Invaders of Religion and Rights, as they who list, may see In a
Discourse entitled, Christianity a Doctrine of the Cross under unrighteous
Rulers. Or, Passive Obedience under Invasion of Legal Rights and Liberties.
proved at large.

In all these Relations, each side must look to what concerns themselves. Their
Duties are Mutual, but not Conditional: so that we may not break with them, tho
they break with us. The breach of their Part, is ill in them. And therefore,
since what is ill in one, cannot be good in another, the Breach of ours, must
needs be answerably ill in us too. So that not to go along with them in an ill
thing, or be condemned for Company; we must every one take care (...) discharge
our own Duty, whether our Relatives make due Return of Duty, and discharge
theirs toward us, or no.

Indeed, all the Laws of the Second Table, or the Duties of Justice, are
absolute in Obligation, without regard, either to the Religion, or to the Good
Performances, and Moral Qualities of Men. We must speak Truth, and keep Faith
and Promises, especially when confirmed by solemn Oaths, and deal justly, and,
where we have received Favors, remember them gratefully, especially in their
need, and return them as we can, even toward the worst Persons, to men of the
worst Carriage, and of the worst Religions, Heretics or Infidels. The Jews,
^ere for streightning the Exercise of Justice, Gratitude, and Kindness, not
extending it to men of an opposite and hated Religion, but confining the
Neighbor mentioned in the Law, to a Fellow Jew, or one of their own Nation and
Religion. But to cure this, our Lord instructs them, in the Parable of the man
falling among Thieves, that the Jews must be Neighbors, even to the
Samaritans; bidding him that asked, Who is my Neighbor? after he had related,
how Neighbourly the Samaritan dealt by the Jew in Distress, Go, and do thou
likewise, Luke 10.29, 30, and 37. Honor thy Father and Mother, thou shall not
kill, thou shall not commit Adultery, thou shall not steal, thou shall not
covet, thou shall not bear false Witness; are Commandments, that oblige equally
toward all Persons. We are no more at Liberty, to break any of them, toward a
Pagan, than toward a Christian; a Papist, than a Proetstant; an ill and
unjust, than toward a Good and Righteous Man. More particularly kind, we ought
to be to the Household of Faith, and those of our own way. But just, and true,
and grateful, is what in common we are bound to be to all.

All this, is plainly owned, and implied in that Maxim, which is confessed by
all sober Persons, and expressly denied by none, but some wild Enthusiasts, viz.
That worldly Dominion is not founded in Grace. Indeed, Grace confers Titles,
and has its Claims; but those are in another Life, where all Possessions will
be measured out, according to the Degrees of M^ns Graces, and Religious
Performances. But here, without any regard to the Graciousness of their Hearts
or Carriage, this World's Properties are all to pass among men, according to
humane Rights and Titles. No man can make out, that he has Right to another
Power or Property, by pleading that his Faith is more Orthodox, or his Life
more just and holy; i. e. that he is more Gracious. Nor that the Legal Owner
has forfeited his Right to them, by his Apostasy from Truth, or Holiness, or
turning Graceless.

The Truth is, the World needs nothing more to make them sensible of the
iniquity of this, than to bring it home to their own Case. For if one man may
turn another out of his Legal Power and Property, on Pretense he has not the
Grace to keep in the Right way to the other World, nor to use and employ them
well for the Good of this; what Change would this make among Proprietors, and
how would it Dispossess the Greatest Part of the Inhabitants of the Earth? Yea,
particularly of those, who are most uneasy, and cast the most envious and
malignant Eye, at the Power and Property of others. So that it would quite
throw out this Pretense, of Discharging our selves of Relative Duties, or
Disseising Relatives of their Legal Rights and Claims, because of Heresy,
Nonperformance, etc. i. e. of Ungraciousness: if men would but allow their
Relatives and Rulers common Justice, (who, if any, ^ure should have
Preference,) and do by them, as they would be willing to be dealt by
themselves. Honor thy Father and Mother; and, Thou shall not steal, are
Precepts universal: securing the Powers and Properties of the Graceless, as
much as of the Gracious. Just therefore we must be to Power and Property,
wheresoever we meet it lodged by Law, whether in the good or bad. And thus just
we shall be to the worst and most ungracious Relatives, if we will allow them
the common Benefit of God's Laws, as made for their Protection as well as ours;
and grant them, to whom we owe, not only Justice, but Reverence, what in common
Right and Equality, we all claim for our selves.

From all this I observe, when men stand in Relation to any Person, we must
distinguish what they do in discharge of Duty to him, as a Relation; and what
in Favor of his ways, and Religion. It is either a Great weakness, or a Great
wickedness in men, to suspect all those that are for showing inviolate Duty to
a Popish King, as being Favorers of the Popish Religion; and for paying all
that is due to a King, when he breaks the Laws, as if they affected, and were
for setting up a Power Arbitrary and lawless. As if there could be no Duty, to
his Power and Person, without inclination to his way and Religion. What would
these Persons have said to St. Paul, and the holy Apostles, had they lived in
those days? Would they have accused them, as secret Friends to Heathenism, and
as having heathen Gods, as now they are wont to say of others, that they have a
Pope in their Bellies, because they preached up a strict and inviolate
Subjection to the Emperors, and other Powers, for all they were Heathens? Or,
that they were Enemies, and Betrayers of the Roman Liberties, and for making
the Empire more absolute than it was, because those Emperors were for grasping
at the small remains of Liberty, and for being more and more lawless? Their
Duty, as I have shown, they must perform to them, and do all that is just to
such an one, both as a man, and a King, in Duty to his Person, and Relation.
Tho at the same time, they bear the most unmovable averseness and opposition,
standing out to the last, in such ways, as their Duty to God and him allows
them to make use of, against his way and Religious Persuasion. It Is only in
Conscience of what he is, not in good liking or approbation of what he does,
that they pay these things to such a Person.

I note also, That in speaking of these Duties, even in the Case of such
Persons, we must not talk, as if we performed them, not from Principles of
Conscience, but only from Humane inducements. It Is the way of too many, God
knows, to discourse in these things, as if the hank these Duties have on us,
toward such unpleasing Relatives, were not on our Conscience, but on our
Convenience. Their Care, and good Carriage, they will allow, as a Reason of our
Duty and Observance; but their Faults and Failures, as a Reason also, to
justify ours. They insist upon Reasons of Ingenuity in this Case, and ask, How
one could expect more, that performed no more, or dealt no better? And look on
the ripping up their Rulers Nonperformance, as a Reason to vindicate their
own. All which is, as if God had required nothing in the Relation, but all we
owed, were to the Carriage of the Person. It Is to act only by Principles of
Interest, or at best of Ingenuity; but not out of Principle of Conscience,
which is the same when they go wrong and when they go right, or not from any
regard to God, or sense of Duty at all.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Imprudence of pursuing our Ends by unlawful Means.
HAving said thus much of this First Rule of Spiritual Wisdom, viz. Not doing
Evil, that Good may come, or not making use of any unlawful ways, for the
compassing our Ends, or Desires: Besides what I have hitherto said of the
Religion, I will now add a little, in the last Place, of the Wisdom of this
Course, and show how prudent it is, never to take up with any Sin, in Pursuit
the most desired Design.

Prudent I mean, not only for the next World; but for the accomplishment of our
Designs here in this. If worldly men would really be wise for worldly things,
and take the way that is best here at present: they must not sin against God,
to bring their Ends about; which, however promising it may seem to them, is not
really the way to make, but to mar them.

The Reason of this is, because the compassing of any Effects, depends more
upon God and his Providence, than on any humane Means. The best and likeliest
Preparations, can never bring them about, when he goes not along with them: and
the lowest and most unlikely, are sure to do it, when he does. Now the way to
have God with us, is by trusting him, and keeping in his ways.

If we dare rely on Providence, and trust God, he will not fail those that
trust him, but take the tenderest care of them, and show himself remarkably, in
preserving and speeding their matters on. I mean those matters, which, in
consistence with the Designs of his Providence, he sees fit to take effect: and
no means, or methods, can bring about any things else. As there is no Friend,
or Deliverer, like God; and no Comfort, like hope in him: So is there no way to
make an interest with him, like confiding in, and depending on him. Thou will
keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is staid on thee, because he trusts in
thee, says the Prophet, Isa. 26.3. But to mistrust God, is the way to
disoblige and lose him, and, together with him, our own Prosperity and Success
too. As the Jews, who would not believe the Lord their God, and trust him, when
he gave them his Word to bring them into the Land of Canaan, Deuteronomy. 1.32. are
put out of all hopes of Coming thither, and bid to turn, and take their journey
into the Wilderness; and told, even in the height of their warlike Preparation,
when they had girded on every man his Weapons, that if they would go up now,
and fight, it should be at their own Peril, for he the Lord was not among them.
And accordingly, they were chased and destroyed, as many as did presumptuously
attempt it, v. 40, 41, 42, 43, 44. Thus it also fared with the Lord, that in
the great Famine at Samaria, would not believe the sudden Plenty, which God
promised, and foretold by his Servant Elisha: Thou shall see it with thine
eyes, said God to him, but thou shall not eat thereof, 2 King. 7.2. which
accordingly fell out, v. 17, 20. And with King Asa, who, on Baasha's Coming up
against him, relied not on the Lord, but on the Syrians; and, in his disease,
sought not to the Lord, but to the Physicians: Herein thou have done foolishly,
says the Prophet, therefore from henceforth thou shall have Wars, 2 Chronicles.
16.2, 3, 8, 9, 12.

And this Trust, must be by keeping in his own Ways: which, when they seem to
have the least of visible Probabilities, have the most of Providence; and so,
to those that ascribe most to Providence, must needs appear the surest way to
success. Wait on the Lord, and keep his way, and he shall exalt thee to inherit
the land, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 37.34. Tho in this keeping to God's Ways,
we should have no visible Preparations to trust to: yet is Providence, the
Ground of our Confidence, full of invisible ones; which do abundantly more
assure Deliverance, or Success, than any others; and which are discernable to
the eye of Faith, tho not to an eye of Flesh. Thus, when the City was compassed
with Horses, and Chariots, and a Mighty host of Syrians, sent by the King of
Syria to take Elisha: tho he had no visible Guard to resist these Forces, yet
had he a Wall of Fire of Providence, the Mountain, where he was, being full of
Horses, and Chariots of Fire, or Guards of Angels, round about Elisha. So that
when Humane Eyes, could see none to preserve him; yet could he say to his
Servant, Fear them not, for they that be with us, are more than they that be
with them, 2 King. 6.14, 15, 16, 17. And when the Great Lord in Jehoram's
Court, thought the Plenty prophesied to be in Samaria the next day, to be
impossible, and that, unless God should make Windows in Heaven on purpose, it
could never be brought to pass: the end showed, that God can infinitely out wit
us, and absolutely surprise us with issues; and that, when there seems no way
to us, Providence has always enough, that never entered into our Thoughts. As the
Event in that case made appear, God raising the Seige in haste, by filling the
Syrians with Fear of mighty Succors come to the King of Israel, on their
hearing in the night a noise of Horses, and Chariots, and of a great Host, 2
King. 7.2, 6, 7.

But if, when there is no visible Appearance of succeeding, or being safe
otherwise, to save our selves we step out of God's ways, and, instead of what
is lawful, betake our selves to what seems expedient and serviceable: in
leaving the way of I^^^cence, we are like also, when we least suspect it, to
lose the way of Success, and when we desert God, God and Providence will desert
us. Order thy way ^ight, and trust in him, says the wise Son of Sirach: (...)
go not aside, lest ye fail, Ecclus. 2.6, 7. We shall not only this way be
unrelieved by the Blessing and Assistance; but broken and opposed, most
commonly, by the just Judgment of Providence, setting it self against us. For
he disappointeth the Devices of the Crafty, so that their hands cannot perform
their Enterprise. He takes the wise in their own Craftiness, making their
Methods bring about what they studied to avoid, and the Counsel of the froward
is carried headlong. They meet with darkness in the day time, and grope in the
noon day, as in the night, Job 5.12, 13, 14.

God loves to defeat such unlawful, and irreligious Expedients; and to turn
wicked Policy and ungodly Wisdom, into Foolishness. To make it hinder, and
obstruct that very Good, it was made use of to acquire; and to bring on us that
very Evil or Trouble, which thereby we seek to remove. Who, says the Prophet,
among us, shall (...) able to dwell with the devouring Fire kindled by the King
of Assyria, called Everlasting Burnings, in regard they could see no likelihood
of any End of his Devastations? He shall, answers he, that walks righteously,
and speaks uprightly; that despises the gain of Oppressions, or handling of
Bribes, and stops his ears from hearing of Blood, or Bloody Counselors, and
shuts his eyes from seeing evil. By this Religious stiffness, and standing off
from the Course of Wickedness in those evil Times, instead of being more
exposed to them, as you fa^sie, he shall be preserved; as safe as he, who (...)
set on high, and whose place of Defense is the Mu^^nition of Rocks, or a strong
Tower situate on (...) accessible Rocks, where is neither want of bre^^ nor
water, and so no danger of being reduced, through want of Provisions, to
surrender. But as for the Sinners in Sion, or those, says in loc.
Grotius, that, against their own Consciences, were for changing their
Principles and Religion, to procure Favor from the conquering Assyrian; they
are afraid, and Fearfulness has surprised these hypocrites, the accomplishment
of their Fears, instead of the Removal of them, being all they should get by
their Apostasy and ungodly Dissimulation, Isa. 33.14, 15, 16.

Thus we find it has usually been, with the Resorters to forbidden and unlawful
ways, in constant Experience. Their fansied Remedy, has proved their real
Snare, and what they took to cure a Fear, God ordinarily turned to accomplish
it.

Thus at Babel, the Presumption and Pride of men, in building of a lofty Tower,
to make them ^ Name, and to prevent their Dispersion, Genesis 11.4. (...) turns
into a Blot upon their Name, and (...) the very means of scattering them, v. 7,
8, 9.

The Brethren of Joseph, to prevent the verifying (...) Dreams, viz. that they,
who were his Elder^^^bers, should come at last to worship him, and (...) their
Obeisance: most wickedly sold him for (...)-slave to the Midianite Merchants,
who brought (...) to the Egyptians, Genesis 37.7, 9, 19, 28. But (...) unnatural
and ungodly Expedient, of pre^^^ing these Submissions; God overrules for ^very
Method of bringing them about. When (...) came, in time, and Course of
Providence, (...) the Corn of Egypt; and Joseph, to be (...) of the Land, and
in sole Power to dispose (...); and these same Brethren came, and (...)
themselves before him, with their Faces to (...) earth, Genesis 42.6, 10. and Chapter
50.18.

Ledekiah, and the Jews, when, being brought (...) subjection to the King of
Babylon, they had all ^^bmitted, made a Covenant, and taken an Oath to (...):
repenting afterward of their Subjection, ^^spire to Rebel, and break that
Oath, which (...) Prince and People had taken, in hopes the (...) of Egypt
would stand by them, Ezekiel. 17.12, 13, 14, 15. But these wicked ways, of
Rebellion and Perjury, for the recovering invaded Liberty: instead of removing,
as they promised themselves, God declares should both increase, and fix their
Slavery, and Misery, v. 17. ad 22. Like as, the Rebelling for Laws and
Liberties, against our Martyred Sovereign; turned, by God's just Judgment, to
such an Overthrow of Laws, and Loss of Liberty, and introduction of extreme
Servitude, as, since they had the Charters of Laws and Libe^^ties, had not
before been brought upon this Peo^ple.

The succeeding Jews, some hundreds of year^ afterward, resolved, by Bloody
and wicked hand^ to cut off Christ, for Fear, should they let him alo^^ and go
on to be generally taken for Christ (...) King; that the Romans, jealous
thereby of their Dejection, would come, and take away their Plac^ and Nation,
Joh. 11.48. And, it is expedient, said Caiaphas, that one man dye, rather than
that (...) whole Nation should perish, v. 50. But this horrible Way or
Expedient, of preserving the Nation, and keeping out the Romans; God turns into
the way of destroying their Nation, and calling of the Romans in.

For the terrible Coming of the Roman Armies, first under Vespasian, and after
under his Son Titus; was a Vid. Dr. Hammond in loc.
Verification of the Coming of Christ, foretold, Mat. 24.3. And in that
miserable Destruction, or taking away of their City and Nation, the Emperors
owned the Vengeance to be God's. The hand of God is plainly with us; and the
Famine, mutual Seditions, unexpected Fall of Walls on their side without help
of our Engines, are so many marks of the Wrath of God upon them, says Ap.
Joseph. de Bello. l 7. c. 1.
Titus to his Soldiers. It was plainly God, that helped us when we fought. It
was God, that drew the Jews from these Strongholds; was again Ib. c. 16.
his Exclamation, when he took the City, and saw those Towers, from which no
Force could have driven them, deserted by the Jews. The Quarrel, they
acknowledged to be God's; and themselves, only his Instruments; (as Attila the
Hunn afterward styled himself Flagellum Dei, God's Scourge on the degenerate
Christians:) and thereupon would (...) of them be called Judaicus, as Dio
Xyphylin. in Vespas.
Dio notes, (...) refused the Honor of a Triumph, for the Victory (...)
Overthrow of the Jews. The Soldiers burnt the (...), tho against the Desire,
and Edict of (...) as moved by a Divine Impulse, L. 7. e. 10. etc. 9.
says Jose^^. And when the Balistae, the Shooting Engines, (...) the beginning
of the Siege were brought up, (...) played upon them: Filius venit, or the Son
(...), was by an overruling Providence, the (...) of Warning, as Ib. l. 6. c.
7.
he reports, or the common ^^^tification given by their Watchmen to the Jews,
(...) as the Engines played. So answering our (...) Christ's Expression, who
had usually (...) them with this Desolation, under the (...) of Matt. 24, 3.
his Coming, or of Matt. 16.27, 28.
the Coming of the (...) Man. Which was thus verified upon these (...), who now
found, when it was too late to (...) it, how the Cry and Quarrel of that Blood,
(...) brought in these over-powering Romans, (...) their Predecessors, yea,
many among their (...) selves still living, had shed to keep them out.

In like sort, as our Ancestors, by rebelling (...) that excellent Prince,
Charles I. to keep out (...), have brought upon us their Posterity, all (...)
late Fears of Popery, and those terrifying Attempts it so lately has, or still
may make upon (...) The cutting off that most Pious and Orthodox Prince, who
would have carefully principled all his Children in the Belief of Protestants;
and driving out the Royal Issue into Popish Countries, exposed with utmost
advantage to be practiced upon by Popish Relations and Instructors; being the
visible Cause of the King's mispersuasion, and turned by a just God, instead of
yielding Relie^ to be a direct and apparent Cause and Acco^^plisher of those
Fears and Sorrows.

To prevent the Increase, and Propagation (...) Christianity afterward, the
Jews raised a (...) Persecution against the Church, which was at Jerus^^lem,
and scattered it abroad, Act. 8.1. But God turn this Scattering, and Dispersing
of the Member^ which they had recourse to, for the Overthrow and Abolition;
into a farther Dissemination (...) the Faith. Which they, who were thus
disperse^ abroad, took along with them, and Disperse^ Preaching the Word every
where, as they came: (...)

The Gnostics, in the Days of Persecution struck in, and externally complied,
both (...) Jews and Gentiles, hoping thereby to save th^^selves. With the Jews,
they went along (...) wickedly, in observing their Rites, and in persecuting
and compelling the Orthodox Christians to observ^ them: only to Gal. 5.11.
get Favor with them, by seeming zealous for Judaism, and left, as S. Paul Gal.
6.12.
says, they should suffer Persecution from them for the Cross of Christ. And
with the Gentiles they went to Idol-Feasts and Sacrifices: those whom S. Paul
dispute^ against for Feasting in Idol-Temples, 1 Cor. 8. (a^ also c. 10.19,
10.) being the (...), as they loved to call themselves, or the great Boasters
of, and Pretenders to Knowledge; as the Apostle sufficiently intimates, V. 1,
2, 10, 11. and it being one of the Doctrines of their Followers, as E^cl. Hist.
l. 4. ^. 7.
Eusebius testifies from Agrippa Castor, that they might lawfully eat of
Idol-Sacrifices, and forswear the Faith in time of Persecution.

But these abominable Compliances, which they took up, as the way to save their
Lives: God, in (...) Providence, makes the Cause of their (...) of their Lives.
Whilst all the upright Or^^^dox, by the Oracle and Admonition of God to (...)
holy Men, all with one consent timely left the (...) before it was begirt, as
Hist. l. 3. c. 5.
Eusebius relates, and (...) themselves at Pella, a City Vid. Dr. Lightfoot.
Chorag. Dec. in S. Mar. c. 7. Sect. 4.
of Decapolis (...) Jordan, and a more secure place: these wick^^ ^emporizers,
persisting in their former Com^^^ces, and coming to their last Passover, as
(...) did, were there shut up together with them Titus, and perished with the
Jews: In which, (...) Lord verified his own Rule in this Case: (...) will save
his Life, i. e. by sinful Complyan^^ as these men did with Jews or Gentiles, in
(...) and Persecutions, shall lose it. As on the (...), whosoever will lose his
Life, or run the (...) of losing it, when there is nothing but a (...) whereby
to escape, for my sake, the same (...) find or Matt. 8.35.
save it, Matthew. 16.25. And to which (...) Peter also may seem to have
reference, when, (...) his second Epistle, writ very near this final Over^^^^w
of their City and Nation, he tells the Chri^^^^ns laboring under Persecution,
which the Jews ^^^dently set on, that the Lord knows how to deli^^^ the Godly,
or those who in all their Dangers (...) to their Duty and Trust in Providence,
out of Temptations; and to reserve the unjust, or those, who by wicked Shifts
seek to escape, unto the Day of Judgment to be punished. As it signally
happened with these Gnostics, when the Day of the Lord, as the Scripture often
calls it, came on the Jews; or by God's just Judgment they were all destroyed,
2 Pet. 2.9.

Indeed this Preservation of themselves in that common Overthrow, by not
craftily deserting, but honestly adhering to their Duty, is what Mat. 24^12, 13.
Christ promised; and what, as it drew on, the Heb. 10.37. 2 Thessalonians. 1.7.
Apostle spressed for their Encouragement; and what the poor persecuted
Christians 1 Pet. 1.5.
believed, and waited for. And accordingly, when the time did come, which in
Mat. 24. was presignified, the Providence of God did most watchfully and
wonderfully accomplish, and bring it about. When the Abomination of Desolation,
i. e. the Roman Armies, which make all desolate, called abominable, because of
their Heathen and Idolatrous Worship, stands in or about the holy Place, viz.
the City Jerusalem: or, as it is in S. Luke, when Jerusalem is compassed about
with Armies, as it was by Cestius Gallus: Then know, says our Lord, that the
destruction thereof is nigh, and let them which be in Judea flee to the
mountains, or out of it, to some quiet and secure place, Matt. 24.15, 16. Luke
21.20, 21. The Siege of Cestius gave the Alarm, according to this Prediction.
And when he, without any visible Cause, both unexpectedly, and most
unaccountably and unwisely, as De Bello, l. 2. c. 24.
Josephus notes, raised the Siege; that gave the upright Christians Liberty and
Opportunity, before its being begirt again, to draw themselves off; and the
Oracle of God to some holy Men, made them all with one consent to embrace it.
So that when Titus at last came before it, at the time of the Passover, when
all the Jews and Judaizers from all Places were come up to the Feast; there
were only unbelieving Jews, and hypocritical Judaizing Christians, to be shut
up for the Slaughter. All the upright Orthodox, having, by the Care of a
Gracious and an Indulgent God, made their Escape before.

In sum, this way of preserving those, by unforeseen Providence, who would not
seek, when there was no other visible means, to preserve themselves by sin; and
of disappointing those, who, in distrust of Providence, make unlawful ways
their refuge, causing the wicked Remedies of their fear, to prove the fatal
accomplishers thereof; has still been God's course. Look at the Generations of
old, and see, says the Son of Sirach, did ever any trust in the Lord, and was
confounded? Or did any abide in his fear, and was forsaken, or God leave those,
that had not first left him? Ecclus. 2.10. And, on the other hand, the fear of
the Wicked, says Solomon, or of him that betakes himself to wicked ways, to
keep off what he fears, shall come upon him, Prove. 10.24.

This, I grant, it does not always, in the issue of things here; there being no
Rule in these matters, viz. the Orderings of Providence, but admits of some
exceptions, and wherein, for wise Reasons, God may alter and change sometimes.
But thus it is in ordinary course; and it is not rare and extraordinary
contingencies, but the ordinary course of Events, that must ground our hopes,
and guide our expectations of them. It usually happens so; and is so common,
that it is drawn into a Rule by the Spirit of God, and the carefullest Observers
of Providence. Particularly by Solomon, in several places, who tells us, that
he only, who walks uprightly, walks surely: But that he, who perverteth his
way, shall be known, Prove. 10.9. That whilst the integrity of the upright,
guides, and delivers them, perverseness destroys the transgressors; and the
wicked, instead of standing thereby, shall fall by his own wickedness; being
not extricated, as they hoped, but taken and ensnared in their own Naughtiness,
Prove. 11.3, 5, 6. That whilst Righteousness, though it may seem to endanger, and
expose, yet really keeps him that is upright in the way: Wickedness, on the
contrary, for all it may seem to uphold, overthrows the Sinner, c. 13.6. His
own Wickedness shall take the wicked himself, and he shall be holden with the
Cords of his Sins, c. 5.22.

The great Pretense, for Men's stretching to such unlawful Expedients, is many
times the preservation of their Children or Families, of Religion and the
Church, or other Public Ends. And the Method of Providence is to make them
Fools in their ungodly Expedients, causing them to fall by their wickedness,
And, at the same time, in his own way, often securing those innocent persons,
or holy things, they were afraid, and sinned for. Thus it was in the Case of the
Israelites, when God would have had them go into the Land of Canaan; they would
not go, or trust to his Power to carry them on, but were for turning back
again, for fear, as of themselves, so least their little ones should become a
Prey to the Inhabitants, who were People of very big Bodies, and lived in Towns
of extraordinary strength, Deuteronomy. 1.27, 28.32.39. For this, by Travels in the
Wilderness, God consumed all these men, that thus sinfully Revolted in hopes of
Preservation, v. 35.40. But as for their little ones, for whose sakes they
sinned, lest they should become a Prey to the Canaanites, and which in that day,
having no knowledge between Good and Evil, could not partake of their Fathers
Offenses, he declared he would, and so accordingly he did, bring them in, and
gave it to them for a Possession, v. 39.

Thus is all use of wicked Means, and unlawful Expedients, as a most wicked, so
a most foolish Course. Since there is more done toward success, by Providence,
than by visible Preparations; there must needs be more security thereof, by
Faith in God, in ways of innocence, than by any promising ways of sinning, for
expediency. To offer up our Sins, as Actors under his Providence, is not sure
the likely way to success, if Providence must give success. God i^ never like
to bless what is sought by such Instruments, they are enough with him, to mar
any Design, which they meddle in. So that if we would, not only keep a good
Conscience, or be wise for the next world; but prosper and speed in any Designs
in this World, either for God, or Religion, the Church, or Kingdom, for our
Selves, or our Friends, we should never seek to succeed by the least Sin. We
must never make Lies our Refuge, or Falsify by Word or Practice; nor make our
selves better, or others, even our Enemies, worse than they are. We must forge
no false Reasons, nor brand any with unjust Names, or load them with Slanders.
Nor in any wise break Faith, or pervert Justice, or oppress by violence, no not
even those who sought to oppress us; or get by evil Arts, or wickedly keep what
we have once unrighteously got; or break any other Commandment or Law of God,
when such breach may be suggested, or seem to lie in our way, as an useful
Expedient. Whatever our Designs are, there is no such security of success, as a
good Providence, nor any way, to make so sure of this, as by trusting God, and
keeping in his ways: This is a wiser, and a more likely course, even where it
happens to have less of humane appearance, than any others, by ways of
wickedness. Where the expediency, shall not so much set on, as the wickedness
thereof, by engaging Providence against us, shall backen and defeat our
purposes.

Having thus largely discoursed upon this Branch of Spiritual Prudence, viz.
against pursuing our ends, though never so fair and promising in themselves, by
wicked and unlawful means: For a Conclusion thereof, I shall only add one
Caution, to keep Men from plunging themselves therein, the rather, for that in
this Point, all Men are so like to be put on Trials, and meet with Temptations
to transgress.

That Rule is, especially in great and Concerning Duties, to beware of
beginning a Breach in their Integrity, and stop at the first entrance. When
once a Man gives way, by any considerable Act, to transgress the Bounds, and
make any Advance in such a Business: it is neither for him, nor for any one
else, to say where he shall stop. By corruptly yielding to Do one such ungodly,
or unjust thing, he is in the ready way to do another. From coming in to do
what is bad, he steps into the next disposition, to do what is worse; 'till it
come to that pass, that there is no other stint or measure to his Compliances,
but his Temptations. David at first, thought only to enjoy Bathsheba. But
having given way to go so far, he was willing, when a new necessity called, to
hearken at that time as he had done before, till, from committing Adultery, he
was got in to commit Murder: St. Peter thought at first, only to dissemble, and
conceal his Relation to Christ. But when his own Curiosity, and Carnal
Considerations, had carried him on to that; the Justice of God left him to
Satan, and his own heart, and opportunities of Temptation which he himself had
^ought, to be carried beyond it; not giving over, ^till he had been brought,
first to Deny, and then, with bitter execrations, to forswear his Master. Thus,
when they would tempt God, by engaging themselves in a wicked thing, have the
very best Men been given up, to go on from bad to worse, till they stuck at no
way of serving the new Necessities of their own creating.

Indeed, he that for his Interest, will either corrupt or force his own
Conscience, and yield to do one very ungodly or injurious thing; is very like,
if the same interest require it, to go as far in doing of another. Nay, he is
in much greater probability and preparation to do the latter, than he was to do
the former. For the best guard against these Breaches, is the Virgin niceness,
and first Modesties and Reluctances of Conscience: Which being once violently
rifled, or thrown out, the tempting offer, or sinful necessity, the next time
meets with much less opposition. Conscience, that cried out loudly against it
at the first, perhaps now, after much pains to corrupt it, is made blind, and
sees no evil in it. Or however, having been once forcibly Mastered and
overpowered, what was before a loud Cry, will afterward dwindle into more
silent and soft grumblings, till God, either in Mercy or Judgment, is pleased
to rouse and awaken it. And the Spirit of God, having suffered violence, and
been quite worsted in a long Conflict, withdraws himself, and goes off from
them: being grieved, as St. Paul says, Ephesians. 4.30. or lost and taken away, as
David Complains, Psalm. 51.10, 11. by Men's committing, or persisting, in any
great wickedness. And as he draws off, the busy and watchful Adversary comes
on, and increases his Power over them; especially, when they give up Duty and a
good Conscience, for worldly Gain, which makes God relinquish them, and leave
them to the God of this World, which they thus shamefully prefer before him. As
it happened to Judas, Luke 22.3, 4, 5. and Ananias, Act. 5.3. and as he tried
to have compassed in our Lord himself, endeavoring by his bait of the Kingdoms
of this World, and the Glory of them, or his preferring Wealth and Power before
his Maker, to have got him out of God's Protection, Mat. 4.8, 9. And when by
this means the regret of a Man's own Conscience is almost gone, and the Spirit
of God is daily departing from him, and an evil Spirit coming in its room; he
must needs be in worse condition, and more incapable than he was at first, to
maintain his station.

Besides, in wicked things, the more a Man yields and complies, the more he
needs to do so. New steps and transgressions, bring with them new Necessities,
and one ill act is a snare and argument to another. When once they have begun,
and are got in, they dare not look back, but are to apt to think they must go
on, and do any thing further, that comes under the Notion and Appearance of
being necessary; sometimes to hide, as in David; or to indemnifie, or, perhaps,
to maintain and justify, what has been once ill done. Having lost the true
Balast of Integrity and Innocence, they float now, as the Gale of outward
Necessity, and Convenience drives. Not to mention, lastly, that many times one
great Breach, especially repeated ^reaches, too commonly (God knows,) tempt men
to cast off all thoughts of Repentance, and to take desperate Counsels.
Thinking with themselves, that whatever they are put upon next, it can be no
worse with them, than it is already. And resolving thenceforward, not to be
scrupulous about right and wrong, nor stick at any thing, which comes upon them
in the way they are engaged in; and that they will not forgo the purchase and
profit of the Guilt already contracted, for want of contracting a little more.

If any Person then is sincerely desirous to secure Integrity, and a clear
Conscience; by all means let him keep his hands free from the first, of all
impious, or unrighteous actions, or undertakings. To keep at a distance, and be
no ways entangled, or engaged therein, is one of his best Guards and
Securities. There is a strange fascination and intanglement in several sins,
and they make Men so forsaken of God, and subject to the Devil to 2 Timothy 2.26.
b^ led Captive by him at his will, That they, who are once engaged therein,
seldom recover themselves. Thus, of accompanying with the Adulteress or Lewd
Woman, Solomon observes, that none, that go in unto her, return again, Prove.
2.17. And of Rebellion, Samuel says, that it is like the sin of Witchcraft: True
in this Sense, among others, that it is a bewitching Evil, and commonly keeps
those close whom it has once got in, like an enchanted Circle, 1 Samuel 15.23.
And so it may be said of other sins, that they entangle like Snares, and detain
like Charms and Enchantments. If once a man is got in at all, a very wicked and
unrighteous Affair is like a whirle-pool, which will keep those it has once
caught within its Sphere, and still draw them in more and more.

But, if he has already stepped aside, and fallen therein: the next care must be,
to cherish, and make the most of his Relentings, if he has any; or, to Repent
of his wickedness without delay, and turn back again. Or, if his fall was first
occasioned, and still continued, by an Error and mistake in Judgment, and he
unlawfully engaged therein, as thinking it without blame, through misperswasion;
though he is not so happy, as to secure the Innocence and Integrity of his
Actions, let him however make out, and show forth the sincerity of his good
intention; and not go further in an ill thing, than his own principle and
misperswasion, which is all he has to offer in excuse, or pretend in
justification, can warrant him. It Is a plain sign of Hypocrisy, and argues a
want of sincere and honest disposition, if, upon new turns of necessities, men
shall still start (...) Pretenses. If they let go that, which they gave (...)
as their ground, and professed to proceed (...) before; and seek out a fitter,
when, on (...) new Trial and Emergence, the former ^^ister proves not broad
enough to cover the present Sore. This is not to bring Men's Actions (...) their
Principles, as all must do, that would ^ake any pretense to Virtue and Justice.
But, (...) need is, still to study new Principles, to justify their present
Actions, and serve their present necessities. Whereof interest and fleshly
convenience, is the real cause; and Principles of Honesty and Conscience* with
such (...), are only the assumed Shows, and false Colors.

CHAP. IX. Of Partaking in the Sins of others.
3. A Second Rule, which I shall note under this Branch of Spiritual Prudence,
about Means and Methods, is, that as it does not allow ^s to commit any sins
our selves, for the gaining of our ends, so neither to partake in the sins of
others.

There is a Partnership and Society in sin, and several men may bear their
part, and have a share in the same evil Action. One, as Executing; another, as
Ordering and Directing, Persuading or Enticing to it; a third, by Ministering
helps and succors; a fourth, by approving or commending afterward, by
justification and defense thereof. All these, some as Principles, some as
Accessaries, have a hand in the sin, and are accountable for the same, both
before God and Men.

Now Spiritual Wisdom, knowing how offensive it is to God in all its Accomplices,
and how fatal both to the Actors and Partakers, is not for going shares in any
wickedness. It is ready to partake in the ill that is suffered, which shows
Charity and Compassion; but never in the ill that is acted by other Men. The
Good they do, it would be glad, by any help or encouragement before, or
approbation and espousal after, in some sort to make its own. But as for the
Evil, in regard both to God, and our selves, it can have no more to do with it,
than to declare against it, or to pity and admonish him that does it. Have no
Fellowship with them, says the Apostle, or no (...).
joint share and communication, in the works of darkness, but rather reprove
them, Ephesians. 5.11. And as for those things, that call down the wrath of God, be
not ye partakers of them, v. 6, 7. And like to this, is St. John's warning to
the Elect Lady and her Children, against the Bringers of Damnable Doctrines,
when they meet them on such Errands, not so much as by a Salutation or
encouraging Countenance, to be partaker of his Evil Deeds, 2 Jo. 10.11. And
that of St. Paul to Timothy, to keep himself pure, and not to be partaker of
other men's sins, 1 Timothy 5.22. Come out of her my People, says God to his
Church for this ^^^pose, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and re^^^ve not
of her Plagues, Rev. 18.4.

^ut in the Rules of worldly Wisdom, this is ^^^erwise. For though it has no
Kindness, or (...) to the sin; yet it is Prudence in its ac^^^nt, either in
reality, or appearance, to take (...) with the times: And so, if any way of
^^^kedness comes backed, and driven on by Au^^^rity, or the Heat and Fury of
the Populace, (...) men will take their part therein, as Ungodly ^emporizers.
Or, if the Wickedness comes (...) them, dressed up in Self-interest, and Secular
^^vantage; though they would not take part with (...) sin, yet they are for
taking part of the (...) and so countenance, encourage, or assist the (...),
for the sake of that, thinking in the mean (...), whilst they come in thus for
the Profits, (...) ^ay the Guilt at other men's doors, and leave (...) be
answered for by the Principals and (...) themselves. Thus, instead of getting
out (...) the way, and keeping off from any Ungodly, (...) Unrighteous Course,
as Religion we see re^^^res, their Study is, to come as near to it, as (...)
can. And, though they cannot swallow it in (...) gross, and openly and directly
act therein; (...), to fetch a compass, and give it all the By-Fa^^^rs, and
secret Stroakings that come in their way, by covert participation.

It Is not without Grief of Heart, and true Christian Compassion, that I have
observed, how many of the more hopeful and well disposed minds, have split upon
this Rock, and, as I think, criminally partook in those things, which
themselves have freely condemned; salving all in the mean while, to their own
Consciencies, because they kept their hands free from being the direct and
principal Actors. But if what they did, made them Accessaries and Partakers,
and the Partakers are involved in Guilt and Punishment, with the Principals and
Actors, in any irreligious and unrighteous Business, what are they the better
for this? If thereby they burden their own Souls, and make them answerable and
punishable for the Offense; it is but cold comfort, if the Punishment does come
at all, to distinguish upon what account it comes: whether, for our having done
the thing our selves; or, for making our selves Parties with them that did it,
when done by others. I think it would be an acceptable Service to God, and true
Charity to all Persons at any time concerned herein, to awaken their
Consciences in this Point, by setting down the chief and most usual ways, of
partaking in those sins, whereof others are the main Actors. And this I shall
endeavor to do for them, that being aware thereof, neither the Bait and
Prospect of worldly Advantages, nor Temporizing and Obsequiousness to any
Command of Princes, or Popular Heat and Vulgar Cries for an ill thing, may ever
carry them to share in other men's Guilt, and partake in what, not only the Law
of God, but their own Consciences do condemn.

Besides the immediate Actors, who perform the Execution thereof, these
following are all Partakers in any impious or unrighteous thing, against either
God or Men, and share the Guilt among them.

^. First, he shares in the Guilt, qui jubet, that (...) and Commands it; which
is the Guilt of (...), as of a Magistrate, Master, or Parent. (...) commanders
of an evil thing, are not only (...), but Authors of the wickedness they (...).
Not only their own Motion lies at their (...), as proceeding from the
naughtiness of (...) own Hearts, but also the wickedness of (...). For their
Subjects, move not of them^^lves; nay, if they make conscience of what (...)
do, they must first force both their inclina^^^ns, and their consciences: but
only in dread (...) their Power and Command, or merely in O^^dience. And
therefore to them does the (...) of God more eminently, and especially (...)
such Actions. As, the 1 Samuel 22.17, 18.
slaying of the 85 (...), to Saul, who commanded others to do (...). And the
Murder of Vriah, to 2 Samuel 11.15. etc. 12.9.
David; and (...) Naboth, to 1 King. 21.8, 9, 10. and v. 19, 23, 24.
Ahab and Jezabel: because, by (...) Letters, they had required and given Order
(...) them.

But this Guilt of Superiors, is then most ^^^eing and consummate, when shown,
not only in Personal mandates; but in establishing wick^^ Constitutions, or
publicly decreeing, and ^^quiring from all their Subjects, any impious,
unrighteous, or otherwise unlawful things; so propagating ungodliness, and
breach of all good Conscience, among all their Subjects, that have not the
Piety, or Spirit, to stand out against their sinful Injunctions. Woe unto them
that Decree unrighteous Decrees, says God, Is. 10.1. Upon them lies, not only
the load of their own Personal Guilts; but also the Guilt of all their
Subjects, in such Actions: Whose Criminal Compliance and Obsequiousness, though
it fall upon themselves, yet does not rest there, but rebound^ back from each
to their unrighteous Rulers, since it was only in regard to them, and in (...)
of their Power and Displeasure, that they became Guilty. So that in them, who
were at the head of the wicked Act, and would force all the rest, yea, though
against their own Mind and Conscience, to transgress therein, does the Guilt of
each Offender concenter and unite. As the Guilt of all Israel, in following
Jeroboam's Calves, and Unrighteous Worship, did (...) 1 King. 12.30, 31. etc.
13.33, 34.
him, who, as the Scripture says, 1 King. 15.30. and 2 King. 10.29.
made Israel to sin thereby, and set up, and by Law enforced that impious and
idolatrous Worship.

So that in truth, the greater the numbers are that comply with such Decrees,
and perform their unconscionable and unlawful injunctions; the more have such
Imposers of wickedness, to throw guilt upon their heads, and to heap up
Vengeance for them, and their Posterities. And their only true and real
Friends, though here they are persecuted as their worst Enemies, are they that
honestly and religiously stand out, and stick true and firm to the Truths or
Laws of God, against them. For, whilst all others, against the Great Day of
Audit, are placing new Debts to their Score, and inflaming the final Reckoning;
these spare them. And, by preserving their own uprightness, hinder more Guilt
and Condemnation from being set to their Account, who, without any addition
from them, are like, God knows, from (...) compliances of others, their seeming
friends ^^erein, but real Destroyers, to have infinitely ^^re than ever they
will be able to bear, or ^^count for.

2. Secondly, he pertakes in the Guilt, qui non ^^hibet; who, when he is in
Place and Station for (...) does not duly show himself, to stop and pre^^^t it.

1. Sometimes, Men have the Power in their (...) hands, as Eli had, both as a
Magistrate and (...), over his Sons, either to Cure and Re^^ess, or exemplarily
to punish their shameful ^^ings. And if they neglect to use this Power, (...).
Restraint or Punishment, they partake in their Sins, which such impunity has
encouraged. Thus God 1 Samuel 2.29, 30. etc. 3.13.
charges Eli with his Son's wickedness; and punishes him for it, as well as
them. And tells the Magistrates, that any ways connive (...) him that gives his
Seed to Moloch, and do not (...) him; that he will set his face, not only
against that Man, but against his Family, or the People of his Place; the word
Family sometimes, (as Jer. 8.3. Mich. 2.3.) signifying the some as People, the
People of a place anciently ^^ing reckoned to some one Family, as if they h^d
all sprung from it, as Genesis 10.2, 3, 4, 5, etc. Contra Auxiliatores, vel
obfirmatores ejus, as it is rendered in the Chaldee Paraphrase; i. e. against
themselves, who by not punishing, may be said to confirm the ungodly in his
impiety, as Grotius there notes: And all that go a whoring after, or, as the
Septuagint, (...).
Consent to him, as, by conniving and not punishing, they were interpreted to
do, Lev. 20.4, 5. And St. Paul blames the Pastors at Corinth, as coming in for
a share of Guilt with the incestuous Person, because they had not mourned to
have him taken away, i. e. proceeded to Excommunication, which, in those days,
used to be with Mourning and Lamentation, as at Funerals, 1 Cor. 5.1, 2.6. Such
also was the case of Gallio the Deputy of Achaia, who, when he sat to keep the
Peace, and do Justice, suffered Softhenes to be beaten even before the Judgment
Seat, by a Popular outrage, and cared for none of those things, as the Text
says, Acts 18.12.17. When Rulers can look on, and see ill things done, without
exerting the Power they are entrusted with, to curb and restrain them; or, give
liberty and connivance, as Gallio did, nay, perhaps, encouragement to Rabbles,
to act their Outrage and unjust Violence, either for punishing, or curbing
those they would willingly see brought down: by not giving check to these
wickednesses, they make them their own, and become answerable to God for them.

2. Sometimes, as when it is lodged in a certain number or Body of Men; they are
only sharers in Power, and to act in Concurrence with others, by common Consent
and Opinion. And each one partakes here in any unlawful thing that passes among
them, unless he openly interpose and protest against it, or visibly manifest
his dissent from it. For what is decreed, or done at such Meetings, is all by
their Authority, and in all their Names. And when the Debate comes, whether any
particular thing shall pass as their Act or no, they sit there to speak their
minds. And if they gainsay it not, it goes as if it were their mind; and by
such silence it comes to ^ffect, and they give as much Authority thereto, as if
they had expressly consented. If an unrighteous thing is proposed, and waits for
their consent; if they suffer it to pass on without their denial, it appears
they were either for promoting, or permitting it. They did not prohibit it when
they could, and when they were put thereupon. And qui non prohibet, quando
po^^st, ac debet, jubet, says the Rule: by not prohibiting, they authorized;
their not gainsaying, in Moral estimate, is consenting to it. They are (...) to
do there, what they do visibly. And if then they do not visibly disclaim, and
cast out such an unlawful thing; they visibly approve, or give way to it. Mar.
9.40.
He that is not against us, is on (...) Part, holds true in this case. That is,
when a thing is sought to be carried by any helps, by this saying, he is got
over to its side, who, when he might, will not hinder or oppose it.

Accordingly, when any such thing passes, the construction is, as having every
ones Consent, if (...) gainsays it. Thus it is said, of the Company, or College
and Council of Priests, whose share was so Great in the Jewish Judicatories,
that they Murdered with one Shoulder or Consent: because, if any of them had
any dislike, or inclinations to justice in any Persons case, he kept them to
himself, and, for ends, gave way to what injustice the rest decreed, not openly
dissenting from it, Hos. 6.9. And therefore Joseph of Arimathea, that Good and
just Counselor, as the Scripture styles him, when he was against the Judgment
of the rest of the Council, in the cause of Christ, showed them he did not
partake therein, by his open dissent from it. He had not consented to the
Council and Deed of them, says St. Luke, but had given his opinion and voice
against it: openly owning afterward the innocence of that just Person, and
going in to beg the Body of Pilate, Luke 23.50, 51, 52. It Is not then for men
in such Stations, through timorousness, or politic considerations, to conceal
themselves, when unrighteous, or unconscionable things, are going on. Their
connivance and Permission, who are in Place and under obligation of
Prohibiting, brings Guilt upon them: and, by not forbidding and opposing, they
partake in the evils which are done.

3. Sometimes again, tho they are in no place of Power, to coerce and restrain;
yet they are in place of Teachers and Monitors, to admonish and give warning.
This is the case of Ministers, who from this are styled Watchmen, Ezekiel. 33.7.
and c. 3.17. Watching for your Souls, as they that must give an account, as St.
Paul speaks, Heb. 13.17. Their Care, and Calling, is to keep out sin, or to
Reform it: so if others sin, through their neglect, or fault, they are more
especially accountable for it.

They are more particularly Guilty of the sins of those committed to them, when
their People either fall into any impious, or unrighteous way, or thing, or
continue therein:

1. First, For want of their giving them warning. Thou shall hear the word at
my mouth, and warn (...) from me, says God to the Watchman, Ezekiel. 3.17. and c.
33.7. they must not take the word of their Preaching, from any appearance of
humane Advantages, or serviceableness of any way to Secular Purposes; from its
being set on by the arm of Authority, the heat of People, and cry of the times;
which is not to hear it from God's mouth, but from carnal suggestions. But if
it is a breach of the mind or will of God; however desirable that way may seem
on those worldly accounts, as his Ministers, they must speak his word, not the
World's, and in his Name declare against it. And if any perish at such times,
for want of their giving warning, God declares he will exact his Blood at their
hands. When I lay a stumbling Block, or Opportunity and Temptation to fall from
any Righteous way, before a Righteous Man; if he turn from his Righteousness,
and commit Iniquity, because thou have not given him warning, his Blood will I
require at thy hand, Ezekiel. 3.20. Or, when a wicked man, that is already plunged
in Sin and Death, continues therein, for that thou blowest not the Trumpet, and
give him not warning, nor speak to warn the wicked from his wicked way, to
save his life: his blood will I require at thine hand, v. 18. and c. 33.6.8.

The Ministers work is to save Souls alive, by the ministry of the Word. And if
any Souls dye, for want of the word; their death is owing to a want in his
ministration: and he is guilty of the blood of Souls, by not speaking the word,
or being silent. His giving warning, is necessary, as God says in Ezekiel, as
to save his Peoples, so to deliver his own Soul, c. 3.19. and c. 33.9. And St.
Paul says, they must keep back nothing that is profitable for them, Acts 20.20.
but declare to them the whole counsel of God, that they may be pure from the
blood of all men, v. 26, 27. But of all other times, it is not for them to hold
their tongues, when danger and temptation comes. Then their Flocks need most of
all to have, and take warning; and therefore then are they more especially
bound to give it. When those ways of death are recommended to them, the Word is
most necessary to keep them alive; and therefore then especially the Ministers
thereof are to administer it. When the Watchmen sees the sword a coming, then
is he at his peril, says God, to blow the Trumpet, and warn the People of it,
Ezekiel. 33.6. When he sees the Wolf coming, i. e. any terror or wolfish Cruelty,
to force on an ill thing; then is his time to call out to the Sheep, and by the
greater fears of Religion, to guard them the best he can against it, as we
learn from our Lord, Jo. 10.11, 12.

2. Secondly, Through their misleading them, if they do not only fail to warn
them from an ill way, but go before them therein. The Shepherd is to lead out
his sheep, and go before them; and they are to follow him, as our Lord says,
Joh. 10.4. And their going wrong must therefore be more especially chargeable
on him that leads them wrong; the st^aying of the Flocks, imputed to the
straying of the Guides. Especially, when they lead them wrong, in the
Ministries of their Function and in the very house of God send up from
themselves, and their Congregations, such an Offering, as, instead of ho^ouring
God, shall profane him. This God mightily resented among the Jews. Both
Prophet and Priest are profane, yea, in my house have I found their
wickedness, says the Lord. Therefore th^s says the Lord, concerning the
Prophets, Behold, I will feed them with wormwood, and make them drink the water
of gall: for from the Prophets of Jerusalem is profaneness gone forth into all
the Land, Jer. 23.11.15. These ways, if their People follow, and are led by
them, turn even their piety into profaneness. Or, if they see through them,
and discern the Pollution, it makes the Lord's People to transgress, or (...),
as the Septuagint render it, i. e. it makes them refrain or forbear God's
service; yea, to abhor the Offering of the Lord, which God took so heinously at
Ely's Sons, and sets down as a special aggravation of their wickedness, 1 Samuel
2.17.24.

And thus it is, when the Ministers of God shall go before the People, in an
idolatrous or superstitious worship. Or in prostituting and profaning of
Prayers and Praises, to immoral uses, (immorality and injustice being as
certainly abominable to God in worship, as superstition is;) applying all the
Solemnities of Prayer and Thanksgiving, to the countenancing and carrying on of
wicked and unrighteous things. As the Jews, who, whilst they were going on in
the greatest immoralities, as Theft, Murder, Perjury, etc. would in the midst
thereof recommend themselves and their ways to God, in his own house, (so
profaning the most sacred Services of Religion, to credit and set off their
wickedness,) and say, we are delivered to Do, or, as the Syriack, deliver us, O
Lord, whilst we are Doing all these abominations. By which profane usage, his
house, as he says, was become a den of Robbers, or a place to protect, to show
forth, and carry on injustice, in their eyes, Jer. 7.9, 10, 11. Or, when they
go before them, in horribly perverting the Solemnities of Repentance, their
Fastings and Humiliations, not to cure, but to carry on their unrighteousness.
As the Lord complained of the Jews, who fasted for unjust strife and debate,
and to smite, not in a righteous cause, but with the fist of wickedness: not
with intent to let the oppressed go free, and to break every yoke, (or depraved
judgment and sentence, as the Chaldee;) nor to loose the bands of wickedness,
i. e. tied on by the Congregation of wicked Judges, in fraud of the innocent,
as from the Chaldee Grotius notes; but to bind those bands still faster on,
Isa. 58.4.6. Or, lastly, when they shall lead them on in gross hypocrisy and
dissimulation, uttering those desires or affections to God in words, which they
neither have themselv^s, nor would have others to have, in their hearts: which
may come under the sending forth hypocrisy through the Land, or gross
dissimulation and plain mockery of God, that, according to the rendering of the
margin, is so severely threatened, Jer. 23.15. When the Ministers of God, who,
in Prayers and Devotions, are the mouths of the People, shall by these, or any
other ways, put ill things into their mouths, and lead them on, not in a pure,
but in a polluted and profane Service; or otherwise, in any wicked, or
unrighteous thing: they are accountable for their followers, as well as for
themselves; and must expect to share in their Peoples unrighteousness or
impiety, as well as to bear the burden of their own.

3. Thirdly, Through false Doctrine, when they teach them to Isa. 5.20.
take darkness for light, preach peace where they should denounce judgments:
and so, either at first seduce, or afterward s^rengthen and confirm them in
any ungodly, or unrighteous thing. This is like to be the consequence of the
former. For, if once the Guides go before the People in an unlawful thing,
their practice will be headed by a Doctrine, to call in others, and to justify
and bear out both what their People and themselves have done. And thus to teach
Men to sin, is to be guilty of their sins with a witness. He that shall break
the least of these Commandments, and shall teach men so; shall be called the
least in the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 5.19. And thus it is, when the Ministers
of Christ instruct and hearten on their followers, to do any thing contrary to
right and justice, to Christian simplicity, truth, and faithfulness, to their
Promises or Oaths, to the Duties they owe God, or God's Vicegerents, or to any
Commandment, respecting either God, our Neighbor, or our selves.

This teaching others to go against the obligation of any of God's Laws, is
commonly by distinguishing away a Duty, so to shorten and abridge it, that it
shall not reach us. Or to blanch and varnish over our own actions with
palliations, or fair Pleas and Pretenses of excuse; that they may not be
thought to oppose, or infringe it. This pains, in making such Fig. leave covers
for moral Nakedness, and starting plausible Palliations for foul Practices, God
taxes as daubing in the false Prophets. One, that is the People, Built a Wall,
says he, viz. of ill manners: and lo! others, i. e. the false Prophets whom he
there accuses, Daubed it with untempered Mortar, i. e. palliated or blanched it
over with fair Colors and Pretenses, that through these, as Grotius notes, men
might not see the filthiness of their Vices, Ezekiel. 13.10.

Such was their Pretense, who bore the Jews in hand, that the securing of
Religion, or of Gods Temple and Service, would defend and warrant them in any
Acts of immorality and unrighteousness. The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of
the Lord, was what they had to oppose, as a sufficient defensative, against all
denunciations of judgments, for perversion of Justice; and which therefore God
tells them were lying words, and would fail those that relied on them, Jer.
7.4.8. And when there was nothing but Bribery and Corruption, the Heads judging
for Reward, and the Priests teaching for hire, and the Prophets Divining for
Money: yet would they say, none evil can come upon us, and that leaning on the
Lord, because the Lord is amongst us, Mich. 3.11. And this Grotius conceives
was the Salvo of those false Prophets of Jerusalem, who so strengthened the
hands of Evildoers, that none returned from his wickedness; viz. as he
explains it, by flattering them in their vices, and promising things
prosperous, because of the Temple, and the House of David, Jer. 23.14. These
Salvos and Palliations, they wo^ld still start anew, as, in the way they were
i^gaged in, any came to need them, and fit them to every ones case. Which God,
in Ezekiel, calls making Kerchifs, or Vales, for every Stature, i. e. as he
Comments, fair Pretenses to cover the sins both of great and small, Ezekiel.
13.18. And these base flatteries, to please and bolster up Sinners, St. Paul
absolutely disclaims through the whole course of his Ministry. Neither at any
time used we flattering words, courting favor by speaking pleasing things, or
suiting our Preaching and Doctrines to the humors or necessities of Men, like
the temporizing Gnostics, 1 Thessalonians. 2.5.

These Palliations and Pretenses they would still change, as put to it by new
necessities. Or, go off from one, when it was sore pressed, or seemed more
weak, to another that could promise to help them better out, and was thought
able to bear up that wicked or unrighteous Act which they sought to defend by
it. And accordingly, of the False Prophets, the Spirit of God observes, that
they caused his People to err, as by their Lies, so by their Lightness. Still
shifting Principles and Pretenses, as serving turns and necessities did
enforce; thinking and saying, now this thing, and anon that, very unconstantly,
as Vatablus explains it, Jer. 23.32.

And by such Salvos and deceitful Pretenses, shifted as often as their
Necessities or new Trials would require it, they bolstred up Sinners in their
sins, and made their Consciences be at ease in the way of their
unrighteousness. This God styles, sewing Pillows under the Elbows, it being a
way to make take their sins soft and easy, whereupon to settle and rest
themselves; and for which he denounces Woe against the false Prophetesses,
Ezekiel. 13.18. Or, at other times, speaking Peace to them, to whom no Peace, but
terror and indignation does belong. As the false Prophets did, against whom God
declares, that his hand should be upon them; and that they should not be in the
Assembly of his People, or place of teaching any more; nor their Names stand in
the Roll of Israel; nor they ever return into their Country again, as others
should at the end of the Captivity: because, even because, they have seduced my
People, Jer. 23.17.
saying Peace, and there was no Peace, Ezekiel. 13.9, 10.

Now, when the Ministers of Christ, and Guides of Souls, shall not only by
neglect of warning, contribute to the Peoples sin; but shall come, moreover,
themselves at any time to lead them on by Example and Doctrine, and speak Peace
to them therein; it makes a deplorable State, and must needs make a sad
reckoning. For,

1. This must needs draw the People by Troops into unrighteous ways; and
prevent their return from them. Especially, if it happen that they have a great
appearance of present ease and interest in this world, to draw them on: as well
as the Authority and Doctrine of their Guides, to justify them therein. So
that by this means they will be answerable for the sinning, and sinful
persisting of their People and Followers; which will lie not only at the
Peoples, but also at their Teachers Doors. Thus God charges those Prophets,
who, by starting Salvos for unri^hteous Actions, or v. 10.
dawbing for sinners, or v. 18.
^^wing Pillows, had made them hope for Life in those ways; that they had
strengthened the hands of the wicked, that he should not return from his wicked
way, Ezekiel. 13.22. And this again he lays to the charge of the Prophets of
Jerusalem, that by their Lies and Adulteries, or Adulterations and
^alsifications of their Duty in these points, by ^^ch Salvos, they had
strengthened the hands of evildoers, that none does return from his wickedness.
Which he cries out of as an horrible thing, and for which he says, they are all
of them as abominable to him as Sodom, Jer. 23.14. Whereas, had they in the day
of trial stood firm, and had caused his People to hear his words; then they
(...) have turned them from their evil way, and from the evil of their doings,
v. 22.

^. And by drawing them into sin, and detaining them therein, it throws them
into death and destruction, which lays their blood, as the Scripture says, at
the Watchmens doors. For whether it be with, or without warning, that the
People come into the ways of death; it is death still, which is at the end
thereof. The same wicked man shall dye in his iniquity, though thou give no
warning, says God, Ezekiel. 3.18. he shall dye in his sin, v. 20. and c. 33.8.
Though the false Prophets deceived them, as Jeremiah v. 13.
suggested to God in their excuse; yet shall the People fall into ruin, and I
will pour their wickedness upon them, Jer. 14.16. When the blind are led by the
blind, says our Savior, or a blind People by blind Guides, both shall fall
into the ditch, Mat. 15.14. The People at such times are generally misled by
false Guides, because they wish for such, and will hear no others. The
Providence of God leaves the^ not utterly destitute of faithful Monitors, but
they turn a deaf ear to them. They are bent upon wicked and unrighteous ways,
and love to be flattered and bolster'd up therein: yea, too often, God knows, are
ready to bite and devour any that shall freely and faithfully reprehend them.
And this makes their Guides to lean to flattering Doctrines; to do, and say,
what will please, not what should profit. So that here is a circle in sin: they
first lead, or drive their Guides, and then are led by them. And if they will
be thus misled into destructive courses, it is at their own peril. They are
misled into death, as well as into dangers: their being misled will burden and
condemn their leaders; but will not clear and excuse themselves.

3. It casts, as the People, so the Guides and Ministers themselves, into daily
and new trains of sin. The way of virtue and uprightness is uniform, and always
the same: but there is nothing, but variety without end, in folly and
wandering. When once men give way to make false steps; after they have made
one, they will soon be called upon to make another, and never know when to give
over. It is in ill ways, as it is in ill reasonings, there is a nearness and
connection among them: and once grant one wicked method, which is a moral
absurdity, and, according to the Rule, dato uno absurdo infinita sequentur,
infinite more will follow it. Thus God tells the false Prophets, who
strengthened the (...) of the evil doers, by their unrighteous shifts (...)
Salvos, that, having got thus upon an ill ^^^tom, and in unrighteous ways,
their way should (...) unto them as slippery ways, wherein they would (...) be
able to hold their feet; and that also in (...) darkness, where they would not
have light e^ough to see where they might make the ^^^est step; and after all,
that in this way they (...) be driven on. And numerous must their ^^lls be, who
are posted on from thing to thing, (...) all in a way where they have no light,
and most unsure footing, Jer. 23.12.

4. It also intraps, and punishes them in these sins. By taking these false
ways, they do not usually escape, but meet their fears; and, (...) of getting
from, run into troubles and calamities. Their false ways, and flattering hopes,
and talk of deliverance from threatened evils, God turns into real overthrow by
them. Thus, of those Prophets, that would promise deliverance by their own
false ways, and fancied grounds, (...) a People that did not put away, but hold
fast their unrighteousness, and perversions of justice, and say the sword and
famine shall not be in this Land; by sword, and famine, shall those Prophets be
consumed, says God, Jer. 14.15. And to those false Prophets, whose study lay
in excusing and blanching over sins, by unsound pretenses and palliations, or
daubing the wall with untemper'd mortar, as it is called in Ezekiel, God
declares, that the wall shall fall, and that they shall be consumed in the
midst thereof, Ezekiel. 13.14. Their ways are slippery, and dark ways, as we heard
from the Prophet Jeremy, and when driven on, they shall fall therein, and have
evil brought upon them, Jer. 23.12.

5. It will bring them to shame, at the discovery of the rottenness, and
unsoundness of their Principles. Their daubing is liken'd to untemper'd mortar,
which, for want of straw, or good tempering, cannot stick long together. It
will first or last be broke to pieces by God, who sets himself against it, to
disgrace and overthrow it. Though it strengthen it self never so much, in names
and numbers; and though men should still fall off, and the way of righteousness
be forsaken of all its friends, and greatest visible supporters: yet will God
never desert that way, though man does; and when some forsake it, he will not
want an instrument, but raise up others to defend it. No Combinations of men
shall ever make falsehood to be truth, or wrong to be right. Nor, as he told the
Jewish daubers, will he allow them long to appear so, before he wash off the
paint, and break down the wall, and discover the foundation of it. Say unto
them that daub it with untemper'd mortar, says he, that it shall fall: there
shall be an overflowing shower, to wash it away, and hail stones shall beat it
down, and a stormy wind shall rent it, Ezekiel. 13.11. I will rent it with a
stormy wind, in my fury, says he again, v. 13. I will break down the wall that
ye have daubed, v. 14. I will accomplish my fury upon the wall, and upon them
that daubed it with untemper'd mortar. To wit, the Prophets of Israel, who thus
plaster'd over a wall of wicked ways, with a daubing of untemper'd, or unsound
Salvos and Pretenses, v. 15, 16. Repeating it thus often, as ad v. 14.
Calvin notes, because the People were so strangely bewitched (...) these fair
covers and palliations. These Principles, as he continues to add, shall be lost
and buried: I will say unto you, the wall is no more, (...) they that daubed
it, v. 15. They shall be ^^id so bare, so openly detected, and universally
condemned, as to turn into a reproach and byword. When the wall is fallen,
shall it (...) be said unto you, where is the daubing wherewith (...) have
daubed it? v. 12.

6. Lastly, To complete the sad consequences of such falls, in the Guides of
Souls, as they are thus full of guilt, so are they, on the other side, of all
others the most empty of hopes, and appearances of cure. The Ministers of
Christ are the reformers of manners; like the (...), as our Mat. 5.13.
Lord compares them, saying, ye are the salt of the earth, which is to season
all other things, and keep out putrefaction and rottenness. If the People sin
then, the Guides are set to season and amend them. But when the Guides
themselves are fallen, to lead others on, and teach them unrighteous ways; what
so likely means is there left, for their new seasoning, and reformation? If the
salt have lost its savor, wherewith shall it be salted? It is thenceforth good
for nothing, there being no use for insipid salt, but is to be cast out, and
trodden under foot of men, was the saying of our Lord, Mat. 5.13. Have salt in
your selves, therefore, is well added in St. Mark, since, when the savor is
once lost, it is so hard to restore it, Mar. 9.50.

By these things it may appear, how the Guides of Souls, who are in place of
warning and instructing, and Magistrates, or Men in power, who are in Authority
of punishing or restraining, may partake of other men's sins, by not prohibiting.

3. Thirdly, He partakes in the guilt, qui ministrat, that acts in
subordination under an higher Power, or ministers in an unlawful business.

The Roman Law was more favorable to persons under Command, imputing the
action, not to the inferior, who was but as the instrument, but to the
superior, who required, and was the Author of it. To that purpose are these
rules of Law. Velle non creditur, qui obsequitur imperio Patris, vel Domini. ad
Calcem Just. instir. p. 219.
Reg. Juris 4. ex Vlpiano. Is damnum dat, qui jubet dare; ejus vero nulla culpa
est, cui parere necesse sit. Ib. p. 236.
Reg. Jur. 169. e Paulo. Particularly as to Servants, they were so much under
their Masters power and command, as not to be accounted a separate head in Law,
nor was an action to be commenced either by them, or against them. Cum servo
nulla actio est. Ib. p. 230.
Reg. Jur. 107. e Gaio. Ad ca, quae non habent Atrocitatem facinoris, vel
sceleris, ignoscitur servis, si vel Dominis, vel his qui vice Dominorum sunt,
(veluti tutoribus,) obtemperaverint. Ib. p. 23
Reg. 157. ex Vlpiano.

But as to the account of Conscience and Religion, Christ tells his followers,
that they must be no Man's Servant in a forbidden thing. For he that is called,
being another Man's Servant, is called to be the Lord's Free man, and must be
at liberty to serve him. Being bought with a price, they must not be the
Servants of Men, 1 Cor. 7.22, 23. Among those that are baptized into Christ,
there is no difference of bond or free, but the same Rule of living, and way to
Heaven for both, Gal. 3.27, 28. Col. 3.10, 11. So that the Pretense of being
under Authority, and acting in subordination, must never carry any Christian
against any of his Lord's Precepts. If it is an unlawful thing, as a Christian,
or as Christ's Servant, he cannot minister therein. And if, notwithstanding the
voice of his heavenly Lord to the contrary, in regard to an earthly Lord, he
will yield to minister and act in it: he dips his hands in the guilt thereof,
and is answerable for it. Woe to them, says God, not only that decree
unrighteous decrees, as Judges and Rulers; but also to them, that write
grievousness, or, as the margin, to the writers that write grievousness, i. e.
the Scribes, that write down and promulge what in justice the other have
prescribed, Isa. 10.1. Thus the Captains of fifties and their Companies, who
would go upon the impious errand, of apprehending the Lords Prophet, were
guilty, and punished accordingly, as well as he that sent them, 2 King. 1.9,
10, 11, 12. And one thing among others of higher Nature, whereby the Scripture
expresses Judas's partaking with the Jews in that Wickedness, is his being
Guide to them that took Jesus, Act. 1.16. Accordingly, the Apostolical Can. 71.
Canons punish Christians, for performing ministerial services, as carrying
Oil, and lighting the Lamps in the Gentile Temples, or Jewish Synagogues. And
on the invasion of the Goths, and other Barbarians, who filled those parts of
the Empire with Spoils and Murders, the Canons of St. Gregory Thaumaturgus,
(confirmed by the 6. Genesis Council in Trullo, Can. 2.) Censure those Christians,
who, tho under their power as their Captives taken by them before, would yield
to come along with the Barbarians in these incursions, to (...) St. Greg.
Thaumat. Can. 7.
show them the ways, or houses, which the others were ignorant of.

4. Fourthly, He is a sharer in the Guilt, Qui adjuvat, who not only Ministers
under another, as an inferior, whereof before; but, as an Equal or Complice,
helps it forward. He that will freely furnish out necessaries, or do his part
to bring it about, or any way help another to Sin, therein Sins with him.

Thus it is,

When they will put their Forces, or Furniture, to his, as to a common stock,
by a joint Supply to accomplish and bring it about. Cast in thy Lo^ with us,
let us all have one Purse: was the Voice of those that invited others to come
in for a share in their Wickedness, Prove. 1.14.

When they are to be Partakers in, and have a Dividend of the Profit. The
Receiver, as we use to say, is as Bad as the Thief. And when thou saw a
Thief, thou consentedst with him; or, by accepting a Proffered share of his
Gettings, came in to be a Consenter, or Complice in his wickedness, Ps. 50.18.

When they are Partners with them, in their Counsels, Cares, and Studies, to
bring their wickedness to effect. Thus in the Psalmist it follows, and have
been Partaker with the Adulterers, one entrusted with their Counsels, and
laying thy head together with theirs, for the accomplishment of their Lusts.
This is being of their Club, and coming in to the Confederacy and Counsel of
the wicked: which is the way, not only to partake in the ill they Do; but to
lose all Remains of Virtue and Goodness, and come to be as bad as they. If
Designers of ill, shall form themselves in Bodies, and meet to Consult, and
Carry on their Ungodly, and Unrighteous ways; it is high time, for all that
would keep innocent, to stand off, and look to themselves. The warning of
Jacob, is the best Advice that can be given in this Case. O! my Soul, Come not
thou into their Secret, and unto their Assembly, mine Honor be not thou
united, Genesis 49.6. Such Accomplices may have their several Posts in acting; but,
being all Privy to the thing, and acting in their Respective Stations to help
it on, they are all as one man in the Sin. Paul was a Principal in the Death of
Stephen, tho his Part was not to throw a Stone, but to keep the Raiment of
those that slew him, Act. 22.20. Being all engaged in the same Cause, tho some
may have a different task therein; as his part is, that goes down to the
Battle, so shall his part be that tarryeth by the Stuff, says David, they
shall part alike, 1 Samuel 30.24. And agreeable to this, is the 71. Canon of St.
Basil ad Amphilochium, decreeing equal Punishment, to the (...), those that are
conscious or Accomplices; as to the (...), the Actors and Effectors of any
Wickedness.

When they Persuade to it: for to Persuade an ill thing, is to bear a Part in
it. As Eve did Adam, to eat of the forbidden Fruit; who was taxed, not only for
her own, but for his Sin, and for being first in the Transgression, Genesis 3.16,
17. and 1 Timothy 2.12.14. And as Jezabel was, for the wickedness of Ahab, because
she stirred him up to it, 1 King. 21.25. And if, by importunities, they urge
and weary those to Do a Wicked or Unjust thing, who are timorous, or backward
and unwilling to Do it of themselves: they show more Malice, and come in to
Partake higher, and be Deeper in Guilt, than the very Actors. So our Savior
speaks, in the Case between the Jews, and Pilate: they urging and importuning
him to Crucify our Lord, against his own Desire and judgment. He that
delivered me unto thee, says he, has the greater Sin, Jo. 19.11. And so it is
in the unjust Clamours of the Populace, (whether greater or lesser Vulgar)
when, at any time, they seek to terrify and overawe Magistrates and Judges,
and, under the Name of demanding Justice, call for the greatest iniquity, and
unjust Violence: which brings all the innocent Blood, that is thereby shed,
upon their own heads.

When they furnish out Provisions for it: as still to set on strong Drink
before those, who, as they plainly see, Design to be intemperate; or, lend a
Sword to one whom they perceive intending to commit Murder therewith; or, bring
a man a burning Coal wherewith to Fire the Temple; or willingly to furnish out,
and equip a Person any other ways, for a wicked and unrighteous Business. This
Administering of Furniture and Provision, for an Unlawful Act, is to partake in
it. For those are a necessary help, without which the Actor, as wanting matter
to sin withal, would not be able to fulfill his Lust; and so will readily own
himself beholding to them for it. To. 13.14.
Make no Provision for the flesh, to fulfill the Lusts thereof, is a Rule to
keep clear of Sin, either in our selves, or others. The Law requiring us to
Love our Neighbor, as we do our selves; and no more to set on sin, or help out
an unlawful Deed, in their Case, than in our own.

When they Express Good wishes, and Pray for success to it. For, since Events
depend most on Providence, Prayers to God are among the highest Assistances:
And a man cannot show a more real Concern and Espousal of any Act, than by
Endeavoring the best he can to engage God for it. He that bids him God speed,
is Partaker of his Evil Deeds, says St. John, 2 Jo. 11.

When they go out Lovingly to Meet and Welcome them, or Friendly Harbor and
Receive those in their Houses, who are going upon ungodly, or unrighteous
Errands. This shows their heart goes along, and that they are ready to further,
as it falls in their way, and take part with them. Thus, Jehonadab's heart
being Right with Jehu's, is set off by his coming to Meet him, 2 King. 10.15.
And, Receive not the bringer of false Doctrine into your Houses, says St.
John, when he Cautions against Partaking in his Evil Deeds, 2 Jo. 10.11. And
thus, on the Canon of St. Basil, equallizing the Accomplices or conscious, to the
Actors of a wicked business, ad Can. 71. S. Basil. ad Amphiloch.
Balsamon notes, that he, who Hides and Harbors a Thief, is a Thief in the
account of the Civil Law. And those, who were studious to conceal and shelter
the man who had offered his seed to Moloch, or to hide their eyes from
discovering him, the Law taxes as going a whoring after him, or, as the
Septuagint, (...).
Consenting and thinking the same with him, Lev. 20.4, 5.

5. Fifthly, he partakes in the Guilt, Qui approbat, that is pleased with an
ill thing, or Applauds and Defends it, or him that does it. For this shows such
a man's Heart is a Party, tho his hand was not: and that he wants only
opportunity, and temptation to Do the like. And by Approving afterward, he
confirms him that did the Deed; and encourages him to persist therein, or to go
on. Nay, such come in oftentimes, not only as Partakers; but, by way of
aggravation, as being worse than the Principals and Actors: these engaging
themselves therein without the others Temptations, which may plead some
infirmity; and that argues them to have more Malice, and to be more fully bent
on the Wickedness. So, in the rank of Sinners, these are set higher by St.
Paul: not only Do the same, but have Pleasure in those that Do them, To. 1.32.

Such are

He that inwardly delights, and takes Complacence in a wicked, or unrighteous
Act: which is to take part thereof, in Will and Affection. And this is one
thing, whereby the Scripture expresses Readiness Partaking in St. Stephen's
Murder. And Saul was (...), approving and well pleased with it, or Consenting
to his Death, Act. 8.1. It is what the Apostle so severely Censures in the
Romans, that what ill they did not act themselves, they were glad of, and had
Complacence in, when they saw, or heard it done by others. Not only Do the
same, but take Pleasure in those that Do them, To. 1.32. Quid refert, says
Philip. 2.
Cicero, ^rum voluerim fieri, an gaudeam Factum? It Is the same thing, whether a
man wills before to have a thing done, or rejoices in it when it is done. The
Will in both is the same: And if he did not will it before the Fact, that was
only, as not being informed thereof, or asked the question.

He that Praises it. Quid interest inter Suasorem facti, and probatorem. Cic.
ib.
He is as Guilty that Applauds, as he that Persuades to it, says Cicero. Nay he
comes in deeper than a mere Actor, and turns Factor for it. For to Praise, is
both to justify, and take part with him that did it; and to recommend, and
take part before hand with any other that shall do it. It sets off the
Wickedness, not only as an innocent, but as a worthy and honorable thing: So
to make the Offender, instead of turning Penitent, to grow Proud thereof; and
to draw in others, (men beng naturally covetous of Honor,) to Do the same. And
he, that looking on one side, will Praise the Evil, looking on the other, will
be as ready to Vilify, and Expose the contrary Good. So that such Commenders,
and Extollers of Unlawful Acts, in the degrees of Guilt, may bid fair for the
top of David's Scale, viz. to sit down in the Seat of the scornful, Ps. 1.1.
And thus a Commender partakes, not only when he Signalizes himself, and is
particular in Praises, but if he strikes in with the common Cry, and bears a
part in the popular Voice, when it is unjustly loud, to cry up ill, or to cry
down any virtuous and good things. Had we been in the days of our Fathers, say
the Scribes and Pharisees, we would not have been partakers with them in the
blood of the Prophets, viz. By joining in the general Cry and Clamours for
their Blood, or Applauses of those that shed it, Mat. 23.30. And St. Paul gives
it as one instance of his partaking in the death of the Saints, that, when they
were put to death, he Concurred in the Popular Acclamations, and bore his part
in the Common Cry, or gave his Voice against them, Act. 26.10. Thus easily and
unwarily may rash, or timorous and complying Persons, in Hot and Violent Times,
plunge themselves in guilt, by Applauding as the number does, and speaking
well, as others about them do, of any impious or Unjust Ways or Acts, which
those times shall happen to be fond of.

Next to him that thus Praises and Extols, I add him that Justifies and Defends
it. Such men will maintain it, if not as meriting praises, yet, however, as
innocent and blameless. To become thus a Pleader and Advocate for any wicked or
Unjust Act, is highly to take the part thereof. It has many Partakers, on
account of good will and inferior assistance, among those that cannot pretend
to be the Patrons and Defenders of it. He that will undertake to Defend, is no
whit inferior to him that Commits a Fault; nay, in great respects beyond him.
In as much, as he that Commits it may be carried on against his mind, by
temptation, and infirmity of passion: but he that Defends it, is for it in mind
and judgment.

Next to this, he Partakes, who, though he does not come openly and fully to
Defend, yet ^isibly Countenances and Approves it; so far as he joins his will
and carriage, his opinion and suffrage to the Offenders, so far he partakes in
the Offense. Every expression of Approbation, in proportion to its degree, puts
him into the Evil-doer's Cause, and makes it his own.

Now, such Countenance and Approbation it is, when they are kind and friendly,
as I noted, in Saluting, Entertaining, or going out to Meet him, as he goes
about the Evil Thing. Do not Salute, or bid him God speed, nor receive him into
your houses, that ye partake not with the bringer of false Doctrine, was the
Rule given by St. John.

When they look on in the Act, without any show of Horror or Dislike, and as
Men pleased and delighted with it. This is to show Favor to an ill thing,
which is to partake with it. Accordingly, St. Paul gives this as one instance
of his being a Party to the death of St. Stephen, that he was standing by, or
looking on with Liking, as one Consenting to them, Act. 22.20. And therefore he
directs us, when we are present thereat, to manifest Dislike, or Reprove them
in a Work of Darkness, that we may have no fellowship with it, Ephesians. 5.11. And
thus the Fathers taught the Christians, about communicating with the Sins of
the Heathen Shows or Spectacles. We think it no great difference, says Legate.
pro Christ. p. 38.
Athenagoras, whether a man be a Pleased Spectator, or an Author of the
Murder. Whilst Willingly, and with Approbation they behold them, they act over
all the things that are done, by seeing, and assenting to them, says St. De
Gubernat. Dei, l. 6. p. 191. ed. Ox.
Salvian.

When they would put on the outward dress, and appear like him that does it.
This is in appearance to partake with the sin, though in heart they are against
it. And accordingly, to the World they appear as Actors therein, and are
reputed as Parties to it. They go Halting indeed, and it may be are not what
they seem. But though they do not admit the whole, they take part therein: the
outward show and form, though not the inward Sentiment and Approbation. This it
to Do what Elihu justly reprehended, but unjustly fastened upon Job, to go in
company with the workers of iniquity, and walk with wicked men: or to borrow
their shape, and say and Do, show and seem, as if a man were one of them, Job
34.8. Thus did the Judaizing Gnostics, who, to avoid Persecution, said they
were Jews, and seemed zealous for Moses; but inwardly were not, nor kept the
Law, (as St. Gal 6.12, 13.
Paul also notes,) Rev. 2.9. Thus also, as I formerly observed, were the
Libellatici of the Primitive Church; who, though in truth they had done no such
thing, yet sought to be numbered, and pass among those that had done sacrifice
to Idols. But besides, the insincerity hereof, which I have showed above, this
is plainly to take part with those ungodly ways, giving them the visible part
and appearance, whilst the invisible is Reserved to God. It is Halting between
two Opinions, as if God, who in point of Worship declares himself a jealous
God, would in that Worship admit Error and Wickedness to go halves with him,
and be his Partners, carrying away the outward, whilst he does the inward
Service.

Lastly, he shares in the Guilt, who, though he does not inwardly approve, nor
Praise it to others, yet deceitfully Complements the Actor of an i^pious or
unrighteous thing, and flatteringly ^^^lauds it to himself. This Carries with
it the Guilt of praising an evil thing, which it does to the Guilty person, and
aggravates it with Falsehood and Dissimulation, speaking therein contrary to
their own Opinion. It Flatters the Offender in his Evil Way, which is to harden
him in his Sin, and bar all thoughts of Repentance or Restitution, and make him
not only ready, but ambitious to repeat the same again upon the next
Temptation. And this is to partake in one Sin, and to prepare him for more,
laying before him new snares, both of Sin and Danger. A man that flatters his
Neighbor, spreads a Net for his feet, says Solomon, Prove. 29.5. A flattering
mouth, says he again, works ruin, Prove. 26.28. So that such a Caressing and
extolling Fatterer comes in, and Partakes, as a cause, both of his sin and Fall.

6. To all these ways of Partaking in the Sins of others, may be added, lastly,
the contributing thereto, by the scandal of our Falls, or ill Ex^^ples. All ill
Examples are but too powerful in promoting ill things. Good Examples are not so
successful in kindling Virtue, as bad ones are in Propagating Vice. The main
Reason is, because Wickedness is more agreeable to corrupt Nature and
inclination; and Virtue and Holiness are Cross to it. An ill Example leads them
to follow Nature, but a good one to overruled and subdue it. So they readily
follow one, because it calls them only to please themselves, and are more
hardly wrought on by the other, as calling them to Self-Denials. Which is the
true Cause, why the Devil and his Servants have so many more Followers in this
world, than God and his Saints: he and his instruments inviting them still to
ways that pursue their fleshly Lusts and Passions, but the other to curb and
restrain them.

Now the State of Mankind being thus, and corrupt Nature like tinder, most ill
Examples, that are all as so many sparks of fire, will be apt to catch one or
other. But then they are most unhappily influential, when ill things are
committed by Parents and Magistrates, or by Men in Power and Authority over
others. For then, besides their conduciveness to ends and inclinations on other
accounts, they are taken up, as the way to have an air of greatness, or to gain
favor, and recommend themselves; or to be like those whom Nature has made
dear, or Honor great and glorious in our eyes. Or, when they are acted by
Persons of note and eminence, for Wisdom and Goodness. For then they come, as
having lost their illness, on a presumption no ill could come from such Actors.
Nay, if they are Pillars of Truth and Piety, in deference to their Judgments,
numbers of good minds are apt to distrust their own, and call in question even
the plain Voice of Conscience, and the clear Sense of Good and Evil, Right, and
Wrong. So that such men's Falls, never go alone, but strengthen the wicked in
their Evil way, and shock the strong in the way of Truth, and turn the weak out
thereof: Yea, they put a reproach into ^he mouths of its Adversaries, and make
the way of Truth and Righteousness to be evil spoken of. All which, to their
own, adds the sins or falls of many others. And this must accumulate guilt, and
inflame reckonings. He that by his sin, draws others, not only to sin after
him, but to blaspheme, must needs precipitate others as well as himself into
destruction; and so will be guilty, and answerable for as many as he has drawn
into guilt with him, G l.
says Salvian.

Thus, by all these forementioned ways, to omit others, may Men make
themselves Guilty of others Sins. Though they are not Actors in an impious or
unrighteous thing, yet if they enjoin it; or, being in Power, do not use their
Power to prevent and punish it; or, in things that go by consent, if they do
not expressly refuse their consent when it is asked; or, if Ministers, if they
neglect to warn against it, or mislead their People, and go before them
therein, or invent Salvo's, and unsound Palliations, to defend and ^olster them
up in the same. If, when in Service or subordinate Office, they Minister in an
Unlawful Business, or help it forward, as Accomplices in Studies or Counsels, as
persuading to it, or furnishing out Provisions for it, or praying for the
Success thereof. If they approve of it when it is acted, being inwardly
delighted therewith, or appearing to Praise it, or Defend it, or visibly to
Countenance the Actors going about it, or stand by, and look on with Delight
whilst it is a doing. Or if, when really they Dislike the Fact, they yet appear
to the World like one that Does it, or Deceitfully Complement and Flatte^ the
wicked Actors thereof. Or, lastly, if by the scandal of their ill Examples,
they Draw others into Guilt, as well as themselves. By all these ways may Men,
that act not the Guilty and Unrighteous Things themselves, draw other men's
Guilt upon their own Heads. And it is the part of Spiritual Prudence, when they
keep out from the Execution of any Wickedness, in the direct Act: to take care,
moreover, that it do not reach them in the Rebound, and that they do not, by
any of the foresaid ways, partake in their Crime, who are engaged therein.

CHAP. X. Of Reliance on Providence, and of the Benefit Religion makes by
outward Sufferings.
FRom what I have before said, of the Folly, as well as Wickedness of the First
Rule of worldly Prudence about Means and Method, viz. Doing Evil that Good may
come. I shall proceed now briefly, to note further on that Point.

3 dly. A Third Rule of Spiritual Wisdom in pursuit of its ends, and that is
Faith in Providence, or, in compassing any Effects, to look more to Providence,
than to Humane Appearances. The great Virtue and Excellence of Religion, as
well (...) the most general and constant exercise and ^^ployment of the Life of
man, is Faith in God. This Faith, is a Faith in Providence, so (...) as
concerns us in all the things of this Life. Our Faith also respects Futurities,
and what God (...) promised beyond this World, in another Life. But all that
God does accomplish, and (...) Government thereof in this World, is the
Administration of Providence. And all our Regard to God in Earthly Affairs,
seeing his ^^nd in them, and expecting from him their desired issues, is the
Faith in Providence. This is that which Spiritualizes this World, and turns all
things that affect us here, into Religion. And this therefore is the Life of
all truly Good and Religious Men. Through the whole Course of this World, they
walk in Faith: and this Faith is in Gods Providence, which they ever look up
to, and rely or build most on, in all things. Contrary to the way of the World,
who, as though they walked without God in it, look not in every thing to the
Living Creatures, i. e. Angels represented in that Vision, with the Face of
Living Creatures, standing by the Wheels, or Course of Worldly things, to
govern their Motions, as Ezekiel says, c. 1.15, 16.19, 20, 21. and c. 10.9.16,
17. Or to the overruling influence of invisible Providence, managed by the
Ministry of Angels, which has the leading hand, and gives the last and Ruling
stroke to all that happens. But only to what is visible before their eyes, or
to humane Preparations and Appearances.

And expecting more from Providence, than from Worldly Appearances, they never
seek to compass any Ends, as I have showed, by Unlawful ways, Which will lose
them more in the Help of Providence, than it will get in that of Humane
Preparations. Nor despair of his Protection, or promised Success, in Gods own
ways. Nay their trust in Providence here, they account as one of the best
Means, being that which will most engage Providence. The Lord will help them,
and save them from the wicked, that are always plotting to Destroy them,
because they put their trust in him, says the Psalmist, Ps. 37.40. They trust
it to the last, when there is nothing visible to back it, nor any thing else to
trust to. When, on the burning of Ziklag, the People with David spoke of
stoning him, and he was Greatly Distressed, then did David encourage himself in
the Lord his God, 1 Samuel 30.1.6. Our bones are scattered at the Graves mouth,
as Chips are when one Cutteth or Cleaves wood upon the Earth, says he on
another occasion, but mine Eyes are unto thee, O Lord, in thee is my Trust, to
keep me from the Snares laid for me, Ps. 141.7, 8, 9. When my Soul fainted
within me, at what time he was in the Whale's Belly, I Remembered the Lord,
says Jonah, Jon. 2.7. We were pressed above measure, and had the Sentence of
Death in our selves, says the Apostle, that we should not trust in our selves,
but in God who raises the Dead* who delivered us, and does deliver, 2 Cor.
1.8, 9, 10. This proves the Sincerity of our Trust in God, when we have no
Reserves of Humane grounds. It shows the commendableness, and Degrees thereof,
when we Dare throw our selves wholly on God's Care and Kindness. And this is
that, whereby Good men Signalise themselves. They are Abraham's Children, by
being Followers of Abraham's Faith, Gal. 3.7. ^t is their best Armor and
Defense, which they ^^ver put off, even in the hottest Persecutions. (...)
here, says St. John, after the seemingly most helpless States, and hardest
Trials, is the Patience and Faith of the Saints, Rev. 13.10. And we are to be
Followers of them; who, through Faith, and Patience, inherit the Promises, Heb.
6.12.

But contrary to this, is the way of Worldly Wisdom. When it has little, or no
humane Prep^^ations, or Worldly Appearances, it is, as if it had nothing to
depend upon; and gives any things up, even those which God has promised, and
for which he is most concerned, as Desperate. What would have become, say
worldly men, of us, or of our holy Religion, if this and that Unlawful Course
had not been taken? What would have become of them? had they kept to their
Duty, when they went beyond it, That would have become of Religion, or of any
good thing, which God pleases. And after all their Breach of Duty to preserve
them* That must still become of them, which God pleases. So this, in Case of
Unlawful Expedients, can only be the saying of those, who have no eye at
Providence in these matters: or that Do not rely on God, or put their trust in
him, but in visible Preparations and Appearances. When they enquire, what would
become? and ask about Events, I would ask them again, whether Events are our
Business, or Gods? And if they are under his care, it is only to Distrust God,
and to ask him what will become of his Charge, not us what will become of ours?
As if he were not able to do his own Business, whithout the help of our Sins:
or to bring to pass, what concerns him in his ways, without our breaking what
is commanded, and concerns us, both in his way and ours.

A Fourth and last Rule, which I shall note of Christian Prudence, about the
Means; whereby its Ends are to be attained, is, The Usefulness of Sufferings,
or seeing how it may highly compass the Ends of Christianity, by Persecutions.

This, indeed, is a Paradox to this world, who cannot think of growing richer
by their Losses; or that the Sufferings of men can ever be brought into the
Account of their Successes and Advantages. But this is a very certain and great
Truth in Religion, which serves its Ends by Suffering, as well as by Thriving,
and looks upon Persecutions with other Eyes than this World does.

Spiritual Prudence, that is wise for the Advancement of our Duty, and the
improvement of our Spirits, sees many singular Advantages, which Persecution
affords for these. So that it never thinks it self out of its way, but in the
high and beaten Road to what it aims at, when it is called to Suffer. It is out
of the way of worldly Peace and Enjoyments; (and those are the things which
Persecution takes from us:) but in a very Good way of practicing a Number of
most acceptable and Honorable Duties, and making Spiritual Improvements. For,

1. Persecutions are the best, and truest Proof, of the Sincerity of our
Affection to Religion, or of our Love to Christ. It shows plainly, that we set
(...) above this World, and are thereby, as he s^ys, Worthy of him, when we are
ready to Part with any thing of this World, for his sake. And therefore
Persecutions are called Trials of our Faith in the Scriptures. Nay, the fiery
Trial, which will separate the Pure Metal from the Dross, and prove Sound and
Right Christians, ^s it proves pure and right Metals, such another way of
trying Christ's faithful Servants, as (...) is of trying Silver, or Gold it
self. And ^his, tho to a worldly mind, as depriving it of worldly enjoyments,
it appears a heavy Af^^ction: to a Christian Spirit, is of Great account. For
what so valuable to it, as to prove (...) self one of Christ's faithful
Servants, the approbation whereof it sets more by, than by all that is Dear,
and desirable to it in this ^ife? What so pleasing to a Soul bent on Heaven,
as to have given such a clear Proof of its Preferring Heaven before Earth; of
its being so set on things above, as, for their sakes, to Overlook and Despise
all beneath; of its having suffered with Christ, which the Apostle gives as a
Pledge to all Good Souls, that they shall Reign with him?

2. It calls us to the Exercise of many Duties of Religion, yea, such as are
the very height and Perfection thereof, which we have no such opportunity to
exercise at a quiet time. For now, when Suffering comes, we are put upon
showing, how far we are set above the World, and how able to Contemn it, being
called to part therewith: Yea we are much prepared thereby, and disposed so to
do, nothing being more effectual to Cure our fondness for this World, than
Worldly Sufferings. We are called to manifest, how Heavenly-minded we are, when
our minds have nothing but Heaven to influence and bear them up, and to carry
them to quit what is most Dear to them here on Earth. How Resigned to the will
of God; when that Will of his is so hard to Flesh and Blood: How Patient, when
we have Heavy Sufferings to try our Patience. How strong our Faith is of unseen
things; when in assurance thereof, we must forego all we see here: or, of Gods
Grace, and Present Assistances, when, in Expectation of them, we are going out
to Encounter the Greatest Trials and Difficulties. How we can take up the
Cross, and bear it after Christ; when the Cross is laid in our way, and we are
called out to Suffer for Christ, or for Righteousness sake. And lastly, how
under all this, we can heartily thank God, and forgive and Love our Enemies,
and Pray for our Persecutors, even whilst they are exasperating our Spirits, by
all the Provoking Arts of spiteful and injurious Usage. Not to mention, how,
instead of rebating, it is found to add Spirit to good men's pious Resolution,
and a stedfastness and Complacency therein. And, ind^ed, Brave Minds, are not
in so much danger of being threatened and forced, as Flattered and Caressed out
of their integrity; suffering that Shipwreck of a good Conscience, many times,
by the Smiles, which they never could be made to do by the Frowns of Princes.

Now, Contempt of the World, and Heavenly mindedness, and Faith, and Patience,
and taking up the Cross, and Loving and Forgiving Enemies, and cruel
Persecutors, and such Religious Bravery and Gallantry of Spirit in God's Cause,
as no menaces and inflictions can shake, much less vanquish, are among the most
raised, and elevated Virtues, in all our Religion. And therefore Spiritual
Prudence, which rates the beneficialness of Things, as they promote the
greatest Virtues, or Carry them on to the Greatest improvements, must needs
see, and acknowledge, how Directly and advantagiously it is pursuing its own
Ends, tho it be quite out of the way of Worldly Ends, when it is called out to
do Honor to God and Religion, and to advance it self, by the exercise of
these, and many other noble Virtues, in Persecution.

3. It calls us to do benefit to others by our Sufferings. For our Sufferings
for Christ, and in a Christian manner; or with a truly Christian Spirit, in the
manifestation of the Virtues before mentioned, will help their Faith. It will
beget Faith in some, and Confirm it in others, there being a Witness or
Testimony in the Blood, and an Evidence in the Sufferings of Martyrs and
Confessors, to make Proselytes, as the Scripture Declares, and they Experienced
in the Primitive Church. It will also help their Practice. For the sight of
such Sufferings in us, will call them with great Power and Force, to
Perseverance in their Duty, when it comes under Trials; it will awaken those
that are lapsed, and help to stop those that are wavering, and about to fall
from it, and Confirm and settle others in what they have received, and embolden
them in Professing of it, animating them to a like Suffering for it, as they
see we Do. Many of the Brethren in the Lord waxing Confident, by Example of my
Constancy in Bonds, says St. Paul, are thereby become much more Bold, to speak
the word without fear, Phil. 1.14. It makes one known to another: and in time
of Distress, it is a Great heartning and encouragement, to see the Number with
us; as well as a Good Confirmation of our Judgment, and Guide of our Practice,
to see the same Truths resolutely owned by others, especially by some, whom we
have cause to esteem better, and wiser, than our selves. And accordingly, St.
Paul calls us to show stedfastness at such times, for these Purposes. Let us
hold fast the Profession of our Faith without wavering, and not forsake the
Assembling of our selves together, says he to the Hebrews, in Persecuting
times, Considering one another, to provoke unto Love, and to Good Works, Heb.
10.23, 24, 25. If we be afflicted, and the Sufferings of Christ abound in us,
says he to the Corinthians, it is for your Consolation, and Salvation, which is
effectual among you in the enduring of the same Sufferings, which we also
suffer, 2 Cor. 1.5, 6. This Free and Steadfast Practice of Suffering Duties, and
Resolute Suffering for them before others, is the way to call upon and Exhort
them to Edify and Build them up in the like Practice, according to the Rule of
Scripture, which requires us Romans 14.19. and 1 Cor. 14.26.
to Edify (...) another.

Whereas, on the Contrary, our Denying those Duties, or Shrinking from the
Sufferings threatened in Persecutions, especialy in Persons of Reputation and
Influence, is apt to give mighty S^andal, or Occasion of Falling. It shocks the
strong, and turns the Weak out of the way, which otherwise they are inclined to
walk in; and has a mighty effect on most, who are Glad of the pretense of
having such Examples to Follow, and of any Colorable Ground to go that way. It
Encourages those that have Erred, and Pricks others forward, and hardens those
that are Resolved, weakening the hearts of those that Stick to their Duty, and
heartning those that Revolt from it, and strengthening the hands of the Wicked,
and of the Persecutors thereof, against which God makes such Complaint, Ezekiel.
13.22.

So that the way of Christian and Resolute Suffering in Persecutions, is a most
Charitable, and Edifying Course. It does Honor to Virtue and Religion, as I
formerly Noted, when they are most exploded, and when they are sorest pressed,
and have fewest to stand by them. It recals some Deserters, and Establishes
other wavering Professors, and Animates and Strengthens all its Followers, even
at that time, when it has the most need of them. And all this, though it be out
of the World, is in the way of Religion, it never goes on more prosperously
with its Ends, then at such times.

4. And being on all these Accounts, the way to improve and perfect our Virtue:
it must answerably be the way to heighten and consummate our Reward. There are
Great and Glorious Prerogatives, in the Recompense of Martyrs and Confessors.
St. John Rev. 20.4, 5.
Notes an extraordinary Preference, and Privilege of highest value, to those,
who were beheaded for the Witness of Jesus, and for the Word of God;
(beheading, being the Nunc a Praeside Mauritaniae, vexatur hoc Nomen, sed
gladio tenus, Sicut and a Primordio Mandatum est animadverti in hujusmodi.
Tertul. ad Scap. c. 4.
usual Death of Martyrs in those Days, the more Cruel ways of Killing, and
exquisiteness of Torture, not being commonly used upon them 'till afterward:)
and had not Worshipped the Beast, nor his Image, nor had received his Mark upon
their hands, or Foreheads, i. e. had stood out courageously under the sorest
Trials, as brave Confessors against all Contrary and Unchristian Practices. Be
the Trials never so Great, for Christ's, or for Righteousness sake, I reckon,
says St. Paul, that the Sufferings of this Present time, are not worthy to be
compared with the Glory, that shall be revealed in us, Romans 8.18. The more we
endure for, the more we shall receive from him. Tert. ad Scap. c. 4.
Majora Certamina, Majora Sequuntur praemia* The harder the Sufferings, the
higher the Recompenses, says Tertullian. These Sufferings for Christ, are
called the Remains, or what is behind of the Sufferings of Christ, Col. 1.24.
and the Marks of the Lord Jesus, Gal. 6.17. And the more conformable his
Servants are, to the likeness of his Sufferings; the more in Proportion, shall
they be conformed to the likeness of his Glories. Answerable to our Suffering,
shall be our Reigning with him, 2 Timothy 12. If so be that we Suffer with him, we
shall be also Glorified together, Romans 8.17. The Surplusage of their Glory and
Bliss, shall be so much the earlier, and Greater than the Bliss of others; as
to render these Sufferings, the most valuable Blessings to all truly Good men,
and a Cause of highest Joy and Thankfulness. Rejoice then, and leap for joy;
rejoice, and be exceeding Glad, says our Savior, for Great is your Reward in
Heaven, Luke 7.22, 23. Mat. 5.12. Rejoice, in as much as ye are made Partakers
of Christ's Sufferings, says St. Peter, that when his Glory shall be Revealed,
ye may partake answerably in that too, and be Glad also with exceeding Joy, 1
Pet. 4.13.

Such as these are the Benefits, which Virtue and Religion have, by
Persecutions. And accordingly, such is the Estimate, which Christian Prudence
makes of them. It Dreads them not, ^s hindrances; but when called by God
thereto, looks upon them with a willing and cheerful eye, as fitting means to
set on, and most proper and advantageous to bring about its own Purposes. And
the Reasons why, at such times Men are so much against Suffering, is because
they look not upon them with Spiritual, but with Carnal Worldly eyes.

I do not seek by this, to make men fond of Sufferings, or put themselves upon
them before they need to suffer, without waiting Gods leisure. Such rash and
hasty zeal there was, which produced ill Effects in some Confessors of the
Primitive Church; and which thereupon it ceased to countenance, and fell
Canonically to censure and repress, forbidding men to run to suffer before God
called them, or to give the Judges unnecessary provocation. But when God sends
Sufferings, as he does, when there is no keeping of it off, without acting
against the Rules, Interest, or Honor of Religion: I say their Master and mine
is not for having us afraid to Suffer; or capable of being forced out of our
Principles, or Duty, to avoid it. Nay, he would be glad to see us willing, and
cheerful under the approach, as well as Constant and Resolute under the
pressure thereof: looking on Persecutions, as what will Do no Final hurt, but
Do both him, and our selves the most, and best service.

For on this Point I would have it observed, that Christianity is a Passive
Religion, or a Doctrine of the Cross. It is a Profession to expect, and to bear
Sufferings. Its Author was a Crucified Savior. He was a Man of Sorrows, and a
most absolute Pattern of Patience. And the sharp Trials thereof, though they
begun in the Head, were not to end there, but to Descend Down to the Members,
whom God, in such measure as he sees fit, fore-ordains or praedestinates to be
conformed* to the Image of his Son, viz. in the conformity of Suffering, which
is the Argument there treated of, Romans 8.29. A Share of these, is left for his
Church, and Followers; which St. Paul calls the (...), the Remainders or what
is behind of the Sufferings of Christ, Col. 1.24. Accordingly he Mat. 10.17,
18, 21, 22.34, 35, 36. and Joh. 16.33
Foretells Sorrows for his Disciples, and calls them to bear, and prepare for
them. Passive times are what he presignifies us; and Passive Duties which we
are to Discharge under them, make up a considerable part of his Precepts. If
any man will come after (...), says he, he must Deny himself, and take up his
Cross, and follow me, Mat. 16.24. Through many Tribulations, says his Apostles,
we must enter into the Kingdom of God, Act. 14.22. Yea, all that will live
Godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer Persecution, says St. Paul, 2 Timothy 3.12.
So that Sufferings and Persecutions must never seem strange things among
Christians.

Indeed, sometimes through the Goodness and Indulgence of God, we have a long
enjoyment of quiet and encouraging times; and so actual Sufferings are Greater
Strangers to us. But it never is a Stranger to our Profession and Principles,
being one of Religion's chief Businesses. And the b^st Souls, and most
Religious men are gone to Heaven that way, bearing the Cross, before they g^t
the Crown, and suffering for Christ e're they were taken to Reign with him. So
went the Ancient Prophets, and Worthies, some stopp^ng the Mouths of Lions,
others quenching the violence of Fire; some having Trial of Cruel Mockings and
Scourgings, yea, moreover, of Bonds and Imprisonments; others, wandering about
in Sheep Skins and Goat Skins, being Destitute, Afflicted, Tormented; some
being stoned, others Sawn asunder, others slain with the Sword; others,
Tortured, and not accepting Deliverance, when proffered them upon their
Apostasy, that they might obtain a better Resurrection, as St. Paul says, Heb.
11.33, 34, 35, 36, 37. So went also, not only our Blessed Lord himself; but his
Apostles, and the best Souls and Saints of the Suffering Ages; who are set off
as much by their Patience, as by any thing else. I John your Brother and
Companion in Tribulation, and in the Kingdom and Patience of Jesus Christ, says
St. John to the Seven Churches, Rev. 1.9. And as they followed Christ, so must
we be ready upon occasion to follow them; our Calling being, as St. Paul notes,
to be Followers of them, who through Faith and Patience, inherit the Promises,
Heb. 6.12.

And Professing thus a Passive Religion, we should all have Passive Spirits.
The Spirit of Suffering or Patience, is one of our most necessary
Qualifications. The Gospel, which we profess, is called, as sometimes the word
of Faith; So, at others, the word of Patience. Thou have kept the word of my
Patience, says Christ to the Angel of the Church of Philadelphia, Rev. 3.10.
And accordingly, the Professors of this Gospel, must be Signalized, and
Remarkably Eminent, as for the Spirit of Faith, so for the Spirit of Patience.
Your Companion, says St. John of himself, in the Patience of Jesus, Rev. 1.9.
And we are Followers of those, who got the Promises through Faith and Patience,
as St. Paul says. And here, says the Spirit, calling on every one that has an
ear to attend, is the Patience and Faith of the Saints, Rev. 13.9, 10. The
Scars on his Body, which were the Trials of his Patience, St. Paul calls the
Marks of the Lord Jesus, Gal. 6.17. And the Miseries and Dangers he every where
underwent for him, he terms, bearing about in his Body the Dying of the Lord
Jesus, 2 Cor. 4.10. So that Sufferings for Righteousness, are the Livery and
Badge, which must be wore by his Retainers.

For ingenerating this, I shall briefly note some (...) of Spiritual Prudence.

1. The First is, For Christians to be above this World. There is no
expectation, that any man should suffer much for Christ, 'till this Foundation
is first laid. A man tied to this World, will not give up Worldly Interests for
a Good Conscience: but, will either violently burst ^^^ough all the Ties and
Remonstrances of Conscience; or, artificially blind the eyes, and corr^pt the
sense thereof, and by studied Salvo's, and nice Distinctions, impose upon
himself, 'till he has brought over his Conscience to his Worldly Convenience.
Whosoever will be a Friend of the World, in such Cases as the Script^re says,
must needs be the Enemy of God, Jam. 4.4. You cannot serve both God and Mammon,
says our Savior, Mat. 6.24. If we will be his Disciples, he tells us, we must
be ready to Leave Houses and Lands, Fathers and Mothers, Luke 14.26. Mar.
10.29. Till our Hearts sit loose to them, they are not like in Trials to stick
fast to him. These seem hard Sayings, but they should not seem strange among
Christians, who have renouced the World at their Baptism, when they were first
Listed under Jesus Christ, and profess to be Men of another World, not of this.
The Sayings are most reasonable in themselves, and easy to such Disposed
Hearers, and fall hard only on Worldly minds, who have a stronger impression of
seen than of unseen things; and are more influenced by Present Advantages, than
by the hopes of Religion, and Faith of Eternal Happiness.

2. Subservient to this, is another Rule, of Mortifying, and not Pleasing our
Appetites. Worldly Losses, are like to fall hard on those, who seek to live in
Ease and Pleasure, and study Worldly Enjoyments. To accustom and indulge our
selves in these, does mightily corrupt the mind, and ties it Down to worldly
things. So that a Voluptuous and Luxurious Age, and a Course of Ease and
Fullness is not like to furnish out many Confessors. And therefore Religion,
that calls us to Suffer, disposes us thereto by Mortifications, and bringing
Down the Body, and Self-Denials, not Self-Pleasings. If we would prepare our
selves for Good Soldiers of Jesus Christ, in trying Days, it must be, as St.
Paul tells Timothy, by enduring hardness, 2 Timothy 2.3. He that striveth, as the
Apostle says in reference to the Heathen Games, is temperate in all things;
such Persons always preparing themselves, by a prescribed course of strict
Labors and Abstinence, both from Wine and Pleasures. For which purpose, adds
he, I my self keep under my Body, and bring it into subjection, 1 Cor. 9.25.27.
And accordingly, this was the Method of the Holy Martyrs, in the days of
Persecution, to prepare themselves for Sufferings, not by self-satisfactions,
but (...) by congruous exercise of stricter abstinence, or by Austerities, and
afflicting of the Flesh, as De Mart. Palaest. c. 4. p. 323.
Eusebius says of young Apphian. This Course of Abstinences and Self-Denyals,
will give us Power over our selves, when we cannot have it over outward things:
and then our Satisfactions, do not stand to their Courtesy. We ^ffect, not to
have what we like, but always to ^^ke what we have, and what God is pleased to
allot, which is the true Christian Spirit. And he who is of that mind, is both
secure against Discontent, and above the Reach and Power of this world.

3. As a further Help, after we have thus pared (...) the Pleasures, it will be
a serviceable piece of wisdom to this Purpose, by a virtuous Frugality and
^^ovidence, to prevent Straits and Necessities of (...) world. Worldly Losses,
can never seize us (...) more Disadvantage, than when we have before ^^warily
run our selves into worldly Necessities, which render us, as the more
unprovided to ^ear, so the more loath to fall under them. And therefore it is,
as a Great Point of Wisdom at all (...), so especially a Preparation for
Sufferings, ^or all Good Christians carefully to live within the compass of
their Fortunes. Not to spend upon Hopes and Expectancies, or live upon things
before they come to possess them, or to live to ^he utmost of their Incomes,
which will be the ready way to go beyond them, or, by any Extra^^gance and
superfluous Expenses, throw themselves into Debts and Worldly Difficulties:
which ^ust needs make the voice of worldly Losses, of p^rting with Lands, or
Livelyhoods, more unwelcome, and a Greater Trial, even to an Honest and well
Disposed mind.

These Suffering Spirits thus prepared, are now, God knows, much out of vogue
amongst us. Christians were once most Eminent, and Distinguishable by Passive
Virtues, and as a suffering Generation. But now, a Soft and Delicate Spirit is
come in place thereof, and the Generality had rather Sin than Suffer, and
instead of cheerfully taking up the Cross, and bearing it themselves; are for
any way that will transfer it, and lay it with Triumph upon their Persecutors;
and are all for being known, not as a Suffering, but as a Secular thriving sort
of Men. This is a sad case, and lamentable Consequences it produces. For this
want of Passive Spirits, and abhorrence of the Cross, is the Root of all the
ill, and the true Cause of all the foregoing wicked Devices, and ungodly Rules
of the wisdom of the Flesh; and that, which in trying times, makes our
Carriage, so unlike that of our Savior Christ, and the Primitive Christians.
But as the Power of Christianity revives, this Suffering Spirit will be
retrieved among Christians. And they, that profess a Doctrine of the Cross,
will have Spirits to bear and take up Crosses, whenever they lie in the way
of Religion, or a Righteous Cause.

But now most opposite to this, is the Wisdom of this world. To be wise for
this world, is to be so wise, as to keep it. And not to suffer the Loss of the
Good things thereof, so long as any Compliance can avoid losing. The Wisdom of
the Flesh, can believe no Good in Fleshly Sufferings, but only in Fleshly
Enjoyments. And therefore on any occasion, it is ready to give up a Good
Conscience, for Carnal Ease; to comply in what is required, though very
Unrighteous, to save it self; and to break any Duty, even what it holds
fastest, and has professed highest, rather than, (...) the Phrase of some at
such times is, to be undone for it.

CHAP. XI. Of Spiritual Prudence, choosing Seasons, and tempering to
Circumstances.
HAving hitherto insisted on Christian Prudence, as it lies in seeing and
following Right Ends of Religion, and pursuing them, only by fit and Christian
ways: I proceed now to show i^ the

2. Place another part of this Prudence in the Execution hereof, viz. in taking
for these Pursuits, the most Advantageous Seasons, in tempering them to
Circumstances, and in showing caution to prevent Harm thereby, or ill
Consequences: All these Parts of care about Right Executions, as well as the
former about Right Ends and Ways, are likewise necessary Requisites of
Prudence, which is not only for Doing a Good thing, but for Doing it well and
wisely. And Christianity is for Ruling this Part of Prudence by the Laws of
Christ, and lays on us sundry Restraints, which, in this matter, are easily and
ordinarily broke through, by the worldly wise.

1. First, in the Execution of our Purposes, by the ways aforesaid, Christian
Prudence is for taking the most Advantageous Seasons.

To every thing, and to every purpose, as the Wise Man says, there is a Season,
Eccles. 3.1. And every thing is both most easy to effect, and most Beneficial
and Beautiful when it is effected, in its Season. He has made every thing
Beautiful in its time, Eccles. 3.11. And a word fitly spoken, or in its Season,
is like Apples of Gold in Pictures of Silver, says Solomon, Prove. 25.11. It Is
the work of Prudence to see these Seasons, or to Discern Opportunities, and
take them. A Fool still slips his Opportunities, and sees them not: but a wise
man's heart Discerns both time and judgment, Eccles. 8.5. His Eyes, says he
again, are in his head, to look before him, and round about, or to espy both
what to Do, and when, Eccles. 2.14. And this is one part of that
Circumspection, or walking Circumspectly, which the Scripture calls upon us to
use, that we may appear to act, not as Fools, but as Wise, Ephesians. 5.15. For that
Circumspection, or looking about us, is, as for the most commodious ways, so
for the fittest times and best opportunities, of Performing Actions, or
bringing about any Business. And as the Prudence of Worldly Men is shown in
taking their best opportunities, for the things of this Life: So must the
Prudence of Christians be shown in a Commodious Timing, and Watching the most
Advantageous Seasons, for what they Do in care of their Souls, and in Service
or Honor of Christ Jesus.

But here care must be taken, in determining what are Good Seasons for
Religious Actions, either Professions of some Points of Faith, or Practice of
some Duties. Of this there is the more Danger, because Religion says one thing,
and Flesh and Blood another, in this Matter. So that when Spiritual Prudence,
that minds Religion, says one time is a Good Season, for such a Profession or
Practice: Worldly Prudence, that minds outward Ease, will often ^ry, they are
most unseasonable. But Christian Prudence must not take its Seasons, from the
Serviceableness of any Duty to worldly Purposes, but to its own Ends.

To prevent our setting aside any Duties as out of Season, at the Suggestion of
Carnal Wisdom, when, indeed, we have an obliging Call and Season to Discharge
them, I shall note these things following.

1. First, in Determining the Seasonableness or Unseasonableness, of Professing
any necessary Truths of Christ, or Practicing any Christian Duties; we must not
say, there is no Season for such Practice or Profession, when there is hazard
in them. This, indeed, is the way of Worldly Wisdom, which thinks Suffering in
this World to be Seasonable at no Time, and so accounts persecuted Suffering
Duties, to be ever out of Season. To call for the Fruits of Righteousness or
Morality, when it is Loss of Power, or Place, of Goods, or, it may be, of Life
it self, to produce them; it looks upon, as a most unreasonable, and unskilful
miss-timing of things. As bad, as to come to the Trees to gather Fruit in the
Spring, e're it is put forth; or in the Depth of Winter, when both Fruit and
Leaves are fallen off long before. The only Season it owns of Doing them, is
when it is like to Do it self no worldly hurt thereby: but when they bring
Suffering, it cries out, This is no time to talk of them.

But this is to Rate the Seasons for Spiritual Duties, not by Ends of Virtue
and Religion, or the Advancement and Honor thereof, which are Spiritual
Considerations: but only by Present Interest and Security, which are Worldly
Motives, and lie ever closest to a Worldly Mind. It is to make the Duties of
our Religion, not to be Duties at all times. As if the Truths thereof were not
to be professed, or the Laws practiced, when we are called to Suffer; but only
when in Worldly account we are like to get, or, at least, to save by them. But
these men never consider, that Christianity, as I observed before, is a
Doctrine of the Cross, or a Suffering Religion; all the Truths whereof were
published, and its Duties prescribed, not for a Thriving, but for a Suffering
time. Instead of excepting them, it was Calculated for Days of Persecution:
since in such it entered and begun, in such it got footing, and daily
maintained and enlarged what it had got among men. All its Duties look for
their Reward in another world; and so must be duly observed, when they draw
after them the Greatest Dangers, or Losses in this world. Persecution, though
it is no Good Season for getting, or keeping any worldly Goods, by Discharge of
Duties: yet is as Good as any, nay, better than others, for getting Heaven
thereby. Though it is no Season, to serve Flesh and Blood; it is the properest
Season, to serve Truth and Virtue; which are then most especially to be
defended by us, when others attack them; and to be owned by their steadfast
Friends, when their Enemies Explode, and their own Dependants are ready to
Desert them. And these being the Ends of Spiritual Prudence, instead of
esteeming Persecutions, which conduce so much thereto, as unseasonable for
Christian Duties, it accounts them, as I have before shown, the most obliging
and Advantageous Seasons.

2. Secondly, We must not say there is no Season for Christian Duties, when
there is no worldly Appearance, of Doing Good by Discharging them. This is
usually taken up by Worldly Wisdom, when any necessary Truth, or Virtue, is
born down with a Torrent. They say it is in vain, for the Servants and
Professors thereof, to practice or appear for it; which would be only to oppose
their single selves against an Host, and to endeavor by their own Strength to
stem a tide, when the course thereof is most violent, and drives away all
before it. This, they think, is only to Destroy themselves, without doing their
Duty any Good: which, however it may be pitiable as well intended, yet, say
they, is not commendable, as being a Service altogether miss-timed, and most
imprudent.

But here men should consider, that their Obligation to profess the necessary
Truths, or perform the Laws of God, as they are called to them, is not only for
their Serviceableness, as an Expedient, but for their own sakes. In Free and
Discretionary things, indeed, men are to look to the usefulness, and to go
according to the probability of doing Good therewith. But in the necessary
Truths, and Laws of Christianity, which are bounden Duty toward God: there
Duty its self is their End, and they have enough to engage them to any Act,
without looking further, if they do their Duty therein. They are not left here
to Prudence, or to Do it or let it alone, as they see Cause: but are bound in
Conscience to Do the thing, and if thereby they are like to Do no more, yet is
the keeping of the Commandment it self, or the Doing of their Duty, a
sufficient Purpose.

Besides, when men are Doing their Duty, though there is little Appearance of
any effect on others: yet, will it be like to do more Good among them, than
they are apt to think, or are aware off. For when they have discharged their
Part, by doing of their Duty; God will manage it as to Events, and make it turn
to more use, for the Ends of Religion an^ hi^ own Glory, than they ever Dreamed
of. It is then out of their Hands and Care, and in the hands of Providence;
which will thereby stop some from being ill; and others that are ill already,
from going on without Check and Remorse, and growing worse. Truth and Goodness,
though Ordinarily driven out thence by Prejudice, Interest, and vile
Affections; are most Natural and near akin to all our Souls, and so have a
secret hank upon us, and a hidden Friend that lurks in all our Bosoms. And
this, the Providence and Spirit of God strikes upon, by our Profession or
Practice thereof before their Eyes, operating thereby, on some at this time,
and on others at that; on some more, on others less; according to his own good
Pleasure, and their Predispositions. So working much Good, and many blessed
Effects, that pass betwixt himself and them, whilst we are insensible of any,
and think of nothing less. Our Free Practice and Profession, at such times as
he requires and calls for them, but worldly men say we shall do no Good with
them, he uses to Encourage and Strengthen the hands of the Strong, to Establish
the Wavering, to call back the Strayed Sheep, and to lift up those that fall,
to work Remorse in its Deserters, and Fear and Faintness in its Persecutors: to
retrieve a Truth, or Duty, when to Humane Eyes it is almost lost; and to beget
anew a Respect and Reverence for it, when it was all in Disgrace, and seemingly
quite Exploded. The Practice of a Right Good thing, though but by a very few,
will quickly draw in more. (...), etc. Chrysostom. Orat. 441. Statuarum. 6. Quod
utilissit Principum Timor. Ed. av. Tom. 6. p. 509.
Though only ten among us should appear for Doing a Duty, says St. Chrysostom,
yet would these ten quickly be made twenty, those twenty fifty, that fifty an
hundred, that hundred a thousand, and that thousand the whole City. And as by
lighting up of ten Candles, a man may easily fill all the whole house with
Light: So also in Spiritual Good Deeds, if only ten of us Do our Duty, we shall
kindle one entire flame through the City, yielding Light to them, and bringing
Security to us. For the Nature of Flame it self, when fallen on combustible
matter, is not so sure to kindle still, and seize the wood that lies next to
it; as the zeal of Virtue fallen into a few Souls, is, by going on, and still
inflaming more, to fill the whole City.

Thus does God, when we put it into his Conduct, do Great Good, and accomplish
great Effects, by our discharge of our Duty, when we thought nothing could be
hoped from thence. Thus in all times he has done, and daily still does, and
will do in the World: the Experience of all Ages, and the Successfulness of
Generous and Brave Asserters, of seemingly destitute and unfriended Virtue,
frequently witnessing on that side. And in confidence of this, or however, if
that should fail, in Discharge of their own Good Conscience, Good men in all
times have been careful still to Confess the Truths of God, and Do their own
Duty, when there were the fewest that seemed capable of being thereby wrought
upon, and they had none to stand by them; but strove altogether against the
stream, having the whole World to oppose them. As, Noah wrought Righteousness,
Elias was zealous for the true God, Jeremy was an asserter of his Mind and
Precepts, and many other Holy Men and Prophets, yea, our Blessed Lord and his
Apostles, were the undaunted Preachers and Practisers of Decryed Godliness, in
the most Degenerate, Deriding, and Persecuting Ages, when they seemed to have
the fewest prepared Hearers or Spectators, all many times appearing ready to
contradict, and few, or sometimes none, to stand by and back them, as I
formerly noted.

3. Thirdly, We must not say Christian Duties are unseasonable, when they Do
not suit with some Designs carrying on, or are against some Seeming and much
Desired Good, of Church or State. This is the way of Worldly Wisdom, which,
when any Truths or Duties hinder some worldly Good they are pursuing, for
Religion, or the Kingdom; bids the Professors thereof, to ^eep their Practice
and Professions of them, for some fitter time. If these are Truths and Duties,
say they at such times, let them give way to Public Good, and the Advancement
of true Religion, which are of more importance. And let those that believe
them, take care, whilst they embrace these, to approve themselves withal, as
Good Members of the Public, whereof they all receive the benefit, by seeking
and setting on, not retarding or obstructing the Good of Church, or
Commonwealth. You may show your care of them, will they suggest, when it will
be as a Good, so a Wise and Prudent care, and hinder no Greater thing. But
never bring them in play now, to stop the Great, and much and Generally wished
for Good, that is going on. For this is a Critical time for it, and if this
opportunity is over-pass'd, the like may never return again.

But are not we all Disciples of Christ, and Professors of Religion, as well as
Members of a settled Church, and Kingdom? And must we not first take care, to
acquit our selves as Good Christians; before we seek how to show our selves
Good Statesmen, and Politicians? Is it not our Profession, to be more for
another World, than for this? And may such Professors go out of the way of
being happy there; when that serves to make themselves more happy here? A Good
Christian must never be wanting to his own Duty, or go beyond it, to Do Good to
any, nay, to a whole Nation. And so must never think of setting aside the
Season for Discharging his Duty, for a Season of serving of the Church or
Nation. He must never slip the Season of showing himself Good; for a Season of
making himself or others Secularly Fortunate: or the Season of Practsing and
Professing as the Servant of Christ; for the Season of serving any Interest or
Condition, though never so Great and Public in this World. There is no Doing
Evil that Good may come; Good public, or Good private, as I have showed before.

Besides, it is not for a Good man to think of Doing Good to a Church or Nation,
by Evil-Doing. The Greatest Good to them in his Opinion, is to engage God for
them. And that must be, by keeping his Commandments, and practicing and
professing them, as we have opportunity. But never breaking them, or setting
them aside, to make use of some Worldly opportunity. If we would Do Good to
Church or State, to Do this wisely, we must Do it under God, not by setting up
against him. So we must not throw out his Service, as an unseasonable thing;
when an opportunity is offered us to serve the Public, by refusing to serve
him when he calls. The Thoughts of Doing Good, i. e. Temporal Good, or that of
outward Settlement to the Public: if by Breach of Duty, or omission thereof
when called by him to Discharge it, is a Temptation. And the Doing it that way,
is endeavoring to be wise against God, and setting up Policy against Religion;
which, if God must give Succ^ss, is not like to speed, or in the Event to
procure Good to them.

Near a kin to this, is thinking it no Season, to Condemn and Fault things, as
we did whilst they served others, when they come to serve our selves. This is
the way of this World, if not to commend, yet to connive at any Error or
Wickedness, whilst it gets by it. It is pleased, if not with the Wickedness,
yet with the Advantage; and had rather bear the Sin for the Profits, than want
and Condemn the Profit for the Sins sake. So it will not open its mouth against
Errors, whilst it is getting; or against Sins, and breach of Duty, whilst it is
served by them: being not so much offended with their falsness, or wickedness;
as pleased with their usefulness, or convenience. Though most loud at others,
it is silent then; and would have others too to be silent, and not cry out
against them at such ^imes. And this is mere Wisdom of this World, or being
Wise for Worldly Things; which lies in getting, or taking worldly Advantages,
however they come by them, and can brook what Religion most abhors, whilst it
brings in what Flesh and Blood best approves. Which plainly shows, that a man
has not so much of Religion, as of this World, and Self-Design; nor is acted so
much by Conscience, as Convenience.

Thus must we be Careful, that the Pretense of unseasonableness, do not carry
us to smother our Belief of any Truth, or our Practice of any Duty, when God
calls us to show them forth; on any Pretense of hazard to our selves, of
unprofitableness to Religion, or our Neighbors, or of their being a hindrance
to any Good, that does come in to our selves, or is sought to be brought about
for the Church or State.

The Truth is, in Points of direct and express Duty, the part of Prudence lies
more in sight and Discerning, than in Choice of Seasons. In Matters that are
not of Direct and Determinate obligation, there is more Room for Discretion in
the timing of them, and in Resolving both whether and when to Do them. For Free
things, which are not Determined by the Law of God; or, that are not directly
enjoined, but may indirectly, some more, and some less, be serviceable to, and
promotive of that which is; or that are free, and undetermined expressions and
instances of General Laws: Such Free Things, I say, and Free Will Offerings,
are most properly matter of Prudence, being left to Prudence, and not
determinately bound on Conscience. And in these, there is a proper Choice of
Seasons, which men may embrace or let slip, either Doing that thing or another,
now or at another time, as they see cause.

But in things expressly required by God, and Points of Direct Duty, there is
not the like Choice of Seasons, or Room for Discretion. For, whenever God
calls us to them, and they are put upon us, either by the Authority of
Superiors, or by any occasion with our Neighbors, or other just Call of
Providence, giving us opportunity for them; or, perhaps, laying us under a
necessity, either of Professing or Dissembling them, or Practicing them, or
what is Repugnant to them: We are then under a necessity and Obligation of
Discharging, and have no Liberty to let them alone. For Matters of express
Duty, we are bound to perform, as often as God calls us to perform them.
Whenever he calls, we have no power to refuse. And this Call is by his
Providence, as that brings us under opportunities, and puts us upon Practicing,
or Declaring our selves. And, what time Providence shall allot and fix on for
these, is at God's Choice, not at ours. He is Free, when he sees best, to give
the Calls: but when once he does, we are under his Command, and never free to
set them aside, or refuse obedience. So our Part, is only a Duty and Necessity,
to see and embrace the Seasons he chooses: and God's part is, to have the
Liberty and Discretionary Power to choose them. And therefore the Wisdom and
Prudence to be shown in Choice of these Seasons, is God's Wisdom, and not ours.
His Providence takes care of that; and it is a wise Providence, that never calls
us to the Profession of necessary Truths, or Practice of necessary Duties, but
at wise and fitting Seasons, which best fit his Purposes, though they least fit
ours. So that whenever he Calls us to them, we are eased of that care, of
Deliberating about the seasonableness of them. In Free things, we are left to
Choose the Seasons our selves, and may let go a worse, in hopes of a better. But
in necessary and bounden Duties, God's Call must always be our Season, and we
are only to discern and take it, not left to Choose and Deliberate upon it, God
having already made that Choice to our Hands.

2. Secondly, In Execution of our Purposes, Christian Prudence is for Tempering
what we Do to Circumstances, i. e. For considering Place, and Persons, and
Instruments, and manner of acting, and the like, and so to suit all, as may
best serve our Design, and set off the thing Done, so as may give us most Help
and Advantage from all, and least Hurt or Hindrance from any of them. This
attention to Circumstances, is that Circumspection which is so much spoken of,
and is employed in Prudence: which St. Paul calls for, when he exhorts the
Ephesians to walk not as Fools, but as Wise, as I noted before, Ephesians. 5.15. Walk
in wisdom, says he again to the Colossians, toward them that are without;
calling them to such Prudence in their Carriage toward, and before such as
considered the Principles and Dispositions of those they conversed with, Col.
4.5. Let your speech, says he in that place, be with Grace, and seasoned with
Salt, i. e. Savoury and Prudent, and so seasoned and tempered on every
occasion, as if most fit; that ye may know how ye ought to answer every man, or
to give each such an Answer as may be proper for him, and the occasion, v. 6.
This tempering what we Do to Circumstances, and Distinguishing of Persons and
Places, and the like; is a Great point of Prudence. And Christians in their
way, must take care, as they are able, to adorn themselves therewith, as well
as others. Endeavoring, when they Do their Duty, to Temper themselves so
toward all, Neglecting or Despising none, that the Good they Do may be best
received, and win most upon the minds of men, and give the least offense to
them. And when they Do any things more Free and Discretionary, for the Honor
or Interest of Virtue or Religion, or for any other Good Design: that they so
moderate and order the things they press, as will be best bore by Persons and
Places, as may get them most or best Friends, or fewest and faintest Opposers;
as may afford most ease and success to them in compassing their Designs, and
most Fruit and Effect both to themselves, and the Good Designs they carried on,
when they have compassed them.

There is Place for this wise tempering themselves to Circumstances, not only
in these Free things, which are matters of Prudence; but also in Doing their
bounden Duty, which is matter of Conscience. Not so tempering themselves to
Places or Persons, Ends, or Instruments, as to let their Duty alone, when the
mere Doing thereof will Distemper and Disturb them. But tempering themselves in
all that is extrinsecal about it, and in the manner of Doing it; that bating
what the Duty it self Does, which ought to be Done, nothing annexed to it, or
in the manner of Doing it, shall give them any unnecessary Provocation. It need
not be Done, for instance, with bitterness, and fierceness of Spirit, when a
milder way, and being more Gently and Compassionably offered, would be like to
be more easily welcomed, and take more effect. It need not come with
accusations, and invectives against others; when it would be more heeded, and
operate higher, in the way of opening our own Consciences. It need not come
tacked to any other things which are more Displeasing; when it may enter better
by it self alone. In these, and the like matters, not our Duty, which we cannot
mince or alter, but our selves, and our manner of expressing it, which we may
alter to Circumstances; is much for the Advantage, both of it, and of our
selves. And is no more but that Caution which Christ called his Disciples to,
when, in their Free Profession of Persecuted Duties, he bid them withal beware
of Men. And when they were sent forth, as Sheep among Wolves: though they
should undauntedly Deliver the Message they were Charged with, yet to be as
harmless as Doves; which, besides what their Duty it self did, would give those
Wolves no unnecessary provocations, Mat. 10.16, 17.

But if Worldly Wisdom comes to temper the doing of our Duty to places and
persons; it will so temper it, as at any time to give it up, for our external
Quiet. It will take so much as will go down, and throw aside the Rest: and
answer all by saying, the Times or Affairs, the Places or Persons would not
bear it. To prevent such tempering of Duty to Circumstances therefore, for our
own Quiet, as would be an impairing, or Breach of Duty; I shall give these
following Cautions in this Point.

1. This tempering of our selves to Circumstances, in the doing of our Duty, is
never by omitting any Duty, as I said, when God Calls for it; but only by
tempering our own manner of Performance, so as best suits the present
Circumstance, and may give the least offense. The Christians, for instance,
would temper their Devotions to the Circumstances of persecuted men in the
first Ages: by not letting those Devotions fall, but by Praying, and
Communicating in the Night, in the Desert, in Close Meetings, when they could
not with safety do it openly and in public, for fear of the Jews and Heathens.
They tempered themselves at Jerusalem to a time of Distress and Confiscations,
for the Profession of Christianity; not by Concealing, or Denying their Sect
and Profession; but by Act. 4.34, 35. and c. 2.44, 45.
Selling their Lands and Houses, and putting it into a common Stock: that so,
when their own Estates were seized on for owning the Christian Name, the Church
might have wherewithal to relieve them. St. Paul, and the other Apostles, were
sent out to Preach the Gospel, to a prepossessed, incensed, and spiteful World,
as so many Sheep in the midst of Wolves, as our Lord says. And they tempered
themselves to these men, and times; not by letting fall their Preaching, or
keeping back any part of the Counsel of God; not that of the Cross of Christ,
which gave the most offense, being 1 Cor. 1.23.
to the Jews a Stumbling Block, and to the Gentiles Foolishness; nor any just
Reproof of Idolatry and Superstition, so irksom to the Heathen; nor any of the
elevated Duties of Morality and Godliness, which were so very disgusting to the
Lusts of men, or the like. But by Delivering these things in fairness and
tenderness, without giving any more offense, than would unavoidably be taken at
the things themselves: Becoming all things to all men, as St. Paul says, that
they might by all means gain some, 1 Cor. 9.22.

The Exercise of Discipline, indeed, was more a matter of Prudence and
Discretion. And therefore in Rules thereof, they would temper to the State of
the Church, sometimes pressing, and sometimes suspending, now executing, and
then omitting them, as the place and time would bear, and as might best suit
the Circumstances of those they had to do with. But in matters of Duty, which
are not at the liberty of Discretion, but under Necessary Obligation; they
never tempered that to any Persons, Place, or other Circumstances, by omitting
it. They never smothered it, when called to profess it; nor omitted it, or did
the contrary, when called to the performance thereof. Their Prudence in
tempering themselves to Circumstances in Points of Duty, was by tempering
themselves thereto, whilst they did their Duty, never whilst they let it alone,
or acted contrary. Theirs was a Godly Prudence, or a Wisdom twisted evermore
with Virtue and Circumspection, never separate from innocence. When they put on
the Subtilty and Circumspection of Serpents; they put on withal, according to
our Savior's Order, the innnocence of Doves; or looked about them, to take
care for their Duty, before they looked about to take care for themselves.

Not as the worldly-wise, who will temper away their Duty, to Compound for
their outward Peace and Enjoyments. Though it be at other times, it is not to
be done, say they, in our Circumstances. That is, if it is like to lose our
Friends, or give opportunity to our Enemies to pull us down, and set up
themselves; if it suits not with the minds of Men, or the state of Affairs;
with the seeming Safety of Men's Persons, of Religion, Laws, or Liberties. Such
Circumstances, it makes a Ground to set aside Duties, not only to temper us in
the Discharge thereof. Instead of tempering the full Discharge of Duty with
Prudence, it thinks it Prudence then to throw it quite off, and allow it no
Observance, or Discharge at all.

2. This Tempering to Circumstances, must not be by abating of Moral Duties, to
Compliance with Worldly Necessities and Convenience. This is the way of the
Worldly-wise, where they do not throw off all, to pare away part of the
Obligation; and to perform no more, than in their present Circumstances may be
tolerably suitable, and the Flesh will consent to.

They will urge the Circumstance of the Person. Another man, say they, might
Discharge the Duty more fully in this Case. But as for me, Men must consider my
Relation, how I am joined in Affinity or Blood; my Obligations, how Great
Favors I have received; or the Necessity of my Condition, and my Dependence
for Support or Interest, on those who are warm and zealous for another way. So
that it is not to be expected from me, that I should keep so fully and
invariably to the Duty, as another Person of more easy and agreeing Relations,
Obligations and Dependence may do.

And the Circumstance of the Place. Were I in a Place, says a mind that retains
too much of this World, where this or that Duty would go down, where the due
Discharge of it would be like to be quietly received, or where the Minds of men
were any ways impressible, to give some appearance of its doing good upon them,
much more Fidelity might be shown therein. But I live where the Spirits of Men
are in a Ferment, where the Duty is Generally Decryed, or bitterly Persecuted,
and the Practice thereof, instead of procuring any Religious Regard from the
Beholders, provokes only their outrage against the Practisers thereof. So I am
forced to Sail as near the Wind as I can, that I may not endeavor both against
Wind and Stream. I omit what will not be endured, and practice what will; and
this merely to content the People, as forced on by the press of a Crowd, one
Man being unable to withstand a whole Multitude.

And the Circumstance of the Instruments or Auxiliaries. Though they would
discharge the Duty fully, were they left to themselves; yet, now they are upon
Designs, and must consider, not only what will pass with themselves, but with
their Accomplices. They must keep in with their Humane Succors, and therefore
they must abate of their Religious Duties, lest standing too stiffly and
inflexibly for them, they disoblige and lose their Patrons, or Auxiliaries. It
is well, say they, if by a Man so linked in, some part can be performed, whilst
some part is abated. Some part must be yielded, to gratify their Interests, or
their Principles; some to keep those of wrong, and some to keep the loose and
immoral, or those of no Religion.

And the Circumstance of the End. They would, as please God in the Duty, so
profit his Church thereby. And a Duty happens at some time, not to suit the
interest of their Party in Religion. If they will abate, or infringe it; they
may set up, or keep up themselves: but if still they will faithfully discharge
it as they ought; in all appearance they must become subject, and truckle under
others. To deduct something in the present Circumstance, is most safe, or
serviceable, for that Party of Christians they espouse, which they call God's
Church. And in this strait, they think they should not be censured, if they
practice so much as is serviceable, and lay the rest aside.

And the Circumstance of the Time admitting no season for the full practice of
any Duties, or profession of any Truths, when there is hazard in them, or no
probability of doing Good by them, or they are like to be impeditive of some
designed Good, or much desired Settlement, to Church or State, of which I spoke
before.

Thus is Worldly Wisdom for making bold with its Duty, to save its Worldly
Concerns; and for tempering Duty to the present Circumstances, by abating it,
and by parting with so much thereof when it retains the rest, as, all its
Circumstances considered, shall make it draw least inconvenience after it from
any of them. Which is nothing else, but setting up this World, above Almighty
God, and our own Convenience, above his ways. Whereby, however we may promise
our selves to pass for Worldly Wise; we shall be sure to appear ill Christians,
as I think is clear enough from the foregoing Chapters.

I speak not this, of abating in Discharge of our Duty thus to Circumstances,
where Circumstances really make Abatements. I know there is not so much due
from us in some Circumstances, as there is in others. For some Circumstances
are incapacities; and these abate, so far, and so long, as they incapacitate.
Impossibilium, says the Moral Rule, nulla est obligatio, No Man is tied to
impossibilities. And therefore, where we owe never so much Duty, we are not
bound to an actual exercise and discharge thereof, whilst we are not in
capacity. So far, as it is Providentially out of our Power, and so long as it
is so, our actual Discharge thereof is under a Suspension: 'till by Degrees it
come to be in our power again, which always brings back with it a like gradual
Return of our Obligation. But I speak of their tempering their Duty in these
Abatements, to Circumstances of Worldly Convenience, where there is the same
State and Foundation of their Religious Obligations, as at other times. We must
not abate our Duties, whose Ground and Obligation is still the same, and which
we have Power and Opportunity to Practice, if we dare run Hazards, and sustain
Inconveniences and Losses for them; to temper them to the external Ease and
Convenience of Place, or Persons, or other present Circumstances. Which, in
this tempering, is not to respect the Obligation of Circumstances, but only the
Fleshly Ease, Convenience, and Advantage of them.

3. This Tempering to Circumstances, must lie only in our not unnecessarily
provoking Men, whilst we do no ill our selves: not in our carrying on the
unreasonable or ungodly wills of others. It is ^ne thing to temper our selves
to the Necessities of things; another, to the Lusts or Vices of Persons; one
thing to suit their innocent wants, or ways; another to set on their
wickedness. This is Ephesians. 5.11
to have Fellowship with the works of Darkness, to Ephesians. 5.7. 1 Timothy 5.22 2 John
11.
partake of other Men's Sins, and Sin along with them for Company. So that we
must never talk of tempering our selves to Circumstances, by putting our selves
into other men's ill circumstance, or by complying in any ungodly or ill things.
If ill things then are driven on, by the violence and press of People, or the
Power of Rulers: if all seem to Conspire together, and Combine to oppress an
innocent Person, or to explode an Excellent and Good thing, to pull down what
is Right, and set up what is Wrong, to seek safety by what is Sinful, or
Public Good, either of Church or State, by Doing Evil: it must not be thought
any part of our Prudence to temper our selves to their Ungodly Wills by
Compliance, by striking in and countenancing, by being, or seeming to be for
them, by crying up, or carrying on, or going along therewith. If we would seek
to be truly Good, rather than falsely to appear Wise; Religion is not for such
ebbs and flows, for being fast and loose with virtuous or vicious things, as
the motion of the Mobile, or Course and Humor of the Time is. It is firm and
staunch, and always true to God, and to it self; not to be used or laid aside
as men please, and made to bend in all the turns and flexures of their Humors,
or Vices.

CHAP XII. Of Caution in preventing harm by any Duties. And of Flight in
Persecutions.
3. THirdly and lastly, in execution of our Purposes, Spiritual Prudence is for
showing Caution, to prevent Harm thereby, or ill Consequences.

This is a Great Part of Prudence, to show Providence, or foresee things before
they are come to pass, and, as far as depends on us, to prepare against, or put
by the ill, and make the most of the Good that is in them. A Prudent man
foreseeth the Evil, says Solomon, and hides himself, or withdraws from it: but
the Simple, without foresight, pass on to meet it, and are punished, Prove.
22.3. It consists much in Caution and Wariness, looking about how it may best
escape or remove Impediments, and avoid hurtful and ill Consequences, which is
the great proof of Prudence among men: the Wise aiming at it, and the
Generality estimating the Prudence of any Counsel or Management, by the absence
of ill Events, and the Prosperity or Successfulness thereof.

Now this Caution our Lord calls for also from his Servants, as what must show
them to be religiously Prudent, or Spiritually Wise. Beware of Men, said he to
his Disciples, when he sent them out to discharge their Duty in the midst of
Dangers, or as Sheep in the midst of Wolves, and bid them, for their Guard
against them, to put on the Serpent's Prudence, as well as the Dove's
Innocence, Mat. 10.16, 17. And their Circumspection, whereby St. Paul Exhorts
the Ephesians to approve themselves, not as Fools, but as Wise. He sets off by
this Caution or Wariness, in preventing whilst they could, without being False
to their Duty, such Harm and ill Consequences to themselves. Redeeming the
time, says he, i. e. says Sapientia conversationis lucrari nos vult commeatum.
Tert. de Fuga in Pe^sec. c 9. p. op. 540.
Tertullian, Gaining your selves a safe Conduct, or free Passage, by the wisdom
of your Conversation. Or, securing your selves whilst you may, and gaining as
much Respite as you can; which is called in Dan. 2.8.
Daniel gaining, or, as the Margin from the Chaldee, and as Junius and
Tremellius render it, buying or redeeming the time; because the Days are Evil.
So that without such Caution, you cannot enjoy, or hold the time long, Ephesians.
5.15, 16. And on the contrary, the improvident man in the Gospel, for his
having no Prospect of Casualties, or Preparation for them, is called the (...).
imprudent or unwise Man. Thou Fool, says God to him, this Night shall thy Soul
be taken from thee, Luc. 12.20.

Two ways I shall note of showing this Caution, to prevent Harm to our selves,
by Suffering, or Persecuted Duties.

1. First, Without a Call, not to put our selves upon what brings Danger. We
must not throw our selves upon Temptations, since we are taught to Pray Daily,
that God would not lead us into them. To go rashly, and put our selves upon
them, especially in a Great Trial, looks like tempting God, and pr^suming too
much upon our ow^ strength, wherein they who are most confident, are oft-times
most shamefully worsted; as Peter, that was confident he should own Christ
beyond all the Disciples, was the man, who of all others did most shamefully
Desert and Deny him, Mat. 26.33.74. And as Quintus the Phrygian, who, as the
Church of Smyrna Ap. Eusebius. Hist Eccl. l. 4. c. 15.
note, rashly Offering himself with some others, and standing forth uncalled
before the Tribunal, fell or Denied Christ in the Trial. Giving, say they, an
illustrious Document to all, not rashly and unnecessarily to throw themselves
upon Dangers, without any just regard to their own weakness and infirmities.
It Is not for us to run into Sufferings for Righteousness, before we are sent;
but patiently to wait God's time. For as our Suffering is only in Obedience and
Conscience toward God, so should we stay for it 'till it pleases God, and
'till his Providence calls us thereto. Whom he called, says St. Paul, speaking
of our Sufferings for Righteousness in conformity to Christ, them he also
justified, or made victorious in them, Romans 8.29, 30. And hereunto are ye
called, says St. Peter, treating of acceptable Suffering for well-Doing, 1
Pet. 2.19, 20, 21. So that in Suffering for God, the most acceptable discharge
of Duty, and surest hope of Victory, is when we are called to it. We must not
run at any time, or choose our own time, but allow God, in Course of Providence,
to Summon us out, and to appoint us the Season, as of Acting, so of Suffering
for him. And this Season, in Scripture is called our hour, which Christ himself
would not Preoccupate, not exposing, but withdrawing himself, before his hour
was come, Joh. 7.1. and 11.54. but when once it was come, readily o^fering and
resigning himself to bear what was appointed for him, Joh. 17.1. and c. 18.4, 5.

Some, indeed, among the Primitive Christians, out of an immoderate zeal of
Martyrdom, were hasty to fetch down Sufferings, where they come not fast enough
of themselves. They stepped out to do a persecuted Duty, when they were not put
upon it, nor had any Call of God thereto; and would not stay to expect their
Enemies Rage; but rashly run out to Challenge and Provoke it. This forwardness,
after they had seen some sad Miscarriages and shameful Effects thereby, was
Discountenanced, and Restrained by the Primitive Church. St. Cyprian's last
Charge to his Flock, a little before his Martyrdom, being Ne quisquam ultro se
Gentilibus offerat, nos confiteri magis voluit, quam Profiteri, Cyp. Ep. 81.
that none of them should voluntarily offer themselves to their Heathen
Persecutors, because, what our Lord is for having us to Do, is to Confess when
we are asked, not to Profess unasked. And the Church of Smyrna, Condemning it
in Ap. Vales. Annot. in Eusebius. Hist. l. 4. c. 15.
their Epistle; and the Council of Eliberis Decreeing in the 60 Canon, that, if
in their zeal against Idolatry, and haste of Martyrdom, any shall break the
Heathen Idols, and be slain for their Pains, there being no direction for this
in the Gospels, nor any such thing ever done by the Apostles, they shall not be
received into the Number of Martyrs. (...), etc. Chrysostom. Homil. 42.
St. Chrysostom's Advice contains, I think, the true Method of Christian
Prudence, in this case. Let us pray to Ged, says he, that we enter not into
Temptation: but being brought thereinto, let us generously undergo it. Quod non
oportet conturbari cum videamus bonos in adversis, etc. Tom. 7. Ed. Sav. p. 908.
For that is the Part of Temperate men not to cast themselves upon Dangers;
this, of Brave Spirits and Philosophers. Let us therefore, neither throw our
selves upon them rashly and simply, which only shows Boldness: nor Draw back
when Driven into them, or when called out by the Nature and Circumstances of
things, for that is Timorousness. When we are called to Preach a Persecuted
Truth, let us not Refuse: but when there is no call, from any Cause at all, or
Profit, or Necessity according to Godliness; let us not run of our selves, for
that is Ostentation, and Superfluous Boasting. -- As a Generous Soldier, be
continually in Arms, be Prudent, be Vigilant, and always expect the Enemy: but
go not to create thy self Enemies; for that is not the Part of a Soldier, but
of one that is Seditious. But if the Trumpet of Religion calls, go out
forthwith, and set lightly even by Life it self, and with Great Promptitude
Descend to the Conflict, etc. These things I say, out of a desire to have you
keep the Laws of Christ, who commands us to pray that we be not led into
Temptation, and commands us too, to take up our Cross and follow him: for these
two are not contrary one to another, but very well agree together.

On this Point I shall further add, when, with the Freedom of Confessors, we
speak for Persecuted Truths, or Laws with others, that another allowance of
Christian Prudence is, not to profess this promiscuously to all Persons; nor,
after we have sufficiently Declared our selves, by importunities of
unprofitable Discourse, still to incite an unpersuadable, and virulent
Disputer's Rage against us.

Some men, are not impressible by Reason, or by any Rules of Sober Virtue and
Goodness; but possessed by Profaneness, or utterly overrun with Madness and
Rage of Faction. They are ready to afford, I say not only a Deaf Ear, but a
Scurrilous and Profane Tongue, a Treacherous Snare, or a Spiteful Hand, to any
offers or arguments on Persecuted Duties, that shall be made to them.

Now to lay such Truths, or Laws of God, before these men; is not to promote,
but to prostitute them. And therefore here the Rule of our Lord takes Place,
not to cast Pearls before Swine, i. e. the Precious Truths of God, before those
Stupid Sinners, that have no Sense of them; but, instead of Reverently taking
of them up, will rudely bespatter, and trample them under Foot. Nor to throw
holy things before Dogs, i. e. before those, who, instead of worthily
entertaining, will spitefully snarl and bark against them, and be ready to Tear
and Rent those, that hand them to them, Mat. 7.6. And thus the Holy Confessors,
though ready to give an Answer, as 1 Pet. 3.15.
St. Peter required, to any one that asked a Reason of the hope that was in
them: yet did not hold themselves obliged to give this account to one that
asked, only that he might Scoff, or Blaspheme, or Treacherously Betray or
Trepan; but to such as asked Soberly, or with a Desire of Learning. Giving,
either no Answer to others: as Christ would not to Herod, who only for his
Curiosity and Pastime, questioned with him, Luke, 23.8, 9. Nor to the High
Priest, who when they had not matter enough from his Accusers, urged him to
speak to what they had said against him; not for Information, they being
resolved, as Christ Luke 22.67, 68.
told them, not to believe him, nor to let him go, but that he might lay hold
of something more sufficient to condemn him, from himself, Mat. 26.60, 62, 63.
Or else, Giving like Answer, as Eusebius. Hist. l. 5. c. 1.
Pothinus of Lions did to the President, (...), if thou art worthy, thou shall
know, when he scoffingly and abusively asked, who is the God of the Christians.

2. Secondly, When, on Gods Call, we have done our Duty, and are thereby
brought into Dangers, it allows us to save our Persons, whilst we innocently
may, by Concealment, or Escape, and Flight in Persecutions. When they Persecute
you in one City, flee to another, Flight and Concealment in extreme Perils,
being what Christ himself allows, Mat. 10 23.

This has been the way in all times, as Petrus Alexandrinus, that Blessed
Martyr, Discourses, in his Can. 9. and 10.
Canonical Epistle, taken Council. Trull. Cap. 2.
afterward into the Code of the Universal Church; and as Apol. 1. de Fug^ sua
p. 707. Tom. ^. op.
St. Athanasius, after him, has Demonstrated more fully, viz. for Good Men, in
Cruel Persecutions, by Flight, or Concealment, to save themselves, till some
necessary Discharge of Duty, or Course of Providence, Delivered them up for
Suffering into their Persecutors Hands. Thus as Athanasius observes, Genesis 27.43.
Jacob Fled from Esau. And Exodus 2.15.
Moses, on Slaying the Egyptian, into the Land of Midian from Pharaoh. And 1 Samuel 19 2.10*12.
David from Saul, when he sent to slay him. Thus also Elijah absconded, and 1
King. 17.3. and c. 19.3.4.
hid himself for Fear of Ahab; and fled for his Life from Jezabel. And (...)
Sons of the Prophets, in Jezabel's Persecution, were 1 King. 18.4.
hid, and fed by Fifties in a Cave, by Good Obadiah. Joh. 20.19. Acts 12.12.
And thus the Disciples likewise assembled in Private, or held Night-Meetings,
and shut the Doors for fear of the Jews. And Paul, at Damascus, was Act. 9.24,
25.
let down by the wall in a Basket by Night, to escape those that watched the
Gaetes Day and Night to kill him. Yea, our Blessed Lord himself, who granted
this Liberty to his Disciples, when Persecuted in one City, of fleeing (...)
another, upon occasion made use thereof. When the Jews at Jerusalem sought to
take him, (...) escaped out of their hands, and went away again beyond Jordan,
and there abode, that being a more quiet and secure Place, Joh. 10.39, 40. And
(...) another time, when he was not safe in Judea, (...) walked in Galilee, and
would not walk in Jury, because the Jews sought to kill him, Joh. 7.1. And
again, when, on the raising of Lazarus, the Jews took counsel together to put
him to Death, he walked no more openly among them, but went thence into a
Country near to the Wilderness, and there continued with his Disciples, Joh.
11.53, 54.

The Reason of his Flying, as Athanasius Ib. p. 709.
notes, was because his hour was not yet come. And this is given as the Reason,
why, when they sought to take him, they could not do it, and no man laid hands
on him, Jo. 8.20.
because his hour was not yet come, Joh. 7.30. Till then, he took the Liberty
which he has allowed us, and prudently absconded, when sought after to his
hurt, and made his escape as we are wont to Do. But that hour being once come,
as he declared it was, Joh. 17.1. instead of absconding any more, he went out
to them, saying whom seek ye? and telling them, I am he, Joh. 18.4, 5. He
neither suffered himself, as Athanasius Ib. p. 711.
observes, to be taken before his time, nor endeavored to hide himself from
them, when once his time was come.

For each man, as that Ib. p. 710.
Father says, there is a prefixed time. As there is for Spring and Autumn,
Summer, and Winter; so there is a stated and appointed time for Life and Death.
And to this the Scriptures refer, when they speak of taking men away in the
midst of their Days, Ps. 102.24. of Dying before their time, Ec^l. 7.17. And of
coming to the Grave in a full Age, as a shock of Corn comes in in its Season,
Job 5.26.

Now, what time was appointed for him, Ib. p.
says he, our Savior Christ knew: and accordingly, though he withdrew at all
times before; at that time he offered himself to the Officers sent to take him.
But as for our time, as he adds, we know not what time God has appointed us,
till it appears by the Order of Events, and the Course of Providence. Behold I
am Old, and know not the Day of my Death, said the Patriarch Isaac, Genesis 27.2.
And therefore the way of God's Saints, when Men laid wait for them, was not, as
he Ib. p. 711.
goes on, to obtrude themselves upon their Persecutors, as not knowing the time
appointed them by the Divine Providence. But their time being in God's hand
they expected the Finishing and Course thereof. Wandering about in the mean
season, or hiding themselves in Caves of the Earth, 'till the Determined time
of their Death came, or till God, who is the Determiner of their times, would
manifest it to them, either preventing, and disappointing their Persecutors, or
Delivering them into their hands, as seemed most fit and seasonable to him.

This Caution, and Flight in Persecution, as he Ib. p. 712*
adds, was not to be called Cowardice; but was an Exercise of their Fortitude,
and Patience. For in their Flight, they did not nourish and indulge Fears of
Death, but fortified their minds against it. They showed Fortitude and
Tolerance, and Gave a Proof of Passive Valor, which is best seen, not in being
suddenly Cut off, but in tedious Sorrows, which so highly enobled Jobe 's
Patience. Their Care was, (...) he pleads, neither to Fear the time of Death,
when it was present; nor to anticipate that time which God's Providence had
Decreed for it, or ^esist the Divine Dispensation, whereto they knew ^ssuredl^
they were Reserved: that so, they might not ^e (...), as being, by their own
rash Actings, the ^^use of their own Fall.

(...) was it without Fruit, either to themselves, or the Church of God. Their
Flight, says Ib. p. 714, 715.
he, was not idle, in as much as they Preached the Truth when they fled, and
never forgot to seek the Profit of others, under all the Hardships which they
sustained themselves When flying they hid themselves, they were, by God's
Dispensation, only reserved this way, as Physicians, for the wants and use of
those that stood in need of them.

In Sum, the Rule of Christian Prudence for us all, as p. 715.716.
he observes, when we are sought for in Persecutions, is not to be rash and
Precipitate in tempting God, but to fly, and hide our selves, and wait till the
appointed time of our Death comes; or, till our Great Judge shall allot that
for us, which seems best to himself. But when he allows us this Liberty, he
would have us to stand always ready and prepared in our minds, when either our
appointed time calls us, or we are taken up and apprehended by our Persecutors,
to stand and strive for Religion and the Church, even unto Death. And thus the
Martyrs did in Persecutions. Whilst they lay hid in Dens and Secret Places,
they confirmed and fortified their own minds: and when Discovered and
Apprehended, they bravely Suffered at the Stake. But if some of them
voluntarily surrendered themselves to their Persecutors, they were not carried
on to this, as he adds, by inconsiderate Zeal or Rashness: but professed every
where, and before all, that this promptitude and Free Oblation of themselves,
proceeded from the Holy Ghost.

Thus is there Place, by the Permissions of Religion, for the Servants of
Christ, to sa^^ themselves by Flight in Persecutions.

And this, for Pastors as well as People, ^hen the Persecutions of the Pastors
is Personal. For then, to save themselves, they may Depart from the Churches
they Conducted, or from the Followers they had gathered: as St. Peter did Act.
12.17.
, upon Herod's Design against him, from Jerusalem; and St. Act. 9.24, 25.
Paul, when laid wait for there, from Damascus; and Jesus himself, from
Jerusalem, or Jury, or other Places, as Designs were laid for his Life by the
Jews. Yea, though by this Flight of theirs, some innocent men, as Petrus
Alexandrinus Can. 13.
observes, be accidentally brought in Trouble, and suffer for their Sakes. As
Act. 19.29, 30, 31.
Gaius and Aristarchus were, as he Notes, for St. Paul; the Act. 12.19.
Guard of Soldiers for St. Peter; the Mat. 2.16.
innocent Infants for our Savior Christ; and Zacharias the Father, for John
the Baptist, when his Mother Elizabeth fled with him from Herod: all of them
unblamed, notwithstanding, on the account of their Flight, such things followed.

But when the Persecution is common, of the ^locks as well as of the Shepherds;
and whilst the Flock it self stays, and is like to be left Destitute and
Unprovided, or much Scandalized and Dispirited by their Departure: there it
seems as if the Pastors had not the same Allowance. For when Dangers are
Common, to the People as well as to the Priests; the Leaders themselves should
by no means be among the foremost in Fears, and backwardest in Trials. They
that in times of Peace have been the Preachers of Faith and Fortitude, of
Resolution and Constancy; when trouble comes, should be the first Patterns and
Examples thereof among their Flocks, and take especial care, lest by the
hastiness of their Flight, and excess of Fear, they Disgrace their former
Sermons, and fall under that smart Censure, which De Coron. Mil. c. 1.
Tertullian past on several Pastors in his days, viz. that in Pace Leones, in
Praelio Cervos, i. e. out of Dangers, they were as bold as Lions, but in
danger, as timorous as Hearts, and, like them, all for trusting to their heels.
The Pastors stand charged, not only with the Care of their own Bodies and
worldly Interests, which the permission of Flight secures; but with the Charge
of the Church, being most Solemnly entrusted with the care thereof, and
watching for their Souls, as they that must give account, as St. Heb. 13.17.
Paul says. And therefore at such times, it behooves them to consider, not only
how their Flight would serve their own Temporal or Private Wants: but also how
it would Comport with their Public Trust and Office, and suit with their
Charges Spiritual Necessities. Whether it be like to leave them quite
Destitute, without necessary Helps or Instructions, or Hope and Expectation of
Spiritual Ministrations. Whether it is like to trouble the Spirits, and weaken
and faint the hearts of their People; and turn those out of the way, whom the
Presence, Direction, and Exhortation of a Spiritual Guide would have kept firm
and constant therein; encouraging them to yield to a Persecutor's Threatenings,
when they see they are so formidable, as to shake the very Pillars of the
Church, and make the Leaders shift for themselves.

And accordingly our Savior, though, when the Pastors are specially
Persecuted, he gives liberty of Flying; yet, in a common Persecution, when the
Wolf, i. e. a Wolfish Persecutor Comes to snatch and scatter the Sheep, as well
as the Shepherds; he tells us, to flee for himself, and leave the Flock without
any Guard or Provision, is the mark, not of a Good Shepherd, but of an
Hireling. The Good Shepherd, says he, when the Wolf comes, is not so careful
for himself, as for his Charge, and Gives or (...).
staketh down his Life for the Sheep, i. e. is ready to expose and hazard it
for their sake, Joh. 10 11, 12. The Good Shepherd he distinguishes, not only
from Thieves and Robbers, who seize those Flocks which are not their own: as
all those False Messiah's were, who came to impose themselves upon the Fold
before him, v. 8. But also from all Mercenaries, who, though v. 2.9^
entering in by the Door, i. e. by himself, or under him the true Lord and
Pastor; yet look to his Sheep only with an Hirelings indifference, and not with
a true Pastoral Spirit and Affection. Instead of watching them, with his Life
in his hand, as the true Shepherd does: He that is an Hireling, whose own the
Sheep are not, i. e. who looks to them, not with an Owners care and heartiness,
but only for his pay; when he sees the Wolf coming, he leaves the Sheep, and
flees to save himself. The Hireling flees, because he is an Hireling, and
cares not for the Sheep, but for his own safety, v. 12, 13. The Note of the
Hireling, is the want of Care for the Sheep in time of Danger, or of Pastoral
Affection. As St. Paul also intimates, when he laments the want of the Pastoral
Spirit, and sets it off, by having ^one by him like-minded to Timothy that good
Shepherd, who would naturally care for their Spiritual State, and by finding
all to seek their own, not the things which are Jesus Christ's, Phil. 2.20, 21.
And this disposition, as our Lord notes, the Pastors show, when in times of
Danger, they leave their Flocks destitute and unprovided, scandalized or
dispirited; and, instead of standing at the peril of their Lives by their
Charge, flee away and shift for themselves.

Indeed, if when some go, who are more particularly obnoxious to a Persecutors
Fury, others are still left to supply the needs of the Saints; these Servants
of God have more Plea to withdraw themselves: As St. Polycarp did at the
importunity of the Brethren, as the Ap. Eusebius Hist. Eccl. l. 4. c. 15.
Church of Smyrna write, when he was sought for by Name. And as Athanasius did,
when Persecuted by Syrianus. Who yet, in that Barbarous Outrage, which drove
him away* was Vid. Apol. pro Fuga.
Resolved to be one of the last in the Church, and see how the Flock escaped
the hands of the rude and merciless Soldiers, before he would attempt to
escape himself. Or, if they are like at one time, to be taken off more
privately, or before strangers, they may think fit by Flight to escape that
storm, that, with the more Advantage to God and the Church, they may offer
themselves before their own People; there, by their own Practice, more
effectually confirming those Exhortations to Martyrdom, which they had formerly
made among them. And thus St. Cyprian, in the Ep. 81.
last Epistle he wrote to them, tells his Church, that when Officers were
coming to fetch him to suffer at Vtica, he had withdrawn, and waited in his
Recess, 'till he should hear the Proconsul was returned to Carthage: intending
then to return to his own House, that he might suffer before their eyes. This
Liberty I grant is indulged us, not only for God's sake, and the Churches, as
St. Cyprian used it in this last instance; but also for our own. We are allowed
to fly, not only in way of well husbanding the Opportunities for serving God,
and our Brethren; at St Strom. 4. and 7.
Clement of Alexandria leaves a mind, that neither seeks nor fears Death, to
Determine this Point by the Glory of God, and the Benefit of Mankind: but also
in mercy to humane weakness. But this Permission to humane weakness, is in
subordination to the Glory of God, and the Good of the Church. So that when the
Pastors cannot withdraw themselves, without dishonouring God and Religion,
scandalising their Flocks, or leaving them de^^itute: they are not to fly, but
to abide by the Dangers, though at the Peril of their Lives.

But this Caution of Spiritual Prudence, lying in preventing Worldly Harm and
Consequences; Worldly Wisdom is forward to extend too far, and turn into a
Doing Harm to our Duty, to keep off Harm from our selves. To keep out Harm and
ill Consequences, as far as we can, so long as we keep not out any Duty, or
part of Duty, together with them; is what God allows, and what Prudence guided
by the Spirit is to take care of. Accordingly, it does not run into a Duty of
outward Harm, as I say, before it has a Call: and when, by a Faithful Discharge
of Duty, Suffering is drawn on; by Flight, or Concealment, it may save it self
from it if it can. But Worldly Prudence is for Providing against the Harm,
though it be by making no Provision at all for the Duty; being always ready,
rather to omit the Doing what is Good, than to Suffer what is Evil.

To prevent this, we must take along with us these Rules, in all our
Deliberations about these matters.

1. That Caution is never Good, which Drops, or Violates a Duty. The Caution of
a Christian is only to beware against Harm, whilst he does his Duty; never to
beware of doing his Duty, lest he suffer Harm thereby. Religion owns no hurt
like the hurt of Sin: and so prescribes no Caution against any thing, so much
as against Evil-Doing. The Breach of Duty is never to be taken up as an
Expedient; but the Performance of it must always be our first and chief End. Do
that when we are called, and do nothing against it; and then be as Cautious of
any hurt that is like to come thereby, as we can. But this must never be
neglected, or let fall, that a Worldly Good or Convenience may be secured. Though
this is so much the way of Worldly Prudence, viz to be wise and wary against
Worldly Harm, by the Omission of any Duty which is like to Draw it upon us,
that, when men have a Call to Discharge a Duty, it is really thought by many
somewhat a suspicious thing, to hear them ask after the Prudence of it; that
being, God knows, much oftener the method of those, who are seeking and have a
mind Prudently to Omit, than of those who have a mind Prudently to Practice it.

2. We must never show more Care and Caution, to prevent ill Consequences to
our Worldly Interests, than to prevent ill Consequences to our Spiritual
Interests. The Interest and Honor of Religion and Virtue, of Truth and
Righteousness, is to be above any Worldly Interest, in a Christan's Thoughts.
And therefore in looking about to descry Consequences, his Eye should soonest
fix upon, and his Care and Wariness Provide for those Consequences in any way,
which are like thereby to befall these. It will consider, and see in the first
place, when a Course is proposed, whether Virtue and Religion are like to get
or lose by it; whether it will bring any Truth of God, or Duty of Godliness,
under good or ill Report: whether it will lay Hindrances and Encumbrances in
its way, or afford Encouragements; whether it will stagger, or confirm others
in the Belief; seduce them from, or invite them to the Practice of Truth and
Holiness. The Consequences to Duty and Religion are far beyond any Consequences
of this Life: and all truly Religious men, as they ought, so they will set much
more by them. And it is a plain Evidence any Persons are men of this World, and
Worldly wise, when they are more Watchful and Sollicitous against Temporal,
than Spiritual Consequences; and can take up with any Damages brought to Truth
and Godliness, when they are necessary to keep off Worldly Damage from
themselves. What will be the Effect and Consequence thereof, to the outward
Ease and Enjoyments, Liberties or Privileges, Security or Advancement, of our
selves or Families, Church or State, says the Carnal Man. But what will be the
Consequence of it, to Duty and Religion; not to make them Secularly Great, but
to show them Spiritually Good; not to hold them in External Power and
Possessions, but to give or keep their hold upon Men's Hearts and Consciences,
by Confirming all in the Belief of the Reality and Sincerity of the Efficacy
and Excellency thereof: This is the Religious or Spiritually Wise Man's
Question.

CHAP. XIII. Of Spiritual Prudence in Worldly Matters, or as overruling all
other inferior Prudence, about things of this Life. And of Solicitude.
THE Third, and last Thing Proposed at first, to set off the Nature and Offices
of Spiritual Prudence, is to show its part in worldly Matters; or how, after
its having been thus wise as is declared, for the things of Religion it self;
as for all other Inferior and Worldly Prudence in Things of this Life; it so
Orders the Ends, and Overrules the ways thereof, as to keep them subservient
to Religion, or as best becomes Christians.

Worldly Prudence, is to be Wise for the Ends of this World. As, to preserve
our Lives here, and the Comforts and Enjoyments thereof, our Properties, Power,
External Quiet. To secure, or augment these, or other earthly Good things, to
our selves, our Friends and Families, to the Church or State. All these are
Worldly Ends. And to be wise for them, is Worldly Prudence. And this we have
all need of here, because we are Members of this World, needing Worldly Things,
and being twisted in worldly Relations, Good Men and Good Christians, as well
as others. But though we live in this World, we aim at a better World. We are
kept alive by Worldly Things, but we live for better, even for Heavenly Things,
which Religion shows, and which the ways thereof will procure for us. So that
the Wisdom of Religion must limit and overruled us in all the Acts of Wisdom
and Prudence we show, about the lesser and inferior Things of this Life. The
Flesh must be subject to the Spirit, and the Wisdom of this World, to the
Wisdom of the next.

Now, Concerning this overruling influence of Spiritual Wisdom, in all
inferior and Worldly Deliberation, I shall note these two things.

1. First, That the Rules of Religion are the truest Wisdom, as for the next,
so even for the Ends of this World. They are really the most Prudent ways, and
best chosen, for all the Great and Desirable Purposes of this Life. So that had
God left them free, and said nothing of them; their own Usefulness would have
recommended them to every discreet man, and true Worldly Wisdom would have said
the same, that Duty and Religion now says of them. No other fancied ways, and
least of all their Contraries, could so well have served the true Ends of
living here as these do. Other ways perhaps may seem more serviceable, and fit
to be taken up for these Ends, at some one particular turn. But none of them
are so fit and conducive, if taken into constant course, and made a General
Rule of Living. And men are made to live by Rules, and their Happiness to be
sought by Rules: without which, there would be nothing but utmost Uncertainty
and Confusion, which would spoil all happiness, and prove the greatest misery
here on Earth. They are made to desire, and to seek what is best for the Ends
of Life, not only in some one, or few Actions, but in the Tenor of Life; not
only what will happen to promote them on some accidental turns; but what is fit
to do so ordinarily, and at all times, though by chance, on some particular
turns, it may admit of an Exception. And this General and constant Service,
must be by Rules, which are general things; and made to direct, not only as
occasion serves, but (that all other men may know where to have us, and we know
where to be our selves, without which, as I say, there would be nothing but
jealousy and confusion instead of happiness,) for Directors in ordinary and
constant course, or at all times.

Now, as for Rules of Wisdom, for attaining the true Ends of Life, there are
none better, than those prescribed by our holy Religion. God having adopted our
Real Interest into our Duty, and made those things, whereby Wisdom would Direct
all men to serve themselves here, the way of serving him, and securing to
themselves the joys of Heaven hereafter.

What Rules, for instance, are better in Conversation, than to give no offense,
neither injuring, nor despising, and less disdaining any. Than by being Gentle,
and easy of Access, and Courteous; a way of gaining much, that will cost us
little. Than by having a care of Censure, not being apt to tax what we do not
know, or to Condemn others. And of all Backbiting, or Accusations, and Ripping
up, either the real or fancied Faults of absent Persons; yea, in Places and
Companies, abounding in Censure, by being ^ary, even how we bring up the Names
of the absent, who are not there to speak for themselves, lest it afford Matter
to the malignity of Evil Tongues, and make them evil spoken of. Than by not
expecting much from others, not being soon angry or exceptions; which will
prevent our having Difference with others, and, under any Carriage of theirs,
keep us easy within our selves: and however Affronting or Provoking their
Carriage be, we do not thereby lose much, if it does not rob us of the
Tranquillity and Enjoyment of our own Spirits. By all these ways, and sundry
others which Religion prescribes, we take the wisest care to Converse with
others, with the most advantage, and the least hurt and trouble to our selves.

What Rules again, are better in Dealing, than to be true and just, which are
the way to be trusted. To be Industrious and Careful in our business, to do
always as we are willing to be done by, to be Reasonable in our Demands,
Moderate in our Gettings, Fair in all our Trading and Transactions; which will
most effectually retain those that try, and draw in others to Deal with us,
when they are neither like to be Neglected or Deceived, and Over-reached in
their Business. To Do all that is Right, and with a willing mind, that
discovers no uneasiness in being showed it, or backwardness in Performing
thereof. To offer nothing that is wrong, yea, when others offer it, not to
return it; not maliciously remembering, and studiously recompensing, but
Forgiving Injuries, which is absolutely, as the most Christian, so the wisest
Course, and most for the Ends and Enjoyment of this Life. For it costs us
abundance more Labor and Vexatious Thought to Revenge an Injury, than it need
do to put it up. To Forgive it, is only to bear the Disquietude that is past;
but to Revenge it, is to throw away a great deal more of our Quiet after it,
and to add to our former Sore, by a New, and, in probability, much Greater Heap
of fresh Toil and Danger.

What Rules are so Wise, for the Enjoyment of our selves, of Health of Body,
and Ease of Mind in this Life, as Sobriety and Temperance, and Chaste and Due
Regulation of Fleshly Pleasures, and Moderation in all things. As bringing our
Minds in every thing to our Conditions, no^ affecting still to have what suits
our Fleshly Likings, but to like what God is pleased to send us. As
Mortification, and due Subjection of Bodily Appetites, instead of pampering of
them; as sitting loose to this World, instead of being Worldly minded, and fond
thereof. As Living upon Providence, and trusting to God more than to our
selves, or to any humane Provisions; and being resigned to his Will, or
Contented and Desirous, rather that he should Do his own Will, (as we profess
in our Daily Prayers,) than that he should Do ours. Than all which, what can
better prepare us to receive all the Vicissitudes of this Life; to give us
least Trouble from the ill, or afford us most Comfort, Contentment, Unwearying
and true Enjoyment from the Good Things thereof.

What Rules, lastly, could Conduce so much to Settle Happiness, as in
Neighbourhoods, so in Families, greater Societies, and all Relations; as the
due Discharge of all those Duties which Religion Prescribes in those Relations.
By Parents being careful to Educate their Children well, and to Provide for
them, keeping them under an wholesome Government, but kind, and without
^nnecessary Provocation: and by Childrens being full of Respect in all things,
and obedient to them again. By Wives being subject, in all things innocent, to
their Husbands: and Husbands being Kind and Condescensive to their Wives, as to
their own Flesh. By Masters Governing with Equity, and forbearing Threatening:
and Servants not answering again, but showing heartiness in what Service they
perform, and Doing it with Diligence, and all Fidelity. By Princes being Wise,
and watchful for the Public Good, and Ruling all in the fear of God, with
Clemency and Justice: And Subjects, on the other hand, ever honoring their
Rulers, as the Ministers and Vicegerents of God, obeying their Commands, where
Conscionably they may; and keeping in their Subjection, not throwing it off,
and forcibly resisting, where they cannot obey.

Such as these are the Rules of Religion, both toward our selves, and toward
others. And better cannot be given for attaining the wise Ends of Life, and for
ordering our selves, as the best studied Prudence would have us, in
Conversation or Business, by our selves, or with others, and in all Relations.
So that every Religious Good Man, whilst he keeps to the ways of Duty and
Religion, follows the wisest Courses, and the best Rules of Prudence for this
Life. Yea, though he should not be among those that pass for the Wise, but the
Weak and Simple Understandings; though he should not see their Conduciveness
for these Ends, nor follow them for the Worldly Wisdom, but only for the
Religion of them. Though he has not the skill and apprehension to see and judge
of Secular Prudence: yet, whilst he keeps to the Rule of his Duty, he has
always this, which is the best Proof of Prudence, ever to be found in the most
Prudent, and Secular wise ways. Having the Grace of being Good and Honest, he
cannot miss of Doing what the best Understandings must needs say is most
Prudent and Discreet. The Wisdom of God guides him, where, if left to himself,
he could not, like better Understandings, show much Wisdom of his own. And
following what God has prescribed, he is sure to act wisely, though he is not
able to say much to others, to show them the Wisdom and Conduciveness of his
own Actings. The Ways of Duty, wherein he walks, are chosen of God, and are the
Ways of Gods Prudence, for serving the wise Ends of Life. And the most Prudent
Persons had better follow him, than their own Understandings; they can never
find such another Director, nor make any other choice of ways, so Wise and
Prudent for themselves.

But besides these ways of Duty, for compassing the Ends of Life, which are
ways of God's choosing: Worldly Wisdom has a great many more of its own, which
God has left Free, and whereof he has said nothing. The worldly Ends of Life
themselves, are rather our Liberty than Duty, more God's Permission than
Injunction. And in pursuing them, besides the Duties of Religion, whereby we
set them on whilst we are serving him: there are multitudes of other ways,
wherein Worldly Wisdom has its latitude, and that a very wide compass. And in
this Field of Worldly Prudence, when it proposes its Ends, and Pursues them by
its own Methods, this is

2. Secondly, The other thing I would note of Spiritual Prudence, That when
worldly Wisdom sets up Ends, or thinks to serve it self by ways Prejudicial to
Godliness, it overrules it in all such motions.

Sometimes Worldly Prudence, is for setting up ill things for Ends. It proposes
how to serve Vices, or Vanities; how to compass Ends of Ambition, or
Covetousness, Lust, or Revenge, Vainglory, or Intemperance. It aims at the
accomplishing, or serving of a Sin; which is no End of Life of God's Making,
nor any part of his Creation; but begot between Satan and our selves, and
merely of his and our Production. And Spiritual Wisdom, quite throws out such
ends; which being the Stain and Reproach, the Misery and Destruction of Life,
must never be turned into the aim thereof. As it does also, all setting up the
Real Advantages, and useful things of this world, for last and main Ends. Not
seeking at all to serve God, or show forth any Virtue thereby, which is to turn
them into an opportunity and matter of Religion: but only to satisfy our
Fleshly Appetites, and enjoy our Selves therein.

Again, in seeking the Good things of this Life, Worldly Prudence is apt to
transgress in Means and Methods. And the Prudence of Religion is, as to prevent
its setting up Undue Ends; so to keep out any thing Ill, or Undue, in the way
or course it takes: overruling it in these, not as agrees most with Worldly
Minds, but as best becomes Christians. Particularly I shall observe,

1. First, In Pursuing any Worldly Ends, it keeps it from serving it self, by
Doing any Forbidden and Unlawful Things. And besides all that has been hitherto
Discoursed to this Purpose, with a more especial Eye to Ends of Duty and
Religion; I shall here set this off briefly, in some most obvious Instances, in
the course of Secular Affairs.

In Competition, the Way of Worldly Wisdom, is for Doing any thing that will
overcome. It will use any Means, and take all as lawful, that seems fit to
strengthen themselves, or weaken their Adversaries. It will blacken a
Competitor by Calumnies, whisper and suggest Fears about him, tell any Stories
it has heard before they are Examined, if not such as it self has Maliciously
invented, misrepresent what might be innocent and well meant, pervert their
Words or Deeds, though harmless in themselves, to very hurtful and evil
purposes, as David complains his Adversaries did by him, saying, every Day they
wrest my words, Ps. 56.5. Yea, sometimes in the midst of these Undermining
Arts, speak fair to his Face, and cover Treachery under Compliment and kind
Expressions, as the same Holy David complains his Enemy did, while his mouth
was smoother than Butter, having War in his heart: and his Words, when softer
than Oil, yet being Drawn Swords, Ps. 55.21. In Sum, their End in Competition,
is Victory; and to do any thing that will overcome, is the Rule in Worldly
Practice, though in Reason and Religion it should be otherwise.

But now Spiritual Wisdom, in pursuing any Worldly Ends against Opponents, will
keep us from using any ways, either False, or Mischievous. Indeed, as Prudence,
it will watch Times, and pick Advantages for it self: A wise man's heart, as
Solomon says, Discerning both time and judgment, Eccl. 8.5. But as Christian,
it will Do nothing injurious to them for Advantage. It may take what lies as
Free for it, as for others, and at the most Advantageous times. But it will
show nothing uncandid, utter nothing false, offer nothing injurious, or what it
is not willing to receive it self. Nay, when we receive such usage from an
Adversary, it will not allow us to return it on him, not being for returning
Evil for Evil, but for overcoming Evil with Good, To. 12.17, 21. As it is for
having every man approve himself the truest Friend; so also the fairest, and
justest Antagonist and Competitor, in the world.

Again, in gaining Interest, and the Favor of Men, worldly Wisdom is for doing
any thing that will please, and procure help from those it has to Deal with.
Without Interest, Designs and Business, will not easily go on. And this needed
Interest, often lies among ill men, with whom no Interest is to be made unless
you please them. And, peradventure, they are not to be pleased, but by engaging
with them in wicked Factions, against Religion, or some much Decryed and
Exploded Duties, or Truths thereof; or, against the known Laws, Privileges,
or, Constitutions, either of Church or State; or by going along in immoral
Practices, without making any Difference, more than they do, of Good or Bad.
They are men Given up to base Ends, or that seek and set on better, by base and
wicked Methods. And if we expect they should serve our Ends, we must first
serve theirs, and Drink, or Swear, or Commit other Lewdness, in compliance with
their wicked Humors, or ungodly and vicious Ends or Interests. And these
Fleshly Wisdom is for taking up when they lie in its way, rather than go
without their Favor and Assistance.

But now true Christian Prudence, will never allow us, either to Dishonor God,
or injure our Brethren, or abuse our selves, to please Men. It is for seeking
the Favor of the Potent, and the esteem of all, by courteous obliging
Carriage, and by worthy Actions: but never by base Arts and Compliances. It is
not for losing God, by Doing any thing that is ill, to please and gain them. It
calls upon us to Do our Duty, and nothing contrary thereto, whether thereby we
keep, or lose Humane Helps and Succors; whether all men cry us up therefore,
or Decry us. When we seek to have our way Established, or take Effect, Ponder
the Path of thy Feet, says this Wisdom, i. e. the Means we use or Course we
take, and turn not to the Right hand, or to the left, Prove. 4.26, 27.

Again, in raising Families or Fortunes, Growing Rich or Great; Fleshly
Prudence, is not to apt to keep within the bounds, of Right and Justice. When
Getting is the End, it will overreach the Ignorant, that want skill to deal
with it; and oppress the Poor and Fatherless, that are too weak to withstand
it. In Bargaining or Commerce, it will prey upon other men's Necessities, vent
False or Faulty Wares, set exacting Prices, start feigned Claims, use any
Falsehood or Unfaithfulness, Strictness and Rigor, Wrong and Violence, to
enrich it self. Making haste to be Rich, it is not like to be Innocent: for
they that will be Rich, fall into Temptation and a Snare, and into many Foolish
and Hurtful Lusts, as St. Paul says, 1 Timothy 6.9.

But now Spiritual Wisdom, is not for being hired to an ill, or Dishonest
Action, by any gain. Unlawful Gains, it reckons among the Greatest Losses, as
giving away a Good Conscience, and a Blessed Eternity, for some empty and
Perishing Riches. What is any man the better, though he should gain the whole
world, and lose his own Soul, says our Savior? Mat. 16.26. What is ill and
unjustly got, it esteems not as a Blessing, but a Curse to Families. The
Gettings, will not so truly enrich; as the Injustice, in time, will load and
impoverish, calling still for a just Retribution, and vindictive stroke of
Providence. And therefore such, are not to pass for durable Riches, being not
so like to raise and build up, as to consume an Estate, and, like a secret
Canker, to eat it out.

Such as these, are wont to be the Methods of Worldly Wisdom, in compassing
Estates, carrying on of Business, Prevailing in Competitions, and the like: And
in all the Hypocritical and Insincere, the Ungodly and Unrighteous Methods,
whereof it uses to serve it self when occasion requires, which I have already
spoke of in the Preceding Chapters. And such as these are the Restraints, which
Spiritual Wisdom lays on all Good Christians therein. It permits not, to look
for Expediency in any Sin, or to serve themselves in any Necessity, or on any
Occasion, by Evil-Doing. The Thoughts of the Righteous are Right, says the Wise
Man, i. e. his Righteous Ends, are always pursued and managed by Right ways:
but the Counsels of the wicked are Deceit, i. e. he seeks to compass his Ends,
by Wicked and Deceitful Doings, Prove. 12.5.

And this Restraint it lays upon us, to keep only in Good ways, not only as
Christian, but as Prudence too. For in Reality, this keeping upright, or only
to Good ways, in pursuing all the main Ends or Good Things of this Life; is the
way to speed most, and to find the best Success in that Pursuit. And the giving
our selves a Liberty, of betaking to ill ones, as occasion serves, is much more
like to miss of it. In an uncertain World, that is all Vicissitudes and
Contingencies, there is no way of Pursuing these Ends, that is certain, and
never fails of Success; but all may miss sometimes. But this upright walking,
will miss much less, neither so frequently, nor so widely, as perverting of our
ways, when our need requires. So Honesty is the best Policy; and this never
stepping aside to an unlawful Expedient, is absolutely the wisest, and the
likeliest course, which, in Pursuing these Ends, a Prudent man can take.

For does not all Driving Trades, and management of Business, and carrying on
of Projects and Designs, lie in Dealing with others? And is not all Dealing,
where men dare Trust, and can Confide? And does not all Trust and Confidence
depend on Uprightness? No man is willing to be Deceived, or Cozened, Wronged or
Outwitted. And therefore if they suspect any to be a Crafty Person, Men are
loath to Deal with him. Or, in Dealing, being still suspicious of Design, they
are slow and difficult to Grant him any Reasonable thing, whereof they would
make no Scruple to another Person. If they find a man to be a man of Tricks;
having had to do with him once, they will be wary, how they come to have to do
with him a second time. Dishonesty, and Unlawful Ways, may serve a man's turn in
some one Act. But it will Disserve him in an hundred for that one, in those
that are to follow, and is mere Folly if we look forward: incapacitating him
for being trusted, and rendering him, it may be, the more unfit to carry on any
Bargain or Business, all his Life afterward. For a man that lives by Trade or
Business, is not only for Doing this one Day, but many Days. Not for Living by
one Customer, or Dealer, and for having all his End on him at once: but for so
using him once, as that he may hope to have him often; for so Dealing by that
one, as may Encourage and Draw in many more to Deal with him. And this Wisdom
or Providence, that looks forward, a man quite Contradicts, that uses any
Dishonesty, or Unlawful Means, to serve a Turn at present. Tricks, for a while,
may lie hid; and so long, they stand a worldly mind in some stead, to the Ends
of this World: but this uses not to be long, and sooner or later, they are for
the most part discovered. A Lying tongue is but for a moment, Prove. 12.19. He
that walks uprightly, walks surely, says Solomon: But he that perverteth his
ways, or has recourse to Dishonest and Unlawful Methods, shall be known, i. e.
a little time will discover him, Prove. 10.9. And when once discovered, his way
is hated, and he is not trusted. And then, by catching unlawfully at a little
gain, or success, in one act; he loses all, that he lawfully might have had, in
all the Scores of Opportunities, which, keeping in honest ways would have
brought him, of getting, or succeeding, in the like matters afterward.

Besides, by the just Providence of God, this way of serving our worldly Ends
by Unlawful Methods, is wont to be Defeated. The ill Means, used to Divert an
Evil, he overrules to bring and pull it down upon them: as the killing of
Christ, to bringing in the Romans, the compliances of the Gnostics, to involve
them in Destruction with the Jews; the Sale of Joseph, to bring his Proud and
Wicked Brethren to pay him Homage: though all these, as I formerly noted, were
intended, and wickedly resorted to by the Actors, for quite contrary Purposes.
When, to compass an End, Men fly to an Evil and Forbidden Thing; that sets God
and Providence against them. And they are like to have but little cause to
boast of their Gettings or Success, whilst he sets himself to blast all they
Project, and to undo what they are unrighteously a Doing.

2. Secondly, In Course of Converse or Business, Spiritual Prudence keeps the
Wisdom of this World, from letting fall, or being wanting in any Duties. It
Drops none, as I said above, to save it self from Persecutions: much less
should it omit them, to suit it self to Turns and Companies. This Men are very
apt to Do, in the usual Method of this World. They are called in Worldly
Companies, and in the Course of Worldly Business, to express their Regard for
many Duties. It may be the Name of God is blasphemed, or some Truth of his run
down, or some Virtue Dishonored, and we stand by and hear it. Or, some
Innocent and Good Men, Good Ways, or Good Things, are loaded with Reproach and
Accusations, which we know to be False. Or, intemperance is carried on, with an
expectation of our Presence, or Concurrence therein; or the like. Now here the
Suggestion of Worldly Wisdom, is out of Bashfulness to keep silence, and not to
show uneasiness at the Reproach of God, or Goodness, or Good Men, for fear of
Displeasing, and giving offense: And to Countenance intemperance, or, it may
be, in part at least, to share therein, rather than break Company, or incur the
Censure of being Rude, Morose, Unsociable, or the like. But Spiritual Wisdom,
sets the Honor of God, and the owning of Virtue, and the assertion of Truth,
of the Goodness of Things, or of the Innocence of Persons, at an higher Rate
than these Worldly Considerations. And therefore it will not be wanting, to
manifest and show forth the Honor it has for God, the Justice it bears to Men,
the Conscionable Regard it has for every Virtue, and the Conscientious Fear it
has of every Sin, when it is called to manifest its Like, or Dislike, its
Concurrence, or Dissent, on any just Occasion. Not being for suffering Sin
upon, much less Countenancing it in our Brother, Lev. 19.17. and requiring us,
to have no Fellowship with the Works of Darkness, but rather to reprove them
where we meet them, as St. Paul says, Ephesians. 5.11. So to bear out Christ's Truths
and Laws, and to bear up his Name, not only in Secret, but in Life and
Conversation.

The better to Discharge and Facilitate this, I think it would be an Excellent
Rule of Spiritual Prudence, for all true Christians, to make open and ordinary
Professions of strict Virtue. Not falsely giving out, what Virtue we have not.
Nor, affectedly bringing into Company what we have, when we need not. But, on
the other hand, not being ashamed or afraid to Profess what we really are, and
all that strictness, which it becomes Christians to have, or they ought to
Practice, when there is occasion for us to show our selves. It would be very
fit, I think, for all Christians, to appear to have, and to keep about them the
same sense of Things in Conversation; which they appear to have at Church.
Professing still, to like and approve here, what they pretend to like and
approve there. And showing their Godly Fear, and Dislike of the same things,
when they meet them Proposed, or Practiced before Men; as they did, when they
heard them Discoursed of, and Represented before God. And for all Ministers, to
appear visibly to think, and to say the same of all Matters in Company, as they
do in their Pulpits: Showing the same Sentiments of Things, in Liking, or
Disliking, allowing or rebuking them; and giving them the same reception, when
they meet them in Practice, as they did whilst far off, and whilst warning
against them in Discourses.

And the benefit of this to all would be, that few or none would expect any
Unchristian Compliance or Entertainment from them; or, where there is any thing
of Breeding and Civility, offer any thing Unchristian in their Company. In
respect of some of the more Modish and Fashionable Vices of the World, which
are the way of Reception in a Place, and expect more Compliance; as showing
Hospitality, for instance, by Furnishing out a Table for Intemperance: These
strict Professions of the contrary Virtue, may perhaps seem harder, and would
incur more Censure at the first. But that makes but a few Days talk. And when
once a man's virtuous Profession and Resolution is known and got abroad, and
some few have had Trial of it: that talk is at an end. And then his Virtue, in
Talking and Acting so at common times, what they themselves are ready to Do in
their best Thoughts, and most serious Discourses, will be Honored: and his
Noncompliance with their breach in their Practice, of what they Profess in
their wisest Seasons, will be no longer Censured by them. And when once men
have this Opinion of his Virtue, he will be out of the way of Temptation; and
they will never come to him, when they seek, or expect to be otherwise
received, than agrees with his known Practice and Profession.

3. Thirdly, In Pursuing any Worldly Ends, Spiritual Prudence will keep a man
from being Sollicitous about Events, in the way he takes.

Solicitude is an anxious and mistrustful Fear, and Care, of speeding in these
Worldly Pursuits, or of attaining what we seek for. When we are in pursuit of
any of these Ends, there is a Care and Studiousness of compassing it. And this
carefulness is the Greater, where men are under a fear of failing therein.
Which fear is wont to be most, where the things are over-valued; an
over-estimate making one jealous without Cause, and apt to fear for a thing,
where no ground of fear is: or, where they want Faith, and mistrust the
Providence of God. All which are too usual in the way of Worldly wise men. Who,
making Worldly things, not so much a Means in their passage, as a main End, so
placing too much in them; and not attending to Providence, or the Promises of
God, which are invisible Things, for the preservation thereof, but only to what
is before their eyes: are apt to be full of very superfluous Fears, and anxious
and distrustful Cares, about these Temporalities, which they so immoderately
and unduly prize.

But now Spiritual Wisdom takes care to prevent this. Not that it is against
all Provision before hand, or all Care for futurity in Worldly Matters. Go to
the Ant thou Sluggard, says Wisdom it self, about Providence, and Seasonable
Cares and Preparations for Futurity, Consider her ways, and be wise, Prove. 6.6,
7, 8. And the Apostles at Jerusalem, and other Christians, under the appearance
of Eminent and approaching Want, and great Distress, were providently careful
to provide for it the best they could, by Selling what Houses and Lands they
had, and putting the Prices into a Common Stock, Act. 4.34, 35. Yea, in the
Family and Retinue of Christ himself, there was a Provident Care, and Judas
bore a common Purse or Bag, which was for having something still beforehand,
Joh. 13.29. and c. 12.6. About these Things Labor est exercendus Sollicitudo
tollenda. Jerome. Tom. 9. Comment. ad c. 6. Mat. on nollite Solicit esse. v.
25.
Labor and Care is to be Exercised, and only Solicitude to be removed, as St.
Jerome notes, i. e. such Care as Disquiets the Mind.

But the Provident Fear and Care, or well-ordered Solicitude about these
Temporal Things or Ends of this Life, which Godly Wisdom allows, is to be a
Care and Providence under these following Limitations.

1. First, It is not to be for these Temporal Things in Life, as for the Ends
of Life it self. We are not made for this World, nor enjoy it as Inhabitants,
that set up their rest therein, as in their proper place. But we are made and
designed for a better, and only pass through this as Strangers and Pilgrims, in
search of a City above in the Highest Heavens, as the 1 Pet. 2.11. Heb. 11.13
Scripture says. And therefore these Worldly Things we must not stop in, as if,
like as they are made for us, so we were made for them. Our Care for them, is
not to be as for the Ends of Life, which we must only seek to please our selves
in, or enjoy: But as for Adminiculis Vitae, for the Means and Helps thereof,
which we must use, in order to better and higher Enjoyments. They are to be
cared for, only as things necessary, or useful to us in our passage. Or, as
subservient to us in seeking better Things; or, in Exercising those Virtues,
and setting forth those Religious Duties, which are the true and real Ends of
Life.

2. It is not to be a Care and Studiousness for Superfluities, but for the true
and Reasonable Necessities, and Conveniences of Life. Superfluities are not
necessary to real Wants and Conveniences; but only to the Fantastic Wants
and Conveniences of Vicious, Vain, or Diseased Minds and Imaginations. And
Spiritual Prudence is not for Pampering and Gratifying, but for Curing an
Unsound and Distempered Fancy and Apprehension. It Neglects not to provide for
real Conveniences, but it seeks not to supply the wants of Vices, or
Distempers of Men's Souls, or makes no Provision for the Flesh, as St. Paul
says, to fulfill the Lusts thereof, Romans 13.14. Where God has provided Men with
Plenty and Surplusage, either by his Blessing on their own Endeavors, or by
the Care of Ancestors, they are eased of the Great Temptation to
Sollicitousness, and are the more inexcusable if they offend therein, for more
and more Superfluities. But where he has allotted less, and Prospect of want
may put men upon more impatient an uneasy Cares; there Spiritual Prudence is
for having its Care and Solicitude spent on Conveniences, not Superfluities;
and on real Conveniences, not Imaginary and Fantastic ones, which are
infinite, and never to be satisfied. Feed me with Food convenient for me,
Demensi mei, that is, commensurate to my Circumstance and Condition in the
World, was wise Agur's Wish, Prove. 30.8. And give us Mat. 6.11.
this Day, or Luke 11 3.
Day by Day, our Daily Bread, says the Lord's Prayer. Bounding our Solicitude
and Cares with what is really sufficient, and enough for us; or with Bread, i.
e. Convenient Sustenance and Support, which excludes Greediness. And claiming
Holy Acquiescence and Content, if it be but for this Day, or from Day to Day,
in Daily Dependence upon Providence, which excludes Diffidence. And so to be
maintained for all the Days of our Lives; at the end whereof, we can carry away
nothing, but Good Works and a Good Conscience, not any Worldly Things.

3. It Is not a Study and Care for these Necessaries and Conveniences, that is
Superfluous, i. e. more than needs; or a showing more Solicitude, when they
would be as well secured, and served, by less. We have Employment enough for
our Care on higher Things, which call for all the Care that we can spare; and
so have little cause to lavish it out, and throw it away unnecessarily, on
lesser Matters. Some Care for them is necessary, God having so Ordered Things
to incite industry, that we cannot compass what we need without our own Care.
But when we do take care for them, that should be a just and proportioned Care:
not an unnecessary Care, where the Superfluity does the End we seek no Good,
but only troubles our selves, and leaves us the less care, in store and reserve
for better Things.

It must not be immoderate, or more than Suits; either,

1. With the true Weight and Worth, the Dangers or Hazards of these Things. The
Worldly Things we seek, are of a very mixed and limited Goodness. And we may
easily bestow more care and pains in pursuit of any of them, than it will
answer. They are likewise many times more easily attainable, and not liable to
any Great hazard. Or, when there is more uncertainty in any pursuit; yet, if we
cannot have one thing, the World has variety, and we may have another as Good,
that will serve as well. Or, if we have it not at one time, let us but wait,
and we may have it at another: And, perhaps, when that time comes, it will
appear to be a better. So that we may easily spend more care upon them, than
they will require. And having so much use of it: Spiritual Prudence is for
having us to be Good Husbands of our Care: not spending more upon any Worldly
Thing, than the worth of the Thing will bear, and, if it were got thereby, we
should be well paid for; nor laying out more thereon, than the Difficulty of
the Thing it self, or the hazards incident to it, do require.

2. Or, more than suits with our other Greater and Higher Cares. We must be
careful in such sort for any Ends of this Life, as that we Neglect not all due
Care for the Things of the Life beyond this. So that our Care for any Worldly
Thing, must not be such, as takes up our mind too much. Not such, for instance,
as leaves it not Time and Care enough to spare for Spiritual improvements, and
for attaining all the Virtues of Religion, and for watching against all the
Temptations of the World, and for any opportunities and ways of Doing the Good
we have been taught, or of Avoiding the Evil, whereof we have been fore-warned:
all which, is such a Care of this Life, as choaks the Word, as our Savior
says, Mat. 13.22. Nor such, as obtrudes it self at an aliene, or unseasonable
time: calling us to mind our Worldly Care, when we have a contrary Call, to
mind God or Religion, some work of Piety, or Charity, or, when we are present
at, and our minds should be attending to, and spending all their Care upon some
Spiritual Functions, as Prayers, or other Divine Offices; or, in any other Call
and Season, for like Good and Religious Things. The Care of this World, must
yield to the Care of Religion: it must not justle out God and our Duty, but
give way to them. So that it is always immoderate and ill Governed, when it is
not made to comport with them.

3. Or, with the enjoyment of our own Minds. When Care grows Great, it is very
Disquieting, and a vexatious burthensom thing. And most of those Worldly Things
which men pursue, though they are valuable when they come cheaper, and are got
more quietly: yet, however they may flatter themselves with Fancies before,
when they come to try them, they do not ordinarily find that Satisfaction
therein, which will Compensate for the loss of Ease and Tranquillity of Mind.
That Care is immoderate, and gives away more than it is like to get, which Robs
us of our Internal Ease, and self Enjoyment. For it is a much more valuable
thing to enjoy what is within, than what is without us; and to enjoy our selves
and our own minds, than those Worldly things we are in pursuit of. That Care is
to be removed, which is Vexatio^s and Disquieting to the mind; What our Lord
has forbid, not being all Labor and Care, but only Solicitude, as St. Jerome
says.

4. Particularly it excludes all such Care, as Disquiets it by Distracting
Fears, and anxiety about Events, or all anxious Cares with mistrust of
Providence.

For, a Competency of Worldly Things, though we have no Surplusage; and always
such success in any pursuit, as is good and fit for us; is what we have secured
by Romans 8.28. Heb. 13.5. Mat. 6.33.
Promises, and the Providence of God. And all our Solicitude for these Things,
must only be a Care, with Faith in God, and Reliance on Providence; never an
anxiou^ Fear, with want of Faith, or Distrust thereof. Which Distrust of God,
and about Things men are eagerly Desirous of; must needs fill Worldly Minds,
indeed, with Anxiety and Distractions. For their Great Desires will put them
upon Great Cares* and their want of Faith, ^^^ving no sure Anchor of Hope in
God, the (...) fixed stay to hold to, will fill them with (...). So that they
are still wavering in Ebbs (...) Flows, Hopes and Fears, and are of Anxious and
Distracted Spirits.

But now this Anxious and Mistrustful Solicitude, is what Spiritual Wisdom by
no means allows. We are not to give way to it, though we have Bread b^t from
Day to Day, which calls us to a constant Dependence on God for what we shall
eat ^ext, as I observed before from the Lord's Prayer. Nor in Dangers, either
Private or Public, to Church or State; though our Preservation or Deliverance
is but from Day to Day, without any comfortable Prospect of Continuance, and we
are held there in like constant Dependence. Our Care indeed is necessary, for
attaining of Worldly Good Things, and putting by Worldly Evils; God having left
those good seize for an Employment of Industry, and not Conferring them
upon us by himself alone, or making them fall on every Man's head by Miracles,
but by our own Concurrence. And these, Depending in good part upon us, must be
a Matter of our Care, employing our Care, as well as his Providence. But as
they Depend on us, they Depend on him too. And as we are to have them by our
Cares, so must we have them under, and from his Providence. And therefore, when
we are careful to get them, we must at the same time look up to him, and trust
he will give them, or such other Good in lieu thereof, as he sees most fitting
for us. Faith in Providence, especially where also we have God's express
Promises withal, must always both support our Cares, and Speed or give Success
to them. So that wh^^soever we Care, and are Solicitous for any Earthly Things,
it must always be under God, not excluding him: and with Faith in Providence
and Gods Promises, not with anxious and distracting Fears, and mistrust
thereof. Which anxious and mistrustful Solicitude about Food or Raiment, that
is, the Good Things of this World, our Savior warns against, Mat. 6.

For the Care there spoken of, is a mistrustful, painful Care; that Solicitude
being taxed, as showing little Faith, v. 30. or being of Doubtful mind, and
hanging in Careful suspense, as St. Luke explains it, Luke 12.29. (...), be not
anxiously and mistrustfully Solicitous, says our Lord, or take no thought for
your Life, or the things of this World to support Life, what ye shall Eat, or
Drink; or for the Body, what ye shall put on, Mat. 6.25, 31. Which Solicitous
mistrust he seeks to remove and exclude, by the Assurance of God's Care over
us. Reproving it, from the Greater instances of his Care, which all of us have
received already: Is not the Life more than Meat, and the Body more than
Raiment? and is he like to withold this, who gave that? v. 25. And from what
Care all other Creatures Do receive: Are not the Fowls of the Air, that have
none of our Provisions, neither Sow, nor Reap, nor gather into Barns, yet taken
care for by him all the year, and Fed? and are not the very Lillies, that
neither Toil, nor Spin, Clad? And are not ye much better than they? or can he
overlook you, whilst he takes Care of them? v. 26.28. From (...) Care
Providence has, even of the minutest ^^^ters belonging to us, the Hairs of our
Head, (...) Mat. 10.30.
he says elsewhere, being all numbered. From God's Knowledge of all our Needs,
and a Pro^^se and Assurance, that as he knows, so he will take care of all
their Wants, that take care of ^^^ir own Duty, and of his Righteousness. Your
Heavenly Father knows ye have need of all these things. But seek ye first the
Kingdom of God, and (...) Righteousness, and all these things shall be (...)
unto you, v. 32, 33. And, to name no ^ore, Lastly, from the Unprofitableness of
such ^^xious and mistrustful Cares, which, in most C^ses, serve not at all to
set on our own wishes, but only to Torment and Disquiet our selves. Which of
you, by such taking Thought, can add (...) Cubit unto his Stature? v. 27.

5. Lastly, It Is not a Solicitude or Carefulness ^^fore the time, or a
Preoccupation of Cares, ^^restalling and anticipating them before the time
comes. Spiritual Prudence, in caring for Worldly Matters, is not for tormenting
it self with Fears of what may never happen; or with troublesome Cares of Things
that are far off. (...) is not Solicitous about Reaping, whilst it is only Seed
time; or, what Opportunity and Season they shall have to Sow again, when they
are now but in the time of Reaping; or how the Markets will go, and what the
Sale thereof will be at the time of Selling, when the Grane is yet in the
Field, and not got into the Barn. This is to trouble our selves with Cares,
before the time of Caring; to be Soliciti in Crastinum, or take thought for to
morrow, which is our Savior's Expression in this Prohibition. Not letting the
thing alone, that is to come to morrow, to be cared for to morrow: when it will
be no better cared for now, than it will be then; and when this Days Care, is
only to add the Care of one Day more, not to prevent any that must come after;
an Early Trouble, and before we need, for what we cannot shun; and a painful
anticipation of a Distant Care, which, at its own time, must be cared for, and
repeated over again. Which our Lord respects, when he says, Take no thought for
the morrow; for the morrow* shall take thought for the Things of it self:
Sufficient to the Day, is the Evil thereof, Mat. 6.34. Sufficient to the Day is
the Evil thereof, i. e. Sufficient to this Day, is the affliction of the Care
and Solicitude that is present, and which it brings along with it: and we shall
have enough to Do, in bearing the Care and Solicitude of any future and remote
burden, when its own time is come, and it is made present.

Such is the Carefulness and Solicitude for Worldly Things, which Christ
forbids, and Christian Prudence is for banishing out of the hearts of
Christians, when they are in the way of Compassing any Worldly Ends. A due Care
it allows, that is not Disquieting or Vexatious, Mistrustful of God, or
Neglectful of better Things. But it permits not such Care of them, as sets them
up for Ends, not only for Means and Instruments; as is laid out for
Superfluities, not for real Wants and Conveniences; such as is a superfluous
Care, more than needs for our purpose; an immoderate and ill-govern'd Care,
more than the Things will answer, as well as more than the attaining of them
would require; such as Defrauds better Things, and Consists not with our
greater or higher Cares; as burdens and disquiets our Minds, as Distrusts God,
and Providence, and turns into Anxiety and Distracting Thoughts; or, lastly,
such as preoccupates distant Evils, and torments it self before hand with
Futurities, which it cannot help, yea, perhaps, with Trials or Maladies it
shall never feel, and is not content to defer a troublesome Care for a Thing,
'till the time of caring for it come. All these ways of being Solicitous,
besides the resort to unlawful Means, so much insisted on above, are the
Solicitude of Worldly Minds, who fix in Worldly Things, and weigh them in a
Worldly Estimate, and seek them only by Worldly Succors. Not of the Spiritually
Wise, who seek them only as serviceable to higher and better Ends, or in
subordination to God, and subservency to Religion; overruling all the
Suggestions of Fleshly Wisdom in these Points, so as may best serve it self,
and as may make us do what most becomes Christians.

And this is the last Office of Christian Prudence, which I proposed to treat
of, viz. to Govern in Worldly Affairs; or, in all the ways forementioned, so to
furnish out Inferior and Worldly Prudence about Things of this Life, in some
Points, and to overruled it in others, keeping it from serving it self by any
forbidden ways, by letting fall, or being wanting to any Duties, and from being
Anxious and Sollicitous about the Attainment of what it pursues; as may best
suit with the Spirit and Precepts of Christianity, and become the Servants and
Followers of Christ Jesus.

And thus at length, it may, at least in part, appear, what true Christian
Prudence is; how it lies in seeing and following Right Ends of Religion, and
pursuing them only by fit and Christian ways; in taking for the Execution
thereof, the most Advantageous Seasons, in tempering them to Circumstances, and
showing Caution to prevent harm thereby, or ill Consequences; and, as for all
other inferior Prudence in Things of this Life, in so ordering the Ends, and
overruling the Ways thereof, as may keep them most subservient to Religion, and
as may best become Christians. And how contrary the way of Worldly Wisdom, or
Fleshly Craftiness, is to all this, in all the foresaid Particulars.

CHAP. XIV. A Recommendation of Christian Prudence.
AND now, in Conclusion, for a further Explanation of, as well as for a Motive
to that Christian Prudence, which I have endeavored to recommend, and set off
in the Preceding Chapters; I shall briefly observe, how we are taught all this,
both to keep to one way, and to shun the other, in St. Paul's Practice. For
this is the Account which that blessed Apostle gives of himself. Our Rejoying
is this, the Testimony of our Conscience, that in Simplicity, and Godly
Sincerity, not with Fleshly Wisdom, but by the Grace of God, we have had our
Conversation in the World, 2 Cor. 1.12.

He Disclaims having had any Conversation by Fleshly Wisdom; i. e. by having
suited his Conversation to Fleshly Ends, or Governing himself by Fleshly
Methods. Wisdom is seen in proposing of Ends, and in choice of Means. And
Fleshly Wisdom is such as is fittest for Fleshly Purposes; pursuing Fleshly
Ends by Fleshly Courses, especially by Deceit and Craftiness. Carnalem
sapientiam hic dicit, non Eloquentiam, sed malitiam and calliditatem. Theod. in
loc.
By Fleshly Wisdom, he here means, not Eloquence, but Wickedness, and
Craftiness, says Theodorit. And to pursue all Things, to Deal and Converse with
all Persons of this World by Fleshly Wisdom, is to serve the Ends, or Appetites
of our Flesh by them: to take up at every turn with such things as are easiest
to Flesh and Blood, or make most for it; and to compass them, as need is, by
any Method, especially by Craft and Deceit. So that then men Converse by
Fleshly Wisdom, when they Govern their Conversations by Fleshly Considerations,
and Worldly Maxims, and Comp^ss their Ends by Unlawful and Deceitful ways, and
steer their Course in every thing they do, or meet withal in this World, as
may give them most and best enjoyment of Worldly Things. And this, all they
count wise, who are fixed to this World, and look no further. But this, the
Blessed Apostle tell us, was not his measure: not by Fleshly Wisdom.

But by the Grace of God. That is, b^ Religion, or the Rules of the Gospel:
which is called the Grace of God, as Containing his Graci^^^ ^^^lings and
Intentions toward us, and a^ both Declaring to us what we should Do, and
Offering us Grace whereby to Do it. The Grace of God bringing Salvation,
teaches us, etc. says St. Paul, i. e. the Gospel does, Tit. 2.11. So that his
Conversation he ordered all along, not a^ might get him, or keep him most ease
and interest in this World: but as might best secure his innocence in every
thing, and the Rules of Religion. His chief Care was, at all times, and in
every Action, to Do his Duty, to keep the Orders, and serve the Honor of
Christianity. All his Study and Deliberation, was as a Man of another World,
not of this; as one that sought to save his Soul, not to pamper his Body; what
way he might be most innocent and holy, not what would make him a more wealthy,
worldly easy, or happy Person. If a way, or thing, was never so cross to his
Worldly Interests, and to the Cravings of the Flesh; to Discharge his Duty, and
keep a Good Conscience, he would take, or Do it. And in any thing, if a Duty
was called for by the Gospel, or the Grace of God, for any Considerations of
this World, he would not forego it. Not in Fleshly Wisdom, but in Simplicity,
and Godly Sincerity (which I have before explained at large,) and by the Grace
of God, or Rules of the Gospel, I have had my Conversation in the World.

Lastly, I shall Note the Comfort and Satisfaction he found in all this. This
is our Rejoicing, (...), our Glory and Triumph, the Testimony of our
Conscience, etc. Such a Cause of Rejoicing, his Conversing in all Things
without Fleshly Wisdom, and by the Grace of God, proved to him most fully
afterward. But whilst he was Practicing this Rule, though he had plenty of
inward Comforts and Satisfaction, yet he found outward Trouble enough therein.
As he had no regard for this World, or for the Rules of Fleshly Wisdom: So had
this World no more Favor or Regard for him. All this time, whilst he held on
in the way of Simplicity, and of the Grace of God; he run through as much Rage,
and Rudeness, and Persecutions of the World, as any man. This, indeed, was one
thing he was still sure of, and the great exercise of his Life in every Place.
So the Holy Ghost, as he says, witnessed to him, that in every City, Bonds and
Afflictions abode or waited for him, Act. 20.23. Nay, these he met with, in the
highest Degrees, Conflicting, not only with the Malice, but with the Downrigh^
Rage and Madness of the People. They were ready to tread him Down, like Dirt
under their Feet; and valued him no more than the sweepings of the Streets: We
are, says he, as the Filth of the World, and as the offscouring of all
things, unto this Day, 1 Cor. 4.13. Here, had he need enough to betake himself
from Simplicity, and the strict Rules of the Gospel or Grace of God, to Fleshly
Wisdom, could any thing on Earth have driven him thereto. And he met with
outward Trouble, and Sorrow enough, for his Conscientious and Religious
Stiffness, that he would not.

And yet after all this, he does not in the least Repent of all his Sufferings;
nay, were they all to be suffered over again, or as many more set before him,
he is as ready as ever he was, to hold on still in the same Course. He looks
upon those Sufferings in this way, with other eyes, than common Spectators do;
rating them as Favors, and the truest matter of Glorying and Joy. His Case,
all this while, seemed most miserable to others; but they saw only the outside,
and viewed it at a distance; whereas, in truth, it was all the time happy to
himself. The Pains of his Sufferings were soon gone; but the Peace and Joy
thereof were lasting. Whilst the Pains and Troubles were most pressing upon
him, he had still a stream of inward Joys and Consolations coming in, that did
refresh and support him under them: God comforting him, as he says, in all his
Tribulations, and still as the Sufferings of Christ abounded in him; so his
Consolations also, in Proportion abounding by Christ, 2 Cor. 1.4, 5, But though
these Joys came with his Sorrows, yet they did not vanish with them, but staid
and stuck by him afterward, for a full and abundant Compensation.

And this is the Comfort of all truly Religious and upright Sufferers; as this
Holy Apostle was, they are best pleased with themselves, when others are most
displeased with them. Though they have not the Joys of this World, yet they
have Joy in it: Joy, whilst they lose the good things thereof, yea, therefore
joy because they lose them, and still a greater measure of joys, the greater
their loss is; if it be for Discharging a Good Conscience toward God, or for
keeping the Rules of Righteousness, and the Service of Jesus. And they have a
clear Prospect of most ineffable and lasting Joys, so soon as ever the Scene
shall change, and they shall be taken and removed from hence. Come thou Good
and Faithful Servant, enter thou into the joy of thy Lord, Mat. 25.21.

But we live in a time, when, to the greatest Numbers, Popery, that is indeed a
very Corrupt Religion, seems more formidable than any other thing. And to call
a way Popish, sounds worse in the ears of the Populace, than to say it is
Unchristian. And therefore, to conclude this Subject, I shall note in the last
place, how all the foresaid Methods of the Worldly Wise, which I have taxed
before, are no better than Popish Corruptions.

There are Popish Morals, as well as Popish Superstitions and Idolatries. The
Depravations of Good Practice, and of Moral Honesty and Justice, by a Number of
their Casuists, have been as scandalous, and will prove as fatal to those Souls
who are deluded by them, as their Depravations in Matters of Faith and
Devotion. And the forecited Rules of the Worldly Wise, are among those very
ways, whereby too many Papists have Corrupted Christian Morals. Nay, they are
the Morals of Jesuits, who are the worst of Papists, and whose scandalous
accommodations of Christ's Rules and Precepts, to comply with Fleshly Passions
and Interests, suiting Religion to Self Ends, and basely bending Moral Duties
to serve Corrupt Turns and Worldly Necessities, are Condemned in these, and
such other Points, by the sober Papists themselves.

And this I the rather note, because I see so many Reverend and Worthy Persons,
who seem the strictest and truest Examples of Moral Integrity among us, and
stand out against all these Unlawful Compliances and Insincerities of the
Fleshly Wise, appearing as the Patterns and Confessors for Honesty and
Morality, in a Day of General Temptation and Defection, are yet, among other
Marks of common hatred and scorn, branded with the Name of Papists,
(notwithstanding all the opposition they made to Popery, and some of them most
Eminently, when the Day of Trial was,) for these their brave and truly
Christian oppositions of Popish Morals. Yea, and that by those, who, content
with a Zeal against Popish. Errors in Faith, and Superstitious Devotions, in
the midst of all their heat against them, are running into the worst parts of
their Morality, sucking in the rankest Poison of Jesuitish Honesty unawares.

For, as to the Points before mentioned, such as these are the Jesuits
Principles; all Taught by some or other, (for God forbid I should Charge all
therewith,) in that Order.

They are for Doing Evil that Good may come. This is the meaning of that Grand
Salvo* so much magnified, and made use of among them, viz. The Right Direction
of the Intention, which affords them such wonderful help in an unlawful Thing.
Thus they clear men of the worst Crimes; as Simony, False Witness, Thefts,
Duels, and Murder it self. Plead but Necessity, and say there is need of it,
for Religion, or the Church, or their Society, for the Public, or a Man's own
Private Good, to preserve his Life, Estate or Reputation: and then the Breach
of the Precept they make to be without Guilt, if therein a Man ^oth but Direct
his Intention aright; permitting the Evil of the Action, if the Actor does but
take care to purify his Intention.

They are Notorious, for Giving a Discharge of Relative Duties, particularly
toward Princes, when those Duties grow Burthensom or Unsafe, under Impious, or
Oppressive Rulers. For, of all others, they are the men that are foremost,
(leading others,) and fullest in Asserting, the Deposition and Dethroning of
Kings; the Absolution and Discharge of Subjects, from the Obligation of their
Natural Allegiance; and the Lawfulness of Rising in Arms, against Heretical, or
Tyrannical Princes. There is scarce any one thing, wherewith for so many years
last past, not only this Order of (...) but the Church of Rome, have been more
^earnedly Charged, and more Shamefully Silent'd. Yea, it is the Test of Popery
by our Laws; the Legal Conviction of Papists, being by the Tender of the Oaths
of Allegiance and Supremacy, which were made to Secure and Defend our Princes,
against the Poison of these Tenets.

They are infamous, for all Arts of Insincerity, and Fallaciousness. Having
been the Pest of Humane Society, by their Doctrines of Equivocation, or using
of Doubtful Words and Ambiguous Speeches, which the Parties concerned shall
take otherwise than they mean them. And of Mental Reservation, Reserving in
their own Minds, some hidden and unexpressed Clauses, in their Declarations; or
secret and unexpected Conditions, in their Promises: So to make their Speech, a
Truth to themselves, though it be a Lie to others. Of getting, and compassing
their Ends, by Deceitful Suggestions; or setting out so much Truth as to serve
the turn, and craftily hiding what would hinder it. And, instead of that
Plainness and Simplicity, which is prescribed by Religion, studiously assuming
all counterfeit Shapes, and inventing and propagating all those Fallacious
ways, or Liberties of Dissembling, which the Father of Lies can suggest to
their hearts, whereby to overthrow the Faith of Men.

Whilst they Reserve their Minds, or inward Service for God; they are for
Giving the External Service, or outward Appearance, to any Wickedness expected
from them. Thus, as the Author of the Provincial Letters p. 51.
observe^ (...) they allowed the Chinese, to worship a Chines^ (...), if they
were careful to hide under their Clothes an Image of Jesus Christ, to which, by
a Mental Reserve, they were to pay those Public Adorations, which, in visible
Appearance, the Idol Received.

They are for Tempering their Duty, to Circumstances of outward Convenience,
Doing so much, as they safely may, without Worldly Loss or Disadvantage.
Contenting themselves, as Ib.
they did in the Indies, to Preach up a Glorified Jesus, to those that would
not hear of a Crucified Jesus. And abating the Duties of Religion, till they
have brought them Down to the Pitch and Proportion, the Wants and Worldly
Necessities of those that consult them.

They are for Changing Doctrines, as they Change Turns and Interests. Not only
in Different Turns, of their own, or their Societies Affairs, but of their
Disciples. Having one Resolution for one man, and at one time, and a contrary
at another. By this looseness, taking in all comers, and fitting and
reconciling all Times and Persons to their own Ends.

They are for Holding, and Maintaining, what is once ill got. And make Unjust
Possession, a Just Title to it. And order Easy Amends and Restitutions, for
Wrongful and Evil-Deeds; no more than can consist with the Offenders own Credit
and Convenience.

They have invented Salvo's, whereby men may keep innocent, and yet Act in an
Unlawful Business; and Minister, and help other Men to Sin, without Sinning
themselves.

They vacate, at their Pleasure, and put by the Laws of Morality, as they lie
in their way; rendering them insignificant, and of little or no Force or
Obligation. Either by Interpretation of Terms, or so expounding the Terms used
in Prohibiting any Sins, as shall exempt all, or almost all their own
Transgressions from coming under them. Or, by allowing the Thing, not under the
Name whereby it stands forbidden, but the very same thing in another Form: like
to what they Resolved in the Case of Usury, permitting it, not under the Name
of Usury, but of the Contract Mohatra, i. e. Selling any Person, that wants
Money, any Commodities on Trust, at a Great Rate; and he presently Selling them
again for ready Money to the same Person, at so much less as the use would come
to. Or, by nice and vain Distinctions, eluding all the Force of a Duty, by
limiting it to some such Bounds, or making it to bind only for such Reasons, as
they will be in little need to transgress: Or running it into such thin, and
subtle Notions, till they have lost both it and themselves. Or, by the Plea of
Favorable Circumstances, which in Carnal Estimate call for Ease and
Indulgence; and which they are most Liberal in Granting at God's Cost, to save
themselves. Or, by Shifting of Intentions, confining the Malignity thereof, to
Doing it for certain Ends, which they can easily Evade, by proposing other Ends
therein to themselves. The main Study, and Boasted Subtilty of their Casuistry,
lies not in Explaining, but in Defeating Moral Duties, in Spreading Plasters
for all Sores, and inventing Salvo's for Sins. And, instead of Instructions and
Inforcements, how to keep; venting among their Disciples, Palliations and
Devices, to show them how, without Sin, they may break God's Commandments.

In Sum, not to lengthen out this Point by any more Particulars, they are
extremely tender of Fleshly Wants and Necessities. But this, as they that are
for more Flesh, than Spirit; showing no tenderness far God, but making as bold
as may be, with Religion and its Duties. Theirs is an accommodating and
complying Theology; and their Great Care is not to bear, but to avoid and shift
off the Cross, and temper and bring Down the Strictnesses and Severities of
Christ, to the Pitch and Measure of a Fleshly Mind. And this wicked Policy, or
Suiting the Rules of Morality and Holiness, to Carnal Ends and Inclinations,
they call Religious Wisdom, or being wise to retain or multiply the Followers,
to serve the Ends and Interest of the Lord Jesus.

It would be too long, to annex particular Sayings and Proofs, of all these,
and other such like Opinions, and Maxims of Fleshly Wisdom, advanced by some or
other of these Carnal Politi^ians. They who list may see enough from their own
Authors; or, without giving themselves trouble to look further for them, in the
Mystery of Jesuitism or Vid. Letter 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. etc.
Provincial Letters; and in the several Extracts of Propositions from the
Jesuits Writings in the Additionals.

Thus are the foresaid Rules and Worldly Maxims, Declared against in the
Preceding Chapters, no better than Jesuits Principles; which Secular Reason,
and Carnal Interests, and Self Ends, are ready enough to Suggest to Fleshly
Natures of all Sects and Parties: but which they, above all others, have
cultivated to Perfection. So that, as these Rules of Fleshly Wisdom take Place,
and come in use, the Jesuit creeps in, and revives amongst us. And if Jesuits
Morals must come in to Drive out Popish Superstitions and Idolatries, as much,
and as bad Popery, will come in at the Back Door, as goes out at the Fore-Door,
and there will be no Deliverance from Popery that way to boast of.

I have an hearty Aversion to Popery; whilst I pity their Persons, and am, I
thank God, ready to perform all that is Just, and Charitable to them; at the
same time mightily condemning their Persuasion, as a most corrupt Religion.
Accordingly, I think it a mighty Preservation, to be kept by God's Grace and
Good Providence, from those most Dangerous and Mischievous Errors; or, from all
violent Temptations to them. But I confess, I am for keeping out Popery, or any
other ill Religion, only by Orthodox Tenets, and true Christian Practices.
Which, God be thanked, whatever it is of too many of its Members, is the way of
this Church, in all her Authentic Doctrines and Offices; that set as much by
Good Life, as by Orthodox Belief, and are not more for Professing Truth, than
for Practicing a strict and inviolable Morality and Holiness: As all her
Children, and Sons, must be too, who will not Revolt, or break off from her
Principles. And I think it a most lamentable Unhappiness, for Men in their Zeal
against so blameworthy a Religion, to run headlong into some of its most
heinous Vices; and even when they are opposing it, with the greatest seeming
Fierceness, from sound and entire Protestants, to become in Truth Part-boyl'd
Romanists, or Drive out Popish Superstitions, by the use and help of Jesuitish
Immoralities. Which really is Done, as I have shown, as often as the
fore-condemn'd Rules of Fleshly Wisdom, and others like unto them, do find
Place amongst us.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of BOOKS Printed for Jo. Hindmarsh.
PArey's Surgery. Davela's History of the Civil-Wars of France. Evelin's Sylva.
Saunderson's Sermons. Bishop Brownrigg's Sermons. Snape's Anatomy of an Horse.
Dr. Rawleigh's Sermons. Dr. Outram's Sermons. Mackenzie against Stilling fleet.
Discourse of Primogeniture. Practical Rule of Christian Piety. L'Estrange's
Tully's Offices. Doctors Physician, or Dialogues concerning Health. The whole
Art of Converse. Arbitrary Government displayed. Hudibras; Fourth Part. Alamode
Phlebotomy, or a Discourse of Blood-letting. Eutropuis in English, or a
Breviary of the R. History. Chalmer's Spelling-Book. Behn's Miscellany Poems.
The Whole Duty of Man in French. The Works of Mr. John Oldham. Tate's
Miscellany Poems. Maimburg's Prerogative of the Church of Rome. The History of
Count Zozimus. Discourse of Monarchy. The French Bible. The Testament in
French. Titus Andronicus. Majestas intemerate. Dr. Pelling's Apostate
Protestant. Dr. Curtis's Sermon. Dr. Allestree's Sermon. Sheridon's Case.
Gouges Principles. Spirit of Meekness. Stafford's Trial. The History of Passive
Obedience Complete, 3 Parts. The Case of the Afflicted Scotch Clergy. History
of the Scotch Persecution. Don Sebastian. Modern Policy. Rebels Catechism, writ
by Doctor Heylin. Scotch Memorial. Proteus Ecclesiasticus. Answer to Obedience
and Submission to the present Government, Demonstrated from Bishop Overall.
Perjured Phanatick. Essay on Pride. Dr. Talbor of Agues. Venice Preserved, a
Tragedy. Elliot against Oats. The History of Edward the Third, a Tragedy. The
Mistake; or False Reports. A Play. Slainees Sermon. Hindmarsh's Sermon. Hool's
Vocabulary. Erasmus Colloquies. 24 s. Ingratitude of a Commonwealth. Aristella.
Castalio's Latin Testament. City Politics. Plays. Sir Courtly Nice. Plays.
Banditti. Plays. Dame Dobson. Plays. The Poets Complaint of his Muse, by Mr.
Otway. Seneca's Morals. Martin's Letters. Disappointment, or, The Mother in
fashion, a Play. Rolls's Loyalty and Peace. Hesketh's Sermon. Robert's Sermon.
Loyal Satyrist. Vindication of the Church of England. Pelling's Good Old Way.
FINIS.

