SERMONS PREACHED Partly Before His MAJESTY AT WHITE HALL.

And Partly Before ANNE Duchess of York, AT THE CHAPEL at St JAMES.

By HENRY KILLIGREW D. D. Master of the Savoy, and Almoner to his Royal
Highness.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for R. Royston Bookseller to His most Sacred Majesty.
MDCLXXXV.

THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
THERE are so many Sermons, upon all sorts of Subjects, already extant; that
the Author of these, had he been perfectly left to his own liberty, would not
have increased the Number.

But there were some Reasons, which made it, in a manner, necessary for him, to
add unto the Heap; though, as the common complaint goes, it be grown too big.

And none were more forcible to extort them from him, than the kindness he has
for some persons: Which every one, that feels any touch of that passion, knows
to have a power to constrain us unto those things, which merely for our own
satisfaction alone, we should not choose to do.

Some near Relations, that is, were desirous to converse with him, by the help
of these Discourses, when he is dead: and were persuaded withal, that others
might now reap some profit by them in the reading; whom the lowness of his
Voice could not reach when they came to hear them.

No man, I can bear him witness, is more sensible than he, that there are more
elaborate and more universally useful Sermons and Tracts, already in the
peoples hands: but Mankind having several tastes, as well as faces, and very
different relishes; it is possible these Discourses may be better fitted to
some palates, and touch some hearts more smartly, than those which, in
themselves, may be more excellent.

This I can say of them, That there are many seasonable Truths delivered in
them: and expressed in words so apt, so pure and clean; that while they display
the Object which they represent, they strengthen and cherish the sight.

In short, they both instruct and delight; satisfy the appetite, and excite
it; present solid nourishment, and give it a grateful taste.

Nothing here, I am sure, is insipid, much less nauseous; nothing feeble and
flagging, much less dead: but there is quickness and life every where, both in
the sense, and in the Style: Which may please even this delicate, not to say
fastidious, Age; wherein things very commendable are wont to be disrelished.

But whether the nice and curious be pleased or no, the Author is not
concerned; if the pious and virtuous reap any profit by these Sermons, and be
the better for them.

And then we grow better, when, as the Apostle speaks, we approve the things
that are excellent (or things that differ) not entertaining falsehood under the
appearance of truth, nor evil under the show of Good: but having a right
judgment in all things, and making the same difference between good and bad in
our lives, that we do in our minds; preserve our selves sincere and without
offense, unto the Great Day of Judgment.

Ian. 26. 1684/5 S. Patrick.

The CONTENTS.
SERMON I. On Christmas Day.
1 John iii.5. And ye know that he was manifested to take away our sins, and in
him is no sin.
SERMON II. On January the 30th.
1 Samuel xii.25. But if ye shall still do wickedly, ye shall be consumed, both
ye and your King.
SERMON III.
John ii.4. -- Woman, what have I to do with thee? mine hour is not yet come.
SERMON IV. On Wednesday before Easter.
Dan. ix.26. And after threescore and two Weeks shall Messiah be cut off, but
not for himself --
SERMON V. On Good Friday.
Zech. xiii.6. And one shall say unto him, What are these wounds in thine
hands? Then shall he answer, Those with which I was wounded in the house of my
friends.
SERMON VI. On Easter Day.
Romans viii.11. But if the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead,
dwell in you: he that raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your
mortal Bodies, by his Spirit that dwells in you.
SERMON VII. On the 29th of May.
Psalm. ii.6. Yet have I set my King upon my holy hill of Sion.
SERMON VIII. On Whitsunday.
John xvi.8. And when he is come, he will reprove the world of sin, of
righteousness, and of judgment.
SERMON IX. and X.
Mark vii.37. -- He has done all things well: he makes both the deaf to hear,
and the dumb to speak.
SERMON XI.
Amos iii.2. You only have I known of all the Families of the Earth: therefore
I will punish you for all your iniquities.
SERMON XII.
Psalm. cv.44, 45. And he gave them the lands of the heathen; and they inherited
the labor of the people: That they might observe his statutes, and keep his
laws --
SERMON XIII.
Mark viii.2, 3. I have compassion on the multitude, because they have now been
with me three days, and have nothing to eat: And if I send them away fasting to
their own houses, they will faint by the way: for diverse of them came from far.
SERMON XIV.
Luke xvi.9. -- Make to your selves friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness,
that when ye fail, they may receive ye into everlasting habitations.
SERMON XV. On the Fifth of November.
Psalm. xi.3. If the foundations be destroyed, what can the righteous do?
SERMON XVI.
John xvi.23. -- Whatsoever ye shall ask the father in my nome, he will give it
you.
SERMON XVII.
Luke xvii.37. And they said unto him, Where, Lord? And he said unto them,
Wheresoever the Body is, thither will the Eagles be gathered together.
SERMON XVIII. and XIX.
1 Pet. iv.8. And above all things have fervent Charity among your selves: for
Charity covers the multitude of Sins.
SERMON XX. and XXI.
Matthew. xxii.46. On these two Commandments hang all the Law and the Prophets.
SERMON XXII.
Lam. iii.39, 40. Wherefore does a living man complain, a man for the
punishment of his sins? Let us search and try our ways, and turn again to the
Lord.
The First Sermon.
1 JOHN iii.5. And ye know that he was manifested to take away our sin, and in
him is no sin.


THE main Drift and Scope of Saint John, throughout this whole Epistle, is to
persuade the Christians to whom he writes, Not to sin; These things, says he in
the former Chapter, I write unto ye, that ye sin not. For such Christians it
seems there were then, as well as now, who believed that the Faith and a wicked
Life were not inconsistent together; that men might profess the Gospel, and not
forsake their Vices. They acknowledged Christ to be the promised Messiah and
Savior that was to come into the World, but they understood not rightly
wherein Salvation consisted, viz. that 'twas not only in the remission of sins,
but in the reclaiming men from the commission of them; not only in taking away
their guilt, but in reforming their evil lives. The Apostle therefore, to set
them right in a matter of so high concernment, alleges in the foregoing
Chapter many Reasons against their indulging themselves in any vicious course:
As the contrariety of sin to God, who is all Light, and to walk in sin, is to
walk in darkness: the unsuteableness of such ways to the glorious Promises they
expected; the vileness of earthly things, in comparison of things heavenly, and
the like. And in the Words of my Text he adds two Reasons more, taken from two
things, which he says they did know, but did not duly consider. The first from
the purpose of the manifestation of Christ in the Flesh, which was to take away
sin. And the second from the Sanctity of his Life, (which was an even course of
righteousness) Christ purposing to take away Sin by his Example, as well as by
his Death and Sufferings. And ye know that he was manifested to take away our
sins, and in him is no sin.

We may observe in the Words these three things:

I. The Purpose of the manifestation of Christ in the Flesh, It was to take
away sin.

II. The Purpose of his holy Life, That was also to take away sin: For St John
alleges this for a Motive, as well as his manifestation in the Flesh, That in
him was no sin.

III. The Inference from these two Purposes, implied in the Argumentation of
the Apostle, though not expressed in his Words, That it is the Duty of all
Christ's Followers, as far as it is possible for frail men, to be without sin.

I begin with the Purpose of Christ's Manifestation in the Flesh, To take away
sin. And first a few things

Of his Manifestation.
Christ's coming into the World is expressed in Scripture by this Term of
Manifestation, to show that 'twas of a different kind from other men's, who had
no Being before their productions into the World, unless in a very imperfect
way of conceiving it, viz. in their Causes and Principles. But Christ before he
was born into the World, had a full and perfect Existence, even from all
Eternity, and did only assume our Nature to his Pre-existent Being, thereby to
enable him to perform the Work of our Salvation, and more familiarly to
converse with Mankind: as our Apostle says, that we might see, and hear, and
handle the Word of Life. And 'twas in reference to his Being before he was born
of the Virgin, that Old Zachary compares his Manifestation in the Flesh, to the
rising of the Sun above the Horizon, Whereby the Dayspring, says he, from on
high has visited us. The Sun's Rising, we know is not his first Being, as some
ignorant People of old conceived, who thought he was extinguished every Night
in the Sea, and a new one lighted every Morning: But the Sun, before he comes
forth to us as a Bridegroom out of his Chamber, has run his Course to many
People and Nations. So likewise Christ, the Sun of righteousness, before he
shone to us here on Earth, had run the Course of Eternity, as I may say, with
his Father, being the power of God from all Ages, the Image of his Goodness,
and the brightness of his Person. And this, by the way, may arm us against the
error and seduction of the Ebionites, Samosatenians, revived again by the
Socinians in later days: who teach, That Christ had no Being before he was
conceived by the Virgin, of the Holy Ghost, Christus non fuit ante Mariam
Virginem; Mary the Virgin, say they, and Christ the Savior, were
Cotemporaries. Thus these Heretics, while they feared to worship a Man, denied
the Son of God; and ran into the highest Infidelity and Sacrilege, to avoid
only a supposed Idolatry. But to proceed.

The Manifestation of Christ unto the World in our Nature, the Appearance of
the Son of God in the Flesh, to speak strictly, was rather an Obscuration than
a Manifestation of him. As the interposition of a Cloud between the sight of
our Eyes and the Sun, is a veiling, and not a showing of him; so the exhibiting
of Christ in the beggarly Rags of our Flesh and Blood, was a disguising, not a
revealing of him. That God (who is incomprehensible and unconceiveable, hid
from our senses, and hid from our understandings, not by Darkness, but by
excess of Light and Glory, and our incapacity to behold him) would stoop to
manifest himself to mortal eyes, though in the most excellent created Form
whatsoever, was an infinite diminution of his Majesty: But to manifest himself
not only to, but in our Nature, must be confessed to be the greatest Clouding and
Absconding, and not Revelation, of the Deity imaginable; and such as could
never have entered into the thoughts of Man to believe, if it had not been done
and seen. But however that this is most true: yet if we consider this Mystery
rightly (for though the Evangelists set down the Manifestation of Christ in the
Flesh Historically, St Paul speaks of it as of a high Mystery) we shall find,
that God could no way have more eminently declared his Wisdom, and consulted
the infirmity of Men, in the manifesting of his Son to the World, than after
that mean manner which he did; that such his eclipsing and obscuring him, was
the most advantageous and effectual way of revealing him.

For in the first Place, how was it possible for mortal eyes to have seen the
Immortal God otherwise? Alas! we cannot behold the Sun, but in his setting, as
one says, Spectantes oculos infirmo lumine passus, our weak Eyes are not able
to gaze on that glorious Luminary in its Meridian strength; but if we will see
its Beauty, we must watch the opportunity of its infirmity: For otherwise the
greater its luster is, the greater is our darkness to perceive it. How then
could we have beheld the Glory of Christ? the ineffable Glory, I say, which he
had with his Father from all Eternity? His three Disciples were as dead men,
beholding only his Transfiguration! and those that apprehended him in the
Garden, upon the streaming-forth only of some Rays of his Divinity through the
Cloud of his Flesh, fell twice to the Ground: who could then have stood or
supported the Fulguration, as I may say, of his Deity in its full Glory? It was
not possible for Christ to have appeared, but in some exinanition, or being
stripped of his Majesty; the Son of God to have conversed with Mankind, but in
the Clothing of Humanity.

2. If we consider the Purpose of his Manifestation, which was to take away
sin; it was not possible again to have effected this by any other
Manifestation, but such as was also an Obscuration of him. For how could he
have been subject to the Law in his Divine Nature? delivered up into the hands
of wicked men, suffered Death, and the like? How could he have fulfilled the
Types that shadowed him in the Law, the Paschal Lamb, the Goat for the
Sin-Offering, the Ram caught by the Horns in the Bush, etc. unless he had been
hampered, as I may say, and caught in our Flesh, entangled in our infirmities,
found, as St. Paul says, in the similitude of a man? There had been no
Sacrifice, no Propitiation for Sin, if Christ had not come in the Flesh; no
Redemption, no Salvation of the World, if the God of the World had not
vouchsafed to have been born of a Woman. Yes, some perhaps will say, God of his
free Grace might have pardoned men's sins, without the Incarnation of his Son,
or any Sacrifice or Atonement for them. What belongs to this will fall-in in
the next Place, the handling the Purpose of the Manifestation of Christ in the
^^^sh, which was

To take away our Sins.
It is no Wisdom barely to understand things; but this is Wisdom, To understand
the Purpose of things. Generally the greatest Naturalists among us admire the
World, this stupendous Workmanship of the Almighty and Eternal Agent, and think
they have studied and observed fairly, if they have arrived to the Knowledge of
the Qualities and Properties of some particular Natural Bodies; but rarely do
they deduce them from their first Original, the Creator, and rarelier discern
the chief End for which they were created; they see a continual corruption and
generation of Sublunary Beings, and that by this means the succession of the
Universe is maintained: but pierce not so deep as to see that this is done, not
so much for the continuance of the World, as for the continuance of God's Glory
in the World; and that many Ages may see, and acknowledge his Power, and
partake of his Bounty and Goodness. And so it is with many Believers under the
Gospel; they read what is written of Christ, they magnify his Miracles, admire
his holy Life and Doctrine, commemorate his Sufferings, celebrate his
Festivals; But what was the main Design of these things, what they were to
bring to pass in the World, they reflect not on as they ought to do: but stand
in need to be put in mind of it, as the first Christians our Apostle here wrote
to. All men are ready to assent to this Saying of St. Paul, Great is the
mystery -- God was manifest in the Flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of
Angels, preached to the Gentiles, etc. But then that all these Mysteries are
Mysteries of Godliness, i. e. such as should produce Godliness, Virtue and
Piety in all those to whom they are preached and revealed; make them renounce
their wicked ways, and fulfill the Law of righteousness; this they neither
penetrate into, nor care to be convinced of. We cannot be therefore too
solicitous and assiduous in making known the End, and awakening men to the
consideration of the Design and Purpose of the Transactions of their Salvation,
as necessary to be understood as the Transactions themselves: As our Apostle
does not only teach, That Christ was manifested in the Flesh, but adds also the
Reason of it, that 'twas to take away our sins. And this being his chief design
in my Text, I shall endeavor to explain, How Christ, assuming our Flesh, did
take away our sins. For the contrary may be imagined, that by taking our Flesh,
he should have taken likewise our sins, but not have taken them away. But
Christ by his Incarnation took away our sins two ways. He took them away [ From
us] And took them away out of us, or [ From within us.]

First, He took away our sins from us.] And this he did by taking them upon
himself, and paying to God the forfeiture for them, undergoing the punishment
of their guilt in our behalf, so that they were no longer our sins, but his
own; the Original sin of Adam, after this manner, and all the Actual sins since
of the whole World, he made his own. To speak strictly indeed, the Guilt of sin
can never be taken away; for sin after it is once committed, remains for ever
sinful: but in a Legal and Political sense Sin may be said to be taken away
from us, when the Guilt of it is transferred, and the Punishment undergone by
another; and the Word in the Original for [ taking away] our Sins is (...),
which signifies [the lifting them up] and is in importance the same with St.
Peter's expression [ he bare] or as the Margent of our Bible has it [ he bare
away] our sins in his Body on the Tree. What our Lord said of his Exaltation on
the Cross, When I am lifted up from the Earth, I will draw all men unto me; may
be affirmed of their Sins, as well as of themselves; of the Guilt, as well as
of the Persons of them that believe in him* viz. that by his lifting up on the
Cross, the Sins of all men should be taken up from them, as Exhalations are
drawn up from the Earth by the heat of the Sun, and after dispersed into Air.

But now if we consider seriously this great and wonderful Dispensation of
God's, in manifesting his Son in the Flesh to take away the Sins of the World,
we must certainly conceive that he had a further and more excellent aim and end
in it, than merely to pardon the Guilt of Sin, and to cancel past
Transgressions. For if this had been all, as 'twas objected, this might have
been done freely, and with less ado, without Sacrifice or Atonement for Sin;
without God's sending his Son from Heaven to live so many Years upon Earth in a
poor and persecuted Condition, and at last to suffer a painful and ignominious
Death: Besides, in all reason, the Pardon of Sin would have been pronounced
more authoritatively and satisfactorily by God in his Glory, than in the
Disguise of Humane Nature; as the Great Lord of Heaven and Earth, than as a
poor Delinquent standing himself before the Tribunal of Justice. Again, what
had all the other Mutations in the Church of the Jews, the removing of the Law
of Moses, and the introducing a more perfect, that of the Gospel, to do with
the bare Remission of Sin? the giving so many excellent Precepts, and Christ
himself for an Example of a holy Life; the clear discovery of a Heaven for the
Reward of Well-doers, and of a Hell for evil; the confirming these things with
so many Miracles, and the Blood of so many Divine Persons; the instituting an
Order of men to preach and inculcate these things to the end of the World? If,
I say, the absolving men from their past Transgressions had been all the
business, and nothing had been aimed at further, or required of them to
qualify them to receive this Grace, but barely to believe that such a Grace
was offered them (as too many flatter and delude themselves) all these operose,
toilsome, mysterious and astonishing Performances of Christ and the Holy Ghost
might have been spared, and any one of the least of the Sons of the Prophets
would have served to have proclaimed the Remission of Sins, and coming on this
Errand, would have found credence and welcome. But, alas, the Case was
otherwise: Men were not only to be pardoned, but reformed; to be absolved from
their Guilt: but, as it is in the Benedict', being delivered out of the hands of
their Enemies, they were to serve God without fear, in holiness and
righteousness before him all the days of their life.

That men therefore may not mistake the principal Design for which Christ came
into the World, our Apostle plainly declares it at the 8th Verse. For this
purpose, says he, the Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy the
works of the Devil. Christ came not only to pardon Sin, but to destroy it; not
only to absolve a wicked World, but to make a righteous; to take away the
condemnation, but the commission of Sin: And therefore the second way I named
of Christ's taking away our Sins [ From within us] ought to be taken into our
highest consideration. For can it be imagined, that he should descend from the
Bosom of his Father, and visit the Earth for no other end, but to make a
Jail-deliver, as I may say, to reprieve so many Rake-Hells only and condemned
Persons, and to turn them loose again into the World to commit more villainies?
The whole Tenor of the Gospel speaks otherwise, that Christ was born in the
Flesh, that we might be regenerate and newborn of the Spirit; that he was
crucified, that we might crucify our vile Lusts and Affections: dyed for the
Guilt of Sin, that we might dye to the Practice of it; suffered, to excuse us
from suffering, but not to excuse us in any wickedness: he cast out the
Handwriting, or Accusation of Satan against us, to no other end but that we
should cast out Satan himself and his Kingdom out of our hearts, and erect in
the place God's Kingdom, or the Kingdom of righteousness. So that the
manifestation of Christ in the Flesh to take away our sins, imports no less
than his rectifying that ugly confusion and disorder which Sin had wrought in
the Universe, and the deposing Satan from his Usurpation over the World; than
the restoring God to his Dominion, and his Creatures to his Obedience; the
repairing his Honor, and giving satisfaction, not to one Attribute only, his
Justice, but to all his other Attributes, his Wisdom, Truth, Goodness,
Holiness, etc. And this was a Design worthy of the Incarnation of the Deity, of
the travel, sufferings, and all the other Glorious Works of the Messiah, of his
unhinging and unframing the Course of Nature by his Miracles: for it was to no
less end, than to re-establish it again in the beautiful Frame and Order, which
God at first created it in, before the Devil had disfigured and deformed it.

And for this Cause the Evangelists, in relating the Passages of Christ's life,
often take us off from looking too intently on the Events which they record,
and call upon us to consider the Purposes of them, rather than the Events
themselves, bidding us regard the Prophecies that went before of them,
frequently repeating, that it might be fulfilled, that it might be fulfilled,
that was spoken by such or such a Prophet. And if we will make the best
advantage of Christ's Incarnation, we must not look so much on the Fact, as on
the design of the Fact, what it intimates and preaches to us, viz. the
extinction and extirpation of Sin, not only of the Guilt, but of the reigning
Power of it. According to what St Peter says, As he has suffered for us in the
Flesh, arm your selves likewise with the same mind: for he that has suffered in
the Flesh has ceased from Sin. This arming-our selves with the same mind, and
ceasing from Sin in the Flesh, was that which God chiefly aimed at in his
Manifestation of his Son in the Flesh; To the end, as the Apostle goes on, that
we should no longer live the rest of our time in the Flesh, to the lusts of
men, but to the will of God. And to show us yet further, that the bringing of
men to live righteously was the great aim of God in all Ages of the World, says
St. Peter, For this cause was the Gospel preached also to those that are dead,
[ i. e. to those of the old World] that they might live according to God in the
Spirit. Let every Christian therefore (that professes the Faith of Christ's
coming in the Flesh to take away Sin, and yet lives in it) hearken and attend
to this Admonition, [ Remember thy End.] In the Place where the Son of Syrach
utters these Words, he means the End or Consummation of our Days, as we are
natural men, which is good Wisdom: But remember thy end, i. e. the Design and
Purpose of thy Christian Profession, and the Mysteries of it: for this is yet a
higher degree of Wisdom. And before I yet leave this Point, I shall give
caution against two sorts of Men, who greatly pervert this Advice:

And first, Against the Papists, who play and trifle with the weightiest
Passages of our Salvation, as Poets and Romance-Writers do with serious
Histories, turn them into Gauds and Entertainments of the Fancy; make Models
and Representations in their Churches, of Christ's lying in the Manger at this
holy Season, and of his rising from the Grave at the Feast of Easter, with all
the circumstances belonging to them; as if such Puppet-Shews were adequate and
suitable Returns of Devotion for these Divine Dispensations. Again, they gather
and hoard up the Nails and Fragments of our Lord's Cross, as if they treasured
to their Souls the Benefits of his Passion: hug his Crucifix, and weep over the
Pictures of his Wounds, as if this expressed a Seraphical Affection, though
they hug also at the same time the grossest Sins.

The second Caution is against those among our selves, who yet worse abuse the
Purpose of the Manifestation of Christ in the Flesh, making it to be more for
the encouragement, than the taking away of Sin; fansying that he died, to
excuse them from holy living; was made subject to the Law, that they might be
freed from the Obedience of it; performed all righteousness, that they should
need to perform none: and these men pray, as they believe, O Lord, say they, do
thou all in us, and for us, and take thou the glory. Thus exempting themselves
from all Obligations to the Commandments, and making the Faith a jest and scorn
to Libertines and Unbelievers, while they talk only more of a holy Life than
they, but practice it as little; make the Cross of Christ not a Sanctuary to
Penitent Sinners, but a refuge for Hypocrites and Cheats in Religion; and yet
none are so righteous, so much in God's favor in their own opinion as these:
But they will find at last to their great confusion, That Christ was manifested
in the Flesh, not only to take away our Sins [ From us] but also to take them
away [Out of us, or from within us.]

And he does this by three Means or Expedients, By his Spirit, by his Word, and
by his Example.

First, By his Spirit. After the Manifestation of Christ in the Flesh, his
Suffering, and being laid in the Grave, he was quickened (or raised to life
again) by the Spirit of God, and exalted to have the Power and Prerogative of
sending down the Spirit into the hearts of Believers, to quicken them, and to
raise them from the Death of Sin to a Life of Righteousness, i. e. to sanctify
and enable them to master Sin in themselves. They that saw Christ in the Flesh,
knew not at first, That the principal Intention of his Flesh, was his Spirit,
viz. that his Incarnation was to produce their Sanctification; to conform them
to his likeness in the Inner-man, as he was conformed to their likeness in the
Outward-Man: and those that are not thus conformed, that have not their Sins
taken away In them, by Virtue of his Nativity, shall never have them taken away
From them by Virtue and Merit of his Passion.

Secondly, By his Word he takes away our sin from within us. Now ye are clean,
says our Lord, John 15.3. through the Word which I have spoken unto you, i. e.
you have put away your former wickedness, upon believing what I have preached.
To believe and to be clean, in a Scripture sense, is the same thing: For it is
not possible rightly to believe, and to continue in the Pollution of Sin. The
Word of God is quick and powerful, sharper than any two edged Sword, piercing
even to the dividing asunder of Soul and Spirit. The efficacy of it was seen in
the reprobate hearts of Herod and Felix; How did it ruffle and discompose the
incestuous security of the first, and put an Earthquake into the stupid
Conscience of the last? But yet it is then only, to use Solomon's expression,
that wise Words are as Apples of Gold in Pictures of Silver, when they meet
with docile ears and honest hearts; when the disposition of the Hearers concurs
with the faithful intention of the Preacher; and they comply to destroy Sin in
themselves, as he endeavors to destroy it in his Sermon. Otherwise this most
powerful and effectual Engine to batter and beat down Sin, the Word preached,
profits not, as it is in the Chapter now mentioned in the Hebrews, But the Word
preached did not profit them, not being mixed with Faith in them that heard it.

Thirdly, Christ takes away Sin from within us by his Example, i. e. by his
holy Life, as well as by his Word and by his Spirit: his Meekness, Holiness,
Self-denial, Obedience, etc. were designed by him to excite his Followers to
practice the same Virtues equally or above his Precepts. And though we condemn
the Error of those who affirm, That the Pattern of Christ's life, the perfect
Exemplar of Piety and Holiness which he exhibited to the World, was the only
means, besides his Word, which he used to take away our Sins: We may yet more
condemn the sloth and hypocrisy of those, who set his Life above our
Imitation; who put his Virtues into the same Classis with his Miracles, and
think it as impossible for us to practice his Humility, Patience, and the like,
as to open the Eyes of the Blind, or to raise the dead; affirm that his
Obedience and Righteousness were not set for our Example, to direct and
encourage us to do the like, but to upbraid and reproach our weakness and
infirmities. In the mean time our Lord himself, Joh. 17.19. declares, That the
holiness he practiced, was not only for the love of holiness, but that his
Disciples should follow him, even in the roughest Paths he trod, those of his
Suffering, to which his Words more particularly relate. For their sakes, says
he, I sanctify my self, [or offer up my self a Sacrifice] that they also might
be sanctified through the Truth. And St Peter says expressly, Christ suffered
for us, leaving us an Example, that we should follow his steps. And this brings
me to the second Motive the Apostle alleges to dissuade men from Sin, the
sanctity and sinlesness of Christ's Person, -- and ye know that in him is no
sin. But because this in a great part has fallen-in with the former Motive, and
to accumulate Reasons of the same Nature rather nauseates than persuades, I
shall wave this Point, and proceed to my last, The Inference which the
Argumentation of the Apostle implies from the foregoing Motives, viz. That it is
the Duty of all Christ's Followers to endeavor, as far as it is possible, to be
also without sin, and which shall serve me also for an Application.

The Son of God, we have heard, was manifested in the Flesh to take away our
sins, and in him is no sin. Now certainly we cannot think that we comply either
with the Example of Righteousness which he has set us, or yet with the gracious
Purpose that brought him into the World, if we reflect on his Nativity only
after an Historical manner, as that he was born in such an Olympiad, or when
such an one was Emperor; that such rare Events attended his coming into the
World, as are recorded by the Evangelists, namely, that he was conceived by a
Virgin of the Holy Ghost, welcomed by Angels, signalized and revealed to the
Gentiles by a Star, etc. as if we were Chronologers, rather than Christian
Believers: But that principally we are to consider these things Doctrinally and
Morally, to regard the Obligations they lay upon us, and the final intendment
of God in them. For Example, to say to our selves, If God came so far as from
the highest Heavens to take our Flesh, that he might destroy sin, how much more
are we concerned to destroy sin, in whom it dwells, whose Flesh is its
Domestic Organ, and which will certainly destroy us both Body and Soul, unless
we destroy it? Again, if God vouchsafe so highly to dignifie our Flesh, as to
assume it to his Divine Nature, and to carry it up to Heaven with him, and that
by way of Pledge and assurance to carry up all that live holy lives thither
also; how ought we to respect and even to revere these our mortal Bodies, and
not to pollute them with sin, which are designed to such sublime Honor, as to
reign with God in Glory? Once more, If the Son of God came into the World, not
only to teach us his Father's Will, but to demonstrate to us, by his own
performance, the feasibleness of accomplishing it; and did not only discourse
of the probability of mortal men's ascending to Heaven, but gave an instance of
it in our Flesh: how are we without excuse, if either upon pretense of the
difficulty of the Duties enjoined, or the arduous ascent to the heavenly
Kingdom promised us, we supersede our endeavors to attain it? When the
Israelites were traveling to the Land of Canaan, they said to Aaron, Make us
Gods that may go before us, i. e. visible Gods that we may behold: they were
not satisfied with the conduct of an invisible Deity, of a God that afforded
not his personal presence. Christ manifested in the Flesh is such a visible
palpable God as they required, who marches as a Captain at the Head of us, and
guides us not only by his Counsel, but leads us by his Bodily Presence. But yet
notwithstanding this compliance with our infirmities, and all the other
endeavors that have been used for our Salvation; though Christ by his Spirit,
by his Word, and by his Example, has essayed to take away our sins From us, and
to take them away In us: I know not how, they are not taken away from [ Among
us!] Our Sins, like Idolatry in Israel, like the Groves and High Places, are
continually taking away, and still found remaining; they vary and change
according to the several Revolutions and Vicissitudes of our Condition, but
they are not abolished; when Rebellion reigned in the Land, Rapine, Oppression,
Bloodshed, Sacrilege, were its complexion: When this Evil by a singular Mercy
was removed from us, the Sins of Peace succeeded, Ingratitude for past, and
Insensibleness of present Benefits, Drunkenness, Whoredom, Irreligion, Schism,
Faction, etc. So that as the Romans complained of old, that after they had
subdued the Nations, themselves were subdued by their own Vices; that these sly
and silent Enemies, Luxury, Covetousness and Ambition, revenged and retaliated
the conquered World -- victumque ulciscitur Orbem: We may in like manner
complain, that after the Violences and Outrages of War ceased, the soft and
soothing Sins of Peace crept in in their place, and have tyrannized over us
more fatally and destructively. And who then can say, our Sins are taken away,
when they are only transformed, and have assumed new Shapes and Names? when
that which was Rebellion in 41. is Dissoluteness or Atheism in the Year 70?

But though there be too much reason to bewail this: yet I hope, (with the same
Charity that I wish the thing) that none that are guilty of the more enormous
Sins I have mentioned, are present in this Assembly: but that it fares with my
Complaint, as it does with the Exhortations which are made out of the Pulpit to
Non-Conformists, those to whom the Speech is directed, are never there. So in
my present Complaint (of not forsaking our Sins, but exchangeing them for
others) I do but inculcate a Doctrine to the Gracious already, and that those
that are otherwise, are not here. But if any chance to be, I shall only mind
them of those Words they find, Psalm. 10.17. Take away his ungodliness, and thou
shall find none. If after God has endeavored so many ways to take away their
ungodliness, it shall still remain, they are more incorrigible than the worst
of men; and their obstinacy may well fear, not only what the Words in the Psalm
sound, but what they signify, viz. that God will not only confound their
wickedness, but themselves also the wicked Doers. Christ was manifested in the
Flesh to destroy Sin, and we ought in compliance with this his gracious Design
to put to all our Powers to destroy Sin in our selves; that purifying our
selves as he is pure, we may hereafter be glorious, even as he is glorious.

To the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost be ascribed all Honor, etc.
The Second Sermon.
1 SAMUEL xii.25. But if ye shall still do wickedly, ye shall be consumed, both
ye and your King.


THE State and Commonwealth of Israel differed from all other States in the
World; it was neither Aristocracy, nor yet Democracy; but, if rightly
denominated, a Theocracy or Divine Monarchy: i. e. it was in subjection to no
Man, or Number of Men, but immediately to God himself. Ye have said, Nay, but a
King shall reign over us, when the Lord your God was your King, v. 12. Again,
C. 10.19. Ye have this day rejected your God, who himself saved you out of all
your adversities. God was the Commander, Prince and Monarch of this State in
his own Person.

But being a Spiritual King, as well as a Temporal; and exercising a Dominion
over the Souls, as well as Bodies of his Subjects: though his Reign were as the
Reign of Prosperity it self; his Scepter, not only a Scepter of righteousness,
but of felicity; Plenty, Victory, and all other Blessings attending it; they
were impatient of it, as of an intolerable and insupportable Yoke; chose rather
to be governed as the Nations of the Earth, than even as the Angels in Heaven;
by a mortal, than a Celestial King; preferred an improsperous Condition,
together with a greater liberty of sinning, before the most prosperous, with a
strict obligation to righteousness; held it, I say, more eligible even to see
their Enemies within their Gates, than their God with narrow eyes continually
prying into their actions.

God, who saw this perverseness of their hearts in demanding a King, punished
their folly by complying with it; defeated their wickedness by granting their
request. Ye shall, says God, for the future be governed as you desire; after
the manner of the Nations, ye shall have a King; the Court and the Sanctuary,
the Palace and the Tabernacle shall be separated; my Divine Authority shall no
more interpose in your making War or Peace, in your marching or encamping, in
your Civil or Military Affairs; all shall be in the power of your King: But
promise not your selves from hence a greater license to sin, for though I shall
withdraw my former manner of Conduct from you, I will have as near an
inspection into your Actions as I had before; and though my miraculous
assistances are more rarely showed, I will visit your iniquity with Scourges.
Your King and new-modell'd State shall be so far from protecting you in your
disobedience, that they shall render your destruction only more signal and
calamitous. But if ye shall still do wickedly, ye shall be consumed both ye and
your King.

In the Days in which God chiefly invited his People to Obedience by the
Promises of temporal Blessings, and deterred them from Disobedience by the
threats of temporal Evils, none were greater than those that related to their
King. As whether he were a Child, or of grown Years; a base Vpstart, or the Son
of Nobles; one that eat in the morning, or at due season; for strength or for
drunkenness, as Solomon speaks: Or as the Prophet Isaiah, A wise and gracious
Prince, or a fierce and cruel Lord and a Fool. Again, whether the Reign of a
wicked King were prolonged, or of a righteous cut short; whether the Prince
were often changed, or many set up at the same time, as those Words may be
interpreted either way, For the transgressions of a Land many are the Princes
thereof. I say, no higher Marks of God's favor, or disfavour to a People,
could be showed, than in what related to their King. And no wonder: For
undoubtedly a good King is infinitely above the increase of the Barn and the
Wine Press, of the Flocks and the Herds: for he is the security of all these,
and whatever else makes a Kingdom happy and blessed. Plenty is not Plenty,
Possessions are not Possessions, Peace is not Peace, Religion is not Religion,
without such a Guardian and Conserver of them.

Well therefore might God, as being the highest of Judgments, threaten his
rebellious People with the destruction of their King. I say, his rebellious
People; for the King is not threatened in my Text, but the People, of whom he
was King. For though a wicked King shall certainly bear the burden of his Sins;
and though the Judgment here denounced by Samuel was after a King was anointed
in Israel: yet 'twas denounced against the Sin of the People committed before
there was a King: Neither had Saul as yet displeased God, he affected not the
Kingdom, though Israel affected to have a King. They are the Israelites
therefore that are threatened in the Person and misfortune of their King, whom
God declares he will involve in their destruction, even when he is not involved
in their sins; and a good King is sooner cut off for the provocation of a Land,
than a bad; but then though he falls, it is the Land that is punished; though he
be untimely snatched away, it is the Nation that is judged and condemned. But if
ye shall still do wickedly, ye shall be consumed, both ye and your King.

The Words consist of a Commination or Threat, Ye shall be consumed, both ye
and your King

And the Case wherein the Commination or Threat shall take place, If ye shall
still do wickedly --

I begin with the Commination or Threat,

Ye shall be consumed, both ye and your King.
The Commination runs high, a greater cannot well be denounced; it is only to be
feared it may suffer the fate of the vain menaces and Rhodomantadoes of men;
which are most despised when they sound loudest, and affect to carry most
terror. Ye shall be consumed, both ye and your King!] Why certainly, men will
say, This is some Figurative Hyperbolical Speech, which carries not so much
danger in it to be feared, as difficulty to be understood; and sends us to an
Interpreter, and not an Asylum or Sanctuary. Was it ever known, that a whole
Nation was destroyed as one man? Dathan and his Accomplices, it is true, went down
into the Bowels of the Earth, and it closed its mouth upon them: but they were
not a whole Nation, but a seditious Party only. Pharaoh and the Egyptians were
overwhelmed in the Sea, and not one of them escaped; but they again were not a
King and his People, but a King and his Host. The seven Nations of the
Canaanites were adjudged to utter extirpation: but by reason of the Sins of
God's own People, the Sentence was not executed with that rigor it was
denounced, and they were not utterly destroyed. Let us see therefore how we are
to understand the Commination in my Text, How a King and People may be said to
be totally consumed.

A thing may be totally consumed or destroyed two ways, simul and semel,
altogether and in a moment; as Fire consumes Flax or Gunpowder, so that nothing
remains but the Place of them: Or gradually and by degrees, when it is wasted by
little and little, as Liquor consumes over the Fire, or as a Body is extenuated
by Sickness. Now though God perhaps through the greatness of his Mercy, has
never consumed a whole Nation in the fullest and strictest sense of either of
these two Ways; yet so dreadful have been his Judgments, and so universal the
Destruction he has wrought, that there will be no cause to say, There is an
Hyperbole in the Commination in my Text.

The first way God practiced, when he caused the ten Tribes and their King to
be carried away captive by Shalmanezer into Assyria with a swift destruction:
and the other two Tribes and their King by Nebuchadnezzar into Babylon. This
way also God practiced, when he gave this Nation up to the Conquest of the
Normans: Or as the Tragedy on this Day should rather prompt us to remember,
when he permitted the Blood of our righteous Sovereign, after the slaughter of
many thousands of his Loyal Subjects, to be spilled by the hands of execrable
Villains, and together with that sacred Sluice broke-up all the Floud-Gates of
Impiety, and suffered it to overwhelm the Land with wickedness and ruin, as
the World was once overwhelmed with a Deluge of Water. At which time, we may
affirm, Death, or a change like Death, past upon all; the Rich became poor, and
the Poor rich; the Nobles were debased, and the Scum of the People exalted; the
Loyal were accounted Traitors, and Traitors Loyal; Oppression and Cruelty sat
in the Seats of Justice; Hypocrisy and Blasphemy in the Chair of Religion, and
an abject Villain in the Throne of Majesty. And when the Kingdom was reduced to
this State, may we not say, it was destroyed simul and semel? altogether and at
once? both King and People? and that nothing remained of what had been, but the
Place and Memory? The Scripture says, Adam dyed on the Day he eat of the
forbidden Fruit, though he survived nine hundred and thirty Years after:
because he fell then into an evil condition, and forfeited all his happiness.
Again, the Scripture calls Damnation Eternal Death, not because the Bodies and
Souls of Sinners shall be extinguished, but eternally tormented; Life
consisting not so much in duration, as in felicity. And in this sense, when a
Kingdom has lost its Felicity and Glory, its Laws and Liberty, its King and
Religion, though a Remnant of the People be left, it may deservedly be said, To
be totally and utterly destroyed.

God practiced the second way of destroying a whole Nation, when he consumed
the Israelites in the Wilderness by such slow and lingering paces, that a new
Generation was grown up by the time that the old was expired; and the Children
were ready to enter into the Land of Canaan, as soon as their Fathers Graves
were made in the Wilderness. God thus punishing them after the manner they had
transgressed; as they had grieved him forty Years, he consumed them for forty
Years together. And when ever a Nation is seen to decline in Piety, Virtue,
Policy, Wealth, Reputation, the Number of its People, and the like; when
private interest takes place in men's hearts before the Public; when Trade,
Vigor, and Industry languish, then this lingering Curse works and ferments.

I may seem both ill-affected, and also to intrude into a Secret that cannot be
known, if I should pronounce, that this Kingdom lay at this present under this
slow and lingering destruction, as it has been more than once a miserable
Instance of the other quick and total destruction: But it may become me, and
all that hear me this day, to fear and endeavor to prevent so dreadful a
Judgment; especially when so many and sad Symptoms of it seem to appear. For,
not to name our Consumptions of late Years by War, by Pestilence and by Fire,
we see the Moral and Spiritual Consumptions of Piety and Virtue, and as fearful
an increase of Riot, Profaneness and Irreligion; Popery gains upon the true
Religion on one side, and Fanaticism on the other; and Atheism, the Vorago of
all other Sects and Schisms, daily swallows up Popery and Fanaticism. Again, we
hear plentiful Years complained of, that the People are impoverished by the
great increase of the Land; Abundance cried out against as a worse evil than
Scarcity. God thus making his Punishments a Riddle, while he confounds us no
less by his Blessings than his Judgments: as if he would at once confute and
deride the Atheism that denies his Providence, and ascribes all Events to
Natural Causes; letting men see, their Wealth cannot enrich them, their
Victories advantage them, their Wisdom profit them, without his Blessing and
concurrence. But that which ought most tenderly and sensibly to affect us, is
the Fatality in the Royal Family, so many of those Illustrious Branches having
been snatched away of late Years in their Youth or Infancy, that we may compute
our Annals by the Death of one or more of our Princes: the Royal House, Alas!
being only fruitful to the Grave. But to proceed.

As the Consumption, mentioned in my Text, may be thus twofold; so the Persons
threatened to be consumed are also twofold; and the threatening of the last is
set down by way of Aggravation of the Evil, Ye shall be consumed, both ye and
your King. But there will not want some Sons of Belial to say here, What Part
have we in David, or Inheritance in the Son of Iesse? that this should be held
a matter of so great moment, so high an aggravation of our misery, that not
only our selves shall be destroyed, but our King also? The Speech of the People
is, When I dye, all the World dies with me; not only all my thoughts perish, as
the Psalmist says, but all my care and concern for my Relations also perish;
whether as of a Father for my Children, or as of an Husband for my Wife, or yet
as of a Subject for my Prince. So that to say, Ye shall be consumed, nay more,
your Prince shall be consumed, aggravates the terror, but as if one should
threaten, Your Limbs shall be torn on the Rack, nay further, Your Garments
shall be torn also.

No doubt, I say, but there are too many of these Sheba's in our Israel: But
yet where ingenuity and natural goodness, honor and generosity are not quite
extinguished by self-love and interest, there is in many men a care of others,
their near Relations, even beyond themselves, and after their Decease. And this
made Lawgivers enact (for a further terror to evil Workers) the destruction of
Wives and Children for the offenses of Fathers and Husbands, ut haberent
aliquid quod timerent, qui mortem non timent; that they that feared not Death
as to their own Persons, might yet fear it reaching to those for whom they had
a greater tenderness than for themselves. And we see those frequently among us,
that choose to wear their lives out in a noysom Prison, or to dye under the
torture of the Press, that by these means they may preserve a poor maintenance
for those they leave behind them. Why, the Relation of a Subject to his King;
of a People to their Prince, is in just estimation the chiefest and highest of
Relations, the principal in importance, though not the nearest in Blood: which
the men of Israel rightly understood, when they called David the light of their
eyes, and preferred him before so many thousands of themselves. And also the
People of Rome, when upon the Election of just Numa they rejoiced, as Plutarch
says, as if they had not only obtained a new King, but a new Kingdom. Indeed
the felicity of a Nation is bound up in the Person of the King, and waxes or
wains according to his Virtue. Well therefore may we pray heartily and truly
for our King, as the Romans were wont to pray flatteringly for their
Tyrant-Emperours, Demas annos meos mihi, and addas Caesari, Take, O Jupiter,
from the number of my Years, and add them to the account of Caesar's; esteeming
the King's life a greater Blessing to us, than our own; the destruction
threatened to him more dreadful than the destruction threatened to our selves;
looking upon the Commination in my Text as the highest aggravation of Evils, Ye
shall dye for your Sins, nay, your religious, your victorious, or your gracious
Prince shall dye also.

But some perhaps will say here, Is it just and righteous with God to destroy a
good King for the transgressions of his People? Surely yes, and the Scripture
affirms as much, For the transgressions of a People, many are the Princes
thereof: and in the second Commandment God says, He will visit the sins of the
Father upon the Children: and for the same reason, of any Relation upon his
Correlation; as of a Subject upon the Prince. For though the Subjects are
Vassals and Homagers to the Prince, both Prince and Subjects are Vassals aad
Homagers to God, and may be disposed of by him, as he sees best for the ends of
his Glory. But then though it be righteous in God to cut off a good Prince for
the punishment of his People, because he can translate him to a better life,
and turn his Crown of Gold into a Crown of Glory; yet woe be to those Subjects,
who any way contribute to their Prince's or Countries misfortune, either by
their wicked Plots or wicked lives; by their immediate Conspiracies against
them, or their remoter, as I may say, of their sins against their Peace and
prosperity: For if men commit great offenses, and go on obstinately in them,
they sin not only against their own Souls, but the Public Safety. Which brings
me to my second general Part, The Case wherein the Commination in my Text shall
take place, wherein both King and People are threatened to be consumed,

If ye shall still do wickedly --
The things wherein both Israel and their Forefathers continually did wickedly,
the Scripture tells us, were Infidelity, Stubbornness, Ingratitude, Murmuring
openly upon the least want or distress, against their best Governors, but
covertly and secretly against God himself, Proneness to Idolatry, Incontinence,
the very Sins for which the Nations were cast out before them, to which the
present Generation added over and above, the demanding a King, with the design
to exclude God from ruling over them. For we must note here, That the greatness
of the present sin of Israel consisted not in desiring a King simply; in
renouncing, as some would have it, the sweet Government of the Sanhedrim, or
Council of Elders, for the Regal and more Tyrannical Power. For, not to say any
thing in vindication of Monarchy (that it is the best of Governments, not only
by the consent of the wisest men of all Ages, but by the attestation of Nature,
or rather the God of Nature in all Orders and Subordinations of things both in
Heaven and Earth) 'twas God's express Purpose from the beginning to establish
Israel under a Monarchical Government, and Deuteronomy. 17. (some hundreds of Years
before a King was demanded) the Laws concerning a King were set down by Moses.

Neither did the greatness of their Sin consist in desiring a King
inordinately, precipitately, rebelliously, not attending God's time, nor
consulting his Will in so important an Affair: these were Aggravations of their
Sin, but not their Sin it self; which was no other than Apostasy, at least in
purpose and determination; a resolution not only to shake off the Yoke of God's
Political Government, but also to break his Yoke of righteousness from off
their Necks. And that their Sin was of no common nature, the miraculous Rain
and Thunder, v. 17. sent to reprove them, are a sufficient Argument But we have
no need to conjecture what their Offense was, for God himself declares it to
Samuel, C. 8. v. 7. They have not rejected thee, says God, but they have
rejected Me, that I should not reign over them. Their desire to be governed as
the Nations of the Earth, was indeed To live after the licentious manner of the
Nations of the Earth; not so much to have a King like them, as to be without
God in the World like them, as the Apostle speaks. They were weary of the
Divine Conduct, uneasy under God's Discipline; his Statutes and Ordinances
were a burden to them, th^^ hated on all occurrences to address themselves to
the Ephod, to have their last Appeal to the Deity, to see the Cloud descend
upon the Tabernacle, on every miscarriage, as in the days of their Fathers. The
Presence of the Living God is dreadful to Flesh and Blood in its purest and
holiest state, well then might these Rebels wish him further removed from them,
that were conscious to themselves not only of infirmities, but of purposed
defection from him; not only of defects and failures, but of direct Apostasy.

And as the Greatness of their Sin thus consisted not in desiring a King, but
in revolting in their hearts from God: so their [ still doing wickedly] which
is so severely threatened in my Text, could not possibly be, as some interpret,
their persisting in the desire to have a King. God had already given them a
King, before the Prophet denounced the Commination in my Text; and not only so,
but he had promised a Blessing upon his Reign, and also on them, in case of
future obedience, as may be seen at the 14th Verse. Their Still doing wickedly
therefore, must be, their persisting and going on to accomplish their wicked
design to forsake God; their making good their Apostasy in Act, as well as in
Determination and Purpose; their giving themselves up like the Heathen to
whatsoever their Lusts prompted them to; and this out of a Persuasion that they
might sin more securely under the Dominion of Flesh and Blood, than under the
Dominion of God. And this was the Case in which the Universal Destruction, the
Destruction of King and People, is threatened in my Text.

All Sin and Doing wickedly offends God; but Presumption in sinning, persisting
and resolving to do wickedly, turns him into a consuming Fire; when men add
wickedness to wickedness, and draw iniquity, as the Prophet says, with a
Cart-rope; i. e. with a long Series or Train of evil Deeds, not interrupting or
breaking them off by Repentance; but lying down to sleep in sin, and rising up
to return again to it; making sin the business of their lives, and not only
transgressing against God and his Laws, but renouncing them. And we find in
After-ages, when the Children fell into the Apostasy, which their Fathers only
consulted of at this time; when, I say, their King, instead of humbling himself
upon hearing God's wrath denounced against him, Cut the Roll, and cast it into
the Fire; and the People presumptuously told his Prophet, As for the Words that
thou have spoken unto us in the Name of the Lord, we will not hearken unto
them; But we will certainly do whatsoever goes forth of our own mouth, to burn
Incense to the Queen of Heaven, etc. as it is Jerem. 44.17. For three
iniquities, and for four, says God, I will visit my People. By three is
understood many, or very much, as we say, thrice happy, and thrice honorable,
for exceeding happy and honorable. When a Nation comes up to be thrice, i. e.
exceeding sinful, their condition is dangerous: but when it goes beyond that,
and is four times sinful, then it is no marvel if God also sets no Bounds to his
Anger, but says, Nunc exurgam, I will now arise and visit; and as they have
vexed me with their transgressions, I will vex them with my Judgments; as they
have cast me out of their Hearts, I will cast them out of my Sight; as they
will allow me no longer to be their God, I will pluck them up by the Roots, and
allow them no longer to be a People and Nation; or, which is all one, a happy
People, a flourishing Nation, governed as in times past: But I will eclipse
their Glory, and change their Laws, together with many thousands of them, cut
off their King; and they that remain, shall be in a worse condition, as Sheep
without a Shepherd, They shall be a living and lasting Destruction.

I am now come to the full Close and Period of my Text; and what Use or
Application shall I make of that which we have heard? Shall I endeavor to set
forth the Heroic Virtues of our murdered King, and show that he fell not for
his own Sins, but the Sins of his People? that the impious Act of executing a
Sovereign Prince by a pretended Process of Law, was a higher Strain of Treason,
than to have dispatched him with a Dagger, or an empoysoned Cup? the one being
Treason only against a single Monarch, but the other against Monarchy in
general. These things, I confess, may be worthy of a pious Pains, and a pious
Attention: but, alas! what would they profit here, where they are already
acknowledged? Or what would it profit to dilate either on the Virtues or Vices
of other men, when we are so apt to think on the one side, that while we only
extol the Virtues of Heroic Persons, we go Half-sharers with them in their
Virtues? like the Cryers in the Olympic Games, who fansied, while they
pronounced only audibly and volubly the Victors Names and Victories, part of
their Glory redounded to them. And again, on the other side, while we declame
against Vice, that we are free from all imputation of Vice our selves; my Text
calls us to other Considerations, not only to look back on Evils past, but
forward on worse Evils to come; I say, on worse, while but on the same
repeated: for if it be a sad reflection, that we have been totally destroyed,
it is certainly a much sadder, that we may be so destroyed again; that if we
shall still do wickedly, we shall be consumed, both we and our King. This
consideration, if rightly made use of, will excite us rather to call our own
Sins to remembrance, than to commemorate the Sins of other men; to arraign and
condemn the evil deeds are found in our selves, than to employ our time in
raking into the crimes of the Age that is past. And in order to our doing this,
I shall instance in three Particulars in which this Nation seems most to tread
the steps of Israel, and to be in danger to bring home to it self, the dreadful
Commination made in my Text against them.

And first, As Israel desired a Change of Government, only to remove God
further from them: so if we may judge of men's minds by their outward actions,
of the Secrets of their hearts by their following behavior, the passionate
desire of many among us to have a King again, after the fatal stroke struck
this Day, was on no better an account than Israel's desire to have a King. We
had lain a long time under a sad Oppression at home, or a sadder Exile abroad;
ate no Bread for many Years, but what came, in a manner, to us, like Manna,
from the immediate hand of God: and the frequent Fasts, strict Devotions, and
holy Lives, which could only promise a continuance of such favor from Heaven,
were as insupportable as the Holiness and Obedience God required of Israel that
he might dwell among them. And many desired a King, not so much to deliver the
Nation from Oppression and Confusion, as themselves from the Paedagogy of
Divine Discipline; not so much, I say, to rescue them from the Tyranny of the
Usurper, as from the Tyrannies of Religion. And such a Surfeit many took, no
less of holy Duties, than of evil days, that they have endeavored since to
obliterate all memory of them both: as 'twas the practice, or at least the
boast of a profane Person, That whereas others observed the Days of their
Deliverance from any great danger, with Fasting and Humiliation; he always kept
such Days with Feasting and Jollity; and for this Reason, To make his Soul
amends for what it had suffered. And such has been the deportment of some men
since God restored them to their prosperity, that they seem to vie by their
voluptuous lives with the former miseries they suffered; to make their Souls
amends for the twenty Years affliction they lay under, by a twenty Years, or a
whole future Life's Debauchery. When God restored us to our forfeited Peace and
Prosperity, he promised himself, he had restored a People sensible of so
wonderful a mercy; who, as he had made them to abound in all secure enjoyments,
would have abounded in Good Works, and Gratitude to him: but he has found such
an (...), as I may say, such an unexpected Issue among us, as the Prophet
Isaiah complains he did in Israel in his Days, He looked for righteousness, but
behold a cry. When God looked for righteousness, that his Glory should have been
exalted in this Land more than in any other, because he had done more for it,
than for any other, behold, I know not what Cry of more than usual infidelity
and wickedness! What shall I say? that we are fallen back again into those
Sins, which brought on us the calamity of this Day? Nay, but we have outdone
all our old Sins, and all that ever went before us; we have not only broken
God's righteous Laws and Commandments, but denied he ever gave a Law to the
World; we have not only denied him by our wicked lives, but even in our words
to have any Being; and as all Ages have been guilty of Adultery, Drunkenness,
and the like, it is the Character of this, That it affirms such things are no
sins.

Secondly, As Israel put their confidence in Flesh and Blood, believed, if they
could obtain a King of their own Nation, he would be invincible, possessed of
all the Heroic Qualities they had read of their Judges, and as his Character
was greater, so his Performances would be also greater; and this of course, as
if God had been obliged, for his own Glory, to see it should be so, though they
never so little regarded his Glory themselves. And have not we put as high a
confidence in Flesh and Blood, who have looked upon our King not only as a
defense against our Enemies, but even against God himself? not only as a
Foundation of our Peace and Felicity, but of our Rebellion against Heaven? Who
have said in our hearts, We have no need of the burthensom Duties of Religion,
and the severities of a holy Life, now we have a King to provide against our
dangers from abroad, and to take care for our quiet at home? Few considering,
in order to the Prosperity they desire, what are the provocations of the Land,
how we stand in favor or disfavour with God: But enquiring, What Alliances we
have made abroad? What Ships we are able to set out? What Money there is in the
Exchequer? What Supplies the Parliament will give, and the like? Is not this to
provoke God to infatuate our Counsels, and to bring our Enterprises to naught?
to involve our King in a common destruction with our selves, as he did this
Day, though he were even a Hezekiah or a David?

Thirdly, As Israel was mutinous and rebellious upon the least occasions
against their best Governors, we come not behind them in this Sin: witness the
black disloyalty of this Day. Historiographers, the public Censurers of
Mankind, brand every Nation of the Earth with some Vice more peculiar to them
than others, as, to name none, one with Drunkenness, another with Robbery and
Piracy, a third with ambition and desire of Sovereignty, a fourth with
Whoredom, and abusing themselves with Mankind, etc. And we of this Nation,
among the rest, are taxt for stubbornness, and proneness to Rebellion, noted
for a People that delight in Sedition and seditious Persons, that are apt to
think the most turbulent and factious, the best Patriots; the greatest
Troublers, the greatest Lovers of their Country: So that as other Princes, in
regard of the sweet compliance of their Subjects, are styled Reges Hominum,
Kings of Men, ours are styled Reges Diabolorum, Kings of Devils. And it is
observable, that what was the Vice of every Nation many hundred Years ago,
continues to be the same still; Time has not altered them, nor the Preaching of
the Gospel reformed them. But though we of this Nation should not care to wipe
off the imputation that lies upon us among men; nor yet fear the displeasure of
God (who counts Rebellion as the Sin of Witchcraft, i. e. Disobedience to
Governors a Degree of Apostasy from himself) yet the experience alone of the
former Evils, which our unquiet Spirits have brought upon us, and their direct
tendency to bring the like again, ( viz. to bereave us a second time of our
Royal Government, and to cast us under the subjection of the basest of the
People) may well make us abhor all seditious thoughts; I say, for fear lest a
second time we become not only the most miserable, but the most ridiculous and
despicable of all People; while we give the World leave to say, that we that
could not digest a miscarriage in the State, are forced to digest Oppression
and Tyranny; that could not pass by an oversight in our Rulers, are compelled
to undergo Sequestration and Banishment, the Axe and the Halter, perhaps a
Foreign Yoke.

To draw to a Conclusion. It is a common Persuasion, That Comets or Blazing
Stars portend the Change of States, and the Falls of Great Men: but we have
much more reason to apprehend, that the Sins of the Nation, which hang like so
many Meteors over our Heads, have an Ominous and Fatal Aspect on us. The Bands
of Discipline are loosned, the Majesty of our Prince is despised, God
blasphemed, common Honesty baffled and affronted, Lewdness triumphs, seditious
Spirits take advantage from all to foment Disorders, Good Men are aghast, the
Magistrate desponds, as if the Distempers were as incurable as Epidemical: And
yet Good Men, as if we sat on a safe Shore, we please our selves in beholding
our Neighbors Ships tossed and wreckt by the Tempests of War; we read
unconcernedly the weekly Gazettes of Armies overthrown, Cities rased, Countries
subdued and ruined, and never apprehend, that our fair weather may suddenly
lowre and overcast into a Storm. We met at this Day with vain and elated minds
to judge others, not to humble our selves; and if we lay load enough upon our
Adversaries, and render them black and odious, we think our selves white as
Innocence. Methinks the loud Thunder in my Text (for so the Commination in it
sounds to me) should chastise these Gaieties, and not appear less terrible,
because articulate, and speaks more to the Soul, than to the Ear; and this
pronounces emphatically, That the Issue of Sin persisted in, is utter ruin and
confusion, and that the only way to prevent destruction, is Reformation. Let us
therefore seek to reverse God's threats, by turning from our evil ways; let us
upbraid the wickedness of our Oppressors by our holy Lives; condemn the Hellish
Practice of this Day, not by Invectives, but by our Loyalty and Obedience; and
this will turn the dreadful Commination, Ye shall be consumed, both ye and your
King, into the Blessing promised at ver. 14. If ye will fear the Lord, and
serve him, and not rebel against his Commandments, then shall ye, and also the
King that reigns over you, continue following the Lord your God, the Blessing
promised to Israel, contained in these Words, shall be made good to us. God, in
an extraordinary manner, will be our God, and we shall be his People: in which
is included all the Felicity that can be wished by man. And which God of his
infinite mercy grant to us, through our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom, together
with the Holy Ghost, be ascribed all Honor and Glory, etc.

The Third Sermon.
JOHN ii.4. -- Woman, What have I to do with thee? my hour is not yet come.


OUR Savior's turning Water into Wine at the Marriage Feast in Cana of
Galilee, was not only the first Miracle he wrought, but, as I may say, the
first Revelation of the Messiah to the World: For the Wonderful Conception of
him by a Virgin, the Vision of Angels declaring his Birth, the Star pointing
out his Cradle, and the like, may rather be reckoned among the Prophecies, than
the Revelations of him; the Types and Shadows of him in the Law, than for the
Completion of them in his Person. The Meanness and Obscurity of his Education
and Parentage did again so darken the Glorious Prognostics that ushered him
into the World, that he was still the Messi^h under a Veil, the Savior to be
given and the Christ to come. But when he once entered on the Execution of his
Office, and began to teach, and Work Miracles; when at this poor but holy Feast
in Cana of Galilee he turned Water into Wine, and gave not only an Instance of
his Benignity to his Creatures, but of his Power over the Creatures, then, as
our Apostle says, He Manifested his Glory, and lay no longer under the Disguise
of Fabri Filius, the Carpenter's Son, but proved himself to be Fabricator
Mundi, the Creator of the Universe! What we read in the Gospel hitherto, is of
the Child Jesus, now it, first, treats of the Lord Jesus; to this Period it
relates his Obedience to his Parents, but now it shows the time that his
Parents were to be Obedient to him. If Mary therefore upon the Score of her
Maternal Authority affects still to exercise a Dominion over him, he checks her
by the Right of his Divine Authority; if she intimates that her Desires are to
be complied with, he lets her know his own appointed Seasons are to be
attended; and the Submission to be paid to him, which she expected from him.
When they wanted Wine, the Mother of Jesus said unto him, They have no Wine.
Jesus said unto her, Woman, What have I to do with thee? my hour is not yet
come.

The Words offer more especially to our Consideration these two things:

I. Our Savior's Check or Reproof of his Mother, Woman, What have I to do with
thee?

II. The Reason of his Checking or Reproving her, Because she importuned him
Unseasonably, when his Hour was not yet come.

In the Reproof we may reflect again upon two things: The Name he calls her by,
Woman: And the Terms in which he reproves her, What have I to do with thee? I
begin first with the Name he calls her by,

Woman.
That Christ should call the Blessed Virgin by the Name only that distinguished
her Sex, Woman, and not by the Individual Name of her Person, Mary; nor yet by
the Name of his Relation to her, Mother; that he should thus treat his Parent,
as not his Parent, use a Compellation to her as a Stranger; was so surprising
and posing a Behavior from him, that it has occasioned many Different, and
some Wild Imaginations in men, why he did this thing. The Montanists and
Valentinians (a sort of Heretics who taught that our Savior took not True
Flesh from the Virgin) affirmed, That he denies her here to be his Mother, and
that these Words, Woman, what have I to do with thee? import as much as, Nihil
tecum commune habeo, non agnosco te pro Matre, I am not of the same Nature with
you, I acknowledge you not to be my Mother: But there is no ground from our
Lord's Words to say, He made his Mother a Stranger to his Nature, though he
made her a Stranger to his Business. The Jovinians, Helvetians, and Eunomians
affirmed as extravagantly, That our Lord called her Woman, to show, that she
continued no longer in her Virgin-State, than till she brought-forth him: But
what St Augustine says, is not only agreeable with the Universal Tradition of
the Church, but also with Scripture it self, Dicta est mulier, secundum
Foemininum Sexum, non secundum corruptionem Virginitatis. Christ called her
Woman in regard of her Sex, not of her Married Condition; as God called Eve
Woman the hour he created her, before he gave her to Adam for a Wife. The
Papists, on the other side, who may be called Beatae Virginis Parasiti, the
Parasites or Flatterers of the Blessed Virgin, create to her an addition of
Honor, and sing her New Magnificats, from her being called Woman. They say
Christ styled her so upon the same account, that himself was styled The Son of
Man, by way of Excellence, because she was something Above a Woman. But our
Church (which has no other Interest in this matter, but the Truth; which
honors the Blessed Virgin, but does not idolize her; which celebrates her
Sanctity, but makes no Markets of her Shrines) speaks as the Gospel gives her
light, viz. That Christ, by the Compellation of Woman in this place, checks and
rebukes her; that his Words are a Diminution and no Accession of Glory to her.
The term Woman, I confess, in it self carries no Reproof or Asperity: neither
did our Lord use it at other times to signify his Displeasure. When he said to
the Woman of Canaan, that besought him to heal her Daughter, O Woman! great is
thy Faith. He called her not Woman, because he was angry with her, but because
she was a Stranger, known only to him by her Faith. But then, though to call a
Stranger Woman, has no Asperity, yet to call a Mother so, has much Asperity. We
find but one time only more besides this, that our Lord took up this
Compellation to the Blessed Virgin, and that was when he hung upon the Cross; a
time, I confess, when he had no displeasure at all to her, but contrariwise the
most tender Resentment of her desolate Condition. When he bequeathed her to the
Care of his Beloved Disciple, he said to her, Woman, behold thy Son. But though
the Expression there implied no Anger, it implied something of the like nature
with what it does in my Text: for as his calling of her Woman upon his entering
on his Prophetic Office, imported the Expiration of her Maternal Authority: So
his calling of her Woman at the hour of his Death, imported the Expiration of
hers, and all other humane Relations to him; and that for the future she was to
look upon him as her Savior, not as her Son; depend upon his Divine
Providence, not his Filial Care of her.

It is not possible for a Son, with the preservation of his Duty and Reverence,
to use a Term of Diminution, or but of Strangeness to a Parent, without some
very important Reason to justify it. But the Case and Condition of Christ, as
I say, was at this time much altered: for when the Relation of Redeemer
commenced, Carnal Relations began to cease; and when he was in a more evident
manner declared to be the Son of God, his being the Son of Mary surceas'd and
expired. He put this Question (concerning his Divine Nature and Humane
Alliance) afterward to the Pharisees. The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou on
my Right hand, until I make thine Enemies thy Footstool. Seeing Christ was the
Son of David, says he, why does he call him Lord? viz. for this only reason,
because the Greater and more Important Relation, on some Occasions, swallows up
the Less. As we see in the Case of a Father and a Son in a Commonwealth, when
the Son comes to bear Office, the Father that was Superior Oeconomically, and
commanded in the Family, becomes Inferior to his Son Politically, and is
commanded by him in the State: and thus though Fabius Maximus might approach
his Son, being a Private Person, on Horseback, or which way he pleased; yet
when his Son was Consul, he might approach the Supreme Magistrate only on foot:
and when the Lictors commanded him from his Son to alight, he not only obeyed,
but rejoiced that he so rightly understood the Dignity he bore. But I might
have brought an Example from Scripture. When Joseph was in his Father's house,
he paid humble Submission and Subjection to his Parents: but when he was
advanced to be a Prince in Egypt, 'twas God's will, that not only the Elder
Sheaves should do Obeisance to the Younger; but even that the Sun and Moon
themselves, i. e. his Father and Mother (by their Representatives his Brethren)
should bow their Heads in Homage to him. And by the same Rule, Christ, who
expressed Obedience to his Parents while he appeared nothing but their Son, had
Obedience belonging to him, when it appeared he was their Lord and Savior.

But now, though these things are true, and that omnis Christi actio nostra est
instructio, every Action of Christ is our Instruction: Yet it will concern us
to take heed, that we rightly understand his Actions, and that we make not a
wrong Construction of that, which was given to be our Instruction. We must not
wrest or extend this Carriage of Christ to his Mother, to the Prejudice of our
Parents Authority: for it does not warrant any one, that is a Son or Daughter
among us, so soon as they are out of their Minority, to cry, Aetatem habeo, I
am of Age, and owe no more Observance: Or as soon as they are promoted to any
Dignity, presently to change their Behavior, and to take up a new Compellation
to them. No, in respect of a dutiful Regard to be paid to those that Bore and
Educated us, Christ would have all men for ever to be Pupils, for ever to
continue in a Voluntary Reverential Wardship, as I may say, to them: and we
read* that he preferred Duty to Parents, even before the Corban; the Maintenance
of them, before the giving Oblations for the Reparations of the Temple. Again,
no Spiritual Change in our Condition absolves us from the Duty of Children;
though we are called to a Divine Office and holy Ministry, we are not exempted
from Filial Obedience and Natural Affection. And therefore the Doctrine of the
Church of Rome in this particular is to be abominated, ubi pietatis genus
ducitur, esse crudelem, among whom it is held a Sublime and abstracted Piece of
Piety, for those that are once entered into a Covent, to forget their Parents
and Kindred according to the Flesh; as soon as their Persons are thus
sequestered from them, to sequester also their Natural Affections; and to
espouse the Interest of their Spiritual Cognation, though it be never so
Prejudicial to their Natural. In some Cases indeed, religiosior est mentium
copula, the Union of the Mind, upon long experience of mutual Virtue, may
deservedly be counted a faster Tie, than that of Consanguinity, accompanied
with less Virtue. As our Lord on this account preferred his Cognation to his
Disciples, before that with his Kinsmen; esteemed those to be nearer Allied to
him, in whom he found Faith, than those that had the same Blood running in
their Veins. And looking upon his Disciples, he said, Behold my Brethren, my
Sisters, and my Mother. But then in such Changes of Condition, as are the mere
Inventions of Men, as the Orders of Friars, and their Rules of Worship are, to
add Barbarity to Superstition, under the pretense of Greater Sanctity to shake
off the Duties of Humanity, no Church can justify, but that which justifies
yet greater Impieties. I proceed to the second Circumstance I observed in
Christ's reproving his Mother, the Terms in which he reproved her,

What have I to do with thee?
This was a Phrase used among the Jews, to repulse those that moved any thing
to them unseasonably, or unworthy of them to do in their Opinion; and also to
express their Resentment, if they thought themselves hardly dealt with. The
Widow of Zerephath used it this last way to the Prophet Elijah, when she
conceived the Cohabitation of so holy a Person with her, and his near
Inspection into her Life, was the Cause of her Child's death, What have I to do
with thee (says she) O thou Man of God! art thou come unto me to call my Sins
to remembrance, and to slay my Son? And David used it the first way, 2 Samuel 19.
to Abishai, urging him to put Shimei to death upon the Day of his Restoration
to the Kingdom, because he had Cursed him in his Flight from Jerusalem. Says
he, What have I to do with you, ye Sons of Zerviah? And notwithstanding the
great Dislike and Offense this Phrase expressed, our Lord forbore not to use it
to his Mother, intermedling in his Divine Employment, Woman, says he, What have
I to do with thee?

I confess it was durum Dictum, a harsh Speech, considering the Person to whom
'twas spoken: but 'twas also, if rightly weighed, frugiferum Dictum, a Speech
full of good Instruction and Profit: For it shows Christ's equal and impartial
Deportment, as he is a Lord and Savior, to all Persons whatsoever, without
Consideration of Country, Acquaintance, or Kindred: The very Womb that bare
him, in an Unadvised Action, shall not go away without a Rebuke; if his Mother
does that which is Dishonorable to his Office, she shall hear that which is
less honorable to her Relation; if she forgets her Duty, he will forget her
Name and Title. A good Lesson for those Favorites of Christ in these our Days,
who call themselves his Elect, and his Darling Children, however they live in
Disobedience to his Laws; and fancy he can see nothing in them that displeases
him, whatever wickedness they commit. Though Propinquity in Grace be more in
Christ's account, than Propinquity in Blood: yet if even those that are allied
to him by Grace, sin presumptuously against him, they will find him but a rough
Kinsman. Though Coniah were as the Signet upon my Right hand, says God, yet
would I pluck him thence. And if Peter, the most Zealous of the Apostles, shall
take upon him to tempt Christ, he shall bear the Name of Adversary, Get thee
behind me Satan. If the Provocations of the Servants of God be Great, however
near and close their former Relation to him was, they will find him as far
Estranged from them: and in Case their Provocations be of a less and meaner
Allay, they will receive a Check, as the Blessed Virgin here did. And so I
proceed to the Reason why Christ reproved her, Because she unseasonably
interposed in what she ought not to have meddled, prompted him to work a
Miracle before his Time was come.

-- My Time, says he, is not yet come.
These, and the foregoing Words, Woman, what have I to do with thee? utterly
o'erthrow all the vain and false Glories, which the Church of Rome
Superstitiously, Idolatrously, and injuriously, rather than Devoutly, heap upon
our Lady: ascribing to her impeccability and being born without Sin, the Title
of Queen of Heaven, and a perpetual Regency over her Son, etc. But as Stout and
resolute Soldiers, where the Works are weakest, show the greatest Valor: So
those of that Church shrink not for all the Assault they receive from my Text;
but the ruder the Shock is, the more obstinately they maintain their Post. They
affirm that the Action of the Blessed Virgin here was not only without Blame,
but full of Faith, Charity, Humility, Prudence, etc. and that Christ was so far
from being angry with her, or having any Cause given him to be so, that he took
up a feigned and dissembled Dislike, to have an Occasion only to teach the
World, and not her neither, That the Power by which a Prophet works Miracles,
is not derived from his Parents, nor to be governed by them, but wholly by the
Spirit of God, says Cornelius a Lapide, In ipsa nulla fuit culpa: ergo non vera
fuit Christi reprehensio, reprehendere tamen illam videtur, ut non ipsam, sed
nos doceret, in operibus theandricis parents nihil habent juris, and so forth.
Thus the Jesuit is not ashamed to make our Lord Jesuitize, i. e. falsify and
dissemble: but the time would be ill spent to confute such gross Follies and
Blasphemies, which choose rather to find a Miscarriage in Christ, than in his
Mother; to make him angry without a Cause, or to feign an Unjust Anger, than to
allow it possible for her to give him a Just Cause to be angry. But the
Explanation of these Words [ my hour is not yet come] will more plainly show
wherein our Lady deserved a Reprehension.

The Hour of Christ is sometimes understood of the Hour of his Death, as it is
said, They could not lay hold of him, because his Hour was not yet come. But
here it is to be understood of his Season or Opportunity to do a thing: as when
he answered his Brethren, that asked him to go up to Jerusalem to the Feast,
Your Time, says he, is always, but my Time is not yet come. But here by the
way, we must not conceive any thing of the Hours assigned to Christ of that
nature, which the Arrians and Priscillians did, who said, He was subject to
Fate and Necessity, and bound up to the Observation of Times, and could not
therefore be the Eternal Son of God. Christ's Death was not imposed on him by
any Fatal Necessity, as himself declares Chap. 10. and 18. of our Evangelist:
No man takes my Life from me, says he, but I lay it down of my self, I have
Power to lay it down, and I have Power to take it up. But when it is said, The
Hour of his Death was not yet come, it means no more than this, That he had not
yet finished the Work for which he came into the World, he had not fully
preached the Gospel, accomplished the Prophecies that were of him, confirmed
his Disciples, etc. i. e. the Hour by his own Eternal Wisdom chosen, was not
yet come; the Hour, as St Augustine speaks, non Necessitatis, sed Voluntatis;
the Hour not of his Necessity, but his Will; not of his Constraint, but of his
Counsel. And the like may be said of the Hour of his working Miracles, he
attended no Critical Minute, or favorable Conjuncture of the Stars to assist
him: as to his Power, he could have wrought them when he would, every Hour was
the Hour of his Power, but every Hour was not the Hour of his Opportunity; he
could have turned the Water into Wine at the time his Mother spoke to him, as
well as at any other, but the End for which he did it, would not have fallen
out so Easily and Naturally at one time, as at another; and though the Miracle
had been the same, the Effect would not have been so great. An Opportunity is
not to be measured or judged by the Power of the Agent, but by the Purpose and
Design of his Action; and the Purpose of Christ's present Action here was, to
give a Testimony of his Divine Power, that Men might the readilier believe in
him; his Inferior and Subordinate Purpose to this was So to dispose his
Miracle, as it might best conduce to this End.

And in the first place therefore 'twas of no small Moment, that he should
order it so, that he might be seen to be the Free and Sole Agent of it, without
any Complice or Confederate, without Monitor or Director: that it proceeded
merely from a Divine Motive as well as Power, and tended to a Divine End; to
use our Adversaries Words, that in operibus Theandricis Parents nihil habent
juris, a Prophets Parents have nothing to do in his Divine Operations. It was
enough alone to have put off the Hour of Christ's working this Miracle, had it
been come, his Mothers prompting him to do it. Secondly, It was of great
Importance to choose the most Advantageous Season or Minute for the Performance
of it, viz. when it would be both most remarkable, and most grateful; and that
would have been after the perfect Absumption of the Wine provided for the
Feast, when the Guests felt the Defect of it: Abundance is most welcome, when
it succeeds Want. Thirdly, It was considerable to perform it, when it was sure
to move the Greatest Admiration and Astonishment; and that was, before there
was any Intimation or Expectation of it. The Surprise of a Rare Event creates
most Wonder: as we see the Good Wine did here in the Master of the Feast, he
not knowing whence it came; the Unexpected Change and Excellence of it was a
Miracle to him, before he knew 'twas derived from a Miracle.

Now the Blessed Virgin forestalled and discomposed all these Divine and
Prudential Purposes of our Lord. First, By her inconsiderate Advising him of
the Want of Wine, she disparaged his Prophetic Power, as if he had been
Ignorant, or less Observant of what past, and of what was needful for him to
do; and he might well answer her trifling Solicitude with Indignation: as
Elisha did the young Prophets, that took upon them to inform him, that his
Master would be taken that day from his head: I know that, says he, hold ye
your peace. Secondly, She precipitated the Proper Season of the Miracle, and
had her motion taken place, the Benefit of it would scarce have appeared to
have been a Benefit. Thirdly, She appears, by interposing her Motherly
Authority, to have affected part of the Glory of the Miracle, ut quae Filium
haberet tali potentia praeditum, as being the Mother of such a Wonderful Son:
so that whatever Honor Christ had acquired, a share of it might redound to the
Womb that bare him, and to the Paps that gave him suck. Fourthly, The highest
Motive which seems to have induced her to desire the Miracle, was some Secular
Regard: as to oblige the Married Couple, to gratify the Guests, or the like:
and this appears by her whispering to the Servants to observe what our Lord
commanded them, as a beneficial Obedience to all that were concerned in the
Feast.

And thus her Purpose was as different from Christ's Purpose, her Design from
his Design: as Good Cheer is from Preaching the Gospel; as Wine is another
thing from Faith; complementing a Friend from Converting men to Christianity;
and she justly deserved the Reprehension she received. For 'twas too low and
mean an Imagination of his Power, that 'twas to be engaged merely to supply
the Defects of a Meal, that those Divine Operations that were designed to
destroy the Kingdom of Satan, and to set up the Kingdom of God in the World,
were fit to be terminated, as well as employed, in serving Tables. We read
indeed in the Legend of Romish Saints, that a holy Abbot or Hermit meeting with
another holy Abbot or Hermit, (merely to exercise their Faith, and to show
which had the greater Favor with God, and the profuser measure of his Graces)
would vie Miracles with one another, as Juglers do Tricks, remove a Hill, or
change the Site of a Forest, and the like: Inventions, as one says, ferrei
oris, and plumbei cordis, of a blockish Understanding, and a shameless
Impudence. Christ did not prostitute his Miracles, to light or Vainglorious
Purposes: That he turned Water into Wine at the present Marriage Feast, was not
so much to gratify the Palates of the Company, as to give them, and the World
after them, a Taste of the Inocciduum Nectar, the Fruit of the Eternal Vine
that grows only in his Father's Kingdom.

And here it may be worthy our Observation, That both Christ and his Apostles
were many times more Severe against the Mistakes of Men, than against their
Misdeeds; more offended with those that did not rightly Apprehend the Faith and
the Design of it, than those that Opposed it. Get thee behind me, Satan, was a
Sharp Reproof, not for Infidelity, but for an Unadvised Carnal Tenderness
showed to Christ. Ananias and Sapphira were made terrible Examples, not again
for Denying the Faith, but for thinking a Cheat or Lie were reconcilable with
the Profession of it, or could be hid from the Spirit of God. And in the
Passage here before us, notwithstanding the Action of the Blessed Virgin was
not without Good Will, Charity, and a Persuasion of Christ's Divine Power: yet
because she had not a due Regard of that Divine Power, of the Dignity of a
Miracle, and our Lord's Office, but thought she might be the Disposer of them,
she received a sharp Rebuke.

And if ever this Observation was worthy a Serious Consideration and adverting
to, it is in these Days, in which the Gospel is so Universally professed, and the
Faith so Factiously Contended for, and the Principal Purpose and Design of it
so little regarded. The Church of Rome on the one side, stands upon the
Antiquity of her Religion and Worship, though her Antiquity be no better, than
that of an old Ship's, which has been pieced and altered, till little remains,
beside the Name, of the first Building; Ignorance and Superstition in some
Ages, and Interest and Ambition in all, having patcht up their boasted
Antiquity, till it is liker to Heathenism, than the Gospel at first professed in
that Church: We of this Nation on the other side stand as much upon our
Reformation, and because our Doctrine and Worship are more holy and consonant
to Scripture, we care not though our Lives and Manners be worse than theirs
whose Errors we condemn. There are others again among us, who are persuaded
they have yet purer Ordinances than we, and that they have Reformed the
Reformation; and so it be to promote their Pretenses, that Faction, Schism,
Sedition, Treason, Murder of Princes, and Subversion of States, are a
Justifiable and Holy Zeal. These Misapprehensions and Erroneous Conceits in
Religion, I say, are more pernicious to it, and hateful to God, than direct
Opposition and Blasphemy against it; and Turks, Jews, and Infidels have not
hindered the Progress and Propagation of the Gospel so much, as the Scandalous
Dissensions and the Unsuitable Lives of the Professors of it. And all this
while, the Ways and Modes of serving God are not the Service of God it self,
but Holiness, Righteousness, Charity, Obedience, Meeknees, Peaceableness, and
the like. All Manners and Forms of Worship are good, that are consonant to
Scripture, conduce to Edification, and established by Just Authority, I say, and
established by Just Authority: for it is not allowed to Private Men to be the
Fashioners or Chusers of the Public Way of Worship; if this were permitted,
the Issue would be only Confusion; and the Dissensions about the Circumstances
of Religion, would destroy the Substance and Essentials of it. Christ laid not
down his Life to establish these or those Rites or Forms of Worship, but, as
himself professes, To destroy the Works of the Devil. And this is that which
ought to be the Business and Concern of his Followers, that about which all
their Care and Solicitude should be employed, against which their Anger and
Animosity should be directed, I say, to abolish Sin, and to make Virtue and
Piety flourish in the Earth. And they that lay not the Weight and Stress of
Religion in this, are Impertinent and Trifling in the Faith, and Impious in
their Zeal; they understand not the most Material and weighty Part of their
Profession; and instead of receiving an Euge, or Well-done from Christ at the
last Day, they will receive a Check or Increpation, as the Blessed Virgin did
in my Text, and not only so, but a Renunciation and a Condemnation. God give us
Grace to be Wise in a Wise Religion; and Holy in a Holy Faith: and to God the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost be ascribed all Honor, Glory and Thanksgiving,
now, and for evermore. Amen.

The Fourth Sermon.
DAN. ix.26. And after threescore and two Weeks Messiah shall be cut off: but
not for himself --


THIS is one of the most clear and most Illustrious Predictions of the Passion
of our Lord, which is contained in Scripture; it comprehending not only the
several Stages of his drawing near to the World for its Redemption, his
Advances and Pauses: but unfolding also the wonderful Mystery, and seeming
Contradiction in it, viz. That the Salvation of the World should be wrought by
the Cutting-Off, or Destruction of its Savior; the Son of God made subject to
the Violence and Outrages of the Sons of Men. I called the Words a Prediction,
but I might have styled them a Description or Register of all the Passages in
that strange and astonishing Transaction; they declaring the Design and
Circumstances, the How, and for Whose behalf, and the precise Time (however
obscurely) of the Death of the Messiah.

However therefore at this Day every Child is catechized and perfect in this
Point of Chronology, imperante Augusto natus est Christus, imperante Tiberio
crucifixus est Christus, in the Reign of Augustus Caesar Christ was born, in
that of Tiberius he was crucified; and none needs to have recourse to the dark
Calculations of remote Ages for this matter: yet with good Reason we may look
back to Prophecies, when they are fulfilled; and scan Aenigmatical Speeches,
even after they are expounded. For though this seems to be seeking of Light in
Shades and Darkness; the retiring back again into Night and Obscurity, after
the Dayspring from on high has visited us: yet not only much Confirmation,
but much Illustration of things Believed may be fetched from the remote Springs
of Antiquity; for not only the Evangelists write the History of Christ, but
also the Law and the Prophets in many things Evangelize: as the Prophet Daniel
does in my Text, And after threescore and two Weeks Messiah shall be cut off,
but not for himself.

We may observe in the Words these two General Parts.

I. The Angels Prediction to Daniel of the Death of the Messiah, or Christ,
After threescore and two Weeks Messiah shall be cut off.

II. His Correction of what he had said, or rather Direction for the right
understanding of his Prediction, and to prevent misapprehe^^^on, -- He shall be
cut off, but not for himself.

In the first of these two General Parts, the Angels Prediction, I shall
observe more particularly two things: The Substance of it, the Excision of the
Messiah -- he shall be cut off. And the Circumstance of the Time of it, when it
should come to pass, After threescore and two Weeks -- I begin first with the
Substance of the Prediction,

-- He shall be cut off.
This Term of cutting-off does usually imply in Scripture three things. 1. The
untimely destroying a Person from the Land of the Living. 2. The destroying him
as a Criminal or Malefactor. 3. The destroying him by God himself, and if not
always immediately, yet by his Appointment. I shall give but one Proof of this,
of the many that might be brought, Exodus 31.14. God gives this Charge by the
mouth of Moses, -- Every one that defiles my Sabbath, shall surely be put to
Death -- that Soul shall be Cut Off from among his people. In which Words are
expressed the Person's untimely Death, that he dies as a Criminal, and that God
is the Author that dooms him to it.

Now Death is called a Cutting-off for two Reasons. First, Because a
Cutting-off is the discontinuation of a thing from that to which it was before
united: or Secondly, A shortning of it from the Measure it had, or would have
arrived to. Thus the Untimely Death of a Person is the shortning of the Days he
might have lived to, and the separating him from the Society of the Living, of
which he was a Member. And however strange and wonderful it is, such was the
End of the Messiah: after all the glorious Prophecies and magnificent Elogies
relating to his Person and his Kingdom, as that he should be called The
Wonderful, the Mighty God, the Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace, that
his Dominion should reach to the Ends of the Earth, and to the End of Time, he
was Cut Off and Extinguished like a Mortal Man; after the fashion, as the
Psalmist speaks, of common Princes, Ye are styled Gods, but ye shall dye like
Men. Like Men? nay he died like a Malefactor, and by God's Sentence and Decree.
And it was upon the account of his Tragical End, and the misunderstanding of
other Predictions of him; especially that one, Christ shall live for ever, that
both the Jews of old despised him, and those of these Days blaspheme him,
calling him, from the manner of his Death, and the Structure of his Cross, The
Warp and the Woof. It was by reason also of his Ignominious Death, that the
Heathen derided and reproached our Holy Faith, saying, We believed in a hanged
Man.

But neither Jew nor Gentile had any just Cause of Exception against our Lord
for his Violent and Untimely Death; I say, there was nothing strange, or hard
to be digested by either of them in this thing: For 'twas the Practice of them
both to sacrifice the Innocent, for the Guilty; the Unoffending Victimes, for
Offending Men: Nay, 'twas usual among the Gentiles for the Noblest and most
Sacrosanct Persons, their Kings, and Generals, and holy Virgins, to devote
themselves to Death for the Preservation of their Country. Why then should the
Devoting of Christ for the Salvation of the Whole World be held irrational and
foolish by them? Why did they despise in another Religion, what they held
Honorable in their own? And the Jews had yet less reason to be scandalized
(especially the most Learned among them who were yet only offended) who saw
their Messiah daily slain before their Eyes in so many Rites and Mysteries, the
Paschal Lamb, the Scapegoat, the Goat for the Sin-Offering, in a word, all
their Expiatory Sacrifices were Prefigurations of Christ's Passion. Beside
those, that were Learned, were sensible, That the Way of propitiating God by
the Blood of Beasts, was of it self Irrational, and had no Efficacy in it, but
as it related to the Blood of Christ. The Jews therefore with less reason than
the Gentiles disclaimed the Messiah, coming in the Guise of a Sacrifice, and
drencht in his own Blood; when 'twas his Blood alone that sanctified all their
Forefathers, and their own Offerings, and distinguished their Temple from a
common Shambles or Slaughterhouse.

The reason that the Cross of Christ has given such Scandal in all Times, and
that so great a Part of the World have thought it Monstrous, That a Divine
Person should undergo an Ignominious Death, arises from the Slight Apprehension
Men generally have of Sin, and their ignorance of the Malignity of its Nature;
they look upon it as a mere Transient Act, and think that the Guilt of it
passes away, as soon as the Fact; they have no Unkindness to their own Wicked
Ways, and fancy God has none neither; that any Trifle will make Compensation
for them, or that God will pass them by without any Compensation at all. But if
they would weigh the Odiousness of Sin to God, by its Contrariety to his Holy
Nature, and the fearful Judgments he has denounced against it, and that it
cannot go unpunisht, if God be just and true, i. e. if God be God: Again, if
they would consider, that the Greatness of an Offense arises in proportion to
the Greatness of the Person Offended, and then compute what would be a
Competent Satisfaction for offending an Infinite and Eternal Deity, they would
not think it monstrous, ut medela responderet morbo, that a Divine Person
should be found only worthy to do Right to a Divine Person. Men may well be
astonished at the Goodness of God, and adore his Mercy, that he vouchsafed to
give his Son to be a Ransom for Sinners, but none can justly wonder, that he
required so Honorable an Amends for the Violation of his Majesty; or that a
less Sanctity than Christ's was sufficient either to intercede for, or to
Counterpoise the Guilt of the Whole World.

But as there are those that despise the Cross of Christ, and count the Blood
of the Covenant, as the Apostle speaks, an unholy thing: so there are those
again on the other side, who are no less Enemies to it, by ascribing to it what
was never the Will or Meaning of our Lord that they should: and these are of
two Sorts; Those of the Church of Rome, who Superstitiously and Idolatrously
Worship the Cross, ascribe to it the Power of driving away Devils, conferring
Divine Graces, and the like. The others are those among us, who teach, That
since Christ has Suffered, all Guilt and Condemnation for Sin is taken away in
respect of Believers: like those in the Apostles time who affirmed, That after
the Faith of Christ was once entertained, all that was necessary for Salvation
was performed, and men need not be sollicitous for their future Behavior,
whether 'twere Righteous, or Unrighteous. But St Paul, Heb. 10.26. stops the
mouths of all such as thus pervert the Grace purchased by Christ's Death. If we
sin wilfully, says he, after we have received the Knowledge of the Truth, there
remains no more Sacrifice for Sin, but a certain fearful looking for of
Judgment, and fiery Indignation. As if he would have said, Although Christ
cannot be Cut Off any more in his Person, yet he may and will be Cut Off again
in the Fruits and Benefits of his first Cutting-off, from those that abuse
them. Which Words, though spoken of Apostates to the Faith, will hold true also
of Subverters of the Faith. And there is a Passage in this Chapter of Daniel
before us, well worthy the observation of all those, who sin now presumptuously
under the Gospel, which is this: When the Angel had revealed to Daniel the Time
when the Captivity in Babylon should expire, and that the People should return,
and rebuild Jerusalem and the Temple: and not only so, but that the
long-promis'd and much-desir'd Messiah should be given them; and the Prophet
thought all was now well, and nothing could be added to the Felicity of the
Nation; immediately it follows, that after so many Weeks again (for the
succeeding Transgressions of the People) the so-long'd-for Prince and Savior,
the Messiah, should be cut off as if he had never been: So that he should be
given in a manner, and not given unto the Nation; but be the Cause of a Second
and Greater Destruction, than the foregoing Captivity, even the final Rejection
of the House of Israel. And it is dreadful to consider, that the giving of a
Savior to many Christians shall have the like Success; that by reason of their
Presumption of I know not what Favor and Election of God's, and their
Continuance in their Unreform'd Lives, this Blessing shall be turned into a
Curse; and He that was cut off For them, shall be again cut off From them; and
the Private State of their Souls, like the Public State of the Jews, shall be
much more Calamitous after their Redemption, than before.

And now what Use shall we make of this first Branch, the Substance of the
Angels Prediction, the Excision of the Messiah, He shall be cut off --? Shall I
exhort you, after the manner of the Church of Rome, to set before you Pictures
of our Lord's Passion, representing his macerated and dilacerated Body hanging
on the Cross between two Thieves, and attended by his Virgin Mother fallen into
a Swoun, and expect that the like Effects of an o'r-whelming Sorrow may be seen
in you? No, I shall rather desire that all such Pageantry and Ostentation of
misplaced Grief may be removed far from you; and as our Lord directed the Women
(who wept for him when he bore his Cross to Mount Calvary) to spend their Tears
on the right Object, Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but weep for your
selves, and your approaching misery: So let me advise you, Not to weep for what
Christ suffered more than sixteen hundred Years ago for your sakes, seeing he
is now at the Right Hand of his Father in Glory; but to weep for your Own
Souls, that you have made no more Advantage by his Sufferings. Weep not
therefore because he was mocked, and spit on, and set at naught by the
Soldiers, but weep because thou thy self have despised him, set his Gospel at
naught, perhaps derided it. Sigh not because Christ was scourged, and crowned
with Thorns, and hung so many hours upon the Cross, but sigh truly and deeply
that all these things have not moved thee to forsake one Sin, or to mortify
one Lust; mourn sensibly and pungently that he drunk the bitter Cup of his
Passion in vain, as to thee, or for thy greater Condemnation: For if it be a
Sad Reflection, that he lived a persecuted and afflicted Life, and died a
Calamitous Death, it is yet a much Sadder, that such his Sufferings do not
Expiate, but aggravate thy Guilt and Damnation.

The second Use I shall desire you to make of the painful and ignominious Death
of so Divine a Person as the Messiah, is to consider the Malignant Nature of
Sin, which (however easily and hourly, regardlesly and remorslesly we commit)
cost our Lord his Heart blood to expiate; and after we were once infected by
it, nothing less than his being Accursed, could put us into a Capacity again of
being Blessed; nothing but his being Cut Off could restore us to Life and
Felicity.

Let the third Use we make of the Messiah's Death be, To consider how precious
a Thing the Soul of a Man is; that it is such a Jewel that the Son of God came
down from Heaven to save from perishing; compassed the Earth, like a greedy
Merchant, to purchase; set his Glory and Life at naught to ransom! And now
it is ransomed at so Immense a Rate, is of more Value than before; and he that
sells it now for Gold, or Pleasure, or any other Worldly Consideration, sells
not only an Immortal Spirit, but a Divine Purchase; sells his Soul Redeemed,
parts with his Soul and his Messiah too; delivers it up together with the
Ransom and Satisfaction, after no more can be expected. When the Devil
therefore offers to barter with us his beggarly and deceitful Wares for this
Divine Treasure; as the Satyrist said with indignation to a Gluttonous Person,
that gave more for a Fish than would have bought the Fisherman, Hoc pretium
Squamae? all this Revenue for Finns and Scales? So let us say with no less
Indignation, Shall we give our Immortal Souls, the Blood of Christ, and Eternal
Glory, for a little Momentary Pleasure? such as the very Slaves to it set often
below a contemptible Sum of Money, even when they have drawn their Purse, and
bid for it, put it up again, as thinking it too dear? I proceed to the
Circumstance of the Time of the Cutting-off the Messiah.

After threescore and two Weeks.
From what Epoch or Computation of Time these threescore and two Weeks begin
to be reckoned, or in what King's Reign they determined, is very difficult to
pronounce, by reason that the Scripture is silent in the Extent or Number of
Years of the Reigns of the Kings of Persia, and those Accounts we have from
Heathen Writers (however competently punctual and suitable to their own
Chronologies, yet) to make them fall in, and come to a Concurrence with Holy
Story, (one reckoning by Lunary Years, and the other by Solary) has been found
a very hard Task: insomuch that some that have labored over-curiously in this
matter, while they have sought to reconcile the Times, have lost much of their
own; and instead of giving Satisfaction, have only forfeited their Discretion.
I shall not therefore engage in so difficult and ambitious an Undertaking, but
content my self to follow the Conclusion of the soberest Expositors, hasting
through the ragged Ways and barren Tracts of Chronology and Arithmetic, as a
Traveller that delights not in his Journey, and not sitting down, and amusing
my self in them, as if I took pleasure in the Passage.

The plain Account is this, The Prophet Jeremy, long before our Prophets time,
had foretold, that the Captivity of the Jews in Babylon should continue seventy
Years. Now Daniel being a Captive in Babylon about the End of this time, and
mindful of Jeremy's Prophecy, besought of God, by fasting and Supplications, an
Accomplishment of the promised Deliverance: whereupon an Angel was sent to him,
with much more Gladsome Tidings than he expected, viz. to assure him, that not
only at the Expiration of the Seventy Years prefixed, the People should
certainly return, but that after Seventy Weeks of Years more, i. e. seventy
times seven Weeks (a Week of Years consisting of seven Years) the righteous and
glorious Prince Messiah should be sent. And the more to confirm Daniel in this
joyful News, the Angel (according to the Distribution of the Time for the
bringing this Counsel and Determination of God to pass) divides the Seventy
Weeks of Years into three Parts, assigns seven Weeks of Years for the
rebuilding Jerusalem and the Temple, threescore and two from that to the Birth
of the Messiah and his Cutting-off, or at least for the Preaching of the Gospel
by his Disciples; and one Week of Years remaining for the destroying of
Unbelievers: as these things may be collected from ver. 21. to the end of the
Chapter.

In which Distribution of Time God's singular Goodness and Wisdom, in choosing
the Season for sending his Son into the World, is very remarkable. He sent him
not the first seven Weeks, or forty nine Years, after the Jews return from
Babylon, that the City and Sanctuary were building, and the Nation
re-establishing, for that was a busy and troublesome Time, but sixty two Weeks
after that, when they were settled and at Leisure to attend Divine things. And
for this Reason God also so ordered it, that Christ should be born in a Calm
and Serene Age of the World, in the peaceful Reign of Augustus Caesar, when, as
the Historian says, universi terrarum orbis aut pax, aut pactio, that there was
either an Universal Peace, or Treaty of Peace through the Whole World. God thus
stilling the Noise of Wars, and the Tumults of the Nations, that the Voice of
his Son might be heard; gave men nothing to intend, that they might intend
Religion. But though he offered the Jews this Opportunity for their Salvation,
they laid not hold of it: but when they were disengaged from Civil Affairs,
they engaged and immersed themselves in all manner of Sin and Wickedness; when
their Wars ceased, their Lusts began to rage; when the Architects and Builders
had finished their Work, the Contrivers of Iniquity set to plot and contrive
theirs. So that few were at leisure to compute how Daniel's Weeks, for the
coming of the Messiah, past away, and much less to prepare themselves for his
Reception; and accordingly when he appeared, so far they were from paying him
Obedience, that they knew him not; from acknowledging him their King, that they
crucified him. They dreamt of a second Joshua for their Messiah, not of a
Melchizedeck; of a fighting, not a preaching King: when therefore he rebuked
their Vices, they conspired his Death; and cut him off, instead of cutting off
their Sins. 'Twas no wonder therefore, that God allowed but one Week of Years
for the destroying so Carnal, so wicked, so ungrateful a People.

It Is an Ominous and Fatal Sign, when God has given Eminent Deliverance to a
Nation, and allowed it time for the Re-establishing it self, if at least in the
second place it makes not Religion and his Worship its Business: but falls from
Secular Employments to Sensual and Sinful; never reflecting either why he did
so severely punish them, or why again so Graciously Restore them. We of this
Nation attend not the fulfilling of the Weeks foretold by Daniel, for the
Coming of the Messiah in the Flesh, his Cutting off, and the Destruction of
Jerusalem, these things are already past: But there are other Weeks in which we
are concerned, which are not yet fulfilled, viz. the few Weeks before God may
possibly call us to account for the ill Use we have made of his Glorious
Restoration of our King and Nation, and his other Illustrious Mercies: Or if in
his Wisdom he shall think fit to adjourn this Account to the General Audit at
the Last Day, then the very few Weeks, before we that are here present shall be
sealed up for that Dreadful Day by our Departure out of this Life. And in the
mean time we have daily an Image or representation of that Great Assize of the
Whole World, in the Absolution which the Church pronounces to Penitent Sinners,
and consequently in binding over to Judgment the Impenitent: For though the
Righteous are not juridically and finally absolved in this World, nor the
Wicked condemned; yet the Issue that both are to expect is foreshew'd; and
however there seems for a time a Forgetfulness of the one and the other, that
the Just appear to go away without their Reward, and the Unjust to be Tenants
to an Easy Lord, that will never call them to account: yet they will receive
their Recompense according to what they have done in this Life, and find though
Christ suffered for Sin, he never suffered or tolerated Sin; but that his Death
will prove Effectual for their Condemnatition, for whom it proved not Effectual
for their Salvation.

The Reason that Men put off the Fear of the Lord's Coming to Judgment, or
think his Coming but a Fable, is, because they consider not how far he is
already advanced on his Way toward them, how many Stages he has past, and how
very near he is come. He is advanced long since to the Destruction of
Jerusalem; there is the first prophesied Stage of his Coming, and so many Weeks
of Years past. Secondly, His Gospel is preached through the World: Christ is
arrived so much Nearer on his Journey toward us. Thirdly, Antichrist is come:
the Apostle speaks of him as entered into the World, though as 'twere incognito
or concealed, in his time: but now for many Years he has showed himself openly,
and raged in the Church: and there is the Third Set of Weeks foretold for
Christ's coming, past: So that there remains but one Parcel of Weeks more,
before we shall see him at our very Doors, i. e. coming in the Clouds of Heaven
to judge the Quick and the Dead. We have seen three Predictions of his Coming
actually fulfilled, and is it possible our Sins should persuade us, that he
will tire by the Way, and that the fourth shall not come to pass? The Night
succeeds not the Day, Winter the Summer so certainly, as Christ's Second Coming
shall succeed in the time appointed. And seeing these things shall be so, what
manner of Persons, as St Peter says, ought we to be in all holy Conversation
and Godliness? My Text says, Christ was not cut off for Himself, let us take
care to be of the Number of those he was cut off For, and not of those he shall
be cut off From. And so I pass to my Second General Part, the Angel's Direction
for the right Understanding of his Prediction,

He shall be cut off, but not for himself.
The Words in the Original [ ve en lo] which our Translators render, but not
for himself, and in the Margent, and shall have nothing, are so concise and
abrupt, that they leave place to several Apprehensions to add, what they think
will best fill up their Sense: But all that is offered being merely
conjectural, and also less edifying than what we read in our own Bibles, I
shall not decline what I there find. And it may be understood in two Respects,
That Christ was cut off, and not for Himself.

1. In Respect of any Demerit or Fault of his. There were many that pretended
to be the Messiah, that were Thieves and Murderers, and were cut off, but 'twas
justly for their Offenses. But the Angel prevents here the least Suspicion,
that the True Messiah should be a Guilty Person, cut off for his own Crimes. He
did no Sin, as St Peter says, neither was Guile found in his mouth: But he
could make that bold Challenge to all the Nations of the Jews, Which of you
convinces me of Sin? It fared indeed with him, as it did with David, a good
King, and his Type, who Psalm. the 59th and the 3d, complains of his Enemies
after this manner, They lie in wait for my Soul, the Mighty are gathered
against me; not for My Transgressions, nor for my Sin, O Lord! they run and
prepare themselves without my Fault. No: if any man could take away our
Messiah, by justly alleging Impiety against him, we would readily deliver him
up our selves: But when he was Holy in his Life and Doctrine, when his
Righteousness was attested from Heaven before, and in, and after his being in
the World, by Prophecies, Miracles, by the Voice, to use St Peter's expression,
which came to him from the Excellent Glory, saying, This is my Beloved Son in
whom I am well-pleased: by his Resurrection, Ascension, and sending the Holy
Ghost, we may well adhere to such a Savior, and excuse the seeming Shame of
his Cutting off, for those real Glories which none beside himself ever
pretended to.

2. Not for himself, in respect of any Benefit he received. If the Angel had
told the Prophet, That the Cutting off of the Messiah had been for any Personal
Advantage of his own, though he had taken Death in the Way to that Advantage,
his Suffering had not been Relative to Others, it had been for Himself. But the
Scripture disclaims this, and affirms, 'Twas for our Redemption, our Salvation,
our being Reconciled to God and instated in Glory that Messiah suffered. For he
being enthroned already in Heaven, what could he gain to himself by taking our
wretched Flesh, and undergoing all the Miseries and Indignities of a Humane
Life? His Sufferings, indeed, were antecedent to his Exaltation, but his
Exaltation was not the End or Reason of his Sufferings; God highly exalted him,
and gave him a Name above every Name; that at the Name of Jesus every Knee
should bow, of things in Heaven, and things in Earth, and things under the
Earth: but this was the Result or Event of the Merit of his Humiliation, not
the Design of it. And the Joy which, as the Apostle says, was set before him,
and made him endure the Cross, and despise the Shame, was a Contemplation of
the Redemption and Recovery of Lost Man, and of the Glory redounding to God by
his Achievement, more than of his own Glory.

There are but two Sorts of Creatures in the Whole Lump of the Creation, for
whom the Excision of the Messiah could possibly be, namely, Angels and Men: but
the Scripture excludes the first, He took not upon him the Nature of Angels,
but took upon him the Seed of Abraham: and the Ancients interpret, That the
Nature that was not assumed, was not ransomed. The State of the Angels, Good
and Bad, immediately after the Fall of those that kept not their Station, was
made Immutable, and they are Happy, or Accursed without Change. For Men
therefore alone the Benefit was: and it being said for Men indefinitely, it
must be understood of all the Race of Mankind; the Men of all Nations, and of
all Times; quocunque sub axe, how remote or in what Clime soever, quocunque sub
scelere, how remote from Righteousness, or under what Sins soever; all that
Believe, all that Repent, are of the Number of those for whom Christ was cut
off: as St John says, He is the Propitiation for our Sins, and not for ours
only, but for the Sins of the Whole World. None are so much cut off from
Goodness, but Christ was cut off to bring them to Righteousness and Salvation.

And now to draw to a Conclusion: What does this Universal, this Wonderful Love
of Christ preach to us? Who when he was not capable, as God, to dye for us, as
our Condition required, espoused our Nature first, that he might espouse our
Miseries after; and that he might bring us to perfect Felicity, was content to
be made perfect by Sufferings, as the Apostle speaks? As I said before, an
affected weeping and sorrowing in remembrance of Christ's Passion, was but an
Insignificant Return for his Sufferings: So I may say here, an Empty Admiration
of his Love will be as Vain, as Ungrateful, and as unacceptable an
Acknowledgment of his Goodness. The Return he expects for his Unspeakable Love
is, that we, according to our Measures and proportions should show the like
Love to our Brethren. And this is the Consequence St John draws from the Love
of Christ, If Christ so loved us, we ought to love one another.

But what Kind of Love is it, which is required of us? For the Love commonly
practiced in the World, is but a Confederation for Lust and Pleasure: or an
Association (like that of Merchants) for Interest and Profit. Moralists observe
three Kinds of Love in regard of the Ends of them, Love for Pleasure sake, Love
for Profit, and Love for Virtues sake. Now the last only of these bears any
Resemblance to the Love of Christ, which we are to imitate: and which is more
perfectly described by the Pen of St Paul, To be, first, a Benevolence or
Well-willing to others, as to our Selves, not excluding our very Enemies; a
Candid and favorable Interpretation of all Men's Actions; a Meek Conceit of our
selves, and a Lowliness toward others; ready to forgive Injuries, and to
overcome Evil with Good, etc. which Love the Apostle prefers even before
Martyrdom. Secondly, a Mutual Compassion and being affected as our Brethren
are, a sorrowing with them that sorrow, and a rejoicing with them that rejoice,
as the Apostle says, like Members of the same Body, suffering all, if one
suffers; and if one be honored, all rejoicing. Thirdly, a Beneficence or
Liberal Contribution to those that need, expressed in these Words, But to do Good
and to Contribute forget not. And this Love, it seems, the Church was so happy
in in St Paul's days, that he thought it superfluous to recommend it among
other Duties to the Thessalonians, But as touching Brotherly Love, says he, ye
need not that I should write unto you. But had the Apostle lived in these days,
he would have thought it necessary, not only to say, Love one another, love
Strangers, love your Enemies; but love your Friends, love your Selves. For we
see Men destroy their Souls for the love of their Bodies; and their Bodies
again for the love of their Lusts. And if any in these days should pretend to
love merely for Virtue and Goodness sake, to have a Kindness to those that gave
them an Opportunity to exercise their Charity, even as unto those that did them
a Good Turn, they would be hissed at as Hypocrites; and if they should love
their Enemies, and return Good for Evil, they would be looked on as base and
degenerate, despicable and ridiculous persons. But had not Christ been so
ridiculous, as to do Good to them that hated him; so degenerate, as to lay down
both his Life and Glory for his Enemies; none, that now shall be admitted into
the Kingdom of Heaven, should ever have come there. And he that gave his Soul
unto Death for our sakes, looks that we should not only be Believers, but
Martyrs for his Sake, if Occasion requires; that we should be ready to be cut
off for Him, that was cut off for us; that is, be content to lay down our Lives
for the Truth, or the Salvation of our Brethren.

To God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, be ascribed all Honor, Glory, etc.
Amen.
The Fifth Sermon.
ZECHARY xiii.6. And one shall say unto him, What are these Wounds in thy
hands? Then shall he answer, Those with which I was wounded in the house of my
Friends.


THere is nothing esteemed more barbarous, than to violate the Laws of
Hospitality, to outrage a Stranger-Guest. The sense of Mankind in this
Particular may be seen by the fatal Revenge taken for the abuse of the Levite's
Concubine; which occasioned the destruction well near of a whole Tribe in
Israel. But then the Violation of an Ambassador, and of such an one as comes
to offer Peace and Alliance, not only to break the Laws of Hospitality, but of
Nations; to Evil-Entreat a Sacrosanct Person, and to return Hostility for
Friendship and Amity, what can be found sufficient to make an Atonement for
such Inhumanity? How beautiful are the feet of them that bring glad Tidings of
Good things? And how deformed and detestable on the other side must the
Ingratitude of those be, that are injurious to such Messengers? It Is no wonder
if such Barbarity creates irreconcilable Feuds, inter mortales inimicitias
immortales. between mortal men immortal Enmities. Yet the Prophet Zechary
foretells, that such should be the Reception of the Messiah, the Entertainment
that the Prince of Peace should find in the World, when he came to offer Peace
to the World. And that he may set it off the more lively, he does it by way of
Dialogue, shows it in a kind of Drama, or Acted Representation, introduces a
Nameless Person to be astonished at the Strange Spectacle of an Ambassador
wounded, a public Minister invaded like a public Enemy; and the Person so
used, giving as strange an account of his Usage, viz. that 'twas not on the
Road, but in the City; not in the Camp, but in the House; again, not in the
House of his Enemies, but in the House of his Allies and Friends. And one shall
say unto him, What are these Wounds in thy hands? Then shall be answer, Those
with which I was wounded in the House of my Friends.

I am not ignorant, that the Generality of Interpreters (a few only excepted)
as well ancient as modern, apply these Words to the False Prophet mentioned
ver. 5. and not to Christ: but though I affect not to follow the Few rather
than the Many, yet I find it hard to resign a Picture so perfectly resembling
our Lord, as my Text does, and allow it to be drawn for a False Prophet. I
shall therefore show upon what Considerations I have been induced to understand
the Words as I do, and if they are not convincing, content my self to handle
them by way of Accommodation to the Business of the Day, though not by way of
Interpretation.

In the first Verse of the Chapter, the Times of the Messiah are confessedly
spoken of, In that Day there shall be a Fountain opened to the house of David,
and to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem for Sin and for Uncleanness. In the five
following Verses, the things transacted preparatory to the Coming of the
Messiah are set down, viz. the rooting Idolatry out of the Land of Israel, and
the destroying of the False Prophets, as at ver. 2. For God having for a time
determined to silence all Prophecies, and to restrain all Miracles, that
greater Notice might be taken of his Son when he came in the Power of both,
with that lumine prophetico, which Justin Martyr says, Christ first kindled
again after 'twas Extinguished; False Prophets from hence took occasion to
arise, and having nothing Divine to countenance their pretended Mission from
Heaven, they apishly imitated the Outward Garb and Austerity of the true
Prophets, as it is ver. 4. wore rough Garments, and used boldness of Speech. But
God not suffering these Impostors to frustrate his Divine Counsels, sent a
Discerning Spirit into his People, and stirred them up to bring them to condign
Punishment, as at v. 3. The very Father and Mother of the False Prophet shall
thrust him through, and force him to confess that he spoke Lies, and that he
was not sent by God, but was a Herdsman that had kept Cattle from his Youth.
And Christ at this Season entering on the Stage of Judaea in a Mean and Poor
Condition, far Unlike that Glorious and Warlike Prince that carnal Nation had
fansy'd him, the Priests and Rulers set him at naught, and out of a pretense of
Zeal to God's Glory (as the faithful Jews had a little before laid hands upon
the False Prophets) did the like on the Messiah, and crucified him for an
Impostor: as these things are implied partly in the Words of my Text, What are
these Wounds in thy hands, etc.? and partly in the Verse immediately following,
Awake, O Sword, against my Shepherd, against the Man which is my Fellow, says
the Lord of Hosts, smite the Shepherd, and the Sheep shall be scattered. Which
last Words our Lord also applies to himself, Matthew. 26.31.

The Prophet Zechary recounting so close together the semblable Treating of
these two most Unresembling Persons, the Messiah and the False Prophets, and
shifting his Narration from the one to the other without any transition, has
made it hard to distinguish which he speaks of: But in Prophetic Writings this
Abruptness is common, as the Rabbis say, lumen propheticum est lumen abruptum:
and St Hierom, Non curae fuit Spiritui prophetali Historiae ordinem sequi, the
Spirit of Prophecy is not sollicitous to observe Method, but despising all
Historical and Logical Contextures, makes the Exits and Intrats of Persons in
an unaccountable Manner. And such a Freedom it uses in this Chapter, that it is
impossible rightly to apply the Particulars related to the Persons they belong,
but by considering what was truly and indeed done to each of them. And by this
Rule, Piercing the Hands plainly alludes to Crucifying, and must belong to the
Messiah, this being a Punishment never practiced among the Jews, till they fell
under the Roman Yoke, Stoning being the Penalty of a False Prophet by the Law:
and then, if we consider, Wounding the Hands, is not only a punishment
differing from that prescribed, but also an Odd one that no way comports with
the Crime, it being more suitable to the Offense, to have bored the Tongue of
the False Prophet, than his Hands. But the truth is, the Prophet had expressed
the Punishment of the False Prophet before, at the third Verse, namely, by
Thrusting him through: which might be done jure Zelotarum, by the Right of
Zealots, God exciting his own Relations against him. Or else the Punishment may
refer to Exodus 19.12. where God commands, That if Man or Beast came within the
forbidden Precincts of the holy Mount, they should be Thrust through with a
Dart: Our Prophet threatening here the same Death to those that, Uncalled,
invaded the Prophetic Office, which was threatened there to such as
presumptuously intruded to pry into God's Mysterious and Dreadful Appearance.
Which things being premised, I shall proceed to handle the Words as they are
applicable to our Savior: and so they contain in them two Great Mysteries of
our Faith, which I shall explain, by enquiring

I. For what Reason the Divine Goodness so ordered it, That Christ our Savior
should be a Wounded Savior, in satisfaction to this Question, What are these
Wounds in thy Hands?

II. For what Reason the Divine Goodness so ordered it, That he should be
wounded by those he deserved Best from, in exposition of these Words, Those
with which I was wounded in the House of my Friends.

I begin with the First of these, Why Christ was to be

A Wounded Savior.
What are these Wounds in thy Hands?] The Wounds in Christ's Hands do more
particularly relate to the Wounds made by the Nails of the Cross, but by the
Figure of a Part for the Whole, they may stand for the Wounds he received all
his Body over; and not only so, but for all his Sufferings, whether in Body or
in Spirit, from his Cradle to his Grave; from the Manger at Bethlehem, to his
Crucifixion at Mount Calvary; and the Sum Total of this Question, (What are
these Wounds in thy Hands?) imports no less, Than what is the meaning of thy
Strange and astonishing Miseries, thy low Condition and sad Wants, thy
perpetual Dangers and Persecutions? What is the meaning of thine Agony and
bloody Sweat, thy Crown of Thorns platted and crushed into thy Head, thy being
Mocked and Spit on? What is the meaning of thy Submitting not only to the
Dishonours of a Humane Birth, but to those also of a Violent and Ignominious
Death? Being the Son of God, why did thou suffer any Evil? Why did thou not
convert the Stable in which thou were Born into a Palace, and the Cross to
which thou were Nailed into a Throne? Why did thou undergo such Miseries and
Indignities as made the World doubt of thy Divine Nature, and not exert thy
Deity, and destroy thy Murderers, and burn up their City, as thou spak'st in
one of thy Parables? Thy People expected thee a mighty Prince, but thou
shew'd'st thy self a Destitute, Forlorn Person; they looked for a Deliverer, but
behold one Obnoxious to Bonds and Death; for a Redeemer, but, Alas! none needed
Redemption more himself.

Great, undoubtedly, and wonderful was the Mystery of the Incarnation of the
Son of God; and that he should not only be born in a Mortal, but in a Miserable
Condition. The Apostle might well give it the precedence to all other Mysteries
of Godliness, Great is the Mystery of Godliness, says he, God was manifested in
the Flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, etc. But that Christ should
suffer the things he did in our Nature, was no less Necessary, than Wonderful:
And to omit all other Reasons for it, I shall insist only on that One Great
One, Because Sin could not otherwise have been abolisht, the End, for which
Christ came into the World, attained; which was To destroy the Works of the
Devil. Christ could have destroyed the Devil with more Facility, if he had come
in Majesty and Glory, as the Apostle says, 2 Thessalonians. 2. He shall consume
Antichrist with the Spirit (or breath only) of his Mouth, and the Brightness
of his Coming. But our Lord's Business at this time was not to destroy the
Person, but the Power of the Devil: Sin was both the Stratagem by which he
conquered, and the Chain by which he held Mankind in Captivity; and Christ
undertaking to rescue them from this Thraldom, to bind the Strong Man, and to
take from him the Armor in which he trusted, he was not to do this by an
Omnipotent Power, as he brought the World out of Nothing, Light out of
Darkness, etc. but by an Heroic Virtue, such as he showed when he trampled
upon the Temptations of the Devil in the Wilderness. He therefore entered the
Lists against Satan as a Champion or Combatant, according to the fair Law of
Arms, as they say, i. e. with a suitable Strength and Appointment to his
Adversaries. Man was lost by Sin, and could only be restored by Righteousness;
he had forfeited God's Favor and his Felicity by his Transgressions, and could
recover them again no other way but by Obedience. On this Account Christ laid
by his Majesty and Glory, and took our Nature, that in the Infirmity of our
Flesh he might foil our Strong Enemy; the Second Adam redeem the Glories lost
by the First Adam; the Seed of the Woman bruise the Serpents head; made himself
subject to the Law, that he might fulfill the Law; obnoxious to Death, that he
might subdue Death and the Author of it by suffering Death: as St Paul says,
Heb. 2.14. That through Death he might destroy him that had the Power of Death,
that is, the Devil. So that we see here was no place for Thunder and Lightning,
for an O'er-bearing Irresistible Power, but only for Divine Graces or Virtues;
and the Weapons Christ used in this Conflict, were only Courage, Holiness,
Obedience, Patience, Self-denial, Meekness, and the like, such as were in the
Power of Men also to make use of; he so conquered, as they might conquer after
him. For the Great Business was not Christ's Personal Victory, that was secure,
but the Victory of his Followers; he indeed was to break the Power of the
Kingdom of Darkness, but they were to complete the Conquest, every one in his
own Particular to subdue Sin and Satan.

And thus while Christ destroyed the Power of the Devil, disarmed him, and made
those that had been his Slaves, Lords over him; by consequence, and in a
Political Sense, he destroyed the Devil himself: as a Prince is said to be
destroyed, that is stripped of his Forts and Castles, his Territories and Armies,
his Ammunition and Harness of War, though his Person still survives. However
then that Zipporah upbraided Moses upon the Circumcising of her Child, saying,
factus es mihi Sponsus sanguinum, thou art to me a Bloody Husband: we have no
reason to quarrel that Christ was to us Salvator Sanguinum, a Bloody Savior,
i. e. a Savior drencht in his own Blood: for without the Blood of Christ there
had been no Redemption.

But to be more particular and distinct: There are two Ways by which Christ
destroyed the Power of the Devil, and delivered Mankind from his Bondage, and
those are Pretio and Exemplo, by the Price or Satisfaction he paid for Sin, And
by the Example of his Holy Life. By the first he destroyed the Guilt of Sin,
And by the second the Dominion or reigning Power of Sin.

1. Therefore we may say, There was a Necessity of Christ's Death and
Sufferings, and that he should be a Wounded Savior, that he might pay a Price,
make Satisfaction to God the Father for the Sins of the World. For whether it
be, that the Vindicative Justice of God for Sin be so natural and intimate to
his Essence that he cannot, without renouncing his very Nature and Being,
pardon Sin without a Competent Satisfaction, as some would have it: Or whether
it be only his Declared Will not to pardon Sin without a Competent
Satisfaction, as others, more sutably to the Divine Goodness and Glory, affirm,
I shall not need here to dispute; seeing both Sides agree in one and the same
Conclusion, That it was necessary for Christ to Dye for the Sins of the World.
The Wages of Sin is Death, says the Apostle: and in another place, Almost all
things by the Law were purged by Blood, and without shedding of Blood there was
no Remission. Now though the Blood there mentioned, was but the Blood of Beasts
that were sacrificed: yet those Beasts were the Proxies and Representatives of
Men, and also Types of the Great Sacrifice which Christ was once to offer on
the Cross, and derived from it all their Virtue and Merit: and God revealed
this Way of atoning by Sacrifice early to the World, and afterward prescribed
it to his People the Jews by written Laws, from whom it was derived to all
Nations: though the Mystery, that Sacrifices were founded in the Death of
Christ, was not clearly understood till the Days of the Gospel. As a Remedy for
Sin was promised from the Beginning, so 'twas also taught, however obscurely,
from the very Beginning, That Sin was not to be abolisht without Satisfaction
made for it; and that no Competent Satisfaction could be made for it, but by
the Blood of the Son of God, or the Eternal Destruction of the Sinner.

And if we will make the best Use of this Doctrine, we must observe, That as
the Parts of the Body are framed in so excellent a manner, that they serve for
more Uses than one: as the Nose not only to breathe, but to smell; the Hand not
only to lay-hold with, but to strike, etc. So likewise that the Institution of
Sacrifices for expiation of Guilt had two Excellent Designs in it: First, to
show God's Mercy to Sinners, and secondly, his Irreconcilable Hatred to Sin.
And if we look no further in this Matter, than on God's Goodness only in
accepting so favorable an Exchange, as the Blood of the Sacrifice, for the
Blood of the Sinner, we defeat one half of his Design, which was to show the
Malignant and Mortiferous Nature of Sin, in that it could not be purged away by
any less Means than Death; than either by the Destruction of the Sinner, or of
some Other in his behalf. And therefore though God deal with us after that
Royal Manner as the Children of Princes are dealt with, who have another
Punishment for their Faults; or as he dealt with David after his Numbering the
People, past by in a great measure his Offense, and took Occasion from it only
to send a Plague on Israel for former Transgressions; thus choosing rather to
punish David's Ingenuity, than his Person; to afflict him with beholding the
Afflictions of others, than by sending any immediately on himself: yet if we
show not the like Ingenuity which David did, suffer not Our Selves, for what we
see another suffer, when we were the Delinquents; I say, if as he cried out
upon the Destruction of the People, Lo, I have sinned, I have done Wickedly;
but these Sheep, what have they done? So if we cry not out, in Contemplation of
what our Proxy suffered on our behalf, We have sinned, we have done Wickedly,
but the Lamb of God, what has he done to be sacrificed for us? We shall forfeit
both the Indulgence and Indemnity which God intended us, and while we show our
selves Insensible of so high a Benefit, we shall be deprived of it; and in the
next place, we must Dye our Selves, and Dye to all Eternity.

And thus we see, as the Death of Christ, paid to God as a Ransom for Sins,
ought to be the highest Object of our Joy: So the Consideration again on the
other side, that Nothing but the Death of Christ could pay that Ransom, ought
to create in us no less than a horror and Detestation of Sin. But yet, I know
not how, we see men precipitately and remorslesly run into all Impiety, as if
there were no danger in Sin; as if Christ had suffered nothing for it; as if it
were as easily remitted, as it is committed; the Price of Iniquity no more than
what it cost the Wicked Person to purchase it: For certainly, if Men did
consider at how dear a Rate God's Justice and Wrath were satisfied, they would
not think the gratifying of every Lust more valuable, than the Compensation
made for it; they would not set more by the Savage Delight of Revenge, or the
Swinish of Drunkenness, than by the Blood of Christ; prefer the Favors of a
Light Woman, before their Peace with God; a cheap Sin, before the
dearest-bought Redemption. A Fool can work a Mischief, which may pose a Wiseman
to remedy; and every Weak Person, when he is tempted, can commit Sin, but none
but the Eternal Son of God can remove the Guilt of it when it is done. And it is
the light Reckoning that men make of Sin, which brings God's heavy Displeasure
upon them for it; their thinking so cheaply of the Greatest Offenses, because
the Pardon of them costs them little, that provokes him to make them feel what
the Weight of Guilt is: For it is but just, that those who refuse to understand
the pernicious Nature of Sin by the Punishment laid on an Other, should
understand it by undergoing the Punishment of it themselves; who will not learn
how Odious it is to God by the Death of his Son, should be taught it by their
own Confusion. Who is there so Ungrateful and Insensible even among the Worst
of Men, that if a Friend hazard his Life for his Preservation, will not
acknowledge so great a Benefit? and yet the Son of God did not only hazard, but
lay down his Life to redeem us from Eternal Damnation, and few there are that
consider it, that have so much Compassion, as but to ask the Question in my
Text, What are these Wounds in thy hands? resentingly to say, Was it possible
so Divine a Person should be so Abused for me? that the Son of God, should be
buffetted, spit on, derided, torn with Scourges, mangled with Tortures, and at
last nailed to the Cross, for my Disobedience? There are those, I confess, in
the Church of Rome who spend a great Part of their Lives in gazing on a
Crucifix, and weeping over the Pictures of our Lord's Passion, in bemoaning his
Sufferings, and kissing the Representations of his Wounds: but, alas, these do
but haerere in cortice, stick at the Bark and Husk of the Mystery, out of a
simple or affected Fondness express their Gratitude to Christ a Wrong Way,
lament his Sufferings now they are past, and he in Glory at the Right Hand of
his Father; they do not penetrate into the true Purpose and Meaning of his
Sufferings, as they declare the Malignant Nature of Sin, that could not be
expiated at a less Rate than the Death of so Divine a Person: For this is the
true Return that Men should make Christ for his Passion, not so much to
consider What his Wounds were, as For what they were, and from thence fly that
which was the Cause of his Sufferings.

The second Reason of the Necessity of Christ's Sufferings, I said, was, To
give Men an Example of Obedience. The Apostle, Heb. 2.17. gives another Reason
for Christ's suffering in our Nature, viz. that he might be a Merciful High
Priest, become Compassionate of our Infirmities by the Experimental Knowledge
of them in his Own Person. But the Reason or Purpose I now speak of, is such as
is in Reference to Men, and not to himself; that he might give an Example to
the World, that God commanded nothing but what was possible to be performed by
Flesh and Blood. The last Effort or Endeavor of Heaven to bring Men to
Salvation was now essaying, and the shortest and most Efficacious Motive was
thought to be, to give them an Instance of the Fulfilling the Law: Precepts are
but cold Inducements; but an Example fires the Soul with Emulation to do, what
it sees done before it; and Men think it a Disparagement to give out in that,
which another has enterpriz'd with Success. The Life of a Christian is full of
Difficulties and Troubles, many Lusts are to be mortified, many Affections to
be rectified, many Vices to be rooted out, and many Virtuous Habits to be
acquired, which things are not Easy even to the best of Men; again,
Persecutions and Evils, loss of Goods, of Liberty, and Life it self, are the
Lot often of the most Righteous, and for their Righteousness: So that there was
need of a Great Encouragement and a Generous Precedent to excite Men to
undertake the Heroic Duties of Christianity. God therefore afforded them his
Own Son clothed in our Nature to go before them; his Own Son, I say, to add the
Greater Authority to his Example; and clothed in our Flesh, to remove all
Objections which Sloth might otherwise make against the Possibility of
following his Steps. I am not Equal, says one, to the Burdens and Dangers
required in a Christian Life, able to undergo Imprisonment, Beggary, Martyrdom,
etc. Behold my Hands and my Feet, says Christ, these Wounds I suffered for thy
Salvation, and can not thou, who art framed of the same Flesh and Blood,
endure as much for thy Self, as another could endure for thee? Says another, I
cannot digest Injuries and Affronts, my Temper, my Profession of Life, are
inconsistent with these things. Learn of me, says Christ, I am lowly and meek,
and when I was enthroned in the highest Heavens, I disdained not to descend
into this World in the form of a Servant, and to bear Indignities and Outrages,
when the Wisdom of God so ordered it, and well then may thou submit to the
like, whose Original is but from the Earth. These things are too plain to be
long insisted on: let thus much suffice to be said in Satisfaction to this
Question, What are these Wounds in thy Hands? viz. they signify first Malum
culpae, the Evil Demerit of Sin, which Christ suffered, that we might be
excused. Secondly Malum poenae, the Toleration of Evil, which Christ underwent
to leave us an Example to follow him. I proceed to show, For what Reason the
Divine Wisdom so ordered it, that Christ should be wounded by those be deserved
Best from, in Explanation of these Words,

Those with which I was wounded in the House of my Friends.
Of whom do the Kings of the Earth take Tribute? says Christ, Of their
Children, or of Strangers? Not of their Children, but of Strangers. So again,
Who are those Men usually Wound and Kill, their Friends, or their Enemies?
certainly, not their Friends, but their Enemies: Yet so it was, that the
Messiah was wounded and murdered by his Own Nation and Kindred. The Gentiles
bore him no Malice, Herod laid nothing to his Charge, Pilate would have set him
free, Am I a Jew? says he, thine own Nation, and the Chief Priests have
delivered thee unto me: all Strangers honored him: but as St John says, He
came unto his Own, and his Own received him not. Received him not] is a
Meiosis, or mitigated Expression for the Worst of Usages, they Persecuted him
with the highest Malice and Hatred, the more to disgrace him, they hung him
between two Thieves, and put him to Death in their Capital City. But though the
Nation of the Jews were not his Friends de facto, yet they are so called,
because they ought to have been his Friends de jure; for they were his
Compatriots and Kindred, he chose to be born of their Stock before any other,
he preached the Gospel to them first, made Palestine the Scene of his Holy Life
and Miracles, designed their whole Nation the Honor of being his Apostles at
large, to be the Preachers of Salvation to the rest of the World; and by how
much the more they ought to have been his Friends for these Obligations, the
more unpardonable was their Barbarity, not only to make him so Strange a
Spectacle, as Saint Paul says himself was made, Legatus in vinculis, an
Ambassador in Bonds, but also Legatus cum vulneribus, an Ambassador wounded
and crucified. What Malice, besides the Jews, was ever so Great, as to destroy
so much Virtue and Goodness? What Envy so black and rancorous to persecute so
much Meekness and Humility? What Wickedness ever so unfortunate and unhappy, as
to cut off the Savior of their Nation and of the World, to the Salvation of
others, and to their own only Destruction? It appears at first hearing, the
most Mysterious and unaccountable, the most Strange and amazing Event, that
ever the Wisdom of God produced in the World, That he should permit his Own
People, of all the People of the Earth, to be the Murderers of his Son! Acts
2.23. says St Peter, Him being delivered by the determinate Counsel and
Foreknowledge of God, ye have taken, and by wicked hands have crucified and
slain. But the wonder of this will vanish, as soon as the Reason appears; for
if we consider the Blindness and Hardness of the Jews Hearts after so many
Glorious Revelations; their Uncorrigible Lives under so many holy Laws; their
high Ingratitude after so many Benefits; Who deserved to be condemned to such a
Prodigious Punishment, but those who were the Greatest Prodigies of
Stubbornness and Impiety? From this wonderful and dreadful Judgment of God, I
shall reflect upon two things for our Edification.

First, The Wickedness of Men's Hearts, when they are void of the Spirit of
Grace: For upon such no Reason, no Benefits, no Miracles, whether of Power or
Goodness, can effect any thing: but those very Means and Endeavors which are
employed for their Salvation, serve only for their greater Obduration; those
that are their chiefest Friends, and of whom it may be said, as of the
Apostles, These Men are the Servants of the most High God, which show the Way
of Salvation, if they rebuke them for their Sins, seek to instruct their
Ignorance, or to confute their Folly, they will look upon them as the Worst of
Enemies.

Am I become your Enemy, says St Paul, because I tell you the Truth? Yes,
Blessed Apostle, there is nothing more certain, nothing turns Friends sooner
into Foes than an Unwelcome Truth: they that will not be reformed, will not be
taught; and to instruct one that loves his Sins, is like the bringing a Candle
upon him, when he is retired to commit it. And it is observable in all times,
that those Persons who, moved by an Heroic Piety, have attempted to reform the
Errors and Vices of a Nation, have found as hostile a Reception, as those who
have sought to Enslave it; men defending their long-wedded Opinions as
passionately, as their Riches; their Hereditary Corruptions, as their
Hereditary Country. In the Parable in which our Lord set forth his own Ill
Success in seeking to convert Sinners, when he lived upon the Earth, he
introduces certain Husbandmen, saying, Come, this is the Heir, let us kill him,
and the Inheritance shall be our own. For such was the Consultation of the
Sanhedrim or principal Council of the Jews concerning him. Come, let us rid our
selves of this Pretended Messiah, this bold Reprover of our Vices, and Confuter
of our Traditions no less by Miracles than by Reason, and then we shall
continue to sit in Moses's Chair, lead the People as we please, and none will
dare to contradict us. If we will not show our selves such Friends to Christ,
as my Text speaks of, who stained their hands in his Blood, let us with all
Submission of Soul, and Singleness of Heart embrace his Doctrines, and pay
Obedience to his Precepts, whether they relate to Faith or to Manners; and
suffer neither Pleasure, nor Profit, Reputation among Men, or any By-Respect
whatsoever to disaffect us to him: For the things of this World are at Enmity
with Christ, and if we set our Affections upon them, they will lead us from the
Worship of the True God, as the Canaanitish Wives did the Israelites, to
worship Idols, and the worst of Idols, even themselves: Christ himself will
appear to us a Deceiver, and we shall sooner rescue Barabbas from the Cross,
than him. And let none in these days, who have received the Knowledge of the
Truth, and after extinguished the Grace of God in their Hearts by fulfilling the
Lusts of the Flesh, flatter themselves as the Jews did, who said, If we had
lived in the Days of Old, we would not have been Partakers of the Blood of the
Prophets: So if we had lived in Christ's days, we would not have used him, as
the Jews did: for this is but a Pharisaical Deception, those that hate Christ's
Gospel, would have showed but little Kindness to his Person; who crucify him
now by their Wicked Lives, would not have spared his very Life, if they had
lived in his days. Idem qua idem semper efficit idem, the same thing disposed
in the same Manner, will produce the same Effect; the same Corruption in the
Heart will always bring forth the same Wickedness in the Hands.

The second Reflection I shall make upon Christ's being wounded in the House of
his Friends, Is the Part which God performed, after the Jews added this Great
Wickedness of murdering the Messiah, to all their former Impieties: For if we
look on the Reverse of the Coin, as I may say, the Vengeance God sent upon
them, we shall find it stamped in as deep and legible Characters, as their
Wickedness was engraved on the other Side; it being no less than the utter
Rejection and Ruin of their Nation, and with such Tragical Circumstances, as
are in no Story to be paralleled: but they are so generally known, that I
shall spend no time to dilate on them, but rather exhort all such, who after
the manifold Admonitions and frequent Warnings of God, still persist in their
Sins, and are deaf and incorrigible to all his Invitations to Repentance, to
consider, How for the like Refractoriness and Hardness of Heart God suffered
his Own People to proceed from Wickedness to Wickedness, till they arrived at
last in profundum malorum, into such a Gulf of Perdition, that if the most
Desperate among them had seen the End of their Rebellious Ways, at their first
setting-out in the Course of them, they would have started back with Horror at
the Prospect. The 2d Kings 5. we read, that when the Prophet Elisha foretold to
Hazael (yet a Private Person, and unacquainted with his own Temper) what
Immanities and Cruelties he would commit, when he came to be King of Assyria,
that he would butcher Men, rip up Women with Child, dash Infants against the
Stones, etc. He answered, But what! is thy Servant a Dog, that I should do
these things? And the very Scribes and Pharisees, who were the Chief Actors in
this Days Tragedy, when our Lord insinuated to them (in the Parable I late
mentioned of the Husbandmen consulting to kill the Heir) that they would be his
Murderers, and by it pull certain Destruction on their Nation, they replied,
God forbid; Not only deprecating the Punishment, but detesting the Crime. The
raw Novice-Sinner knows not at first to what a Villain, to what a Devil he will
grow: Men ought therefore to fear the first Motions of Sin, and to suppress the
Beginnings of Wickedness, if for no other Reason but this, Lest they become
Worse than they could have imagined it possible for them to have been. Who
allows himself at first only to Overreach his Brother, by degrees will take
from him by Violence or Open Robbery; who makes no Scruple to be Factious and
Seditious, will hardly stop till he arrives at Rebellion and Treason; who
indulges himself at first in a Negligent Irreverent Performance of God's
Service, and makes the Church the Scene of his Vanity, and not of his Devotion,
is in the ready Path to proceed from Profaneness to Atheism. But as Sin
increases, we have heard that Vengeance also ripens and Increases; says our
Lord, Whoever falls on this Stone, shall be broken; but on whomsoever it shall
fall, it will grind him to Powder. The first Sins a man commits, dangerously
wound his Soul, they dash against Christ, as an Earthen Vessel does against a
Rock; but Presumption and Obstinacy in Sinning causes Christ to fall upon the
Sinner, as a Rock upon an Earthen Vessel, which is sure to crush it to Dust.

To conclude: Though we that are here present, are not of the House of Christ's
Friends, i. e. of his Kindred and Nation: yet we have a Nearer and more
Excellent Relation to him, in that we are of the Household of Faith, and of the
Family of his Church; as himself declared, when he stretched forth his Hand to
his Disciple, saying, Behold my Mother and my Brethren; for whoever shall do
the Will of my Father which is in Heaven, the same is my Mother, my Sister, and
my Brother. Now, if we in our Spiritual Relation shall by our Sins crucify
Christ in his Glory, as his Kindred according to the Flesh nailed him to the
Cross when he lived on Earth, our Wickedness will far exceed theirs; as the
Wickedness of a Disciple far exceeds that of an Unbeliever; the Wickedness of
Judas, did that of Pontius Pilate and Caiaphas. It is our Unspeakable
Happiness, that Christ was Wounded for us, but it will be our Unexcusable
Impiety, if he be wounded by us; it is again our Strange Felicity, that when
Others slew him, we reap the Benefit of his Death; when the Husbandmen Killed
the Heir, that we inherit the Vineyard. And if we make that faithful Use of
Christ's Death which we ought, while the Jews bear the Guilt of his Blood, we
shall be purged by it from all our Transgressions; and while Eternal Infamy and
Wrath cleaves to them, Eternal Glory and Felicity shall be our Portion; which
God of his Infinite Mercy, through our Lord Jesus Christ, grant to us.

And to God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, be ascribed all Honor, Glory,
etc. Amen.
The Sixth Sermon.
ROMANS viii.11. But if the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the Dead,
dwell in you, he that raised up Christ from the dead, shall quicken your mortal
Bodies, by his Spirit that dwells in you.


IF the Resurrection of Christ had been of his Person only, it would have been
a rare and glorious Event, but an Event of no Concern to us; and if we did meet
only this Day to celebrate his Resurrection from the Dead, and not our Own that
shall be, though we celebrated a Great Miracle, we should not celebrate a Great
Benefit. But St Paul teaches us in my Text, how we may be assured to
commemorate our own Resurrection, as well as Christ's, namely, If the Spirit of
him that raised up Jesus from the dead, dwell in us. Those whom the Spirit does
not inhabit in this Life, when they dye, they dye for ever: but they on the
other side in whom it dwells and inhabits now, the Resurrection of Christ is
not to them a History, but a Precedent; and such Persons shall not be only
Admirers, but themselves Partakers of the Miracle. If the Spirit of him that
raised up Jesus from the Dead, dwell in you, he that raised up Christ from the
Dead shall also quicken, etc.

To look further into this Mystery, and the Expedient proposed to bring this
Wonderful thing to pass, I shall observe in the Words these three Particulars:

I. What it is for the Spirit of God (or, which is all one, of him that raised
up Jesus from the dead) to dwell in us.

II. The Effect or Consequence of such In-dwelling of the Spirit of God, viz.
if it be in a Man, He that raised up Christ from the Dead, shall raise up his
Mortal Body.

III. By what Means God will produce this Effect in such a Man, even by that
which dwells in him, -- by his Spirit that dwells in him.

I. What it is for the Spirit of God to dwell in a man.
The Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the Dead is no other, than the
Eternal Spirit of God, the third Person in the Trinity, the Spirit which is
mentioned in Genesis, that in the beginning of the World gave Life to all
things, is the same Spirit that still gives the Palingenesia, the second
Genesis, or Regeneration: whether we understand the Word of the Change and
Renovation of our Soul and Affections to the Will of God in this Life, or the
Resuscitation of the Body from the Grave in the next, and the Reuniting it with
the Soul in order to Eternal Bliss.

The Spirit is said here to be the Spirit [ Of God] but not the Spirit [ In
God:] as if it dwelt in God, as it dwells in us: it is in God Personally and
Essentially, as his Being, but it is in us only by way of Tenancy, as an
Inhabitant or Inmate, to excite in us its Gifts and Graces. And this may serve
to refute and silence those deceived Souls, who of late times, through their
misunderstanding of the Union of the Saints with God expressed in Scripture, have
run into such high-flown and horrible Blasphemies, as to say, They are
In-Godded in God, and In-Christed in Christ: thus claiming Prerogative, instead
of Privilege; and affirming Divinity, instead of a Divine Spirit, to be in
them; supposing themselves to be inspired even Essentially with the Divine
Nature. But such Blasphemous Conceits as these, so audacious and injurious to
the Deity, are so far from being Effects of God's Spirit, which is the
Principle of Eternal Life in those it dwells, that they are Demonstrations of
the Spirit of Satan, an Affectation to be like the Most High, and to equal
their Maker, and unrepented of will certainly consign them to have a Portion
with him in Eternal Death: for what the Jews blindly objected against our Lord
as a Crime, That being but a Man, he made himself God, may be justly charged on
these, that being indeed but Men, and commonly but the Dreggs of Men, they
fancy themselves to be Gods: Only the Sin of these is more unpardonable, in
regard that after so long a time, and so much warning of the like Miscarriage
in this kind, they have not exploded this old worn out Stratagem of Satan's.
But though this Diabolical Frenzy must be abhorred, yet when it is said that the
Spirit of God dwells in a Man, we must look upon it as denoting something more
Extraordinary and Excellent, than the common Lodging or Abiding of an
Inhabitant in a House; as representing rather God's Residence in his Temple at
Jerusalem: which Temple as it was Splendid and Glorious with all that Art and
Cost could make it, a Representation of Heaven, so God by wonderful Tokens and
Testimonies declared his Divine Presence in it. And after this manner the Heart
of every Christian ought to be embellished with Virtue, and sanctified like a
Temple, appear like a little Heaven upon Earth, in which the Holy Spirit may be
seen to dwell by showing his Divine Operations. Know ye not, says St Paul, that
your Bodies are the Temples of the Holy Ghost? Solomon built God but one
Material House, but Christ by his Spirit has raised to God as many Living
Temples on Earth, as there are Believers.

But to be more particular: Dwelling in a House implies three things. 1.
Legitimate Possession by Legal Title and Introduction. 2. Command and Dominion.
3. Residence or Mansion. And all these Properties the In-dwelling of the Spirit
of God ought to have in those, whom it hereafter quickens to Everlasting Life.

1. The Spirit must have Legitimate Introduction and Possession. God dwelt not
in his Temple at Jerusalem, till it was Dedicated and consecrated to him, till
he was introduced into it by Supplications and Sacrifices. And his Holy Spirit
will not dwell in Men's Hearts, till they be dedicated and consecrated to him by
Baptism, and he be introduced by Prayer, and Vows of Faith and Repentance,
Ephesians. 3.17. St Paul beseeches God, that he would grant to the Ephesians,
according to the riches of his Glory, to be strengthened with might by his
Spirit in the Inner-Man, that Christ may dwell in their Hearts by Faith. They
that by Faith in Christ do not unite themselves unto him, and so receive of his
Spirit, have not yet introduced the Spirit into its Temple: and they that
recede again from the Faith after they have received it, dislodge and thrust
the Holy Spirit out of his Tenure and Occupation. The Jews reckoned that God
was still among them, as before, when they had rejected and crucified the Holy
One: but after such their Infidelity and Wickedness he remained no more in
their Hearts, than he did in their Material Temple, after that Voice was heard
to come out of it, migremus hinc, let us depart hence. Wheresoever it is so,
That either Men believe not on the Son of God, or else having believed on him,
through the Allurements of the World and the Flesh fall back again into
Unbelief, and choose rather to dispossess his Spirit, than their Sins and Lusts,
there no Quickening Power will be found to revive their Mortal Bodies at the
last Day: for where the Spirit it self is not, its Operations cannot be
expected. It Is true indeed, that Sinners and Infidels shall rise again, as St
Paul says, Acts 24.15. There shall be a Resurrection of the Dead, both of the
Just, and Unjust. Those that crucified Christ in the days of his Flesh, and
those that crucify him by their Wicked Lives now in his Glory, shall rise no
less than True Believers, than his holy Apostles and Martyrs: But how, and to
what Resurrection shall they rise? Even to such a Resurrection as is no other
than a Second and Worse Death, a Death not of Extinction or annihilation, but a
Death of Eternal Duration in Torment; Nonexistence being not the State of the
Second Death, but Endless and Insupportable Misery: insomuch that they shall
wish, that the Grave had for ever swallowed them up; that as they lived like
the Beasts that perish, so they had also dyed like them, without the
Expectation of any After-Being. So that the Resurrection of the Wicked is but
an Aequivocal Resurrection: as the lifting up of the Head of Pharaoh's Baker on
the Gallows, and the hanging Haman fifty Cubits high, were but Aequivocal
Advancements. The Bodies of the Saints that rose after the Passion, died again
the same Death; but those that shall rise at the Last Day, not having the
Spirit, shall dye again, not the same Death (that would be a Happiness) but a
Death that shall have no End; and the Miseries of which we can no more
describe, than we can the Joys of Eternal Life: but we must suffer a Change,
and be endued with new Powers and Faculties, before we can support the Bliss of
the one, or the Torments of the other.

The second Property of an Inhabitant or Dweller in a House, is to Command and
Rule. It Is the Saying of every man to those that withstand the Exercise of
their just Authority, or but their Civility, Give me leave to Command in my own
House. The Spirit of God must Rule and Command where it dwells; we must not
only give it House-room, but Dominion; look upon him as a Tenant, but revere as
our Landlord, resign our Actions, Wills, Affections, the Whole Man to his
Dispose and Guidance. Faith invites the Holy Ghost, but Obedience and
Submission to his Gracious Motions perfumes his Habitation, and makes him
delight to stay in it. The Spirit of Love, Meekness, Purity, and Holiness, will
not reside, but where these and the like Virtues bear the Sway. Let the Word of
Christ, says St Paul, dwell in you Richly in all Wisdom: So let the Spirit of
God dwell in you Richly in all Wisdom: it will not Cohabit with the Sons of
Men, unless it be Richly, i. e. in the Abundance of its own Divine Graces and
Operations. If we will have the Spirit of God quicken our Mortal Bodies
hereafter, we must suffer him to quicken our Souls in this Life; if we hope to
reign by his Power in the World to come, we must submit to his Dominion in this
present World.

The third Property is Residence and Mansion; our Houses are called our Manours
and Places, i. e. the Places where we ordinarily abide, and where the Law
presumes we are to be found: so that if a Writ be delivered to any of the
Household, or but fastened to the Ring of the Door, it is counted the same thing
as if given into our hands. Thus our Hearts must be the Holy Spirit's Manor or
Place: for what David says of God's constant Abode in his Temple on Mount Sion,
This is the Hill which God delights to dwell in, yea the Lord will dwell in it
for ever: the like must be said of the constant Abode of the Holy Spirit in our
Hearts, This is the Habitation of the Holy Spirit, and if we grieve him not,
nor drive him away by our Sins, he will delight to dwell in us for ever. When
we were devoted to God in Baptism, we devolved and made-over to his Holy Spirit
an Estate in our Hearts, even the Whole Term we had to live in this World: and
if we make good this Grant or Demise, he will never abandon his Tenements, till
he has raised them up to Eternal Glory. The Reason that a Great Schole-Man
gives, Why God punishes the Sins of Men, which were but Temporal, with an
Eternity of Torments, is, Quia peccaverunt in suo aeterno, because they sinned
out all the Eternity they had, i. e. all the Time God allowed them in this
World; and had he continued their Lives to the End of all Ages, they would have
continued still the same Wicked Persons. The like Reason may be given for God's
rewarding the Temporal Obedience of the Righteous with Eternal Glory, Quia
obedientes fuerunt in suo aeterno, because they were Obedient all that little
Eternity he allowed them in this World, and would have persever'd in their
Obedience if he had drawn out their Lives to the last Period of Time. Abiding
and Persevering in Righteousness is that which will give us Immortality: if we
give up the Possession of our Souls to the Dispose and Conduct of the Blessed
Spirit the Whole Little Aeternum we have in this World, we shall certainly
obtain an Eternity, that shall have no end in the next. And thus I have showed
the Manner of the Spirit's Dwelling in every Christian: and they that pretend
to his In-dwelling without these Properties, boast of an In-mate which they
have not; and as they want this Divine Guest, so they will want the Blessed
Effects and Consequence of his inhabiting in them, the quickening of their
Mortal Bodies at the last Day to Glory. Which is the second thing I proposed to
explain,

The Effect or Consequence of the Spirit's dwelling in us.
If the Spirit dwell in you, He that raised up Jesus from the Dead, shall
quicken your Mortal Bodies. The Words suggest two things to our Consideration:
1. What shall be done to such Persons in whom the Spirit dwells, He shall
quicken their Mortal Bodies. 2. Who shall be the Author to effect or bring this
to pass, He that raised up Jesus from the Dead.

1. What shall be done to such Persons in whom the Spirit dwells. It Is said, He
shall quicken their Mortal Bodies. Our Bodies are Mortal three Ways; by Natural
Death, the Dissolution of the Substance of them; by Eternal Death, which
succeeds the Natural, that Riddle of a Death, which by its Existence is in
truth a Life, but by the Torments belonging to it may deservedly be called a
Death; and by Spiritual Death, which is the Cause of the other two. Now our
Mortal Bodies may be quickened or revived again to three Lives; To a Life of
Eternal Duration; to a Life of Eternal Joy; and to a Spiritual Life, or a Life
of Grace, which is the Cause in us of the other two Lives. Some understand
these Words [ shall quicken our mortal bodies] only of Spiritual Proselytism,
of the raising us from the Death of Sin, and the enlivening us to a Life of
Grace. But though this meaning suits well with St Paul's Design in this
Epistle, to confute the Imagination of the Jews, that they could obtain Eternal
Life by Virtue of the Law of Moses, without Faith in Christ: Yet the Words of
my Text point at the Blessed Immortality the Righteous shall hereafter be
Partakers of, and are only to be understood after this manner: If Christians
give themselves up to be led and governed by the Spirit of God in this World
(which is the Spirit that raised up Jesus) they in like manner shall be raised
up by it at the Last Day; and the more they are quickened to a Life of Grace
here, the more they may be assured they shall be quickened to the Life of Glory
hereafter.

Many Practical Uses and Advantages might be inferred from hence: but I shall
collect only this one, which may be of great Encouragement to our Christian
Industry and Endeavors to lead a Godly Life, and that is the Expedition we
shall make toward the attaining the Unspeakable Rewards of the Kingdom of
Heaven. There are three Lives to be attained, and all to be attained by the
Well-Ordering of One, of our Spiritual Life alone in this World: if we rise
from the Death of Sin to Newness of Life, we shall attain by the same
Performance three Resurrections, to that of perfect Grace, to that of perfect
Time or Duration, and to that of perfect Joy and Glory. This I say is so rich a
Harvest, and to be purchased with such Expedition, that the Nicest and most
impatient of Toil and Difficulties may be encouraged to strive for it. Happy is
he, says St John, that has a share in the first Resurrection, i. e. in the Life
of Grace: for the other are but Corollaries or Additional Complements of this:
Sanctification is as certain and assured a Way to Glorification, as Childhood
is the Way to Manhood; it is the Inchoation or Beginning of it, and in a sense
may be said to be it. Those whom he Justified, says St Paul, those he also
Glorified: as if these were done together, and not in process of Time. But to
proceed.

The Author, secondly, of this Grace and Bounty is God. And why did not the
Apostle express himself so in a Word, but used this Circumlocution, [ He that
raised up Jesus from the dead?] Because since Christ's coming in the Flesh, and
having performed the Work of our Salvation, God has left off to govern in the
Church immediately by himself, and does all things by and through our Lord
Jesus Christ. God Created and Drowned the World, and wrought all the other
wonderful things we read of in the Old Testament, in his Own Name, as God: But
now under the Gospel he dispenses all his Mercies as the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and we must expect the Gift of Grace, the Pardon of Sin,
Resurrection to Eternal Life, and all his other Blessings and Favors, from his
Relation to his Son. It is indeed by the Power of God that all men shall be
raised from the Dead: but then it is again for the Merits sake of Christ, and
their Believing in him, that they shall be raised to Glory. And that we should
take notice of the Change of his Name in the New Testament, from that he
delighted to be called by in the Old, is his own Will and Pleasure. Says he
there, By my name Jehovah I will be known: but now to us, by the Name of his
Relation to his Son, as the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. The Manichees from
the Mistake of some Passages and Observations like this raised their detestable
Heresy, That the God of the Old Testament, and the God of the New were two
Different Persons; the Father of Christ another God from the Creator of the
World; who sent his Son in the Flesh with a Design to win men from the Creator
of the World. But these are Wicked and Impious Dotages: it is only an Other Name
that God has taken, it is not an Other God that acts among us: there is but One
God from and to all Eternity, whose Name be Blessed for ever. The meaning of
the Scripture is only to teach us, That it is not God, quatenus God, that we
expect should quicken us at the Last Day, but God as the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ. And this manifests the Perverseness of the Jews, who still adhere
to Moses and the Synagogue for their hopes of Salvation: and the Blindness also
of those, who persuade themselves they can please God and attain Heaven by
Natural and Moral Performances, without Faith in Christ: But the time permits
me not to insist on these things. I haste therefore to my last Particular, The
Means by which God will quicken our Mortal Bodies at the last Day, viz.

By his Spirit that dwells in us.
This Particle [ By] in the Original [(...)] does not infer any Means that God
shall use as Instrumental for the quickening our Mortal Bodies, but implies
here, and in many other places, the Motive only or Reason that invites the
Agent to perform an Action. God will raise us from the Dead, as he does all his
other Works, by his Word or Omnipotent Power: but though his Power does the
thing, yet it is for something in Men that invites him to do it, namely, his
Holy Spirit; which he gave them to that very End and Purpose to dispose and fit
them for the receiving Eternal Life. David says of himself immediately, and
Christ typically, and of all Faithful People mystically, Thou will not suffer
thy Holy One to see Corruption, i. e. God will not leave or forsake the
Righteous either in their Life or Death, as if he had forgotten them, and the
Motive of this his Favor to them is, Because they are Righteous, or Holy Ones.
And the Psalmist expresses the thing with some Indignation, and as if it were
an injury to God to imagine, that he could suffer in his very Nature, that that
which was Holy should be swallowed up in the Grave, that which was Righteous
should perish, that which was Incorruptible, should see Corruption. And indeed
there is not only an Incongruity, but an Impossibility, that this should be:
For what the Apostle says of Christ's Resurrection, God raised him up, having
loosed the Pains or Bands of Death, because it was possible he should be held
of them: may be said of the Resurrection of all the Faithful, with this
Difference only, That the Impossibility of Christ's being detained in the Grave
proceeded from his Divine Nature, ours from a Divine Promise: Nay, we may add,
and with good Warrant, That the Impossibility of our remaining in the Grave
depends not only on an External Promise, but on Something With-in our selves,
though not Of our selves, even on the Spirit of God which dwells in us; by
which we are united to Christ, and made Members of his Body, he being the Head;
and our Resurrection must necessarily be a Consequence of his by the very Law,
as I may say, of the Body, or the Inseparable Conjunction of the Limbs to one
another: for it is not possible that the Head should be quickened, and the Body
mortified: that the Head should be raised to Life, and crowned with Glory, and
the Members remain in Death and Dishonor. And it is on this account that Christ
is said To be the First-fruit of those that Sleep: and not only in regard that
none went before him, but the First-fruit in relation to them that were to
follow after him. The First Fruits in the Law, were Part of the Fruits of the
Season, one Sheaf of the Harvest, which being lift-up and consecrated to God in
the Name of the rest, sanctified the Whole Crop: So Christ being lift up as the
First-fruit of the Dead, consecrated and sanctified the Whole Harvest of the
Dead. And, as Saint John says of every true Believer in point of Impeccability,
He cannot Sin, because the Seed of God abides in him; i. e. none can be a
Child of God's, and a customary Sinner, for these are irreconcilable: So we
may affirm with unspeakable Comfort in the point of our Immortality, A true
Believer cannot be held in Death, because God's Seed abides in him, i. e.
Death, and a Seed or Principle of Immortality are inconsistent with one another.

And thus we see we have not only Matter of Congratulation for Christ's Victory
over Death and the Grave, but the highest Cause of Jubilee and Rejoicing for
our own Deliverance from this heavy Curse and Punishment of Sin. As Sin
subjected us to the Dominion of Death, the Spirit of Sanctification breaks the
Bonds of the Tyrant asunder, and enables us to conquer this Conqueror of
Mankind; as Disobedience shut the Gates of Heaven against us, Obedience sets
them open again; Holiness of Life in the Faith of Christ in this World, is the
Ticket whereby we receive Happiness and Immortality in that to come. The Young
Phoenix is said to spring out of the perfumed Ashes and Relics of the Old:
but though this be never so fabulous, I am sure we shall be renewed and
quickened to Eternal Life, from the perfumed Relics of a Holy Life, the
remaining Good Works and Graces the Spirit of God wrought in us; which, as St
John says, can never dye, but will follow us into the other World. If therefore
we give our selves up to be led and governed by the Spirit of Christ in this
Life, conform our selves in all things to his Divine Will; if the Spirit of
Christ conducts us safely, to use the Psalmist's Expression, through Fire and
Water (i. e. through the Sharper Trials of Afflictions, and the Softer
Allurements and Temptations of the Flesh and the World) he will carry us also
safe through the Regions of Death and the Grave, pass us indemnified by the
Gates of Hell, and neither the Malice of Devils, the Weight of our Tombstone,
the Load of our Flesh, or the yet greater Load of our Infirmities shall hinder,
but our Bodies shall be raised, and so winged, that they shall overtake their
Souls, and be joined to them, that took their Flight so long a time before
them, and both of them together shall be transported in Triumph to Heaven, and
crowned with Immortality and Glory; the Assurance and Pledge of which Christ
has given us this Day in his own Resurrection.

To God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, be ascribed all Honor, Glory,
Worship, and Thanksgiving, this Day forth and for evermore. Amen.
The Seventh Sermon.
PSALM ii.6. Yet have I set my King upon my holy Hill of Sion.


Wisdom does not only do her Works well, but perceives that she does so,
delights in their Beauty, exults in remembrance of the mastered difficulty, and
triumphs over the conquered Opposition: Thus God stood-off, as 'twere, from his
great work of the Creation when he had finished it, applauded, and blessed it;
prided himself, as I may say, in his noble performance; in that he had brought
Light out of Darkness Order out of Chaos, a World out of nothing. In the like
manner, when he had here composed the Distractions and Confusions both in the
Church and State of Israel, by establishing David literally, and Christ
mystically, on the Throne of the Kingdom, he glories in having brought about
his great Design; laughs at the fruitless Opposition of his Adversaries at home
and abroad, of the Philistines, the Moabites, the Ammonites, the Damascens, the
Amalekites, of the King of Zoba, and of all the turbulent and ambitious Spirits
of the House of Saul: delights to recount their Might, and their Machinations,
the more to signalize their Overthrow, and to make his Victory illustrious. For
after all their rage, their malice, their Counsels, their Combinations, their
seeming successes against him, the Issue was this: Yet have I set my King upon
my holy Hill of Sion.

We may observe in the Words these three things: I. The Person established, My
King, i. e. David Literally so called, and Christ Mystically. II. His
Establishment, I have set my King upon my holy Hill of Sion. III. God's
Glorying in the Fact, that he had done it with such a Non obstante,
notwithstanding such Opposition and Contradiction: Yet have I set my King --


I. The Person established, My King, God's King. Not only holy Scripture, but
the Writings of Heathens declare Kings to be Sacred Persons, descended more
immediately from the Gods, and more particularly depending on them. Kings are
from Jupiter, says Callimachus, and nothing ever descended more sacred from
him. And Theocritus, Kings are the special Care of the Gods. And this Epithet's
affected by Homer (...), God loved Kings. Indeed all Kings in general are
God's, derive their Authority from him, govern by his Permission and
Providence, as himself testifies, By me Kings Reign. But then he delights in a
more especial manner to style Good Kings, his; to appropriate their Persons,
and own their Causes, to interpret all things done to them, as done to
himself, as at Verse 2. Why do the Rulers take Counsel together against the
Lord, and against his Anointed? Conspiracies against the King* are reckoned
Conspiracies against God; the resisting his Anointed, the resisting himself.
And thus, if it be a Glorious thing to be a King, it is a Blessed to be a Good
King: for as splendor attends Majesty and Greatness; protection, and safety,
and felicity, and the love of Heaven attend Righteousness. But let us see why
David is here more particularly called God's King than others.

The First Reason we may say was, Because he was a King of God's Making,
because he brought him to the Throne, having no Title by Birth to it, a Caulis
Ovium tuli te, I called him from the Sheep-hook to the Scepter. And as those
Persons which are of our Election, preferring, or favoring, we call Ours; this
is my Scholar, my Soldier, my Officer, because he was of my nomination, my
choosing, my advancing: so David was called God's King, because he was of his
choosing and advancing; his Right to the Crown, was his immediate nomination; he
had no other Interest in the Royalty, but the Interest he had in God's favor;
and if he had not been God's King, he had not been King of Israel.

2. David was called God's King more particularly, by reason of his many
Deliverances of him; he preserved him, from the time of his first anointing by
Samuel, from the jealousy of Saul, and the malice of Readiness house; conducted
him through all the potent and perilous Oppositions of the Heathen, as I
showed, and left him not till he had set him on his holy Hill of Sion, i. e.
established him peaceably and Gloriously on the United Throne of Israel and
Judah. And for this reason David is not only called God's King in my Text, but
in the following Verse, his Son, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten
thee. The Day of his Redemption and Promotion, being counted the Day of his
Creation. And the same Words are applied to Christ in the like manner after his
Resurrection, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee. The day of his
deliverance from death and the Grave, is called the day of his Nativity or
Generation; the day in which God exalted him, and Invested him with Power, the
day in which he begot him.

3. David was called God's King more particularly, because he was a King of his
liking, as it is said, After his own heart. And in this sense also men say a
thing is theirs, when they approve it, and are pleased with it above things of
the like kind. Horace is my Poet, Tully is my Orator, Tacitus is my Historian,
because these hit my fancy and Genius. In the Books of the Kings of Israel and
Judah, and the Chronicles of their Acts, there is registered a long Catalogue of
them; but though they were all Kings of God's people, they were not all God's
Kings, in this last sense, Kings of his liking: he did not boast of many of
them, or own their proceedings, but of those only which executed Justice and
Judgment, destroyed Idolatry, and restored the true Worship; the others, though
they wore the Crown, they wore not the Praise of being Kings of God's liking;
they were of the Royal Unction, but not of this Divine Relation. And just after
this manner Christ esteemed his Kindred, not she that bare him was his Mother;
nor those that descended of the same Stock, were of his Alliance; but they that
heard his sayings, and did them, were his Mother, his Sisters, and his
Brethren. It Is not he that bears the Diadem and the Scepter, not he that is of
the Race of Kings, that is anointed by the Prophet, shouted for by the people,
praised by the hired Historian, that is God's King, but he that does that which
is Righteous in his sight: the others may boast their Title from God, but they
can boast no Title to him, to his Approbation and liking, and consequently not
to his Protection and Blessing. In the Hebrew Dialect, things that excel in
Greatness or Height above others, are entitled to God, tall Cedars are thus
styled Cedars of God, high Mountains, Mountains of God; great Rivers, Rivers of
God, etc. And Kings that excel only in might and magnificence, are entitled to
God but as Trees and Mountains, and we may say unto them, as the Psalmist does
to the high Hills, Why leap ye so ye high Hills? that is, why do ye insult, or
lift up your proud heads unto the Clouds? Sion is God's Hill, where he delights
to dwell, Sion of an humbler and lower pitch, but more pleasant and fruitful.
It Is not the Bulk and large Dimensions of any thing that commends it to God,
but the Virtue of it; not the King, mighty in his Host, goodly in the Symmetry
and Proportions of his Body, but the King that is mighty in Goodness, whose
Actions hold a just Symmetry and Proportion with God's Laws; 'twas not Saul
higher than the People, but David eminent in Piety, with whom God made his
Covenant of Mercy, and set upon his holy Hill. Which brings me to my second
part, The Establishment of David.

I have set my King upon my holy Hill of Sion. By four Circumstances observable
in the Words, may be seen the extraordinary security in which God placed David
after all his Troubles. He set him on Sion, and Sion was a Fortress taken by
David from the Jebusites, who had made it the chief strength and Seat of their
Kingdom. And so, First, 'Twas a Fortification by Art. Secondly, 'Twas a Hill,
and that is a Fortification by Nature: such as must be ascended, before it can
be assaulted. Thirdly, 'Twas a holy Hill, and Holiness is another
Fortification, a Moral or Spiritual, stronger than either of the former, for
here God is the Watch man, and concerned in the Defense. And therefore,
Fourthly, It Is said My, i. e. God's holy Hill of Sion, the place where he
dwelt, and had fixed his Tabernacle; God had other Places of Religious Worship
in the Land, but Sion was the Metropolis to which the rest paid Homage, and to
which all the Tribes came up thrice every Year to offer their Oblation, and so
was God's by a more Excellent Title. And to storm this Place was as vain an
Enterprise (if God did not first forsake it, drove away by the Sins of the
Inhabitants) as to attempt to force Heaven it self: for he would sooner neglect
the Government of the World, than forget the Place where his Honor dwelt. So
that David being established on Sion, might defy all danger from the Princes
his Enemies abroad, or from his ill affected Subjects at home; nay he was so
far from Fearing from any of them, that he was Formidable to them, as the last
Verse of this Psalm shows. Be wise now therefore, O ye Kings -- Kiss the Son,
i. e. pay subjection to David himself (for that is the first sense of the Words)
lest he be angry, and ye perish --

Thus we see David, who for so many Years together, fled from place to place
(as he describes his own condition) like a Partridge upon the Mountains, fixed
and established like a Mountain, environed with a fourfold Fortification, as if
he had been within the Enclosures of Heaven it self: so that with a Pious
presumptiom he might well say, as he does, Psalm. 30.6. I shall never be
removed, thou, Lord, of thy goodness have made my Hill so strong. And let no
man think much, that there was a time that he was depressed and afflicted, as
many are apt to take scandal when they read or hear such things as this,
Insignem pietate virum tot adire labores. That Persons excelling in Piety,
should excel also in Sufferings; for God by these ways conducts his Servants to
the Noblest Ends, hardens and prepares the Instruments of his Glory by
afflictions, as men do those Tools which they design for the toughest
Employments, by several drenchings of them in astringent Water. Prospera in
plebem, ac vilia ingenia deveniunt, a constant even Prosperity is the Lot of
mean Persons and Spirits, the Noble and Magnanimous are opposed to the Storms
and Outrages of Fortune; nor are they otherwise to be distinguished from the
Vulgar, than by these Encounters. That Great Person, says Seneca, that never
proved Adversity, is like a Champion that enters the Lists without an
Antagonist; Coronam habet, Victoriam non habet. He may gain a Crown, but he
never got a Victory. In a still Calm of Affairs God himself gets less Glory, he
has no Field to show his Power, his Wisdom, and his Goodness in, the
Opportunity is not afforded him to frustrate the Counsels of the wicked, and to
bring the Preparations of the Mighty to naught. It Is true, He governs all
things at all times, but every Act of his Providence is not a Victory over his
Enemies; and though he disposes Crowns and Scepters as he pleases; it is when
the wicked resists, that he says, Yet have I set my King -- And so I pass to my
Third Part, God's Glorying in his Establishment of David.

The Holy Ghost in this Second Psalm, sets down the Method which the Enemies of
David used, to prevent his succeeding in the Throne, which is also the Scheme
ordinarily of all Sedition and Rebellion. First, The Heathen did rage, i. e.
The Neighbor Princes were jealous and angry, out of apprehension of their own
Estates; and this is commonly the ground of Defection and Rebellion: For a
King's own Subjects, though they be malecontent, and bear him ill will in their
hearts; yet they often want Courage or Opportunity to execute it, till they are
backed by a Foreign Power. But then Secondly, The People, i. e. the Prince's own
People, begin to imagine vain things; which may either mean false things which
shall not take Effect; or Wicked which shall; for in both senses Vain is taken
in the Hebrew. In the Third place, The Kings of the Earth, and the Rulers take
counsel together, i. e. The Neighbor Kings, and the Magistrates, and Great
Ones of the Realm fall into Combinations and Associations. And then Fourthly,
Nothing remains but open defection, the breach of all Covenants and Contracts,
and Sedition is heard in every man's mouth, as Verse 3. Let us break their Bonds
asunder, and cast away their Cords from us: Their Bonds, and their Cords, i. e.
both of the Lord, and of his Anointed, all Obligations both Humane and Divine
are Cancelled. By Bonds, may be understood the softer and gentler Ties of
Natural Love and Loyalty, which every Subject owes unto his Sovereign: by
Cords, the stronger Obligations of Oaths, those Sacramental Chains that bind
men like Iron Shackles and Fetters. But both these are broken, and for fear
they should be again united, cast quite from them. And why was all this? as the
Question is deservedly asked at Verse 1. with wonder and indignation: Why did
the Heathen rage? Why did the prople imagine a vain thing? Why did they take
Counsel together? David was just to his Allies abroad, and gracious to his
Subjects at home, God prosper'd him, and made him Victorious in all his
Enterprises. Why, Lord? To answer in the Words of another in a like Case,
Odiorum causae acriores, quia iniquiores, their hatred was the sharper and more
implacable, because it was the ^^juster; Innocence is abhorred by the Wicked,
more than Injury and Violence; The Religion and Piety of David was more
insupportable to his Enemies, than the Yoke of Tyranny and Oppression; and they
chose rather to bear the Iron Scepter of the Nations, or of a base Usurper,
than his holy and righteous Scepter. And this it was which made the
Establishment of David so difficult, because there was no Why, no Just Cause
for the Aversion of his Enemies; had there been a Reason, it might have been
removed; had there been a Wrong, there might have been a Reparation: but
Perverseness and Impiety only governed, and God utters himself, as if he had
broke through some great Obstruction in setting David on the Throne. Like one
that for a long time rolled a Stone against a Hill, which often returned upon
him; or Rowed against a strong Tide, which forced his Boat back, and when at
last by many a weary stretch and Strain of his Arms has got the better, sits
down, and reflects on what has past, congratulates his labor, and tells
himself what himself has done: Yet I have planted my Stone upon the Top of the
Hill; or, yet I have stemmed this Churlish Stream, and got my Boat ahead of
it. So God is pleased to speak in the Restoring of David, as if he had been
hard put to it, and groaned under the performance, and Gloried in having at
last carried it through, Yet have I set my King --

But perhaps some will say, Is there any thing difficult to the Almighty? Could
not he have crushed the Cockatrice in the Shell? Dashed the yet Infant-Plot
against the Stones? Scattered his Enemies in their first Imaginations? Why did
he suffer them to Combine, before he confounded them? Confederate and grow to
strength, before he cast them down, and had them in derision? as it is said,
ver. 4. Even for this very reason, That he might not spoil such his Scene of
Laughter, prevent the Glory of his Triumph, obscure the wise Dispensations of
his Providence, that David might see the whole Wonder of his Deliverance, and
his wicked Adversaries the whole Folly of their Enterprise. A wise General will
not presently give on the Charge upon an Enemy passing a Ford, till a
considerable Party have gained the Bank; that he may not only show his Courage
but his Conduct; and cut off the adverse Power as well as repulse it. Thus,
though God had it in his hands to dissipate and discourage the first Attempts
of his own and David's Opposers, he chose rather to let them proceed and
prosper to a degree, that he might not only obstruct their wickedness, but
defeat it; disturb the Conspiracy, but confound the Conspirators. And our
Blessed Lord practiced this piece of Policy, when he suffered the Devil by his
wicked Instruments, the Jews, to take away his Innocent Life, and lay him in
the Grave: For after Satan flattered himself that he had surpised his strong
Foe, he let him see he was surpised by him; that instead of receiving a
Captive, he had received a Conqueror within his Gates: one that sacked and
despoiled his Kingdom, dismantled his Forts, and razed his Strongholds. And
this was a performance worthy of that Triumphant Speech, O Death, where is thy
Sting! O Grave, where is thy Victory! A downright Defeat is not so renowned to
the Conqueror, or so grievous to the Conquered, as to turn his Stratagems upon
himself, and to overthrow him by his own Subtilty and Treachery, Again, to Mock
and Vex an Enemy, is a further degree of Revenge than to destroy him. When the
Pirates of Cilicia began to treat some Passengers of Italy with the cruelty
they used unto their other Prisoners, they cried out, They were Citizens of
Rome, at which the Pirates pretended to start, as awed by that formidable Name,
and commanded presently Gowns to be brought, and put upon their Backs, and
Shoes on their Feet; and then with a seeming lowly observance besought them, To
walk over the sides of the Ship, and be free; telling them by way of excuse for
their Violation of such Venerable Persons, When they met them next in that
Attire they should not be ignorant of their Quality; and with this derision
threw them into the Sea, when the unfortunate men refused to cast themselves.
And the Enemies of David were such, as God thought fit not only to destroy, but
also to mock and vex, as it is said Verse the 4th and 5th, The Lord had them in
derision -- And vexed them in his sore displeasure. But How, and after What
manner did he mock and vex them: By letting them a long time plot and
strengthen themselves, make a profuse expense of labor, money and blood, by
letting them persuade themselves they had prevailed, that David was utterly
excluded; and then after all, to show them the despised and Rejected Son of
Jesse set Gloriously on the Throne; their Machine of Usurped Government, made a
Pageant for his Triumph; all their endeavors, all their glorying, serve but
for this Occasion of God's glorying over them, Yet have I set my King upon my
holy Hill of Sion.

I have done with the Words, which have been twice already eminently fulfilled;
Once, as I have showed, in the Person of David. And a Second time, in the
Exaltation of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ into the Kingdom of Heaven,
after his Resurrection, and setting up his Spiritual Throne in the hearts of
men. So that I may seem to essay an Impious thing, to make a Third Application
to any Mortal King whatsoever. But while I shall not parallel or compare the
Sufferings and Exaltation of the Divine and Mystical King, but adore his
Footsteps; there will be no danger to show the Tracts and Lineaments that are
between the Deliverance and Establishment of David, and of our Gracious
Sovereign, for the awaking our Gratitude, and magnifying God's mercies showed
to this Nation this Day.

And to observe the Method I began with: For the same Reasons and Respects that
David is called Gods King in my Text, our King may pretend to the Title, before
all the present Kings of the Earth.

First, He was a King of God's particular and singular Advancing, and placing
on the Throne: though not called, like David, from being a poor Shepherd-Boy to
Rule a Kingdom, but descended of a long and glorious Race of Kings; yet
recalled from a forlorn exiled State, and a deposd Condition, to hold the
Scepter of his Royal Ancestors by a no less Divine Favor. So that whatever his
Title to the Crown was, we may truly say, Had he not been God's King, he had
not been King of this Land.

Secondly, David was not only called God's King, as we have showed, for his
Eminent Deliverance of him, but His Son. And whoever considers the many Risques
of our Sovereign's Life, the Prodigies both of his Dangers and Escapes, how God
snatched him out of the Battle, led him safe through the midst of his Enemies,
concealed him many days by a Divine Providence, after the manner the Ancients
feigned their Heroes were wrapped in a Cloud; and then, without the assistance of
Armies, by the same Invisible and Unresistable Hand, fixed him in his Throne:
must confess, we have not only reason to celebrate this Day, for his coming
into the World, and his coming to the Crown; for the Birth, I say, of his
Person, or the Birth of his Royal Dignity, but for his being Born God's King,
and God's Son, i. e. The King of his Preservation, and the Son of his Promotion.

Thirdly, As David was called God's King, because he was more pleased with him,
than with others; was the King of his liking, as well as of his Preserving and
Advancing: So the Wonderful Testimonies of God's Love to our Sovereign,
warrants, nay obliges us to believe, and revere him as God's King also in this
sense, as the King of his liking, and after his own heart. And whom God has
approved, let no man judge; whom he has Sealed, let no man dare to Censure; no
not in his thoughts. Princes then for the most part want Goodness, when the
People want Candor; and their defect of Virtue, is their Subjects defect of
Love and Loyalty. But if those were God's Kings, Kings of his liking, Kings
after his own heart, that set up the True Worship, and discountenanced the
False, that executed Justice and Judgment in the Land, then Malice it self must
confess, our King is God's King. David was renowned for that one Merciful
Speech upon his Return to his Kingdom, Shall there any man be put to death this
day in Israel? As if it had been a thing to be abominated, to show Severity,
when God had showed him such singular Grace. But how many Shimei's, how many
Railers, how many Cursers? ('it is but a small thing which I have said) how many
Capital Enemies, how many Betrayers, how many Covenanters against him, and
liars in wait for his Blood, did our David pardon upon his Return? 'Twas an
Observation of Old, -- regnabit sanguine multo
Ad regnum quisquis venit ab exilio;
The King that returns after Exile, will Reign for the Future in Blood and
Revenge: But our King contrariwise after his Exile, -- regnabat Sanguine parco,
Reigns at this day, as one Elected to a Kingdom, that had a Crown bestowed on
him, and not as one that had recovered his own. So that as the Virgins gave
David the pre-eminence to Saul in the Songs of Victory and Triumph, saying,
Saul has slain his thousands, and David his Ten thousands: We in the Songs of
Mercy and Clemency, may give our King the pre-eminence to David, and say, As
David pardoned one single Detractor, our Gracious Sovereign gave life, and
opportunity of Repentance to thousands of Traitors and Murderers, and was
truly in this, Gods King, and not only a King of his liking, but a King that is
like him, resembling him in one of his Noblest Attributes, that of his Mercy.
Those to whom Princes entrust the care of their Souls, ought to be faithful to
them; and not only speak pleasing things, but true; to imitate good Surgeons,
who not always use Oils and Lenitives, but if need be, Lancets and Corrosives.
But then let no man at a distance surmise Evil of his Prince, lest while he
denies him to be Gods King, he sets to his hand to make him no King at all; and
while he strips him of his Righteousness, strips him also of his Royal Dignity.
I speak not to the Kings Enemies, but to his severer Friends, if he have any:
The Sinister Thoughts and Censures of the Subject are often Ominous and Fatal
to a Prince, whereas their good Opinions are prophetic, and presage the
Virtue, they ascribe; and make him the Person, they proclaim him. St Paul says,
Charity believes all things, hops all things, endures all things, (i. e.)
those who have this Grace, are easily induced to believe the good of another,
which they do not know; to hope that, which they do not believe; and to suffer,
even when they can neither believe, nor hope. And if any man be not able to
walk upon this profound Sea of Charity, why does he, like Peter, rashly and
unbidden cast himself into it? Why does he presumptuously Intrude into his
Masters company? Who supported by a Divine Power, shall stride Majestically
over the Waves, and march through the storm in safety; while the other
disordered by every Gust, and amazed at every Billow, poorly sinks in the
danger his Fancy only framed. Will not such an one another day (like him in the
Parable that wanted a Wedding Garment) be speechless? (i. e.) have nothing to
say for himself, when he sees his Prince as far above him in Glory, as he was
in his Station in this life? And when it is objected to him, as 'twas to Peter,
O thou of little faith, wherefore did thou doubt? But to proceed. God set
David on his holy hill of Sion.

Not to say, that instead of one Fort of Sion, God has guarded our King with
many strongholds and Castles, or yet to boast the Advantages of an Island
above a Hill, which is not only to be ascended before it can be assaulted, but
to be Sailed to before it can be approached, and fought for before it can be
Sailed to; being defended by moveable Bulwarks, stout Ships, which must be
subdued before the Inhabitants can be grappl'd with upon equal terms: But to
come to the Point, in which the chiefest strength of Sion consisted, in that it
was a Moral and Spiritual Fortification, a holy hill, and God's hill. If the
Church of Christ be not inferior to the Old Tabernacle, the Gospel to the Law,
the substance to the shadow; when God not only set our King upon his Throne,
but restored the True Religion, and placed him within the Protection of it, he
set him upon as Holy, and consequently upon as strong a Hill as he set David;
and we may rest assured, he delights as much to dwell here, and that it is as
desperate an Enterprise to assault this his Habitation, as 'twas to assault
Sion. But alas some will say with a deep sigh! Would we found these things to
be so! But what for a long time has been more infirm and unstable than the
Condition of this Nation? Not only ready to be broken in pieces by any
Impression of an Enemy, but even to dissolve and fall asunder of it self; and
the supports of Religion have been as weak, as those of the Arm of Flesh.

To which I answer, This has not happened from the Weakness of the Divine
Assistances which God has given us, but from our neglect and contempt of them.
Religion does not guard men like a Palladium or Charm, preserve those who have
the luck only to wear it, and be possessed of it, but those who practice it,
and live according to its Precepts; they are not Sextons and Sacrists that are
chiefly protected by Heaven, those that keep Divine things under Lock and Key,
but that treasure them up in a faithful heart. When David by sin dishonored
God, and defamed Religion, his fourfold Fortification little profited him, but
that security which the power of the Heathen, united with the disaffection of
his Subjects, could not shake, his rebellious Son alone drove him from; and he
fled ingloriously, and left his impregnable Sion, and all the Pledges of Gods
favor and residence with him, behind him: confessing, that when he had
violated their Sanctity, he had invalidated also their Power of Protecting; and
though he possessed still the Curtains of the Tabernacle, the Deity was fled
from him. And little will it profit us, to have the Gospel among us, nay, to
have it more purely Preached than to any other People under the Sun, if we are
the worst Auditors of it of any other People under the Sun; to have the
Sacraments more rightly administered, if we are the wickedst Receivers of them.
It Is the holy Use of holy Ordinances that makes them a guard and defense.
Righteousness, as it is the Honor of the Soul, so it is the best Armor of the
Body; and does not only, as the Psalmist says, Bring peace at the last, but as
the Apostle teaches, safety at present, For who is he that shall harm you, says
he, if you follow that which is good? 'Twas the Custom of the Ancient Heathen,
when they Besieged a City, in the first place to endeavor to entice out the
Guardian Deity, by alleging the Injustice of the Inhabitants, and inviting it
to reside with a more holy People, -- ut habeat te Vrbs melior acceptiorque.
Holding it impossible to prevail against the Outworks, when this Divine Inward
strength stood firm. The Sanctity of a Christian is this little retired Deity
in the Chapel, which if it cannot be charmed or enticed out by Temptation, the
Malice of Earth and Hell cannot prejudice the Person in whom it dwells. The
Prophet Eliah was called, The Chariots and Horsemen of Israel, but much more
deservedly may Justice, Piety, and Sanctity, be styled, The Chariots and
Horsemen of a Kingdom. And when God, by the Restoration of his Majesty, and
true Religion, gave us the Opportunity of exercising all Virtues Civil and
Divine, he put it also into our hands to be as safe and well fortified as we
cared or desired to be, he made our Condition as secure as a Mortal condition
could be made: and if our Mountain be turned into a Wheel, our Rock into a
Rolling-stone, it is our sins that have unfixt and loosened its Roots; and while
we are led by Vanity, what wonder is it that the Kingdom fluctuates after the
manner of the Seas that surround it?

If we consider, Lastly, how great and difficult the work was, to set the
Kingdom again upon its Basis, after it was so utterly subverted; to raise up
the Truth and Splendour of the Church so long a time deformed and Oppressed by
Schism and Sacrilege, we may allow God also as high, nay, a higher cause of
Glorying in our behalf, than for establishing the Church and State of Israel.
But the time suffers me not to insist on this particular, neither is it very
necessary to do it, we having all here been Witnesses and Partakers of what was
passed, and this will be the properer Task of another Age. Instead therefore of
dressing up a Triumph for God, into which also our own Vanity or Spleen may be
apt to insinuate it self, I shall employ the few words yet allowed me to speak,
to excite our Thanks for these things.

And if the Benefits we have received are such as are worthy of God's Glorying,
undoubtedly they are Worthy of our highest acknowledgments, I say, of Ours, in
the most General and Universal comprehension both of Prince and People; not of
the Prince alone, as some are willing to reckon the Benefits his Majesty has
received, not to revere him the more for being so much in God's Favor, but to
make him more indebted to God than themselves: as if, because this is called
the King's Day, all the Mercies of it, and all the Thanks for them were to be
put upon his account. Undoubtedly the Kings Obligations to Heaven are infinite;
but was he only restored this Day to his Crown and Country? Or were not all we
likewise re-call'd from the same Banishment, or from Prisons and
Sequestrations, Dungeons, and Gibbets at home, to enjoy our Lives and
Liberties, our Religion and Estates? Has all the delicious Fare of the Land
been served to the Kings Table? All the Gold Lace been worn upon his Back? Nay,
but I behold many at this instant standing like Kings in the presence of the
King: and it is to be complained of, that the Enjoyments of many Out vie his in
their proportion. Is there then no Thanks of our Own due to God? We have this
Obligation even more than the King has, that we have him, that we enjoy this
Principle of Union, this Bond of Peace, this Foundation of Security and
Prosperity. O let us not forget in the loud Joys, and Gaiety, and Festivity of
this Day, the days of Sadness and Silence, of Scarcity and Doubtfulness of
Soul, when we had no King; when a Villain sat on the Throne, when our Hatred
and Aversion ruled over us; the Scourge of Loyalty, and the Oppressor of
Religion and Justice. Let us not forget the Time, when to be Noble, was to be
Guilty; and to be Loyal, an Enemy to the State: Again, when to be a Mechanic,
made room for the Person in the Places of Honor; and a Fanatic, qualified him
for the highest Charges and Honors, and our Great Ones bowed down to these, or
bowed under the saddest Misery.

The remembrance of these things will make us readily acknowledge the Mercies
of this Day to have been General to us all; and not only heighten, but
sanctify our Joy; make the Feast resound with Thanksgiving and Praises of God,
and not wholly to be spent in loose and confused Mirth, Riot, and Excess; it
will preserve us from falling into that Fatal Ingratitude which accompanies
Prosperity, and which God, in the People of Israel, warns all Nations of, and
yet which all more or less fall into, The forgetfulness of the Arm that
delivered them, and the Goodness that made them Great. And in the midst of our
Felicity, we shall remember our Duty; and our Ease shall not corrupt our
Manners; nor our Prosperity and Affluence, be snares to us. And God will repeat
and iterate his glorying, we have heard this Day, not only in the Person of our
King, but of his Posterity to all Ages, even till all Kingdoms are swallowed up
in the Kingdom of Heaven, Yet have I set my King upon my holy hill of Sion.
Which God of the riches of his Mercy grant, to whom be ascribed all Honor,
Glory, and Thanksgiving this day forth, and for evermore. Amen.

The Eighth Sermon.
JOHN xvi.8. And when he is come, he will reprove the World of Sin, of
Righteousness, and of Judgment.


GOD, who at sundry times, and in diverse manners, says the Apostle, spoke in
times past unto the Fathers by the Prophets, has in these last days spoken
unto us by his Son, etc. as if this were his ultimus conatus, the last and
utmost Effort or Endeavor of his Power and Goodness to reduce the Sinful and
Unbelieving World. But by miserable Event it appeared, that this Means proved
as uneffectual as the former; that the World did unto Christ, as they had done
unto the Prophets before him; slew the Son, as they had slain the Servants. Yet
notwithstanding, the unfathomable Depths and Riches of the Divine Goodness gave
not over here, where Reason would have given over; but showed it self still
Infinite, where Humane Imagination was Finite; bowed the Heavens again, and
sent down the third Person in the Trinity, the Holy Ghost. Pertinacia nostra
exhausit Coelum, the Obstinacy of Men even drained and exhausted Heaven; Verbum
Caro, the Word made Flesh was not sufficient to master this Obstinacy, but it
must be Verbum Spiritus too, the Spirit must become a Word, i. e. be sent from
Heaven to be a Word in the Mouth of the Apostles to reprove, or as the Margent
has it [ to convince] the World of Sin. And when he is come, he will reprove
[or convince] the World of Sin, of Righteousness, and of Judgment.

To convince, is to force the Understanding of the Opposer by strength of
Argument to acknowledge the Truth that is contended for. And to reprove or
rebuke is again but a Moral Conviction of Sin in a person.

In the Words I shall consider these two things.

I. The Matter of the Conviction, which the Spirit shall bring the World to an
Acknowledgment of, namely, of Sin, of Righteousness, and of Judgment.

II. The Manner how he shall bring the World to this Acknowledgment, viz. by
convincing it by irrefragable Arguments. I begin with the Matter of the
Conviction, Sin, R^ghteousness, and Judgment.

And First, He shall convince the World of Sin.
What Sin it is, which is meant here, that the Spirit shall convince the World
of, is doubtful. It may well be thought to be the Sin of Cruelty, the perverse
and barbarous Inhumanity the Jews showed, when they demanded a Murderer to be
released unto them, and killed the Just One. And we read in Effect, Acts 2.36.
that it was one of the first Works of the Spirit after his coming, to bring
three thousand Souls to confess this Sin, and show their Compunction for it:
for after St Peter had laid before them how by wicked hands they had crucified
and slain the Lord of Life, they were pricked to the heart, and said, Men and
Brethren, what shall we do? i. e. to be delivered from the Sin of Murder or
Cruelty.

But though this Interpretation be plausible, it agrees not with the Reason
Christ himself gives in the Verse immediately following my Text, why the Holy
Ghost should convince the World of Sin. Of Sin, says he, because they believe
not on me. It should seem then, it was the Sin of Unbelief that he came to
reprove or convince the World of. And this is the Opinion of many on the place.
The truth is, Infidelity is a Sin highly injurious to the Deity, it makes God a
Liar, as St John says, He that believes not God, has made him a Liar. It
makes him impotent and ignorant, How should God perceive, says the Wicked,
Psalm. 73.11. is there knowledge in the most High? And the faithless Israelites,
Can God prepare a Table in the Wilderness? He smote the stony Rock indeed, that
the Water gushed out; but can he give Bread also, and provide Flesh for his
People? Nay, it fancies him also Wicked, as those words spoken in the Person of
God, Psalm. 50. do show. Thou thoughtest I was altogether such an one as thy
self. And in the last place it concludes him to be Nothing at all. The fool
has said in his heart, There is no God. Infidelity first entertains Mean
thoughts of God, doubts of his Attributes, and afterward of his very Being.
Infidelity moved God to send upon the Israelites in the Wilderness almost as
many and grievous Plagues, as he had sent upon the Egyptians. And many
Christian Professors are so possessed against this Sin, that they have not
doubted to aver, That as there is no Virtue that justifies but Faith, so there
is no Sin that condemns but Infidelity. And that the Jews were highly guilty of
this Sin in reference to Christ, there is no question: for though he had
wrought so many Miracles among them, as the Evangelist says, they believed not
on him. They might have known who he was, if they had not been wilfully blind,
by the Rule given them by Moses, Deuteronomy. 18.12. to discern a True Prophet from a
False; and again at the 18th ver. to distinguish the Messiah from other Common
Prophets: yet blinded with Pride, Malice, Envy, and the like, the Great Council
it self of the Sanhedrim condemned the Lord of Life for an Impostor, and
crucified him; affirmed, That by a Confederacy with the Devil he cast out
Devils. So that this their Unbelief, and perverse Proceeding, might be a very
just Cause of the Descent of the third Person in the Trinity to vindicate the
Injury and Outrage done to the second; after a Judicial Manner to arraign and
convince the World of Sin, i. e. of Infidelity and Injustice to the Son of God.

But though there was Infidelity in the Case, I conceive they do exactliest hit
the meaning of the place, who make not our Lord's Words point so much at any
particular determinate Sin after his Coming, as at the General Sin, wherein all
the World lay before his Coming, viz. the Sin of Adam, in which both Jew and
Gentile were concluded: and from which, it is said, He that believes, and is
baptized, shall be saved; but he that believes not, shall be damned. Now the
Holy Ghost, when he came into the World to bear Testimony to all that Christ
did, reproved and convinced it (that is, all Unbelievers) that they lay still
under the Old Condemnation of the First Man, seeing they embraced not the Means
of Grace and Pardon offered by Christ in the Gospel: nay, and that their
Infidelity added a new and worse Guilt to the former they lay under, the Guilt
of refusing Offered Redemption; which would make their Condemnation yet
heavier: For though Hell be the ultimum Supplicium, the utmost Punishment the
Divine Vengeance can inflict; yet as there are Degrees of Sins, so there are
Degrees of Torment; and, as it is said, Hell shall be a second time heated for
those that leave their first Station: so we may say, it shall be a second time
heated for those that refuse the Salvation offered by Christ.

The second Particular the Spirit shall convince the World of, is of
Righteousness. But how must this be understood? Shall he convince the World of
Sin and of Righteousness both? Yes, de Peccato proprio, and Justitia aliena, as
St Augustine distinguishes, of its Own Wickedness, and of an Others
Righteousness; the Spirit shall convince the World that it is sinful, and that
Christ was Righteous. And thus our Lord afterward interprets his own Words, He
will convince the World of Wickedness, because I go to my Father. The World
spared not, while Christ was on Earth, to spend their rash Judgments of him, He
is a Good Man; say some: Nay, say others, but he deceives the People. Others
again, He is a Samaritan, and has a Devil, and the like. But his going to the
Father, stopped the Mouth of all Slander: For as this was an approved Maxim,
which was uttered by the Man that was born Blind, God hears not Sinners: So
this was a Truth likely to find a more Easy and General Admittance, God
translateth not Sinners miraculously and visibly to Heaven. Enoch and Elias
were thus translated; but it is testified of the first, That he pleased God, and
of the last, That his Zeal for God's Glory exceeded. Christ therefore being
translated to Heaven, it was an irrefragable Proof of his Righteousness. But
how did the Holy Ghost convince this? Why, by his very coming into the World,
had he born no other Testimony: For Christ had said in the Verse before my
Text, If I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you; but if I depart,
I will send him unto you. The Descending of the Holy Ghost was the Consequent
of Christ's Ascending.

But then the Righteousness, which the Spirit shall here convince the World of,
must be understood in a greater Latitude, than only of the Inherent
Righteousness in Christ's Person; it comprehends also the Transient
Righteousness that past from him to others: As St John says in another place,
That he was not only a Glorious Light in himself, but the Light of the World,
and the Light of Men. A Righteousness of greater Concern and Importance, than
his Inherent Righteousness: for that made his Person only Illustrious, but this
brought Utility and Benefit to Mankind; and as the first spoke him the Son of
God, the last also the Savior of the World. Christ's Righteousness is
therefore here to be understood Causative, that he was the Author or Cause of
Righteousness; not only that he was Righteous, but Righteousness unto others;
and that two Ways. First, In respect of his Doctrine, that was Righteousness,
the very Rule and Standard of it, the perfect Will of God able to conform us to
his Likeness, and the World rejected it, only because their Deeds were Evil.
And this the Holy Ghost, when he came, convinced the World of, viz. of the
Desperateness of its Condition, that it had refused the True Light, and for no
other reason than for that which was named, Because their Deeds were Evil, and
they hated to be reformed. Secondly, Christ was Righteousness in respect of the
Justification of the World, as he was Justitia nostra, the Lord our
Righteousness, as the Prophets had foretold. And indeed this was the Chief
Office and Business of the Holy Ghost at his coming, to convince Men, That
there was no other Name under Heaven by which they could be saved, but only by
that Name: That neither the Contemplation of things Divine, together with the
Practice of Moral Virtues, which was the Gentiles Way; nor the Plea of being
Circumcised, and descended from such and such Parents, which was the Jewish
Way, availed any thing toward the obtaining of Justification, without the
laying hold of Christ's Righteousness.

The third Particular the Spirit shall convince the World of, is of Judgment.
St Bernard understood the Words Actively, viz. That the Spirit shall convince
the World of its Perverse Judgment of Christ, and the other things appertaining
to God. He shall convince the World, says he, de Peccato quod dissimulat, de
Justitia quod non ordinat, de Judicio quod usurpat, of the Sin which they now
cloak or dissemble, of the Righteousness which they direct not aright, and of
the Judgment they unduly exercise. But the 11th Verse clearly opposes this
Interpretation, and shows that the Judgment spoken of, is not meant of the
World Actively, which the World had made, but Passively, which shall be made or
passed upon the World. Now the World, or Unbelieving Part of it, are said to be
convinced by the Judgment that should come upon them in this, That the Prince
of the World is cast out. For he that has Mastered the Prince, broken the
Power of his Kingdom, and holds him in Vassalage, may be accounted to have
mastered and subdued his People also: And the Prince of the World is said to be
thus Judged two Ways.

First, By spoiling him of his Strength: Having spoiled Principalities and
Powers, he made a show of them openly, triumphing over them in it, Coloss.
2.15. What is a Prince when he is stripped of his Power? When his Counsels and
Policies are defeated or detected, his Officers arrested, his Prisons broke
open, his Fortresses ruined and dismantled, his Harness and Ammunition of War
seized, and the like? And thus Satan was divested and unthroned by Christ, and
showed openly to be judged and subdued after the Coming of the Holy Ghost. Sin,
his strong Yoke, by which he held Mankind in Bondage and Slavery, was broken;
Guilt, the Plea of his Dominion and Tyranny over them, taken away by
Satisfaction made for it; Temptation, his great Stratagem, made weak and
invalid by Grace; Death, his Sergeant himself, mortified; the Grave, his
Prison, set open, and made only a Dormitory and harmless Through-fare to Life.
These things were his first Judgment, before the great and final Day, when the
Staff of his Authority was, as 'twere, broken over his head, and no Power left
him, but what those that love Servitude better than Freedom; chose their own
Destruction before the Salvation purchased for them, voluntarily give him over
themselves. These things, I say, did evince the Fall of Satan as manifestly, as
the train of Light, which follows that which the People call a Falling Star,
evinces the descent of that Meteor; and which possibly our Lord alluded to,
when he said, I beheld Satan, as Lightning, fall from Heaven.

But then, Secondly, Satan is judged Personally: for though his Sentence of
Condemnation be yet, as I may say, but Ambulatory, in regard of the Execution,
yet it is Final and Peremptory in regard of the Determination. He that has
forfeited his Life to the Law, and is reserved in Chains in expectation of the
next Assize; or waits only donec sternuntur Subsellia, till the Judge puts on
his Robes, and the Court sits, differs but little from him, that has actually
received his Doom. And such is Satan's Condition since the Coming of Christ and
the Holy Ghost, Datur mora parvula, some little stay there is, till the Figure
of this World be changed, and then he goes for ever to his Proper Place. And
let this suffice to be said of the Matter which the Spirit shall reprove or
convince the World of: namely, of Sin, of Righteousness, and of Judgment. I
come in the next place to show the Manner, how the Spirit did convince the
World.

The Manner of the Conviction.
The word in the Original (...), signifies, as was said, either to Reprove or
to Convince; to convince the Understanding of an Error, or to reprove the Will
of a Crime. And the Holy Ghost performed both these parts at his Coming.

First, He convinced men's Understandings, that they were in Sin; under the
Guilt contracted by the first Man, and that Belief in Christ, (who was the Seed
of the Woman that was to bruise the Serpents head, and who had power to cast
out the Prince of the World, that he should no more abuse the Nations) was the
only Way to get out of that and all other Sins, and to obtain Justification.
And this was de facto brought to pass, in so great a Part of the World's being
converted after the Coming of the Holy Ghost, and being content to go down into
the Laver of Regeneration, the Waters of Baptism, to cleanse away their Sins:
and the Church of Christ in those days might have been compared, as Solomon
compared the Jewish to a Flock of Sheep newly come up from washing. For all
these renounced the Prince of this World, and acknowledged Jesus Christ to be
the only Savior: and those that made use of and improved the Grace given them
in Baptism, found the Devil a weak and impotent Prince, that might easily be
resisted and foiled; that had no Power but what was merely precarious and
delusive, such as might persuade or deceive men into Sin, but could not compel
them.

But then as the Holy Ghost wrought this Conviction on the Unbelieving World,
by what Means did he work it? There are two Ways of convincing Men's Judgments,
The one by Argumentation, and necessary Consequence on certain Premises
granted; The other by sensible and ocular Demonstration: And though the last
Way of these, by Aristotle and the Masters of Reason, be counted (...),
unartificial and less Noble, yet in Assurance it goes beyond all manner of
Reasoning. And this was the Way the Holy Ghost took to Convince the Gainsaying
World of the Salvation preached by Christ: Our Lord himself also points at this
Way, Joh. 15.26. where he says to his Disciples, When the Comforter is come,
the Spirit of Truth, he shall testify of me, and ye also shall bear Witness.
Ye also shall bear Witness] was not unnecessarily added: for a Spirit has no
Voice of its own, no more than it has Flesh and Bones: But the Apostles were
the Spirit's Agents, their Sermons were its Voice, and their Hands its Organs
by which it wrought its Miracles: the Epistles of St Paul, and of the rest of
the Apostles, we may say, were the Rhetoric, but the Acts of the Apostles were
the Logic of the Holy Ghost. The truth is, whatever other Proofs were brought
for the Confirmation of Christian Religion, Miracles were the Strength of it,
the Unresistible Engines that bore down all Infidelity before them: and St
Paul, Heb. 2.3. shows the Unexcusableness of not yielding to this Conviction.
How shall we escape, says he, if we neglect so Great Salvation, which at the
first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that
heard it, God also bearing them Witness with Signs and Wonders, and with diverse
Miracles and Gifts of the Holy Ghost?

But then here some will say, That this Conviction, by the Miraculous
Operations of the Holy Ghost, was indeed a Powerful Conviction to those that
were Witnesses of them, and saw these things done: but what do they signify to
us, upon whom the Ends of the World are come, and saw them not? To answer this
Objection at large, would be in Effect to engage in a Discourse of the whole
Subject of the Truth of Christian Religion, or the Demonstration Evangelical,
of which Eusebius, the first Christian Historian after the Apostles, now
extant, wrote seven Books: I shall therefore content my self, in the short time
that remains to me, to present you, by way of Answer, only with one
Consideration, but it is a Consideration that had great force with St Augustine,
and it is this; The very Conversion of the World is the highest Argument
imaginable, that it was converted by the Miraculous Power of the Holy Ghost.
For that Man, says the Father, that can conceive the World should relinquish
their long doted on Religion, received from their Ancestors with so much
Veneration, and a Superstitious Conceit, that they had been Prosperous under
it, a Religion so well suited to their Carnal Affections; and receive in
Exchange of it a New Religion, derived from so despicable and infamous an
Author, as a Mean Man crucified by his own Nation, and the very Principles of
which were so harsh to Flesh and Blood, and contrary to all worldly Glory and
Interest; That Man, says St Augustine, that can conceive this could be done
without Miracle, is himself a greater Miracle, than those he thinks so hard to
be believed. There were among the Roman Fencers of old one sort, that with a
Net and Trident maintained Combat against their Opposers armed with a Sword
and Helmet, and were so dextrous as to entangle and vanquish their Adversaries
with these Uncouth Weapons. The Apostles of Christ, those Fishers of Men, may
be likened to these Retiarii, these Fencers with Nets, who with the
Metaphorical Nooses and Meaches of preaching, seconded by the Power of
Miracles, ensnared and captivated to the Gospel the armed, potent, proud,
Idolatrous, learned, and vicious World! And this was the Way the Spirit took at
his Coming, if we interpret (...) to Convince the Understanding of the World of
its Errors.

But if we take it in the other Sense, redarguet Mundum, he shall Reprove the
World for its Sins, it imports these two things. That the Spirit shall shame
the World, And condemn it.

First, That it shall reproach and shame the World, for loving Darkness more
than Light; Death, than Life; for lying under Wickedness and Guilt, when the
Means of becoming Innocent was offered them; for choosing things Base and
Degenerate, before things Noble and Praiseworthy; things Vicious and
accompanied with Danger, rather than things Virtuous, though accompanied with
Glory and Felicity; in a word, for choosing rather to perish in their Sins and
Ignorance, than to be Instructed, reformed, and saved. And as the Spirit shall
shame the World for so brutish and sottish a Choice, so, Secondly, it shall
Condemn it. Shame and Confusion of Face is but the beginning of the Misery of
Sinners, the consequent of the Discovery of their Wickedness, not the
Punishment of it. What the Wiseman says shall be the Portion of those that love
Danger, they shall perish in it: is true also of those that love Darkness more
than Light; and the ways of Death, than the ways of Life; that they shall prove
what the Riddle of Eternal Death is, of a Death that never dies, and dwell in
Eternal Night and Darkness. And thus that Spirit, which is the Spirit of Love
and Gentleness, which descended in the Similitude of a Creature that has no
Gall nor Anger, and whose Office it is to save, to comfort, and support, shall
exercise a Part so contrary to its Name and Nature, as to Condemn, destroy, and
confound; instead of showing it self the Spirit of Lenity and Kindness, show it
self the Spirit of Indignation and Fury, a Froward, Chiding, and Reproaching
Spirit. O ye stiff-necked and uncircumcised in Heart and Ears! says the Holy
Ghost by the mouth of St Stephen, which of the Prophets have not your Fathers
persecuted? and they have slain them which showed before of the coming of the
Just One, of whom ye have been now the Betrayers and Murderers. Stephen who
dyed the Example of Meekness, the Miracle of Patience and Charity, inspired by
the same Divine Spirit, lived a sharp Reprover and severe Condemner of their
Hardness of Heart and Unbelief.

And now, Beloved, to make some Application of what has been said: Are the
things we have heard this day remote and unconcerning Stories? Tales only of
the Apostles Times, and Events at the first preaching of the Gospel? Or is it
not still the Business of the Spirit to Convince the World of Sin, of
Righteousness, and of Judgment? To rebuke and reprove it for the little or ill
Use it has made of the Unvaluable Benefits offered it by Christ? To Judge and
Condemn it for preferring the Ways of Death and Destruction, before those of
Life and Salvation; even rejecting and crucifying the Lord of Glory a second
time by their Sins? It Is true, the Extraordinary Miraculous Operations of the
Holy Ghost are ceased; but his Ordinary, his Inward Reproofs and Convictions,
by the Outward preaching of the Word; his converting, sanctifying, and
justifying of some, and final Condemnation, and sealing up of others in their
Impenitence, still remain. Christ's Work of our Salvation lasted but a while,
and had its Period on the Cross; but the Spirit of Christ, which came after
him, had no Period, no Hitherto of his working, but his Operations continue to
the End of the World. And it is wonderful to consider, That after so many
Unwearied and powerful Endeavors of the Spirit for sixteen hundred Years, that
so much gross Infidelity and so many scandalous Impieties are still in the
World: That the Unjust and Unmerciful are Unjust and Unmerciful still, the
Voluptuous and Incontinent are voluptuous and incontinent still, the Profane
and Atheistical are profane and atheistical still, the Seditious and
Disobedient to Government persist to be so still: as if the World were grown
too Old to blush or to learn: and what was said in Praise of our Lords
Constancy and Resolution in Suffering, That he Despised the Shame, were
Commendable also in the Effrontery and Impudence of the World in its Sins, That
it despises all Shame. St Augustine says, That in his Young Unconverted days he
boasted of many Sins, which he had never committed, ne viderer abjectior, quo
innocentior, lest I should have appeared Abject and poor Spirited, if I had
been known to be Innocent. And too many there are in this Age, that count the
Vices of the Time the Gallantries of it; and are as much abasht to come behind
in any Lewdness in Vogue, as to be late in the Fashion.

And when things stand thus, that those that have given their Names to Christ
in Baptism are more profligate Sinners, than Turks and Infidels; may not
Preachers be allowed to say, The World is not yet Converted, the Holy Ghost has
not perfected his Work? Good God! what a Change, what a Bustle, as I may say,
did the Spirit make at his first Coming? Such as is still Wonderful to
Posterity to hear or read! How many thousands were Converted by one Sermon? How
many Nations were made Proselytes by unfolding but some one Divine Truth? Rich
men sold their Lands, the Learned in Curious Arts their Books, and laid the
Money at the Apostles Feet; Soldiers surrendered their Swords, Philosophers
their Reason, Kings their Scepters, upon the Sight of a single Miracle; and,
which was more than all the rest, they parted with their habitual Lusts, their
gainful delightful Corruptions, as allowable and current generally in those
days, as the Coin among them, and made an entire Oblation of them to the
Gospel. But now the Spirit of God, by all the industrious and laborious
Endeavors of his Servants, can hardly in many Months, in many Years, win some
one Person from a Gainless Tasteless Evil Custom only, as vain Swearing, Lying,
malicious Censuring, and the like.

And all that Men have to say in their Defense for this is, That they have not
such Divine Teachers, nor do see the Miracles spoken of heretofore. Neither, as
we may reply, do they need these. It was necessary to remove the Jewish Law,
which was given by the Ministry of Angels, by a no less Glorious Ministration;
to extirpate the long-rooted Superstition and Idolatry of the Heathens, by
Divine and Supernatural Convictions: But do those that have been bred and
trained up in the Christian Religion, need an Apostle or Supernatural Teacher
to tell them, They should not steal? Signs and Wonders from Heaven to inform
them, They ought not to be Drunk, to commit Adultery, to be Schismatics or
Traitors? If their Darkness be so great, it is not that God has not afforded
them sufficient Light, but they wilfully shut their Eyes against it, or have
Extinguished it, loving the Ways of Sin, more than the Ways of Righteousness:
and it is not for such as these, proudly to exact Miracles again to enlighten
them. God expects from the World the Returns of a holy Faith and Obedience for
the innumerable Miracles of his Power, Wisdom and Goodness already showed; and
if obstinate and obdurate Sinners ask for more Signs and Wonders, they are to
be answered, as our Lord answered the Jews upon the like perverse Demand, That
no Sign shall be given them, but that of the Prophet Jonas, i. e. those that
are already past, and not regarded by them.

The Holy Spirit with great Benignity and Long-suffering endeavors to reclaim
Lapsed Sinners, gives them his preventing and assisting Grace; prompts them
with Good Thoughts, and if they make use of these, actuates their Repentance,
strengthens them to improve and increase in Righteousness, and the like: But if
they despise these Favors, stand upon Terms, and expect Miracles; will be
converted at no Cheaper Rate, than the Holy Ghost's showing himself in that
Outward astonishing Manner, as he did at the first Pentecost; they will sooner
provoke him to exercise his last Dreadful Act, which is to Seal up obstinate
Sinners in the Hardness of their Heart, than win him to prostitute his Divine
Power to their wicked Fancies; urge him to pronounce to them, what he does to
the like Uncorrigible Sinners, Rev. 22.11. He that is unjust, let him be unjust
still; and he that is filthy, let him be filthy still; i. e. the Time of Grace
being forfeited by them, he will give them up to their own ways, and certain
Destruction. Those therefore that thus Exalt themselves like Lucifer, let them
take heed (while it is yet allowed them so to do) that they fall not also like
him into the same Abyss of Eternal Misery; consider that it becomes not those
that have been Rebels to Heaven, to article and capitulate for the Manner of
their Pardon and Reception into Favor; to demand such Conditions and
Privileges as the Greatest Saints presume not to beg, viz. to stipulate for
Miracles, when Pardon is too high a Grace; as if Salvation was not their aim,
but to triumph in the Contempt of God, and the breach of his Laws. The Prodigal
Son, when he had spent his Portion in riotous Courses among Harlots, did not
send impudently to his Father to supply him with more Considerable Sums, upon
the consideration that what he had received of him was Small and Contemptible:
but confessed his Miscarriage, that he had wasted in Lewdness and Dissoluteness
a Liberal Patrimony, and was not worthy to be counted the Son of so Good a
Father; that to be as one of his hired Servants, was above his desert: thus as
his Crimes were heinous, his Thoughts of himself were lowly and mean; as his
Name was infamous, his Person squalid, his Condition indigent and vagabund, his
Deportment and Requests were stamped with the profoundest Humility and
Submission. And this being not a History of one that had spent a Portion in
Money, but a Parable of such as have wasted the Stock of Grace given them by
God, upbraids those that are arrogant and pufft up in the like Circumstance;
teaches them that it is their part, to put their Mouths in the Dust, and to
abhor themselves, to repent in Sackcloth and Ashes, and to catch greedily and
thankfully at the least Glimpse of Pardon, even upon the hardest Terms: and
that this is the only Course to turn their Rags into Rich Robes and Gold Rings;
their Husks into a Fatted Calf; their accursed Condition, without a Figure,
into a Blessed and Heavenly.

The Ninth Sermon.
MARK vii.37. -- He has done all things well: he makes both the Deaf to hear,
and the Dumb to speak.


OUR Lord had cured a man that was born deaf and dumb, by pronouncing the word
Ephata, or be opened, and given him and the Standers-by a Charge not to make
known the Miracle: but straight, (as if the Ephata spoken to one, had been to
many thousands; the untying the Dumb man's tongue had been the letting loose of
the whole Multitudes) all the People began to spread and divulge the Fact; and
whereas he forbad them to whisper it, they proclaimed it; whereas he restrained
them the Use of the Tongue, they employed, as I may say, the Trumpet; and he
that could make the Deaf to hear, and the Dumb to speak, could not make the
Multitude hold their peace. Neither does it appear that they were faulty, but
grateful, in what they did; perverse or refractory, but faithful and just.
There were some Kind of Miracles, or rather some Conjunctures of Time in which
our Lord wrought his Miracles, that he thought fit to suppress the Knowledge of
them; not that they were less Glorious, or likely to prove less Edifying, but
contrariwise too Edifying and too Glorious, and would have disclosed his Divine
Nature too early and abruptly to the World, before his Counsels permitted it.
But the People (who supposed the reason of his concealing his Miracles
proceeded only from a Modesty that fled public Applause after the performing
Noble Actions) out of an Honest Disobedience, as I may say, refused to keep the
Silence he enjoined them: For after he had done such Wonderful things, and no
less Good and Beneficial, than Great and astonishing, they could not, they
would not consent they should be smothered; that that which was Praiseworthy,
should go away without Praise; that that which deserved so well of the World,
should not be known to the World; and they even contested with our Lord in this
matter, as it is said ver. 36. By how much the more he charged them to keep
Silence, by so much the more a great deal they published it. It Is reported that
Virgil condemned his incomparable Poems to the fire, and that this endeared
them the more to Posterity; men setting a Value on them afterward, not only
because they were Excellent, but because they were Preserved. And the People in
like manner here set a higher Rate on those Miracles our Lord sought to
Conceal, because he sought to Conceal them; more industriously endeavored to
make them Illustrious, because they were condemned to Obscurity and Oblivion;
to pay them their due Honor, because it was denied them. When the Pharisees
out of Envy urged our Lord to rebuke his Disciples and the Multitude for crying
Hosanna before him, he said unto them, If these should hold their peace, the
Stones would cry out: And if the People had not done him the Right they did,
the Stones would have proclaimed his Glory; and I look not upon their words in
my Text, as proceeding from the Spirit of Opposition and Contradiction, but
from the Spirit of Grace and Truth, even from the Inspiration and Dictate of
the Holy Ghost himself. He has done all things well: he makes both the Deaf
to hear, and the Dumb to speak.

Before I proceed yet to the Division, it will not be amiss to premise some
things more particularly both concerning the Words, and the Speakers of them.
And the Words, in the first place, are plainly a Justification of our Savior
from the mouth of the People, their Verdict given upon him in Opposition to the
Censure of their Priests and Rulers. But of What are they a Justification? Of
his Innocent and holy Conversation among men? There was no need of that, He
went about his whole Life, as St Peter says, doing Good, conferring Health, as
well as Faith; Curing, as well as Converting men: and though the Malice of his
Adversaries joined with the Malice of Hell at his arraignment to bring an
Accusation against him, they found none. There was as little need also of their
Justification of his Miracles; for they were wrought in the face of all Judea;
and the Sanhedrim, as well as the People, confessed them; What do we do? (say
they, John 11.47.) for this Man does many Miracles! Of what then was their
Justification? Not so much of his Life and Miracles, as of the Divine Power or
Principle by which he wrought all that he did. There was a Division in the
Thoughts of men concerning him, upon the Sight of his works, and some said, He
was a Good Man, and others again, Nay, but he deceives the People; secretly
intimating, that every One that made a holy Show, was not a holy Person; that
every Worker of Miracles, was not a Messenger of God's; but many times the most
seeming Instruments of Heaven, were indeed Agents and Instruments of the Devil.
In these Extremes of a good and bad Opinion, the People adhered to the most
Favorable, concluded, that he was a Good Man, and no Seducer; that a Great
Prophet was risen among them, and that God had visited his People. And their [
omnia bene] in my Text, [ he has done all things well] points not so much at
his Morality, as at his Mission from God; at the Truth of his Miracles, as at
the Truth of his Pretenses, viz. that all he taught and did, was by the Power
and Spirit of God.

Secondly, The Persons that pronounced this Sentence, were the Multitude; the
Judgment proceeded ex ore populi, from the mouth of the People: But it was
never the worse for that; what is to be concluded upon the Sight of an
undoubted Miracle, may be believed as well, nay perhaps better, from the
impartial Opinion of the People, than from the biased Reasonings of the Great
Ones: in those things where Common sense is a sufficient Guide, it is safer many
times to submit the Trial to the Country, than to the Bench; to honest and
plain Dealing, than to Wit and Learning; for too often it comes to pass, that
the Politics of Persons in high Place extinguish their Ethics; and that the
Truth of Religion is corrupted for Reasons of State: As may be seen in the
Church of Rome, where Truth holds always the second place to Interest, and is
frequently on its account allowed no place at all. The Scribes and Pharisees
saw the same Miracles, which the People did; but while they were ambitious to
be Teachers themselves, while Vainglory, Envy, and other by-Respects possessed
them, they were not Converted, but hardened by them, John 9.24. when our Lord
had cured one that was born blind, the Pharisees said to him, Give God the
Praise, we know this Man is a Sinner: But the Person cured (that was one of the
People, and unconcerned in their Pretenses) pronounced, If he were not of God,
he could do nothing. Again, Matthew. 12.22. when our Lord healed another that was
blind and dumb, and possessed with a Devil, the Pharisees said, This Fellow does
not cast out Devils, but by Beelzebub the Prince of the Devils: But what said
the Multitude on the other side? Is not this the Son of David? i. e. the Great
Prophet or Messiah that was to come into the World? Such were the Collections
of a Simple and Sincere People free from Envy and Malice. We owe the Growth of
Christian Religion to plain honest Men, that heard the Gospel with
disinteressed and unprejudiced Affections, and closed with it, when they saw it
consonant to Right Reason; and Christ found at first but few of the Great or
Learned that were fit to be Evangelists, or yet Disciples; 'twas three hundred
Years before any Scepter submitted to Christ, and none were so fierce Opposers
of the Faith in the Infancy of it, as the Philosophers. But the Ignorant People
that knew not the Law, as the Pharisees reproached them to weaken their
Testimony, conveyed to us the Knowledge of the Gospel; and in my Text, and many
places beside, it may be truly said, Vox populi, Vox Dei, the Voice of the
People, was the Voice of God.

O how happy and blessed were this Nation, if it had a People of the like
Temper! that without Prejudice and Prepossession, without Siding and Faction
would embrace Sound Doctrine, and bear Testimony to it by their peaceable and
holy Lives; be profitable H^^rers of the Word, and not, like the Pharisees,
a^fect to be Teachers of it; Followers of Christ and his Apostles, and not
think they are all Christ's and Apostles themselves; believe, because the first
Evangelists were Fishermen, that therefore all Fishermen and Fishermen-like are
Evangelists; because God can enable the most Unlearned and Ignorant to be
Expounders of his deepest Mysteries, that therefore the most Ignorant and
Unlearned are the best Expounders of them; in a word, because want of
Scholarship is no Obstruction to God's Omnipotent Power, that it is therefore
the highest Qualification of a Person to preach. Alas, my Brethren, though the
Multitude could give Testimony to Christ's Miracles, they could not preach
Christ's Sermons; though the People could say, Diseases cannot be cured, Devils
cast out, the Dead raised to Life, by a Word speaking, unless a Divine Power
accompanied that Word: yet even the Apostles were not able to understand the
Prophecies which related to our Lord's Person and his Kingdom, till he
interpreted to them the Scriptures concerning himself; and as it was a Speech
of Ingenuity to say, He has done all things well: he makes both the Deaf to
hear, and the Dumb to speak: so it had been no less than a Prodigy, if the
People had taught the Pardon of Sins through the Blood of Christ, Justification
through Faith, or any other revealed Doctrine. When therefore the People in
these Days take upon them to condemn the Doctrine and Worship of the Church
they were bred in, to reject all Antiquity, and to expound the hardest
Scriptures without Learning by their New-Lights, it is not enough for them to
say, The Apostles, who were Handy-Crafts men like us, did such things in the
Jewish Church before us, unless they can also show the like Warrant and
Commission from Heaven which the Apostles did, namely, unless they can speak
all Tongues, cure all Diseases, utter such Wisdom, as all the Learning in the
World cannot withstand. For we must not take out-of-Fashion Hats and Coats,
rude Behavior, Thouing and Theeing their Betters, for Miracles and the Seals
of a Divine Calling; accept of Ignorance and Presumption, for Gifts of the Holy
Ghost; Nonsense and Dreams of Inspiration, for Inspiration. In the days of the
Prophet Zechary there arose a Sort of Mock-Prophets or Teachers like these, who
having no Divine Gift to countenance their pretended Mission from Heaven,
apishly imitated the Outward Garb and Free Speech of the True Prophets. And the
like Entertainment which the People of God gave to those Impostors, ours
deserve to receive. For it is recorded, that the very Father and Mother, that
begat the False Prophet, said unto him, Thou shall not live, for thou speak
Lies in the Name of the Lord: and they thrust him through, and made him ashamed
every one of his Vision, and that he had prophesied: so that they wore Rough
Garments no more to deceive, but were constrained to say, I am no Prophet, I am
a Husbandman: for men have taught me to keep Cattle from my Youth, Zech. 13.

To come at length to the Division of the Words, they offer these two things in
general to our consideration: 1. Our Savior's Performance, He made the Deaf to
hear, and the Dumb to speak 2. The Verdict or Testimony of the People upon it,
He has done all things well.

In our Savior's Performance we may consider more particularly: 1. The
Substance of it, Giving of Hearing, and giving of Speech. 2. The Ceremonies or
Circumstances which he used in giving them, set down ver. 33. the Touch of his
Finger, his Spittle, the lifting up of his Eyes and Sighing, and the Word he
uttered, Ephata, or be opened.

The Testimony or Verdict of the People offers also three things to our
consideration. 1. The Appellation they give our Lord, He, or this Man. 2. The
Kind or Nature of their Verdict, 'twas an Approbation, that he had done Well.
3. The Extent of their Approbation, that he had done All things Well. I begin,
first, with the Substance of Christ's Performance.

Giving of Hearing, and giving of Speech:
Deaf and Dumb are in Effect one and the same Infirmity, Evils so complicated,
that one is a necessary Consequence of the other, and the Word in the Original
(...) signifies both Deaf and Dumb: to cure also the one, is to cure the other,
i. e. he that opens the Ear, does with one and the same Act so far release the
Tongue, as to put it into a Capacity of recovering Speech. But yet the People
here very properly expressed these as two distinct Cures: for though that which
makes a Bar on the one Sense, ties a Knot likewise on the other, yet they are
really two Impotencies, and the Operation of our Lord was, as I may say, a
Single Double Miracle; Single, considering the necessary Complication of the
two Evils; Double, considering the opening of the two Doors, the Door of
Audience, and the Door of Utterance; and the People with good Reason Separated,
as well as Extolled, the Fact, viz. that our Lord, with the simple Clue or Key
only of his Finger did perforate and discover all the subtle Wards and
Meanders of the Ear, and the hidden Vaults of the Mouth; and so rectify the
Imperfections of them, that Sound entered into the one, and was formed and made
to issue Articulately out of the other. The Senses may receive Help from the
Arts and Inventions of men, but not Creation; the Orator, with a Pebble in his
mouth, might help his Pronunciation, and by an Instrument conveying Sound, the
Hearing may be assisted: but a total Privation, or rather Privative Abnegation
or Original Impotence, that derides the Operations of the Surgeon, and the
Prescriptions of the Physician, and the Cure can never be wrought, but where
the Finger of Christ is the Probe and the Salve.

But I have not yet declared the Greatness of the Miracle, it was still more
wonderful, if, as Interpreters conjecture, and not without reason, Christ did
not only open the Ears and loosen the Tongue of the Impotent Person, but also
enricht his Understanding; instructed his Mind, as well as healed his Senses;
bestowed on him Knowledge, which through defect of Hearing, must needs be
defective in him; conferred on him Words, as well as the Power to pronounce
them; and Conceptions, as well as Words; thus giving him linguam and linguam,
not only a Tongue, but also a Language: infusing into his Soul the Dictionary
or whole Treasure of Words in a Moment, together with a Competency of
Principles and Notions; which, even to those that have the Use of the Organs,
is opus dierum, a Work of Time and Labor to acquire; after the Miracle done
upon the Deaf and Dumb Man, there was need of Study and Industry to inform him;
when the Surgeon had done his Work, there was place still for the Teacher. As
may be seen by him that was newly recovered of his Blindness in the following
Chapter, I see, says he, Men like Trees walking, i. e. I see, but I know not
well what I see; I cannot distinguish Men from Trees, but that they walk. Those
that are endowed with the Senses they were not born with, cannot immediately
make a Right Use of them: and upon this account diverse Counterfeits have been
detected, while they have too soon confessed a distinct Knowledge of Objects and
their Accidents after their pretended Recovery; showing at once both their
Fraud and Ignorance, by their too quick revealing their Experience. This
therefore, I say, greatly adds to the Glory of the Miracle, if it were indeed
so, that the Organ and the skill; the Faculty, and the Learning were both given
together.

We are taught from hence these two Lessons: 1. That whatever our Wants or
Distresses are, however amazing and seemingly insuperable our Dangers, yet to
trust and confide in that Omnipotent God, to whose Power nothing can give
check; who when the Senses could not be cured, could yet create them; and when
there was no Remedy in Nature, could find one by a Miracle! 2. We are taught no
less to adore his Bounty and Goodness, who knows no other Measure of Giving,
but to supply all that is Necessary: who to the Impotent Man gave Senses, to
his Senses added Knowledge, to his Knowledge Faith, to his Faith Salvation. For
God deals no otherwise with men at this day, if they reject not his Grace;
whoever are his Patients, he desires should be also his Disciples; upon
whomsoever he bestows Corporal or Worldly Blessings, he is more ready to bestow
Spiritual and Heavenly. And let this suffice to be said of the first
Particular, the Substance of Christ's Performance, his giving of Hearing, and
giving of Speech. I shall consider in the next place, the Manner of his doing
it, or the Ceremony and Circumstances which he used in performing his Cure. The
first of which was

The Touch of his Finger.
But you will say what need was there of this? Do but speak the Word, as the
Centurion said, and my Servant shall be whole: so do but speak the Word, and
the Deaf and Dumb shall hear and speak: Christ's Ephata had been enough,
without his Touch; the Breath of his Mouth could have wrought the Cure, without
the help of his Finger. It Is true, and in many of his Miracles our Lord used
only his Voice, he restored Lazarus to Life, stilled the Tempest, cast out
Devils merely by his Word. But yet frequently he did his Cures by his Touch, he
took the Damsel that was dead, by the hand, and she arose; and he laid his
hands upon the Sick, and healed them. For some reason therefore it must be,
that not only at this time, but at many others, he performed by many
Circumstances, what he could have performed, if he had pleased, by fewer, or by
none at all.

And the first Reason might be this, That the Beholders might see, the Cure
came from himself, from no Confederacy with Spirits, or any External Power, and
from thence might have a greater Veneration both of his Person and his
Doctrine; be persuaded, that what proceeded from his Mouth must be True, when
they saw what proceeded from his Body was Divine.

The second Reason might be, That by a greater Number of Circumstances the
Miracle might make a deeper Impression, and be longer remembered both by the
Person healed, and by the Standers-by; remain a Monument, as well as a
Demonstration of his Power and Goodness. God, in the days of Moses, gave not
only his Precepts in Writing, but exposed them to the Touch and Sight of his
People; made his Commandments dangle between their Eyes in Phylacteries, and
trail at their feet in Fringes, that what they would have forgot in Books, they
might remember, wearing as Dresses and Ornaments. And 'twas for a like reason
to this, that our Lord instituted Baptism, and his Last Supper: for he could
have conveyed to us the Pardon of our Sins, and the Grace of his Holy Spirit,
without the Ceremonies of Washing, and breaking of Bread: but he thought fit to
add these Performances, not only to make Spiritual things more plain and
conceiveable, but to make Transient things more permanent; that his Benefits
being thus rendered operatiora, more full of Business and Toil, they might be
also memorabiliora, more full of Remark, and better fixed in our Minds.

The third Reason why our Lord wrought this Miracle by his Touch, and such a
Singular Touch, as thrusting his Finger into the Ear, and putting his Spittle
upon the Tongue, might be; because these Actions have a Resemblance and kind of
Similitude to the Means, which Art ordinarily uses in like Cases; Obstructions
are opened by Perforations, and Lenitives cause Lubricity and Volubility; and
the more to set off the Greatness of his Power, he would have it seen, that he
could cure by the Figures and Images only of those things, by which Surgeons
and Physicians exercise their Narrow and restrained Skill: he used, as one
says, Metaphoram in facto, a Metaphor in Fact, employed his Finger as a Probe,
and his Spittle as an Ointment. It was a wonderful Performance to cure an
Original Dumbness and Deafness by any Means; but to do it by such things, as
were indeed No Means, that was more Wonderful. To proceed, the second Ceremony
Christ used, was

The Lifting up of his Eyes, and Sighing.
A Look to Heaven and a Sigh are the Prayers of them, that have no other
Opportunity to make their Supplications. Levavi oculos meos, says the Psalmist,
I lift up mine Eyes unto the Hills, from whence comes my help. That little
Motion of the Prophets, the looking only for Help in Faith, was his Impetration
of it: and St Paul says, By Sighs and Groans the Spirit makes Intercession for
things that cannot be uttered, [or distinctly expressed.] Thus our Lord, by
casting up his Eyes to the Throne of God, made his Petition; and his Sighing,
was his Strong Intercession. Not that the Father did not hear him readily, and
at all times, as himself said, but he prayed after this manner, to show the
Correspondence he held with Heaven, and that the People might see, that the
Miracles which he wrought were the Return of his Prayers; that as his Finger
touched the Ear and Tongue of the Impotent Man, so his Request touched the Throne
of God. But we must look upon this, and all other Ceremonies which Christ used
in working his Miracles, as things no way needful to what he did, but needful
to our Imbecility; to help our Faith, not to help him in his Performances;
they were like the Voices that came to him from Heaven, not for his own Sake,
but for the sake of the Standers-by.

The third Circumstance, was the Word our Lord used, Ephata, or be opened. And
if the former Circumstances which he made use of, expressed any seeming
Weakness or Insufficiency, this last declared the Fullness of his Power and
Omnipotence; it being a Word like that which God spoke at the Creation, Let
there be Light, and there was Light; a Word pronounced as Imperatively and
Magisterially, and which found as ready Obedience; it was dictum factum, as
it is said, a Word and a Deed. The Poets tell of a famous Enchantress, whose
Spells were so dreadful, that the Celestial Orbs yielded Obedience to her --
carmenque timent audire secundum, and durst at no time stay her second Charm.
But though this were but a Fiction or Juggle; yet so it was that all the
Creatures, without any Demur, speedily and constantly obeyed the Injunctions of
our Lord, and never stayed his second Command; whether they were Elements,
Diseases, or Devils themselves. And as when he commanded the Storm to cease,
the Mariners asked amazedly, What manner of Man is this, that even the Sea and
the Winds obey? So the Multitude were no less astonished here, when they saw not
only the deaf Elements obey, but Deafness it self to lend an Ear; when I say
upon the pronouncing only of this single powerful Ephata, they beheld the Doors
of Audience and of Utterance both fly open; the Dumb to speak, and the Deaf to
be so quick of hearing; their Mouths were also opened in Lauds and Praises, and
with one Universal Consent they gave our Lord this Testimony or Elogy: He has
done all things Well: he makes both the Deaf to hear, and the Dumb to speak.
Which brings me to my second General Part, The Verdict and Approbation of the
People. But the time will not suffer me to go through the Several Stages of it;
I shall therefore only make some Use of what I have said, and conclude at
present.

We have heard, that our Lord (not only in the present Miracle before us, but
in many others) used diverse Ceremonies, though he could have wrought them, if
he had pleased, without so much as seeing the Persons, as he did the absent
Servant of the Centurion: But while such Ceremonies edified the Beholders,
instructed their Ignorance, made a deeper and more durable Impression in their
Minds of his Glorious Works, while they added Authority to his Words, and
Veneration to his Person, he disdained not to serve himself with them. And
though the Wisdom of our Church (for the like prudential Reasons, viz. to
explain her Doctrines, to add Order and Beauty to her Worship, to stir up Zeal
and Reverence in her Worshippers, and the like) has admitted of some few
Ceremonies: yet they lie under so great a Prejudice to many, that to name them
only without Detestation, is enough to render the Person that names them
Detestable. But what our Lord has so far approved of, as to practice, ought not
to be detested by his Followers.

It will not be possible in the few Minutes remaining to me, to treat fully of
this Subject: But what are Ceremonies, which are so cry'd-out against, but the
Outward Expressions of the Faith and Devotion we have Inwardly in our Hearts to
God? As the Apostle says, With the Heart we believe unto Righteousness, and
with the Mouth Confession is made unto Salvation: For we may manifest our
Belief by Actions as well as by Words; neither is it material by which we do
it, so we do it sincerely; and whatever Exceptions can be made against
Ceremonies, may be made also against Words, viz. that they may be Abused: But
then as men reject not the Use of Words, because some do Deceive with them: So
neither ought they to reject Ceremonies, the Outward Expressions of a Devout
Soul, because they are used by some Superstitiously and Idolatrously.

And the true Cause indeed of so manys abhorring Ceremonies, is the Excessive
and Idolatrous Use of them in the Church of Rome, the multitude of their
Cringings, Bowings, Crossings, Prostrations, Sprinklings of Water, tinklings of
Bells, censing and kissing of Books, Images, and Altars, changing of Vestments,
exposing of Relics, lighting and extinguishing of Candles, etc. all in one
and the same Service, insomuch that the Worship of God, among so many busy
Fooleries, is the least part of it self: and Religion so far from being
Explained and Adorned by these things, that it is Disfigured, and rendered only
more Dark and Mysterious. Which while some have taken just offense at, they
have run as much into the other Extreme, and condemned all Ceremonies in
general, and endeavored to justify their transport against them by Scripture;
Unskilfully or Unsincerely wresting, whatever they find spoken against the Old
Jewish Ceremonies, to the Christian: Whereas the Apostles Quarrel against the
Jewish Ceremonies, was not for any thing which they had in Common with those
that are used at this day in the Church of Christ: but for their being directly
Contrary to Christianity: they were Types of Christ and of the Gospel, and
while they were kept on foot, they denied that he was come into the World.
However therefore that Ceremonies have been abused, or that it may be said,
that the Outward Worship of the Body, if compared with the Inward Worship of
the Soul, is but as the Outward Court of the Sanctuary to the Holy of Holies:
Yet if we consider rightly of the Exterior Acts of Devotion, they are no less
the Acts of the Heart, than the Interior: for as the one are the Elicite, the
other are the Imperate Acts of the Soul; and, though in a Degree once removed,
may be as Cordial and Sincere as the other; and are in many respects not only
Useful, but Necessary in Religion.

For first, It is not possible to perform the Public Worship of God without
them, the assembling in his House, in his holy Name, and on his Own Day, the
bowing our Knees before him, and lifting up our Hands and Eyes to Heaven, and
the like, are all Ceremonies, Outward Expressions of the Faith, Reverence, and
Dependence we have on God: and those that are so Unreconcil'd to some of these
things, necessarily and unavoidably practice others of the like nature to those
they condemn. And what reason can these Men give, when they can dishonor and
sin against God with their Body, why they may not also honor him with it? When
with their Body they can commit Idolatry, why with their Body also they cannot
perform a Legitimate and holy Worship? The Body is to be Partaker with the Soul
hereafter in Glory, and no reason can be given why it should not now join with
the Soul in the Duties of Religion. How graciously did God accept and reward
the Formal, Outward and Ceremonial Humiliation of that Hypocrite and Idolater
Ahab? for his Fasting, and putting on Sackcloth, and walking softly, (upon
hearing the Judgments denounced against him by Elijah) God reversed his
Judgments! See thou, says God to the Prophet, how Ahab humbles himself
before me? because he humbles himself before me, I will not send the Evil in
his days, etc. If men rightly considered these things, they would not come into
God's House, as if they came to affront, and not to adore him, neither baring
the Head, nor bending the Knee; out of a foolish fear to commit Idolatry,
deport themselves in his Presence like Idols; and as if they came there to be
worshipped, and not to worship.

2. Ceremonies are useful in regard of the Persons that use them: for they are
Wings to their Devotion, and raise it to a higher Pitch, than the quiet Actings
of the Heart alone can do. And as a man by vehement Speeches and Emotions of
his Body may chafe himself into a greater Degree of Anger: so by devout
Gestures in Prayer he may heighten and inflame his Zeal.

3. Ceremonies are useful in regard of the Beholders. The reverent, solemn, and
holy Rites of the Church being suited to the Majesty of the Deity that is
worshipped, excite Faith and a more awful Regard in the Hearts of men; and
'twas for this very Reason, as I said, that our Lord used so many Circumstances
and Ceremonies in the working of his Miracles. For such Visible Performances
are many times more Efficacious Lessons, than long Harangues; and though men
affect to appropriate the term of Edification to Sermons only, the External
Parts of Religion are not without their Edification too; and a holy Practice or
Custom may make a smarter Impression on the Soul, than the Inculcations of a
flat and heavy Sermon.

4. Ceremonies are useful in regard of the Light they give to many Doctrines,
which being assisted and seconded by such Sensible Circumstances, as Exhibit
them to the Eye as well as to the Ear, they are the better explained, and
established in the Understanding by the help of two Senses, as Differences in
Law are by the Mouths of two Witnesses; and we may term the Ceremonies which
accompany the Precepts of Religion, the Jael, or Nail that fastens the
Substance of them in our Minds, as the holy Matron of that Name rivetted the
temples of Sisera to the ground: Or we may call them the Masorah of the Church:
for as the Jewish Masorah by an exact and critical Calculation of the Number of
Words, Syllables, and Letters in the Scripture, hedged in the Text both from
Mutilations and Additions: So Ceremonies often empale the Substance of
Religion, and guard it from Innovation and Corruption. And may we not then
justly condemn the Perverseness of those, that make such Outcries against such
Useful, such Innocent, nay such Necessary things, as Ceremonies? who decry the
same things for Superstition, when used in the Church, which they allow to be
Wisdom, when practiced by our Savior? But Wisdom is justified of her Children
impartially, and those that have the Ingenuity and Goodness of the People in my
Text, and no Taint of Pharisaical Pride and Hypocrisy, will approve the Rites
of our Church, as well as her Doctrines; and say, She has done all things Well,
She has made the Unanimous in Faith, Uniform in Worship; added to the Beauty of
Truth, the Beauty of Holiness; neither dressing up the Service of God in that
Strumpet-like Attire, which the Church of Rome does; nor stripping it into that
deformed and sordid Nakedness which is seen in the Fanatic and Congregational
Assemblies.

The Tenth Sermon.
MARK vii.37. -- He has done all things well: he makes both the Deaf to hear,
and the Dumb to speak.


I Observed in the Testimony or Verdict of the People three things: 1. The
Appellation or Denomination they give our Lord, He, or This Man. 2. The Kind or
Nature of their Verdict, it was an Approbation, That he had done Well. 3. The
Extent of their Approbation, That he had done All Things well. I begin, first,
with the Appellation or Denomination they give our Lord,

He, or This Man.
The Peoples Appellation here is but a lame and imperfect Acknowledgment of
Christ, it expressed only one half, and the meanest half, of his Condition. It
was not the Style in which Believers in aftertimes spoke of him; who never
mentioned him as mere Man, but as God, or the Eternal Son of God. When the
Primitive Christians met in their early Devotions before day, lauds Christo,
tanquam Deo, canebant, they sung Hymns to Christ, as to a God, as a Heathen
could bear witness. But however the Appellation of the People was less
Honorable, at the present it was accepted from them, and registered as a Proof
of their Ingenuity, that they gave Christ the Due of his Actions, though under
an imperfect Style of his Person. God opens the Eyes of men's Understanding, and
cures the Infirmities of their Souls, by Degrees: as Christ in the following
Chapter cured the Blind man's Eyes, who first saw Men like Trees, and afterward
Men like Men. 'Twas enough, upon our Lord's first entering on his Prophetic
Office, and preaching to the World, that the People received his Doctrine, and
conceived rightly of his Miracles, though not of his Divine Nature; that they
acknowledged him to be a Good Man, though not the Son of God Incarnate: which
at that time was not understood even by the Apostles themselves.

But then that which was an Ingenuous Expression in those days, would be an
Injurious or Blasphemous one in these; if men should now so far debase Christ,
as to restrain him to his Humane Nature only, and deny his Divine: as the
Socinians do, who allow no higher Title to be due to him, than this Man, this
Man has done all things well, this Man was born of a pure Virgin, this Man
died, rose from the Grave, ascended into Heaven, and sits at the right hand
of God, and the like. And it is not without good reason, that some have doubted,
whether those that are of this Persuasion, are to be numbered among Christians;
who, after so full and perfect a Revelation of Christ, apprehend him yet so
imperfectly; who with a greater blindness, if not malice, persecute his
Divinity, than the Scribes and Pharisees did his Humanity; use greater
Endeavors to destroy the Son of God, than they did to destroy the Supposed Son
of Joseph and Mary. I say though [ He or This Man] was a pardonable appellation
from the People, who were yet but Raw Auditors of the Gospel, yet it is
intolerable, coming from Grown Christians; and such Elementarii Senes,
Grey-headed Ignorants, as stick still at the first Rudiments of the Faith,
deserve to be expelled the School of Christ for their Non-proficiency. Saint
Paul, 1 Cor. 1.12. sharply reproves Believers for saying, I am of Paul, I of
Apollos, I of Cephas, I of Christ: and not only for their Schisms, but chiefly,
for levelling our Lord with his Servants, and making him only the Head of a
Sect, a Partial Minister of men's Salvation, when he was the Sole Author and
Finisher of their Faith.

But what shall we say then of those Fanatics of later times, who deny not
only the Divinity, but Humanity of Christ; affirm, that what the Gospel says of
God Incarnate, is not to be understood Historically, but Morally; not of a
Particular Single Person, but of all that are True Believers; and that
themselves are the Godded with God, those in whom God is Manned, or Humaniz'd,
as they delight to Cant. Acknowledge no Savior or Redeemer of the World, but
make themselves all to be Christ's; assume his Attributes and Prerogatives,
pretend to be without Sin; Not that they do not do those things, which the
Worst of Men do, but the Spirit of God, as they fancy, doing all things in
them; to say they could sin, were to say that God himself could Sin: however
therefore all Breaches and Transgressions of the Law are Criminal in other Men,
in them they are only Nominal and Seeming Sins, Sins improperly and falsely so
called, from the similitude they bear to them. And on this account they reprove
none among themselves for committing the most heinous and flagitious Crimes,
but for showing Sorrow for them after; it being not Sin, in their Opinion, but
a Remorse for Sin, that is the Sign of an Unregenerate State, the discerning a
Difference between Good and Evil; which they call the Relish of Eves Apple
still remaining, and endeavor by all means to eradicate; persuading
themselves, that when they have destroyed all Sense of Sin, they are arrived to
the highest Point of Saintship and Perfection, to the very State of Innocence
in which Adam was created, the State in which he knew no Evil. Miserably
dreaming, because Adam knew no Difference between Good and Evil Experimentally
before his Fall, that he knew not any Intellectually. And thus we see, not to
believe Rightly of the Person of Christ, is, in truth, not to believe in
Christ; to deny either his Humanity or Divinity, is in Effect not to be a
Christian. It is not only necessary therefore to receive all that is delivered
By him, but also all that is delivered Of him; to acknowledge him to be our
God, as well as our Savior; and to adore him, as well as to be Instructed by
him. To say in these days, with the People in my Text, He (or This Man) has
done all things well, were no less than Sacrilege; when our Style ought to be,
The Eternal Son of God, blessed for evermore, has done all things well! And so
I pass to the Second Particular, The Kind or Nature of the Peoples Verdict, it
was an Approbation,

He has done Well.
The Peoples Approbation here was rightly grounded, they concluded with good
Reason, That he that had made the Deaf and Dumb to hear and speak, was a
Prophet, and no Deceiver; that he whose Works were so Mighty, must himself be
Holy, and his Words True. Miracles are infallible Signs of a Divine Person,
Irrefragable Testimonies of a Man of God: as the Widow of Zarephath rightly
concluded, when Elijah restored her dead Son to Life, Now, says she, I know
thou art a Man of God, and that the Word of the Lord in thy Mouth is Truth: and
likewise Nicodemus, when he said to our Lord, Rabbi, we know thou art a Teacher
come from God; for no Man can do the Miracles thou do, except God be with
him. Our Lord himself made use of this Argument drawn from his Mighty Works, as
his last Appeal for the Truth of his Divine Mission: says he, If I do not the
Works of my Father, believe me not: but if I do, though ye believe not me,
believe the Works. Thus even licensing the Infidelity of men, in case he had
not performed Works above the Power and Ability of men. At the first production
of the Creatures, there were certain Properties or Qualities implanted in them,
as Descending to heavy Bodies, Ascending to light, moving Circularly to
heavenly, etc. Now when it comes to pass, that Heavy things move Upwards, and
Light Downwards; when Water, a fluid Body, is made a Pavement or a Wall; the
Fiery Furnace a Refrigeratory, as Nebuchadnezzar's was to the three Children,
circa frigidos capillorum globulos innoxium luxit incendium, says St Jerome,
the harmless Flame did only shine upon, not singe their curled Locks. When, I
say, the Courses of Nature are thus changed, and its Laws inverted, when the
Creature is fashioned again anew, as the Author of the Book of Wisdom speaks,
and is made to observe Particular Commands, it is a Kind of Second Creation:
For none can change the Laws of Nature, but the God of Nature: Well therefore
did St Augustine say, Habent Miracula linguam suam, and opera sunt and
argumenta; Miracles have a Tongue and speak, and they are not only Works, but
Arguments. To give a man Speech, that was born without it, is even of it self a
Kind of Speech, the Speech no less than of the Almighty: for God appears not
Personally to converse with Men; but such as these are his Utterances of
himself to the World: neither did the Voices that broke from the Clouds at the
Baptism and Transfiguration of our Lord, saying, This is my Beloved Son, more
clearly and intelligibly declare to the Hearers, who Christ was, than the Voice
of God, in every Miracle he wrought, pronounced the same thing; but on all his
Mighty Works was engraved in bright and shining Characters, This is my Beloved
Son, and again, This is my Beloved Son, hear him! The first Way, I say, was not
more convincing to men's Senses, than the second was argumentative to their
Reason; and there is but One and the same Proof of the Deity, and of the Truth
of Christ's Pretenses; and they are either both True, or both False; he that
gives Hearing to the Deaf-born, is a Righteous Person, or he that made the Ear,
is nothing; he that gives Speech to the Dumb-born, has done well, or he that
made the Tongue is a mere Chimaera.

But yet this is to be received with some Caution: for there are two Uses which
God makes of Miracles, The one to plant Faith, And the other to try the
Constancy of Believers: And as God sent Christ and the Prophets before him with
the Power of working Miracles for the first End: so he permits Antichrist and
other Impostors to work False Signs and Wonders for the second End, and those
so seemingly true, as to deceive, if it were possible, the very Elect. You will
say then, Which of these two shall have the Pre-eminence in our Belief? how
shall we know to which to adhere, both performing the same Works, but drawing
several Ways? Must these Miracle-Workers, as one asks the Question, take place
as Women in a Bake-house? the first Comer, the first served?

There is a Rule set down Deuteronomy. 13.1. how we are to carry our selves in this
Case, and to judge of Miracles. If there arise among you a Prophet, says Moses,
or a Dreamer of Dreams, and gives you a Sign or a Wonder, and the Sign or the
Wonder comes to pass, whereof he spoke unto you, saying, Let us go after other
Gods, which you have not known, and let us serve them, you shall not hearken
unto the Word of that Prophet, for the Lord your God proves you. Now the
Wonders and Signs performed by Antichrist and other Impostors are all to this
Purpose, To draw men from the Worship of the True God, or at least from some
Fundamental Points in Religion: For as St Paul says of Antichrist, He opposes
and exalts himself above all that is called God, so that he as God sits in
the Temple of God, showing himself to be God. When we hear therefore any
Creature whatsoever bring such a Doctrine as this, Ego altissimus, that himself
is the Supreme God, or that usurps the Power and Prerogative of the Supreme
God, forgives Sins, not Ministerially, but Absolutely, grants Dispensations to
commit them, abrogates Divine Institutions, makes New Articles of Faith,
assumes to himself Infallibility, and other Divine Properties, claims not only
an Exorbitant Jurisdiction above his Commission in this World, but extends it
even into the other, etc. as the Popes of Rome do; let the Miracles they or
their Followers work be never so astonishing, yet they are to be held accursed
by us, and we may safely pronounce, They are not Good Men, but Deceivers of the
People.

But then Christ's Miracles tended quite to another End, to ratify and
establish all holy and Divine Truths, especially that Summa Veritas, that
Supreme Truth, which was the Test, not only of all other Truths, but of
Miracles themselves, viz. That there is but One God, and he alone to be
worshipped: So that his Doctrine was a Proof of his Miracles, as his Miracles
were a Proof of his Doctrine: neither will this reciprocal Proof, if well
observed, be found to be that Circular Way of Proof so much condemned in
Logic, in which the Effect is made the Cause of the same thing, which is its
Cause, which cannot be in Nature. However therefore the Grand Exception, both
of the Jews of old, and of these days, lies in this Point, That notwithstanding
Christ, by the Confession of their own Rulers, wrought many Miracles; yet he
was not to be hearkened to, because he destroyed the Worship of the True God,
i. e. abolished those Rites and Ordinances, which were immediately delivered
from Heaven; this their Exception is vain and without Reason. For Christ did
not, as they say, destroy the Worship of the True God, but reformed and
improved it; took away only the outward Cortex or Husk of Religion, to show
more plainly the Substance of it, and wherein its Weightier Duties consisted,
removed the Shadows, drew the Veil from off Moses's face, altered such Inferior
Alterable things in God's Service, as were foretold should be altered. And then
he did this by the most clear and authentic Commission from Heaven that could
be showed, by the Broad Seal and Patent, as I may say, of Miracles: and the
Ceremonial Law was removed by a no less Glorious Ministration, than 'twas at
first given. Now these things being so, that a Prophet's Doctrine, Miracles,
and Sanctity of Life concur (especially, as I said, when he secured the
Essentials of Religion, and above all others that Great Requisite, de Vnius Dei
Cultu, of the Non-Avocation of men from the Worship of the One and True God)
even by the Sentence of the Sanhedrim he ought to have been received as sent
from God. We may therefore conclude, that the proceeding of the Elders and
Rulers against our Lord, was perverse and wicked, and the Judgment of the
People a right Judgment; upon good Warrant we may justify their Justification,
and say, In pronouncing he did All things Well, they also spoke Well. And so I
pass to the third Circumstance I observed, The Extension of their Approbation,

He has done All things Well.
The Judgment here of the People, I say, was a Right Judgment: but 'twas only
so, as the Young man's in the Gospel was, who came running to Christ, and
kneeled down to him, saying, Good Master, what shall I do to inherit Eternal
Life? Whose Words and Behavior, though they attributed to our Lord no more
than his Due, yet he gave him a Check of Instruction, because he ascribed
Absolute Goodness to him, which belonged only to God, when he apprehended him
to be no more than a Man. So though the Peoples Approbation was Right both in
the Nature and Extent of it, That our Lord had done Well, and that he had done
All things Well: yet 'twas not without Exception. For though our Lord had
evidenced even to the most Scrupulous, that he was a True Prophet: yet the
People not understanding him to be that Great Prophet that was to come into the
World, the Messiah and Son of God, they could not give him so Large a Testimony
as they did: for even those that were True Prophets sent by God, did not do All
things Well, but all of them had their Infirmities, and committed Sin. So that
the best that we can say here of the Universal Extent of the Peoples
Approbation, is, That they had better Luck in it, than Skill; and aequum licet
statuerint, haud aequi suerunt, that though they pronounced a Right Sentence,
'twas not with a Right Knowledge; but as Physicians say, An Error in the first
Concoction is never corrected in the second: so the People not rightly
understanding Christ in the first place, their following Praises of him were
not right; but as far as they came short in his Title, when they styled him
this Man, they over-shot themselves in their Testimony, when they said, He has
done All things well.

Neither is this a Nice and trifling Cavil or Observation, but a Point of great
Importance in the Consequences of it. For if from a few Instances of Goodness a
Universal Goodness may be concluded: if from some Specious or astonishing
Actions a Divine Approbation may be allowed, a Theudas or Judas Gaulonites may
pass for the Messiah; Abbaris, for his dexterity of catching an Arrow flying in
the Air, may pretend to the Divine Honors decreed him by the Scythians; and
Simon Magus to the Godhead given him at Rome, for his Skill in Magic; the
Heathen Demons challenge their Deities, who were all Deified for some
Extraordinary and Uncommon Performances. But I shall choose to insist on more
known and familiar Instances. Many here present may remember, that in the
breaking out of the late Great Troubles of this Kingdom, there were Persons
that pretended to stand up for the Interest of the Nation, to reform Abuses, to
be the only Public Spirited Men and Good Patriots; and the People, because
they pleased them in Some things, thought they might trust them in All; and
idolized Traitors and Rebels, and put it into their Power to plunder and
tyrannize over themselves, to ruin the State, and at last murder their King.
Again, while the same People in like manner doted on the Fansy'd Holiness and
Endowments of some Teachers and Pastors, because they saw them Zealous and
frequent Preachers, sharp Reprovers of Vice, bold Opposers of those in High
Place, and Pretenders to suffer for Truth and Righteousness sake, they
concluded from these things, That they were Good Men, and that they did All
things Well: but as soon as these had gained their Point, they threw-off their
Vizors, and showed themselves Hypocrites and Schismatics, Trumpets to
Rebellion, Misleaders of the People, and Corrupters of their Allegiance.

We see therefore that to infer from some Particular Acts a Universal Goodness,
is no less an Unsafe, than an Unsound Way of arguing. He prays well, he
preaches well, he is ever arraigning Sin, and the like: but, caetera sint
paria? do all things correspond? does his private Practice comport with his
public Demeanor? his inward Goodness with his outward Austerity? as he is
Severe against Sin, is he merciful to Sinners? as he is assiduous in his
Calling, is he Obedient to his Governors, and faithful to his Prince? as he
exhorts the People to Church, does he not debauch them with Factious Doctrines
when they come there? as he is not Scandalous in his Conversation, so is he not
Morose, Proud, or Covetous? In a Word, does he conform his Whole Life to the
Tenor of the Gospel? does he indeed do All things well? All things? that is, in
a Moral Sense, and according to the Measure of a Sincere Honest Man? If he
does, let him carry away our Euge's and our Sophos, our Approbations and
Applauses. But if he does only two or three of these things, and those
hypocritically and upon Design, to give credit to a Cause, and to carry on an
Interest, the Pharisees made long Prayers, that they might devour Widows
houses; and Herod heard John the Baptist gladly, and did many things upon his
preaching, but continued still to live incestuously with his Brother Philip's
Wife, and at last gratified her Malice with the Baptist's head. If a few Good
Actions may set such a Color and Varnish upon men's Lives, that they ought to
be accounted holy Persons, the Scenes in our Theaters may pass for the Glorious
Heavens, and solid Edifices they represent, when they are nothing but patcht
Clouts, and pasted Papers, painted and showed to an artificial Light. Lucian's
Image of Jupiter in Gold, outwardly of a Majestic Form grasping a
Thunderbolt, may be allowed to be the Deity that rules the World, though it be
nothing within but Dust and Cobwebs, Soder and Cramps of Iron, which hold the
miserable Machine from falling asunder. I say, if we thus make Saints from
Shows and Seemings, we may fill the Calendar with Red Letters, but we shall
add but few Names to the Book of Life. I shall therefore conclude this last
Particular with our Lord's advice, John 7. and 24. Judge not according to
Appearance, but judge righteous Judgment.

And now what Use shall we make in general of the Peoples Testimony and
Approbation of our Lord? shall we likewise justify his Actions, assert his
Divine Mission, and say, He has done all things well? To praise Christ, to
speak Honorably of him, to vindicate him from the Aspersions of Jews and
Gentiles, and the like, is our bounden Duty; but all of us here present are his
Disciples and Followers, all of us Christianissimi, Pretenders to be the
Chiefest and most Eminent of his Worshippers; and we acknowledge not only that
he spoke the Truth, but that he is the Truth, even the Eternal Logos: and to
take upon us to pass a humane Judgment on him, and to censure him as one Man
censures another, to say, He is no Seducer, or the like, were so far from
honoring him, that it were to be Irreverent and Insolent toward him, and to
set our selves above him; for the Justifier is Greater than the Justified. How
then? must we celebrate his Eternal Generation, and Descent from his Father's
Bosom for our Redemption, in Magnificats sing his Victory over Death and Hell
--? Yes, this we must do, but not this only, for these are still but Empty
Words, we must add Deeds to our Praises: Obedience to our Magnificats, Duty
and Service to our Psalms and Hymns: the Praises of a holy Life to the
Acknowledgments of a thankful Tongue. To praise God only with the Voice, is to
praise him like the Trumpets of the Sanctuary, or the Organs of our Churches:
Or as the Psalmist calls upon the Sun and Moon, Fire and Hail, Beasts and
feathered Fowls to praise him, which all do in a Figure, and after a manner, in
that they are the Works of his hands, and proclaim his Wisdom and Power; thus
also the Devils and Damned Spirits praise him, while their Sufferings and
Torments declare his Justice. But we are to praise God, not only passively,
occasionally, and instrumentally, like Inanimate, Brute, or accursed Creatures:
but intentionally, primarily, and affectionately, as becomes Rational and
Intellectual Beings, Obliged and illuminated Persons and Believers. And as the
Faithful do best evidence their Faith by their Works, so they best evidence
also their Good Opinion of Christ by their Works, viz. by following his
Precepts: then we give our true Approbation of him, when we transcribe his
Actions and tread in his Steps: it is the Life of a man that expresses his
Thoughts of Christ; if that be righteous and conformable to his Gospel, he has
set to his Seal that he is the Messiah and Son of God that was to come into the
World, proclaims indeed, That he has done All things Well. But if his Ways are
Wicked and repugnant to his Gospel, let him praise him never so industriously,
never so ambitiously, with never so loud Vociferations, he does but in Effect
say, He was an Impostor, and deceived the People. For as St Paul says of False
Teachers, Tit. 1.17. They profess that they know Christ, but in Works they deny
him, being abominable, disobedient, and to every Good Work reprobate: So we may
say of these false and counterfeit Extollers of Christ, that in Words they
Approve him, but in their Works they Condemn him, being abominable,
disobedient, and to every Good Work reprobate. How can a Strumpet praise
Chastity? Or the Sot that is filled with Drink like a Sponge, say any thing in
the Commendation of Sobriety? Virtue is praised of her Followers; and the best
Verdict we can pass on Christ, is to imitate him in all holy Conversation; to
live after his Example, is the highest Encomium we can give him.

To God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, be ascribed all Honor, Glory,
Worship, and Thanksgiving, this Day forth and for evermore. Amen.
The Eleventh Sermon.
AMOS iii.2. You only have I known of all the Families of the Earth, therefore
will I punish you for all your iniquities.


THIS Expression of God's [ knowing] a Thing or Person, is taken in Scripture
in several Senses. Sometimes it is meant literally and in propriety of Speech,
of the Knowledge of mere Perception and Discerning; as when David says, Thou
know my thoughts long before: and St John, God is greater than our hearts,
and Knows all things, i. e. perceives and discerns all things. Sometimes
again it is taken Figuratively, not for mere Perceiving or Understanding a
thing, but for the Owning, Approving, Favoring, Blessing of it, or the like:
because these follow upon God's perceiving a Good thing. Thou have Known my
Soul in adversity, says the Psalmist, i. e. Owned, protected, and delivered it.
Again, the Lord Knows the way of the Righteous, and the way of the Ungodly
shall perish. Knows their way, i. e. prospers, blesses, and will not
suffer it to miscarry like that of the Ungodly.

And this last Way did God Know Israel above all the Families of the Earth: for
he knew them not only with a Perceptive Knowledge, so as he Knows equally all
the Nations of the World, but Owned, favored, and was beneficial to them. As
the Sun beholds some Countries with a more bounteous Aspect than others, not
only shedding on them Light and common Influences, but enriching them with the
Noblest Plants, Minerals, and Precious Stones: Or as he is feigned by the Poets
to have beheld Thessaly, when he was in love with Daphne, -- and terra figit in
una
Quos mundo debet oculos --
he fixed his Eyes on one particular Soil, which ought to have cheered the
Universe. So God, as if he had been Enamoured on Israel of all the Nations of
the Earth, set his Heart on them alone, to the seeming Contempt of all beside,
he revealed himself to them in a more Especial Manner, made a Covenant with
them, gave them Laws, and heaped Blessings upon them, vouchsafed to be their
King and Governor in his own Person, conducted, fed, protected them by by
Wonderful and Supernatural Means; and whereas he governed the other Nations by
his Ordinary Invisible Power (as if he had erected a New Providence in the
World for them) he brought all things to pass in their behalf by Miracles. And
thus though by Nature Israel was no better than other Nations, by his Grace and
Favor God made them Excel them.

But then though it be the highest Advantage, To be Known by God after a
particular and Extraordinary Manner, yet if a People show themselves not worthy
of it, it ceases to be an Advantage; nay it turns to their greater Evil. It Is
not enough therefore, that men are known by God, to make them happy, but God
must also be known by them, they must understand his Will, what is pleasing and
displeasing to him, and hold a reciprocal Correspondence with him by Faith,
Love and Obedience. For as St Peter says of Apostates, It had been better for
them, not to have known the Way of Righteousness, than after they have known
it, to turn from the holy Commandment: So it had been better for Israel if they
had not been the Favorites of God, than after their being so, by their Sins to
lose that Grace; for Sins against Favor are greater than Sins against a
Commandment; Men in this Case being not only Disobedient, but Ungrateful; and
whereas God would possibly have past by the Offenses of less Obliged Persons,
he will call such as these to a strict account; what he would have pardoned in
the Heathen, that were Strangers to him, he will punish in his own People, whom
he has known by so many Great and Distinguishing Benefits. You only have I
known of all the Families of the Earth, therefore will I punish you for all
your Iniquities.

The Words afford us this Proposition or Observation, That whatever People God
blesses above others, if they show themselves Ungrateful by sinning against
him, he will punish them above others. Which Proposition I shall handle after
this manner:

I. Prove and confirm the Truth of it, that it is indeed so. And

II. Show the Reason and Equity of it, why it should be so.

I. To clear and confirm the Proposition.
Sin, as soon as it is committed, is followed by Punishment, except prevented
by Repentance; Punishment follows it, I say, sometimes with Slow, but always
with Sure Paces, till it over-takes it; Vengeance attends it, as the Jailer in
some Countries does Malefactors, who is bound in the same Chain with them: Or
is coupled to it as the Afterbirth is to the Birth: For as in Natural
Productions, after the Birth of the Creature, there is a second Birth or
Protrusion; so there is in the bringing-forth of Sin, it is no sooner produced
in the World, but there succeeds a Title to Punishment so close upon it, as if
it came from the same Womb. If thou do Evil, says God to Cain, Sin lies at
the Door, i. e. the Punishment of Sin is at hand to seize thee: and says our
Lord, in regard of men's proneness to Wickedness, It is necessary that Offenses
should come, but then also that 'twas as necessary, That upon them Woes should
come: and the Scripture makes it a piece of Injustice to detain them, no less
than a Sin, to spare Sin. The Wages of Sin is Death, says St Paul: and as when
the Wages of a Labourer or the Pay of a Soldier is detained, a Mutiny or
Clamor is raised: so when Punishment, the Wages of Sin, is withheld, a Cry is
sent up to Heaven, and God's Justice is continually solicited, till Guilt
receive its due Reward.

This, indeed, to the Men of this World is the primum incredibile, one of the
most Incredible Doctrines that is taught: they see not the Link, which by God's
appointment, couples Sin and Punishment, and because the Act of Sin is
transient, and Vengeance deferred, they conceive the Guilt, and the Bitterness
of Death contracted by it, are also transient; and that they can confute the
whole Hypothesis from their own Experience; they having not only run on in
Disobedience for many Years together, but increased their Wickedness, as well
as continued in it; proceeded from sinning with fear, to sin with presumption;
from offending God, to the affronting him; from breaking his Laws, to the
deriding of his Worship, and the denying of his Deity; and yet, say they, we
have found none of that Vengeance that is spoken of, no, not the least
Disturbance in our Evil Ways. But is it then no Vengeance, to let a Sinner run
on in the Ways of Perdition without any Check? Is the Blindness and Darkness of
the Soul, and Hardness of the Heart, no Judgment? Is the falling from the
Condition of a Man, to that of a Beast, the despising all things Spiritual and
Noble, and finding no relish but in things sensual and Brutish, no Judgment? Is
God's giving them up thus to a Reprobate Mind and Vile Affections, condemning
them to love Necessarily and Finally, what they have so long loved Perversely
and Wilfully, no Judgment? Is the visible trailing after them in this manner
the Chain of Damnation, and going on singing and dancing to Hell, without
apprehending the least Evil, no Judgment? What Sadder Arrest can there be of
God's Wrath, than such an Exemption from it? What Plague or Punishment sent
upon Less Offending Sinners half so dreadful, as the Calm and Peace which these
boast of? But let it be as these Men imagine, that all these things we speak of
are Dreams, that Obdurateness and Insensibility in Sinning is no Punishment,
and that nothing deserves the Name of Vengeance, but what is Corporal Loss of
Life or Liberty, deprivation of Health, Estate, and the like. How do these know
they shall escape these Evils? Those of this Way are for the most part Young,
or in the Strength of their Days, and perhaps God has determined before they
depart hence to make them as Eminent Examples of his Wrath, as they have been
of Disobedience.

I should think my Hour well bestowed, to remove this one Practical Dangerous
Error, to open men's eyes, that they may be convinced, That Sin is a Serpent
that does insidiare calcaneo, lie in the Path, and mortally bite the Heel of
the Sinner; and that he runs not on faster in the Ways of Disobedience, than he
does in those of Destruction: but it is not my Business at this time, the
Proposition which I am to prove, concerns not the Punishment of Sin Absolutely
considered, but Comparatively, viz. That Sin in some Persons or People is more
heinous, and more severely punished, than in others; that where God has
conferred more Signal and Illustrious Favors, there he punishes Sin with more
Signal and Exemplary Vengeance; and his foregoing Bounty despised, adds Weight
to his future Severity.

And this Truth is written in so Great Characters, and so legible through the
Whole Series of the Chronicle of Scripture, even from the Creation, that I
shall not need so much to prove the Proposition, as to refresh your Memories,
by setting before you things already known. The first Man of our Race was the
first miserable Example of this Truth; and he that first brought Sin into the
World, first also left the Confirmation to us of the Fatal Consequence of it,
when committed against an Extraordinary Grace. Adam was created after God's own
Likeness, in perfect Righteousness and Holiness, and not only with the
Knowledge of his Laws, but with a Power and Ability to keep them; he was made
to Excel all Sublunary Creatures, and had Dominion given him over them; he was
placed in a furnished World, fruitful without Labor, delightful without
Satiety; and the Continuance of this his Felicity was put into his own hands,
he was not Subject to Death, Infirmities, or Misfortunes, like his Posterity:
nay, 'twas in his power not only to have Prolonged his Felicity to all
Eternity, but to have Improved it. Greater Favors God could not conferr on
Flesh and Blood, on a Creature lower than the Angels. But whither tended the
Collation of all these Benefits, when Adam rebelled against God? Only to his
greater Misery, the Punishment of his Transgression was as Eminent as his
Privileges and Graces had been; his ensuing Calamity, as his foregoing
Prosperity. The day thou eatest of the forbidden Tree, says God, thou shall dye
the Death. What Death? All manner of Deaths, Death Temporal, Death Spiritual,
Death Eternal; Death to Nature, Death to Grace, Death to Glory! The Sin was but
Single, but the Punishment inflicted was Threefold: like a Stroke with a
Trident, which makes a Triple Wound; and the Blow fell not only on himself, but
on all his Posterity. Never any Sin since his had the like Recompense of
Reward; because none since Adam could sin against so much Bounty.

I shall give you but one Instance more. We know by how Strange and Unexpected
a Favor Saul was promoted to the Throne of Israel, who being sent in quest of
his Father's Asses, found a Kingdom; God advancing him above all his People in
Honor, more than he Excelled them in Stature. But he proving after this
Ungrateful and disobedient to the Commandment of God, falling no less than
thrice into that Common Fatal Error of Faithless Princes, to rely on Humane
Policy, more than on the Divine Support: on the Favor of the People, than on
the Favor of God; and seeking to establish his Kingdom by Blood and
Sacrilege, rather than by Innocence and Justice; as if the Power that gave him
a Throne could not uphold him in it; God's Indignation against him was as
Great, as his Prevarications had been. And then what did all his antecedent
Favors profit him, but to enhance his following Punishment? Which was such, as
when we read it, we cannot choose but pity, though it were the Lord's doing. For
he rejected Saul, as he was rejected by him; he withdrew his Holy Spirit from
him, and sent an Evil Spirit to vex him in the room of it, a Spirit of
Jealousy and Frenzy, which periodically possessed him, and clouded all his
Felicity and Glory; disinherited his Posterity, dethroned, in a manner, himself
while he was yet alive, by causing another to be anointed King in his days. And
after he had suffered him thus to survive a few Years a dreadful Spectacle of
the Divine Wrath, he stirr'd-up the Philistines against him, and when their
Host appeared, and he most needed it, bereaved him of his Kingly Courage and
Magnanimity, refused to direct or answer him by his Oracles. In which
distressed and disconsolate State, all Heavenly Comfort being silent, and
Readiness guilty Conscience only loud and clamorous, overwhelmed with Sorrow and
Despair, under a Disguise and the Covert of the Night, with two Attendants
only, he repaired to a poor Witches Cell to enquire the Fortune of his Life and
Kingdom, and where God met him, as I may say, also in Disguise, made use of the
Witches delusive Arts, to give him a Real Prediction of his near-approaching
Overthrow, and inglorious Death: So that partly broken with Sorrow, and partly
weakened through Hunger, he fell into a Swoun, and was sustained by the Bread
and Counsel of the Silly Woman, the next day putting a Period to his Life and
Miseries. What Invention of Romance, or Fiction of Poetry can parallel the
Calamity of this once so Glorious and Heroic King? And if any ask, Why was all
this? how came the patient Spirit of the God of Mercy to turn into Fury, like
that of the Person he punished? Because the Sin of Saul was not only a Sin
against God, but against a Benefactor; and the wonderful Bounty God had showed
in bringing him to the Throne, pulled upon his Ingratitude and Infidelity this
wonderful Severity and Displeasure.

And as this is God's Dealing with Particular Persons, so it is the same with
Whole Nations: Of which we shall not need a further Example, than that before
us of Israel. In the foregoing Chapter the Prophet denounces God's Judgments
against the Neighboring Kingdoms for their Sins. For three Transgressions and
for four, says he, God will punish Damascus, and chiefly for their Cruelty. For
three Transgressions and for four God will punish Gaza, and again for their
Cruelty. For three Transgressions and for four God will punish Tire, because
they kept not their Brotherly Love. And so on against the rest: But when he
comes in the last place to Israel and to Judah, their Transgressions being not
inferior to those of the Gentiles, he intimates that heavier Judgments were
laid up in Store for them, and that they should not escape so easily as the
others; he casts their Ingratitude for their former Benefits into the burden of
their Guilt; their forgetfulness of God's bringing them out of Egypt which a
high hand, and destroying the Nations before them; his raising up their Sons
and Daughters to be Prophets, and their Young men to be Nazarites. Shall the
People that have not known God be judged for their Sins, and shall not those to
whom he has revealed his Laws and his Righteousness, on whom he has heaped his
Blessings, be judged more severely? He that knows his Masters Will, says our
Lord, and does it not, shall be beaten with many Stripes. As the Heathen
therefore were chastised for their Offenses, Israel was utterly ruined and
Un-nationed.

And this was not only God's proceeding under the Law, but it is the same still
under the Gospel: For he has Known or favored Believers in Christ, not only
above the Gentiles, but even above the Jews themselves; and if Judah be trod
down, and the Temple destroyed for the Sins and Ingratitude of that People, the
seven Churches in Asia lie under a Sadder Desolation at this Day for their
Disobedience to Christ, Travelers being scarce able to discern so much as the
Places where they stood. These Examples of God's Wrath both on Single Persons
and whole Nations, teach us this Lesson, That it is never so dangerous to offend
against God, as when he has been Gracious to us; his former Benefits being so
far from priviledging any to transgress, that he is sure to punish those most,
he has done most for. But it is not enough to show the quod sit, the Truth of
the Proposition, that it is so; I proceed in the next place to show the cur
sit, the Reason, Equity, and Merit of it, why it should be so.

The Reason why it should be so.
This Position, That God punishes with heavier Judgments, those whom he has
chosen to fix his Favors on, if they offend against him, than others; seems to
have something in it contrary to the Nature and Disposition of Men, who are apt
to delight in the Persons, on whom they have placed their Benefits; to love the
Creatures of their Advancing, no less than those of their Begetting: So St
Augustine affirms the like Disposition is found in God; who, speaking of his
Rewards to Men, says, Coronat opera sua, non merita nostra, God crowns his own
Gifts and Graces, not any Merit he finds in us: and Moses makes it a Plea for
his Mercy to Israel, that he would not destroy them, after he had done them so
much Good; alleging his former Bounty, as a Motive, for his Pardon and
Forgiveness.

In satisfaction to this, I answer: We must consider in God's Benefits to men
not only his Love, but the Purpose of his Love; he confers his Gifts upon us
with a Design to make us more holy Persons, and for the Favors he bestows he
looks for a Return of Obedience and Righteousness on our part; and where he
fails of this Return, he does not only cease to give, but hates in a manner his
Gifts, and destroys them for the Parties sake on whom they were bestowed. Says
St Paul, Ephesians. 1.3. God has blessed us with all Spiritual Blessings in Christ,
(and why?) that we should be holy, and without blame before him in love. But
then if this Design be defeated and made void, and we are not holy and without
blame before him in love, we may assure our selves, that all his purposed
Bounty is also made void; and that is hated which is loved; thought fit to be
destroyed, that was intended to be built; and the rather, because it was not
found fit to be built.

There are three things which are observed to provoke Anger and Indignation in
the most Patient. First, An affront to a Man's Person: all vilifying and
despising, as Aristotle, the best Describer of Passions, says, being a just
Cause of Choler. Secondly, The Loss of a Man's Labor: as when a Professor of
some Curious Art arrives to great Perfection in it, and reaps no Advantage by
it; is Excellent, but yet notwithstanding Poor and Neglected; ravishes all (for
Example, with his Music or Poetry) and wants Bread: this will make him hate
his Muse, and break his Strings, reek his Revenge upon the Instrument of his
Profession, because he cannot reach his unfortunate Profession it self.
Thirdly, The Loss of a Man's Love and Good Will exasperates him more than all
the rest, and turns his Kindness into Fury. Neglect of Worth, and Personal
Contempt, though they be deeply resented, yet they touch not so to the Quick,
as the Contempt of Affection, for indeed the Contempt of Affection includes in
it both the Contempt of the Worth, and of the Person; and he that despises a
man's Love, despises all that he has, and all that he is. But what then must the
Provocation be, when all these Causes concur? as they do, when either a Nation,
or a Single Person returns God Disobedience after he has showed them his
Extraordinary Mercies and Favors.

For, First, His Person is affronted; Regard is not had to the Great God of
Heaven and Earth condescending to do Good to his own Sinful Creatures; and the
Greater the Person is, the Greater is the Contempt, and consequently the
Greater Anger and Evil Effects of it, Revenge and Punishment, may be expected.
Says St Paul, Of how much Sorer Punishment, suppose you, shall he be thought
worthy, who has trod under foot the Son of God? viz. than he that has only trod
Moses under his feet?

Secondly, God loses his Labor on such Persons, and that enrages him yet more:
he likens Israel to a Vineyard, on which he had bestowed great Cost and
Husbandry; fenced, and gathered out the Stones, and planted it with a Choice
Vine: but after all, when he looked for Grapes, behold, it brought forth Wild
Grapes! Grapes which instead of delighting the Taste, set the Teeth on Edge!
What does he do therefore upon so unexpected a Frustration and disappointment
of his Hopes? Why, as a Person much Incensed, shows many times a Wild and
Frantic Behavior; so God puts on a seeming Transport and Fury, breaks out
into a Tragical Song to vent his Indignation. I will sing, says he, a Song of
my Beloved touching my Vineyard -- in which he utters both his Displeasure and
his purposed Revenge. The Issue of God's Labor lost upon a People, can be no
less than the Perdition or Loss of those People; First, He complains, but after
that, lest he should seem to be Mastered or Mocked by his own Creatures, he
sends Destruction and Desolation on them.

Thirdly, His Love and Kindness is despised, which provokes his Anger above all
the rest. When God has showed Singular Goodness and Mercy to a Nation,
eminently delivered them, or otherwise Blessed and prospered them, and they
return him nothing but contempt and Neglect, disregard his Laws and violate his
Commandments, esteem his Worship a Burden, and his Service a Slavery; reflect
upon their late Infelicities and Deliverances as the Common Vicissitudes of the
World, or only as False, or more Wary and Masterly Steps made by themselves in
Points of Policy. Thus, like Israel, sacrificing to their own Net, and burning
Incense to their Drag: Or as another Prophet represents them; ascribing all
the Good things they received from God, to the Idols of Canaan, to Baal, and
Moloch, and the Queen of Heaven: So these ascribe to Chance or Fortune, to Good
and Bad Seasons, to Humane Prudence or Folly, all their Prosperity and
Adversity, and not to Divine Providence. When, I say, the Goodness of God is
thus injured, his Benefits over-seen or denied, his Judgments contemned, his
Righteousness hated, and his Deity set at naught, what wonder is it, if his
Love be also turned into Detestation and Hatred. When Men hate, they wish the
Person hated may perish; they wish it, I say, because their Power does not
always answer their Anger: but God, to whom it is as easy to destroy, as to be
angry; when he hates, he sends certain Ruin and Destruction on the Offenders;
he punishes with the same Facility, as he says in my Text -- I will punish you
for all your iniquities.

And now to hang our Ancestors Picture in our Gallery, if I may so allude, to
set the Actions of Israel by ours, that we may draw some Instructions from
them, I could almost wish that this Proposition, ( Whatever People God has
blessed above others, if they sin against him, he will also punish above
others) were not so great a Truth, so Ominously it sounds: For if there be a
Nation upon the Earth that God has Known, i. e. distinguished by his Singular
and Signal Favors from all others, it is this of ours: St Paul reckons it
among the highest Privileges of Israel, that they had the Oracles of God;
though we may say of them, they were Oracles indeed, if their Darkness be
compared with the Clear Light of the Gospel revealed to us; Christ was preached
to them, and not preached; but if to any of us he be hid, it is through wilful
and affected blindness, and, as the Apostle says, He is hid only to those that
perish. And when through the Inundation of Barbarians and Ignorance, and the
worse Inundation of Corrupt Manners, Errors and Superstition overspread the
Face of the whole Christian World: upon the first Dawning again of the Light of
the Gospel, and the shaking off of this Darkness, while the Abominations of
Rome were yet seen and detested by all Discerning and Conscientious Believers,
and the Fermentation of the Truth in men's hearts was not settled again upon the
Lees of Secular Policy and Interest, we were rescued by God's Goodness from the
Yoke of Antichrist. But not to look back to the Benefits of remote Ages, but
only to those we our selves have been immediate Partakers of, and are
accountable for. What Mercy was ever more Glorious than the Restoration of our
King and Church in these our Days, not to name our later, though Signal and
Illustrious Deliverances?

But as God has known us in all our Distresses and Adversities, and wrought
such Miracles of Mercy for us, how have we received them? What Miracles of
Thanksgivings and Duty have we returned to him? We have wrought Miracles
indeed, but Miracles in an Untoward Sense, Miracles of Impiety and Ingratitude.
As God restored our King and Kingdom to their former Splendor and Glory, and
all of us to our forfeited Peace and Prosperity: multitudes have endeavored,
by their Atheistical Opinions, to depose God from his Kingdom in Heaven, and
Government over the World. As God brought us out of the Saddest and Darkest
Night of Adversity, into the bright Sunshine of Felicity, by a Power and
Goodness like that by which he brought Light out of Darkness at the Creation:
there are those that have turned Light into Darkness, i. e. denied and obscured
all the Light of Divine Truth and Revelation: again, that have turned Darkness
into Light, made the Sins of Darkness become Sins of Light and Noonday; those
Sins which were reproachful and crept into Corners in all Ages, to be of Credit
and Reputation in this. These, together with the rendering things Venerable and
Sacred, ridiculous and contemptible, are the Miracles of these times! Saint
Peter says, In the last days shall come Scoffers, walking after their own
Lusts. These two Sins, Walking after their own Lusts, and Scoffing at things
Holy, go together: and it is no wonder that this dissolute and profligate Age
should mock at Religion and at all things Serious; mock at their Reason, and
degrade it below their Sense; mock at the Immortality of their Souls, and level
themselves with the Beasts; mock the Kingdom of Heaven into a Dream, and the
Torments of Hell into a Fable; the Creation of the World into a piece of
Nonsense and Impossibility; and why? Because it is more rational to believe the
Doctrine of Atoms? that the orderly and beautiful Frame of Heaven and Earth,
and all that is in them, were produced by the casual shuffling together of I
know not what little Particles, than by the Contrivance of an Infinitely Wise
and Powerful God? Or again, that the World was from all Eternity, and that Men
and all other Creatures grew at first, like Plants, out of the Earth, and the
like, rather than that they were created? No certainly, these things are not so
easy to be conceived and digested by Reason, as the Doctrines that are
rejected: but the most Monstrous Opinions are easier to be embraced by Wicked
men, than such Truths as cannot be held, together with their Vicious Lives; as
the Apostle says, They live without God in the World, and they cannot endure to
hear, that he made it, and will judge it; that their Bodies should dye, and
their Souls survive; their Pleasures come to an End, and their Guilt remain;
that there should be a Resurrection to Punishment, and not for the Execution of
their Lusts. Julian the Apostate, to justify his revolt from the Faith, said
of the Gospel, (...), I have perused it, I have understood it, I have despised
it. Alas, if he had approved it, he must have condemned himself; if he had
acknowledged the Gospel to be Divine, and the Way to Bliss, he must have
confessed himself a Monster, and the most Accursed of Mankind. But that which
is so great a Prodigy, is, that the least Night or Darkness of Atheism should
be seen in this Kingdom, where the Gospel shines in its Meridian; that
Apostasy should be found, where so many glorious Manifestations of God's Power
and Goodness are found! We have heard, that the Ungratefully Wicked, the Wicked
after much Good done for them, are in greater Danger of God's Wrath and
Displeasure, than the Simply Disobedient. What then can we expect our Portion
should be, when after so many Unparalleled Benefits, we have showed our selves
not only Unthankful, but Atheistical? not only Transgressors of God's Laws, but
Renouncers of them? Says our Prophet, Verse the 5th, Will a Lion roar in the
Forest, when he has no Prey? i. e. will he roar to no purpose, when nothing
provokes him, when he designs nothing by it? So when God threatens Sinners,
does he mean nothing? are the Dreadful Denunciations of his Judgments mere
Empty Noise? Again, in the Verse before my Text, says the Prophet, Can two walk
together except they be agreed? i. e. can it be expected, that God should go
along with men, and bless them, unless they be righteous? that he should Favor
them, if they live in Rebellion against him? If we will not have God our Enemy,
after he has been our Friend; and therefore our Enemy, because he has been our
Friend; if we will not have him send Evils on us, because he has sent Blessings
on us so long in vain: we must rise in our Duty to him, as he exceeds in his
Mercies to us; improve in our Obedience, as he enlarges in his Bounty: And then
he will add Grace to Grace, and Blessing to Blessing, till he has brought us
to the Perfect State of Blessedness, even to the Unspeakable Joys and Glory of
his Heavenly Kingdom. Whither God of his infinite Mercy through our Lord Jesus
Christ bring us all. To whom be ascribed all Honor, Glory, etc.

The Twelfth Sermon.
PSALM CV.44, 45. And he gave them the lands of the Heathen, and they inherited
the labors of the people:

That they might observe his Statutes, and keep his Laws.


THIS long Psalm is nothing but an Enumeration or Recital of the Favors and
Benefits conferred by God on Israel, even before it was Israel; beginning with
the first Promise of the Land of Canaan made to their Fathers, when they were
yet but a Family, and not a Nation; Wanderers from one Kingdom to another
People, Sojurners in all places, where they found admittance, but Inhabitants
of none. In which fleeting weak Condition, and obnoxious to many Evils, God
greatly preserved them, as we read ver. 4. He suffered no man to do them wrong,
yea he reproved Kings for their sakes. And he delivered them not only from the
Violences and Outrages of Men, but exempted them from the Judgments which
himself sent on the Nations where they sojourned. For when a Dearth, as it is
said Genesis 41. was on all Lands, i. e. the adjacent Countries, Canaan, Syria,
Arabia, and Idumea, by a Gracious Providence he sent a Man before them to
introduce them into Egypt, where he had made Provision of Bread for them: And
though he suffered them in this place of Sojourners to be made Bondmen, yet
when the determined Time of such his Counsel was expired, he raised up another
Man, even Moses, who by ten Miraculous Judgments made the stubborn Heart of
Pharaoh stoop, and let them go free. And thus he brought them out of Egypt with
a Mighty Hand, they being but imbellis turba, an unwarlike Troop, a mixed
Multitude of Men, Women, and Children, and conducted them with a Supernatural
Cloud, which was a Shadow by Day, and a Light and Bulwark by Night: and when
the Host of Pharaoh pursued them, he opened them a Passage through the midst of
the Sea, but overwhelmed the Egyptians presuming to follow them. Their Way then
lying through the Wilderness, a place by Nature barren of all Provisions, he
made it fruitful by Miracles; spread a Table for them with Dainties, not
afforded from the Earth, but from the Clouds; commanded a River to flow out of
the Stony Rock, and to journey with them forty Years to refresh them and their
Cattle. And when they drew near unto the Borders of the Promised Land, he
inspired a third Heroic Person to be their Military Leader, and by his Prowess
and Conduct cast out the Heathen before them, and, to crown all his foregoing
Mercies, he put them into actual Possession of the Land of Canaan; a Land that
was the Glory of Lands, ready tilled and cultivated, built and furnished to
their hands, with all manner of rich Movables and Commodities, Dominis
parantur ista, serviunt vobis, Provisions made for the Canaanites, but enjoyed
by the Israelites.

And now if any ask, Why was all this Munificence and Bounty showred on this
People? what was the Design of the Almighty in making such a Profusion both of
natural and supernatural Favors? The Declaration of that is reserved to the
last place, suspended to the End of the Recital of the Benefits, that it might
look back to all that went before, and make a deeper and more lasting
Impression in the hearts of the Receivers, and it was naturally this, That they
might observe his Statutes, and keep his Laws. All the Families of the Earth
had corrupted themselves again after the Flood, before God, and were either
fallen into Atheism or Idolatry: but God determining in his Mercy never utterly
to destroy Mankind again, resolved to take a contrary Course, to woo and soothe
them to Virtue and Righteousness by his Favors; to add Benefits to the
authority of his Commands; Blessings to the Obedience of his Laws; Blessings, I
say, and Benefits, not only in the ordinary secret Course of his Providence,
but, as Occasion required, Openly and Miraculously: that Men might see 'twas
wiser to worship the Living God, than to be Idolaters or Atheists, more
advantageous to do his Will, than to bow to Stocks and Stones, or to be Slaves
to wicked Spirits. And he made Election of Abraham and his Seed after him to
experiment this his Gracious Method on: but with the Design, that as he
revealed his Power, Wisdom, and Goodness to them, they should be as a Nation of
Prophets, Holy in themselves, and Preachers of Righteousness to the rest of the
World. The Israelites thought, all the Wonders that were wrought for them, were
only to pleasure and profit them, but they were principally to make known the
Glory of God; and were Sermons, as well as Benefits; designed not so much to
gratify their Carnal Affections, as to train them up in the Obedience of God's
Laws. And he gave them the lands of the Heathen, and they inherited the labor
of the People: that they might observe his Statutes, and keep his Laws.

I shall observe in the Words these two things:

I. How or which Way God did confer the Lands and Labors of the Canaanites on
the Israelites, viz. He gave them.

II. Why or for what End he gave them, it was for this one Great End, That they
might observe his Statutes, and keep his Laws.

In the handling of the first of these, The Manner or Way of God's conferring
the Lands and labor of the Canaanites, (there being many collateral
Circumstances in it which highly magnify his Gift) I shall not only reflect on
the bare Donation, but also on the concomitant Circumstances.

I. He [ Gave] the Lands.
In the Translation we use in the Common Prayer Book, it is said they [ took]
the lands and labors of the Heathen in possession. But the Expression of their
[ taking them] in one Translation, and God's [ giving them] in the other,
amounts to the same thing: for a thing may be [ taken] two ways, by Force, or
by Gift and Reception. Now Israel took the lands and labors of the Canaanites
the second of these two Ways, by Gift from God. 'Twas not their own Sword, as
it is said, or their own Bow that subdued their Enemies, but God that fought
their Battles. They took Canaan, as they took Jericho; the Walls of which, when
they had walked seven times about it, by the miraculous power of God fell down.
The Grecians painted Timotheus, the fortunate Athenian Captain, lying cross a
River with a Net in his hand, and Cities flowing down the Stream into it, to
show how Easy a Town-taker he was: after the like facile easy Manner did the
Cities of Canaan flow into the possession of Israel. And if all Men would
consider how they came possessed of the Blessings they enjoy, they would find
that even the Greatest of them came to them, in a manner, sitting still and
without Pains. We think it is we that get them, that it is our Wit and Industry
that acquire Riches and Honor, our Valor that conquers Nations, etc. but
alas, we do but walk, as I may say, about the City, and long enough we might
walk, and never take it, if God did not cast down the Walls of it, i. e. remove
the Obstructions and Difficulties that stand in our way. Who can arrogate to
himself that he had a hand in the bringing about the Mercies of the Year 1660,
which we this Day commemorate, when all our Endeavors were frustrated, when
our Designs came home to us uneffectually, or with the Destruction only of the
Undertakers, when the Royal Party grew unactive, and began to despond? Then,
even then, when all Humane Power was at a Stand, our King was restored by a
Secret and Divine Hand, by means as surprising and unhop'd for, as undeserved
by us: he was not freelier bestowed on us this Day in his Birth, than in his
Restoration.

Secondly, The Substance or Matter of God's Donation to Israel is worthy the
reflecting on, he gave them [ the Lands and Labours] of the Heathen. 1. The
Lands: The Gift of Lands to a people that were a kind of wandering Arabs, and
who might have been denominated Sans-terre, Without-Land, as a Prince of our
own Country was called on the same account, was no small Accommodation and
Benefit. But then the Land God gave to the Israelites was a Land flowing with
Milk and Honey, with Oil and Wine, a Land whose Stones were Iron, and the
Bowels of whose Hills Brass. For we must not judge of Palestine, by what
Travelers report of it at this day, since it fell under the Subjection of its
present barbarous Antichristian Lord, whose Foot treads Barrenness and
Desolation wherever he marches Victoriously; who ruins Lands, as well as
Arts and Sciences; and puts the Countrymen to flight, as well as the Scholar.
But Palestine must be considered in the State 'twas in at the time God gave it,
when not only the Bounty of Nature, but his special Blessing was upon it. And
if Good Land be a Good Motive to love and serve God, we of this Nation need
look no further for an Argument to do our Duty, than the very Ground we tread
on: for that old Verse ( England excells in Mountains, Bridges, Fountains, Fair
Churches, Women, Wool) however comprehensive, falls short in computing the
numerous Blessings of this Isle. Our misery only is, that as our most malignant
Enemies are forced to confess our Country to be bona Terra, a good Land, so
the most candid Historiographers cannot forbear censuring it for bringing forth
mala gente, a naughty People, no way comporting with the Excellence of the
Soil; a People that are stubborn and prone to Rebellion, who think Sedition the
best Physic for a Sick Government, and Seditious Persons the best Physicians:
whereas the Diseases of a State were never cured by turbulent Spirits, though
many States have been subverted by them; and History that tells of so many
Kingdoms ruined by Rebellion, records none that was ever reformed that way.

Thirdly, As God gave the Lands, he gave likewise [ the Labour] of the Heathen
into the possession of the Israelites: they entered into Houses which they built
not, enjoyed Riches which they purchased not, reaped Corn which they sowed not:
what our Lord said of his Disciples coming after the Prophets to preach the
Gospel, What one man sows, another reapeth, was literally true here. The
Israelites came not into the Land of Canaan, as Planters do into a
new-discovered Country, in vacuum, into a Void and Empty Soil: but as Students
into a College, or Infirm persons into an Hospital, in plenum, into an
Accommodation of all things Necessary; where the Benefactors have not been only
Builders, but Founders of a liberal Maintenance; and provided Subsistence, as
well as Reception. It Is the happy Lot of many in this Nation to come into the
World provided of all things which the Life of Man can need, possessed of
Estates, not got by the Sweat of their Brows, but left them by the Acquisition
of their Ancestors, so clear and disengaged, that they seem not to descend to
them, as Lawyers speak, res cum onere, the Estate with the Burden and
Encumbrances, but res cum foenore, the Estate with the Emolument and pure
Enjoyments of it. And such was the happy Condition of the Loyal Party of this
Kingdom, upon the Blessed Restoration of his Majesty, that they were like
Newborn Heirs to great Fortunes; being not only called from a Fugitive
Condition abroad, or delivered from Death, or the Apprehensions of Death or
Bonds at home: but had Preferments and Riches, Honors and Dignities added to
the Gifts of their Lives and Country: God being not content, in the overflowing
of his Bounty, to bestow on us only a Dry-Deliverance, but accumulated on our
heads all other Good things. But whereas such boundless and unparalled
Mercies required suitable Acknowledgments on our Part, the multiplicity and
greatness of our Benefactors have made us, like Israel, forget our Benefactor;
and as they were waiward and froward on every Disgust, and looked back again to
Egypt, preferring their Bondage before the glorious Deliverance God had wrought
for them: So we, as little sensible of our Wonderful Restoration, upon every
dislike to the Government, think better of our past Miseries, than our present
Enjoyments; and, which is a Prodigy to hear, join hands with those that were
our Oppressors, to bring our selves again into Slavery.

Fourthly, He gave [ Them] the Lands and labor of the Heathen. The Persons to
whom God was so liberal are worthy to be considered. God gave the seven Nations
in promise unto Abraham, to be made good to his Posterity: but to say nothing
of his Posterity, whose Ingratitude is so well known, What was Abraham himself,
for whose sake Canaan was promised, then when God called him out of Vr of the
Chaldees? Even an Idolater as well as the Chaldees. For we must not take the
Tradition of the Jews for a current Truth, who, because the word Vr signifies
Fire, as well as it denominates a Country, tell us, That Abraham's coming out
of Vr, was his Escape out of the Flames of Martyrdom, which he was cast into
for opposing Idolatry. The Jews together with the Papists, though they
otherwise hate them not only as Christians, but as Idolaters, are always
seeking a Reason in Man for the Motive of God's favor to him: whereas when God
gives any thing, it is not for the Merit of the Person he gives it to. Yes, say
they, he gave Abraham the promise of Canaan for his Faith so highly approved of
in Scripture: But who gave Abraham that Faith? They say, He was so ingenuous as
to believe upon God's Call. Ay, but who gave him that Ingenuity? If it were a
Good Gift, it came from above. We must look upon all God's After-Gifts, as we
do upon those which we first and originally received from him at our Creation,
as proceeding from no antecedent merit on our Part that invited them: God gave
no man Beauty, Sharpness of Wit, or any other Grace of Body or Mind, for any
antecedent Graces that were in him: it were as absurd and ridiculous to say,
That any one merited the Preheminences and Advantages he has above others, as
to say, he could merit his Being it self before he had one: but as God's
Goodness was the Fountain, so 'twas the sole Motive of his Endowments. Let no
Man go say this Day among us, That 'twas for his Loyalty, and adhering to the
true Religion, when so many were Schismatics and Traitors, that God let him
behold the Restoration of the King and Church after their fatal Ruin: but for
his own Bounty sake, and the Reasons of his unsearchable Wisdom. For what could
it profit any man to hold the Truth in Unrighteousness? to be Orthodox in
Profession, as many boast themselves to be, and Ethnicks in Manners? Loyal to
their Prince, and Vicious in their Lives?

I shall name but one Circumstance more of God's Bounty to Israel, and little
more than name it; and that is the Smallness of the Return he required for all
his immense Favors, it was only, That they should live according to his Holy
Laws. A performance rather delightsom than burthensom, so natural and
reasonable, that a Wise man would close with the Condition, upon the bare
hearing it, without Stipulation. Isreal's manner of Tenure of God's Favor was
like our Tenure in the Church by Frank Alms; who for many comfortable, and too
often envied Endowments, are obliged only to send up Prayers and Thansgivings
to God, and to perform such other Duties, as conduce to our Eternal Felicity.
God's very appointment of so merciful a Return to Israel, was of it self a
Singular Mercy. But because this falls into my second General Part, Why, or for
what End God gave the Lands and Labors of the Heathen into the Possession of
the Israelites, I shall not prevent my self by enlarging on it before the time.
And he gave them the lands and labor of the Heathen -- (Why?)

That they might observe his Statutes, and keep his Laws.
Statutes and Laws are much the same in Sense, and seem here to be but two
Names for one thing. Laws being so called from their binding Authority, and
Statutes from their being established or decreed. Likewise the observing the
one, and keeping the other, are but two Expressions again of the same Duty: for
by keeping the Laws is meant, that men should not wittingly violate them: and
by observing the Statutes, that they should not transgress them through
Ignorance or Incogitancy: as St Paul says in a like Case, Therefore we ought to
give more earnest heed to the things we have heard, lest at any time we should
let them slip.

But what were the Laws and the Statutes, for the keeping of which, God
accumulated so many Extraordinary Benefits on Israel? The Jews had three Sorts
of Laws, Judicial, which related to their Civil Affairs, the Trials of Justice
and punishing Criminals. Ceremonial, which belonged to Religion, as the Laws of
Sacrifices, Observations of Days, Purifications, etc. Thirdly, the Moral Law,
contained in the Ten Commandments. The two former Sort, though they proceeded
from the same Divine Wisdom, and were established by the same Divine Authority,
as the last; yet their Deductions being so remote from their Principles, like
the Branches or Twigs of a Tree from the Root, and their Reason and Equity not
so discernible, they were enjoyed only as the Rudiments or Elements of a
Science, not so much for themselves, as for a further End: And as such
Rudiments or Elements are laid aside, when once the Science it self is
attained: so the Judicial and Ceremonial Laws were laid aside, as soon as the
End for which they were given was attained. But the Moral Law, quite of another
Nature, is the very Transcript or Copy of the Eternal Law of Reason residing in
God's own Breast, and can no more be abrogated, than Virtue and Righteousness
can be abrogated, it being the same thing with them. And therefore though God
did require at the present, that All his Laws and Commandments, of what Kind
soever, should be kept and observed: yet it was the Moral Law for which he was
chiefly concerned, the Law of Eternal and Immutable Goodness, not temporarily
imposed upon Men, but interwoven into their very Nature at their Creation, and
which, though a long Night of Sin may obscure and dim the Characters of,
nothing can utterly obliterate. It Is true this Law was afterward written on
Tables of Stone, but that was but for the same Reason, that we write them now
adays on our Church-Walls, to put men in remembrance of them, and to send them
to consult the Tables of their Hearts, where they were before engraved. But to
proceed:

God's Laws, as my Text declares, go hand in hand with his Benefits; his
Favors and Commandments are never divided, but where he confers his Bounty, he
always exacts Obedience. Men are willing to think (as Israel did) that all the
Good they receive from God, is merely for their Accommodation, and that he has
no regard to his own Glory and Service in bestowing them: that the Sun was made
only to give them Light, to distinguish their Seasons, and to ripen their
Fruit, Corn, and Wine, and other Products of the Earth; to furnish their
Tables, and relieve their Necessities, etc. Whereas these were given not only
as Blessings, but as Documents and Instructions; not so much to indulge the
Outward, as to edify the Inward Man; to bring the Partakers of them to the
Knowledge, Fear, and Love of the Deity: and if we would reflect on the End of
God's Benefits, as well as barely on his Benefits, that which the Vine boasts
of it self in the Parable, would be found true of all other good Creatures,
viz. that they would cheer both God and Man at the same time, i. e. refresh and
comfort indigent Man, and occasion Sacrifices of Thanksgiving and Obedience to
the Almighty. It Is a Maxim even in the Gifts of Men conferred on one another,
and grounded on good reason, Omne beneficium est propter officium, every
Good-turn is for the sake of some Good-turn; and Gifts otherwise bestowed, are
justly looked upon as proceeding only from Weakness; as the Effects of
Prodigality, or some impotent Passion. And if any say, Benefits given on Design
are by the Generous held base and sordid; that is only true, when the Design is
Sinister and Unworthy, not when it is Noble and Religious, to promote Virtue,
Friendship, etc.

Again, whereas my Text teaches us, that God makes use not only of his Laws,
but of his Benefits to bring us to a Holy Life; not only employs his Authority,
but wooes and hires us to Righteousness: This shows that he is more than
ordinarily concerned in our Obedience, and that our yielding or denying it to
him is not so Indifferent a thing as we make it. And if any ask, Why is the
Almighty so concerned in the Actions and Behaviors of Men? Do their Virtue and
Righteousness any way profit him? I answer, Not at all: the Righteousness of
Faith contributes no more to his Happiness now under the Gospel, than Legal
Righteousness did under the Law; his Essential Glory is no more augmented by
our Spiritual Oblations, than his Being was sustained by the Blood of Bulls and
Goats: God is self-sufficient and self-happy, his Creatures receive all they
have from his Fullness, and can confer nothing to him. That he is pleased to
use so many Artifices and Endeavors to make Men Righteous, is for their sakes,
not his own; it is his Goodness, not his Interest moves him to it; his
Earnestness that we should live Holy Lives, is nothing else but his Earnestness
that we should be saved. A petulant Inconsideration may wonder, why God was
pleased to create Rebellious Man; but why he should desire to preserve him,
when he had created him after his Own Image, there is no temptation to wonder
at, any more than to wonder that God should be Good; or, to use the Psalmist's
expression, that the Righteous Lord loves Righteousness. We shall show our
selves wiser to adore the Wisdom of God, and to submit to his Will, than to
cavil at his proceedings, especially if we consider the Danger there is in
Disobeying him: for though he sollicites and courts us to a Holy Life, his
Judgments always attend and stand by his Favors, and are ready to right any
Wrong or Contempt that is cast upon them.

But now this being the End of all God's Mercies, That he may be Glorified in
the Obedience of his Creatures, how did Israel comply with this his Design?
Why, truly, if we did not read it in his own Word, their Wickedness and
Ingratitude, after so many and miraculous Benefits, would be incredible. There
was no Sin or Abomination of the Heathen, Idolatry only excepted, that they
were not guilty of. And why did I say, Idolatry only excepted? when they added
Apostasy to their other Provocations, and multiplied Idols equal to the
Gentiles: so that it may be said, God cast out the Canaanites for those that
proved worse Canaanites; and that the Jebusites were better than the
Israelites. And they went on despising God's Mercies, and frustrating the
Designs of his Bounty, till at last they forfeited all his Mercies and his
Bounties, and became of the most happy and glorious People, the most Miserable
and Despicable, even the Astonishment of all Nations. Neither need we to travel
into the once Holy, but now Unholy Land to understand their Condition: for God
has made their Punishment as far known, as they made their Sins and
Provocations; and has sent them home to the very Doors of all the Nations of
the Earth, to preach by their Example the Penalty of Ingratitude and
Disobedience.

I have done with the Words, and that we may not amuse our selves with
insignificant Invectives, or unconcerning Relations, in contemplation of God's
Mercies in common to us with other Christians, and his particular, Signal, and
distinguishing Favor to us this Day, not only above other Nations, but even
above our own Predecessors, let us ask our selves these two Questions:

1. Whether the Mercies of God have not been Greater to us, than to Israel, or
to any other People? And

2. Whether our Ingratitude to him has not been also Greater than any others?

1. That his Mercies to us have been Greater than to Israel or any other, will
need no long or laborious Proof: if the Mercies of the Gospel are Greater than
those of the Law, the Substance of things more Excellent than their Shadows; if
God's casting out the Israelites themselves for our sakes, as he cast out the
seven Nations for theirs, and making the Jews but as Gibeonites to Christians,
as Drawers of Water, and Hewers of Wood, be a higher Favor: If again his
Benefits to us exceed even those of our Fellow Christians, if our Religion be
purer, our Government happier, our People freer than theirs: If, lastly, the
Blessings conferred on us of this Generation transcend even those of our
Ancestors; the Deliverance of the Kingdom in no Age being able to parallel the
wonderful Restoration of it in this.

2. And secondly, I fear 'twill be as easily made to appear, our Sins have been
also Greater than any besides. For if Israel and Others were Ungrateful, we
have been even Despiteful to our Gracious God and Benefactor; sinned, as
'twere, out of a Pique to the Divine Goodness, more than out of infirmity;
whereas they were Idolaters, we have been Atheists; whereas they only forgot
their God, we have derided ours; and not only denied him by our Wicked Lives,
but denied him in Words to have any Being. Again, if Israel and others have
defiled themselves with the Sins of the Flesh, our Nation is polluted from one
End to the Other with Riot and Debauchery: we being not contented to commit the
Shamefullest of all Sins, but we must leave Trophies of them; affix to whole
Streets of our Cities the Names of those Nefanda, those infamous Crimes, which,
as the Apostle says, ought not so much as to be mentioned among Christians. If
others have Murmured after their Eminent Benefits and Deliverances, we have
mutinied and been Seditious after ours; turned our Thanksgivings and
Glorifications of God into Libels against the Government; our Vows of Loyalty
and Obedience to the King, into Conspiracies and Treasons against his Life.

And what do we promise our selves after these things? That though God spared
not his own People, but took the Forfeiture of the Lands of the Israelites, as
well as of the Canaanites, for the greatness of their Transgressions, yet that
he will spare us as more Precious to him? Let us not deceive our selves, the
Greater has been God's Bounty to an Ungrateful People, the Greater will be the
Displeasure he shows to them. Saint Paul, Romans II. brings in God displanting
one Nation for their Iniquity, and planting in another; cutting off, and
graffing-in; after the manner of a Husbandman or Gardener, who places and
displaces his Trees, according to their fruitfulness or unfruitfulness; and he
expressly tells us, That we that are but Wild Branches graffed into the
Olive Tree, have no reason to boast our selves against the Natural Branches and
to be high-minded, but to fear: For if God, says he, spared not the Natural
Branches, take heed lest he spare not you. It Is not so much the Contingency
that is in the Nature of the things of this World, as the Sins of Men that make
them unstable; the Fortunes of Kingdoms are not tossed like the Waves of the Sea,
lift up one while to the Clouds, and then carried down again to the Center by
the force of Winds; but according to their Righteousness or Unrighteousness God
pulls down one, and sets up another. Neither are they governed by the Power of
Stars: The Jews have an excellent Saying, Non est Planeta Israeli, Israel has
no Planet, i. e. though God gave up the Heathen oft-times to be governed, like
the Plants of the Earth, by the Influences of Stars, because they trusted in
such Vain things: yet he orders and disposes the Affairs of his faithful People
immediately himself. And it is a mere Vulgar Conceit, that Comets cause Wars and
Changes of States; Divine Philosophy tells us, Men's Sins occasion God to send
Comets, and to fill the Sky with Prophetic Prodigies. We affect to look as far
beyond our selves as we can for the Causes of our Evils, but they are to be
found nearer at Home, and arise out of our own Breasts; the Heavens are not the
Authors of our Misfortunes, i. e. the Conjunctions or Revolutions of the
Celestial Bodies, but our own Wicked Lives; and the surest Prognostics are to
be made from the Innocence or Guilt of a Nation, and not from the Face of the
Sky. Let no Man think I cast a Cloud upon the Glory of this Day, Illustrious in
the Birth, Illustrious in the Restoration of our most Gracious King; that
instead of exciting, I affect to damp the Public Joy by Ill Bodings; unless he
also supposes, that the Blessings of a Nation cannot be rightly commemorated
and celebrated without Noise and Inconsideration, Tumult and Riot, Excess and
Debauchery, setting-light by Sin, and forgetfulness of Religion. A sad and
severe Reflection on our Unthankfulness to God for the Singular Mercies of this
Day, with a serious Resolution of our better Acknowledging them by a future
Holy Life, will add more Luster and true Joy to it, than the Bravery and
Feasts, the Bells and Bonfires, and all the other Pomps that solemnize it. For
let us consider, That every Wise Agent works to some End or other, and that not
only the Words we have heard this Day explained, but the whole Tenor of
Scripture concurs in this, That the End and Purpose of God's bestowing Benefits
on a Nation, is to make them Righteous and Holy; and that the only Expedient on
our part to secure a Continuation of them, is to have a strict regard to our
Duty; that Obedience is the best Preserver of our Happiness; and the Means
always to keep God's Favor, is always to keep his Laws.

The Thirteenth Sermon.
MARK viii.2, 3. I have Compassion on the Multitude: because they have now been
with me three days, and have nothing to eat.

And if I send them away fasting to their own houses, they will faint by the
way: for diverse of them came from far.


THESE Words were the Introduction to that Illustrious Miracle, by which our
Lord fed four thousand Souls with seven Loaves, and a few small Fishes; made
the bare and spare Allowance of seven Persons (as some suppose) sufficient to
satisfy the Hunger of so great a Multitude. A Miracle that baffled one of the
clearest and most irrefragable Principles in Natural Reason, namely, That the
Part is less than the Whole; making it appear, that when the Lord of Nature
will have it so, a Part shall as many times exceed the Whole, as he pleases: as
the Bread and Fishes here increased, by being eaten and consumed; multiplied,
by being dol'd and distributed about; and the Fragments which remained,
exceeded seven times seven fold the Provision, which at first was set before
them that eat.

Our Lord wrought this Miracle, as himself declares, to relieve the Hunger of
the Multitude: but his principal Design here, as in all his other Miracles, was
to create Faith in such as received Benefit by them; to teach those whom he
healed, that he was the great Physician of the Soul; and whom he fed, that he
was the true Bread that came down from Heaven. And if We (at this great
Distance of time, by our Meditations and Reflections on this Miracle) shall
make it also nourish our Souls, refresh our Faith, relieve and sustain our
fainting Spirits, ready to sink under the continual Opposition of Sin, and the
length of Duties, we shall add yet to the Glory of it, and, in a Spiritual
Sense, make these Words spoken to us: I have Compassion on the Multitude:
because they have now been with me three days, and have nothing to eat, etc.

This Portion of Scripture is part of a larger Narrative, and I shall take that
Way in handling it, which those do, who make Remarks and Observations upon
Notable Occurrents and Events in History, reflect and descant on the Principal
Passages in it, as I conceive they may be most edifying and useful. And in
order to this I shall observe in the Words three things: 1. Our Lord's tender
and compassionate Spirit, I have Compassion. 2. The Object of his Compassion,
the Persons to whom he showed it, the Multitude, I have compassion on the
Multitude. 3. The Motives of his Compassion, which are expressed to be two, Their
present Distress, they were Hungry, and had nothing to eat. And their future
feared Danger, in case they were so dismissed, they will faint by the way. I
begin first with Christ's tender and compassionate Spirit.

I have Compassion.
The Great Preacher, our Blessed Lord, had ended his Sermon to the People, and
as the ancient custom of the Church was, at the End of the first Service, to
dismiss the Poenitentes and Catechumeni, all such as were not qualified to
receive the Sacrament, with these Words, Ite, missa est, Depart and void the
Church: So the Disciples might very fairly here have pronounced an Ite, missa
est, to the Multitude, Ye may be gone, there is nothing more at this time to be
expected, the Prophet has no further words of Instruction to impart to you.
For, as for their want of Bread, whether it proceeded from Negligence or
Necessity, it was not chargeable on the Preacher; he that ministered Spiritual
things, was not also to minister Temporal, but in these to be ministered to. But
our Lord had no purpose to shift off a Work of Mercy, when 'twas seasonable and
in his power, though he might never so fairly have done it: he cast not
therefore in his thoughts, how he might plausibly Excuse his not relieving the
peoples Hunger, but which way he might do it best for the Glory of God, and
their Comfort and Edification. There were a Sort of Preachers in this Kingdom
in the days of its late Troubles, who when they had usurped the whole Revenues
of the Church, grudged to allow the least part of them to the Just Owners: but
thought they approved themselves faithful Pastors, absolved all the Duties of
Good Men, if they showed but Strong Sides, and able Lungs, stood three Hours,
as they called it, in the Pulpit, but after that concerned not themselves,
though their poor Brethren stood as many Days without Meat. The continual
Burden of their Sermon was, The Word of God, the Word of God! Frighting the
People with a Fear of a Famine of that of which there was no fear, viz. of
their seditious Doctrines, and shutting their Eyes to all other Famine, the
Want of those things which should cherish the Life of Man. But our Lord, who
was Pastor bonus, as well as Doctor bonus, a good Shepherd, as well as a good
Teacher, thought Tender Bowels were requisite, as well as Tough Sides; and fed
his Sheep Corporally, as well as Spiritually, when necessity required: he
considered that the devoutest Souls stood in need of Meat, and that as Man did
not live by Bread only, so neither did he live by the Word of God only; but
that Food was necessary, as well as Precepts; Relief to the Hungry, as well as
Instruction to the Ignorant. In the Church of Rome they have an Order of
Fryars-Preachers, men of learning and ability to confute Heretics: and another
Order, which were called Fratres ignorantes, the Unlearned Friars, whose
business it is to tend Hospitals, and to do other Offices of Charity: And though
we approve not the bringing of Ignorant Orders into the Church and Clergy, yet
this double Care of theirs, in providing for the Bodies, as well as the Souls
of men, is highly commendable, and may be justified by the Practice of the
Church in its Earliest and holiest days: as we read Acts 6. that there were not
only Apostles to preach, but also Deacons to serve Tables. The People had been
our Lords Auditors now three days fasting in a desert place, and his
compassionate Heart would not dismiss them hungry, lest the Dissolution of the
Assembly, should be the Dissolution of the Souls and Bodies of many of them; he
resolved therefore to supply by a Miracle, what was wanting in the Desert; to
furnish from the Granaries of Heaven, what the Villages did not afford.

The Word in the Original rendered by our Translators [ Compassion] implies more
than a bare Pity, viz. that our Lord felt a Strong Impulse, or vehement
Percussion in his Bowels, for the Suffering of the people. He wanted not meat
himself, but he was nevertheless sensible of the hunger of others; his own
Stomach gripped him not, yet he was pained, because the Multitude lacked
Sustenance. And this is the true nature of Compassion and Goodness, it lies
under no Evil it self, but yet it is afflicted for what another suffers; it is
safe in its own particular, and yet aghast at the Dangers which it hears of. Who
is weak, says St Paul, and I am not weak? who is offended, and I burn not? That
which Flattery does in Pretense and Dissimulation, Compassion does in truth and
Reality. The Satyrist makes the Sycophant, if his Patron says, It Is cold, call
presently for his Furr-Gown, though in the midst of Summer; and again, if he
says, It Is hot, strip himself of it in the Extremity of Winter. Compassion
feels the heats and colds, the pains and griefs, the wants and nakedness of
those that are under such Afflictions, not apishly imitating, but truly
suffering their Distresses. And our Savior showed that this Passion was
predominant in him, not only at the present, but on many other Occasions; he
sighed for the Sick, shed tears for the Dead, prayed for his Persecutors upon
the Cross, etc. And now I have said so much of our Lord's Compassion, it were
to reproach my Auditory, and not to exhort them, to use any Arguments to show,
we ought to sympathize with him in the like Tenderness; that when he was all
Pity, and melted at every Calamity, it will ill become us to show our selves
Rock and Steel at the Miseries of our Brethren. I proceed to the Object of
Christ's Compassion, the Multitude.

I have Compassion on the Multitude.
Our Lord in journeying from Decapolis and the Regions thereabout, had gathered
to himself by the power of his Preaching, and the sight of his Miracles, a
great Number of promiscuous People, styled in the Original (...), a Rabble of
the Meaner Sort, such as the Priests and Pharisees pointed at John 7. when they
said, Have any of the Rulers believed on him, but only this People, who know
not the Law, and are accursed? For the over-weaning Pharisees reckoned the Poor
among Publicans and Sinners, Reprobates and Harlots; esteemed those who had no
Name in the State, who were capable of bearing no Honor or Office, to be also
incapable of receiving any Special Mark of God's Favor: according to the
Proverbial Speech so common among them, Spiritus non requiescit nisi super
divitem, the Spirit is sent only to Eminent Persons, and refuses to rest on the
Mean and Abject. And yet it was the Distress of these undervalued, despised
People, the Hunger of this condemned reprobated Rabble (in their Rulers account
not worthy to be fed, if with trouble, scarce to be starved, and who if they
did dye through Want, the World would find no Want of them.) that so nearly
affected our Lord, and so sensibly touched his very Vitals. A Commiseration fit
to be transcribed by those that are in Power and Great Place, who show too much
of that Antichristian Turkish Principle, That the Lives of the Vulgar are of
no Moment, fit only to be sacrificed to the Lusts and Pleasures of the Rich in
times of peace, and in War to fill up Ditches, and blunt the Enemies Sword:
thus not being content to be at Ease only, and out of the Peoples Danger,
unless they may be also without all Sense of their Misery. It Is said, as I
remember, of Pompey the Great, mavult Rempublicam turbari, quam Comam, he would
rather the Commonwealth should be disordered than his Hair: and too many there
are of this nice Temper, to be deeplier concerned for every trifling Curiosity
about their own Persons, than for the Public Good or Evil of their Country;
and if their Lot be so happy, as to exempt them from bearing a part in a
General Calamity, they easily exempt themselves from feeling any Trouble for
it. But our Lord showed himself of a Public Spirit; for when he was above the
Evils and Calamities of Mankind, he espoused their Nature to no other End, but
that he might espouse their Miseries; and after he had laid aside his Glory, he
laid down also his Life for the Salvation of his Creatures; he disdained not to
converse with the Meanest of the People, to instruct their Ignorance, to heal
their Infirmities, to relieve their Hunger. And this to teach us, That
Christians ought to show Regard, where others show Scorn; there to place their
Pity and Compassion, where the Custom of the World is to place its Contempt; to
teach by his Own Example, what he afterward taught his Apostle St Peter by the
Sheet of all Sorts of Creatures let down from Heaven, To hold none Refuse or
Common, no, not to esteem the People themselves Vulgar. I pass to the Motives
of our Lord's Compassion, which I said were two. The present Want of the
Multitude, They have nothing to eat. And their feared future Danger, in case
they were so dismissed, They will faint by the Way.

1. Their present Want, They have nothing to eat.
Our Lord not only exercised his Compassion toward the Meanest of Men, but
even in the Meanest things which concerned such men, the catering or providing
Food for them. His Disciples after him thought it a Disparagement to their
higher Calling of Preaching to stoop to such Low Employments. It is not reason,
say they, that we should leave the Word of God, to serve Tables: but He
despised not to serve Tables too. Meat is not the Reward or Aim of a Follower
of Christ, but Grace and the Holy Ghost, Heaven and Eternal Life: Food,
raiment, houses, land, and the rest of things Temporal, are indeed but
Impedimenta Religionis, the Baggage or Luggage of our Christian Warfare,
cumbersome to a Believer, as well as useful; yet because they are useful in our
present Condition, Christ indulges them to us, and is troubled if we want a
Sufficiency of them; and however there is but Vnum Necessarium, One Great
Requisite, Faith; yet the other things of this Life, which are necessary, in
their kind, to that One Necessary, he wills and commands should be given to his
Servants; and if they be, he imputes it to the Givers of them for
Righteousness; and if they be not, to the With-holders of them for
Unrighteousness.

The second Motive of Christ's Compassion was, The feared future Danger of the
People, lest they might faint by the way. He showed himself not only troubled
at present and incumbent Distresses, but solicitous for those that were future
and possible, for all Emergences of Evils which might happen. Thus he wept for
the Destruction of Jerusalem forty Years before it was destroyed: bewailed the
Desolation of Capernaum, while it yet flourisht, and was exalted to heaven.
Compassion, or Fellow-feeling, of another Misery, expresses not the
Commiseration that was in Christ; his was an Ante-passion, or Fore-feeling; he
felt not only what his Servants felt, but what they felt not, but might
possibly feel: If I send them away fasting, says he, they will faint by the
way: We are sensible of one another Calamities, when they fall out, Christ
even when they are contingent. He well deserves the Title of a Merciful
High Priest, who showed himself not only touched with the Evils that oppress
men, but with those also that threaten them.

These were the two Motives of our Lord's Compassion, The present Distress, And
the future Danger of the People. But the Distresses and Dangers of all Sorts of
Men do not equally affect him, but only those of the Worthy. It was the
Singular Faith and Devotion of the Multitude which brought them into the
Inconvenience they were in, and our Lord's words do not only express a
Disposition or Inclination to relieve them, but an Indignation that they should
suffer; (...), that men should do Well, and yet suffer Evil, his Gracious
Nature could not endure. The Circumstances of the Peoples Worthiness and
Goodness, which may be collected from the Words of my Text, are these four:

1. The End for which they followed Christ, It was purely for Instruction and
Conviction: they had no other Design, no other Interest in attending him, but
to hear his Words, and to see his Works; and such deserved not to be starved
away. The Lions do lack and suffer hunger, says the Psalmist, but they which
seek the Lord, shall want no manner of thing that is good. Those that sit
assiduously at Christ's feet, deserve to be fed by his hand; who neglect all
for him, to be cared for by him; and till he had here relieved the Multitude,
he himself suffered; for they appeared to him not only to be his Disciples, but
his Martyrs.

The second Circumstance of their Worthiness was, The Pains they took in
following Christ, Diverse of them, says he, came from far. To follow Christ only
from Street to Street, and Synagogue to Synagogue within the City, merited
Regard: but to attend him from Town to Town, from City to Country, from
Mountain to Desert, called for a greater measure of our Affection. To receive
the Gospel, when it is brought Home to us, is commendable; but to go on
Pilgrimage to hear Wisdom, like the Queen of Sheba, deserves, as she did, to
find more Satisfaction than was expected: those that submit to hear the Word of
God, shall find Comfort and Refreshment to their Souls, but they that hunger
and thirst after Righteousness, inebriabuntur ubertate domus tuae, they shall
be even gorged and sated with the Plenty of his House. The Church of Rome,
among other vain and false Glories, reckons that of Pilgrimages: but who looks
nearly into the Mystery of them, will find, that when they are undertaken by
Great Men, it is with a Persuasion, that the most heinous Offenses may be
expiated by Bodily Pains and profuse Offerings, without Reformation of Life:
and when by those of the Meaner Sort, it is but, under a Color of Religion, a
plain running-away from their Wives and Children, or the Burden of their
Calling; and as they went out Idle and Profligate Persons, they return commonly
Thieves and Murderers.

The third Circumstance of their Worthiness was, The Generosity and
Spiritual-Mindedness they showed: Though they had continued with our Lord three
days, and had made no Provision for the Body, yet they felt no Hunger, or
despised it; they were so transported with his Conversation, that what Christ
said of his own doing the Will of his Father, That it was Meat and Drink to
him, appeared true in the Multitudes hearing his Gracious Words, That it was
Meat and Drink to them: they practiced this Precept before it was taught them,
Anima est plusquam esca, the Concerns of the Soul are to take place before
those of the Body. 'Twas said of the ancient common People of Rome, -- duas
tantum res anxias optat, Panem and Circenses -- that they passionately set
their heart but upon two things, Bread and Plays, their Belly and their
Pastime. But the People here of a Nobler Strain, despised their belly,
pleasure, profit, ease, Life it self, for Religion and Instruction sake: And
therefore though our Lord many other times sent away the People Empty, or slipped
away himself from their importunity, he treated and feasted these, and dismissed
them with Respect and Complement.

The fourth Circumstance of their Worthiness was their Constancy and
Perseverance, they forsook not Christ in three days. Those that are not
discouraged at the first Onset on Religion, yet many times length and hardness
of Duties, severe Discipline, Danger and Persecutions, will make them stagger
and recoil. The Seed that fell upon Stony Ground, sprung up faster for a
season, than that which fell on the Good Ground: but when the Sun arose and
smote it, it presently withered, wanting root. The Children of Israel went
cheerfully and lustily with Moses out of Egypt, but when their Food grew
scarce, and they saw the Host of Pharaoh pursue them, they boggled in their
Enterprise, and in their hearts returned again into Egypt, preferring Bondage
with Safety and Plenty, before Freedom with Hardship and Danger. But their
Posterity voluntarily followed Christ three days without Sustenance, and never
looked back to their houses, or yet to their beloved City. If I forget thee, O
Jerusalem! says the Psalmist, let my right Hand forget its Cunning. But these
Israelites, when they heard Tidings of the Heavenly Jerusalem, the Jerusalem
above, they cast behind them all thoughts of Jerusalem below, it appeared to
them no better than a second Babylon, or house of Bondage. As our Lord
therefore made others of the People his Scholars, he made these of his Family;
as he taught them, he fed these; revealed not only the Word, but the Power and
Glory of God to them. To conclude:

I shall raise from all that I have said but this One acceptable and
comfortable Doctrine, Whosoever follows Christ faithfully, affectionately, and
constantly in these days, will find him as Compassionate in their Wants and
Distresses, as the Multitude here did. For he has the same Bowels and
Tenderness, now at the Right Hand of God, which he had when he conversed with
men on Earth: he is ascended Entire into the Heavens, he did not carry up his
Body thither, and leave his Affections in the Grave. If we therefore seek the
Kingdom of Heaven, in the first place, and its Righteousness, we may rest
assured of our Lord's Promise, That all the Necessaries of this Life shall be
added to us; that if we perform the Principal, he will take care to make good
the Accessory. What is said of the Productions of Nature, That she brings forth
nothing but what she provides for, is much more true of the Productions or
Children of Grace. For when the Earth withholds its Fatness, and the Clouds
their Dew, when the Creatures that should nourish Men starve themselves for
want of Nourishment, when the Breasts of Nature seem wholly dried up, venit
Coelum in parts, Heaven it self will come in to succor, and take Part with
the Faithful: and if Sterility abounds, Grace (on this occasion also) will much
more abound; if the Soil afford no Corn, Bread shall be rained from the Sky; if
the Springs fail, the Stony Rock shall send forth Water, and Rivers shall run
in dry places; the Ravens shall feed the Righteous, or their little Stock shall
increase as fast as it is spent; the Courses of Nature shall be inverted, rather
than Christ's Truth fail; Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but not one Tittle
of his Word shall fall to the ground. And if any say, How comes it then to
pass, that the Servants of God do suffer Want? Nay, that commonly they are more
destitute and persecuted than other Men? I answer to this, as our Lord did to
his Disciples urging him on a time to eat, I have Meat to eat, says he, which
you know not of: So the Faithful have Meat to eat, which the World knows not
of; they have Peace, Plenty, and Prosperity, though not seen by every Eye. They
have the Grace of God, which is as a hidden Manna in their Hearts, and as a
Well of Living Water, which suffers them neither to hunger nor thirst. And is
it not much more Eligible and Glorious to fast with Moses and Elias forty days,
than to feast even at the Table of Princes? To be in the State of Angels, who
need neither Food nor Raiment, than to be clothed and served with all the
Sumptuousness and Magnificence of Solomon? The Righteous have Content in
Poverty, which is more than Riches; Joy in Bonds, which is better than Freedom;
Satiety in a little, which is not always found in Abundance. And what is this,
but to receive Bread from Heaven, when the Earth affords none? Water from the
Rock, when the Springs are dried up? To be fed even by a more Wonderful Way,
than by the Ministry of Ravens? Neither is the Favor of God this Way showed to
the Followers of Christ, less than that which he showed to his Own Servants of
old, but much greater: for it speaks yet a higher Grace to be content to perish
under Hunger, Poverty, and Bonds, than to be snatched out of these Evils after
a Miraculous Manner. Saint Peter rejoiced more, when he was scourged for
bearing Testimony to Christ, than when he was delivered by an Angel from the
Death designed him by Herod. And Saint Paul gloried more in his Persecutions
and Sufferings, than he did even in his Charismata, his Miraculous Gifts of the
Holy Ghost. And thus our Gracious Lord relieves the Necessities of his Servants
from the Storehouses of the World, or from the Riches of his Grace; rescues
them out of their Afflictions, or makes them delight in them; supplies their
Wants, or sets them above the Wants of other Men; takes away their Wants, or
takes them up to that Place, where no Wants are, and where all Tears shall be
wiped from their Eyes. To which blessed Place, God of his infinite Mercy,
through our Lord Jesus Christ, bring us all. And

To God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, be ascribed all Honor, Glory,
Worship, and Thanksgiving, this Day forth and for evermore. Amen.
The Fourteenth Sermon.
LUKE xvi.9. -- Make to your selves Friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness,
that when ye fail, they may receive you into everlasting habitations.


THESE Words may be called a Lecture of holy Usury, they teaching us the
highest Advantages that are to be made of Riches; beyond what is to be learned
from the Books of Eastern Merchants, or the Trade to both the Indies; from the
Mysterious Rules of the ancient Publicans, or our modern Bankers. 1. They teach
men, by a Divine Alchymy, how to convert Earthly Treasure into Heavenly; to
make Money (the ordinary Salary and hire of Sin) to be the Price of Salvation,
and the Purchase of the Holy Ghost, without the Danger of Simony. 2. Men are
instructed by them how to cure the Vanity and Instability of Riches, called for
their inconstant and short Abode, mendacium, phantasmata, praestigiae, scenica
persona, etc. a Lie, a Dream, a Delusion, the quick shifting of a Scene or
Vizor in the Theater; and notwithstanding that it is said, We can carry nothing
out of this World with us, we are showed which way to confer them to Heaven,
and to erect Banks in those Eternal Mansions. 3. Whereas Folly is ordinarily
imputed to Rich men, insanus and dives, stultus and dives, the Mad man and the
Rich, the Fool and the Rich, being seldom in Scripture out of conjunction, it
being rarely seen that a Good Understanding goes along with a Great Estate;
that the same Person should be born both to much Wealth, and to much Wit; my
Text informs men how to reconcile these together, how the Rich having the
advantage of Wealth, may have also the advantage of Wisdom; how with their
Transitory things they may purchase things Eternal: nay, and which is yet a
higher Strain of Wisdom, how (being but Stewards of the Riches they possess)
they may make (after the example of one of the craftiest Dealers in this World*
and best practiced in the Double ways of Cozenage) the gainful Purchase of
Heaven at another Cost: and do this Innocently* as he did it Fraudulently.
Lastly, Men are taught how to remove the Difficulty, and almost Impossibility,
of a Rich man's entering into the Kingdom of Heaven; how to make its Narrow
Passage ( which is as the Eye of a Needle to a Camel) as wide as the Gate of a
City, or the Royal Way leading to it. A Lecture which, undoubtedly, must be
very acceptable to Great and Rich men, instructing them how to possess the Good
Things of this World, without forfeiting those of the next; how to join
Celestial Joys to Earthly Felicity; immortal Glory to Secular Prosperity;
Again, which can be no less grateful to the Penurious and Covetous, who love to
enjoy their Wealth, after they have parted with it; to have it their Friend,
when they can hold it no longer their Servant; who desire to dwell for ever, if
it were possible, with their beloved Gold; to cohabit with it in the next Life,
as they brooded over it in this; my Text comports and complies with all these
Desires. Make to your selves Friends of the Mammon of Unrighteousness, that
when ye fail, they may receive you into Everlasting Habitations.

The Words offer these two things in general to our Consideration,

I. The Necessity of our Fa^ling in these Habitations, -- When ye fail --

II. The Policy taught us, how to procure Admission into Everlasting
Habitations, when we fail in these: and that is, By making Friends of the
Mammon of Unrighteousness.

And without troubling you with any further Division at present, I begin with
the first of these,

The Necessity of our failing in these Habitation
These Words [ when ye fail] are by some understood two ways, by our failing in
Duty, and our failing in our Being, or Dying: As the Steward in the Parable
failed two Ways: 1. In his Honesty, as at ver. 1. he had wasted his Master's
Goods. And 2dly, In his Office, as at ver. 2. where his Master says to him,
Thou may be no longer Steward. And after the like manner all Men fail, more
or less, in their Fidelity and Justice: But all equally and necessarily in
their Mortal Being. But whether we fail in the one of these Ways, or the other,
whether we come short in our Duty, or are cut short in our Lives; in both these
Failings the Unrighteous Mammon will stand us in stead. 1. If we fail in our
Justice, Eleemosynae sunt instar Justitiae, Alms are a kind of Justice; and not
only to Forgive, but also to Give, will cover a multitude of Sins: So that if
we fail, viz. in our Integrity, we may again be restored by our Charity; and
when we have wasted and consumed our Graces, we may recruite them by exhausting
our Purses, and in this Shipwreck also, casting our Goods overboard, may be a
Means of our Preservation.

But though this Sense of the Words has nothing in it contrary to sound
Doctrine, yet it cannot be that which our Lord points at in them: For the
Failing here spoken of is supposed to be Inevitable, Necessary, and Universal,
when ye fail; indefinitely, when ye All fail: neither can the Words be supposed
to allude to the Common Pardonable Failing or Miscarriage of an honest Servant,
but to the Purloining and Cheating of a Thief, which the Steward was, and for
that cause was turned out of his Office. If therefore we say the Failing here
is meant of our Duty, it must be of our General Total Duty, which is Apostasy,
or else it holds no proportion to the Steward's failing in the Parable: and if
we do, it holds no proportion with the Truth: for we must affirm, our Lord
supposes it Necessary and Inevitable for all Men Universally to be Apostates.

We must take the Words therefore in the other Sense, For Failing in our Being,
or Mortal Bodies: which are often resembled in Scripture to Houses and
Tabernacles, but I shall instance only in 2. Cor. 5.1. For we know, if the
Earthly Houses of this Tabernacle were dissolved* we have a Building of God, a
House not made with Hands, Eternal in the Heavens. There is in the Words the
Figure Euphemismus, which terms things by more gentle and Favorable Names,
than properly belong to them. Death sounds harsh to those it is denounced; to
alleviate therefore the ungratefulness of it, it is rendered Failing: But the
plain Importance of these Words [ when ye fail] is no other than this, When ye
Die.

But now, though this be the true Meaning of the Words, it may seem to be a
Theme less necessary to be insisted on, than any other, To tell men they must
Die: Not that the Admonition is not weighty and of the highest Concern, but
because it is so well known by all, and none needs this Information, Linquenda
domus, and tellus, and pavens uxor -- that our Houses, Lands, and tender
Relations must be left by us; that nothing which is either dear to us, or we
dear unto, can exempt us from the Law of Death, is News to no man; all men, of
what Sort and Condition soever, can assume Saint Paul's scio, We Know that this
Earthly Tabernacle shall be dissolved. The Ignorant see it daily demonstrated
in the Mortality of other men, and the Infirmities they find in themselves; the
Learned yet further by Philosophy and Reason, which tell them, That their
Bodies being made up of a Mass of contrary Humors continually jarring and
fighting with one another, the Victory on either side must certainly be the
Destruction of the Subject in which they are contained. Divinity adds to these
a third Demonstration, teaching men that there is a Law of Death in their
Members, not that which I but now spoke of, a Natural Law of Mortality, but a
Spiritual Law of Sin, and consequently of Death: which Law had its Sanction*
from God's own Mouth, Genesis 2. In the hour thou eatest, thou shall dye. This
present World is but a Nursery or Seminary to another, in which nothing is to
be seen more common, than the transplanting of Men from this to that: Or it may
be likened to a Tree, that has at the same time upon it, some Fruit decaying,
some ripe, and some blooming, the one continually succeeding and thrusting off
the other, till the Tree it self at last fails, as not being designed to stand
for ever.

All Men, I say, are of sufficient Learning to preach such Lectures as these,
and stand not in need to have their Understanding instructed, or their Reason
convinced in this Particular. But yet, I know not how, though Demonstration and
Experience assure this Truth on the one side, there is something in Life it
self on the other, something in Prosperity, Youth, Greatness, the Businesses of
this World, and the like, which strangely contradict it; and though we believe
nothing more certainly, than that All Men must Dye, we believe nothing more
hardly, than that we our Selves must Dye. Those that burn in a Fever feel no
Cold; that are encompassed with much Light, discern no Darkness; no more can
those that are incircled with the Splendor of a high Fortune, see through it
the gloomy Shades of the Grave; nor those that are within the warm embraces of
Youth and Health apprehend the Cold remote Hand of Death. Paracelsus was
persuaded, that there was a Certain Spirit of Salt, that gave Vegetation to all
things in the World, which if he could have found out, he would have preserved
himself and others Immortal. All men have generally a Tincture of this foolish
Chemical, or rather Chimerical, Salt in their Fancy; which though it preserves
them not from Dying, yet it gives them a Persuasion of long Living; and though
it cannot defer the Fatal Hour one Moment, it can make them forget it, and put
the Consideration of it far from them. Our Reflections upon our own Dying, are
much like those of Raving Lovers upon the Loss of those they Immoderately
affected, who at the very Instant that they embrace their Dead Bodies in their
Arms, cry out, They cannot, they must not, they shall not Dye. What they are
not able to support, they are not willing to acknowledge; the Sorrow which is
too Great for their Hearts to bear, is too Great also for their Tongues to
pronounce. And after the like manner, though we see and feel Death daily
marching toward us, we being not able to brook its Approach, we endeavor to
disbelieve it; and hope to avoid the Evil, by disowning it; to delude or delay
our Destiny, by entertaining Fictions of a Long Life; and I may say, There is
nothing that we at once so much Believe, and so much Disbelieve, as the
Necessity of our Dying.

It Is not therefore Superfluous to teach Men the so Known Lesson of Dying, to
put them in mind of that, which is daily presented before their Eyes. And the
Wisest in all Ages, as well Heathens as Christians, have used studied Arts to
preserve a Memory of their Frail Condition: some have brought Urns, and Skulls,
and Coffins into their Bed-Chambers and Closets, that where the Scene of their
Business or Pleasure lay, there they might be admonished, that they must one
day bid a Farewell to those things: Others have served up Skeletons at their
Feasts, the whole Frame of a Dead man's Bones made with Art to turn to all the
Guests, and with a horrid Aspect to survey the Table, and to insinuate that
Death was always near, though forgotten in the Noise of Mirth and Wine; sat
President of many Feasts, though invisibly through the Reek of Jollity and
Meat. Others upon the Days of their Coronation and Triumph have placed those
among the Multitude, that might mingle Admonitions of their Mortality together
with the general Applauses and Acclamations, that they might not forget, while
they conquered or commanded many People, themselves were Subject to Death; and
that their Heads, which were now crowned with Gold or Laurel, must after a
short time be laid in the Dust. All these confessing, that it was not enough
that Men should believe they must Dye, when they Considered and Reasoned of it,
but that they ought frequently to Consider and Reason of it.

And now after all is done, though these Courses may seem of great Power and
Efficacy to take off the Strangeness and Terror of Death: yet they have been
found to fall short of the End they aimed at: For though men by these Artifices
have become acquainted with the Name and Images of Death, they have still been
miserably Strangers to Death it self; neither is it possible to strip the King
of Terrors of his amazing Circumstances merely by remembering him, and making
Pictures and Representations of him: but men must fit and prepare themselves to
entertain him, they must lie under no Guilt of Sin, nor be too much in love
with this Life, before they can Master this Apprehension: for it is no less than
a Contradiction, that those that are fond of this Life, should welcome Death;
that are inferior to every Lust and Temptation, should be Superior to the
Greatest of Evils. We must make Death Harmless, before we can make him not to
be Dreadful; take away his Sting and Curse by Repentance and a holy Life,
before we can take away his Terror; make him Beneficial and Advantageous,
before we can reconcile him to our thoughts, and render him Familiar to us. For
to retain Sin, and yet to hope to free our Selves from the Punishment of Sin,
would not be to set our selves to conquer the Unreasonable Fears of our Nature,
but to conquer God, to wrest the Vengeance of Iniquity out of his hands, which
the Pain and Fear of Death are. And if it be objected, that the ancient
Heathen, out of a Principle only of Magnanimity and an Emulous Bravery,
despised Death; I answer, That they cannot so truly be said to have Despised
Death, as to have been Ignorant of it; they promised themselves after their
departure hence a Being of Fame and Renown, they knew nothing but Fables of the
Punishments of another World: for it is not Courage, but Madness, to despise
Torments that are Intolerable, and Eternal. If it be urged again, That many
Professors of Christianity, who have heard the Doctrine of Damnation and
another Life frequently preached, have yet after many heinous and unrepented
Sins rushed as boldly upon Death as the Heathen; I reply, Though they often
heard the Doctrine of Damnation preached, they never believed it; but
Infidelity wrought the same Effect in them, which Ignorance did in the other.
No, we must disarm Death, as I said, of the Evil that accompanies him by a
Righteous Life, before we can disarm him of his Terror; if we will not be
dismayed, when this Grim Landlord comes to turn us out of our Mortal Tenements,
we must provide our Selves beforehand Everlasting Habitations. Which brings me
to my Second General Part, the Policy which is taught us to procure Everlasting
Habitations, when we fail in these; and that is, by making to our selves Friends

Of the Mammon of Unrighteousness.
We may observe in the Policy here prescribed us, three things: 1. The
Instrument of it, The Unrighteous Mammon. 2. The Use of this Instrument, We are
to make Friends with it. 3. The End of this Use, That we may be received into
Everlasting Habitations.

I begin with the Instrument, the Unrighteous Mammon, in which there are two
things to be explained, The Name and Substance of it, Mammon; And the Condition
or Qualification of it, The Unrighteous Mammon.

1. The Name and Substance of it, Mammon.
The Word Mammon, by the consent of most Critics, is originally Syriack, but
with very little Variation of writing and pronunciation, as Mamon or Mammon,
Mamona or Mammona, it is Chaldee, Hebrew, Greek, Latin, and as St Hierome and
St Augustine affirm, also Punick or Carthaginian; not to say how far it has
obtained in the Modern Tongues. A Word, it seems, very significant, that is
adopted into so many Languages, and become Proverbial, and the Proper Name of a
Deity: for Mammon imports the Same with Plutus, the God of Riches: who was an
Anti-Deity of old set up by Covetousness, which, as the Apostle says, is
Idolatry; and to whom every full Barn of the Miser, is, as 'twere, a Chapel;
and every Storehouse a Temple. And this Idol has more and more Early Votaries,
than any other whatsoever; not only Old men being its Priests and Sacrists, but
Young men are also its Adorers; and Children were of old dedicated to it, in
Ventilabro olim infantes collocabant, in futurarum divitiarum and affluentiae
auspicium, 'twas an ancient Custom to lay Infants to sleep in the Fan that
winnow'd Corn, as a Good Auspice of their future Plenty and Abundance. But to
understand plainly what Mammon is without Deity or Disguise, without Figure or
Mystery, we have no more to do but to look to the 6th Verse of this Chapter,
where he is set down in his pure and naked Nature, to be a hundred Measures of
Oil, and a hundred Measures of Wheat, i. e. to be the Fruits and Products of
the Earth, Corn, Wine, Oil, Gold, Silver, Jewels, etc. all that is Money and
Money-Worth, is Mammon: and so the Word signifies in the Original, Treasure or
Riches of any Sort: or as Suidas yet more critically, Superfluous or
Unnecessary Riches.

And here by the way, this mightily commends the Policy which is taught us,
that with such Vile, Superfluous, Unnecessary things we may purchase things
Inestimable, and of the highest Importance; that with things Temporal, and
Perishing even in the Using, we may procure things Eternal, even Everlasting
Habitations. But so it is, God is pleased that we should trade with him for his
Heavenly Treasures, as men traded at first with the Indians for their Gold and
Jewels, with Beads and Glasses: Only we must observe the Rule St Jerome
prescribes in such our Negotiation, We must give our Hearts to God, as well as
our Goods; male enim dividit, says the Father, qui animam Diabolo tribuit, opes
Deo; he is a false and deceitful Merchant, that offers his Goods to God, and his
Service to the Devil; without Sanctity of Life there is no difference between
Alms and Simony; between attempting to purchase the Kingdom of Heaven, and the
Gifts of the Holy Ghost, for Money; Mammon joined with Righteousness is the
Current Price of Salvation, but mixed with Sin is worse than the Dung of the
Earth; this is Mammon.

And then in the second place, for the Condition or Qualification of it, the
Unrighteous Mammon, or as it is in my Text, the Mammon of Unrighteousness,
which is the same thing, this being only the Hebrew manner of speaking, which
often uses the Genitive Case for the Adjective, or instead of an Adjective. Now
Mammon is not called Unrighteous, because it is Unrighteous in it self; all the
Creatures of God are Good, and Riches are the Choicest Part of those Good
Creatures: Neither in regard that it is Unrighteous to possess them;
contrariwise, they are the Gifts and Favors of God, and beatus and dives, the
Rich and Blessed are not undeservedly made Synonyma's: But Mammon is called
Unrighteous, because, for the most part, it is got Unrighteously, according to
that Saying, Omnis Dives aut iniquus est, aut iniqui Haeres, Every Rich man is
either an Unjust Man, or the Heir of an Unjust: Or again, because it goes
Unjustly from us in the Expense of Sin and Vanity. It Is called also Unrighteous
in Opposition to the True Riches, as at ver. 11. If ye have not been faithful
in the Unrighteous Mammon, who shall commit to your trust the True Riches? But
though Mammon may be, and is, called Unrighteous upon these and the like
accounts: yet it seems to be termed Unrighteous in my Text upon a Particular
and distinct Account from all these, which is set down ver. 12. If you have not
been faithful in that which is an Other Man's, who shall give you that which is
your Own? So that Mammon is principally styled Unrighteous here, because the
Riches we employ are an Other Persons, and yet we employ them for our
Advantage, as if they were our Own: as the False Steward did his Lord's Goods.
And Riches may be said not to be our Own in two Respects.

1. Because they are God's; as the Psalmist says, The Earth is the Lord's, and
the fullness thereof. He is the True Proprietary; and the most rightful
Possessors among Men, are but Stewards. 2. Because in the Law those things are
only styled propria, our Own, which will stay with us, which are in our Power,
and which we can dispose of at our pleasure: as Birds and Beasts which we take,
and let go, and take again: but those which we have not thus at our Will and
Command, are counted Ferae Naturae, of a Wild Nature. Now Worldly Riches, in a
Moral account, are of this last Sort, Wild and Uncertain, no man is Secure of
them, with any Care or Providence can hedge them in, But they make them Wings,
as Solomon says, and fly away; They depart through their own default, or the
default of others; we forfeit, or we lose them; they perish, or by a Secret
Decree, pass to an other Master.

On these Considerations therefore, when ever we bestow a Charity, or any other
Pious Benefaction; we may well account, we give but that which is at present in
our power, and perhaps to morrow will not be: and again, that when we are most
Liberal, we are but de alieno munifici, bountiful at an Others Cost; and we may
say of our Alms, if we speak strictly, what Christ did of the Sitting at his
Right hand and his Left in his Kingdom, They are not mine to give. Yet such is
the Goodness of God, that he accepts our Robberies from him, as our Bounty to
him; interprets our Trespasses on his Royalties, and Purloinings of his
Treasure, our Righteousness, Fidelity, and Wisdom; gives us an Euge for it, as
the Lord of the False Steward did to him in the Parable. Not that he applauded
his Falsehood and Dishonesty, but the Subtilty and Dexterity he showed in it; as
it is said -- subitis casibus ingenium, for showing a Present Wit in a sudden
Straight, and making the best of a bad Accident. The Steward is praised, as we
praise the Fox; not for the Mischief he does us, but for the Craft with which
he does it. Or as a Judge may admire the cunning Fetches or Contrivances of a
Thief, whom he thinks fit notwithstanding to condemn to the Gallows. We are not
taught, by the Example of the Steward, to steal from our Neighbor to serve our
Own, the Poors, or God's Interests; we must not cheat in our Trade to provide
for our Children; rob on the Highway, or cozen the Exchequer to give Alms or
build Hospitals. No, but if as the False Steward made Provision for his
approaching Poverty at his Lord's Charges, we shall take of God's Abundance, of
which he has made us his Stewards, and lay it out in Pious Works, there is no
harm done; if, I say, we make the things of this World Instrumental to the
obtaining the Next; if we make Riches (which are commonly a Snare, and lead so
many to Perdition) conduce to bring us to the Kingdom of Heaven, God, who is
our Lord and Master, will applaud this Divine Craft in us; who thinks himself
only then to be Robbed and Defrauded, when his Goods are not after this manner
employed. And so I pass to the Use we are to make of the Unrighteous Mammon,
which is,

To procure Friends with it.
Here I shall enquire, 1. How we are to make Friends with it; And, 2. What
Friends we are to make. How we are to make Friends with it, the Practice of the
Steward will direct us, Who where a hundred Measures were due, required only
fifty; again, where the Debt was a hundred, accepted of fourscore; i. e. in
fewer Words, By Giving our Riches. There is nothing that makes Friends, equal
to Bounty; a Gift, as it blinds the Eyes of the Wise, so it wins the Hearts of
the Ingenious, and reconciles the Affections of the Averse. The ancient Heroes
held no Friendship so Sacred, as that which was begun with Gifts: a Goblet or
Spear, a fair Horse or Armor given by the Parents, laid the Foundation of
future Amity between their Posterity; and they often preferred such Amity
before Alliance or Consanguinity: as Teucer, on this account, sided with the
Grecians against the Trojans, though Priam was his Uncle, and his Mother a
Trojan. But we need not seek profane Story for the proof of this matter:
Solomon tells us, A Gift is as a Precious Stone in the eyes of him that has it,
wheresoever it turns, it prospers. And Jacob found this Course successful in
appeasing his Brother Esau's wrath. God himself is pleased with Offerings and
Sacrifices, with Alms and Oblations: Thy Prayers are heard, says the Angel to
Cornelius, Acts 10.4. and thy Alms are had in remembrance in the Sight of God.
If we would write many Volumes of the Art of making Friends, we could not
prescribe a more powerful Expedient than this of Liberality. A Gift is an
Experienced Good Will, a Demonstration of the Affection, as it is vulgarly
called: he that Gives not, may Love; but he that Gives, has testified his
Kindness.

But then in the second place, What Friends are we to make? We shall learn this
best from the Rule Christ gives us, Luke 14.12. to choose our Guests. When thou
make a Supper, says he, call not thy Kinsfolk and rich Neighbors, but the
Poor, the Maimed, and the Blind. Those which he would have us there make our
Guests, he would have us here make our Friends. It Is the Practice in a great
Part of Christendom, to give away large Estates and Possessions to lusty Men
to sing Latin Prayers in behalf of the Living and the Dead, which the one hear
not, and the other, for the most part, understand not; Prayers poured out by
Number, not by Devotion; and that plentiful Relief that should be sent to the
Hospital, is consumed in the Covent; which should feed the Hungry, and clothe
the Naked, is given to maintain a Holy Sloth, and too often a Lewd Idleness;
and it may be truly said of those that part with their Estates on this account,
that they part with them for a Song. I know they maintain, That these
Evangelical Poor, as they call them, are to be relieved in the first place, and
the Poor through a hard Necessity in the second. But we neither find any such
Doctrine, or yet such Persons in the Gospel: the Widows and Fatherless, the
Sick and Aged, are there recommended to our Charity, and not the Voluntary,
Sturdy, Ambitious, and affected Beggars, the Beggars that awe the States they
live in. The Rule Christ gives us is, To make those our Friends, that cannot be
our Friends again. These are they to whom the Corn and the Oil are to be
imparted, or remitted. Invite not the Rich, says he, lest they invite you
again: as if there were Danger in so doing, Danger of losing the Reward
promised to Charity. Alms never shoots up to so large a Harvest, as when it is
cast into Barren Soil; the greatest Sterility sends forth the richest Crop. And
so I pass to my last Particular, The End of the Policy,

That they may receive you into Everlasting Habitations.
As our Lord said, There were many Widows in Israel in the days of the Prophet
Elias, but he was sent to none of them, but unto Zarepath to a Woman that was a
Widow; so it may be said, Though there are many Lazarus's in the World, there
may be but few that will be admitted into Abraham's Bosom: and therefore the
Policy may not be so good to rely on them, to introduce us into that Place,
from whence themselves shall be shut out. But yet if we consider, that in
giving to the Falsely Poor, we may be Truly Charitable; and though our Money be
cast away, our Good Purpose will not; we shall not trust to a Deceitful Policy,
if we promise our selves, that those that are rejected and cast into Hell, may
assist us to the attaining of Heaven; and that even these Reprobates may make
us Saints. But to answer this and the like Objections: Whereas it is said in my
Text [ that They may receive you] as if the Poor, or Mammon, or Angels, or some
other failing Power, were to receive us, the Words are to be taken Impersonally
[ ye shall be received:] Or else as having a Figure in them, a Metonymy of the
Motive for the Effect, and so the Poor are said to receive us, when God or
Christ, in Contemplation of our Charity to them, receives us.

Now to make some Application, and to conclude: Though things stand thus, that
Men are of their Worldly Goods but breves Domini, short Possessors, and they
may purchase with them Eternal Felicity and Glory, they generally neglect to
make this Advantage by them. And we see some, when their Treasure is like a
Mine, and their Storehouses resemble the Harvest and Vintage of the Year, yet
their Covetousness so much exceeds their Abundance, that they cannot be content
to do any Good with all they have; their Business is to Gather, not to Use;
cogitant quam been alii post se vivant, non quam male ipsi moriantur; they are
pleased to think how Happily others shall live after them, and consider not how
Accursedly themselves in the mean time Live and Dye. Again, on the other side,
other Rich men as sottishly waste in Voluptuousness and Sensuality, what the
former gripingly spared; to gratify a Lust, to purchase a Delicious Sin, they
will pour out their Wealth without Measure, and think no Profusion too great:
but to all Works of Piety and Charity they are Deaf, and a Public
Contribution, in their conceit, would undo them. And thus all the Advantages
God has given them to procure their Salvation, serve only to increase their
Accounts at Doomsday, and to aseertain to themselves a greater Damnation: of
all the Vast Riches they possessed, there remains not one Monument of
Liberality, but only fouler Sinks, and bigger Dunghills, an Ill Reputation, and
a Corrupted Age. When Alphonso (the Good King of Arragon, who gave so much in
Charity) was asked, What he intended, in such vast Donations, to reserve for
himself? answered, Ea ipsa quae dono, the very things that I give. Which
Saying, though it may be despised by those that are of a contrary Temper: as
the rapacious Pharisees laughed at our Lord, and pitied him, when he preached
against Covetousness: yet at that Day, when Men's Words and Works shall be
rewarded according to their Merit, the Words of King Alphonso will be found to
have no less Wisdom in them, than Bounty: and then men will also understand,
That all that they have Ill-Saved, or Spent, profits them nothing, but only
what they have Piously or Charitably bestowed; that this is the only Wealth
that benefits them, and never forsakes them; the Good Works, which, as St John
says, follow them into the Other World.

But the Rich and Potent are not only concerned in the Policy taught in my
Text, but those also of an Inferior Condition have their Names in God's Census,
or Book of Cesments for the Poor, and must not look upon themselves as exempted
from the Duties of Charity. Acts 3.6. says St Peter, Gold and Silver have I
none, but such as I have, give I thee. In the Name of Jesus of Nazareth, rise
up and walk. He that cannot clothe nor feed his Brother, possibly may heal him;
who can Give him nothing, can Forgive him and pray for him. But we may keep
here to the Letter of Giving Charity: for it is rarely seen, that any are so
destitute, but they may give to the Destitute. Christ had not where to lay his
Head, yet he had a Small Bag, out of which he could say to his Disciples, Give
something to the Poor. And if those that count themselves the most Indigent,
did compute, what passed through their Hands in a Year, (as Seneca says of Men's
Time, Non exiguum temporis habemus, sed multum perdimus, We have not little
Time, but spend much Idly) they might say of their undervalued Stock, Non
exiguum Mammonae habemus, sed multum perdimus, our Money would not be little,
if we spent it not Idly. The Sums which slip away inconsiderately through
the Fingers even of the Meaner Sort, would set Beggars on work, and knock the
Shackles off from hundreds of Prisoners and Captives.

But let us all consider, of what Condition soever we are, High or Low, that we
have no long time either to abuse our Wealth, or to deceive our Selves with
false Measures taken of our Actions. Some perhaps, who hear me this Day, may
not have so much Leisure allowed them, as the Steward had, to change an Item in
their Accounts; to say to a Poor Debtor, that owes them a hundred Measures,
Take thy Bill, sit down, and write fifty; or Take thy Bill, and write
fourscore. If any of us have a Lease or Patent ready to expire, we neglect no
time to renew it: but we are not at all sollicitous whether we lapse the Time
of Grace, or forfeit our Heavenly Inheritance. How much wiser Tenants are we,
than Christians? Patentees, than Heirs of Glory? We are all assured, that the
Day of Death, the Dissolution of these Earthly Tabernacles, will come; the Day
in which Wealth, Beauty, Greatness, Glory, and all other Worldly Advantages
will profit us nothing; the Day in which the Rich and Potent, as well as the
Poor and Mean (however Numerous their Friends and Attendants now are) must
stand alone, and answer for what they have done in this Life; in solatium
ruinae, in Consolation of the Dreadful Circumstances of that Day, let us
provide some Support, some Refuge, some Good Works, as Friends to stand by us,
lest our Spirits break through intolerable Horror and Despair! We will not
remove from one House to another, without sending before Furniture, Provisions,
and Servants, to receive us; and is it possible we should not care, what the
Habitations are, in which we must abide to all Eternity? Whether they be Places
of Refreshment, or Torment? Mansions of Bliss, or Prisons of Darkness and
Horror? If we value not what it becomes us to do in this Life, as Good Men,
yet let us consider at least what it becomes us to do, as Wise Men: But, alas,
Wisdom and Goodness are not two things! Had the Rich Man in the Parable had
leave to return out of Hell, to have acted his Life a second time over upon
Earth, he would not have deserved to have been called Fool again, for despising
the Poor, and trusting in Full Barns and Enlarged Storehouses; he would sooner
have clothed the Beggar in Purple, and have set him at his Table, and have
taken himself his place among the Dogs: but the Season was past, and Leave and
Opportunity to show such Wisdom was not allowed him. This, this Life is the
Time of doing our Duty, of giving Largess and Charity to the Poor, and of
performing every Good Work beside: if our Lord could say of himself, I must
work the Works of him that sent me, while it is Day; the Night comes when no
man can work, Joh. 9.4. then certainly it more highly concerns us to lay hold
of the Season allowed us to do God's Will: and this weighty Admonition is our
Lord's, and not mine. -- Make to your selves Friends of the Mammon of
Unrighteousness, that when ye fail, they may receive you into Everlasting
Habitations.

The Fifteenth Sermon.
PSALM xi.3. If the Foundations be destroyed: what can the Righteous do?


THE preceding Verses run thus: In the Lord put I my trust: how say ye to my
Soul, Fly as a Bird to the Mountain? For lo, the wicked bend their Bow, and
make ready their Arrow upon the String, that they may privily shoot at the
Upright in heart. If the Foundations be destroyed: what can the Righteous do?

That the Lord cares for the Righteous, defends them against the
Machinations of the Wicked, as with a Shield, or, as it follows at the 7th
Verse, That the Righteous Lord loves Righteousness, his Countenance does
behold the Upright, is prima Veritas, the first Truth and Fundamental Article,
that both comforts and confirms the Godly in their Godliness; that while they
continue to be faithful, God will continue to be favorable; while they serve
him, he will protect them; while their Righteousness is immutable, their State
shall be invincible; at least their Foundations shall not be destroyed, in
their greatest Dangers they shall have a Refuge, in their highest Exigents they
shall know what to do.

The Time and Occasion of writing many Psalms are utterly unknown, and we have
nothing but the bare Conjecture of Expositors for them, grounded upon the
fansy'd comporting or agreeing of some Words in the Psalm with some Historical
Passage: and in the great Obscurity and uncertainty of the Occasion of the
present Psalm before us, all I can say is, It seems thus to have stood with
David when he wrote it: He had cast the Jebusites, a Nation of the Canaanites,
out of their Strong hold, the City of Jerusalem flanked with the Fortress of
Sion; which he made his Habitation, the Seat of his Kingdom, and of the Worship
of his God. But as it is said of the foul Spirit in the Gospel, that when he
was cast-out, he was restless as in a Desert, till he had regained his
Possession: So it fared with the Jebusites here, they could not sit down with
the Loss of their Power and Dominion, digest the Disgrace of their Deities, and
the baffling of their Confidences, hear the taunting Scoff of the Lame and the
Blind, (which themselves had Ironically uttered of their Idols according to the
Sense of the Hebrews, not their own) retorted and verified on them. These
things pricked and stung them to the heart, and they could find no peace, till
they had restored their Gods to their Glory, and themselves to their Country
and Reputation, and that by destroying David and his Foundations. One while
therefore they sought to subdue him by Force, another while by Stratagems and
treacherous Practices, another while by Parley and friendly Advices,
representing to him the Danger of his Condition, surrounded by so many Nations
of a Contrary Religion, to induce him to forsake his own, and to fly as a Bird
to their Mountain.

But he, whose Heart was fixed and rooted in his God, at once encourages
himself, and confutes his Enemies, with this Fundamental Principle, That God is
the sure Rock and Refuge of the Faithful: beats them with his Argumentation and
Reasoning, out of their Sophistry, as he had before by his Arms out of their
Strongholds. The Demonstration which he uses, is that which Logicians call
leading to an Absurdity, and is the Strongest of all others: for it evinces,
That if such an Assertion be not granted, then some thing must, which is a
Contradiction to a confessed Principle. For example, If the Foundations which I
rely upon may be destroyed, then this Absurdity will follow, That the Righteous
may be destitute of a Refuge, brought to that pass as not to know what to do.
The Minor, which for brevity is omitted, and ought to be subsum'd, is this, But
the Righteous cannot be destitute of a Refuge, brought to that pass as not to
know what to do: therefore the Foundations I rely upon cannot be destroyed. If
the Foundations be destroyed, what can the Righteous do?

In the Words thus explained, we may observe these two General Parts:

I. The Design of David's Enemies, It was to destroy his Foundations.

II. The Absurdity of such their Design, or the Impossibility of it, For
otherwise the Righteous would not know what to do.

I begin, first, with their Design,

Which was to destroy David's Foundations.
And what were the Foundations which the Psalmist here speaks of? For the Word
is in the Plural Number, and the Foundations of a Kingdom may be many. Some
Material and Visible, as Fortresses, Armies, Rocks, Mountains, etc. Others
Immaterial, and visible only in practice, as Laws Civil and Ecclesiastical,
which are its Moral Fortifications: for the Laws of a Land support it no less
than its People, Wealth, Bulwarks; and whoever seeks to subvert these, though
he attempts nothing against the Magazines and Strongholds, yet he undermines
the very Foundations. There is also an Invisible Foundation of a State, which
is God's Favor and Defense, pointed at by the Prophet Isaiah, Chap. 4. ver. 5.
in these words, Over all the Glory shall be Defense. And though David had a
regard to all his other Foundations, this was the Chief, the Surest Rock in
which he trusted, as himself professes 2 Samuel 22. The Lord, says he, is my Rock
and my Fortress, he is the God of my Rock -- and saves me from violence. His
Rock was strong, but the God of his Rock was stronger; his Habitations stood
upon the Rock of Sion, but then Sion again was founded upon God. And thus as
Ezekiel's Vision was rota in rota, a wheel in a wheel; so David's Foundation
was Fundamentum in Fundamento, a Foundation upon a Foundation. The Heathen had
also in their Superstitious Way an Invisible or Divine Foundation: for as out
of jealousy to their Neighbors they chose to plant their Cities upon Rocks
and Hills, so they dedicated again those Rocks and Hills to the Protection of
some Deity, which was the Rock of their Rock: and Moses seems to allude to
this, Deuteronomy. 32.31. where he says, Their Rock is not as our Rock, even our
Enemies themselves being Judges.

Now in the first place, the Design of David's Enemies was to destroy All his
Foundations: not only his Material and Visible ones, but also his Immaterial of
his Laws, and his Invisible of the Deity in which he trusted: For the Gentiles
had a conceit, that the Gods themselves were conquerable. They had a Sort of
Godlings or lesser Gods, which they assigned to the Guardianship of Springs and
Trees, as Nymphs and Dryades, which they thought Mortal and extinguishable with
those Springs and Trees. Other Great Gods again which they set over Kingdoms
and Cities, and though they believed these last to be immortal: yet they
fansy'd, when the Cities or Kingdoms over which they presided were subdued,
that these Deities were also subdued.

Secondly, As the Design of David's Enemies was to destroy all his Foundations
in general, of what kind soever: So it was to destroy them Finally and Utterly.
For as our Lord says of the Providence of the Children of this World in
Temporal things, That they are Wiser than the Children of Light: So they are
also in their Malice and Mischievous Designs, they lay the Axe to the Root,
they dig as deep to destroy, as others do to build. Says St Paul, As a wise
Master Builder, I have laid the Foundation: but these on the contrary as
Master-Destroyers aim to raze the Foundation, knowing this to be the speediest
way to make an absolute Destruction, for the Super-structures must follow these.

Thirdly, The Ways which the Enemies of David took to effect his Destruction,
are expressed to be three, Parley, Violence, and Stratagem. Parley is employed at
the first Verse, In the Lord put I my trust, how say ye then to my Soul, Flee
as a Bird to the Mountain. Violence is intimated, ver. 5. The Lord tries the
Righteous, but the Wicked and he that loves Violence, his Soul hates.
Stratagem is mentioned ver. 3. For lo, the Wicked bend their Bow, they make
ready their Arrow upon the String, that they may privily shoot at the Upright
in heart.

And now before we proceed any further, if we shall compare the Machinations of
the Enemies of our Israel this Day, with those of the Enemies of David; if we
stretch Plot upon Plot, and Conspiracy upon Conspiracy, as Elijah stretched
himself upon the dead Child, we shall find, that not only Limb answers to Limb,
but that the Malice of our Adversaries exceeded that of David's, as much as the
Dimensions of a Man exceed those of a Child.

1. We say, The Design of David's Enemies was to destroy All his Foundations of
what Kind soever: and the Design of ours was as Universal, to destroy our Forts
and Castles, our Ships and Ammunition, our Laws and Policies, our Prince and
People: and though they knew they could not subvert our Invisible Divine
Foundation, that the Eternal Omnipotent God was not to be subdued: yet they
sought to deprave his Worship, and to corrupt his Religion, which would have
deprived us of him, or have alienated him to us. It was not for their Interest
to set up Baal against Jehovah, Dagon against the God of Israel: but as it was
Jeroboam's interest to set up the Calves and High Places against the Temple and
Altar at Jerusalem; so it was hugely their Interest to set up their
Superstitious and Idolatrous Worship in the place of our pure and Holy, so
inconsistent with their Antichristian Monarchy. And though the Enemies of
Israel designed after the same manner to destroy all their Foundations, and All
can be but All, yet one All may be greater than another, and our All, if we may
believe Geographers, many times exceeds theirs.

2. The Design of David's Enemies was Fatal and Final, and to extirpate
utterly; not only, I say, to make a total Destruction, but to destroy Totally.
And the same was the Design of our Enemies, only whereas the Malice of David's
Enemies was weak and insignificant, they being Aliens, and at a Distance;
rather a Disposition, than an Ability to hurt; only one of those kinds of Ill
will, which Aristotle in his Ethics says, Is not furnished to do much Evil, and
seldom grows up beyond Petulancy, and the Trouble of them that are possessed
with it: Our Adversaries were Natives and in the Bowels of us, armed with
Power, as well as Malice; and wanted not the Means and Opportunity to effect
our Ruin, any more than the Will to plot it. Can a Nation be born at once?
says Job. No, nor one would think be destroyed and brought to Nothing in a Day.
The Grecians were ten Years in ruining Troy: and when our Lord said, Destroy
this Temple, and I will rear it again in three days, the Jews supposing he
spoke of the Temple of Stone, which was forty and six Years a building, heard
his words as a Prodigy. But lo a People, that were our Adversaries, that could
do more! And had not our Rock, or rather the Rock of our Rock, been Invincible,
they had destroyed us; I say not in three days, but in three Minutes, in a
Thought, in a Moment. Many, Alas! and of Various Persuasions and Pretenses are
the Adversaries of our Church: but as the Historian says of the Contentions
Rome had in her Minority with the Veii and the Gabii, and other petty Townships
her Neighbors, that they were but as the Squabbles of little Children about
the Lap of their Mother, not like those she had afterward with Carthage, and
other potent States, which were like the Fatal Dissentions of grown Men, which
seldom end without the Blood of the one or the other Party. So we hoped it
might be said of the Quarrels of our Dissenting Brethren, (though they troubled
us about the Superstructions, the Rites of Religion, and the like) that their
Exceptions were but lucta circa matrem, as the Brabbles and Wranglings of
Children standing about the Lap of their Mother, not like the Mortal Enmities
of those that plotted against us this day, whom nothing could satisfy, but the
Destruction of our Foundations, and that Totally and Finally. But late times
have given us experience, that the Malignity of these is not inferior to the
others, not less black and bloody; and though they make such Outcries against
Popery, pretend to dread and detest nothing like its Return again into the
Nation, yet they abstain not from its Practices, nor abhor to serve themselves
with the Wickedest of its Principles. So that these two so seeming contrary
Parties are not ill resembled to two fierce opposite Streams, which when they
meet, roar and chide, but then friendly close and join. But while both Papist
and Puritan stick at nothing, though never so impious, to subvert the
Foundations of our truly pure and holy Religion, they plainly demonstrate, they
have subverted in their own Hearts the Fundamental Principles of Christianity
it self. But to proceed.

I said, Thirdly, That the Ways which the Enemies of David took to bring about
his Destruction, were three, Parley, Violence, and Stratagem; and our Enemies
took the very same Courses to effect ours.

1. Parley. The Danger of Parley is not easily seen, it pretends only to remove
Misunderstandings, and to compose Differences in an amicable Way, and
Book-Combats have been ever held consistent with a State of Peace: but more
Mischief has been done by this Close and Covert, than by Open and professed
Hostilities; and those that have defended themselves against Force, have been
undone by Treaties; many Camps and Cities have been lost by permitting a free
Parley and Intercourse between the Soldiers, that could never have been
stormed. And while simple and unskilful Israelites among us have played with
this Danger, like Children upon the hole of the Asp, they have perished by it,
before they have understood that any Evil was near. How many were the Attempts
of Rome in this kind upon our Glorious Queen Elizabeth at her first coming to
the Crown? how many flattering Epistles were there sent her from that See? how
many fatherly Admonitions? What tender Care expressed for her Souls good? What
Solicitude for her Temporal? How were the Treasures, i. e. the Cheats of that
Church offered to be commanded by her? its Usurpt Authority to be put upon the
Tenter for her accommodation? She might have married Philip King of Spain her
Brother, if her fancy or interest had lain for it; there was nothing so
Unlawful, but it should have been dispensed with; so Infirm, but, after the
manner of Rome, it should have been corroborated. Never, I may say, was the Way
to Destruction more strowed with Roses; never did the smooth Accents of the
Tongue so vie with the soft Airs of Instrumental and Vocal Music; till the
Holy Father saw that his Artifices were seen through and despised:

And then he betook himself to the second Means, that of Violence. But, Good
God! how great was now the Change? all the late harmonious Courtship was turned
into Harshness and Discord; the Blessings into Anathema's or Curses; nothing
was heard but the Reproaches of Heretic, Apostate, Accursed Woman; nothing but
Fulminations, Excommunications, Interdictions, which may be called Rome's
Spiritual Violence. Foreign Princes were stirred up against the Queen, open
Invasions set on foot by Sea and Land, secret Conspiracies plotted at home;
Insurrections, Poysonings, Assassinations, Treasons of all kinds fomented and
encouraged: which by Divine Providence being also rendered bruta Fulmina, idle
Thunder, that made a Noise, and did no further Hurt, the Great Enemy of our
Church and State and his Accomplices had recourse

In the Third place to Stratagem, to carry on their Designs in tenebris, with
the dark and hellish Contrivance of the Powder Treason this Day. I will not say
with the Psalmist, They put the Arrow upon the String, that they might privily
shoot at the Upright in heart, Alas! Bows and Arrows are an antiquated and
despicable Artillery in these days, being so far outdone by the Newer and
rarer Invention of Execution and Cruelty, Guns, that they deserve not to be
named for destroying Foundations, to be compared with the Still, and, for a
time, Silent Battery in the Cave; but which, when least expected, thunders
louder than the Heavens, and overturns Towns and whole Cities with greater
Violence than an Earthquake. The Jebusites were but rude and ignorant Engineers
in comparison of those, who but with a little Change bear their Name, the
Jesuits: these indeed are great Workers in Darkness, none ever before them
delved so deep to undermine Foundations; we may apply to them the words of the
Prophet Hosea, These Revolters are profound to make Slaughter: For the Jesuits
did not only Acheronta movere, stir Hell to promote their Plot, but they dug to
Hell to carry it on. But their Stratagem, I was going to say, was blown up;
but, blessed be God, I cannot say so, but is blown over, and many more since to
their own great Shame only and Confusion.

And now if we ask here, Why was all this Transport of Rage and Fury against
us? Why all this restless and unwearied Malice? 'Twas still for the same
Reasons that the Enemies of David were set on fire against him. We had
dispossessed them of their Dominion, retrenched their Power, supplanted their
Religion, derided their Lame and their Blind, namely, their Images, detected
their forged Miracles, degraded their Mock-Saints, their Hypochondriack St
Anthony, their Fanatical St Francis, their Bedlam Ignatius, their Chimera Giant
St Christopher, etc. and they could find no peace or rest in their Spirit, till
they had restored these to their former Credit and Reputation, and that by
making their Prophaners, their Worshippers. And by this we may see what would
have been our Condition, in case our Adversaries could have brought about their
Design? For as the Jebusites were Idolaters, as well as the rest of the
Canaanites, and the Lame and the Blind with which they braved David, and defied
the Host of Israel, were (as the most Learned conjecture) their Tutelar Gods,
Telesmatical or Magical Images: So our Adversaries, however they seek to purge
themselves with their Distinctions, are gross Idolaters: and just such a goodly
Change as David should have made, if he had left the Eternal God, to trust in
Stocks and Stones, is the Change we should make, if our Adversaries could
prevail to make us leave our Mountain or Church to fly to theirs of Rome.

And, First, In regard that our Mountain is a Clear Mountain, enlightened by the
bright Beams of the Word of God, which darts its Rays into every Corner of it:
Or stands, as I may say, like a Mercurius directorius in every Path, and points
the Right-Way to all that go by, bidding them to walk in it. But the Mountain
of our Adversaries is always wrapped in Fogs and Mists: and yet, as if it were
not Dark enough, those that profess to be Guides to it, blind the Eyes of all
that are to ascend it: And as the Guards of Forts and Frontier Castles make
those that enter into them first surrender their Weapons: so these make their
Disciples and Proselytes resign their Reason and lay down their Understanding
at the foot of the Mount, and go on for ever after in Ignorance and an Implicit
Faith. And they do wisely in taking this Course: for it is not possible that any
with their Reason about them should make any long Progress, where they meet so
many gross Scandals or Stumbling Blocks at every step: where they see the
Scripture not only misinterpreted in some hard places, but in the most Easy
industriously perverted to Countenance the foulest Errors, even Idolatry it
self; and after they have swallowed whole so many Contradictions no less to
humane Reason, than to Divine Writ, where they are obliged to believe, that the
Church which imposes these Monsters, cannot Err; nay, that God has confirmed
them with Miracles, showed Signs and Wonders more and more glorious to
overthrow the Gospel of his Son, than he did at first to establish it. Signs
and Wonders cried indeed every Market Day among them, like the Fruits of the
Earth, i. e. the Relation of them, but which were never seen by any Eye. For,
as one well observes, Whereas our Lord wrought his Miracles to make Believers,
the Church of Rome requires that men should be Believers, before they see any
of her Miracles, i. e. should be trained up to swallow Lies and Impostures.

Secondly, As our Mountain is a Lightsome and Clear Mountain, so it is also a
Safe: whereas that of our Adversaries may be likened to the Hills of Robbers,
which the Psalmist speaks of, where nothing is heard of but Depredations, the
continual Pillaging and spoiling of Travelers; men go up to Rome as to a great
Fair, where Themselves are bought and sold; Confessions, Pardons, Penances,
Indulgences, Dispensations, Pilgrimages, etc. aiming all at the Purse, and not
at the Good of the Soul: and who shall look no further than our English
Chronicle, will find, that the Universal Pastor, when he exercised his Usurped
and Tyrannical Power in this Realm, was not content to fleece his Sheep only,
but tore off the very Flesh from their Bones.

Thirdly, Ours is our own Mountain, we are in it; but our Adversary's is more
than a thousand Miles distant, and many other Mountains are to be past over
before we can come to it; and those that with a tame Simplicity delight to pay
Homage to the Usurped Majesty of that Mount, travel many a dangerous and weary
League, before they can attain the Abuse they seek: And sad was the Condition
of this Nation, when upon every great Controversy to be judged, every great
Preferment to be collated, every great Sin to be absolved, men were transferred
to the Sea of Rome, corpus cum causa, themselves as well as their Cause; and
where, if they sped in their Pretenses, they often miscarried in their Journey.
We may therefore say of those that affect to be Proselytes to this Mountain,
what St Paul says of the Corinthians, That they more gladly submitted to those
that took of them, that brought them into bondage, than to those that were
Sincere toward them, and abounded in labor for them. Or else we may upbraid
them, as the Prophet Hosea did Ephraim, Ephraim is like a silly Dove without
heart, they call to Egypt, they go to Assyria, i. e. to the places of their
Captivity and Oppression: So these delight in those that plume them and
tyrannize over them, that seal up their Eyes in Darkness, and make them believe
they tower toward Heaven and the Regions of Glory, till they find themselves
in the Precincts of Eternal Night. And as Ephraim was not only made a Prey, but
a Scorn for their Folly, This shall be their Derision, says the Prophet, in the
Land of Egypt; so those among us that call to go to the Spiritual Egypt, shall
be mocked in the Day of Great Accounts, as well as Condemned: For what remains
for those that would not be warned, but to be laughed at? for those that choose
Destruction, but to be derided when they are fallen into it? In the mean time
let our Adversaries triumph in the Victories they obtain by their threefold
Machinations, Parley, Violence, and Stratagem: for though they sometimes
prevail upon Unstable Souls, prepared by their own Vanity for Ruin, yet they
cannot prevail against our Cause; they may deceive some particular Persons, but
they cannot overthrow our Foundations, no more than the Enemies of David could
his. Which brings me to my second General Part, The Absurdity or Impossibility
of the Design of David's Enemies, To destroy his Foundations: for then the
Righteous would not know what to do.

If the Foundations be destroyed, what can the Righteous do?
What shall I do?] is the Expression of a Person driven to the greatest
Exigence, and knows not which way to turn himself in the Difficulties he is in:
they are the Words of the Unjust Steward in the Gospel, when he was turned out
of his Stewardship, What shall I do? says he; Dig I cannot, and to beg I am
ashamed. The only two Means of Livelihood left to those that are reduced to the
Extremest Poverty, Labor and Begging, were taken from him; the one by Shame,
and the other by a Soft Education. Such an Utter Distress as this the Words of
my Text imply, they being a Negative by way of Question, which is the strongest
kind of Negative. What can the Righteous do? i. e. They can do nothing. And if
any say, Yes, the Unjust Steward had still recourse unto his old Arts of
Cheating and False reckoning: and so David and other Righteous men, in case
their Foundations be destroyed, may make some shift, they may fly as a Bird to
the Mountain of their Enemies. I answer, That this is not to be admitted,
Unlawful Remedies come not so much as into the Consultation of the Righteous,
be their Distress never so great; what is Wicked, is to them Impossible; and
what they cannot do justly, they cannot do at all. How can I do this great
Wickedness, and sin against God? said Joseph, when his wanton Mistress tempted
him, i. e. I cannot possibly do it. He could have done it actually, but he
could not do it honestly; and what was impossible to his Virtue, he resolved to
be impossible to his Practice. But the Supposition here it self is vain, That
the Foundations of the Righteous can be destroyed.

But how! some will say, not possible to destroy their Foundations? Why,
Commanders will affirm, that no Place is impregnable, and consequently, that
there are no Foundations but may be destroyed. When Philip of Macedon was told
of a strong Place, which, by reason of the steepness, rockiness and narrowness
of the Ascent to it, was Inaccessible; he asked in derision, If an Ass laden
with Gold could not get up to it? Intimating, that no place was impregnable to
Force and Fraud both. But the Distinction I gave before of a Visible and
Invisible Foundation, answers all such Objections. David, beside his Rock, as
ye have heard, had the Rock of his Rock, namely, his God. It Is the Invisible
Divine Foundation that is the Security of the Visible. No City or Fortress is
safe by its natural or artificial Strength: for as the Psalmist says, A horse
is but a vain thing to save a man: so Rocks and Bulwarks are but vain things to
save a City; Except the Lord keeps it, the Watchman waketh but in vain. But
on the other side, if he be the Rock and Defense, if he be the Sion himself
unto Jerusalem, no Force, no Stratagem whatsoever can prevail against it, but
Jerusalem on Earth shall be as invincible, as Jerusalem in Heaven, whose
Builder and Maker is God.

And if any say, What is this to us, who are not to promise our selves the
Privileges of Israel? I answer, If we be Faithful like them, we may promise
our selves God's protection no less than they. For, as Saint Peter says, God is
no Respecter of Persons, but in every Nation they that fearh im, and work
Righteousness, are accepted by him. We have a Kingdom, thanks be to Providence,
more strongly fortified by Nature, than Israel was; founded, as the Psalmist
says the World is, upon the Waters, He laid it in the Waters, and founded it
upon the Floods. And though our Foundations be moveable and fluctuating, yet
their Mobility and Mutability being only Local, and not Substantial, they are
not less permanent. We may compare our Political Foundations also with Isreal's.
But be our Material or Moral Foundations what they will, our Invisible is the
same with theirs: For God is not only our Founder, but our Foundation too; he
has not only founded us By, but On himself. He brought us one of the first of
the Nations out of the Darkness of Paganism to the Light of the Gospel; and
again one of the first of the Nations out of the Bondage of Spiritual Babylon
to the Liberty of the Truth, and free Use of his Word; and he has not only
given us more Excellent Ordinances, than he did to his people Israel, but many
Advantages even above our Fellow Christians; and no Church can boast more truly
than ours, That it is built upon the Foundation of the Apostles and Prophets,
Christ himself being the Chief Cornerstone; and what is this, but to be
Founded on God himself? And it is our Reliance on this our Invisible Foundation,
which makes us with David not to fear the Designs of our Enemies upon our
Material and Visible. For though God has made us no particular Promise
concerning our Temporal Prosperity, in case we keep his Commandments, as he did
to Israel; yet we may rest assured on his Holy and Divine Nature and Promises
in general: which are to Love and Protect the Righteous; and not only Israel,
as the Psalmist says, but all that put their Trust in the Lord, shall be as
Mount Sion, which shall not be removed, but stands fast for ever. And the
truth is, that which is said of Temporal Kingdoms, Justitia Thronum firmat,
Justice supports the Throne, may be affirmed of God's Spiritual Kingdom in the
World, his Justice and Goodness establishes his Dominion in the Hearts of Men.
For if it were not so, That the Lord regarded the Righteous, this great
Incongruity would produce another great Incongruity and Irregularity, The
Righteous, as the Psalmist says, would put their hand to Iniquity, i e. they
would be no longer Righteous, they would make Justice and Piety no more their
Business and Concern, if there were no Regard in Heaven for these things: and
so God would lose his Obedience when he neglected Good Men. Let us therefore be
careful of our Duty, and we need not be solicitous for our Safety; let us
firmly rely upon God in well-doing, and believe that our Trust in our Divine
Invisible Foundation is not merely Chimerical or Imaginary, and while we fail
not it, it will never fail us: but the Business of this Day shall be the
business of the Year round, viz. to praise and magnify our Foundation, for
protecting and preserving our Foundations: and these Lauds and Thanksgivings,
if they be Cordial and Real, will create us new Occasions of Lauds and
Thanksgivings, even daily Mercies and Blessings, I say, if they be Cordial and
Real, not only Verbal and Vocal; not only expressed in Bells and Bonfires,
Noises and Excesses, but in true Piety and Devotion; as our Prayer of General
Thanksgiving teaches us, In showing forth God's Praise not only with our Lips,
but in our Lives; by giving up our selves to his Service, and so forth. For
though it is impossible to solemnize Public Joy and Thanksgiving, without
Public Expressions of them: yet these Public Expressions should be but the
Outward Signs and Significations of the Inward Sense we have of God's Benefits,
and the Gratitude that dwells in our Hearts, and which ought chiefly to be
showed in the Duties of Religion, in the Acts of Mercy and Charity in a Day of
Mercy and Deliverance; in the Reformation of whatsoever is contrary to the
Divine Will in us, and the like, It Is not enough therefore that our Streets
resound with Festivity and Joy, or yet that we celebrate God's great Mercies in
Psalms and Hymns sung to the Organ by Asaph and other Chief Musicians, but
every Faithful Person must be a Musician; and every Grateful Heart, that has
been delivered, an Instrument of God's Praise.

To God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, be ascribed all Honor, Glory,
Worship, and Thanksgiving, this Day forth and for evermore. Amen.
The Sixteenth Sermon.
JOHN xvi.23. -- Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my Name, he will give it
you.


THESE Words are part of our Lord's Farewel-Speech to his Disciples, when he
was to leave the World: the unexpected News of which did so afflict them, that
they had not the power (as himself takes notice, ver. 5.) so much as to ask him
any Question concerning it. But now I go to him that sent me, and none of you
ask, Whither go thou? but because I have said these things unto you, Sorrow
has filled your heart. And very deservedly: for what more amazing, more
Ominous Tidings could they have heard, than that he, for whom they had forsaken
all they had, should after that forsake them? than that he, that had put Enmity
between them and the World, should abandon them to the World? he in whom they
had placed all their Ambition, all their Hope, should at last leave them in a
Riddle? A little while and ye shall not see me, and again, a little while and
ye shall see me. To raise therefore their drooping and disconsolate Spirits he
promises them a double Advantage by his Departure, and which could only arrive
to them by his Departure. 1. That they should receive the Holy Ghost, who would
establish their Faith, and wonderfully rejoice their Hearts, by assuring them
of the truth of the Doctrines he had taught them, and of their own Divine
Mission. 2. That they should be under the immediate Care of the Father, by
reason of whose Almighty Protection they would have no Cause to deplore his
Absence, or in the least to wish for his Corporal Presence again: for they
would find their Dependence on the Father much more happy, than the following
his Steps through the Cities of Palestine. The Words of my Text relate to the
latter of these two Advantages, Their being under the immediate Care and
Protection of the Father. While our Lord abode with his Disciples, he supplied
all their Wants, solved all their Doubts, stopped the mouths of all their
Maligners: but he let them know, that his Father was Greater than he, and would
perform all these things in a more uncontrolled and unlimited manner, than he
had done, when he acted only in the Flesh by his Commission; that the Using
only of his Name to the Father would be more Beneficial to them, than his
Person had formerly been: for though in many things he had been kind to them,
there was nothing so Precious, nothing so Difficult, nothing so Wonderful, but
if they prayed for it in his Name, the Father would bestow it on them.
Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my Name, he will give it you.

In this Singular Privilege and Prerogative promised by our Lord to his
Disciples, there are three things very remarkable:

I. The Person with whom they are to have it, The Father, -- he will give it
you.

II. The Measure in which they were to have it; it is a Measure indeed
unlimited and without Measure, Whatsoever ye shall ask, ask what you will, he
will give it you.

III. By what Means they are to obtain it, by asking in Christ's Name,
Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my Name.

I begin with the first of these, The Person with whom they are to have this
Singular Privilege,

The Father.
This was a comfortable Promise of our Lord's to his Disciples, if they had
then understood it, as they afterward did: but when the Words were spoken,
they were but as a Parable or Proverb to them, as it is ver. 25. These things
have I spoken unto you in Proverbs, the time will come that I shall speak no
more unto you in Proverbs, but I shall show you Plainly of the Father. How was
that? in what fashion did he afterward show them plainly of the Father? By his
Charismata, the miraculous Gifts of the Holy Ghost which they received from
him, and which bore the very Character of the Father stamped upon them: For
every Good and perfect Gift, as St James says, is from above, and comes from
the Father of Light. And thus he showed them more plainly and convincingly of
the Father, than he did to Philip, when he said, Have I been so long time with
you, and yet have thou not known me, Philip? he that has seen Me, has seen
the Father: For he showed them not the Father now in the Person of another, but
in their Own, in his Divine and Omnipotent Power displayed in themselves. And
this was not only a Plain and Evident, but a Gracious Revelation of the Father;
which as it improved their Knowledge of him, so it gave them also
Demonstrations of his Love and Favor. The Father was both gracious to them,
and present with them before, under the Law; he was their God, and they were
his People: but after they had embraced the Gospel he sent his Son into the
World to preach, they were admitted into a Nearer Relation; and were not only
called the People and Servants, but the Children of God, the adopted Brethren
of Christ; and the Father of Heaven and Earth was appropriated by our Lord no
less to them, than to himself; I go, says he, to my Father and to your Father,
to my God and to your God.

And this being the blessed Condition not only of the first Disciples, but of
all true Believers since, I cannot choose but take Occasion from hence to say,
That those Christians are not sensible of their own Privilege and Dignity,
that go a Compass to God, when they are allowed the Directest and Shortest Way
to him; who keep a Distance, when they are invited and encouraged to make a
Near and familiar Address; out of an affected Humility move them, that they may
move her, that she may move Christ, that Christ may move the Father. What a
trifling Ambages is this, after our Lord has promised an Immediate Access? and
upon no better ground, but because, forsooth, the like is practiced in the
Courts of Earthly Princes; where Strangers and Unknown Persons are not allowed
to make their Approach to the King without the Introduction of some in Place.
Alas! to the Court of Heaven there comes no Strangers or Unknown Persons, all
the Suitors there are Sons, and these use not to implore the help of Servants,
but being first in Power and Place themselves, go directly and boldly to the
Throne of the King their Father: as St Paul, Heb. 4.16. encourages the Faithful
to do, Let us come boldly, says he, to the Throne of Grace: and our Lord at the
16th Verse of this Chapter speaks, as if his own Mediation were not always
necessary: At that day, says he, ye shall ask in my Name, and I say not unto
you, that I will pray the Father for you, for the Father himself loves you,
because ye have loved me, and have believed that I came out from God. Those
that believe that Jesus is the Christ, as the Apostle says, are born of God,
and begotten of his Spirit, and they need no other Advocate to speak for them,
but the Spirit, and such their Propinquity by Faith; and to distrust their
Interest, were to distrust God's Love and Christ's Truth; and we may say of
such a Diffidence, what one says of the like in humane Alliance, -- peccat, Qui
commendandum se putat esse suis, he sins against the Right of Kindred, that
thinks he needs to be recommended to his own Relations.

Therefore, though we decline not, with the ranker Socinians, the Intercession
of Christ, who say, He is mere Man, and not God, and consequently that all
Prayers made to him are idolatrous: Nor yet comply with the more allayed and
qualified Poison of others of them, who allow it lawful to pray to Christ, but
not necessary: yet we may vindicate the Prerogative given to a Disciple in my
Text, against the Show of Wisdom, in Will Worship and Humility, practiced in
the Church of Rome. For we who are rightly instructed in the Close Conjunction
of the Father and the Son, that teach he is both God and Man, know it is
indifferent, whether we supplicate the Father or the Son; whether with our Lord
himself we say, Father, into thy hands I commend my Spirit: or whether with St
Stephen, Lord Jesu receive my Spirit, who praying after this manner, is said
also to have called upon God. And in truth, when our Lord sends his Disciples
in my Text to his Father, he neither extinguishes his own Adoration, nor
Mediation: but sends them from his Humane Nature, as I may say, to meet them
again in his Divine. And this is the true Importance of his sending them to the
Father: but they were not capable at this time of receiving the Doctrine of his
Divinity: for a little before, in plain terms without a Figure, he had
discoursed to them of his Death and Passion, and those to whom it was a hard
Saying, That they should eat his Flesh and drink his Blood, would have thought
it a much harder to have heard, That he was the Eternal God, and could yet be
Crucified by Wicked men. Not willing therefore to force their Reason either by
his Argumentation or Authority, he let this Mystery alone to be revealed in due
time by the Holy Ghost, and established their Comfort on a Foundation more easy
to be conceived by them, the Goodness and All Sufficiency of the Father: For
however they did believe their Master to be an Extraordinary and Divine Person,
they could not choose but believe their God was Greater; and if it were a
happiness to follow the Son, it must be yet a higher Felicity to be Favorites
to the Father, of whom the whole Family of Heaven and Earth is named.

Now this being the Condition which a Disciple was left in at his Lord's
Departure, he had no reason to mourn and languish for his Absence; with St
Augustine to desire to see Christum in ore, Christ's natural face again, while
he enjoyed Christum in Patre, Christ in the power and presence of the Father.
When a less Person at his Departure gives us the Favor of a Greater, we may
say, He does not Desert us, but bestows his Absence on us. But Christ's Care of
his Disciples and kindness to them will be seen yet more in the Unlimited
Measure in which they were promised God's Favor, expressed in these Words,
Whatsoever ye shall ask -- he will give it you. Which is the next thing I am to
explain.

Whatsoever ye shall ask -- he will give it you.
This was a large Promise, and yet as largely and stupendiously made good. For,
1. Such was the Power of a Disciple by Prayer upon Earth, that he could cast
out Devils, chase away all Diseases, heal all Infirmities, call the Dead out of
their Grave, and send the Living into it. 2. Such was his Power in the Sea,
that when the Ship was become a Prey to the merciless Element, and nothing but
Death and Desperation appeared to all others, a St Paul could say, Not one of
the Company shall perish. And why so? Because he had prayed, and God had given
him the Lives of them that sailed with him. 3. Such was his Power in Heaven,
that the Holy Ghost stood pressed and ready, as I may say, upon the laying-on
of the Apostles hands, as upon a Sign given, to descend in all his various and
wonderful Endowments. St James notes, that Elijah by the power of prayer shut
the Windows of Heaven, and caused a Dearth; and again opened them, and made
Plenty: But the Prayers of the Apostles wrought not only Wonderful Effects in
the second Region of the Air, in the Magazines of Snow and Rain, but entering
into the Heaven of Heavens called down Showers of Supernatural and Divine
Graces; And though before the time of Christ, it was said, That 'twas not
known, that God so hearkened to the Voice of a Man, as he did to Joshua
commanding the Sun to stand still: yet after Christ's ascension, he frequently
hearkened to the Voice of Men, and effected greater Wonders: For after this
Promise was once of force, Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my Name, he
will give it you; nothing was impossible, nothing was difficult to a Disciple
of Christ.

But some perhaps will say, That it does not appear that this Promise was
fulfilled according to the Extent and Latitude of it, even to the Apostles
themselves, not to say how little of it has been made good to the Faithful
since. For undoubtedly St Paul was not the only Person that prayed thrice, i.
e. often and instantly, that the Thorn in his Flesh might be taken away, and
was not heard: but others also of the Apostles and first Planters of the Gospel
made many earnest Supplications for Success to their Endeavors and Deliverance
in their Persecutions, and were not answered in their Petitions. So that this
Promise, Whatsoever ye shall ask, etc. seems to be (...), a Promise with
Repentance, which was never made good.

To this may be said in general, what St Paul says of all God's Promises, That
in him they are Yea and Amen, i. e. Truths which are ratified with
Performances. But when we meet with such General and Unlimited Expressions, as
this in my Text, Whatsoever ye shall ask, he will give it you, though we ought
to look upon them as no more than what God is both able and willing to perform,
when any Just Cause shall require, yet they are only then to be expected from
him, when a Just Cause does require: For we must not imagine, because he
promises according to the Greatness of his own Power and Goodness, that he
promises according to the Extravagance of Men's Lusts and Phancies; because he
promises Liberally, that he promises also, like Herod, Licentiously; who at a
wanton Banquet engaged the one half of his Kingdom to a dancing Damsel, and
gratified a Harlot with the Head of a Saint. God's Unlimited Promises are to be
understood like the Unlimited Promise of the Good Samaritan, when he left the
Wounded Man in the Inn: Whatsoever thou spendest more, says he to the Host, I
will give it thee, i. e. in Order to the hurt man's Recovery; the Credit did
not extend to the Purchase of the Inn, in case his Guest had desired it. And if
we shall thus receive the Words of our Lord cum grano Salis, as they say, but
with two Grains only of prudent Interpretation cast into them, we shall
understand their just Latitude and Extent. Whatsoever ye shall ask, he will
give it you, i. e. si justum, si rationabile, if it be Righteous, if it be
Reasonable.

First, If it be Righteous, Righteous in the Matter, Righteous in the End, and
Righteous in the Manner of the Petition. 1. Righteous in the Matter, if it be
something Pious or Charitable that is prayed for, something for God's Honor,
or the Spiritual Advantage of the Votary, something, in a word, worthy to
concern and engage Heaven in: for if men show themselves overmuch in love with
the things of this Life, too solicitous for that which is Vile and Transitory,
when they have the Promise of things Eternal, this declares a Degenerateness in
their Affections, and an Indecorum that is reprovable, and not rewardable, as
it is said, indecorum est ei curare de cibo, qui militat de regno, Care of the
Belly and the Kitchen, ill becomes him, that is in pursuance of a Kingdom. Such
as these, while they pray to God, despise him; and let them not hope, while
they set at Naught the Glories of Heaven, that he will regard their abject
Desires; he promised to give to them that asked in his Son's Name, not in the
Name of the World.

2. Righteous in the End. The End of what men desire should be the Glory of
God: for if it be to satisfy their Pride, Revenge, Concupiscence, etc. it is
enough again to put an Embargo upon their Requests, as St James says, Ye ask,
and ye receive not, because ye ask for your Lusts: and though God has promised
to have his Ears open to faithful Prayers, he has not engaged to assist Sin, or
to be accessory to Wickedness.

3. Righteous in the Manner, if men lift up pure and holy Hands, sincere and
faithful Hearts, without Hypocrisy and without Presumption, neither doubting
nor tempting God: constant, but with resignation; devout, but yet humble;
Zealous and Fervent, but without Murmuring and impatience. Heaven is taken by
Violence, but it is by an Agonistical, not a Hostile Violence; by contesting
with our own Sins, not by quarrelling with God; his Kingdom is not to be
stormed after the manner the Poets feigned the Giants to assault Olympus, but
to be conquered by Submission, Duty, and Devotion; God is to be wrestled with,
as Jacob did with the Angel, in Faith and Prayer; and they are brutish, who,
because he has promised his Servants shall have power With him, expect to have
a power Over him.

And thus as our Prayers must be Righteous, have nothing in them repugnant to
God's Holiness and Majesty; so, secondly, they must be Reasonable, i. e.
agreeable to God's Divine Will: for Reasonable here is not to be measured by
what is Reasonable to us, but to God; that which is often Good and fit in our
Eyes, is not so in his. If therefore, as St John says, we ask according to his
Will, he hears us. And a thing may be supposed to be asked according to his
Will three Ways.

1. If it be not contrary to his Decrees, something which he has predetermined:
for these are immutable, and though Noah, Daniel, or Job, should intercede,
they should not prevail: again, as reducible to these, if the Prayer be not
against the Decrees or Laws of Nature: For though I confess the Promise made to
the Apostles in my Text, relates chiefly to things of a Miraculous Nature: yet
the Promise in that part is not to be extended beyond the Apostles Own Persons,
or the Time of the first planting the Gospel. To bring about some great Designs
of his in the World, God thought fit to interrupt and discompose the Order of
Nature; but it is not for Men, at their Pleasure, to think to do the same:
Miracles, it is true, were wrought by Men, but they were never wrought by the
Will of men; and it is a Fanatic Presumption to tempt God in this kind, when
they are not moved to it by a Divine Spirit. And if Miracles were to be
performed at the asking of every Follower of Christ, if every Prophet or
Preacher of the Gospel in these days might divide the Sea, and call down Fire
from Heaven, every faithful Commander cause Hailstones to be cast from the
Clouds upon his Enemies, and the like; not only the Harmony of the Creation,
the Laws of Agents and Patients would be confounded, but the Harmony of
Religion: For if such a present certain Impetration of all things of this Life
did attend every true Christian Professor, that their Prayers were answered
with a Miracle, who would not be a Professor or Believer on these Terms? and
what Praise were it to be a Believer? The Congregation of the Faithful would be
increased on this account, but the Virtue of Faith would be wholly destroyed.

2. If that which is prayed for, be not foreseen by God to be hurtful to him
that prays, as it is said, dando irascitur, and non dando miseretur, if he
gives, he is angry; and if he denies, he is merciful. If a Child aks of his
Father a Fish, says our Lord, will he give him a Serpent? Or if he asks a
Serpent instead of a Fish, will he give him a Serpent? The Gentiles indeed
complained, that their Gods, which were Devils, easily granted them Evil
things, but were inexorable when they sought Good things at their hands,
Evertere Vrbes totas optantibus ipsis Dii faciles: But the Father of Heaven and
Earth gives only Good things to his Children.

3. If there be not something that is Better for the Petitioner, than that
which he prays for, though Good; and which undoubtedly he would have desired
before it, if he had understood it: and thus it is said again, Non tribuit quod
vellem, ut tribuat quod mallem; God gave me not what I asked, that he might
give me what I aimed at; he denied the Form of my Request, that he might grant
what was more Advantageous for me. And 'twas with this purpose of conferring a
Greater Benefit than was asked, that God denied St Paul praying thrice, that
the Thorn in his Flesh might be taken away: for he gave him his Grace to
support him in that Temptation or Affliction, whichsoever it was, which was
better for the Apostle, than to have removed the Evil: for that would have
deprived him both of the Trial and reward of his Virtue. And on this account
it is said, Heb. 5.7. of our Lord's praying that the Cup of his Passion might
pass from him, That he was heard in that he feared, though God made him drink
up the very Dregs of that bitter Potion.

And thus we see, though the Promise made in my Text extends not to the
Exorbitant Desires of fond Men, nor yet to the Mistakes or Weaknesses of those
that are Pious and Righteous, yet it reaches to all their great and important
Concerns, to all that is behoof full and best for them, that it is commensurate
to God's Goodness and Wisdom; and it is not to be imagined, that when he
promises his Creatures to be merciful to them, he obliges himself to do any
thing unworthy of his Majesty; that when he says, he will hear their Prayers,
he divests himself of his Sovereignty, renounces his Wisdom, or any other of
his Attributes. We must not therefore liken God to Antigonus King of Macedon,
that was Sir-named (...), or the Giver, for giving much in Words and little in
Deeds, because upon every trifling Petition he does not unframe the World, or
break the Course of Providence. The Words of our Lord, Whatsoever ye shall ask
the Father in my Name, he will give it you, as they are not to be swallowed
crudely, as if a Fortunatus's Cap were promised; so neither on the other side
are they to be received with Doubting and Suspicion, as if they were fallacious
and deceiveable: For in case their Petitions are retarded, or not answered in
kind, it becomes not Christians presently to entertain thoughts like the
Heathen, who were persuaded that the Winds had power to scatter their Prayers
before they reached Heaven, Terribilisque Notus jactat mea verba precesque: nor
yet, should it be so that their righteous Requests succeeded not to their
Expectation, are they to stagger in their Faith like Cato, who because his
honest Vows for Pompey and the Commonwealth were not heard against the
Usurpation of Caesar, doubted of a Providence. Both this melancholy Mis-giving,
that God often regards not our Prayers, though they are Just; and the other
Sanguine Folly and Credulity, that it is fit for him to grant whatever is
desired, spring from one and the same Root, viz. the Immoderate Love of Earthly
things: For the truly Faithful, who set their Affection on things above, feel
neither such Flashes of fond Hopes, nor Damps of black Despair: but being
Indifferent to Worldly things, and wholly resigned to God's good Will and
Pleasure, they can think it reasonable, that the Ends of his Providence, and
the Interests of his Glory should be served in the first place. And then for
those that depend and hang on Christ in hopes only of Preferment in his
Imagined Temporal Kingdom, if his Followers for the Loaves, his Disciples, as I
may call them, of the Basket, be disappointed, it is no great marvel, nor
matter: for it is not said, Whatever ye shall ambitiously, wantonly, or any
other way inordinately covet, ye shall receive: but, Whatsoever ye shall ask
the Father in my Name, he will give it you, i. e. Whatever ye that are my
Disciples shall duly pray for, if you request it in my Name, as nothing is
difficult to my Father, so you will find there is nothing so precious that for
Love of me he will not grant you. Which brings me to my last Part, The Means by
which we are to obtain our Requests, By asking in Christ's Name.

Whatsoever ye shall ask in my Name.
Though all the Favor Men receive from God is in the Name, or for the Sake or
Merits of Christ, yet even that Meritorious and prevailing Name will benefit
them nothing, unless they be Faithful Persons, or such as are disposed to be
so, such as those to whom the Promise in my Text is made; and no small Emphasis
or Stress is to be put in this Particle [ Ye] whatsover Ye shall ask, Ye that
are my Disciples, Ye that have received me as coming from the Father, believed
my Miracles and my Doctrine, relied upon my Promises, continued with me from
the beginning to the end, notwithstanding the Scandal that so many others took
at the Meanness of my Condition, and the Severity of my Precepts. The Promise,
I say, is not Universal to all Men; no, nor yet to the mere titular Professors
of Christianity, who (as the Jews of old cried, The Temple of the Lord, the
Temple of the Lord, even when they were Idolaters and Apostates, so) cry in
these days, Lord, Lord, but do not the Will of God. A Vain and Superstitious
Citation of Christ's Name will avail none in their Prayers, his Name is no
Charm; and if there be no Virtue in the Users of it, there will be as little in
the Letters or Sound as in other Names. Which the Sons of Sceva the Jew found
Acts 19. when they called over the Evil Spirits the Name of the Lord Jesus in
imitation, but not with the Faith of St Paul: for the Name protected them not,
but left them to the Outrage of the Devil, strengthened, and not subdued by the
undue Invocation of it. Saint Peter best interprets these Words [in my Name]
Acts 3. when he cured the Lame man in the Name of Christ, His Name, says he,
through Faith in his Name has made this man Strong. And our Lord himself, John
15.7. shows, that it is not the Vocal, but Vertual Using of his Name that
prevails, If you abide in me, says he, and my Words in you, ye shall ask what
you will, and it shall be done unto you. So that the true Quatenus, or Reason
of the Return of men's Prayers, the Secret wherein their Strength lies (as
Samson's did in his Hair) is their Discipleship to Christ, or in other words,
their doing the Will of God: this only powerfully insinuates, and effectually
presses his Name to the Father. When mere Nominal Christians present themselves
before God in the Congregation of Believers, it is but as Satan intruded ( Job
1.) among the Sons of God, they are of their Company, but not of their Number;
neither will they find any Advantage by using Christ's Name. God is not to be
imposed upon, like Isaac, by false Pretenses, by counterfeit Hands, a borrowed
Name, or Garments, but will discover the Cheat through all; and he that to the
Righteous is all Ear, to the Wicked will be as an Idol, that has Ears and hears
not; those, I say, that regard not the Words of his Commandments, nor
understand the Voice of his Spirit, are to him also as Barbarians, as a People
whose Language he understands not. Nay, and it is well if it fares no worse with
them, than not to be understood, and that their Petitions are only answered
with Silence: for God many times breaks forth in Fury and Indignation against
such for their double Provocation of him, for rebelling against him, and
presuming to make Addresses for his Favor. Unto the Wicked, says God, What
have thou to do to declare my Statutes, or that thou should take my Covenant
into thy mouth, seeing thou hate to be reformed, etc.? Such as these when
they make their Prayers, add Sacrilege to Disobedience; and as they have
corrupted themselves, they profane the Ordinances of Religion; and God is not
only deaf to their Devotion, but angry at their Presumption. Men themselves are
not patient of such an Usage, that those that injure them (be they never so
much their Near Relations) should importune them for the highest Benefits. And
can we imagine that God should brook the bold and impudent Solicitations of
those that Sin against him, which are his only Enemies, be they Jews, or be
they Christians? Esse Christianum grande est, non videri, as St Jerome says,
it is a Blessed and Glorious Privilege to be a Christian, but not only to be
called one; and they are hugely deceived, as the Father goes on, that think a
Good Name can profit those that do wickedly; a fair Appellation justify such
as have foul Manners. If we will have God Kind and Propitious to us, we must be
first Kind to our Selves; if we will have his Ears open to our Prayers, we must
keep our Ears open to his Commandments; we must be Obedient, if we expect he
should be Gracious; like David we must search and try our Hearts, whether any
Iniquity be found in us, for we may assure our Selves, where Iniquity is found,
Favor will not be found. There is no Name under Heaven given among men,
whereby they can be saved, but that of the Lord Jesus: But as we must not trust
in a Wrong Name, so neither must we trust in the Right Name a Wrong Way; we
must not entertain Vain Confidences in our Savior himself, hope that he will
countenance any thing contrary to his Gospel: as St Paul says, Let every one
that names the Name of Christ depart from Iniquity. Which God give us Grace
all to do: to whom be ascribed all Honor, Glory, etc.

The Seventeenth Sermon.
LUKE xvii.37. And they said unto him, Where Lord? And he said unto them,
Wheresoever the Body is, thither will the Eagles be gathered together.


AS the Spirit of God, before the time of the Gospel, was fain to turn and
wind it self, as I may say, many ways to reclaim the World from Sin: So after
the Son of God came into the World to preach to it, he found it necessary to
use many holy Arts to win upon it. Sometimes the Convictions of Miracles,
sometimes the Invitations of Promises, sometimes the Terrors of Threats and
Judgments, as in my Text, and those Judgments not only temporal, which
concerned the Jewish Nation, but eternal, which concerned all Mankind.

And we that live in these Days so much nearer the Approach of the final
Judgment prophesied of by our Lord, have reason to deplore the strange
Contumacy which is yet seen in the World; that the Hearts of men are still so
Unalterable from their Evil Ways; that those Engines that heretofore were so
successful in oppugning Sin, should now, like antiquated Engines of War, become
wholly unserviceable; those powerful Methods of the Gospel, which could convert
the Heathen World, cannot reclaim the Relapsed and Apostate. If the Preacher
does paulo majora canere, add Terrors to his Persuasions; join the Voice of
the Trumpet, and even of the last Trumpet, to his own Voice; leave Christ's
Sermons, and take his Prophecies for Texts, threaten Destruction to restrain
Vice; Damnation to awe Impiety; it effects nothing: But where the Pulpit is
Ominous, Men are Obstinate and Obdurate; hear of Christ's coming in the Clouds,
and their appearing before his Tribunal as unconcerned, as they hear a Poetic
Fable: show not that Fear and Amazement, however mixed with hesitancy and
doubting, which the yet raw Disciples did upon their being informed of these
things. And they said unto him, Where Lord? And he said unto them, Wheresoever
the Body is, thither will the Eagles be gathered together.

Before I proceed to explain the Words, it will be necessary to show to what
they appertain. The which that I may do, I must have recourse to the 24th
Chapter of St Matthew, where the Subject, of which my Text is but a Branch, is
more fully treated of, than by our Evangelist. And there we read at the third
Verse, That the Disciples enquired of our Lord three things, When the Time of
his Coming, the Destruction of Jerusalem and the Temple, and the End of the
World, should be? To which, according as his Custom was, he framed an Answer,
not to gratify the Curiosity of the Askers but, to reveal to the World, what
was the Will of God should be revealed. For there are some future Events which
the Divine Wisdom thinks fit to make known to men, the better to prepare them
to receive or avoid them: Others again which it thinks fit to hide from them,
not only to restrain their Curiosity, but to prevent their Trouble. Our Lord
being therefore to speak of Future things, and the secret Counsels of God, as
the Subject was Prophetic, he treats of them in a Prophetic, i. e. in a more
Obscure Strain, than when he taught the Doctrines and Precepts of Life. Not
that there is any imperfection in his expressing himself, or uncertainty of
that which he foretold: but as Solomon says, It is the Glory of God to conceal
a thing, as it is the Honor of Kings to search out a matter. Christ spoke
sufficiently plain, what his purpose was should then be known, and what was
not, he kept still under a Cloud.

However therefore there are those that undertake to say, He handles one
Question precisely to such a Verse, and another to such a Verse, and the like,
there are no discernible Transitions in his Discourse, but he seems purposely
to involve the matter he speaks of, to treat sometimes of two Questions
together, and sometimes of all three promiscuously; uttering himself one while
literally, another while allegorically. Which has caused some to conceive, that
his whole Discourse has respect but to one thing: Which some will have to be
the Day of Judgment: Others, to the temporal Destruction only of the Jewish
Nation by the Romans, expounding the Eagles in my Text of the Roman Standards
or Ensigns, and all the other Wonders and Prodigies that are mentioned, The
darkning of the Sun and Moon, the falling of the Stars, etc. allegorically, of
the Change that should be in the Church and State of Israel, parallel to the
like Allegory used in the second of Joel. Some understand by the Eagles in my
Text the Elect or Faithful; and by the Body about which they shall be gathered
together, the Person of Christ, to which they shall fly as to their Spiritual
Food.

But it seems very strange, when the Disciples enquired of our Lord three
things, and his Words comport so well to the Satisfaction of all three, that he
should be thought to answer to None, or but to one of them: which yet we must
say, if we admit of any of the Interpretations I have instanc't in. As
therefore not only as more congruous to Reason, but to the Passages in our
Lord's Discourse, we may determine, that he answers, however indistinctly, to
all his Disciples Queries. And as there is no Question, but that he speaks of
his Coming to destroy Jerusalem and his wicked Crucifiers: So there is as
little doubt to be made, that he speaks also of the Destruction of the World at
the last Day, and his coming to judge it. For however the Calamity of the Jews
was so great, the Tragical Circumstances of the Subversion of their Nation so
dismal, that it was a kind of Doomsday to them; and their particular
Destruction may be resembled to the General Destruction of the World: Yet they
that shall duly consider the formidable Phenomenon or Appearances, the Scene
of mixed Majesty and Terror set out by St Matthew, must confess they are
Incommunicable to any other Event, but his coming to judge the World, and the
Dissolution of the visible Heaven and Earth, and can be affixt to none beside
but figuratively and improperly: So that not only to accommodate, but to
appropriate them to a less Accomplishment, with the exclusion of the greater,
seems an Interpretation intolerable.

I shall not therefore scruple to proceed to understand the Words, as I have
begun, of the last Judgment. Particularly, that by [ the Body] in my Text, or
by [ the Carcase] as St Matthew has it, is meant all Persons of the World; and
by [ the Eagles] the Angels, whose Office it shall be (as God's Apparators) to
summon and bring together at the Last Day the Quick and the Dead before the
Tribunal of Christ. And the End or Drift of an Emblem or Parable being chiefly
to be regarded, and not the particular Words racked, for what Mysteries may
possibly be found in them, I shall insist no longer at present to consider,
what Comparisons may be brought from Carcasses and Eagles, or the like: but
observe from the General Scope of the Words these three things:

I. That at the Last Day there shall be an Exact Discrimination and Distinction
between the Righteous and the Wicked.

II. That there shall be a particular Visible Place to which all men shall be
brought together to Judgment.

III. That Men very hardly, or very unwillingly, believe these things.

I begin with the first of these,

That at the Last Day there shall be an Exact Discrimination made between the
Righteous and the Wicked.
The Almighty and Wise God finds it not Expedient, while this World remains,
continually to be giving outward and ocular Demonstrations, either of his
Approbation of the Faithful, or of his Detestation of the Wicked: the most
which he does in the Course of his Providence, is sometimes to check the
Madness of the one, that they grow not insupportable; and to encourage the
Virtue of the other, that they may not be dejected: but as Solomon says, There
is no convincing Argument from visible Occurrences of God's love or hatred to
either of them. And the Unrighteous take from hence no little heart to run on
in their Evil Ways, and to deride the Faithful for losing the certain pleasures
of a present Life, for the uncertain Hopes of a future: they see no Difference
made between themselves and the Godly in this World, and they conceive there
will be as little in the next; flatter themselves, that their Sins will either
be buried with them in the Grave, and forgotten in that long Night; or else
shuffled and lost in the vast Heap of semblable Transgressions of other men.
But as it is the Quality of Cold to congeal and unite together into one Lump
things heterogeneous, or of diverse Sorts, as Sticks, Straws, Stones, etc. and
of the Thaw when it comes to dissolve the Union, and then the Stones and like
heavy Bodies are precipitated, Straws and light Bodies float, and those of a
middle Nature are suspended between both: So though in this World the Innocent
and Guilty cohabit together, and make but one Lump or Corporation; yet at the
Dissolution of it, some Men shall be precipitated into the Bottomless Pit, and
others again exalted above the Region of the Stars. Or else, as at the
Creation, all things made but one Chaos, and appeared to be but of one and the
same Nature, till God by his Divine Power separated them, and then the Lighter
flew up to the Heavens or higher Parts of the World, and the Heavier settled on
the Earth below: So at the End of the World, when God shall come to judge it,
he will distinguish and separate the Mass of men according to the Quality of
their Works, and those who have set their Hearts on heavenly things, shall be
thought worthy of Heaven, and to reign for ever with him and his holy Angels in
Glory; and those who have hated heavenly things, and set their Affections on
things below, corrupted themselves with the Vices of this Life, to use the
Psalmists words, shall be turned into Hell.

And the revealing of this Mystery does vindicate the Justice of the Deity, and
absolve Providence from the Censures and hard Speeches of men: for our Lord has
plainly taught, That there shall be a Day of calling all Flesh to account for
what they have done in this Life: and however the Good and Bad are
promiscuously joined at present, and seem to be every way alike, and equal to
one another; though they be in the same Field, as he says, or the same Bed, yet
one shall be taken, and the other left: Again, in another place, The hour is
coming when all that are in the Graves shall come forth, those that have done
Good unto the Resurrection of Life, and they that have done Evil unto the
Resurrection of Damnation. And this being asserted by the mouth of Truth it
self, and also the Fundamental Part of our Creed, which sustains its whole
Frame and Fabric, it will be sufficient thus to have illustrated it without
bringing any Proofs of the Matter: The Article of Christ's judging the Quick
and the Dead, though it be last in Place in the Confession of our Faith, yet it
is the first in Office and Importance, and has an Influence on all the Articles
that go before it, and which would be of no Consequence without it. For what
avails it to believe there is a God, if neither in this Life, nor in the Life
to come he will make any Difference between the Righteous and the Wicked? What
profit is it to believe a Redeemer or a Savior, if there be no Salvation or
Damnation? That there is a Holy Ghost, if in the Issue it shall be all one to
those that are Sanctified, and to those that are not Sanctified? The very
Equity and Reason of the thing, that there should be a Day of Judgment, is a
sufficient Demonstration that there shall be such a Day.

Instead therefore, I say, of bringing Proofs of this Doctrine, I shall rather
advise men to make the best Use of it, and not to be deceived with the present
Uniformity and Identity, as 'twere, of the Condition of the Godly and Ungodly
in this World: but to reflect on what is said of the Severe Scrutiny that shall
be at the Last Day, when the present Mask shall be pulled off from the Face of
the World, and no Action whatsoever be concealed; when the secret Sins, as well
as secret Counsels of Princes, whatever they have done amiss, or been the
Authors of others doing amiss, without regard to their Persons, shall be laid
open: when the delinquencies of the Meaner Sort shall not be past over, or lost
in Oblivion, by reason of the Obscurity of their Condition: When the Nice in
point of Fame and Reputation, but regardless of their Innocence, shall have
their Sly and close Sins ripped open, and published to their greater Confusion
before Men and Angels: When the Player and Actor in Religion, the Hypocrite,
shall be stripped of his Vizard and Mantle of Holiness, and the loathsome Vices
concealed under them, exposed. For as it is said, At the coming of Christ,
Antichrist shall no longer deceive the Nations: So it shall arrive, to all
those that have lived Antichrists, at the coming of Christ to Judgment, they
shall no longer deceive, however successful their Cozenages have been in this
Life. The Children of Darkness are many times, to outward Appearance, clad in
richer Robes of Righteousness, and make a goodlier Show of Piety and Devotion,
than the Children of Light: But in the Day that God shall make up his Jewels,
as the Prophet Malachi speaks, he will distinguish the true from the false; and
however the Counterfeit Vye at present in Luster with the right and Orient, and
exceed them in Magnitude, then it shall be seen what trash they are. Which if
men would duly consider, and that this Trial and Examination of all Flesh is
not only to lay open their Actions to the Eye of the Judge, for alas he knew
them in the hour they were committed: or yet to expose them only to Shame
before the innumerable Host of Men and Angels that will be there assembled, for
that is but the Beginning of the Evils they are to expect: But it is, that every
One may receive a Reward according to his Merit, as our Lord says, They that
have done Well, Everlasting Glory, and they that have done Evil, Everlasting
Fire. I say, if men would seriously consider this, they would anticipate this
Work of Trial and Judgment while time was allowed them to do it; they would
tear off their Disguises of Sin, before they were stripped of them; they would
distinguish and separate themselves from the Wicked by a Holy Life, before the
Great Day of Separation of the Just and Unjust; prevent God's severe Sentence
on their Misdeeds, by their own severe Condemnation of them beforehand; that
whether they labor at the Mill, or in the Field; in the City, or in the Camp;
whatever their Callings and Employments be, they may be of the number of those
that are taken, and not of those that are left. And let this suffice to be said
of my first Observation, That at the last Day there shall be an exact
Discrimination between the Righteous and the Wicked. I proceed to my Second
Observation,

That there shall be some particular visible Place to which all men shall be
brought to Judgment.
Although it be in the Power of the Almighty, wherever Sinners shall be found
at the last Day, there to sentence and send them to Hell; and wherever the
Righteous shall be found, from thence to translate them to Heaven: Yet, as it is
the manner of Earthly Princes, to summon their People to receive Justice at
some certain Place, their chief City, where their Court and ordinary Residence
are; so it seems good to the Wisdom of God, to assemble all Persons, both Just
and Unjust, to one Place of Common Judicature: and Writers do most probably
conceive the place shall be Jerusalem, the City of God's most visible Residence
on Earth. And that for these two Reasons:

1. For the Reparation of Christ's Honor: Because he suffered there not only
the Scorn and Despite of the Jews, who put him to a cruel, unjust and shameful
Death, but the Affronts also of all Nations gathered together at the Feast of
the Passover: it being God's will that he should receive Reparation and Amends,
where he had received the greatest Outrage and Indignity: and that the Prophecy
of Zechary should be fulfilled in the most eminent Manner, They shall look on
him whom they pierced.

2. For the clearer Conviction and more sensible Compunction of those that
denied and murdered him. For as it is the Custom again among Men, to send
Malefactors to be judged and executed near the Place they committed their
Crimes, the more to awaken their Guilt; so God the more, first, to awaken, and
then to confound the daring and relentless Infidelity of our Lord's Crucifiers,
(who, after all their Persecutions, wished his Blood might be on them and on
their Children) has determined to pass the Sentence of Condemnation on them in
the Place they perpetrated their Crimes. And the Prophecy of Joel, Chap. 3.
seemed to some of the Ancients to countenance this Opinion, That God will
assemble all Nations to Judgment in the Valley of Jehoshaphat, which was near
adjoining to Jerusalem; says the Prophet, Assemble your selves all ye Heathen
-- and come up to the Valley of Jehoshaphat, for there I will sit to judge,
etc. Multitudes, multitudes in the Valley of Jehoshaphat: for the Day of the
Lord is near in the Valley of Decision. Which Prophecy, whatever earlier
Accomplishment it had in God's judging the Heathen that were Enemies to Israel,
yet the Principal Completion of it has been thought to point at the last
Universal Judgment. And it is a General Persuasion of the Jews, that the Trial
of all Men at the Last Day shall be at Jerusalem: but not understanding, That
the Dead shall be gathered together by the Office and Ministry of Angels, they
say, That in whatever remoter Parts of the World they dye in their Dispersion,
their Bodies, by the Power of God, shall be rolled along through the inward and
secret Parts of the Earth to Jerusalem, the Place assigned for their
Resurrection, and the Appearance of all Men.

But now after all that has been said, though we conclude not peremptorily and
chorographically, Where, or over what Part of the Earth, Christ will erect his
Throne for Judgment, the Scriptures being silent, or very obscure as to the
Place: yet there is nothing that they deliver more plainly, than that the Great
Session or Assize at the End of the World shall be Conspicuous and Dreadful;
and they seem even solicitous and industrious in describing the formidable
Manner of it, to make in men's minds a deeper impression of the Terrors of the
Lord, as the Apostle calls them. And as we have two Corporal Senses, or Inletts
of Fear into the Soul, the Eye and the Ear, the Word of God makes the Terrors
of Doomsday to consist in the Objects of both these Senses, viz. in fearful
and amazing Sounds, and in Prodigious and Ghastly Sights. For it is said, That
the Lord shall descend from Heaven in a Shout, with the Voice of the
Archangel, and with the Trump of God, and the Dead shall rise, and the Sun
shall become black as Sackcloth, and the Moon red as Blood, and the Stars shall
fall, and the Heavens be rolled up like a Scrole, etc. A Picture of such
Horror which no Fancy of Man could ever have drawn, or possibly conceived, if
it had not first been Divinely revealed: and though we look upon this Scheme or
Draught of the Lord's coming at present with little Concern, because we suppose
it to be at a great Distance: yet if we would consider, that the holiest
Persons of old were as dead men at the Sight only of an Angel, though coming to
them in a familiar Shape, and with a gracious Message; and that we our selves
are beside our selves, but at the fansy'd Appearance of a Spectre or Ghost, or
any other Supernatural Occurrent; what must our amazement and Confusion be,
when we shall behold the whole World in a Flame, the Visible Heaven and Earth
passing away with tumultuous Thunders, Lightnings, and Earthquakes? When we
shall hear the Crack of the dissolving Universe, and the Groans of dying
Nature? when we shall behold not only one Evil Spirit, but the whole accursed
and damned Crew in their Horror? again, when we shall behold not only one
Angel, but all the Host of Heaven, and their Lord and ours sitting in the midst
of them with all the annexes of Majesty and Terror? And this dreadful
Spectacle, not like one of the Visions of the old Prophets, which concerned not
the Beholder himself, but others: but such as concerns the Eternal Woe or
Welfare, Salvation or Damnation of every Person there present, i. e. of all
that ever came, or shall come into the World.

When our Lord discoursed of these things to his Disciples, and of the dreadful
manner of the Destruction of the Jewish Nation as a Prelude to it, they were
too big for their Imaginations to conceive, or their Faith to digest: and they
could not, or durst not understand him; they were in the like Astonishment the
three Disciples were in at his Transfiguration, when Peter said, not knowing
what he said, Let us make three Tabernacles, etc. So great, I say, was the
Consternation of the Disciples at our Lord's Words, that their Reason, and
Spirits were in a kind of Deliquium, or Swoun, as well as their Faith. And they
answered and said unto him, Where Lord? a Question not of Curiosity, but of
Terror and Doubt. And even still to this day we find men more inclined to
distrust what is taught of the last Judgment, than to be warned and edified by
it; to think the things affirmed of it impossible, than to follow St Peter's
Advice and to consider what manner of Persons they ought to be, seeing the
World shall be dissolved. And so I pass to my last Observation,

The Unwillingness of Men to believe a Judgment-Day.
So weak is the Nature of man, or such is the Subtilty of our Spiritual
Adversary the Devil, that even when we are convinced of the Substance of many
Truths, yet by reason of the Strangeness and Unconceiveableness of some
Circumstances of them, we let go the very Substance of the Truths again; and
the best Men have been sometimes subject to this Infirmity. The Psalmist was
thoroughly instructed in this fundamental Truth, That there was a God that
judged in the Earth; yet because he saw the Righteous oppressed, and the Wicked
in prosperiry, he staggered in his Faith, and his feet, as himself confesses,
had well-nigh slipped. The Blessed Virgin could not but believe the Message of an
Angel appearing at Noonday, and out-shining the Brightness of the Noon-days
Light: but because she was to conceive miraculously, without the knowing of a
man, some Scruple remained in her holy breast of the Event of the Prediction.
The Israelites heard from their Prophets, of whose Divine Mission they doubted
not, That if they went on in their Transgressions, their Temple should be
destroyed, and themselves led Captive by the Gentiles: but then the Conceit,
that God would never suffer these things to be done for his own Glory, whatever
their Demerits were; that if they were removed, he would want a People; and if
his House were profaned, his Worship would be extinguished in the World; made
them disbelieve their Prophets. And the like latent Incredulity possessed the
Disciples here, They knew their Lord had the Words of Truth, but the
Strangeness and Dreadfulness of the things spoken of by him made their Faith
fluctuate, and they could not believe, even what they could not disbelieve.

And when we see the holiest Men thus to have Doubts and Scruples to withold
them from receiving a harsh and displeasing, though never so plainly a
revealed, Truth; to have a Where, or a When, Lord? a How, or by What Means?
Some Question or other of the Time, the Place, the Possibility, and the like?
What marvel is it, if Wicked and profligate Persons, who are wholly Strangers
to the Power and Wonderful Ways of God, show a greater Infidelity, when they
hear a Doctrine wholly contrary to their Temper, repugnant to their Pleasures,
destructive of their Interests, and withal difficult to be conceived? I say, if
when such as these, to restrain them from their Lusts, or gainful Oppressions,
are told, that they will certainly be called to a strict Account in another
Life, for what they do amiss in this, smile, or laugh out, and conceive they
shall do well enough after their Sins, notwithstanding all that is threatened
against them? We see Malefactors against the Laws of Men, even after the
Sentence of Death is past upon them, and their Execution as certain to ensue,
as the revolution of the short time appointed for it; yet flatter themselves
they shall find means to escape, by a Bribe, by a Rope at a Window, by a
Reprieve, by a Rescue, by an Accident, by any thing, they know not what. And
after the like manner Offenders against God, though their Condemnation be
recorded in his Word, and their Condition more desperate, promise themselves
they shall never feel the Evils denounced against them; that the Report of
Doomsday is false, the Doctrine of a Resurrection and another Life foolish and
impossible. When therefore they hear such passages in Scripture as these, Some
men's Sins are open beforehand, going before to Judgment, and some men's follow
after: and again, The Good Works of some are manifest beforehand, and they
that are otherwise, cannot escape: they reason in their hearts, and say, Ay,
but why? the Parties are dead. Ay, but When, and Where? the Parties are escaped
into a far Country. Ay, but How, or which way? the Parties are drowned, and
devoured by Fishes, and their Bodies turned into Nourishment, or else burnt to
Ashes, and that scattered -- True, but wherever the Carcass is, or the least
Remains of it, thither will the Eagles be gathered together, i. e. though the
Body of a Sinner seem to all humane Appearance annihilated; yet God by his
Power will restore it, and by the Office of his Angels bring it before the
Tribunal of Christ.

And this is the importance of our Lord's Emblematical Words in my Text: for
it is observed, that Eagles and other Birds of Prey, Ravens, Vulturs, etc. have
a great Perspicacity in discovering their Food, a kind of divining, or
Prophetic Conjecture where to seek it, insomuch that they will follow Armies,
and know the unsuccessful Troops, and expect their Banquets from their
Overthrow. Says Job, The Eagle abides on the rock -- from thence she sees her
Prey, her Eyes behold afar off -- and where the slain are, there is she. And
then the Celerity, strength, and rapacity of these Creatures to seize, is as
great, as their Sagacity to find out. And God has more abundantly endowed the
Angels with requisite Qualities to execute his Will and Commands: however
therefore Virtue and Piety went out of this World without any seeming Regard,
yet they are the Objects of God's Love, and the particular Care and Charge of
the Angels, and they shall not pass in the next without a Glorious Reward:
Again, though Wickedness died in Prosperity, yet it is the Object of God's
Wrath and Justice, and the Quarry of the Angels, and it will be found out by
them in all the Ruins of Mortality, and brought to receive its just Punishment.

And that these things are so incredible to Sinners is without all reason: For
they are the only men that believe this World to be immovable and eternal, and
yet it is supported only by the Word or Will of God: as Job says, He hangs the
Earth upon nothing, and we may say, the Heavens upon as little: But God's
rewarding the Righteous, and punishing the Wicked are founded on his Justice,
i. e. on his very Essence or Being, and can fail no more than the Deity it
self. However therefore this Doctrine is disbelieved and slighted by sensual
and carnal Men, it ought continually to ring and sound in the Ears of the
Faithful, as St Jerome fansy'd the last Trump did in his; the Parable of the
Eagles and the Carcass should frequently occur to our thoughts, to make us
break off our Sins, and to keep us close to our Duty. For if any One, to
encourage himself in his Sins, shall say, When I leave this World, I shall
creep again into the Cells of Darkness and Obscurity, where I lay before I was
born, I shall be reduced again to the State of Nothing, as when I was in my
first Causes: Let him consider, that God can call him out of that Nothing which
he speaks of, as he did when he first made him a living Man; and that
Restoration is not so hard a Work, as Creation; that what the Psalmist says of
the Nocturnal Darkness, caused by the absence of the Sun, The Darkness is no
Darkness to thee, may be affirmed of the Philosophical Darkness of his
Dissolution, That Darkness is also no Darkness to him; the Night and the Day of
his Being or Not-being are alike in his all-seeing Eyes. The fat and grown Deer
seems Subtle to himself in retiring into the Coverts and Thickets, and leaving
the Younger and smaller to feed abroad in danger of the Huntsmen; but alas it is
for him alone that all the Quest and Search is made, and while the lean and
Rascal-Herd are past by, the Keeper only marks and lodges him for the Chase.
The Policies of Wicked Men are as Simple as the Craft of these Silly Creatures,
who when they are grown fat with the Oppressions and Spoils of their Brethren,
swollen and ready to burst with Excess and Luxury, flatter themselves, if they
can but escape the Penalty of the Laws, and get into their Graves in Peace, no
Vengeance can afterward overtake them: But alas it is to rouse them chiefly
that Doomsday is appointed, Aquila non capit Muscas, the heavenly Eagles, the
Angels, stoop not at Flies; they are not Small Sinners, but these Monsters and
Prodigies of Impiety which are their principal Game or Quarry. As therefore the
bloody Tyrant Sylla found it a foolish Meditation, after his butchering so many
of the Roman Nobility, to lay down his Power, and to hope for Safety in a
Retirement from the Swords of those whose Relations he had murdered: So let no
Man after a Wicked Life hope to find a Place so remote, obscure, or fortified,
as to protect him from God's Vengeance. It Is said, That Kings have long arms,
and can reach Delinquents at a great Distance; but the King of Kings has much
longer: and if the Offenders against him could take Refuge even in the Center
of the Earth, obtain of the Rocks to shelter them, or the Mountains to fall
upon them, the Angels would fetch them from thence to Judgment. There are none
that shall escape, none that shall be dispensed with from appearing before the
Tribunal of God, and receiving their Doom at the Last Day: Only it is now in
our power, while we are yet in this Life, to make it a happy or unhappy Doom; a
Doom that adjudges us to Crowns and Scepters, or to Chains and Everlasting
Torments. Repentance and a Holy Life will turn that Day of Terror into a Day
of Rejoicing; make the Ominous Portents, the dreadful Thunders, and other
amazing Concomitants of it, but as the loud Music, cheerful Acclamations, and
Solemnities which attend a Triumph or Coronation; I say, which attend our own
Triumph and Coronation, as St Paul assures us, 2 Timothy 4 8. I have finished my
Course, says he, I have kept the Faith; henceforth there is laid up for me a
Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at
that day, and not to me only, but unto all them that love his appearance.
However the Predictions of the Last Day cause Consternation and Distraction of
Mind in Wicked Doers, to the Righteous they are altogether Gospel or Good
Tidings; they that keep God's Laws, cannot choose but love and delight in his
Appearance. Let the Heavens rejoice, and the Earth be glad, says the Psalmist:
Let the Field be joyful, and all that is therein before the Lord -- And why all
this Joy? For he comes, for he comes to judge the World, and the People with
Equity. And Luke 21.28. says our Lord, When these things come to pass, then
look up and lift up your heads: for your Redemption draws nigh.

To God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, be ascribed all Honor, Glory, etc.
The Eighteenth Sermon.
1 PETER iv.8. And above all things have fervent Charity among your selves: for
Charity covers the multitude of Sins.


THE Commandment of Charity, if we look to the Birth and Cradle of it, is as
ancient as Adam: for this Natural Law, Deal so with others, as you would have
them deal with you, which is the radical and original Precept out of which this
Gospel one did immediately issue, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self,
sprung-up with Nature, and is as old as it; mutual Love beginning with mutual
Society; and affection to one another being exercised, as soon as there was a
Pair in the World to keep it up. But the Practice of the Jews in our Savior's
time much thwarted this Precept, Sect was against Sect, the Pharisee against
the Sadducee, and the Sadducee against the Pharisee, and both against Christ;
Professions and Offices were made Crimes, Publicans, the Receivers of Tribute,
were counted Sinners: again, Revenge was held as lawful as Punishment;
Extrajudicial Righting of a man's self, as Judicial Censures; Do Good to those
that do Good to you, and Evil to those that do Evil, was good Ethics among
them, and the Moral Man esteemed to appear as eminent in practicing the last
part of this Maxim, as the first. So that the Precept of Charity was, in a
manner, wholly extinguished among them, so overwhelmed with the Rubbish of ill
Customs, and worse Traditions, that to clear it and make it shine out again,
was a Work as hard, as to introduce something that never before was: Which
caused our Lord to call this Commandment a New one, I give you a New
Commandment, says he, That ye love one another. New, not as if it then first
entered the World, but because it was then renewed to them: as things redeemed
from the injury of Age and Oblivion appear fresh and new, when they are brought
into Use and Fashion again.

But we may admire, that the World has so much agreed in all Times to abrogate
this Law, brought in at first by General Interest, and of so Universal Benefit,
that we may say with Tully, Non aqua, non igne, non aere, pluribus locis
utimur, quam amicitia, we stand not more in need of water, fire, or air in
every turn of our Lives, than of Friendship, or the mutual Offices of Love. And
if this Law were entertained, it would render all other Laws useless, it would
disannul the Commandments, by fulfilling them; it would remove heaps of Legal
Cautions and Provisions, the two Tables would be no more necessary to Men, than
to Angels; private Grudges, open Wars, Rebellions, Factions, Schisms, would all
vanish, every Person would be not only more holy in himself, but would cause
others to be more holy; many Sins would be amended by a fair Example, many
would be extenuated by a candid Interpretation, many overcome by a kind and
amicable Usage: Therefore, as the Apostle advises in the foregoing Verses,
mortify your Lusts, be sober and watch unto Prayer, neglect not necessary
Duty. But above all things have fervent Charity among your selves: for Charity
shall cover the multitude of Sins. In the Words we may observe these four
things:

I. The Habit or Grace that is enjoined, Love. Not that Passion which is born
with all Sensitive Creatures, and is common to Men and Beasts, but that
Theological Virtue which is infused into Man only; it is not simply Love, but
Christian and Brotherly Love, Have Charity.

II. The Degree of this Habit, the Intenseness of this Divine Quality, and that
is Fervency; it is not enough to have a remiss lukewarm Charity, it must burn
and glow in us, Have fervent Charity.

III. The Object of this Virtue, that which bounds and terminates it, and is
adequately commensurate to it; and that is, All Men in general, the Object is
as large as Humane Nature, our Charity is not to be tied to Families or Tribes,
to Sects or Nations, or whatever Partitions else Policy or Passion have made
use of to distinguish and estrange men from one another: but it is to be
extended to all, not to this or that Man, but to Mankind; as it is indefinitely
expressed in my Text, Among your selves.

IV. The Inforcement of the Practice of this Quality, and that is by the
Recommendation of it from its Operation or Effect, it covers Sins: together
with the Extent of that Effect, not one or two, but many and many Sins, For
Charity shall cover the Multitude of Sins.

I begin first with the Habit or Virtue it self, contained in these Words,

Have Charity.
The Charity or Love here enjoined us, is not, I say, that melting Passion that
is common to Men and Beasts, an affection awakened in us by the beholding of
outward Beauty, the comely Structure of the Body, or other Graces of a fair and
amiable Person, which is the Child only of an abused Fancy, begot through
Weakness, and nursed up by fond Conversation, Music, Feasts, Comedies, and
other the like Genial Sports, and busy Idlenesses of the times, and produces
no better Effects than Folly, dissolute Manners, Jealousy, discontent,
Madness, etc. This Frenzy has obtained too much in being the glorified Theme of
Poets and Romance-Writers, who advance it above all other Concerns of Man's
Life, whether Secular or Sacred: and while they make it the admired Subject of
many Fables, and the ambitious Pursuit and highest Ornament of their
counterfeit Heroes, the gilded Poison is often swallowed by the more Sober and
Virtuous. Our Apostle is so far from recommending, or in the least degree
countenancing of this Dotage, that ver. 3. he ranks it among the detestable
practices of the Heathen, and such things as Christians ought to be ashamed of:
For this Sensual Love in those days was not only an Immorality or Vice, but a
prime Branch of Idolatry; from hence flew all the Cupids, from hence came the
Temples dedicated to Venus, the Divinity of Beauty, and the Deities of Women.
And happy it were if we could say, These were not Idols still in the World: for
if, as St Jerome says, every reigning Lust is an Idol set up in our hearts,
Sensual Love is no inferior Deity; Quotcunque habemus Vitia, says the Father,
quotcunque peccata, tot recentes habemus Deos; iratus sum, ira mihi Deus est;
vidi Mulierem and concupivi, Libido mihi Deus est; as many Vices we have, as
many Sins, so many Gods we have; I am angry, Anger is a God to me; I see a
Woman and lust, my Lust again's a God to me. And the Reason of this is plain:
Because none of these things can be in us, but they must be before God in us:
for if they can come after God, they can agree with and be reconciled to God,
which is impossible; and then being before or above him, can we say less of
them, than that they are Gods in us? It Is not the Temple or the Image that
constitutes the Idolatry, but the Shrine the Idol has in our hearts, the
Adoration and Sacrifice paid to it by our Affections: Neither does God require
of us a higher Acknowledgment, than to love him with all our Heart and with all
our Mind. The Love therefore recommended here by the Apostle, cannot be any
thing that is an Enemy to God, to Man, or to our Selves: Charity or Love
carries something Pious and Beneficial in its very Name, and if these things be
not in the Nature of it, it is a Spurious or Bastard Love.

To come then to the Love recommended by the Apostle, we define it to be A
Divine Virtue or Supernatural Grace inspired into us by God's Holy Spirit, a
Quality which resides in himself, and which is subject to no perturbation: an
Image of it we see in the pious Love of Parents and Children, the religious
Amity between Brethren, Friends, and Neighbors, and the Perfection of it in
our Savior, his Apostles, Martyrs, and other Christian Heroes, that followed
his Example. An Affection it is, but a Severe and Sober one; a Fire that warms
the hearts of men, but a pure and sanctified one, lifted far above the
Softnesses and Wantonnesses of the other Carnal heat, and not kindled by the
Deception of the Outward Senses, or flaming from the Fuel of a bright Beauty,
but a reflected Beam of our Love to God descending downwards, and glancing on
our Brethren, from a Sense of God's Goodness to us, and in obedience to that
Commandment of his, that enjoins us to pay to men, as his Proxies and
Substitutes on Earth, the Tolls and Tributes due unto himself. So that it is not
This or That Person that this Love makes court to, but to Mankind; its
Addresses are as Universal as the Image of God in the World, no more regard is
had by it of the Handsome, than the Deformed; of the Young, than the Aged; or
if more be had of the one than the other, it is of the Party most to be
compassioned; the Object of this Love is Want or Misery in any kind, and
whoever it can help is its Amata or Beloved.

And as the Object of this Love is no less General than the Distresses of
Humane Nature, so its Expressions toward them are as many and various as there
are Ways of doing Good, and being Beneficial in any kind. For Charity is not
only a Largess of Money, or a Dole of Bread, a feeding of the hungry, and a
clothing the naked, etc. but a parting with our Passions for the sake of our
Brethren, a condescending to their Weakness, a complying with their Temper, and
tolerating their Infirmities: It Is again, a relieving them with Good Counsel, a
Donative of Seasonable Admonition and Reproof; a showing of Severity, when need
requires, as well as Mercy; an Exacting of Punishment, as well as a remitting
of it: for Charity is not that which is always grateful and always pleasing,
but which is ever salutary and ever beneficial. The Wanton Love we condemned,
is a constant Flood of Sweetness, which flows smoothly into the Ocean of
Destruction, a smiling Evil that knows nothing harsh or disagreeable, till it
turns all to Harshness and Disagreeableness: But Godly Love is often bitter in
the first Taste, and sweet in the after Relish, a rugged Mercy and an Austere
Kindness, a Good transferred with Frowns and Severe Discipline: and such are
the Corrections of Servants and Children, the Correptions of Friends, the
Excommunications of the Church, and the exterminating Sentences of the Law; the
Rod and the Stocks, the Hurdle and the Axe, being as instrumental unto Charity,
as Money, Food, Raiment, and the like. Open Rebuke, says Solomon, is better
than secret Love: and I may say, Open Rebuke has in it much secret Love. And to
think the Remissness of Laws, charitable; and the Execution of them, cruel; is
a Shortness of Reasoning, which becomes only Women and Children, who pity the
present Sufferings of the Criminal, but see not the future Good purchased by
it. The timely cutting off of a Notorious Malefactor has rescued a Nation from
Destruction, Phineas stood up and prayed, and the Plague ceased: his seasonable
Execution of two Eminent Offenders preserved the lives of many thousands of the
people; and holy Writ calls not his Fact, Slaughter, but styles it by the
milder Name of Prayer: because it invoked God's Mercy, and propitiated his
Wrath. If Pity may bind the hands of Justice, and Charity protect Violence and
Outrage, not only one Wolf will worry a whole Flock, but the Flock or Body of
People will in time become Wolves and Tigers: for Religion only persuades men
to be Just and Righteous, it does not constrain them to be so; indeed it
promises Rewards to Well-doers, and threatens Judgment to Evildoers, but they
are Rewards to come, and Judgments at a great distance, and the Sinner has
leave to execute his Wickedness; so that the Terrors of Religion work only
upon the Good and Faithful, while the Worst and most of men despise them. But
even the boldest and most daring in their Impiety, who count Heaven and Hell
only the Parables of Scripture, and the Fictions of Preachers, will boggle in
the Cariere of their Sins at the remembrance of a severe Judge and an
unrelenting Humane Law, and consider whether they can escape, if they commit
them; and will not run on madly to transgress, when they see nothing is to be
had but Vengeance; the Attempt, and their Miscarriage; their Sin, and their
certain Death.

Thus we see Severity is not contrary to the Rules of Charity, the Sword in the
hand of Justice less instrumental to men's Good, than the Scales; that the fear
of Punishment is a kind of Grace and Principle of Obedience in the Hearts of
Wicked men, which restrains them from Vice, even when it wins them not to the
Part of Virtue. But then though Severity and Punishment are Noble and necessary
Branches of Charity, they are not the Natural and Genuine; they relate to it,
but as the Prophet Isaiah says they do to God, They are his Works, his strange
Works; his Acts, his strange Acts. The Works which Charity delights most in,
are those that are mild and gentle; which not only produce Good, but which in
themselves are Good; which show Mercy by the Ways of Mercy, and are no less
beneficial in their Progress, than their End: And these are the Operations of
Charity which our Apostle chiefly recommends here to us: and that we may not
err in so Divine a Grace, or come short in so important a Duty, our best way
will be to set before us the Perfectest Exemplar of it that ever was, our Lord
and Savior, and himself commands us, John 15.12. to do this. As I have loved
you, says he, so love one another: thus making his Love to us the Rule or
Pattern of our Affection to those of our own Kind.

And the first Instance of Christ's Love, which I shall propose for Imitation,
is this, That as he loved us, Before we loved him; loved us, without any Merit
or Invitation on our part; loved us, when we could not love him, when we were
wholly benumbed and dead to all heavenly Affections: So likewise that we love
one another, expect not Obligations and Invitations from our Brethren, to
quicken our Charity toward them; but rather delight to begin and be
beforehand in our Expressions of Kindness, and to have it seen that they come
from our selves. A natural Spring flows of its own Impulse, unbid, unprovoked,
and makes its Way through all Oppositions: if it meets a hollow in its Course,
it fills it up; if a light Obstacle, it bears it away with its Stream; if a
great one, it swells and passes over it, at least pours out still its free
Source, till it finds, or makes a Passage. And thus our Charity must take its
Rise, and flow from its self, show it depends on naught beside, that it cannot
be obstructed by the want of any Qualifications, or yet by any Disobligations
of our Brethren. Atticus the charitable Bishop of Constantinople, when he sent
Money to relieve the Poor in the City of Nice, commanded that no enquiry should
be made in the Distribution of it, of what Sect in Religion the Poor were, but
what their Wants were. He that confers his Benefits upon Consideration only of
men's agreeing with him in Opinion, of their Merit, Neighborhood, former
Obligations, or the like, may be just, prudent, or Grateful, but he cannot be
said to be Charitable: for this is a free, unbiased, disinterested Virtue, and
if it regards ought in the Good it does, beside the Opportunity and Power it
has to do it, it changes its Nature, becomes another thing, and assumes a New
Name. Let no man therefore think he has absolved the Duty of Charity, if he be
Kind only where his Honor is courted and complied with; ready to entertain
Friendship, when he is sought to; to be reconciled, when full Amends is made
him: But if he will show this Grace, he must first break the Ice, and lead the
way to Concord, Kindness, and Beneficence. And none think this so hard a
Saying, as those who would hugely stomach and disdain, in case their Neighbor
should precede or take place of them upon any Meeting or Encounter: as if it
were Disparagement to them to sit lower than another at the Table, and not to
be below him in Virtue; to go after him at a Door, and not to come behind him
in all Goodness. If we cannot part with our Passions and Evil Affections for
the sake of our Brethren, as well as our Money; for go our Pride and
Animosities, as well as our Goods; we are Charitable but in part, Merciful but
in a Case; and possibly the Virtue may not be only Imperfect and lame in us,
but we may be wholly destitute of it: for St Paul says, We may bestow all our
Goods to feed the Poor, give our Bodies to be burnt, and yet not have the Grace
of Charity: Because these things may be done out of Ostentation, and not only
so, but without any Profit or Benefit: For put the Case, our Brother be not low
in Fortune, but weak of Undestanding; not indigent of outward things, but of
Instruction and Advice; stands in need to be born with, not to be relieved;
what Good will our Money do him in these his Infirmities? It were as seasonable
to apply it to a broken Arm, or fester'd Wound, to give it to one starving in a
Desert where no Food is to be bought. If we will be Charitable, we must
compassionate our Brothers Necessities, of what Nature soever they be; supply
his Wants, not gratify our own Temper.

The second Instance of Christ's Love which I recommend to our Imitation, is
this, That as he loved us not only first and before we loved him, but loved us
when we were Enemies to him; when we were not only Strangers, but Rebels to
Heaven; when we exercised all the acts of hatred and hostility against it: So
that we love one another, and not think the Obliging and Good Natured only
worthy of our Kindness, but the Discourteous and Injurious. Some men are
contentious with their Neighbors, outrageous to their Children, tyrannical to
their Inferiors, insupportable to their Equals, irreconcilable to their
Enemies, implacable upon every Color of a Wrong: But the Charitable on the
other side can Excuse and pardon the most designed and studied Injuries, see
something to commiserate and pity even in men's Injustice; can look upon their
Malice, as their Mistake or Misfortune, pray for their Enemies, as our Lord
did, in the very Article of the Death which they have brought upon them, Father
forgive them, for they know not what they do. And if we consider rightly,
Sinners are Ignorant and Mistaken in what they do, Fools, as the Scripture
constantly terms them: for no man can will a Wrong Action, that is not Ignorant
and Mistaken; and whether the Mistake lie in the thing Chosen, or in the
Principle by which it is chosen, it matters not, if it be still a Mistake; and
the grosser the Error is, the more pitiable still it is: and if we can pardon
Fools and Mad Folks, Children and Sick persons, and cannot likewise commiserate
the Sick in Sin, the Mad and Foolish in Wickedness, we are as blind in our
Anger, as they are in their Actions. How will that man stand before the Severe
Tribunal of God, who weighs every Grain and Scruple in his Brothers Trespasses
against him? who shows the exactest and highest Rigor of Justice in his
Revenges, and perhaps was never just in any other passage of his Life? how will
he be able to excuse his non-payment of the vast Arrears he is indebted to God,
who has exacted the utmost Farthing of his Brother? Beloved, we make our
Condition in the World to come, according to our Charitableness or
Uncharitableness in this; God will love us, or hate us; judge us, or justify
us; enlarge his Mercy, or shut it up to us; as we do these things to others: if
we be difficult in remitting our Brothers Faults, he will be difficult in
remitting ours; if we forgive only small Offenses, he will not pardon our
Great; if we forgive only in part, we shall not be absolved in the whole. He
shall have Judgment without Mercy, as St James says, that showed no Mercy. Let
no man therefore seek an Excuse, or be glad when he has found a Distinction to
take him off from pardoning his Brother: for what profit is there in that Wrath
which does but treasure up Wrath against the Day of Wrath? The Fourth Council
of Carthage forbad, that the Oblations of Contentious Persons should be
received into the Treasury of the Church, for the same reason that the High
Priest refused to put the money returned by Judas into the Treasury of the
Temple, because it was the Price of Blood. So this the Council: Obligationes
dissidentium Fratrum neque in Sacrario, neque in Gazophylacio Episcopi
recipiant. As there is no place in the Church of God for Uncharitableness, so
we may be sure there is as little in the Kingdom of Heaven.

I have not time to set forth all the Instances of Christ's Love: but there is
One which I must not omit, and it is that which differences and distinguishes
Spiritual Love from Worldly and Carnal above all others: and that is Christ's
performing all he did, merely for their Sakes for whom he did it. Carnal Love,
or Dotage on outward Beauty, can in a measure imitate the former things we have
mentioned, love first, before it be beloved; love without Merit in the Person
affected, digest all their Peevishness and Affronts, and hang on still, and
leave no means unattempted to bring their Mind about: but then they do this not
for their sakes, but their own, to attain the Fruition of what they have so
much desired. But, Alas! what End, what Design could the Creator of all things
have on his own Creatures? What Advantage could he receive by them? As Christ
therefore loved us not for his own Good, but ours; as it was our Salvation, our
re-estating in Immortality that he intended, and not his own: so in our Love to
our Brethren we must not have an Eye to any Sordid Profit of our own; we must
not chaffer Kindness, huckster, as I may say, friendly Offices; Charity
requires the mind of a Prince, not of a Merchant; and we must make a difference
between Christianity, and Factoring. As I have loved you, so love one another.
If it be here objected, That the most Spiritual and Divine Love was never so
abstracted, as to be without all Intuition of Reward, and that our Lord
himself, for the joy that was set before him, endured the Cross and despised
the Shame: It will be enough to say in answer, That as in a Kingdom or
Commonwealth they are accounted Disinterested Persons and without all Designs,
who pursue only the Public Interest and Honorable Designs: So in the Kingdom
of the Gospel those are counted to love without all Design, who have no base
and bye Design; who love God and their Neighbor for Heavens sake, are
interpreted to love them purely for their Own sakes. And let this suffice to be
said of the Habit or Grace of Love enjoined by the Apostle: I proceed next to
speak of the Degree of it.

Have Fervent Charity.
The Word in the Original for Fervent (...), signifies as well the Continuation
of Time, as the Vehemence and Intenseness of the Quality; the Constancy that
should be in our Love, as well as the Ardour. I shall therefore handle it
according to both Senses.

1. In regard of the Time or Constancy of this Quality, our Charity must not be
Fantastic, interrupted, and uncertain; there must not be several Weathers in
our Affections; they must not change like the Winds, but move like the Heavens
in one constant Circumvolution shedding and dispensing their favorable
Influences. For he that loves not always, when he does love, loves out of
Humor, not Virtue; and we may account all the good Offices he does, only the
Fits and Starts of some momentany Passion, and not the Actions of a settled and
radicated Habit. Again, this Virtue must not be taken up only at the Alarm of a
Danger or Sickness, at the approach of a Holy Season, or by way of Preparation
to the Communion: for they are far from fulfilling the Law of Charity that lay
down their Grudges and Quarrels to their Brethren out of some Affright or
Design, but as soon as these are over, reassume them again; imitating the
Serpent that casts up her Poison, when she goes into the Water, and as soon as
she comes on dry Land licks it up again. God accepts not those kind of Truces,
where Battle ceases, but the hatred does not; where the Weapons rest, but the
Affections still rage. Though Charity ought to flourish more eminently at holy
Seasons, yet it must live and be exercised all the whole Year. Our Savior's
Example will direct us here in the Continuation of our Love, as formerly it did
for the Manner of it; of whom we read, That having loved his own which were in
the World, he loved them unto the End.

2. In regard of its Degree, our Charity must be Vehement and Intense, it must
confess its Part in its Ardour, the Holy Ghost; which is called the Spirit of
Love, and has appeared oftener to the World in Fire, than under any other Form:
Good will without Fervency, is but the Endeavor of an imperfect Elementary
Charity. That we may know therefore the Just Degree, and certain Temper that is
required in our Love, the best means will be to bring it to the Test and Trial
of the Rule which is given us to measure it by, which is, Thou shall love thy
Neighbor as thy Self. And this Commandment makes our Love to our own Selves
the Pattern or Standard of that which we ought to bear to other Men: Not that
we are obliged to love other men every way Equal to our selves, that is not the
meaning of the Rule, it implies not an Equality, but a Similitude; not a
Parity, but a Resemblance of it in Truth and Reality: Our Love must be as
Sincere and Cordial to our Brethren, as to our Selves; we must heat our
Affections in the same Forge, have the like Zeal, the like Promptness to snatch
all Occasions to advance their temporal and spiritual Good, as we would to
advance our own: but yet still other men's Concerns ought to be but our second
Care; before we preach to others, before we labor for their Salvation, we must
take heed with St Paul, that we our selves be not Cast-aways.

I shall not need in these days, in which Self-Love so much abounds, and
Christian Love so little, to give Cautions against Supererogating and
overflowing Charity: but though little will need to be said against any Excess
in this Grace, yet much may be behoof-ful to prevent the Mistakes of it. For
many think that for Friendship-sake they are obliged to engage in all manner of
Wickedness, to drink Drunk, and fight Duels, to spend the main of their Life in
Gaming, and other dissolute Courses; nay, to enter into treasonable Practices
against their Prince and Country. And there are those again that will debauch
as highly in matters of Religion: out of their Kindness to a Sect, dip their
hands in Blood, and put a Nation into a Flame and Combustion; for their Love to
an ill-taken up Opinion, and a Party they have long adhered to, renounce the
Church and Truth, which in effect is God himself; choose rather to live and dye
in Disobedience and a damnable Schism, than seem to be inconstant; and to carry
their Flocks along with them in the way of Perdition, than undeceive and grieve
them with an Unwelcome, though Necessary Truth. Such as these are not tender of
their Brethrens Peace, but guilty of their Destruction; and set not so high a
Price on their Contentment, as a cheap on their own Consciences: it is not
possible to be Wicked, and Charitable; to love men, and sooth them in their
Sins. What St Paul says of the false Teachers among the Galatians, is true of
these, They zealously affect you, but not well; yea they would exclude you,
that you might affect them; i. e. they had rather their Congregations should
miss of Salvation, than they lose the Interest they have in them. There may be
some Extraordinary Cases in which we ought to prefer our Neighbors Good before
our own: as their greater Good before our lesser; their Spiritual before our
Temporal, etc. But the Rule holds in General, I am not to destroy my self out
of Courtesy; I am not to contract Guilt, to preserve another Innocent; I must
love my Neighbor As my self, not Above, not Before my self.

But this Doctrine seems to be opposed by the Practice of the two greatest
Guides of the Jewish and Christian Church, Moses and St Paul. The one, Exodus
32.31. when the Israelites had so heinously transgressed in the Golden Calf,
interceded for them in this manner, This people have sinned a great Sin, they
have made them Gods of Gold: yet now, if thou will, forgive their Sin; if not,
blot me (I pray thee) out of the Book which thou have written. And the other,
Romans 9.7. out of his heat of Zeal for the Salvation of the same Seed of
Abraham, utters these words, I could wish my self Accursed from Christ for my
Brethren. And both these seem to prefer not only the Temporal, but Spiritual
Good of others, before their own: insomuch as to salve their Excess of Charity,
some have thought nothing less sufficient, than to say, There are many things
done in Scripture by Persons acted by an Extraordinary and Heroic Spirit,
which are not to be brought into Practice by us, who are moved by lower Degrees
of the Spirit; and though we may admire them, we must not imitate them. Others
again, on the other side, have as much depressed the transcendent Charity of
these Great Persons, by parallelling what they did with like Usages and Customs
common among the Jews: For, first, they resemble Moses's Intercession for the
people, to a friendly Complement or Expression of Good Will familiarly used by
those of the Circumcision, and possibly first taken up in imitation of Moses's
intercession, May I be thy Propitiation or Expiation, my Brother; i. e. may I
undergo the Penalty of the Law in thy Stead; to rescue thee from the Divine
Displeasure, bear thy temporal Punishment? And after the like manner they
parallel St Paul's words, ( I could wish my self Accursed from Christ) to a
like Passage found in Ignatius, who was an Auditor of the Apostles, Let the
Punishment of the Devil come upon me, only let me obtain Christ. Where the
Punishment of the Devil cannot possibly import the Eternal Torments of Hell,
for from thence there is no Redemption, or returning to enjoy Christ: and
therefore it must point at Excommunication, to the giving up to Satan, and the
Punishments he had power to inflict on the Excommunicated, so frequently
mentioned in Scripture, but I shall need to give only one instance of. Deliver
such an one unto Satan for the Destruction of the Flesh, that the Spirit may be
saved in the day of the Lord Jesus, 1 Cor. 5.5.

But there seems here to be no need of these Extraordinary Salvo's, these,
however ingenious and learned, Accommodations. For put the Case we should take
the Words of Moses in the strictest literal Sense they can bear, (and we must
take them so, if we will take them, as God's Answer shows he took them,
Whosoever has sinned against me, says he, him will I blot out of my Book) what
would be the Danger or Inconvenience? What did his Intercession import more,
than may be thus fairly paraphrased? Lord, let me prevail with thee to revoke
thy Sentence of totally destroying this People thou have done such wonderful
things for, or involve me in their Destruction, which is easier for me to bear,
than to survive so great a Calamity, and to hear the Heathen insult and
blaspheme thy Name on this Occasion. But Moses's words relate to an Eternal
blotting out. Not necessarily, no nor probably: for whatever knowledge he might
have of another Life, the less it is to be supposed, that he should be willing
to undergo an Eternal Death, to save the People only from a Temporal. And as
fair an account may be given of St Paul's words, who does not say, I do, but I
could wish my self accursed from Christ for my Brethren. So that his words are
not an anathematizing or devoting himself, but only a Meditation: as if he had
said, I could in my Imagination be contented, upon the Condition or
Contemplation of an Event so much to God's Glory and the salvation of so many
Millions, as the bringing in the body of the Jewish Nation to the Faith of
Christ, to whom the Promise was principally made, to be separated or excluded
my self from him: as Vatablus excellently expounds, Vnus pro tam multis optarim
perire, si liceat, I could wish, as far as it is lawful for me, that One rather
than so many might perish. And there is nothing in either of these Passages of
Moses or St Paul, which every faithful Pastor may not safely imitate; let their
Zeal be as much in Earnest, and as right placed as theirs, and it will not only
be pardonable, but rewardable: Neither is there any thing in their Practice, if
rightly weighed, contrary to this Rule, I must love my Neighbor As my self,
not Above, not Before my self. I should proceed to the Object of our Charity,
but what remains will be sufficient for another Task.

The Nineteenth Sermon.
1 PETER iv.8. And above all things have fervent Charity among your selves: for
Charity covers the multitude of Sins.


The Object of Charity, All Men in General.
GOD taught the Church of the Jews in the beginning by easy and natural
Notices and Instructions, by a kind of hieroglyphical or symbolical Divinity,
the Scene of their Religion lay in Garments, Diet, Washes, and the like; the
Commandment was conversant in the Objects of the Senses, touch not, taste not,
handle not. And thus men were inured to the Ways of Virtue, and held at a
Distance from Vice, by allowing or disallowing them the Use of such Creatures
and Customs, as showed the Beauty of the one, and the Deformity of the other.
God endeavoring to render Sensuality and Profaneness odious, by rendering Dogs
and Swine so; Hypocrisy and Corruption of Doctrine, by forbidding Garments of
mixed matters, and sowing the Field with Seeds of several kinds; Exorbitant
Lust, by amputation of the Foreskin; Idolatry and Unnatural Mixtures, by
commanding a perpetual War with the seven Nations of Palestine, deeply
ingulph'd in these Sins. Again, he endeavored to train them in Purity and
Innocence of Life, by enjoining frequent Washings of themselves, their Garments
and their Vessels: But the Jews perverted and defeated the Counsel of God in
this method of instructing them, they looked not, as it is said of them, to the
bottom of their Lavatories, to the Design and Signification of their Types;
they cleans'd their Pots and Skins, and polluted their Lives; they entertained
the forbidden Sin, and terminated their Hatred in the innocent Sign; wallow'd
in the Sensuality of Beasts, and detested the harmless Creatures; practiced all
the Abominations of the Heathen, and when they were as guilty as they, looked
upon them as their Enemies: As if God had taught them, not to hate Idolatry,
but Men; not to be at Variance with Sin, but to keep up a Feud with the
greatest part of the Creation. When they were enjoined utterly to root out the
Canaanites, that their Corruptions might not spread among them, they made
Marriages with them, and incorporated them into one People with themselves: and
again, when in after Ages the reason of such Enmity was worn out, and the
Danger of their Community Outdated; when their Aversion to the Gentiles did not
Secure their Religion, but render it Odious; and preserved not the Truth, but
hindered the Propagation of it; then most preposterously and unreasonably they
showed an irreconcilable Hatred to the Heathen, and extended their Malice not
only to the seven Nations, but to all Nations beside themselves, and were
detestable to all the Inhabitants of the Earth for their Churlishness and
Inhumanity.

In this Condition of hating, and being hated, our Lord found them when he came
into the World; and when he set himself to reform their Mistakes, to remove the
Outward Ordinances they had so little profited by, and to reveal the Duties
that were shadowed under them, they abhorred the Sanctity of their Meaning,
preferred the Burden of them before the Virtue they signified; embraced closer
and more strictly their beggarly Elements; like degenerate Children that fly
from their Book to the Bables of their Infancy; from their Tutors to their
Nurses; choosing rather to counterfeit still an imperfect clipped Speech, than to
form their Tongue to pronounce Words of Instruction and Knowledge. And it cost
our Savior the Cross, and his Disciples Persecutions and cruel Deaths, while
they labored to wean them from their first Childish Rudiments; to redeem the
Creatures from those Prejudices which for a time were thrown upon them for
Religion and Instruction sake; to bring the anathematized and excommunicated
World into the Pale of the Church; to have all men seen to be of one Kindred,
as they were at the Creation; to revive the Consanguinity of Nature, by the
Alliance of Grace; which acknowledges its scattered and remotest Relations,
though situate in the furthest Climes, and made not only Strangers, but Enemies
by distant Countries, and more distant Religions and Interests.

However therefore the Jews were born to Animosities and Hatreds, had Quarrels
entailed on them like their Lands, had so many Nations made over to them their
hereditary, legal, and commanded Enemies: yet Christians are allowed to account
no Sort of People their Enemies, but are enjoined to bear an Amicable friendly
Disposition to all men; or taught that their Brethren are not those only of the
same Kindred or Nation, but those of the same Kind and the same Nature: as
Tertullian says, Lex vetus amorem docet in proximos, nova in extraneos; the Old
Law taught us to love our Neighbors, but the New teaches us that all the World
are our Neighbors; not only those that live near us, but those that do any way
stand in need of our Assistance; not those alone that we know, but those whose
Distresses we are acquainted with, though their Persons are Strangers to us.
And this Doctrine our Lord revealed or explained in the Parable of the wounded
Samaritan: and according to the Tenor of it, we ought to say with Gregory
Nazianzen, All the Earth is my Country, and no Part of the Earth is my Country,
it is Heaven alone that can claim that Title; and no man ought to be excluded my
Kindness, till I know him to be excluded Heaven; and no man but may challenge
my Love, of whom I can say, Behold an Other Man. And this Point of Christianity
is so grounded on the Principles of Nature, that the better Heathens discerned
and practiced it: As I am Antoninus, says that excellent Emperor, my Country
and City are Rome and Italy: but as I am a Man, the whole World. And like again
to this is that Speech in the Comoedian, Homo sum, humani nihil a me alienum
puto; I am a Man, and I esteem nothing humane strange to me, or not to be my
Concern.

Be then my Brother an Arabian or Indian, though he has traveled far, and
planted himself in a remote Clime, though he be fed with Fruits of the Earth I
never saw, and speaks a Language I never heard, he ceases not to be my Brother;
nay, though he be a Jew, Mohammedan, or Infidel, and not only an Enemy to the
Faith, but also to me; he has not lost his Humanity, though he lost his
Religion and Goodness; he has not drunk of Circe's Cup, he is not become a Lion
or a Wolf: and docet Christus, delicto alterius non tolli Naturam, and Christ
teaches us, that a man's Nature is not destroyed by his Sins, the Image of God
remains still in him, and he is yet a Member of Mankind: and whoever shall
obliterate this Character, though but in his Uncharitable Estimation, is
impious and sacrilegious; and because his Brother has done something unworthy
of his Relation to him, he does that which is unworthy of his Creation,
unworthy of the Divine Character he bears.

The Word Enemy ought to be a mere Notion or empty Term in Christian Religion,
or to be Relative to nothing, but to Sin and Satan, to the Devil and the
Devil's Works; God and Nature made all men Brethren; Malice, Interest, or
Chance, made them Strangers or Enemies. Says Hierocles, To a Good man no man is
an Enemy, i. e. a Good man may be hated, but he will not hate again; he may be
treated hostilely, but he will not use another as an Adversary. And this
unconquered Love, of returning good for evil, is the truest and noblest Badge
of our Christian Profession. The Disciples of the Philosophers were
distinguished by the Various Opinions of their Masters; those of the Lawyers by
particular Sentences and Interpretations of the Law; the Scholars of the
Pharisees by certain Traditions and Observations: But Christ would have his
Disciples known by no Vainglorious Marks or Distinctions, But by this, says
he, shall men know that you are my Disciples, if ye love one another: And those
that hate their Brother, be it upon what Pretense soever, Judaize; and though
they wear their Baptismal Cross as conspicuously on their Foreheads, as the
Pharisees did their Phylacteries, they are Disciples of the Synagogue.

I shall add but one thing more, and conclude this Point. Though we are obliged
to love one another, i. e. All men to love all men, we are not obliged to love
all men alike. Our heavenly Father, who is set to be our Example in general
Beneficence, does not do so; though his Love be Universal to all, it is not
Equal to all: but as Seneca says of Earthly Kings, Rex honores dignis dat,
congiarium and indignis, a King bestows common Largesses both on the Worthy and
Unworthy, but Offices and Charges of Honor he confers only on the Worthy. So
the King of Heaven sends his Rain and makes the Sun to shine on the Good and
Bad, on the Just and Unjust; but does not in the like promiscuous manner and
without Distinction scatter the Gifts of his Holy Spirit; he shows himself a
Common Father to all men, but a Gracious Father only to the Righteous. And we
ought to conduct our private limited Charity by the like Rule, shed the common
Influences of it on all Mankind, even as far as we can extend them: but when
they will not reach both to Believers and Unbelievers, then to give the
preference to Believers: for the Alliance of Grace is yet straiter, than that
of Nature. And thus St Paul states this Duty, Gal. 6.10. As we have
opportunity, says he, let us do good to all men, but especially unto the
household of Faith. And I conceive after this manner we are to understand what
is said Ecclus 12.4. Give to a godly man, and help not a Sinner; i. e. help the
Godly man rather; when thou can not relieve both, choose to relieve the first.
And let thus much suffice to be said of the Object of our Charity. I proceed to
the Reason that inforces it, which is taken from its Operation and Effect, It
covers Sins, together with the Extent of that Effect, not one or two, but many
and many Sins;

For Charity shall cover the multitude of Sins.
These Words are Parallel to the last Verse of the fifth Chapter of St James,
He that converteth a Sinner from the error of his ways, shall save a Soul from
death, and shall hide a multitude of Sins. But in some Copies, both in this
place and in my Text, the Original has not (...) in the Future Tense, Charity
[shall] cover a multitude of Sins, implying the Sins of the Charitable Man, but
(...) in the present, [Does] cover a multitude of Sins, implying the Sins of
other men: as it is Prove. 10.12. Hatred stirs up Strife, but Love [or
Charity] covers all Sins, i. e. hides and bears with the transgressions of
other men: and thus again it is said 1 Cor. 13.4. Charity suffers long, and is
kind. In which words the Apostle speaks of a prime Act of Charity, not of its
Reward; of the Goodness it shows, not of the Recompense it shall receive. But
there will be no need to contend for rendering of the Words either way: for both
these Propositions are true. Charity is a benign Virtue that pardons the Sins
of those that offend against us. And again, Charity is so acceptable a Virtue
in the Sight of God, that for its sake he will pardon many Sins committed
against him. I shall therefore handle the Words in both Senses.

And first, Charity shall cover the Multitude of Sins, i. e. of our own Sins
against God. Sins are said to be hid or covered in Scripture, when they are
pardoned: so Psalm. 32.1. Blessed is he whose unrighteousness is forgiven, and
whose sin is covered. And again, Psalm. 84.3. Thou have forgiven the iniquity of
thy people, thou have covered all their Sins. Covering of Sins imports not the
concealing them in relation to God's Sight or Knowledge, but in relation to his
Justice or Punishment: as men are said to forget Injuries, not in a Sense of
Memory, but of Mercy, when they remember them not to revenge them: as Joseph
forgot his Brethrens selling him into Egypt, not as Pharaoh's Butler forgot
Joseph in Prison. But may not then the same Question be asked here, which the
Scribes and Pharisees asked in the Gospel? Who can forgive sins, but God alone?
In what Sense can Charity be said to cover or pardon Sins? for covering or
pardoning of Sins, and Justification, are one and the same thing, the peculiar
Prerogative of God, and his free Gift of Grace through Jesus Christ: and to
affirm, that Charity, or any other Virtue whatsoever, can work this Work
belonging only to God, were to make it, as St Hilary speaks, ambitiosa errorum
patrona, an ambitious or aspiring Patroness of Error, to make it affect the
Throne of God like Lucifer; to attribute to an imperfect humane Virtue the
Power of the Deity, and to advance that to be a Giver of Pardon, which stands
in need to receive Pardon it self. When it is said therefore, That Charity shall
cover our Sins, it means only, That it will dispose God to show us Favor, that
it is an acceptable Virtue in his Sight, and if we come qualified with this
Grace for his Mercy, which is a special Condition also of his Covenant, we
shall not fail to obtain it; but may more powerfully urge this Petition,
Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us: not, as
the Papists teach, upon the Presumption of Merit, but upon the Confidence of
God's Promise and Covenant, Fac hoc, and vives; Do this, and thou shall live.

Secondly, If we take the Words in the other Sense, Charity covers the Sins of
other men against us. Charity does this many ways, but I shall mention only
three: 1. Remittendo, by pardoning and forgiving them: and this is the
perfectest and most absolute way of covering Sins of all other: for thus Sins
are covered, as, I said, God covers them; he that remits Offenses, when he has
right to do it, restores the Person guilty to the State of Innocence again; and
does not so much cover his Transgressions, as utterly take them away: as he on
the other side that revenges or punishes Offenses, registers and preserves the
Memory of them; as the Widow of Zerepaths Expostulation with the Prophet Elijah
imports, Art thou come, says she, to call my Sins to remembrance, and to slay
my Son? to punish her old Guilt, and to revive it, was all one in her account;
to slay her Son, to call her past transgressions to remembrance.

2. Charity covers the Sins of other men, corrigendo and medendo, by Correcting
and amending them, by turning their Vicious Habits into Virtuous: and thus it
covers Sins, as a Plaster does a Wound; its covering is its healing them, and
bringing it to sound flesh again. But then much Prudence and Skill is required
in this Point of Charity, we must be sure that our Corrections of our Brethren
be medicinal and salutary, that our Cures of Men's Minds and Manners be
conducted with as much Caution and Tenderness, as Surgeons and Physicians use
in the Cure of their Bodies. The first Caution therefore that I shall give, is,
That we do not mistake the Disease, and cast the Patient into a Worse
Condition; bring him out of a light Distemper, into a more dangerous and
deadly. There are many Spiritual Physicians in these days, who, like the
Pharisees of old, compass Sea and Land to make Proselytes, and then render them
sevenfold more the Children of Hell, than they were before. The second Caution
which I shall give, is, That if soft and gentle Remedies will work the Cure; we
do not apply rough and sharp ones; affect to operate with Saws, and Knives, and
Fire, use cutting and corroding Reproofs, where Oils and Balsams, milder
Counsels will suffice: a Physician ought to compassionate the Sufferings of his
Patient; and the Reformer of his Brother that shows more Rigor and Austerity
than is necessary, acts the part of a Tyrant, not of a Councellor; and leaves
it to be suspected, that his Design is not so much to reclaim, as to insult
over him; to make him a Convert, as to dress up a Trophee to his own Pride.
Churlishness and Harshness hardens the Bread that is given in Alms, into a
Stone; whereas on the other side, Mildness and Gentleness renders the sharpest
Reprehensions, sweet; and the severest Discipline, grateful. The last Caution I
recommend, is, If the Disease or Sin be disgraceful, that we not only show our
selves good Physicians, but good Men; perform the Duty of Confessors, as well
as of Reformers; hide the Shame, as well as amend the Crime: Open Reprehension
turns into Scandal, and that which would have been Advice, if secret; published,
becomes a Libel.

3. Charity covers the Sins of other men, benign interpretando, by favorably
Interpreting of them, and taking them in the best Part, by setting all Actions,
even Injuries themselves in the most advantageous Light; as Joseph called not
his Brethrens ill-Dealing with him (in selling him into Egypt) their Envy or
their Malice, but God's Providence; and looking upon the Success, and not upon
their Intention, he upbraided them not for their Cruelty, but congratulated the
Preservation of his Father's House. And those that will have God look with
favorable Eyes upon their Miscarriages, must in like manner behold and excuse
the Miscarriages and Delinquences of others: where the Intention appears to
have been Evil toward them, content themselves, if the Success be Good; and
when the Success is Ill, yet persuade themselves the Meaning was not so bad;
and when they can make no fair Construction of either of them, then consider if
themselves would not have done the same upon the like Temptation, or have not
done Worse in some other Instance. And thus where they cannot preserve their
Charity by a candid Interpretation of their Neighbors Defaults, support it yet
on the Consideration of their own Infirmities; where they find them not Kind,
Just, or Reasonable in their proceedings, remember that themselves are as
Unkind, Unjust, and Unreasonable as they.

And now I shall not have much to do in the last place, to show the Extent of
the Operation of Charity, viz. That it covers a Multitude of Sins: For if it
covers all our Own Sins, and all the Sins of other Men; not only a Great
Number, where a Greater Number yet remains; but the whole Infinity of them,
though they outvie the Leaves of Autumn, and the Sand on the Seashore; we may
well allow the Apostles Expression, That Charity covers the Multitude of Sins.
And I doubt not to understand the Words in their utmost Latitude, Our Lord
commands us to forgive our Brother seventy times seven times, which is a
definite Number set for an indefinite, and imports as much as to forgive him
without Measure or Number, if he request it: Again, Luke 6.37. he says,
Forgive, and ye shall be forgiven, and without all doubt, as Unlimitedly as he
commands us to forgive, he will forgive: for it is not imaginable that God's
Benignity should be less than his Creatures; that when he requires of us to
remit the Sins of others totally and plenarily, that he will remit ours
partially and restrainedly.

And if it be said, There are some Sins mentioned in Scripture, as the Sin
against the Holy Ghost, which shall neither be forgiven in this World, nor in
the World to come: I answer, This is no Objection: For where such Sins are
found, it is not possible that Charity, or any other Grace, can be found to
mediate for the Transgressor; such Sins do not only offend against God's Laws,
but deny his Deity; and the Committers of them are not only Transgressors, but
Apostates; and unpardonable not on the account that their Crimes are above his
Mercy, but renounce it; or that they transcend the Promise made to Charity, but
are destitute of the Virtue.

And if it seems too high a Prerogative to ascribe to Charity, or to any other
Single Virtue whatsoever, and such as derogates from the rest, and makes them
useless, to say, It covers all Sins; I answer, That Charity, nor no other
Virtue in a high and Heroic Degree, are Single, but Complicated Virtues: and
whoever shall consider what St Paul says of Charity throughout the thirteenth
Chapter of the First to the Corinthians, and again, Romans 13.8. He that loves
another, has fulfilled the Law; will confess it is not a Single Virtue; but
that whoever has Charity in an Eminent Degree, must also have Faith, Justice,
Liberality, Patience, Humility, Self-denial, even a whole Conjugation or
Constellation of Christian Graces. And that where this Virtue is entertained,
there all Quarrels and Dissentions, secret Malice and open Injuries, both the
greater Outrages and more petty Vexations and Molestations so much complained
of in humane Society, are utterly interdicted and banished. Where Charity has
its abode, indifferent actions are not put upon the Tenter, and men made guilty
by Censures, when their Lives are Innocent. Calamities and Misfortunes are not
reckoned among Crimes, and the Miserable judged void of Goodness, because they
are void of Success. Brutish and voluptuous Affections are not called Virtues;
Lust, the greatest Enemy to Charity, stamped with the Specious Title of Love.
Men are not seen to visit their Lawyer oftener than their Neighbor; to seek
his Ruin and undoing, whom it is their Duty to protect; to keep him upon a
perpetual Guard and Alarm, whose Security should be as precious to them as
their own, giving him cause to complain, That he rather borders on the Den of a
Dragon or some savage Beast, than on the Habitation of his Christian Brother.
Men disturb not, for every Nothing, the Quiet of their own Families, making
their Houses resemble the Habitation, the Poets describe, of Aeolus, places of
continual Storms and Tempests. Look not upon the Peace and Safety of their
Country with a more malignant and malevolent Aspect, than a fatal Comet; hatch
not worse Mischiefs in their black Cabals, than are brooded in the poisonous
Womb of the Air, when the Contagion of a Plague is fermenting in it. Men rend
not the Church in pieces to patch up their Beggarly Fortunes, or to cover their
more beggarly Endowment; knowing the Perverseness of men is such, that a mean
Harangue will lead them sooner into Sedition, than the most powerful Oratory
will be able to retain them in their Duty and Obedience; and that their Voices
which sound so loud and shrill in the Cause of Schism and Rebellion, would be
hoarse and flat in the Defense of Loyalty and Conformity. Against these, and
infinite Disorders more, Charity is the best Catholicon, the best General
Antidote can be prescribed, Which, as the Apostle says, seeks not its own
things, but the things of another. And if we entertain this Virtue, it will not
only remove those Mischiefs which are already on foot, but prevent those that
are springing up; it will defend us, not by the Power of Arms, but by turning
Wars into Peace; Ill Will into Love; Enemies into Brethren; by making the World
one Common Family, and of one Common Interest; by making God our Common Father,
and Heaven our Common Aim and Ambition; to the attaining the highest Honors
and Dignities in which Kingdom, it is not Envy and Strife, the crossing and
frustrating Men's Endeavors, but the furthering and assisting them, that
conduces.

To God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, be ascribed all Honor, Glory, etc.
The Twentieth Sermon.
MATTHEW. xxii.46. On these two Commandments hang all the Law and the Prophets.


THE Law being a large Body, consisting of many weighty Precepts upon several
distinct accounts; as that of the Sabbath, for the remembrance of the Creation
of the World and the Redemption out of Egypt; that of Tithes, for the
maintenance of the Sanctuary and the Priests; that of Sacrifices, for the
purging away transgressions; that of Circumcision, for the sealing of the
Covenant, and which for its better remembrance was rigorously carved into the
very Flesh of the Covenanters, etc.; the Jewish Doctors (more curious to
compare the Excellence of their Precepts, than solicitous to obey them; to make
them contest their Priority with one another, than to reform and regulate their
Lives by them;) made it a Question of the highest concern, Which Commandment
had the Pre-eminence of all the rest. And our Lord in those days opening, as
'twere, a School of Divine Knowledge, and professing a Solution of all
Difficulties in the Revealed Will of God to men; a Pharisee (either to show his
Skill in the Law, or to try our Lord's; to inform himself, or to have whereat
to cavil;) put to him this so controverted Point among those of his own Sect,
Quaenam est suprema Lex? among the many Great Commandments, which is the Queen,
or Supreme Commandment? the Law, as one may say, that gives Law to all beside?
Our Lord (whose custom it was not to answer directly to the impertinence of the
Asker, but to take occasion from his malice, mistake, or the like, to make
known some important Truth) satisfies not the folly of the enquiry, Which Law
had the Precedence to the prejudice of the rest, but declares, That the End and
Design of all God's Laws is Piety and Charity, the love of God, and the love of
our Neighbor: brings these two Duties (which lay overwhelmed and neglected
under the Rubbish of vain Traditions, over-seen like Saul in the Stuff and
Lumber) not only into Competition with the Commandments more highly prized by
them, but as the tallest and most Illustrious anointed them with the Royal Oil,
and set the Crown upon their heads. The Love of God, and of our Neighbor are
not distinct formal Laws, but the Drift and Scope of the Whole Law, duae
Cardines Tabularum, the Hinges on which the two Tables and all the preaching of
the Prophets hang and turn, and without which they would fall to the ground, i.
e. have nothing of Virtue or Moment in them. But our Lord having styled them
two Commandments, has made them so by his authority, and as such, I shall
observe in them these two General Parts:

I. The Substance of them, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart,
with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, And thy Neighbor as thy self. And

II. The high Dignity of them, by reason of the Dependence of the Whole Law and
Prophets on them, On these two Commandments hang all the Law and the Prophets.

In the First of these two General Parts, the Substance of these two
Commandments, I shall observe more particularly these three things.

1. The Duty enjoined, which is the same in both Commandments, Love.

2. The Objects of this Duty, God and our Neighbor.

3. The Measure or Degree in which the Love to each Object is commanded, viz.
God to be loved with All the heart, And our Neighbor as our self.

I begin first with the Duty enjoined, which is the same in both Commandments,

Love.
To love a Person, as Aristotle defines, is to wish him well, and to procure
things Good and Agreeable to him for his own sake. And this Rule of Love to
Men, may teach us what Love we ought to pay to God: for we ought to wish Well
to God, and to procure things Good and Agreeable to him. And if any ask,
Wherein we can do this to God? I need look no further for an Answer than the
second Petition in the Lord's Prayer, Thy Kingdom come, thy Will be done in
Earth as it is in Heaven. It consists in the Execution of God's Will, and the
Extension of his Glory: For all other things besides these are nothing to God,
as the Psalmist says, My goods are nothing unto thee. The Riches of this World,
and the most precious things in its account, are contemptible in his Sight: but
these two which I have named, he esteems, and in some measure wants and
desires, possesses not perfectly and absolutely as he would, All his Creatures
do not acknowledge him, honor him, worship him, delight in his Dominion, pay a
ready cheerful Obedience to his Commands, as the Angels in Heaven do;
notwithstanding that they are reasonable, honorable, beneficial, have more of
Profit, than of the Yoke in them. But so it is, there is another God of this
World that blinds most men, and leads them away captive with diverse Lusts, and
they choose rather to be Vassals and Drudges to this Usurper and Tyrant, than to
be Nobles and Princes, even adopted Children to the King of Heaven and Earth.
And with good reason holy Men in every Age have prayed for God's Kingdom, i. e.
the Increase of Righteousness, and of the Number of the Faithful: for God is
yet, in a manner, like those Princes, which are outed of part of their
Dominions, and denied the Obedience of whole Nations of their People, and his
Loyal Subjects can no way show their affection so much to him, as by espousing
his Interest, abetting his Title, employing their best Endeavors to reduce the
Rebellious to Allegiance; by wishing with the Psalmist, That Kings and all
People, young men and maidens, old men and children, would praise and glorify
his holy Name. It Is the business of Great Ministers of State to understand the
Strength and weakness of Foreign Princes, the Commodities and Defects of their
Countries, that they make the most advantageous Alliances for their own
Masters, and they are held the best Politicians that do this best: But if both
those of the highest Condition, and also of the lowest and meanest, even all
People would set to their Power to serve the Great Monarch of Heaven and Earth,
they would find no Policy comparable to this; that the promoting of his
Designs, would be the most certain way of promoting their own, whether public
or private; they would find, that they would thrive like Jacob, that all things
would prosper under their hands like Joseph, that they would return with
constant Victory like David, and heap up Gold and Silver like Solomon. Numa,
though a Heathen, relied so confidently on this Policy, that when he was told
on a time, That the Enemy was drawing up against him, he answered, And I am
praying against them; And when 'twas said, They were charging, he replied, and
he was Sacrificing; assuring himself the Gods would not neglect his Safety,
while he was solicitous for their Worship.

But you will say, Is it needful that we should wish for the Increase of God's
Kingdom? does he want the help of his Creatures? No. Is he not Omnipotent, and
can bring to pass whatever seems good to him? Yes. Who has resisted his Will?
As the Question is asked, None: and yet it may be as truly said, Who is there
that has not resisted his Will? What was spoken of Israel, may be affirmed of
all Mankind, that they are a rebellious and gainsaying People. God, it is true,
is Omnipotent, and his Power never fails; he brought the World out of nothing
by his Word, and by his bare Word can reduce it again to nothing; if he had
pleased, he could have created a Generation of Men that should have served him
regularly and constantly, fatally and necessarily, as the Fire burns, and the
Sun and the Moon move in their Courses. But this is not the Service that God
wants, and which we are to pray for in his behalf; it is the Free and Voluntary,
not the Constrained, Service of his Rational Creatures, that Men would obey him
out of Love and Choice; as his Dominion is gracious, that they would desire it;
as it is beneficial and honorable, that they would delight in it. Compelled
Righteousness is no Righteousness; it is in Obedience, as in Charity; he that
gives grudgingly and of necessity, does not give, but is taxed; and he that
obeys of Compulsion, is a Slave, and not a Votary. It Is reported of the famous
Painter Apelles, that when he had finished any rare Piece, his custom was
latere post tabulam, to hide himself behind it, that he might hear what
Passengers said of it, and that he cared for no Approbation, but what came in
this free way. After the like manner, God exposes to the View and Consideration
of Men his Works of Power and of Wisdom, of Mercy and of Goodness, and then
delights latere post tabulam, to conceal himself in his inaccessible Glory, and
to observe what free and unextorted Returns of Honor and Love they will bring
him in; all forced or feigned, Superstitious and Hypocritical Acknowledgments
being odious to him. And now after all that has been said, in strict speaking,
God stands no more in need of our Obedience and Worship, than he does of our
Riches: as it is said, Acts 17.24. He dwells not in Temples made by hands,
neither is he worshipped by men's hands. The meaning of his being outed of part
of his Kingdom and denied his full Dominion, in truth signifies no more, But
that he has not yet extended the Salvation of Men to the Bounds his Goodness
designed.

But to proceed. We said, Love did not only Wish, but Procure things good and
acceptable to the Person beloved: and we ought not only to wish the Execution
of God's Will, and the Extension of his Glory, but to set-to our hands to
Effect what we pray for: as it is not sufficient, in Point of Charity, to give
good Words only to the Poor, to say, Be thou warm, be thou filled, God assist
thee, and the like, when we can supply what they want our selves: so it is not
sufficient in our Love to God to say only, Thy Kingdom come, thy Will be done
in Earth as it is in Heaven: but we must zealously and industriously do his
Will, and endeavor all we can to promote his Kingdom. Says our Lord to St
Peter, Simon Peter, love thou me? Lord, replied he, thou know that I love
thee. And yet notwithstanding that he knew the Sincerity of his heart, he asked
him the same Question three times. Why? to grieve Peter? or that he delighted
in the repetition of the Profession of his Love? No, but to excite him to a
more diligent Execution of his Apostleship, Feed my Sheep. And the Method which
our Lord here prescribes to Peter must be observed also by us in advancing the
Kingdom of God, When thou art converted, says he, strengthen thy Brethren; We
must first set up the Kingdom of God in our own hearts, before we attempt to
erect it in others. As he is unfit to be a Teacher, that is not first well
instructed himself: So he is not fit to be a Reformer, that is not first
reformed himself: for his Evil Manners will certainly defeat his Sermon, and
instead of making others righteous by his preaching, he will render himself
ridiculous. It Is a Noble Undertaking to bring others to the fear of God, but
it is an indispensable Duty to serve God our selves: says St James, He that
converteth a Sinner from the Error of his ways, shall save a Soul from death --
(that is an Heroic Action) and shall hide a multitude of Sins, (that is a
necessary Concern.) Self-reformation is the most Effectual Step we can make to
promote God's Glory, it is such a Giantly Step, as I may say, as reaches from
the Setting out of the Course to the End of it; it is like the first Step of the
Sun above the Horizon, which darts Rays to the furthest Circumference of it,
and fills the whole Hemisphere with Light and Vigor, which these Words of our
Lord seem to allude to, Let your Light so shine before men, that they may see
your good Works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven. Nothing so
illustrates the Gospel, nothing so powerfully converts Sinners, and brings them
to glorify God, as the Holy Lives of the Faithful: But I urge not this to
exclude other Endeavors to propagate Righteousness, but to show the great
Force and Prevalence that Righteousness has to produce Righteousness. I proceed
to the Objects of our Love, which are two, God, and our Neighbor.

1. God.
Saint John speaks as if there were some difficulty in this Part of our Duty,
Our loving God: says he, He that loves not his Brother, whom he has seen, how
can he love God whom he has not seen? Implying, though the Ear be Janua
Scientiae, the Gate of Knowledge, the Eye is Janua Amoris, the Gate of Love,
and that to excite this Passion it is requisite some Visible Beauty be
displayed. But we may say to this, Though we do not see God, yet we may love
him, by what we see and hear of him, nay with good reason we may be the more
enamored on him, because his Perfections transcend not only our mortal Senses,
but even all humane Conception: and thus we may fall in love, as Blind Men
often passionately do, by report* and hearsay. But more particularly, there
are three Motives why we should love God, comprehended in the very Object, The
Lord thy God.

1. Because he is God: For that is the Name of the highest Excellence and
Perfection, and they are only Glorious and Illustrious things that stir Love
and Admiration in us; we run not out to gaze upon Common Persons, but upon
those that are famous for Greatness, Learning, Beauty, Prowess, and the like.
Now there is nothing Rare or Admirable of any kind, but it is in God in its
Fullness and Perfection: and for this reason Epicurus, though he believed no
Providence, or that Men received any Good or Evil from the Gods, yet he adored
them, and sacrificed to them, merely because they were Glorious Beings. Had we
no other Cause to love God, but for the Stupendous Perfections that are in him,
it were sufficient.

But we have greater reason to love him from the

Second Motive, Because we have the Honor of Relation to him, he is The Lord
Our God. The Psalmist thought it a high Obligation to praise him, because he
was created by him, I will praise thee, because I am fearfully and wonderfully
made. But we have not only the Obligation upon us of Creation and Conversation,
which is a kind of continual Creation, in common with all Creatures, to love
God; but other Extraordinary and Distinguishing Favors, viz. his calling us to
the Knowledge of the Faith, and the Blessed Consequences attending it: and this
ought to tune our Harps yet higher, and to be the Subject of many Hymns and
Psalms more.

But then, Thirdly, Our greatest Motive of all to love him is, Because he
Redeemed us, after we were lost; restored us, when by our Sins we were in a
manner uncreated again; when we had defaced the Image of God in us, our
Innocence and Righteousness; forfeited all our Felicity, and were become the
Bondslaves of Satan; then he rescued us from Eternal Damnation, and made us
again the Children of God. So that as he is Deus, or God, to all Mankind, to
Christians he is also, over and above, Dominus, a Lord, i. e. a Redeemer and
Savior. There is nothing so much obliges, as Love and Benefits: Celsus the
Physician speaking of Philtres or Love-potions, says, Amor est natural
Philtrum, Love is a Natural Love-potion, and more powerful than those that are
compounded of Drugs and by Incantations. The most stupid of Creatures, the dull
Ox and Ass; the wildest and fiercest, the Lion and Tiger, are brought to love
by good Usage; though they know not the Nature of a Man, they know if they
receive Meat at his hands, and be well treated by him, and will love him, and
be obsequious to him. And men were more insensible than the Brutes, if when
they have received of the Riches of God's Bounty and Goodness, they refuse to
love him, because they have not seen his Person, and cannot comprehend his
Essence. And God, Isai. 1.3. complains of this stupid Insensibility in Israel,
The Ox, says he, knows his Owner, and the Ass his Master's Crib: but Israel
does not know, my people do not consider. We love God, as St John says, because
he loved us first, he began with us, and our Love to him is at best a Gratitude
or Retaliation: if therefore the innumerable and inestimable Benefits of God
work no return of Love in us to him, we deserve not only to have our Names
rased out of the Number of Men, but to be allowed no place among the better
natured Beasts, but to be ranged with Devils, who are the only Enemies of God
for his Goodness, and Haters of him for that which is Excellent and Amiable in
him. The next thing I am to show, is,

In what Measure or Degree we are to love God.
The Words of the Commandment are, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all
thy Soul, with all thy heart, and with all thy mind. On which three Expressions
Commentators have many Observations and Criticisms, but more nice than
profitable: for as Saint John says of the three that bear witness on Earth, the
Spirit, the Water, and the Blood, these three are one: so I may say of these
three Expressions in the Commandment, however diversified, that in importance
they are but One, and may be summed up in this single term, omnibus viribus,
with all thy Strength. Instead therefore of amuzing my Auditory with fruitless
Niceties, it will be more worthy the while to take notice

In the first place, That when God commands us to love him with all our
Strength or Power, he commands us no more, than what we are able to perform,
and not, as some will have it, what is above our Ability, posse autem hominem
quantum potest, nemo sanus negabit, for that a man can do as much as he can,
none that is in his wits will deny; and we are enjoined here, To love God With
All our Strength, and not Above it.

Secondly, It may be worth the while to note on the other side, The ambitious
Folly and Vanity of the Church of Rome, who, more to exalt her own false
Reputation than the Truth, boasts of such performances of her Saints, as are
above the measures of Humane Nature. For Example, their living in Deserts,
after the manner of Elias and John the Baptist, and using such wonderful
Austerities as have not only mortified their Carnal Affections, but so
Spiritualized their very Bodies, that they have been seen, to the astonishment
of the Beholders, raised and suspended in the Air many Foot above Earth: as if
it were as easy a thing to work Miracles, as to write a Legend, or tell Lies;
to bring God to c^^ply with the Follies of Men, as for them to conceive or
fancy foolish things; as if again it were as easy to live a Miraculous Life,
as to assume the Name of Heremite, or to live in a Wood; the last indeed they
do in an apish Imitation of Elias and John the Baptist, which is all that is
true in this Piece of Pageantry, they being ridiculously fed by the
neighboring Towns. All that I shall say to this Affectation of Divine
Performances, shall be something like that which the Elder Pliny said to the
Younger racking his Invention for an Oration he was to make, Visne melius
dicere quam potes? Will you speak better than you can? So will you show your
selves Diviner Persons than you are? When you are but Men, would you act like
Angels? Have you performed all that is enjoined you in the Gospel? Are the
Commandments of God indeed so mean and trifling that they are not worthy to
amuse your Greater Abilities? The Example of Christ's patience, meekness,
self-denial, etc. such narrow Scenes to show your Spacious Virtue in, that you
aspire to his Supernatural Performances? He trod no other way to Heaven, than
those which honest men ordinarily tread in; and though none was ever so
abstracted from the Love of the World, as he; yet none was more conversant in
it; none abhorred Sin equal to him, and none yet was more familiar with
Sinners! But to leave these men to their Dreams; as in Humane Love we may love
ardently, and yet be wise; so in Divine Love we may love Exaltedly, and yet not
Extravagantly and affectedly; we may love God above our selves and the whole
World, and yet not above Sobriety. To direct us in the way of this Duty by so
many perverted, we need only observe two things, which are expressed both in
the Letter of the Commandment, namely, That we love God with the Heart, And
with All the Heart.

First, With the Heart, i. e. unfeignedly, and without Hypocrisy. Hypocritical
Love is odious even to Men, we endure not to have Professions made to us, when
there is no real Affection; to be embraced and caressed, when the Heart is far
distant from the Outward Behavior: much less does God suffer such Juggling,
but, as St Augustine says, Sim(...) Sanctitas est duplex iniquitas, counterfeit
Sanctity, (...) God's account, is a double Provocation; and he more detests the
feigned Saint, than the Open Sinner; denounces more Judgments in Scripture
against those that mock him in this manner, than against those that defy him.

Secondly, We are to love God with All the Heart: which implies two things, All
in Quantity or Extension, and All in Quality or Intention. 1. With all the
Heart in Quantity or Extension, is as much as with the Entire Heart; not
excluding all Inferior Loves, but all Competitor or Rival Loves with our Love
of God: and so debarrs not only Idolatry, but all Inordinate Love whatsoever to
any Creature, which is a kind of Idolatry. No man can serve two Masters: nor no
man can love two Opposite Objects, Diverse he may, but not Contrary and
Opposite; but as he loves the one, he must hate or dissemble with the other. 2.
To love God with all the Heart in Quality or Intention, implies Fervency, and
excludes Coldness and Indifferency: Slack Lukewarm Love is neither active nor
durable; productive of Service, nor constant in the Day of Trial; Demas has
forsaken me, says St Paul, having loved this present World: and no wonder: for
it is not possible for him that loves this present World, to suffer Persecution
for the Gospel. Such as Demas love God, as Flatterers love those in Power; who
are officious to them in Prosperity, but are sure to leave them in Adversity.
As 'twas observed, that none were so forward to break down Sejanus's Statues,
and to lay their hand on the Hang-man's Rope that dragged him to Execution, as
those that had saluted him loudest that morning, and were readiest to have
proclaimed him Emperor had his Treason succeeded. Let this suffice to be said
of our Love to God. I proceed to the Love of our Neighbor: In which, as in the
former, there are two things to be observed: The Object of our Love, Our
Neighbor. And the Measure of our Love to him, We must love him as our self.

I. The Object of our Love, Our Neighbor.
The Jews, before our Lord interpreted to them who was their Neighbor,
understood not this Commandment; they allowed none this Title, but those that
were of their Nation, or at least Proselytes to their Religion, to all beside
that they were directly Inhumane, they would not show a Heathen a waste running
Water to save him from perishing by thirst, or so much as direct him in the
right Way. But our Lord in the Parable of the Samaritan taught them, who they
were to esteem their Neighbor, that 'twas not only those of the same Kindred
or Religion, but those of the same Kind or Nature; as it is said in the Parable,
Quidam homo, a Certain man fell among Thieves; no mention is made of what
Country or Religion he was, Tros, Tyriusve nullo discrimine habentur, in Point
of Charity no Difference is to be made between Jew and Gentile, Native and
Stranger: Charity or Divine Love knows no Partiality, but where there is an
Object of Misery, there is also an Object of Mercy; if there be Distress on the
one Side, and Power to relieve on the other, all Circumstances are fitted to
show our Love, and in Christ's account there are two Neighbors met. The Object
of our Love, or who is our Neighbor, is so well known, that I shall not need
to insist longer on it. The Measure of the Love we are to show him, requires
more Explanation.

We are to love him as our self.
And the Rule is so Excellent, that I may say of it, That if the like Freedom
had been allowed to Men to choose a Standard of their Love to those of their own
Kind, as was allowed, Isai. 7.11. to Ahaz to ask a Sign, ( Ask thee a Sign
either in the Depth, or in the Height above, i. e. in the whole Circuit of
Heaven and Earth) they could not have found a more apt and congruous, than that
which is here prescribed them, The Love of their own selves. Which I shall show
in four Regards or Respects.

1. In regard of the Universality of it, it is a great Universality where there
is no Exception: St Paul says of our Love to Our Selves, No man ever hated his
own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it. God implanted this Love in every man
by Nature, and that with singular Wisdom and Goodness, that his Creatures
loving themselves, might conserve themselves in their Being: and we see, when
this Love in any afterward fails, through Miseries which befall them, and that
they find no Amability in themselves, they ordinarily make themselves away. God
therefore made choice of this Passion implanted in all men in general for
Self-Preservation, for the Preservation of our Neighbor, that as our Love
never fails to our Selves, so it should never be wanting to others.

2. In regard that this Rule is ever ready and at hand, as present and
officious as he in the Gospel that said to our Lord, Master, I will follow thee
wheresoever thou go. Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self, is a
Sociable and Concomitant Rule that is never absent, an inherent Direction that
prompts us from within, when any Opportunity of doing Good is offered us. Or we
may liken it to the Foot of the Compass that stands fixed at home, and guides
and carries on the other that romes and circuits about: so this quiescent
resident Love we bear our Selves, ought to be the Guide of that Love we extend
or carry out to others.

3. In regard that this Rule takes from us all Excuse of Ignorance in
performing the Duties of Charity. Men are often Churlish to one another, too
apt to say, How must I love my Neighbor? What must I do to him, to be said to
love him? Nescio quid sit Amor, as the Young Novice is made to speak, I know
not what this Enjoined Love is. No? why the Pattern of it is within thy self:
how do thou love thine own Person? do thou not clothe it, when it is naked?
feed it, when it is hungry? cure it, when it is hurt? consult for it, when it is
in Trouble or Danger? etc. Do the same for thy Neighbor. There is no need here
to turn over Books, or to ask how the Learned have determined: but to ask thy
self, what thou would do to thy self in the like Cases? What desire thou?
Not, What read thou? What God says of men's knowing his Laws under the
Gospel, I will put my Law into their Inward Parts, and write them in their
Hearts -- and they shall teach no more every man his Neighbor, saying, Know
the Lord, for all shall know me: may be affirmed of the Rule that is given us
for the Love of our Neighbor, It needs not be learned or copied out from any
other, for the Original of the Duty, is a multiplied Original in the Breasts of
all Mankind.

4. In regard of the Truth and Sincerity of the Rule. No man loves himself with
a False or Counterfeit Love, but is truly Dear to himself, will not hurt, will
not deceive himself. David in the 22th Psalm calls his Soul (or Life) his
Darling, Deliver my Soul, says he, from the Sword, my Darling from the power of
the dog. How tender is David to David? how David cares for himself! Why, every
man does this as well as he: and lo here is the Rule of our Love to other Men!
With the same Fidelity, with the same Sincerity, with the Same Tenderness, we
treat Our Selves, we ought to treat our Other-Selves, our Neighbors. What
David calls in this place [ his Darling] is styled in the Margin [his Only-One]
unicam meam. Men are allowed, in a sense of Propriety, to esteem their Own
Souls, their own Lives, their own Interests, to be their Only Ones: yet in a
sense of Charity they are obliged to make this Onlyness, or Singularity, become
Plural; and so to look upon themselves as their Only-Selves, as to reckon all
Men else their Multiplied and Several-Selves. Since this Commandment was given,
Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self, all men are made, in a manner, One
Man again, as at the first Creation: and I can no more count my self and my
Neighbor to be two in regard of Charity, than I can separate my self from my
self; seclude him from my Love, than I can seclude my self from it. I shall
make but one General Reflection on all that has been said, for Application, and
conclude my first General Part.

Although these two Precepts, Of loving our Neighbor As our selves, and God
Above our selves, are founded in Nature, re-inforc'd and bound straiter on us
by express Commandments, pressed further in the Gospel, and declared to be the
Sum and General Design of the whole Law; yet there is one Rival, one Opposite
Vicious Principle, which is able to withold us from paying Obedience to them.
I say, One, because whatever withholds us beside, may be reduced to this One,
and that is our Overmuch Love of our selves. Saint Paul, 2 Timothy 3. reckoning
many Vices, which are causes of perilous Times, brings them all out of the
Belly of this Monster, makes them all the Daughters and Spawn of Self-Love;
says he, This know also, That in the last days perilous times shall come: for
men shall be Lovers of themselves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers,
without natural affection, etc. All the cursed Genealogy of Ungodliness and
Uncharitableness draw their Extraction from this Stock, The Immoderate Love of
Our Selves. From hence it is that we think it more reasonable to satisfy our
vainest Desires, and to gratify our most Sinful Affections, than to relieve
the most weighty and pressing Distresses of our Brethren: from hence it is,
that we set more by our own Opinions and Estimation, than by the Truth it self,
or God's Glory; by our Ambition or Revenge, than by the Peace and Tranquillity
of the Land. The Rule that Divines give men, when they seek Justification from
God, viz. That they go out of themselves, and look upon nothing in themselves,
with a very small change will direct us in the Duty of Love that is commanded
us, We must go out of our Selves, and look less upon what concerns our Selves,
if we will love God and our Neighbor as we ought to do. Some men are praised,
and perhaps not undeservedly, for being good Fathers, they have laid up for
their Children; for being kind Husbands, they have provided for their Wives;
for being bountiful Masters, they have preferred their Servants: But yet all
this is but to do Good or Charity Oeconomically, or within our own Doors, not
Oecumenically or Universally; all this is still but the Love of a Man's Self:
for he is hardly yet gone out of Himself, that is not gone beyond his Family
and Relations; This measure of Love, as our Lord observes, is found among
Infidels, They love those that love them: but we are to be like our Father
which is in Heaven, who sends his Rain upon the Unjust, as well as the Just; we
are to love Aliens and Enemies, as well as Friends. The Love that is expressed
to Relations, may be the Pin or Hook on which some Single Precept hangs, but
not which supports the Stress of the Whole Law and the Prophets, that Honor or
Dignity belongs only to these two, The Love of God Above our selves, And the
Love of all men As our selves. Which brings me to my Second General Part, The
Dignity of these two Commandments, by reason of the Dependence of the whole Law
and Prophets on them.

The Twenty First Sermon.
MATTHEW. xxii.46. On these two Commandments hang all the Law and the Prophets.


THESE two Commandments, The Love of God, And the Love of our Neighbor,
sustain the Entire Structure or Frame of the Book of God, as the two Pillars
Boaz and Jachin bore up the stupendous Fabric of Solomon's Temple: Or rather,
to keep to our Lord's Comparison, they are as two mighty Hooks, Hinges, or Pins
on which all the Law and the Prophets hang. For the better Explanation of
which, I shall do these three things:

I. Show, how it is to be understood, That all the Law and the Prophets hang on
these two Commandments, The Love of God, And the Love of our Neighbor.

II. I shall show the Excellence of Love by way of Essay, so far as to make it
appear worthy of the Honor ascribed to it, of sustaining all the Law and the
Prophets.

III. I shall add, as a Corollary, how we may attain this Excellent and
important Grace, Love, on which all the Law and the Prophets hang.

I. How it is to be understood, That all the Law and the Prophets hang on these
two Commandments, The Love of God, And of our Neighbor.
The Law and the Prophets, i. e. the Text, and the Gloss or Comment; whatsoever
the Law has concisely commanded or employed only, and the Prophets more largely
expounded and dilated on, were but to plant this one Duty, this One Master
Principle in the hearts of men, Love. In every Law there are two Parts, the
Matter enjoined, and the Rewards and Punishments annexed, by way of Sanction,
for the better Observation of it: For a bare Injunction, not animated and
fortified with the Promise of Good things to the Keepers of it, and Threats of
Evil to the Infringers, will find but cold Observation among men: Who, as the
Psalmist speaks, are little better than horse and mule, that must be held with
bitt and bridle [of Penalties] lest they fall upon you. The Office of the
Prophets was to be Custodes Legis, the Guardians and Conservators of the Law,
they were not to add to the Law, though they were inspired by God as Moses was,
but to interpret, press, and inculcate the Duties of it, to revive in men's
thoughts the Promises and Threats, and thus they were a kind of Mound or Fence
to the Law to keep off Transgressions. The Jews had a Sort of Critics, who
with great preciseness observed the Number of the Letters in each Book of
Moses, how they were written, together with the Various Readings, and these
were called the Masorites, because they were, as the Word imports, a Hedge to
the Law: But with much better right the Greater and Lesser Prophets may deserve
this Name. And upon this account it is, that these two, the Law and the
Prophets, or Moses and the Prophets, are still quoted by our Lord together, who
says not, The Law and the Interpretation of the Scribes, or the Law and the
Determination of the Priests, (though in lesser Matters the People were also to
harken to them) but the Law and the Prophets, which were both of equal Divine
Production, and carried on the Same Design, the one by commanding, and the
other by preaching and inculcating the Will of God and Duty of Men. Now
whatsoever the one of these enjoins, and the other enforces, our Lord says,
Hang all upon these two Pins, The Love of God, and the Love of our Neighbor:
And though the Word [ Love] is not often found in the Law and the Books of the
Prophets, though they are not, as I may say, so much Canticles, as the Sermons
of Christ, and the Writings of his Apostles, (in some of which there is scarce
a Verse but it is even verbally repeated and ingeminated:) yet the Duties which
the Prophets urge and press, are all Acts of Love to God, and Charity to our
Neighbor; and whatsoever else they seem most to intend and employ their Pens
about, the propagation of Piety and Charity may be seen latent in the Scheme
and Contexture of their Discourse, and he that reads the one, shall be unawares
engaged and entangled in the other.

But then it may be asked here, Seeing all the Law and the Prophets hang on
this One Law of Love, what need was there of so many Specifications of the
Several Duties contained in both Tables? as, Thou shall not kill? Thou shall
not commit Adultery? Thou shall not Steal, etc.? For this Single Word, Love,
comprehending them all in effect, so many Tautologies might have been spared.
To this we may say, Men are so crafty and subtle to evade the Duties imposed on
them, or pretend Ignorance for their Disobedience, that 'twas not sufficient to
set down in Generals the Obligations that lay on them, but it was necessary by
Express Prohibitions, and Particular Instances to convince them, when they
offended against the Divine Precepts. And for this reason the Law is fain often
to descend to many trivial Specifications, to work a lively and sensible
Impression of the Justice or Injustice of every Fact in their minds: As for
Example, Thou shall not reap the Corners of thy Field, nor glean thy Vineyard.
Thou shall not suffer the Hire of the Labourer to remain with thee till the
morning. Thou shall not take his Garment to Pledge, his Bed, nor his
Working-tools, nor his upper Millstone, and the like. Sure'y to an Ingenious
Heart, disposed to Humanity, this particularizing would have been needless, I
say, to a Good and Friendly Nature these things are of easy Deduction from the
bare Word, Love, that all the rest might have been spared: we say, Verbum
Sapienti, a Word to the Wise is sufficient; but it is much truer, Verbum Amanti,
a single Word to a true Lover is abundantly sufficient to make him recollect
the rest of his Beloveds mind. But, I say, Men being generally of a Churlish
Disposition, it comes to pass that the Duties both to God and Men, which are to
be inferred from the General Precept of Love, are obscure, or at least
pretended to be so; and that they may have no Color, from the Abridging their
Whole Duty into one Word, Love, to say, There is no Obligation upon us to do
the things required, show us where they are commanded, produce the Letter of
the Law, and the like: all the Silva Legum, as Justinian calls them, the Forest
of God's and Men's Laws, consisting of such Heaps of Precepts, were added,
whereas otherwise all the Duties would have been seen to hang on this brief
Syllable, Love.

This Phrase [ do hang upon it] is a Figurative Expression borrowed from the
hanging things upon a Hook or Pin in a Wall, which bears the Stress of their
Weight. We find the same Figure used Isaiah 22.23. God determining to make
Eliakim Treasurer over his House, to show the Support he should be, by the
Influence of his Wisdom and Justice, to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, he says,
I will fasten him as a Nail in a sure place -- and they shall hang upon him all
the Glory of his Father's House -- all the Vessels, from the Vessels of Cups,
to the Vessels of Flaggons: (and then it follows) In that day, says the Lord of
hosts, shall the Nail that is fastened in a sure place be removed, and cut down,
and the Burden that was upon it shall be cut off. But I shall show more
particularly three Ways, how all the Commandments hang or depend on the
Commandment of Love.

1. As the Parts do upon the Whole, the Whole contains the Parts, and is but
the Parts collected into One. And some will have this the only Dependence that
is here meant of the other Commandments on that of Love, according to St Paul's
interpretation, Romans 13.9. He that loves another, has fulfilled the whole
Law: For this, Thou shall not Kill, Thou shall not commit Adultery, Thou shall
not Steal, etc. are briefly comprehended in this saying, namely, Thou shall
love thy Neighbor as thy Self. And the like may be said of the Duties of the
First Table, Thou shall have no other God, but the God of Israel; Thou shall
worship him no other way than he has prescribed, Thou shall not take his Name
in vain, Thou shall not break his Sabbath, they are briefly contained in this,
Thou shall love the Lord thy God. And if Love were deeply rooted in the Hearts
of men, upon their going about any Act dishonorable to God, or unjust to their
Neighbor, it would pull them back from it: for this would be the immediate
Question they would ask themselves, By what Rule do I do this? Will it hold
according to the Precept of Love to God and to my Neighbor? This particular
Fact, which I put forth by way of retail, does it not vary from the General
Rule in which it ought to be comprehended as in its Body?

2. The Law and the Prophets may be said to hang or depend upon the Law of
Love, because it is the Scope or Drift to which all the Commandments in
particular tend: according to that Saying of St Paul, 1 Timothy 1.5. The End of
the Commandment is Charity, or Love, out of a pure Heart, and good Conscience,
and Faith unfeigned, i. e. upon the Ground of the Belief of Remission of our
Sins through Christ, to love God and our Brethren for so great a Benefit, and
to express our Love in the Works of a good Conscience. It Is not preaching the
Law, though never so zealously, as those did St Paul here speaks of; or the
performing the Outward Acts of the Law, as many of the Jews were very
scrupulous in the Observation of, that makes a Righteous Man according to the
Law: but he that does according to the Design and Intention of the Law, which
is Love. Ratio Legis est interpres Legis, the Purpose of the Law is the best
Interpreter of the Law; and they that mind not this, as St Paul says, Take
their Aim amiss, and swerve from the End and Intention of the Law, discern not
the Grace of Love that runs through it, as the Warp and the Woof do through a
Web of Cloth, and wholly sustains the Contexture of it. Without Love all that
is Excellent, all that is Divine in the Law would fall to the Ground, as all
the Riches and Gallantry of the Veil of the Temple, all the Purple and Scarlet
would have lain grovelling on the Earth, without the Tacks or Hooks on which
they hung.

3. The Law, i. e. all the Virtue, Goodness, and Righteousness it commands, all
the Worth and Value of its Duties depend upon Love, as the Value of Coin
depends upon the Price the Stamp sets upon it: or as a thing that is Accessory
depends on its Principle, take away the Principle and the Accessory is nothing:
so take away Love, and all the Commandments are insignificant and nothing. And
this Saint Paul shows, 1 Cor. 13. That even the most Specious, and seemingly
Heroic Performances of Christianity it self ( as a man's giving his Goods to
feed the Poor, and his Body to be burned, etc.) if they be not accompanied with
Charity (or Love) are all nothing: the Dignity of these Works depending so
absolutely upon this Grace, that in God's Esteem to suffer Injury only out of
Love to our Fellow-Christian, is more than to suffer Martyrdom; not to envy,
not to be puffed up, not to despise our Brother, is more in his Eyes than to
speak with Tongues, than to prophecy, than to understand all Mysteries. And
indeed there is more true Religion in this one Benign Good Natured Virtue, than
in the Ostentation and outward Grandeur of all the other. But the Excellence of
Love, and that it is worthy of the Honor ascribed to it, to sustain all the Law
and the Prophets, is the next thing I am to show.

The Excellence of Love, etc.
This I shall make appear by four Reasons, 1. For the Natural, Universal
pleasing Effect Love has upon All, and even upon God himself, as well as men
and other Creatures: insomuch as God for his part requires almost nothing else
from us, Now, O Israel! what does the Lord thy God require of thee, but to fear
the Lord thy God -- and to love him with all thy heart, and with all thy soul?
Deuteronomy. 10.12. To be beloved is so grateful a thing, that men receive delight
even in the Affection of Brute Creatures: and we see, that such as are not
qualified to deserve any true Love, are taken with the Similitude only of it,
the gross Flatteries of them that counterfeit it. Sinners, as our Lord tells
us, love those that love them: and St Paul, 1 Thessalonians. 2.15. brands the Jews for
their want of Love, as with a Crime of so high Nature, as deserved to be
reckoned with their murdering the Prophets, and of Christ himself, says he, Who
have killed the Lord Jesus, and their own Prophets, and persecuted us, and are
Contrary to all men.

2. Because Love easily forgives Injuries, hardly perceives any, can never
possibly wrong the Party Beloved; and the Object, or Party Beloved, of Divine
Love is all Mankind: So that there needs no Admonitions here to suppress Malice
or Uncharitable Inclinations, for the first Motions of them never arise in the
heart to be suppressed.

3. Because Love of all other Virtues of the Soul goes forth of a Man's self,
and places its Content in the Good it does to another: that so hard a Duty to
Flesh and Blood which the Apostle commands, 1 Cor. 10.12. Let no man seek his
own, but every man an Others Wealth, is its Choice and Delight. No Virtue
therefore qualifies us equal to this to perform the Works of Piety, Justice,
and Charity.

4. Because of the wonderful Activity of Love in the Soul, and enflaming it
more than any other Virtue to Great Actions: for indeed whatsoever is
Vigorously performed is the Effect of Love. This Grace is like a Fire in the
Heart, and makes it restless in what it conceives will be acceptable to the
Person beloved; it renders it also undaunted in the greatest Difficulties and
Dangers, and for this reason it is Faiths chiefest Instrument to conquer the
World and the Temptations of it, This is the Victory that overcomes the World,
says St John, even your Faith: but then it is that Faith, which, as St Paul
speaks, works by Love. It Is a strange word in the Original which the Apostle
uses in that place for [working by Love] (...), which imports as much as being
possessed with Love, as a Demoniack is possessed with an Evil Spirit, which
kind of Persons are ordinarily endued with an Unusual Strength, to do things
which naturally they could not do: as the Demoniack that met our Lord out of
the Tombs, whom no Chains of Iron could hold, but he brake them asunder. Those
that are acted by Love, are transported after the like manner to perform things
above their own and other men's Measures: As the Spouse speaks in the Canticles,
Love is strong as Death, i. e. conquers all things, and nothing can stand
against it. 2 Cor. 5.13. St Paul says again, That for the Love of God, and the
cause of the Gospel, and the sake of the Brethren, he had done some things that
in the Eye of the World appeared Wild and Extravagant, But whether we be Beside
our Selves, says he, it is to God, or whether we be sober, it is for your Cause,
for the love of Christ Constrains us: For the Influence therefore Love has
upon all other Good Works, as well as for its own Good Nature, it is that God
so highly Esteems it: and it is no wonder that it is the Favorite of his Graces,
when, as St John says, God himself is Love: and though he be no more Love
essentially, than he is Wisdom, Justice, Power, or any of his other Attributes:
yet because he exerts and diffuses his Love more among men, and is revealed and
made known more by it, than by another Attribute, it is spoken of as his Sole
Being. And now after so many Excellent things have been said of this Divine
Grace, namely, That it is the Sum of the Commandments, the Soul of all Virtue,
the Favorite of God, and in a Sense God himself, certainly it will be worth
our best Endeavors to acquire it: and how we may do this is the last thing I
am to show.

How we may acquire or attain Divine Love.
That we may take the right course to attain this Virtue, we must look upon it,
as upon all other Virtues, partly as a Grace of God's bestowing, and partly as
that which is to be acquired by our own Labor; for there is something of Gift,
and something of Industry in it. First, We must look upon it as a Grace of
God's Donation: For what our Lord says of Faith, That all men have it not; and
St Paul, That no man has it of himself, but it is the Gift of God, may likewise
be said of the Love of God, and of our Neighbor, We have them not of our
Selves, but they are Heavenly Gifts, born of a Divine Seed, and we must not
conceive, that by our own mere Natural Power and humane Will we can acquire
them to the Soul, and that we have no more to do, but to resolve to obtain
them, and the Possession will follow: But we must seek them by devout Addresses
from God, and expect them from his Bounty, they being, as I say, Graces, as
well as the Fruits of our Labor. As our Church therefore sets before the
Epistle of Charity a Collect or Prayer to God for it, [Send, O Lord, into our
Hearts the most Excellent Gift of Charity, without which all our doings are
nothing worth, etc.] we must also supplicate for this Grace, before we can hope
to attain it.

But then, Secondly, it is also an Acquisition of Labor, and to be arrived to,
as other Virtues or Habits, by Industry. There are that have written of the Art
of Unchaste Love, and all the Mysteries of it, taught men how to accomplish
their Wicked Ends, which it would have been happier for them if they had been
ignorant of. And the Art of Godly Love may be also taught, Rules and Precepts
given to make men Masters of it: And the Way in general to raise our Affections
to the Love of God, is to take the same course which we do when we betray our
selves into a humane Passion, reflect on what is Excellent and Amiable in God,
meditate on his Unparalleled and Glorious Perfections, which are sufficient to
ravish us from the Desire of all Earthly things. The reason that the Love of
many waxes cold, and their Affection to God, as I may say, is without
Affection, without heat and ardour, is because they understand not the Beauties
of his Essence, and the Glorious Operations of his Power, Wisdom, and Goodness.
Men profess to be Worshippers of God, to be brought up and skilled in the
Knowledge of him, and his Religion, but generally they are Strangers to him and
his ways; and what the Psalmist says of the Ungodly, That they care not for
God, neither is God in all their thoughts, I fear, without Injustice, may be
affirmed of most men, That they care not for God, neither is he in all their
thoughts: and then what wonder is it, si ignoti nulla cupido? if men have no
longing after a Good that they are ignorant of, or at least never weigh and
consider? The Spouse in the Canticles numbers up and runs over in her Thoughts
the manifold Graces that are in Christ, which made him so amiable in her own
and others Eyes, before she sighed out her Love for him. My Beloved, says she,
is white and ruddy, the chiefest among ten thousand: again, Because of the
Savor of thy Ointments, therefore do the Virgins love thee. There must be some
Fuel for the Flame of Divine Love, as well as for that of Carnal; and if men
excite not their Love to God by the Contemplation of his Sublime Perfections
and Goodness, their Love will be no better than the dead Carcass of a Passion,
than the cold Picture of a Flame.

And if any say, A high and abstracted Contemplation of the Nature, Properties,
and Attributes of the Deity, is only fit for Philosophers, who have Learning
and Subtilty to penetrate into them; but they come not within the comprehension
of Common Men, though otherwise Godly: I answer, Neither need they be
solicitous in this matter, there are other Motives to stir men up to the Love
of God, no less Excellent, and subjected to the meanest Capacity, viz. those
which are taken from his Love to us first, his manifold and
never-to-be-enough-acknowledged Benefits both Spiritual and Temporal,
especially Spiritual, which he has bestowed upon us through Christ Jesus the
Son of his Love, as the Remission of our Sins, the Gift of Grace, the Adoption
of us to be his Children, the Promise of the Kingdom of Heaven, etc. For when
all is done, there is no greater Procurer of Love or Motive to it, than to be
prevented with the Acts of Love. Says David, Praise the Lord, O my Soul, and
all that is within me praise his holy Name: who forgiveth all thy Sin, and
heals all thy Infirmities; who saves thy Life from Destruction, and crowns
thee with Mercy and Loving Kindness. If men would weigh and consider the
accursed and dreadful Condition into which the Guilt of Sin had brought them,
that the Wages of it is Eternal Damnation, they would also be sensible how
inestimable a Benefit the Remission of Sin, and the Gifts of Grace, and Glory
are: And as there can be no greater Motive to wind up men's Affections to God
to the highest Pitch, than this Exceeding great Love of God to them, so there
will need no other. Instead therefore of heaping up many Motives, I shall leave
this one to your Meditations, and proceed to show what Inducements we have

To Love our Neighbor. And now the whole Hour would not suffice me to give a
particular account of them, some drawn from Mankinds being all at first of one
Stock and Kindred; others again, from the Renewing this Relation between them,
by their being made Brethren through Grace in Christ, and the adopted Children
of one Father in Heaven; from men's needing one another mutual help, even the
Greatest and Happiest as well as the Poorest and Meanest; and the like. But all
these Inducements, however weighty, I shall wave at present, not having time to
insist on them, and restrain my self to the one Motive expressed in my Text,
Because the Love of our Neighbor is one of the two Hooks or Hinges on which
all the Law and the Prophets hang, has the Honor to support at least one of
the Tables of the Commandments, one half of the Conditions God requires of men
to make them Partakers of his Promises, of the Blessings of this Life, and of
the Glory of that to come. And though I said it has the Honor or Dignity to
support but One of the two Tables; yet there is that inseparable Connection
between the two Tables, that he that breaks the one, inevitably breaks the
other, Whosoever, says St James, shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in
one Point, he is guilty of all. It Is not possible to offend against the Law,
and not against the Lawgiver; it is not possible to transgress against the
Second Table, and not to violate the First; to hate our Brother, and to love
God. And the Schoolmen on this account make but one Theological Virtue, of our
Love to God, and our Love to our Neighbor: and St John reckons Uncharitable
men among Unbelievers, the Hater of his Brother, and an Infidel to be the same;
says he, If a man says, I love God, and hate his Brother, he is a Liar -- and
again, he is in darkness, i. e. without Faith or the Knowledge of God. Our Lord
also, Matthew. 25. pronounces, That whatsoever Love is showed to his Brethren, is
showed to him; Inasmuch, says he, as you have done it unto one of the least of
these my Brethren, ye have done it unto me: and again, what is denied to them,
is denied to him, Inasmuch as you did it not to one of the least of these, you
did it not to me. The true Love of God carries with it, as a necessary
Consequence, the Love of our Brother; and it is but a cheap Piece of Hypocrisy,
and a niggardly Lie, to pretend to love God, who is above any Material
Expressions of our Love, and to harden our hearts to our Brethren, who stand in
need of such things, and whom God has appointed and deputed to be the Receivers
of such Tribute in his behalf. And thus as all the Law and the Prophets hang on
these two Commandments, The Love of God, And the Love of our Neighbor: So
these two again depend on one another.

The Sum of all that has been said is this: Love is the End of the
Commandment, all the Numerous Precepts contained in the Law, point only at this
One grand Duty, and are but particular Instances and Exemplifications of it.
Many things in the Law consist more in a Show of Goodness, than of true
Goodness; and are rather the Way to Righteousness, than Righteousness it self;
all the Typical Ceremonial Ordinances were but ad populum phalerae, as it is
said, Pomps and Ornaments either to amuse the rude People, or to be Helps to
their weak Understanding to bring them to the Knowledge of better things; while
therefore they observed these, they learned to be Religious; but when they
loved God and their Neighbor, they were Religious. Etiam stante Hierosolyma,
Jerusalem even standing, and the Law of the Sabbath being in force, the Strict
Rest of it yielded to the Works of it; and our Lord tells us, Matthew. 12. None
broke and profaned the Sabbath more than the Priests toiling in killing and
sleying the Beasts for Sacrifice, and were yet blameless: And upon another
occasion of breaking the Sabbath, says he, I will have Mercy, and not
Sacrifice, i. e. when both cannot be performed, he prefers the Works of Mercy
or Charity to a Brother, before the Outward Duties to God himself: And the
learned among the Jews perceived, that even while they did perform the Outward
Works enjoined them by the Law, that they were not principally intended in the
Law: nay, that in respect of the Works of Love, that they were cancelled, even
when they stood most in force: that which is said of our Lord's particular
Obedience, Psalm. 40. Burnt-Offerings and Sacrifices thou would not, but a
Body have thou prepared me -- then said I, Lo, I come to do thy Will, O God!
may be said in like manner of the Obedience that is required of all Men, that
there is a [noluisti] thou would not have, employed in all Commands concerning
them, when they clash or come in competition with these two Great Commandments,
The Love of God, And the Love of our Neighbor. We see what is become of the
Purifications, Vows, Sabbaths, Sacrifices, Feasts, New Mons, etc. they are
all, since the bringing in of a better Covenant, de facto done away: all that
Forest of Laws was cut down by this Novum Mandatum, this New Commandment of our
Lord's, Behold, a New Commandment I give unto you, That ye love one another.
And not only Shadows and Figures gave way to this Divine Law, but many real and
Substantial Virtues vail to this Eternal and never-to-be-out-dated Virtue of
Love or Charity: Whether there be Prophecies, they shall cease; whether there
be Knowledge, it shall vanish away: Nay, when Faith and Hope are no more,
Charity abides for ever. The Noblest Virtues, I may say, are without Virtue,
the most heroic Acts of Religion are without Religion, if performed without
Love or Charity: for where this Grace is wanting, they are but Acts of
Ostentation, Hypocrisy, or Compliance with men's own humors. That which is
therefore the chief Scope of the Law, ought to be the chief Scope of our Lives;
and what we see to be the main Drift of God's Precepts, ought to be likewise
the main Aim of our Actions.

To God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, be ascribed all Honor, Glory,
Worship, and Thanksgiving, this Day forth and for evermore. Amen.
THE Twenty Second Sermon.
LAMENT. iii.39, 40. Wherefore does a living man complain, a man for the
punishment of his Sins?

Let us search and try our ways, and turn again unto the Lord.


THIS Book is styled [ the Lamentations of Jeremiah:] representing of, and
grieving for the Miseries of Judah under the Captivity of Babylon: and so far
it is justifiable. For who can deny to them that are in Affliction, the only
Consolation of Affliction, which is to ease themselves by complaining? to
evaporate their Sufferings by the breathings-out of a Sorrowful Spirit? This is
natural to all men, and it would show an affected Piece of Stoicism to quarrel
at it; the Prophet's Temper had been of Iron, and his Bowels of Brass, if he
could have looked upon the Calamity of his Country with dry Eyes, and an
unwounded heart; if, I say, he could have beheld the People of God, fallen into
the Displeasure of God; the City that was called by his Name and the Glory of
all Cities, sunk to be the Byword and Scorn of the Heathen; the Land that so
abounded with Inhabitants, to be solitary and desolate; that was the Stage of
Miracles and Divine Favors, to be ruined and accursed. His breaking-out in the
first Chapter upon contemplation of so Sad a Change in this admiring
Commiseration, ( How is she become a Widow, She that was great among the
Nations, a Princess among the Provinces, how is She become tributary?) was but
a just Passion.

But the Prophet, in the prosecution of his Complaints, teaches us a better
Remedy of our Evils, than empty and idle Complaining, viz. to consider them as
Punishments, as well as Evils; as the Effects of God's wrath for our Sins, as
well as Miseries; to join Repentance to our Lamentations; and amendment of Life
to our Uneasiness under God's correcting hand: for the sense of Sufferings,
without Contrition for Sin, shows only a love of our Selves and Earthly things,
but nothing that is praiseworthy. Our Prophet therefore (like a good Physician
that amuses not himself with the Groans or Exclamations of his Patient, but
sets himself to find out the Cause of his Distemper, as the readiest way to
give him Ease) passes by or reproves the Unseasonable Wailings and Lamentations
of those that are in Misery, and lets them know that the Root of all their
Mischiefs and Misfortunes are their Trangressions against God's Laws, and to
wring their hands and fill the Air with Cries, was Womanish and Childish, when
their business was to try and search their Ways, and turn to the Lord, whom
they had forsaken by their Iniquities. Wherefore does a living man complain? a
man for the punishment of his Sins? Let us search and try our ways, and turn
again to the Lord.

What one says of a good Author he was expounding, Whereas in the obscure
places of many Writers it is hard to make out any tolerable Sense, the
difficulty I find, is, in the multiplicity of excellent Senses, to know which
to choose; may more deservedly be affirmed of doubtful places in Scripture, That
it is more difficult to resolve which Sense to prefer, than to find a good one.

Many are the Interpretations of my Text, and all tending to Edification. Some
Expositors, because the Hebrew has no more than [ Why does a living man
complain, a man of his Sins?] and makes no mention of the Punishment of them,
interpret the Words after this manner, Why do men pretendingly or really sorrow
excessively for their Sins, and rest there? why do they not rather proceed from
Confession, to Dereliction? and from Dereliction to Amendment? But though this
be a good Admonition, there is no reason here to decline the Translation of our
Bible, and to leave out [ Punishment] it being common in the Hebrew to put Sin,
for the Punishment of Sin. If thou do well, says God to Cain, Genesis 4.7.
shall thou not be accepted? and if thou do not well, Sin lies at the door,
i. e. the Punishment of Sin is at hand to seize thee. Others there are who
observing the Prophet to vary his terms, in the first Clause to say, Why does a
living man complain? and in the second only, Why does a Man complain? put a
weight and Emphasis in living: as if his meaning were, Why does he, that has
yet Life and Time, complain, and not rather hope? But a living man in this
place imports no more, than a man, or any man: this form of Speech being not
only usual in Scripture, but among our selves, who say, No living man can
endure this, when we mean no more than no man can endure it. Others understand
the words thus, Why does any Mortal Man complain, i. e. murmur, as if God were
cruel, and dealt harder measure to him, than he deserved; when none ever yet
bore the full Burden of his Sins, but God always in judgment remembers mercy;
applying justly to such Repiners, what Solomon says Prove. 19.3. The foolish man
perverteth his way, and his heart fretteth against the Lord. And not much
unlike unto this is their Interpretation, who say, Why does a living man
complain, i. e. afflict himself for his Afflictions? annoy himself for his
Annoyances, when Troubles and Molestations are the common Lot of Mankind? When,
as Job says, Man is born to trouble, as the Sparks fly upwards? Such Wailing
and bemoaning speaks only an over-fondness and tenderness of our selves, as if
we thought we were fit to be exempted from what our whole Race is obnoxious to:
or else a mutinous discontented Spirit against the Sovereign of the World and
his Providence. The wiser Heathen may reproach the Pusillanimity, or
Undisciplined Temper, which soever it is, of such Believers, one of whom could
say, If our Misfortunes proceed from our Enemies, we ought to bear them with
Fortitude; if from God, with Patience. Others again expound, Why does a living
man complain, a man for the punishment of his Sin? Why does any man complain or
murmur at his Punishment, and not rather at himself for doing such things as
brought the Punishment upon him?

In this Variety of Interpretations I shall adhere to that which I touched upon
in my Introduction, as the fullest and most comprehensive of the rest, viz. Why
does any man amuze himself with idle and fruitless Bewailing the Punishment of
his Sins, and not rather set to remove the Punishment by putting away his Sins?
Or as the Prophet speaks, By searching and trying his ways, and turning again
to the Lord. And so the Words have these two Parts:

I. A Condemnation of the Course which Men ordinarily take under God's
Judgments sent on them for their Sins, They complain.

II. The Recommendation of a better Course, which is, To search and try their
Ways, and turn to the Lord.

I begin first with the Prophet's Condemnation of the Course Men ordinarily
take under God's Judgments sent on them for their Sins,

They Complain.
The Complaint of a man under the Punishment of his Sins may be blameable in
many Respects, and deserve the Check implied in this Question, Wherefore does a
living man complain? But I shall insist only on three.

1. It may be blameable in respect of the Complaint it self: For if it be a
mere Complaint, without any Endeavor to get out of the Misfortune, it is either
an Action without all Design and Purpose, and so is irrational and foolish: or
else it pronounces that there is no Redress of the Evil a man lies under, and
then the Complaint is false: for there is no Case and Condition at least of a
Faithful Person so miserable, as to be also Desperate and helpless: but as
Saint Paul says of Temptation, That God will not suffer his Servants to be
tempted above what they are able, but will with the Temptation also make a way
to escape: So in the Punishment of Sin, God does not inflict any so
irreversibly, that there is no Evasion out of his Displeasure: but if the
Sinner make due Application to his Goodness, he will remove it; or so support
and comfort him under it, that it will countervail a Deliverance. That
therefore which is here taxed in the frequent Practice of men, is a lazy
fruitless bemoaning themselves, as if they were excluded all possibility of
future Comfort, as well as the present possession of it; a vain and affected
Delight to ask our Prophet's Question, Chap. 1.12. of all they meet, but
without just cause, Was there ever Sorrow like my Sorrow, wherewith the Lord
has afflicted me? insinuating that great Severity is exercised toward them,
which they have not deserved; and that they are of the Number of the Innocent,
that are afflicted; of the Noble, that are Unfortunate: and they complain in
this fond manner, till at last they grow in love with their Complaints; find a
Consolation, in the Want of Consolation; the conceived Singularity of their
Condition converting their Disasters into Glory, and a kind of Shadow of
Comfort. But if these Persons in the mean time would search their own Hearts,
and make Inquisition into their Lives past, they would find Cause enough for
God's Wrath, and confess that their Sufferings were the least part of their
Demerit; and their Plumes of Vanity would flag and sink; this fond Imagination,
That Satisfaction was rather due from God to them, than from them to God, would
be changed into a sad Repentance; and they would seek a Solid Comfort by
humbling themselves before his Divine Majesty in Sackcloth and Ashes, and not
in the vain Complacencies and Ravings of an abused Fancy. But such is the Folly
of men (like the Prodigal Son before he came to himself) they set themselves to
feed on Husks, when in their Father's House the very hired Servants have their
fill of Bread; they mourn and suffer misery, when Music and Feasting, a Ring
and Robe of Honor, i. e. the highest Content, is prepared for them, and
attends only their sueing for it.

2. Men's Complaints may be blameable and reproveable in regard of the Persons
against whom they make them. Men commonly complain against Fortune, as if the
World were governed as blindly, as they govern their particular Affairs:
against their Enemies, when their Enemies have no more power over them, than
their Sins give them; and God overrules the most Potent Malice, and makes a
Good Man's Enemies to be at peace with him: they complain against themselves, as
if their Misfortunes proceeded only from some false or imprudent Step which
they had made, and that they were the Efficient, as well as Meritorious Cause
of their Sufferings: or, what is yet worse and more dangerous, they charge
themselves with Unkindness to themselves, that they are not indulgent enough to
their own Content, deny themselves the Satisfactions that are in their power;
and this makes them often seek to drown their Cares, as they call them, in
Wine; to alleviate their Misfortunes by Debauchery: as Thetis in the Poet
persuades her Son Achilles to comfort his approaching Fate with the enjoying of
young Women. But Sin is a sad Refreshment of Sorrow; and the Enlargement which
men endeavor to procure from the Arrests of God's Judgments, by letting loose
the reins of Lust, is like the Relief an Hydropick Person seeks in large
Draughts of Drink; which gratify his Thirst, but quench withal the little
Spark of Life remaining to him; and remove not his Distemper, but make it
incurable: Or else we may liken this wicked Course which Men take to ease their
Sorrows, to Readiness seeking Counsel from the Witch, when the Oracles of God were
silent; he learned by such his Apostasy his approaching Destruction, but he
assured it also. The Church of Rome has as many appropriate Saints, as they
have Needs and Distresses; and every Complaint of theirs has a Patron to
redress it; St Christopher at Sea, St Roch in the time of Infection, St Anthony
when their Cattle are diseased, our Lady of Good-Succour for Women in
Childbed, etc. But God is all the while passed by, and all these that I have
named, deservedly forfeit Help from him that can only give it, while they
perversely seek it, where it is not to be had.

3. Men's Complaints may be blameable in respect of the Nature or Manner of
them: when though they be rightly Addressed, i. e. to God, yet the Complaint it
self is not Right, not qualified with the Conditions God requires, with Faith,
Holiness, Humility, etc. First, If men complain without Faith, they complain to
God, as they do to their Fellow Creatures; they tell him a Tale of their Wants
and Discontents, unload their Breasts of their Evils, but find no Redress: and
we may reckon among the Unfaithful, those who refuse or neglect to perform the
Conditions upon which alone God has promised to hear the Cries and Complaints
of men, though they never so much believe his Power and Goodness: for to be
persuaded that God will accept the Prayers of the Wicked, is equal Infidelity,
as to be persuaded that he will not accept those of the Righteous; and
proceeds, if rightly considered, not from an Excess, but a Defect of Faith: and
we may say with St James, Let not such look for any thing at his hands.

Secondly, If men's Complaints be not seasoned with Humility, they are Murmurs,
and not Prayers; Expostulations for Dues, not Supplications for Grace and
Favor. Again, if they proceed not from a Gracious and Holy Mind, more from the
Sense of their Sins, than of their Sufferings; from their Sorrow for their
Unworthiness and Ingratitude to the Divine Goodness, than for the Chastisements
they lie under; their Mourning and Complaining is but like that which God
reproaches Israel for, Hos. 7.14. when he had sent a Famine upon them for their
Disobedience, They have not cried unto me, says God, with their hearts, when
they howled upon their beds: they assemble themselves [viz. to make
Supplications to me in my House] for Corn and for Wine, i. e. they bewailed not
their Sins, but their Wants; howled not like Penitents, but like Wolves;
because their Bellies, not the Sense of their Sins, pinched them; they desired
again their loaded Tables and full Cups, they found no miss of Justice,
Righteousness, etc. The Burden of our Complaints must not be the Loss of our
Plenty and Prosperity, of our Riches or our Honor, our Health or our Friends;
but of the Loss of our Innocence and God's Favor; of the Smart we feel for our
Guilt, not of our Punishment, if we will have them accepted by God, without the
reprehensive Interrogatory or Check in my Text, Wherefore does a living man
complain, a man for the Punishment of his Sins? And after all that has been
said, Complaints, even the best of them, Prayers themselves, are but Empty
Words and Air without Amendment of Life: and therefore in the second place, the
Prophet recommends to us a Better Course to deliver us out of God's
Displeasure, than Complaining, viz. To search and try our Ways, and turn again
to the Lord. Which is my second General Part.

Let us search and try our Ways, and turn again to the Lord.
The Prophet's Advice comprehends in it two things: 1. Searching and Trying our
Ways in order to Conversion. And, 2dly, Conversion it self unto the Lord.

1. Investigation or searching out our Ways: which is a figurative or
metaphorical Expression, taken from the hunting of wild Beasts by the Track or
Scent which they leave behind them, and implies, that our Sins many times lie
hid from our selves, as well as others, and require Pains and Diligence to find
them out. For as those Creatures, which are either profitable or hurtful to us,
out of a Natural Instinct hide themselves from us in Holes and other fast and
retired Places, till the skillful Huntsman discovers them by their Scent, their
Slotts, their Brousings, and the like, and beats them up for the Chase: So
those also that have committed Heinous Crimes, know that they are Obnoxious
both to God and Man for the same, and use all possible Means to conceal them;
and for their greater peace, not only from the Eyes of the World, but from
themselves, i. e. from the reflections of their own memory and Conscience:
insomuch, that when God awakens and affrights their secure and slumbering Souls
with some loud and dreadful Judgment, they are utter Strangers to their Sins,
and at as high a Loss to find them out as others; and are fain to use no less
Diligence to discover them, than they did to conceal them; to serve themselves
with the Huntsman's Art, to traverse and search by-ways to recover the secret
Lairs of their Lust, the intricate perplexed Windings of their Injustice, and
to follow them by their Scent, as I may say, viz. the Scandal and Ill Fame they
have left behind them; by their Tracks and wild Rangings, the Breaches made in
God's Laws, and the injurious Marks yet remaining of them among men: and before
Amendment of Life, Peace with God and their own Consciences can be attained,
they must thus hunt back on the Scent, and beat over again the same Ground, to
retrieve the Knowledge of those Crimes which either their wicked Habits or
Custom of Sinning made them pass over without regret or regard, or their wicked
Craft industriously concealed. And this is that which the Prophet means, by
searching out our ways.

And then [ the trying them] is much the same thing, being a Metaphor or
Similitude borrowed from the Trade of the Goldsmiths, who by the Touchstone
and Weights, Fire, and the Waters of Separation, and many laborious Operations,
proves and distinguishes false and adulterate Metals from true and sincere,
light and counterfeit Coins from current and legitimate. For all Men are more
or less Hypocrites, Coiners and Gilders of Brass and Copper, and Utterers of
them for good Gold, i. e. Embasers of the pure Metal of God's Word, and
Clippers of his Commandments, whenever their Reputation or Interest are at
Stake, and that there needs either an Extenuation or Varnish for their Evil
Actions; and there is no less need of the Gold-smith's or Chymist's Art, than
of the Huntsman's; of the trying our ways, than of the hunting them out. And
the same Scriptures which we have perverted and bowed to our Crooked Purposes,
are the only Rule and Test by which we can straighten and set them right again;
the only Waters of Separation, by which we can discover and discriminate the
Allays and Corruptions of our Duties, from the pure and sincere Holiness which
ought to have been in them, that can purge away the Dross of our Evasions,
Palliations, Self-flatteries, and the like. To try Other men's Ways, as it is not
so Ungrateful, so it seems not so hard a Task: we hear nothing of late more
commonly cried in the Streets, than The Trial of such a Priest, or such a
Sectary; of such a Jesuit, or such a Traitorous Schismatic; and what by the
Sagacity of the Judge, the Uprightness of the Jury, and the False-Brothers
among themselves, the Dangerous Thoughts of many Hearts are revealed. But the
great Difficulty is to find out a man's Own Ways: we are so much better
Alchymists, than Christians; cunning Falsifyers, than honest Disclosers of our
Actions; we so long hug our selves in our Iniquities, till, as the Psalmist
says, our abominable Wickedness be found out, i. e. by God, or by some other,
but we rarely discover it our selves; we may be deprehended, but we are seldom
self-detected. All generally abominate and execrate the very Names of Sectary
and Papist; but we are not so unkind to their Falsifications and Equivocations,
as to their Appellations and Denominations; we can give as large Dispensations
and Allowances to our selves in any Interested Point as they, though they
contradict the express Word of God, and make that glorious Light a mere Ignis
fatuus, a Will with the Wisp, and extinguish also the Candle of the Lord, that
Inward Light of our Conscience which was kindled in our Soul at our first
Creation, and instead of its Divine Instructions teach it new Lessons after the
Mysteries of Hell and Iniquity. But these wicked Artifices must be laid aside,
and Sincerity, Fidelity and Diligence used in the Examination and Trial of our
Ways, before we can possibly turn to the Lord.

Which is the Second Particular I said was contained in the Prophet's Advice,
and for the sake of which Duty the other of Searching and Trying our Ways was
prescribed: for to search into our wicked Lives, and to call our passed Sins to
remembrance, if not in order to their Condemnation, and our Returning again to
the Lord, must be to applaud them, and to delight our selves in a fanciful
re-acting them over again, which is a greater Sin, if it be possible, than the
first committing them. And this Duty of Turning again to the Lord, is also
expressed by a Metaphor, the so common Figure in Scripture, by a Similitude
taken from such as go astray, and return again into the Right way: or that fly
from their Abode, and upon better thoughts return home again. For there are
Wanderers from their Duty, as well as from the Road or Highway; Fugitives from
Virtue, as well as from their Houses and Country. Philo says of Adam and Eves
flying from God's presence after their Transgression, Every Sinner is a
Fugitive: and the Psalmist calls those that break the Commandments, Wanderers
out of the Right-way. God, in the Wisdom of his Counsel, made Some things
without Himself the Center or Resting Place of Inferior Creatures, as the Air
for light Bodies, the Earth for heavy, etc. but he made Himself the only Center
of Man's happiness, the only Resting Place of his Soul; and when ever Men are
enticed and led away with their Lusts to seek Content in any Worldly or Carnal
Enjoyment, as they depart from God and turn their Backs upon him, so they
depart from their Peace, and turn their Backs upon their Felicity; and till
they follow the Prophet's Advice, Turn again to the Lord, they pursue only
their Misery.

Now [ the turning] here spoken of being Figurative; not Corporal, but
Spiritual; not local from place to place, but progressive from Vice to Virtue;
the plain Importance of returning to the Lord, is Repentance, the forsaking our
former wicked Courses, and serving God for the future in Holiness of Life. And
though the Words comprehend in their full Latitude the Whole Duty of Man, yet
they may be reduced to these two short Precepts which we find in the fourth
Chapter of St James, ver. 8. -- Cleanse your Hands ye Sinners, and purify your
Hearts ye double-minded. By our Hands the Apostle means our Outward Actions,
our Hands being the ordinary Instruments by which they are wrought: and by our
Hearts he denotes our Inward Affections, because from thence our Affections
proceed. Now our Outward Actions must be Just and Honest, because by them our
Hearts are only made legible and intelligible to the World: and our Hearts
again or Inward Affections must be pure and holy, because otherwise it is as
impossible that our Actions should be Just and Honest, as that a clear Stream
should flow from a troubled and puddled Fountain: besides, God sees the Heart,
though Man does not; and East and West will sooner meet, and make one Point in
the Compass, than God will close with an Impure or Wicked Person. If we will
enjoy an Union with God, we must forsake our Sins, and not expect that he
should recede from his Righteousness; we must turn to him, or he will never
turn to us: and all our Prosperity and Felicity depend upon our Early and
Sincere Turning to the Lord: for as those that Dye in the Lord, have all Tears
wiped from their Eyes; so the Living Man that turns to the Lord, shall have all
Tears wiped from his Eyes, as the Prophet implies in my Text, i. e. his
Complaints for the Punishment of his Sins taken away, nay his Punishment shall
be turned into Blessings and Mercies by the God of Mercy. I shall add but a few
Words of Application, and conclude.

We see here the highest Encouragement to excite us to Repentance and a Holy
Life, no less than the removing all our Complaints, by the removing all our
Evils; nay, than by turning our Evils into Blessings. Thanks be to God, we
cannot parallel the Evils of our days, with those of the Jewish Nation, which
the Prophet here laments; we are not actually reduced again, as some years
since, to an Egyptian bondage, to work in Brick-kilns, by our bloody and
oppressing Dissenting Brethren. Thanks be to God, I say, the Calamity of our
Israel is not such, that we should take up this Complaint, How is She become a
Widow, She that was Great among the Nations, a Princess among the Provinces,
how is She become tributary? Among ancient Roman Medals there is one with a
disconsolate Figure, sitting on the Ground, with this Inscription, Britannia
capta, Britain subdued: but I trust to the Divine Goodness, that the like Fate
is far from us this day: though we were lately so near being Surpised, and
totally destroyed by the Malice of our Bloody Enemies, that what one said of a
Dog's near seizing the Prey, might be applied to us -- similisque tenenti, non
tenet, we were so near being taken, that we were only not taken; and though we
were not confounded, we seemed to be: As might be gathered, as by other
Evidences so, from the Letters of our ill-willing Neighbors, who, more
solicitous for our Ruin, than charitable to warn us of our Danger, enquired
only after the Manner and Measure of our Destruction, but doubted not in the
least of the Certainty of it. But though we were Miraculously snatched out of
the Jaws of Ruin, are we now secure? so that the Reprehension in my Text may
be retorted on us, Wherefore does a living man complain? Some forward Heads and
Branches of the late Conspiracy, I acknowledge, are cut off, or secured; but
the Roots of it are still left in the Ground, and charily preserved and
fostered by the Still-Designing Parties, and not a little cherished and
assisted by many who pretend to be of a contrary Persuasion. This Age, which
despises to go less in a Refined Way of working Mischief than any former
whatsoever, has framed an Engine, which would be thought to have been filed and
polished by the very Hand of Charity, though it was forged in Hell, and that
is, To disbelieve all that is said of any Plot and Conspiracy against the King,
Church or State; insinuate, nay dare to publish in Print, That the Conspiracy,
which makes such a Noise, is indeed only against the Accused Party, either to
destroy or to bring it low. Good and Gracious Souls! who can give the Lie to
their King and Country to justify Villains; make no scruple to rescue Traitors
from the Bar, and to set the Judges in their place; to acquit Schismatics and
Regicides, and to arraign the whole Loyalty of the Realm. And with what reason,
beside their secret favoring of the Guilty? Forsooth, some of the Condemned
Persons denied their Treason to the last Moment of their Life, and expired in
Protestation of their Innocence. Their False Principles and Impious Tenets were
their Innocence, and the Good Opinion they have of their Wicked Designs is all
the Uprightness and Integrity they insist on. O foolish Galatians! says St
Paul, who has bewitched you? when the Christians among them Judaized. And we
may say to those that countenance Sectaries and Schismatics among us, O
insensati, O fautores! O mad and besotted Favorers of your greatest Enemies!
who has fascinated, who has bewitched you? Are these indeed those truly
Illuminated Persons they pretend to be, and are you your selves those
Reprobated People they call you, that you think the Terms easy to involve the
Kingdom in Blood and Ruin to be of their Number? This is no time to convince
this Frenzy: but I instance in these Important and even Incumbent Evils to show
we are not without Just Causes of Complaint: and so little does the Nation want
Complaints, that Complaints are one of the greatest Grievances we complain of,
namely, the Complaints of those who at present have no power to do further
Mischief, but with false Surmises and feigned Lamentations endeavor to fill
the Unwary with Jealousies and Fears. Against all these Complaints the
Prophet's Advice in my Text is a Sure Armor and Defense, If we turn unto the
Lord by Repentance and holy Lives, he will turn our Dangers into Security, our
Troubles into Peace and Prosperity, I laid me down and slept, says the
Psalmist, and rose again, for the Lord sustained me. If we lie down, and repose
our Trust in the Lord in well-doing, though there be Traiterous Cabals and
Midnight Conspiracies against us, our Sleeps shall be as Safe as Sweet: a false
Brother or a Misgiving Conscience, a faint Heart or an Unwary Word let slip,
shall betray all: Nay, Means most remote and unlikely, no way relating to the
Design on foot, shall overthrow the whole Machination; a casual Fire shall
drive the King into his Safety, and leave the Traitors in the Destruction they
contrived against him, and the like. If we secure our Duty, God will secure our
Peace and Safety. To whom be ascribed all Honor, Glory, etc.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 14. Line 29. for in read by. p. 16. l. 30. r. vouchsafed. p. 32. l. 16.
for that r. they. p. 36. l. 32. r. Secular Enjoyments. p. 121. l. 19. r. proved
an Adversary. p. 195. l. 18. r. Transgression. p. 228. l. 23. for were r. are.
p. 266. l. 14. r. be a defense. p. 269. l. 2. dele and. p. 330. l. 12. r.
Humor. p. 333. l. 2. for so this r. says the. p. 335. l. 10. r. where the
battle. p. 341. l. 6. r. washings. p. 344. l. 4. for or r. are. p. 354. l. 1.
r. Endowments. p. 363. l. 26. for Conversation r. Conservation. p. 378. l. 24.
r. of so easy.

A Catalogue of some Books Printed for R. Royston, at the Angel in Amen-Corner.
Books written by the Reverend Dr. Patrick.
THE Christian Sacrifice; A Treatise showing the Necessity, End, and Manner of
receiving the Holy Communion: together with suitable Prayers and Meditations for
every Month in the Year; and for the Principal Festivals in Memory of our
Blessed Savior. In four Parts. The Eighth Edition corrected. The Devout
Christian instructed how to pray and give thanks to God: Or, A Book of
Devotions for Families, and particular persons, in most of the concerns of
Humane Life. The Fifth Edition, in Twelves. An Advice to a Friend. The Fourth
Edition, in Twelves. Jesus and the Resurrection, justified by Witnesses in
Heaven and in Earth. In two Parts. in Octavo. The Book of Job Paraphrased, in
Octavo. The Book of Psalms Paraphrased, in Octavo. The Truth of Christian
Religion, in Octavo. The Glorious Epiphany, with the Devout Christians Love to
it, in Octavo. The Proverbs of Solomon Paraphrased, with the Arguments of each
Chapter, which supply the place of Commenting. A Paraphrase upon the Books of
Ecclesiastes and the Song of Solomon: With Arguments to each Chapter, and
Annotations thereupon. In Octavo. New. A Book for Beginners; Or, A Help to
Young Communicants, that they may be fitted for the Holy Communion, and receive
it with profit. A Friendly Debate between a Conformist and a Nonconformist. In
Two Parts. The Sixth Edition Corrected and Enlarged. A Treatise of the
Necessity and Frequency of receiving the Holy Communion: With a Resolution of
Doubts about it. In three Discourses, begun upon Whitsunday, in the Cathedral
Church of Peterburgh. In Twelves. New.
The Works of Doctor Hammond, in Four large Volumes, viz.
Vol. I. A Collection of Discourses chiefly Practical. Vol. II. A Collection of
Discourses in Defense of the Church of England. 1. Against the Romanists. 2.
Against other Adversaries. Vol. III. A Paraphrase and Annotations upon all the
Books of the New Testament. Vol. IV. A Paraphrase and Annotations upon the
Books of the Psalms. A Paraphrase and Annotations upon (the ten first Chapters
of) the Proverbs. MS. Thirty one Sermons Preached upon several Occasions. With
an Appendix to Vol. II. The Freeholders Grand Inquest, touching our Sovereign
Lord the King and His Parliament. To which are added Observations upon Forms of
Government. Together with Directions for Obedience to Governors in dangerous
and doubtful Times. By the Learned Sir Robert Filmer, Knight.
The End of the Catalogue.

