A Sober Discourse OF RIGHT TO Church Communion. Wherein is proved by
Scripture, the Example of the Primitive Times, and the Practice of All that
have Professed the Christian Religion: That no Unbaptized person may be
Regularly admitted to the Lords Supper.

By W. Kiffin a lover of Truth and Peace

Act. 2.41. Then they that gladly received his Word were Baptized: and the same
day there were added to them about three thousand Souls.

Deuteronomy. 5.32. Ye shall observe to do therefore as the Lord your God has
Commanded you, you shall not turn aside to the right hand or to the left.

Col. 2.5. Joying and beholding your order and the stedfastness of your Faith
in Christ.

London, Printed by Geo. Larkin, for Enoch Prosser, at the Rose and Crown in
Sweethings-Alley, at the East End of the Royal Exchange, 1681.

TO THE Christian READER.
WHen it pleased God of his free Grace to cause me to make a serious inquiry
after Jesus Christ, and to give me some taste of his pardoning Love, the sense
of which did engage my heart with desires to be obedient to his will in all
things. I used all indeavers both by Converse with such as were able, and also
by diligently searching the Scriptures, with earnest desires of God, that I
might be directed in a right way of Worship; and after some time concluded that
the safest way was to follow the Footsteps of the Flock (namely) that Order
laid down by Christ and his Apostles, and Practiced by the Primitive Christians
in their times, which I found to be; that after Conversion they were Baptized,
added to the Church, and Continued in the Apostles Doctrine, Fellowship,
Breaking of Bread, and Prayer; according to which I thought my self bound to be
Conformable, and having continued in the Profession of the same for these forty
years, although through many Weaknesses, and Fears, Temptations, and
Sufferings, yet not without some Witness from God of his gracious Acceptance
and Strength to this very day: The sense I have of my own Weakness and
Inability, would have been a Bar to me to appear in this Public way, did I not
see a necessity lying upon me for the Truths-sake, and the sakes of many, by
reason of some that have lately risen up to weaken, if not make void that great
Ordinance of Baptism, by endeavoring to maintain, that all persons that
Believe, although they never did, nor do Practice the same, may partake of the
Ordinance of the Lords Supper, and all other Gospel instituted Duties. A
Notion, not only Contrary to the Primitive Pattern, but the Constant Practice
of all that ever professed the Christian Religion, or that own the Scriptures
to be the Rule of Faith and Practice; and it would be a happiness to the
Christian Religion, if all that Profess the same, did in other things agree as
they do in this, namely, that none ought to be Partakers of the Lords Supper,
but such as have been Baptized those that differ; in this matter from them,
would be found to be as few in Number as they are Weak in Argument, and
although I am well satisfied that the performance of all Duties and Ordinances,
will be of no value to any man, further than Christ is enjoyed in them: the
very Gospel it self Severed from Christ, will prove the Administration of
Death, 2 Cor. 1.21. The Powerfulest Preaching, and the clearest Discourse of
the free Grace of God has no Life in it, unless the soul be led by the Spirit
to Christ, who is the Life of all Duties. Knowledge of the Truth, and Obedience
to it in outward performances, will as little save a man's soul as the Covenant
of Works. Yet every man that has an interest in Christ, is bound by the Word
of God to be obedient to all his Commands. It was the great Commendation of
Zacharias and Elizabeth, That they walked in all the Commandments and
Ordinances of the Lord blameless, the Ordinance of Baptism is none of the
least, the very Foundation of Religion being comprehended in the Form thereof,
as appears at large by the Worthy and Learned Dr. Owen, in his Book of the
Divine Nature and Personality of the Holy Spirit, page 50. viz. All things
necessary to this purpose, are comprised in the solemn form of our Initiation
into Covenant with God, Matthew. 28.19. Our Lord Jesus Christ Commands his
Apostles to Disciple all Nations, Baptising them in the Name of the Father, and
of the Son, and the Holy Ghost, this is the Foundation we lay of our Obedience
and Profession, which are to be regulated by this Initial engagement page 51.
No sense can be afixed unto these words but what does unavoidably include his
Personality, we are alike Baptized into their Name, equally submiting to their
Authority, and equally taking the Profession of their Name upon us. Again, By
being Baptized into the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost, we are Sacredly Initiated, and Consecrated, or Dedicated unto the
Service and Worship of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; this we take upon us in
our Baptism: herein lies the Foundation of all our Faith and Profession with
that engagement of our selves unto God, which Constitutes our Christianity;
this is the pledge of our entrance into Covenant with God, and of our giving up
our selves unto him in the solemn Bond of Religion. And concludes in page 52.
If the Doctrine of a Trinity of Persons subsisting in the same undivided
Essence, be not taught and declar in these words, we may justly despair of ever
having any Divine Mystery manifested unto us, I leave the Reader to peruse it
at large.

If this Ordinance of Baptism be the Pledge of our Entrance into Covenant with
God, and of the giving up our selves unto him in the solemn Bond of Religion,
and we are hereby Dedicated unto the service of the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, then must it of necessity be the First Ordinance, before that of the
Lords Supper. We may as well conclude a man may go into a House before he
Enters, and a man may be paid for his Goods, and afterward receive Earnest, as
any may lawfully partake of the Lords Supper before he is Baptized. And if we
are sacredly Initiated and Consecrated, or Dedicated unto the Worship of the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, as that Text Matthew. 28,19. shows we are, and
take this upon us in our Baptism, and thereby owning the Spirit to be God,
equal with the Father, and the Son, as that Faith which is to be exercised by
us in all other Ordinances, than the admit^ing of persons to the Lords Supper,
and other Instituted Duties, before they are Baptized, does greatly weaken this
main Argument of the Spirits being God, at least in the Practice of these
Gospel Duties, for from what Scripture will it be made appear, that he is so to
be owned in them, if ye partake of them before, or without being Baptized? if
this be laid as the Foundation of all our Faith, and Profession, which are to
be built upon in all our Profession, if it be omited, the structure must needs
be weak, we had need rather to have our Faith strengthened in the belief of so
great and essential a Truth as the Divine Essence of the Spirit is, by the use
of all means appointed to that end.

Mr. Francis Cheynel in his Learned Treatise, of the Divine Trinity, Printed
1650. page 258. quotes it as the Judgment of Iraeneus, Tertullian, Athanasius,
Basil, and others of the Ancients, That the Principal Fundamentals of the
Christian Faith is Contained in the Form of Baptism, and founded on Matt.
28.19. And in page 185. tells us, If any man in Athanasius 's time asked, how
many persons Subsist in the Godhead, they were wont to send him to Jordan, and
there you may hear and see the blessed Trinity. Matt. 3.16. in page 381. God
the Holy Ghost is to be obeyed, we are devoted to his Service in Baptism. And
page 430. In Baptism we Christians are devoted and Consecrated to the Belief,
Worship, and Service of God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost. By
which we may see, what Esteem the Ancients had of that Ordinance, and great
Reason there is for every Christian to be found in the Practice thereof, seeing
they are thereby Baptized into Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, as the first
Foundation of our visible Profession of Christ; for as Repentance is the
Visible initiating grace; so Baptism is called the Baptism of Repentance as the
first initiating Ordinance.

I have for the satisfaction of All, endeavored in the following Essay to
clear this truth both from Scripture and Example, as also to produce the
Judgment of the Learned in all Ages. As for our Modern Divines, you have their
own words set down faithfully by me, and as for those who are more Ancient, I
have requested a Friend to Translate the same, which I doubt not but is done
Impartially. And although I may expect to meet with Censures from some who will
be ready to charge the Truth herein with Incharitableness and to be of a
dividing Nature; yet I can with comfort and sincerity of heart in the Presence
of God declare, I have no other design, but the preserving the Ordinances of
Christ, in their purity and Order as they are left unto us in the holy
Scriptures of Truth; and to warn the Churches To keep close to the Rule, least
they being found not to Worship the Lord according to his prescribed Order he
make a Breach amongst them, neither are you presented with any new Opinion, but
that which has been the Judgment of all that have Professed the Christian
Religion in all times; so that what Censure any shall make upon it, respects
not us only, but the servants of God of all Persuasions in all Ages, and for my
self, as I have a witness in my own Conscience, so I doubt not but I have the
same also with those that know me, that I have made it a great part of my Duty,
as I have had opportunity, to persuade all Christians to Love and Peace, to
avoid judging, and reproching each other under their differing Persuasions, to
turn their Heats and Passions, which has greatly abounded in our days one
against another, into Prayer, and Supplication (...) for another, that although
they differ in their Light, it may not make any breach in their Love; He that
knows most of the mind of God, knows but in part, for who art thou that judge
another man's servant? I shall trouble you no farther, but leave the perusal of
this small Essay to thy serious consideration.

Thine in the Service of Christ, W. K.

ERRATA.
PAge 7. line 23. read Waldenses. p. 13. margent for supra r. frustra, p. 18.
l. 8. r. practisers. p. 35. l. 20. r. dispensed. p. 47. l. 19. dele of. l. 24.
for at r. until. p. 57. l. 5. r. The Rule. p. 70. l. 11. r. principles. p. 75.
margent l. 4. r. that they. p. 83. l. 14. r. Suspiciens. p. 85. l. 15. r.
Catechumens. p, 86. l. 11. r. Yet the. l. 23. r. except. p. 89. r. Baptism. for
p. 89. r. 87. for 92. r. 90. for 93. r. 91. for 96. r. 94. for 97. r. 95. where
line 9. r. But. l. 11. r. Baptizing. p. 97. l. 11. r. Initiation. p. 108. l. 1.
r. Judgment. p. 109. l. 23. r. of Christ Commonly. p. 110. l. 18. r.
consequence. for p. 211. r. 112. where l. 24. r. to joy in beholding. last l.
r. none. p. 118. l. 16. dele others, p. 132. l. 11. for first r. later. p. 136.
l. 19. dele to p. 140. l. 21. r. choice of. l. 22. r. enforce. p. 148. l. 10
for sheet r. street. p. 153. l. 12. r. by the. p. 158. margent l. 9. dele one
Law. p. 144. last l. for But r. By. Litteral escapes and mispointings are left
to the Candor of the Reader, to Correct or Pardon.

THE PREFACE.
WHat was Praiseworthy in those Primitive Christians, to whom the Apostle Paul
writes, 1. Cor. 11.2. Can be no Blemish, but really a Duty in other Christians,
in after times, to imitate; his words are, I praise you, Brethren, that ye
remember me in all things, and keep the Ordinances as I delivered them to you:
our Translation of the (...).
Greek Word (rendering it Ordinances) is excepted against by some Papists,
especially Gregory Martin, reputed a great Linguist in the Rhemish Seminary,
who would have it Translated ( Traditions) to countenance the Romish Opinion;
to which shall be opposed that the Greek Word signifies indeed Tradition, that
is in English, a Delivery, viz. of Doctrines, Ordinances, Instructions, or
Institutions, 2 Thessalonians. 2.15. by those Evangelical Preachers to their Auditors,
which is nothing else but the Doctrine of the Gospel first Preached, (which is
of the greatest and highest Authority,) and afterward committed to writing by
the Evangelists and Apostles, as standing Records to future Ages; so that any
Traditions, besides what is written, are justly to be excepted against, and (in
matters relating to Divine Worship) to be esteemed Apocryphal. Because a
Delivery of Transactions or Doctrines by Ancestors to Posterity by word of
Mouth, is liable to many mistakes and uncertainties, by reason of the different
constitutions and circumstances of men, who frequently introduce that Authority
to color their Inventions, or the product of their imaginary Fancies, with
respect to Divine Matters. Though it is very apparent that such a Rule is not
at all self-evidencing, for it cannot prove it self; nor is it Demonstrative,
for it has no certain Medium to Convince; nor Universally True in all times and
places, because Reports vary every where; neither is it Unerring, being no
where stamped with that Character; and lastly not Plain, for no doubting person
can possibly examine all Traditions. Now these are some of the properties of a
General Rule to try Controversies by, which being wanting in Oral Traditions,
the word cannot here be understood otherwise than by Ordinances or Institutions
of the Gospel So the S^ack, Version, and Vatablus, render it.
Recorded in the Scriptures, which were given for our Instruction, 2 Timothy 3.16.
written by the immediate Dictates of the Spirit; preserved by the gracious
Providence of God in the Church, from the injuries of Time, Ignorance, and
Fraud, through all Ages; they have been kept with much greater care, than any
other Books, Translated into all Languages, retained both by Orthodox and
Heretics, diligently observing and watching each other, so that there could
not possibly hapen any remarkable variation or alteration in them, but that
presently the whole world would have exclaimed against it.

Man's Nature is very prone to be meddling with things beyond his Commission,
which has proved the very pest and bane of Christianity; for notwithstanding
that dreadful prohibition, Rev. 22.18,19. of adding to, or taking from his
word, is not Europe full of pernicious Additions and Subtractions in the
Worship of God, which are imposed as Magisterially as if enstampt with a Divine
Character, though in themselves no other than (as Christ himself calls them)
the Traditions of men! Matthew. 15.3. It is a superlative and desperate piece of
audacity for men to presume to mend any thing in the Worship of God; for it
supposes the All-wise Law giver capable of error, and the attempter wiser than
his Maker. And if Sovereign Princes and Worldly States be so jealous of their
Prerogatives and respective Rights, that they will (to the utmost hazard) repel
any Invader: If men be displeased to have their Laws undervalued by the private
Judgments of those who rather Interpret than obey them: Chrysostom. in Romans Hom.
2.
If the Conquest of an Enemy against the Command of his General, cost a Roman
Gentleman his life, though his own Father were the Judge: Briston, de Reg.
Pers. lib. 1.
If the killing of a Lion contrary to the Laws of the Kings Hunting (though to
rescue the King himself) cost a poor Persian his Head: If the Architect that
brought not the same (but as he judged a fitter) piece of Timber than he was
commanded, to a Roman Consul, was rewarded with a bundle of Rods. If Levit.
10.1,2.
Nadab and Abihu came to a Tragical end for their prohibited service, in
offering not the same that was commanded, but strange fire before the Lord;
what shall we say to such as mix their Inventions with the Sacred Institutions
and Prescripts of the Great unerring Sovereign? When the same person who is to
perform the Obedience, shall dare to appoint the Laws? Implying a peremptory
purpose of no further observance than may consist with the allowance of his own
Judgment? Whereas true Obedience must be grounded on the Majesty of that Power
that Commands, not on the Judgment of the Subject, or benefit of the Prescript
proposed; not so much from the Quality of the things Commanded, as from the
Authority of him that Institutes. Is not such a Practice an Invasion upon
Christ's Prerogative? Do not such men make themselves (as it were) Joint Authors
of his Ordinances? And may it not be truly said that whoever Practices any
Institution otherwise than as was appointed by the Supreme Lawgiver, does not
Honor the Ordinance, but an Idol of his own making? Mixtures are useful for
two purposes; viz. Either to slaken and abate some thing that is excessive, or
to supply something that is deficient: and so all Heterogeneous mixtures do
plainly intimate, either a Viciousness to be Corrected, or a Defect to be
Supplied. Now it is no less than Blasphemy to charge either of these upon the
Pure and Perfect Word of God, and any Glosses that take away or diminish the
force of it, or human Traditions that argue any defect, are equally dangerous
and impious. To stamp any thing of a humane Original with a Divine Character,
and father it upon God, is one of the highest and most daring Presumptions the
Pride of man can aspire unto, and is provided against by special prohibitions
and threatening, Deuteronomy. 12.32. and 18.20. Jer. 26.2. Prove. 30.6.

When that question shall be asked, Who has required this at your hands? I
doubt it will be no sufficient plea to say, That if we have erred in any
Punctilio's of Divine Truth, it was for Peace and Unions sake, etc. For, No
motions of Peace are to be made or received with the loss of Truth: Nor may the
Laws, Orders, and Prescriptions of Christ be altered, or varyed, in any tittle,
upon any pretense whatsoever, God having never given any such Prerogative to
mankind, as to be Arbitrators how he may be best and most decently Worshipped.

It is not to be questioned but all Protestants, or any sober impartial
Persons, that bear any Reverence to the Divine Majesty and his holy Word, will
readily own these General Theories, which are so self-evidencing, that if any
gainsay them, he does at the same time strike at the Majesty, Wisdom, and
Authority of GOD, the most daring and desperate Enterprise in the World.

Now this being (as it must be) granted, viz. That no part of Gods Law, or
Worship, whether we respect the Manner or Form, or the Matter and Substance
thereof, is to be altered without the express Order and Direction of GOD
Himself; It will lead us to a Sober Enquiry, Whether the Opinion here examined,
be grounded upon the Law and Word of God. To do which, for Methods sake, Chap.
1. We will state the Question. Chap. 2. We will propose some Reasons why
Unbaptised Persons may not be admitted to the Lords Supper. Chap. 3. We will
produce some Scripture-Demonstrations to evidence that such a Practice (viz. so
to admit them) is not Evangelical. Chap. 4. We will show that it is against the
Practice and Judgment of all Christians that have owned Ordinances, for above
Sixteen hundred Years. Chap. 5. We will Answer Objections.


In the prosecution of which Heads, we shall labor to sift out Truth
Impartially, propose our own Judgment heartily and plainly, without the least
Reflection upon, or Prejudice to our Christian Brethren that dissent from us in
this Point, with whom and with all that can own the Name of the Lord Jesus
according to his Gospel, we desire to live in Brotherly Love and Christian
Society, and if we find our Brethren entertain any unsound Notion with respect
to Gospel Truths, we look upon it as our duty to endeavor to inform them of
it, in a meek and sober way; and if we fail of success, then to leave them to
the Lord, who in his own due Season will uncloud those Sacred Mysteries, which
yet are hidden to a great many.

We are not willing to be Censorious, nor arrogate that wisdom to our selves,
as to think that we are wiser than others, yet in all Modesty we may be bold to
affirm, that in the point here handled, we have the Scriptures, and the
concurrence of See Chapter 4. following.
all Christians from the beginning, to this Age, on our side; whereas the
opposite Opinion can challenge but a few Favorites, and is of a very late
Original: which is not the main Reason brought here to oppose it, but only
serves for a Collateral Evidence, to illustrate the Arguments proposed from
Scripture, and to show that the eminent Professors of, and Sufferers for
Christianity have owned it, which is no slight Circumstance to sober and
considering Christians.

A Sober Discourse of Right to Church Communion: Wherein is proved, That no
Unbaptized Person may be Regularly admitted to the Lords Supper, etc.
CHAP. I. The Question Stated.
IN the Stating of this Question it may be necessary to examine how far we
disagree, and wherein we concur with our Dissenting Brethren, because that will
prevent much needless Discourse, and lead us to debate the matter in Dispute
only.

The Professors of the Christian Religion, are distinguished by certain terms,
invented by their opposites, to know them by, as Prelatical, Presbyterian,
Independent, Anabaptist, etc. And it were well if such names were laid aside,
and the Title of Christian Brother reassumed, because they agree in
Fundamentals. Now of all these, our Controversy in the Case in hand is only
with some on the last, who are (though not rightly) called Anabaptists. As for
the others, their avowed Principle is, To admit none into Church Fellowship or
Communion, that are Unbaptized: Yea so positive are the Papists, that they look
upon all so far from being qualified for Church Commnnion, till they are
Baptized, that they say they are all damned that die without it; but we derive
no Authority from their practice. the Church of England receives no Member into
their Communion without Baptism, neither do Presbyterians, Independants, nor
indeed any sort of Christians that own Ordinances, admit any as a Churchmember
without Baptism. We shall therefore direct this Discourse to our Dissenting
Brethren, of the Baptized way only, who reason thus, That there being no
Precept, President nor Example in all the Scripture, for our excluding our Holy
Brethren that differ in this Point from us, therefore we ought not to dare to
do it.

Now how unsafe, unsound, and of what pernicious Consequence, such a Position
in its direct tendency is and has been, shall appear in the Chapter of
Objections; to which at present we refer -- Only in general we say, That if by
Precept, President, or Example, is meant such, in express words, viz. such
Texts of Scripture as prohibit Practices by name and circumstance, then Popish
Purgatory, and Monkery and ten thousand other things, as Doctor Owen well says,
may be made Lawful by this Argument, there being not an express word in
Scripture that prohibits those things by their very name, because not then in
being. If it be meant what may be inferred by direct and plain consequence in
the true Logical Notion of it, without Sophistry or Quibble, I am satisfied we
can produce, Precept, President, and Example, that it is our Duty to withdraw
from disorderly Walkers. And our Dissenting Brethren grant, that the
Administration of Baptism, by Rantism or Sprinkling in Infancy is disorderly,
as being a Practice without Example or Consequent Warrant from Scripture, and
Administered to a Subject not capable, or qualified to receive it, nor in an
orderly manner. And therefore it is so much the more wonderful, that they above
any, should blame us for obeying the Solemn Command we read, 2 Thessalonians. 3.6, viz.
Now we command you, brethren, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye
withdraw your selves from every brother that walks disorderly, and not after
the Tradition which ye received of us. Which last Phrase (...), etc.
(the word [ Paradosis] signifying not only Doctrine delivered, Matthew. 15.2,3.
But also a Command, Ordinance or Institution, as before, 2 Thessalonians. 2.15.)
plainly makes out that they were not only to withdraw from persons of
disorderly Conversation, or defective in Morals, but also from such as were
corrupt in Doctrine, or disorderly in their Gospel-Administrations, that being
as great a violation of Gospel Order, and as pernicious of Christians as
Immorality, which must be granted, or else there is no Authority given to the
Church to deal with Members of corrupt Principles, etc.

Now this Command being General, includes all disorders of any kind, in
Manners, Doctrine, or Practice, and is a sufficient Warrant (were there no
more) for our Obedience, to exclude such as disorderly practice the Ordinance
of Baptism, from our immediate Communion at the Lords Table, though not from
our Love and Affection, for we hope they walk according to their Light, and the
Error being not so fundamental as to endanger their Eternal state, we esteem
them Christian Brethren and Saints, for whose further illumination we daily put
up our Prayers.

But in regard we are convinced (1.) That it is the Duty of all Belivers to be
Baptized in Water upon Confession of their Faith, etc. (2.) That none but such
ought to be Baptized. (3.) That such as Practice otherwise deviate from the
Rule of the Gospel, and the Precedents Recorded there. (4.) That such a
Deviation is in it self disorderly, and in the Consequence dangerous, as
bringing many unregenerate Members into the Church, etc. We conceive our selves
bound by the indispensable Rule of our Duty, to bear our Testimony against such
a Practice, and in the most Healing manner we can, to discharge our selves from
being countenancers, or abettors of it, which we can do no other way (unless
they will be reclaimed) then by withdrawing from those disorders; after the
Example of the Primitive Saints, of the Ancient Waldensoe, our Modern
Reformers, etc. (5.) We are satisfied that we are guilty of no Schism in that
particular, for we separate not from any Christian as such, but hold Communion
as far as we agree, and where we cannot agree, we dare not but obey the Command
before recited, though we expose our selves to worldly inconveniences by it;
The least particle of Divine Truth being more valuable than any thing the world
can present: for which our, Brethren should not blame us, but rather seriously
examine our Reasons and Arguments, and then judge.

The farther prosecution of this matter is referred to its proper Head: And
therefore we shall propose to consideration the following Inquiry, viz.

Question. Whether Perons Unbaptized may Regularly be admitted to the Communion
of the Lords Supper?

To obviate a Cavil, which may be made, the Reader may understand that under
the term [Vnbaptized] we comprehend all persons that either were never Baptized
at all, or such as have been (as they call it) Christened or Baptized (more
properly Sprinkled) in their Infancy. Now our Dissenting Brethren with whom we
have to do, look upon this way to be absolutely invalid, and so no Baptism
(else they would not be Baptized themselves) and consequently esteem all such
as Unbaptized: so that we need not prove what is granted, and shall therefore
proceed to examine the Question in the following Chapter.

CHAP. II. Reasons why Unbaptized Members may not be admitted to the Lords
Supper.
THat persons Unbaptized may regularly be admitted to the Communion of the
Lords Supper, is denied from these Reasons:

1. Because this Opinion tends to destroy the Nature, Ends, and Uses of these
Gospel Ordinances. The nature of Baptism is Spiritual, when rightly
Administered: Was it not submitted unto by the Primitive Christians? Was it not
the first Act done by them, after their Conversion? Act. 2.41,42. Whereby they
became visible Professors of the Gospel of Truth, which figured their Death,
Burial, and Resurrection with Christ. Romans 6.4. Col. 2.12. Is it not an
Institution stamped with as Divine a Character, and as Sacred a Sanction as any
in Scripture? All Nations taught, being to receive it, and being of the same
duration with Preaching, submitted to by Christ himself, before he entered upon
his Public Ministry (which is the most Illustrious Example in the World)
witnessed unto by the Renowned Worthies of all Ages.

Now that this Ordinance, being of that quality, enforced by so great
Authority, submitted to by such Examples, and serving for such gracious ends,
(as to be the Symbol of Regeneration, in which a Believer is made a Partaker of
those Divine Conveyances, those communications of Grace, and increasings of
Faith, promised by the Lord Jesus to his sincere followers,) should be put in
danger of being quite abolisht, and the practice lost by an unseasonable and
mistaken apprehension, and that by such persons as own Baptism to be as here
represented, is a matter something strange, and it is to be feared, will prove
in the consequence of ill Effect, not only to this but the succeeding
Generation, if they that Espouse it should go about to propagate this new
Principle: to prevent which, (if it may please the Divine Will to bless these
lines) was the only end of this Essay, and that purely out of the Zeal I have
to preserve (as much as in me lies) the Ordinances in their purity, as they
were delivered to us by Christ; for we all know what a vast trouble and hazard
the Reformers (and indeed many that are alive at present) had to Rescue this as
well other Truths and Ordinances, from the Ridiculous Additions of Sanguinary
Persecuting Romanists, under whose Captivity it groaned for some Ages.

To enforce what is said, I shall endeavor to show here some of the ill
consequences of this Opinion, and the small reason our Brethren have to
propagate it, though I still reserve much to the Chapter of Objections, where
their Reasons will be more largly replied to.

1. This Opinion has a direct tendency to invalidate, or indeed, quite throw
out of doors, and discontinue the use of a Foundation Ordinance, or Principle
of the Gospel of Christ, Heb. 6.2. For if Unbaptized Persons may be admitted to
all Church Privileges, does not such a practice plainly suppose that it is
unnecessary? Supra sic per plura quod sieri potest perp^ciora.
for to what purpose is it to be Baptized (may one Reason with himself) if he
may enjoy all Church Privileges without it? The Baptists (if once such a
belief prevails,) would be easily tempted to lay aside that reproached
Practice, (which Envious Men have unjustly derided and aspersed,) of being
dipped, that is Baptized, and challenge their Church Communion by virtue of their
Faith only; and such as Baptized Infants would be satisfied to discontinue the
practice, when one they are persuaded, that their Children may be Regular
Church Members without it; for if it be superfluous, discreet and thrifty
People would willingly be rid of the trouble of Christning-Feasts, (as they
call them) and all the appurtenances thereto belonging: so that in a short time
we should have neither old nor young baptized, and by consequence be in a
likely condition to lose one of the Sacraments, which would easily make way for
the loss of the other, both having an equal Sanction in Scripture; and the
Arguments that disanul the one, will destroy the other, and consequently all
Ordinances, and Modes of Worship, and lastly, Religion it self. For if a thing
expressly commanded, and practiced by Christ, be looked upon as unnecessary,
every man will conclude, that it is all one, whether he takes or leaves it, and
will, if he can choose, rather leave it, since the taking it up, is something
troublesome and of no use, (as is supposed) which begets an Opinion, That
Christ's Laws may be dispensed withal by men, and so lessens that Reverence and
Esteem which persons ought to have for Christ: and when such do once make a
Breach in those Boundaries and Limits, which they are enjoined not to pass,
they seldom stop in that extravagant Career till they run beyond all Religion
into Atheism, or pretended Enthusiasm. So that (at best) this Opinion tends to
encourage persons in the neglect or contempt of Religious Duty, or to the loss
thereof quite and clean; which is, no less, than to be, not only an Accessory,
but (in a great measure) the Cause of that sin.

2. This Opinion gives up a Cause and Truth that has been by judicious Pens
well Defended both from Scripture and Antiquity, and which these Brethren
themselves are convinced to be a Gospel Truth: for if it be once admitted that
it is not necessary to Church Communion, every Man of sense will infer, That
our contentions for it were frivolous, our Separation Schismatical, and our
Suffering the Penalties of Humane Laws, foolish: and consequently, we shall be
exposed to the Reproaches of such as are (without this advantage) ready enough
to Revile and Persecute us.

3. This Opinion perverts or rather destroys Order: and flatly contradicts the
Practice of the Primitive Christians; It is said, Act 2.41. Then they that
gladly received his Word were Baptized. Here is the right Gospel Order, First,
they that gladly received the Word; that is, they that believed, and no other,
were immediately Baptized, (that it was immediately, appears by the Adverb
then) which was the second Work, and the same day ( viz. after they believed
and were Baptized) there were added unto them, (that is, received into
Church Fellowship, by Faith and Baptism) about Three thousand Souls. ver. 42.
And they continued steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine and Fellowship (that is
in the same Faith and Communion,) and in breaking of Bread and Prayers (that is
in the enjoyment and Administration of Church Ordinances:) Is not here a famous
Instance or President of their Practice, which answers those frequent and
undecent Clamours of such, who call for Scripture to justify the Exclusion of
our holy Brethren that have not been so Baptized. 2 Thessalonians. 3.6.
Whereas in the foregoing Pages, there is a Scripture cited, That justifies
our withdrawing from disorderly walkers; and such as make this Outcry own the
practices of Infant Baptism in that particular to be such, and therefore our
Separation for that Reason (pursuant to that Express Command) lawful; which
they must grant, or deny Infant Baptism to be disorderly; or else must say,
that there be some disorderly walkers, that we may and ought to have Communion
with, notwithstanding that solemn Prohibition of it, 2 Thessalonians. 3.6.

And whereas it is said, That Baptism was never Ordained of God to be a Wall of
Division, between the holy, and the holy; the holy that are, and the holy that
are not so Baptized with Water, as we, etc. It is Answered,

1. The Phrase [Wall of Division] is ambiguous; If it be meant of a total
Exclusion of other Christians from our Love, Charity, and Christian-Communion,
as far as we agree; we do not look upon Baptism to be such a Wall of Division,
neither do we so practice it.

2. If it be meant, of an Excluding from immediate Church Fellowship, although
we meet not with this Phrase, [ viz. Wall of Division] in those very words, yet
we find what is equivalent in 2 Thessalonians. 3.6. and several other Texts: and it is
remarkable, that the Word Translated (...) ex a priv. and (...) Ordinatus.
(...). inordinatus vel ex ordine, out of Order.
disorderly, is a metaphor borrowed from the Custom of War, wherein every
Soldier has his Station assigned him, from which, when he swerves, he becomes
disorderly, which the Apostle Elegantly uses, to denote, That every Christian
is a Soldier that is Listed under the Banner of Christ, and must keep his exact
Station appointed him, without the least inclining to the right or left hand,
backward or forward, without the Word of Command. Beza upon the place tells us,
that Livius was wont to use this word of Soldiers, that kept not their Station:
And Stephanus calls those Soldiers by this Name, who are disorderly. From this
Emphasis of the word, we may gather, That if Military Commanders expect a
punctual and regular Obedience from their Soldiers; and severely punish such as
break their Array, or quit their Stations; The Lord (who is a Jealous God with
respect to his Worship, and positive Institutions) will call any, that presume
to break the Order he has prescribed, to a severe account, as has been, and
shall be further demonstrated.

3. This Assertion reaches any other Gospel-Ordinance, as well as Baptism: For
if it should be said, That the Supper was never Ordained of God to be a Wall of
Division between the Holy and the Holy, that do not so receive it as we, it
will as rationally follow with respect to this, as well as Baptism, that we
should not exclude a person that doubts it, or positively asserts it to be
needless, from our Communion, which may be likewise said of any
Church-Ordinance whatsoever; and consequently, the Rule of Communion must not
be what we find written, but the Sanctity of the Party (whether pretended or
real) that proposes himself as a Member. For I would ask those that pretend
tenderness, and for that cause admit Persons to the Lords Supper that are
Unbaptized, that if any person should desire to join to a Church, and yet
declares, he wants Light to practice the Ordinance of the Supper, but in other
things would be of their Communion, whether they would admit him upon those
terms, he wanting Light in that Ordinance of Christ wherein the Communion of
the Church does chiefly consist? If they would admit him, they open so wide a
gap, that any Ordinance upon the like pretense may be dispensed with, and two
or three, yea all, as well as one, may be Cashiered, and Church Order may be
quite turned to an Anarchy. If they would not admit a person upon the said
terms, then it is necessary to produce some Divine Law that makes the Supper
more Essential than Baptism, or else the practice can never be justified. But
that no such Authority can be shown, is undeniable; for that Divine Law that
Ordained the Supper, did also Establish Baptism. If it be said, Matt. 26.26.
Luke 22.19. 1 Cor. 11. 24. Take eat, this is my Body. This do in Remembrance
of me, etc. It is also said, Matt. 28.19. Go teach all Nations Baptizing them
in the Name of the Father, and of the Son and holy Ghost. Act. 2.38. Repent and
be Baptized every one of you for the Remission of Sins, etc. Act. 22.16. Arise
and be Baptized, and wash away thy Sins, etc.

Do the former Scriptures Institute the Supper, and Command its constant
Observation? The latter do as well Institute Baptism, and Command its constant
Observation, the very same Sanction, the same Spirit, with equal Authority
Establishes both, giving Baptism precedence in order of time, as being the
Sacrament of the Spiritual Birth, and the other of Spiritual Nourishment and
Growth; and surely there is as much need of being New Born, as being
Spiritually fed, that being of absolute necessity with respect to priority, in
order to this.

Did Christ himself Celebrate this Supper, as before? Why the same Lord Jesus
before he entered upon his Public Ministry, was Baptized, Matt. 3.16,17. And
Jesus when he was Baptized, went up straightway out of the Water: and lo the
Heavens were opened to him, and he saw the Spirit of God descending like a
Dove, and lighting upon him; saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased. Here the whole Trinity appears, the Father by a Voice, the Son in his
Body, and the Holy Ghost like a Dove: All Three make the Triumph, and Ratify
the Affair; never was any Ordinance graced with such a Presence, nor made
Authentic by a more Illustrious Example.

Does the Supper show forth the Lords Death till he come? 1 Cor- 11.26. So
Baptism is a lively symbol of the Death, Burial, and Resurrection of Christ,
Romans 6.4. Col. 2.12.

Does Examination go before the Supper? 1 Cor. 11.28. So Faith and Repentance,
the two great Gospel Graces, with Confession of sins, are necessary Antecedents
to Baptism, Act. 2.38. Act. 8.37. and all these are altogether as necessary
before the Supper.

Is it said John 6.54. Whosoever eats my flesh and drinks my blood, has
eternal life? etc. So it is said Mark 16.16. He that believes and is baptized
shall be saved, etc. 1 Pet. 3.21. The like figure whereunto, even Baptism does
also now save us, (not the putting away the filth of the flesh, but the (...).
Stipulatio.
stipulation (or answer) of a good Conscience toward God, by the Resurrection of
Jesus Christ. As the Supper is a Spiritual participation of the Body and Blood
of Christ by Faith, and so (not merely by the work done) is a means of
Salvation; so Baptism Signs and Seals our Salvation to us, which lies in
Justification and discharge of sin, etc.

By this brief Parallel we may see that Baptism is not only ordained and
ratified by the great Lawgiver, as well as the Supper, but that it is
dignified with as Spiritual Encomiums as any Gospel Ordinance can be; and if
the advantage inclines to either of them, it is evident that the New Testament
more frequently mentions the Command and Practice of Baptism than of the
Supper: for besides the Great Commission, Matthew. 28.19. Mark 16.15,16. etc. you
have frequent Precepts and Examples of it. Act. 2.38. Act. 8.38. Act. 9.18.
Act. 10.48. Act. 16.15,33. Act. 18.8. etc. Neither do we find any one Ordinance
of the New Testament so made use of by the Apostle to incite Christians to dye
to sin and live to God, as this Ordinance of Baptism, being that which is
signified thereby is called a Burial with Christ, Romans 6.4. A putting on of
Christ. Gal. 3.27. The signification of the washing away of our sins by the
blood of Christ, Act. 22.16. That having an interest in Christ, and being
buried with him, We may walk in newness of life, etc. Whereas besides the
Institution of the Lords Supper by Jesus Christ, instanced by the several
Evangelists, that Ordinance is but four times mentioned, viz. Act. 2.42. Act.
20.7. 1 Cor. 10.16. and 11.23. By all which it appears that the Ordinance of
Baptism, as it has the Precedence in point of Order, so it is more frequently
mentioned, and more earnestly inculcated, than the other, and therefore the
Obligation to preserve it, as Delivered by Christ and his Apostles, is
indispensable.

4. In regard it is granted by such as hold the opinion here argued against,
that Baptism and the Supper, etc. are positive Institutions It will unavoidably
follow, tha^ all the Force and Authority they have upon the Conscience in point
of Practice, is to be derived from the plain express Law and Word of God, which
made them Ordinances; from whence only we are to seek both a Warrant for, and
the Method and manner of Practicing them. The Direction given to Moses was, See
that thou make ALL things according to the PATTERN showed thee in the Mount,
Heb. 8.5. Exodus 25.9. to 40. And no less exact are Christians to be in the
Administration of Gospel Ordinances; since to deviate from the express Rule, is
branded with the odious Title of Will Worship, and humane Tradition.

All Sound and Orthodox Writers with one mind agree (and mere Reason teaches
it) that where a Rule and express Law is prescribed to men, that very
Prescription, is an express prohibition of the contrary: Act. 2.38. to 42.
Here we have the Order of Gospel Administration, not only Commanded, but
Practiced. First they Preached; and such as were Converted, were Baptized; such
as were Baptized, walked in Church Fellowship, etc. Breaking of Bread and
Prayers; which being so express, what necessity is there to be wise above what
is written, and to clamor for Precept or Example, to prove that Baptism is a
bar to Communion, since we read every where, (where Gospel order is set down,)
that all such as were received, were first Baptized; and not one instance in
the whole Bible, that any were received without it. Nor is it rational to think
that any were admitted to Church Fellowship any other way, unless we will say
that these positive Precepts were calculated for some only, and not for all
Christians, which is not only absurd, but against the very Letter of the
Scripture, Matthew. 28.19. Teach all Nations Baptizing them, that is every
individual that gladly receives the Word in every Nation: Take Eat, etc. Drink
ye all of it, Matthew. 26.26. etc. That is, every individual Member of the
Church. Which Interpretation must needs stand, until the Maintainers of this
new Opinion can assign to what sort of Christians these Divine Precepts are
obligatory, and to what sort they are not; a thing impossible to be made out.
Which I shall shut up in the words of Mr. Coxe, in his late Discourse of the
Covenants, page 131. In matters of Positive Right (says he) we can have no
warrant for our practice, but from a Positive Precept: for things of this kind
fall not within the compass of Common Light, or general Principles of Natural
Religion; but have their Original from a particular, distinct, and independent
Will of the Lawgiver. And therefore Inferences built upon General Notions may
soon lead us into mistakes about them; if upon such inferences we Form a Rule
to our selves of larger extent than the express words of the Institution do
warrant. Which as it is a sound and excellent Truth, quite overthrows this
practice of admitting Unbaptized persons to the Communion of the Lords Supper,
there being no positive Precept to warrant it: Quere how consistent, etc.
and therefore is queried how this their Opinion can be consistent, or
reconciled with these expressions?

To conclude: The ends and uses of Baptism being (1.) To represent to the Eye
and Understanding by a visible sign or figure what has been Preached to the Ear
and Heart. (2.) To witness Repentance, Matthew. 3.6,11. Act. 2.38. Mark 1.4. (3.)
To evidence Regeneration, called in allusion to it the washing of Regeneration,
Tit. 3.5. A being born of the Water and the Spirit, John 3.5. (4.) A Symbol of
our dying unto sin, and living again to Christian newness of life, Romans 6.4.
Col. 2.12. etc. It is therefore an Ordinance of very great significancy, and
such as go about to lay it aside, (as this Opinion in its tendency and
Consequence must needs do) deserve no thanks from the Churches of Christ, who
have experienced much of the Lords presence in its Regular and Orderly
Administration.

CHAP. III. Shows that this Practice of admitting Unbaptized Persons to the
Lords Supper, is against Scripture.
TO Demonstrate this Truth we shall add some further enforcements from that
Text beforementioned, viz. 1 Cor. 11.2. Now I praise you Brethren, that ye
remember me in all things, and keep the (...). Syriack. Mandatum, a Command.
Institutum, an Ordinance, Rivet. Praecepta mea tenetis, and keep my Precepts.
Montanus.
Ordinances as I delivered them unto you.

The Apostle having in the foregoing Chapter, verse 14. exhorted them to fly
from Idolatry, showing the great danger of mixture in the Worship of God, in
verse 22. brings them to consider the danger; Do we provoke the Lord to (...)
ad iram, vel ad aemulandi studium provoco, To provoke to wrath or jealousy.
jealousy? Are we stronger than he? And ver. 23. to prevent all mistakes
shows that in things of an indifferent Nature, there might be a lawful use of
them provided therein all occasion of offense were avoided. And elsewhere (
viz. Romans 14.) he Treats largely of the duty of Saints to bear one with
another, and not to with draw their Love and Affections from each other, where
the matter of difference lay only in such things, as in themselves had no
relation to the Worship of God.

In the beginning of this Chapter he exhorts them to be followers of him as he
was of Christ, by which he informs them that no man's Practice or Example ought
to be any further followed than they follow Christ.

In the Text he commends them for their care in keeping the Ordinances of
Christ pure, both with respect to matter and form, as appears by the Phrase [as
they were delivered unto you] from whence we may observe,

That it is Practice praise worthy for the Churches of Jesus Christ to preserve
and keep the Ordinances of Christ, as they have been delivered by Christ and
his Apostles to them. because,

1. We hereby advance the Wisdom of Jesus Christ, who has in his House ordered
all things so, to the effecting of those ends for which he has appointed them,
that there is no necessity of man's Additions, either with respect to the matter
of them, or the Order and Method in which they are disposed. Now the Church of
Christ is his House, and his Wisdom shines greatly, not only in the Food he
has provided for them, but in the way by which they receive it from him, there
being nothing that intrencheth more upon the Wisdom of God, than that (when he
has prescribed a method in his Word) men should presume to alter or change the
same; it being a much greater sin than the bare Omission of any Duty, for by
our Omissions we show only our weakness and shortness of what we should know
and do; but by Additions, we cast a blemish upon the Wisdom of Christ, as if we
were wiser to order things than he.

That which occasioned so great an astonishment in the Queen of Sheba, 1 Kings
10.4,5,8. Was the observation of the Order of Solomon's House, which made her
admire his Wisdom. And surely the Wisdom of Christ is very eminently seen in
the Order wherein the Ordinances of his House ought to be Practiced. The
Apostle, Col. 2.5. Rejoiced to behold not only the stedfastness of their Faith,
but their Order also in the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

2. Because the Ordinances of Christ are given by him to his people as a Trust,
and therefore great care and fidelity must be used to keep them as they were
delivered by him: For as in Humane Affairs, the exact conscientious and upright
management of a Trust, is a certain note of the Integrity and Honesty of the
Trustee, so the violation of it is a high breach and violation of Sincerity and
Faithfulness. Hence the Apostle so earnestly exhorts Timothy to keep that which
was committed to his trust, (...) any thing deposited, or credited to ones
faithfulness, and trust.
2 Timothy 6.20. Yea, the glorious Gospel it self, (of which this Holy Ordinance
is a part) is said to be committed to the Apostles Trust, 1 Timothy 1.11. And so it
is indeed committed to the Care and Trust of all True Churches of Christ, who
are to be accountable for it, to the Great Lord and Author of it the Lord Jesus
Christ, etc.

3. Because it preserves the Beauty of the House of God: For whatsoever is
prescribed by the Lord Jesus, with respect to his Worship, is full of Beauty,
Harmony, and Order, every thing answering its respective end, and what is
signified thereby: and as Grace shines in its luster in the orderly exercise
thereof; so do the Ordinances of Christ: For as Regeneration is the first work
of God upon the Soul, in order to the exercise of the Graces of Christ given,
so has he appointed Baptism, as that which is the first Ordinance to be
Practiced, which does more particularly, than any other Ordidinance in the
signification of it, hold out, and visibly represent our New Birth, and
therefore is called the Baptism of Repentance, Mark 1.4. Luke 3.3.

Suitable hereunto does that Learned and Eminent Divine Mr. Daniel Rogers
express himself. Treat. of the two Sacram. p. 71. Printed, 1633.
'Baptism then is the First Sacrament of the Gospel, consisting of Water, which
is Sacramentally Christ; or wherein by Water duly applied, not only the
presented party is made a Member of the visible Church; but also Sealed up to
an invisible Union with Christ, and thereby interessed in all those benefits of
his, which concern the being of Regeneration.

'By calling it the first Sacrament, I point at the Precedence and Order of
Baptism. The which all those Names of Baptism both in Scripture, and else where
do approve Its the Seed of the Church, as the other is of Food. It issued first
out of the side of our Lord Jesus upon the Cross. Its the Creating Instrument
of God to produce and form the Lord Jesus to a New Creature, and to
Regeneration in the Soul. Tit. 3.5.
Its called our Union with Christ, our Marriage Ring, our Military Press-mony,
our Matriculation, Cognizance and Character of Christ, our Implanting or
Ingrafting into him, and his Body, our Ship, our Ark, our Red Sea, our putting
on of Christ. For as all those go before our Nourishment, Communion,
Cohabitation, service, Fruit, Manna, or Food from Heaven, so this Sacrament
must go before the other. Breeding, Begetting and bringing out of the Womb,
does not more Naturally go before the feeding of the Infant by the mothers
Breasts, then this Womb of the Youth of the Church goes before the Milk
thereof; the Church being no Dry Nurse, but a Mother of her own, the Sons and
Daughters of her own Womb -- Let all who desire to taste of the Sealing power
of the second Sacrament to Nourish them as Saints: First prove the Sealing
power of the former Sacrament to beget and make you Saints. And a little after
Page 72
-- Beware -- lest the Lord be froward with them that fight against the God of
Order: lest instead of finding Nourishment before Breeding, as they Rob God of
his Order, so they meet with Wrath and Judgment, before Mercy and Salvation;
yea lest God accurse their single emptyness of Christ, with such a double
barrenness, as will admit no Conception or Birth.

' And very pathetically page 73. after he has showed that Christ has joined
Water with a kind of equal necessity with himself, Mar. 16.16. John 3.5.
subjoyns 'Shall not he who despises Water (appointed to such an unseparable
Holy end) despise the Ordainer of Water? Exodus 20.7.
shall we take his name in vain, by slighting that by which he makes himself
and the power of his Word and Spirit manifest to beget the Soul to him, and be
holden guiltless? Matthew. 19.6.
When Christ has put both in one, shall we dare to say the one is strong, the
other is base? shall we slight it, slack our haste to it, our Holy preparing of
our selves to it, our abiding at it, our offering up Prayers for blessing it,
our making it the joint Object of our Humiliation, Faith, Reverence, and
Thanks? Far be it from us, so to abhor that Popish Hyperbolical esteem of it,
and the merit of the work wrought of it; that we run into another Riot to
disesteem it? Doubtless he that cares not for Christ in the Word, Christ in the
Promise, Christ in the Minister, Christ in the Water, Christ in the Bread and
Wine, Christ Sacramental; cares as little for Christ God, Christ Flesh, Christ
Emanuel. By these he comes near. And Matthew. 10.40.
He that despises you, despises me, and him that sent me. Beware we of such
contempt, even in the secretest of our thoughts and Affections: and let Christ
in the Water be Honored as Christ, for that sweet Union and Fruit which he
brings to poor Souls thereby. If Jordan be precious when God will use it, for
the Angels Healing by it, much more this. 2 Kings 5.^. John 5.2.


' Page 81. The Lords Scope in Baptism is an inward Grace, but this general
Privilege is to all equal, viz. A badge of an outward Member: distinction from
the common Rout of the World, out of the Pale of the Church. The Lord appointed
Circumcision as a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith chiefly: yet as an
overplus he allowed it to be the Differencer of all other Nations from the
Jews. It was a Fence and Wall of Separation from them in all their Converse. So
is Baptism now a mark or badge of external Communion: whereby the Lord settles
a Right upon the Person to his Ordinances, that he may comfortably use them as
his own Privilege, and wait for the inward Prerogative of Saints by them. And
yet this (as much as men boast of it) is but a shell in respect of the other.
So far he.

Again, Baptism holds out the Souls Interest in the Death, Burial, and
Resurrection of Christ in a more special manner then any other Ordinance, it is
called the Stipulation or Answer of a good Conscience, by the Resurrection of
Jesus Christ from the Dead; 1 Pet. 3.21.
that is, when a Conscience appeased and pacified with the discharge of Sin,
can cry Abba Father with a holy security, and speak to God himself, etc. Now
this Stipulation of a good Conscience is the Effect of Baptism, and which
Baptism Seals: For what it finds ^ Seals, although it does also Exhibit more of
the same kind. A Learned Expositor Mr. Tho. Godwin.
gives his Sense of this place thus.

'The Answer of a good Conscience is here Attributed to Christ's Resurrection,
as the thing signified and represented in Baptism, and as the cause of that
Answer of a good Conscience, even Baptism (says he) does now save [us] as
being the Ordinance that Seals up Salvation, not the putting away the filth of
the Flesh, or the washing of the outward man; but the Answer of a good
Conscience toward God by the Resurrection of Christ from the Dead. (To open
this, says he) Our Conscienccs are that Principle within us, which are the
Seat of the guilt of all the Sins of the whole Man, unto whose Court they all
come to accuse us, as unto Gods Deputy, which Conscience is called Good or
Evil, as the State of the Man is. Now in Baptism, forgiveness of Sins and
Justification being Sealed up to a Believers Faith and Conscience under that
lively Representation of his Communion with Christ in his Resurrection; hence
this is made the fruit of Baptism, that the good Conscience of a Believer
Sealed up in Baptism, has wherewithal from thence to Answer all Accusations of
Sin that can or do at any time come in upon him, and is, as it is here added
(by virtue of the Resurrection of Jesus Christ,) namely in this Respect, that
his Communion with Christ in his Resurrection has been represented in his
Baptism as the Ground of his Faith, and of that Answer unto all Accusations.

By all which we may (by the way) see of what necessity Faith is required of
the Persons that are Baptized, if they will receive any benefit thereby. Also,
how Baptism being the first Ordinance to be Administered, answers to the first
Grace Received; From whence it appears, That as the Grace of Regeneration
gives a Right to the Enjoyment of Gospel Institutions; so Baptism, with respect
to Priority and Order, is the first Institution, without which, none may
regularly partake of other Church-Ordinances.

And this further may be noted as considerable, that as there is but one
Beginning of Natural Life to man; and one beginning of Spiritual of Life, which
is by Regeneration, John 3.3. Ames Medulla Theol. page 183 The Supper of the
Lord ought oftentimes to be Administered to the same Person, etc.
So Baptism is to be but once Administered; whereas, if Baptism had the same
import and signification with respect to the Privileges that are to be enjoyed
at the Second Coming of Christ as the Supper of the Lord has, there would be
the same Reason for the frequent Administration of it, as is for the Supper of
the Lord.

4. It is commendable to keep the Ordinances of Christ pure, as they were
delivered, because it prevents the creeping in of the Inventions of Men in the
Worship of God. For (as it was before Noted) Man is naturally apt to be meddling
that way, and mixing something of his own with those Sacred Institutions which
God has with greatest severity prohibited, having not spared any, no not his
own People, though what they have done therein seems not to be out of any
wicked intentions, but rather out of an Ignorant Zeal: Of which there are many
Instances in Scripture as before recited; particularly, the Memorable Cases of
Nadab and Abihu, Lev. 10.2,3. Uzzah 2 Samuel 6.6,7. and c.

Suitable hereto Mr. Buroughs very excellently expresses himself in his Book
entitled Gospel Worship, or the Right Manner of Sanctifying the Name of God,
page 8, 9, etc.

-- 'All things in Gods Worship must have a Warrant out of Gods Word, must be
Commanded; it is not enough that it is not Forbidden, and what hurt is there in
it? But it must be Commanded. -- When we come to Matters of Religion and the
Worship of God, we must either have a Command, or somewhat out of Gods Word, by
some Consequence drawn from some Command, wherein God manifests his Will;
either a Direct Command, or by comparing one thing with another, or drawing
Consequences plainly from the words, we must have a Warrant for the Worship of
God, etc. -- When any Creature is raised in a Religious way above what it has
in it by Nature, if I have not Scripture to warrant me, I am therein
Superstitious. -- We must be all Willing-Worshippers, but not Will-Worshippers,
Matthew. 15.9. Isa. 29.13.

Page 10. ' -- You see how severe God was to Nadab and Abihu, for but taking
other Fire then that which God appointed, to offer up Incense, though there
there was no direct Commandment against it, etc.

Page 11. 'In the matters of Worship God stands up little things, such things
as seem to be very small and little to us, yet God stands much upon them in the
matter of Worship. For there is nothing wherein the Prerogative of God does
more appear, then in Worship, as Princes stand much upon their Prerogatives. --
There are -- things in the Worship of God that are not written in our hearts,
that only depend upon the will of God Revealed in his Word; which were no
Duties except they were Revealed there. And these are of such a nature, as we
can see no Reason for, but only this, Because God will have them. -- Though men
would think it a little matter whether this Fire, or that Fire, and will not
this burn as well as that? ^t God stands upon it. -- When Vzzah did but touch
the Ark, when it was ready to fall, we would think it no great matter; but one
touch of the Ark cost him his life. There is not a minnim in the Worship of
God, but God stands mightily upon it. -- For a man Numb. 15.32.
to gather a few sticks (on the Sabbath) what great great matter was it? But
God stands upon it. So when the men of Bethshemesh did but look into the Ark,
it cost the Lives of fifty thousand and seventy men, etc.

He further adds, page 12. That there is no Privileges or Dignities of Man,
that can secure them from Gods stroke; Instancing Nadab and Abihu's Case, Moses
the man of God being their Uncle, and Aaron their Father, men newly consecrated
to the Priests Office, renowned men that God put much glory upon; yet if they
will venture but to offend God in this little thing, his wrath breaks out upon
them, and kills them presently, etc.

This Eminent Servant of God Adds much to the same effect in the said Book
which for Brevity is past over -- And amongst the Rest, offers several Reasons
by which he judges that Nadab and Abihu, were good men, and gives a plain
Demonstration that they had no wicked Design, as [1] They were Young men, newly
come to their Office, and might not understand all things, as if they had had
longer Experience. [2] Its observable for ver. 1. It Is called strange fire,
which he Commanded not, that if there be not a Command for our Practice, nor
such a President as the Scripture approves of, no Humane pretense can excuse
the transgressor from the Judgment of God.

Beza, In his Annotations upon the third verse. I will be sanctified, observes
that the meaning of it is, -- I will punish them that serve me otherwise then I
have Commanded, not sparing the Chief, that the People may fear and praise my
Judgments. There is also a notable Instance, 1. Sam. 6.13,15,19. Concerning the
men of Beshemesh, who being in the field reaping their Harvest, Rejoiced at its
Return, ver. 13. And therefore offered Sacrifices to the Lord, ver. 15. But
because they looked into the Ark, fifty thousand, threescore and ten men of
them (as was said) were slain. The like instance we have (as was already urged)
about Vzzah, 2 Samuel 6.6. whom God smites dead for touching the Ark, etc.

It is concluded by all Orthodox Writers, that the Rise of Antichrist was by
Degrees; first encroaching by one Invention, and then from time to time
super-adding another; which is indeed no wonder, for if a Church once swerves
from the Rule in one thing, a Foundation is thereby laid of doing so in many
things. And for this Reason the Apostle with great Earnestness charges, Tim.
6.13,14.
Timothy, and in him all Saints, thus, I give thee charge in the sight of God,
etc. That thou keep this Commandment without spot, unrebukeable, until the
Appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ. The Apostle had in this Epistle been
instructing Timothy about Church-VVorship, and things rela^ing to Prayer,
Eldership, dealing with Members, etc. And therefore concludes, I charge thee to
keep this Commandment; that is, that which he all along in the Epistle directed
and pressed with so weighty Arguments: As if he had said, It is your
indispensible Duty to be careful in this, because, as it is expressed verse. 15,
16. In his own time he shall show who is the blessed and only Potentate, etc.
Jesus Christ has given Gospel-VVorship to his Church, as King of his Church:
The Potentates of the World show their power in nothing more then in keeping
those who are employed by them to the strict Observation of the Commissions
given to them; So that if an Ambassador goes beyond his Commission, he forfeits
his Head; and therefore if any Thing be demanded, or any Particular offered in
order to a Treaty, which is not in their Commission, they usually answer, I
have no Commission to answer or meddle with this or that point. Now says the
Apostle, Keep the Commandment blameless without Spot: Jesus Christ is King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords, the only Potentate, and in his time he will show it,
and Examine by what Commission from him they have done what they have done and
Practiced, and will ask this great Question, Who has Required this at your
hands? what satisfactory answer can any man give, if such a thing be allowed?
If you ask a Rule for Baptizing Children, may not such a Person Demand where
your Rule is for Unbabtized Persons to Receive the Lords Supper? If you ask a
Rule for signing with the Cross in Baptism, he will ask where your Rule is for
Baptizing of Children, and in a word if any one thing be admitted in point of
Practice, that has not the express Warrant of Gods Word, it will make way for
others, because the same Reason or Pretense that Establishes one, may equally
be Produced for another, and another, without end; and so a Deviation from Rule
in any thing, though never so small, tends directly to bring in the Inventions
and Traditions of Men into the Worship of God.

From the whole of what has been said, we may Infer these Corollaries or
Inferences,

1. That God has Prescribed a particular way and method in which he will be
Worshipped.

2. That he is so tender and nice therein, that the least Variation from his
own Stated Order will not be allowed by him, which appears by the punishment of
such as Transgressed, and the praises given to such as kept his Ordinances as
they were Delivered unto them, mentioned at large before.

3. That to swerve from the Lords Institutions, and Invert his Order, has a
direct Tendency to Destroy all Modes of Worship, and consequently all the
public and solemn Exercise of Religion, in as much as the same Reason by which
one Ordinance may be changed, or Discontinued, will equally prove the change or
Discontinuance of any, yea of all at long Run.

And if the first Churches might not be Constituted without this Ordinance of
Baptism, neither may those that succeed them, because the same Reason that made
Baptism necessary to them, makes it also necessary to us. For Gospel Order
settled by Apostical Authority and Direction, as this was, has not lost any of
its native worth and efficacy, or obliging Virtue, by any Disuse or
Discontinuance occasioned by any, but ought to be the same to us now, as it was
to them in the beginning of such Order; especially considering the day wherein
we live, many endeavoring to bring in their own Inventions into the Worship of
God, which should make all Christians be more careful and Zealous to Cleave to
the Institutions of Jesus Christ, as they were first Delivered by the holy
Penmen, and the Practice of the Primitive Christians.

To conclude this head, as Baptism is not to be Repeated, because it is the
Sacrament of Regeneration, Initiation, and Incorporation, which are not capable
of Reiteration, so neither can the Seal and Sign thereof; so whatsoever makes
for the not Repeating it in the ordinary use of it, makes also for this as
fully or more, that it should be the first.

If it not to be repeated because it is the Sign or Seal of Initiation,
Regeneration and Incorporation, by the same Reason it must be first, as
Initiation, Admission, Incorporation, and Regeneration, are the first Internal
Acts in us, and upon us, by which we are made Christians. But of this we have
said enough before.

CHAP. IV. Showing that this Opinion that Unbaptized Persons may be Admitted to
the Lords Supper, is against the Practice of all Christians in all Ages that
have Owned Ordinances.
AS for the Practice of Gospel times, it has been evidently Demonstrated, that
the Apostles and Disciples of Christ, did Constantly Baptize such as were
Converted, and that after they were Taught, the next thing was to Baptize them,
neither durst they break that order, the Scripture Rule being, Teach all
Nations, and Baptize them; Matthew. 28.19. Make Disciples, and Baptize. Mark.
16.16. He that beleiveth and is Baptized, shall be Saved -- You see here the
rank of Baptism immediately; After Teaching, after Beleiving, It holds the
first place of Ordinances properly Christian: Ye may see it again, in the Rule
in Peter's Preaching, Acts 2.38.
Repent and be Baptized, which was instantly put in Practice, which is a second
head of Proof -- namely Scripture Example, for they that gladly Received his
Word were presently Baptized, to the Number of 3000. ver. 41. after which they
continued constantly -- in Christian Fellowship; and in the Practice of
Ordinances, as the Lords Supper, Prayer, etc. ver. 42. In the Example of the
Eunuch you have the same, as soon as ever Jesus was Preached, and he Discovered
water, what hinders me, says he, to be Baptized? Nothing, says Philip, if
thou have Faith, so he was instantly Baptized Acts 8.38. and 10.48.
-- The like ye have of Cornelius, who upon the first Preaching of Christ,
before the Assembly was Baptized he and his.

The like you have of the Jailer Act. 16. To whom at Midnight (being astonished
by a Miraculous Action) the word was Preached, and to all in his house, and he
and all his Beleiving, were forthwith all of them Baptized. Here was no loss of
time, and for the Order, it was after Faith, and before any other
Administration -- There may be other Instances given, but from these and the
foregoing Pages, this Conclusion necessarily follows, That Baptism in point of
order and time, is the very next Ordinance to Beleiving. Not but that there
ought to be fit time allowed for the Trial of Faith, wherein to be sure the
Apostles were not Negligent, as being an absolute Duty.

As it is certain that in the History of the Gospel or whatsoever Relation we
have in the new Testament, as to matter of Fact or Precepts, in matter of
Right, Relating to the Order and Administration of Baptism, do clearly hold
forth the Order to be after Faith, and the subject Baptized by immediate and
necessary Consequence, an Actual Beleiver; So on the other hand it is evident,
that there is not the least Tittle either in express Terms, or Rational and
plain Inference, in the whole new Testament, to Countenance the Opinion we
oppose. 1. There is no Precept directly or Consequentially Commanding Us to
Receive any Member without, 2. Nor one Instance to be produced, that ever it
was done. 3. It is evident, that the Abettors or Promoters of such a Practice
now, do in so much invert Gods Order, and lay a dangerous Foundation for the
Abolition of this great and sacred Institution of our Christian Baptism.

As for the Ages next the Apostles, for near 300 Years, we have Examined the
Records of those times, and find that the Ordinance of Baptism was Retained by
the Churches in the same Order and Mode of Administration as is Recorded in the
New Testament viz first they Taught and Preached the Gospel, then they Baptized
all such as were so Taught, and so immediately Received them into the Communion
of the Church.

As to the Practice of the second Century we have a memorable Instance In
Justin Martyrs second Apology to Autoninus Pius the Roman Emperor, as Mr.
Baxter Renders it in his Saints Rest, Chap. 8. Sect 5. viz.

'I will declare unto you how we offer up our selves to God after that we are
Renewed through Christ, those amongst us that are Instructed in the Faith and
Believe that which we teach is true being willing to live according to the
same, we do admonish to Fast and Pray for the Forgiveness of Sins, and we also
Fast and Pray with them and when they are brought by us unto the water and
there as we were NEW BORN (that is Baptized) are they also by New Birth (viz
Baptism) Renewed; and then calling upon God the Father, and the Lord Jesus
Christ, and the holy Spirit they are washed (that is Baptized) in water. Then
we bring the person thus washed and Instructed to the Brethren (as they are
called,) where the Assemblies are, that we may pray both for our selves, and
the new Illuminated, that we may be found by true Doctrine and by good Works
worthy observers and keepers of the Commandments, and that we may attain
Eternal Life and Salvation. Then Bread and Wine being brought to the Chief
Brother (so they call the Chief Minister) he takes it and offers praise and
Thanksgiving to the Father, by the Name of the Son and Holy Spirit, and so a
while he Celebrateth Thanksgiving. After Prayer and Thanksgiving, the whole
Assembly says, Amen.

'Thanksgiving being ended by the President (or Chief Guide) and the Consent of
the whole People the Deacons, as we Call them, do give unto every one Present
part of the Bread and Wine, over which Thanks was given, and they also suffer
them to bring it to the absent.

'This Food we call the Eucharist, to which NO MAN is admitted, but only he
that Believes in the Truth of the Doctrine, being washed in the Laver of
Regeneration for Remission of Sins, and that so lives as Christ has Taught.

'So far this Learned Father and Martyr gives a positive account of matter of
Fact in his time, from whom we may plainly be informed that no Unbaptized
Person was then admitted to the Lords Supper.

'Dr. Cave in his Primitive Christianity page 296. part, 1. Chap. 10. 3.
Edition Printed 1676. Says thus, Our Lord having Instituted Baptism and the
Lords Supper as the two great Sacraments of the Christian Law, they have
accordingly been ever acccounted principal parts of public Worship in the
Christian Church; -- Baptism is the Door, by which Persons Enter in, and the
great and Solemn Rite of our Initiation into the Faith of Christ, etc.

'The Persons by whom this Sacrament was Administered, were the Ministers of the
Gospel, the Stewards of the Mysteries of Christ, Baptizing and Preaching the
Gospel, being Joined together by our Savior in the same Commission etc.

'Nor was it accounted enough by some in these times that Baptism was conferred
by a Person called to the Ministry, unless he was also Orthodox in the Faith --
Hence sprang that famous controversy between Cyprian and Stephen Bishop of
Rome, Concerning the Rebaptizing those that had been Baptized by Heretics,
Cyprian asserting that they ought to be Rebaptized, etc. calling a Council at
Carthage of 87. Affrican Bishops, who all concluded for his Opinion -- For they
looked upon that Baptism that had been conferred by Heretics, as null and
invalid, (seeing Heretics being out of the Church, could not give what they had
not) and therefore when they Returned to the Union of the Church, they could
not properly be said to be Rebaptized, seeing they did but Receive what
(lawfully) they had not before etc.

'Then page 305. After he had Discoursed of Infant Baptism, adds that those who
made up the main Body of the Baptized in those days were Adult Persons, who
flocking over daily to the Faith of Christ, were Received in at this Door.
Usually they were for some considerable time Catechi'sd and Trained up in the
Principle of the Christian Faith, till having given Testimony of their
Proficiency in knowledge -- and of a sober and Regular Conversation, they then
bebecame Candidates for Baptism, and were accordingly taken in etc.

'Page 308. Persons finding themselves at any time surprised with a dangerous
or mortal sickness and not daring to pass into another World without this Badge
of their Initiation into Christ, they presently signified their earnest desire
to be Baptized, which was done accordingly as well as the Circumstances of a
sick Bed would permit. These were called Clinici of (whom there is frequent
mention in the Ancient Writers of the Church) because (...).
Baptized as they lay along in their Beds. This was accounted a less Solemn and
perfect kind of Baptism, partly because 'twas not done by Immersion, but by
Sprinkling etc.

'Page. 333. The Persons Communicating at this Sacrament ( viz. the Lords
Supper) were at first the whole Church or Body of Christians within such a
space, that had Embraced the Doctrine of the Gospel, and been Baptized into the
Faith of Christ, used constantly to meet together at the Lords Table. As
Christians Multiplied, and a more exact Discipline became necessary NONE were
admitted to this Ordinance, till they had arrived at the Degree of the
faithful, for who ever were in the State of the Catechumens under Instruction
in order to their Baptism, or by Reason of any Heinous Crime under the Censures
and suspension of the Church, and not yet passed through the several Stages of
the Penitents, might not Commumunicate, and were therefore commanded to Depart
the Church, when the rest went to the Celebration of the Sacrament.

So far this Learned enquirer into, and writer of Primitive Christianity, from
whom we may positively infer that no Unbaptized person was by the Ancients
admitted to the Communion of the Lords Supper.

It is true that about the third Century, from a fatal mistake of John 3.5.
Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the
Kingdom of God. God.

Some began to bring in Infant Baptism, conceiving (as Cyprian and his
Disciples taught them) that no person, small or great could be saved without
it, and that it blotted out all sins committed before its Administration. Hence
Nazianzen exhorts against Infant Baptism, unless in case of apparent danger of
Death. When this dismal Error once took place, how many mischiefs did follow
it, as

1. The Subjects of Baptism were changed from actual Believers to ignorant
Babes, and the Church altered in its Primitive Constitution, viz. from persons
professing the Faith, to a mixture of both Converted and Unconverted ones.

2. It being conceived that the old manner of Administration by Dipping, might
be dangerous to Young Infants, and to the people that Superstitiously delayed
their Baptism until their Death Bed (because they believed it would take away
all sin) therefore they contrived Sprinkling to serve the turn for the Infant,
as well as those sick people, which were called Clinici, from the Beds or
Hamocks they lay in; upon which Mr. Rogers writes thus: 'He betrays the Church
to a disordered error, if he cleave not to the Institution, to Dip the Infant
in Water, and this I so averr as thinking it ( viz. Dipping) exceeding material
to the Ordinance. and no slight thing, yea which both Antiquity, constantly and
without exception of Countries Hot or Cold, witnesses unto, and especially the
constant word of the Holy Ghost, first and last approves, as Causabon in
Matthew. 3.11. has noted, etc. Treat. of Sacram. p. 77. which misadministration
came in time to be decreed by Counsels, and imposed by fierce and severe
Anathema's, which is all the Authority that can be produced (and which is
indeed nothing at all to us that ought to have Divine Warrant for Practical
Duties.)

Now as the Consequences of this error have been so fatal to the Church of
Christ, and as the prevalency of it was gradual, so Yet so forceable was Truth
that they kept the Order tho they mist the Subject.
it ought to be a very serious warning to us, to oppose all the beginings of
error, that is to contend earnestly for the Faith once delivered to the Saints,
because when error is once admitted, it comes with a fair and specious Mask of
Vizard on, to disguise its deformity, till it spreads like a Gangrene, and
infects the whole.

So this Opinion comes disguised with the plausible Allegation of Charity and
Brotherly love, etc.

But was not the same pretense mainly made use of for the introducing Infant
Baptism, viz. Charity to the Childrens Souls, whom they judged in a state of
Damnation without it, and certainly of the two, the introducers of
Paedo-Baptism are more excusable than the bringers in of this Opinion, because,
although they mist the Right Subject of Baptism, and attributed too much to it,
yet they kept up a Practice of that name in its due Rank and Order in the
Church, whereas these, on the other hand dispense with the total neglect of
Baptism, since Baptism in Infancy is by them held for no Baptism for
unanswerable Reasons, as for instance. In Baptism the Covenant struck between
God and us implies, especially the consent of parties, but by Infant Baptism
the Infant is not bound, for he consented not. Again, consent must be expressed,
but the Child wants the just ripeness and formation of Organs inward and
outward for such expressions, and so cannot will it, because he cannot
understand it, nor can he express that which within him he has not: Nor can he
depute others to consent for him, nor is there any Authority for such a
Deputation given by God, nor any Instance in the Sacred Records that it was
ever Practiced. Nor can such as undertake it, perform what they promise for the
Child, viz. Faith and Repentance, being the two great Graces of the Gospel, and
the sole Gift of God. Besides Christ looks for a Believer, which no Infant can
at present be said to be, the want of which, makes the Baptism null, for if
there be no Bond, no Covenant, no Obligation in it (as it is plain there is not,
and they confess it) than there is no Sealing, for a Seal serves but to Ratify
and Confirm a Bond and Covenant, and as there is no Sealing, so there is no
exhibition or conveyance of any thing from Christ, for there are no Pipes to
receive it, that is, as an Ordinance, there is no Reason in the use of it, no
Faith, no Sense, no Receptive Faculty proportionable to the Ordinance in the
manner of Conveying it etc. So that the Conclusion is, that Infant Baptism is
as much a nullity as the Marrying or Ordination of Infants, and being really so
by the grant of the Favorers of this Opinion: it will unavoidably follow that
their admitting persons, upon pretense of that Baptism to the Lords Supper, is
neither more nor less, than an admission without Baptism, and a plain
Declaration that they esteem this Ordinance to be unnecessary, and consequently
a direct throwing it out of the Church as was said before, so that
Paedo-Baptism is but a perverting or an abuse of the Ordinance of Baptism, but
this Opinion quite abolishes it, which is the necessary effect and Consequence
of their declaring it to be needless in order to admission into a Church, etc.

But to Return we can have no better Instances of the practice of Antiquity,
then what we find Recorded of the Cathecumeni, who were excluded not only from
the Eucharist, but from the very Sight thereof; and therefore after the Words
Holy things to Saints, they went out, not because they were without Faith, for
there were two sorts, viz. (...).
Sancta Sanctis.
Audientes, and competentes, or Electi.
Hearers, and such as were competent or Elect; the first were Beginners which
heard Sermons, and had a desire to Christ; the other were such as desired
Baptism, and had given up their Names for it, as Lib. de cura pro mortuis. c.
12.
Austin and others mention.

Now these were supposed to have Faith, and waited only a fit time for the
Administration of Baptism, during which time they were not at all admitted to
the Lords Supper, though judged Believers, but as soon as Baptized, they were
admitted to the Lords Supper on the same day also.

To Illustrate this point further we will give a Brief Abstract of some things
Recorded in that Excellent History compiled by the Divines of Magdeburg. Cent.
4. cap. 6. p 233. and ^ Printed (...) Basil. (...)

BAsilius non alios quam Cathecumenos Baptizatos esse scribit qui in Paschate
convocabantur, Exhort. ad Baptismum.

Baptisandi autem in Asiaticis Ecclesiis, prius aliquandiu in Doctrina Pietatis
erudiebantur, and Cathecumeni dicebantur: quemadmodum ex Basilio Paulo ante
Retulimus. ' Resurrectionis (inquit) gratiam in die Resurrectionis excipiamus.
Quamobrem Eccleisia suos procul alta voce convocet Alumnos: ut quos pravum
peperit, tunc demum lacte sanae eruditionis sideCathecumenos Enutritos cibi
firmioris degust^tione Institutoque perfecto corroboret. Et ibidem rursus, '
sciendum est Inquit, quod primum docere and instru^e oportet; atque ita Deum
preclarissimo baptismate rite Instruct Dignari.

Narrat Idem Athanasius de Judaeis, ' quod ad Episcopt ejus urbis Genua ad
voluti, Baptisma Petierunt: quos ipse cum Clericis suis suspitiens, perdies
plurimos in Doctrina Christianae Pietatis crudierit; Et Catechumenos inde
factos, post tridui Jejunium Baptizarit.

Basil Writes, That there were no others but Catechumens. (...) Baptized who
were called together at Easter.

Such as were to be Baptized in the Churches of Asia were first for some time
instructed in the Doctrine of Piety, and were called Catechumens: as we have
before recited it from Basil. Let us receive (says he) the grace of
Resurrection in the day of Resurrection. For that Reason the Church with a loud
Voice calls together from afar, those she brings up, that such as were brought
forth naught, may at length by the Milk of sound Doctrine being Catechumens
nourished by Faith, be strengthened by the taste of more more solid food; and
perfect Institution. And there again, we must know (says he) that it is
necessary, first to teach and instruct, and afterward dignifie (or vouchsafe
to) him that is so rightly Instructed, with the most excellent Baptism.

Athanasius declares, the same thing of the Jews, that they cast themselves at
the feet of the Bishop of that City ( v. where they lived) and desired
Baptism, whom when he and his Clergy beheld, he instructed them for many days
in the Doctrine of Christian Piety and being thereby made Catechumens after
three days Fast he Baptized them.

This practice of Catechizing, and then Baptizing, and afterward receiving
into Church Fellowship was so Universal among all the Christians of those
times, as appears by those few Instances, and many more cited from Athanatius,
Nazianzen, Optatus Milevitanus, Epiphanius, Hilarious, Ambrose, Jerome, Sozomen
and others, that we find no Opposition at all to it; all Candidates for
Christianity being that way only admitted; the necessity of it being reputed so
great, that it became the very inlet of Poedo-baptism. So that the Conclusion
is undoubted that we have got above Four hundred Years of Primitive Antiquity,
to Witness our practice.

And in the Fifth Century Augustine gives the Sense of that Age thus. Trans^ant
per Mare Rubrum, i.e. baptizentu^, and manducent Manna, id est, Corpus, and
Sanguinem Domini. Tract. 11. in Joh.
'Let them (that is the Cathecumens) past through the Red Sea, that is, be
baptized, and let them eat Manna, that is the Body and Blood of the Lord.

And in the Seventh Century, Isidorus de Officiis makes Three Degrees. The
First is, 'Of the Cathecumens, who were such as were first come from Gentilism,
and had a mind to believe in Christ. The Second of Competents, who desire
Baptism, when they were instructed in the Doctrine of Christ. And the Third, of
the Baptized, who were then Church Members.

Haymo says, in Century Nine, In cap. 1. ad Ephesians. Catechumeni sunt fideles
quia credunt in verum Deum; sed quia nondum baptizati, non sunt Sancti.
'That the Catechumes are the Faithful, because they Believe in the true God;
but because they are not Baptized, they are not Holy.

But what needs any more of these Quotations, when all that know any thing of
the practice of Antiquity must confess, That this Opinion we oppose, was never
in the World for Sixteen hundred years and more. For though an Antichristian
Darkness overspread the greatest part of Christendom for a long time, and
Infant Baptism almost crowded that true and Apostolical practice of Believers
Baptism out of the Church; though Lodovicus Vives says, 'That the custom of
Baptizing Adult Persons was yearly practiced in Rome it self, even in his time.
Yet he very Papists all along (as they do at this time) retained this as the
initiating Ordinance; All their Writings Canons, Decrees, etc. cry up Baptism,
to be not only necessary to Church Communion, but even to Salvation.

Yea all the Reformers, whether Lutherans, Calvinists or other Foreigners, The
Church of England, and all the Dissenting Congregations that own Ordinances
(exa few Persons of the Baptized way and that lately too) have owned, and do
own, That Baptism is an Ordinance of Christ; yea, the very first, or initiating
Ordinance into Church Fellowship, without which, no man may be regularly
admitted to the Supper.

So that this Opinion is not only against us, but contradictory to the Judgment
and Practice of all other Christians, Ancient and Modern. Batism was of old,
and not without Reason, called The Gate of Sacraments, Janua Sacramentorum.
and is to keep that Name and Nature still, viz. to be the first and Primitive
Ordinance. If the timing and order of Instituted Worship be any thing, as it is
of great moment, a great part of it lying in nothing else, but the right and
orderly Administration of Ceremonies, and if the Scripture Rule and Example be
any thing, (which is all we have to show for any Practice,) than Baptism is to
be the first Ordinance after Believing.

If the Testimony of Ancient* Records, and Modern Writers of all sorts,
unanimously makes out that there has not been any other Practice in Fact among
Christians all along, than what we here demonstrate, though that is not brought
by it self to prove the same, it is certainly a very fair Collateral
in^orcement and illustration: For there is no point of Religion debated in the
World, that has a more clear and Universal concurrence of sixteen hundread
years complete, than, that no persons were received to the Communion of the
Lords Supper or Church Fellowship, unless they were first Baptized. Yea such a
value had Antiquity for this Ordinance, that such as were Baptized by
Heretics, as the Arians and others, that used not the name of Christ, or
(otherwise) defectively performed it, were judged by the most Learned men of
their times to be Unbaptized, and therefore were Baptized again by such as were
Orthodox, when they left their Heresies, which is so well known that it needs
no instances,

To conclude this Chapter, we shall give a few instances of some Modern Writers
besides what are given before, not so much deriving Authority from them,
(though they deserve all due respect) but because of the solidity and force of
their Reasonings.

A very noted and Learned Author now living, writes thus, (1.) 'If we have
neither Precept nor Example in Scripture since Christ Ordained Baptism, of any
other way of Admitting Visible Members, but only by Baptism, than all that must
be admitted Visible Members; must be ordinarily Baptized: But since Baptism was
Instituted (or Established we have no Precept or Example of admitting Visible
Members any other way (but John 4.1. Act. 2.38,41. and 8.12,13,16,36,38. and
9.18. and 10.47,48. and 16.15,33. and 18.8. and 19.3,4,5. Romans 6.3. etc.
constant Precept and Example of admitting this way:) therefore all that must
be admitted Visible Members, must be Baptized.

'I know not what in any show of Reason can be said to this by those that
renounce not Scripture. For what man dare go in a way which has neither
Precept nor Example to warrant it, from a Way that has a full Current of both?
yet they that will admit Members into the Visible Church without Baptism, do
so.

2. 'Either Members must be Baptized at their Admission or else after they are
stated in the Church, or else never. But the two later are false: therefore it
must be the former way, viz. at their admission.

(1.) 'That they should never be Baptized, none will affirm but the Seekers,
and they that are above Ordinances (that is, above obedience to God, and so
Gods.)

(2.) 'If they say they must be Baptized after they are stated in the Church
(and that many years as they would have it) I answer (1.) Show any Scripture
for that if you can. (2.) It is contrary to all Scripture Example, Act. 2. The
three thousand were presently Baptized, and the Jailer at the same hour of the
night, and so of all the rest. And if you could show any that did delay it,
(since Christ's Command, Matthew. 28.20.) It would appear to have been sinful, as
through Ignorance or Negligence; so that then it must needs be done at their
first Admittance according to the constant course of Scripture.

3. 'It is evident also from the very Nature and end of Baptism, which is to be
Christ's Listing and Engaging Sign; and therefore must be applied when we enter
his Army.

4. 'If we were (Jews and Gentiles, etc.) Baptized into one Body, then we are
not to delay it till we are stated in the Body: But we are all Baptized into
one Body, 1 Cor. 12 13. therefore, etc. For if it be the use of Baptism to
ingraft and enter us into the Body or Church (and into Christ, as Romans 6.3.)
than sure it must be used as our ingrafting and entrance. Shall a Soldier be
Listed two or three years after he has been in the Army, or at the first
entrance, whether?

(5.) 'If all Church Members are Christ's Disciples, and all Disciples must be
Baptized (at their Admission) then all Church Members must be Baptized at their
Admission: but all Church Members are Disciples, and all Disciples must be
Baptized at their Admission, therefore all Church Members must be Baptized at
their Admission.

1. 'That Disciples must be Baptized at their Admission is plain, Matthew.
28.19,20. Disciple all Nations Baptising them, and by constant Example (2.)
That all Church Members are Disciples I prove thus, (1.) If it be the Church
which is Christ's School, than all the Members of the Church are his Scholars or
Disciples, or Members of his School: but it is only the Church which is called
Christ's School; therefore all Church Members are School-Members or Disciples,
(2.) And thus if all Church Members are Christians, and all Christians are
Christ's Disciples, then all Church Members are Christ's Disciples: but all
Church Members are Christians, and all Christians are Christ's Disciples:
therefore all Church Members are Christ's Disciples, (1.) That all
Church Members (true ones) are Christians, that is retainers to Christ, or such
as belong to Christ (as his own Phrase is) is beyond doubt, (2.) That all
Christians are Disciples I proved before, it being the plain words of the Holy
Ghost, Act. 11.26. The Disciples were called Christians first at Antioch; so
that all Church Members being Disciples, they must regularly be Baptized at
their Admission, according to the course of Scripture, and my Text, Matthew.
28.19,20.

(6) 'Another Argument may be plainly fetched from Ephesians. 5.26. That he might
Sanctify it, and cleanse it (his Church) by the washing of Water through the
Word; If the whole Church must be Sanctified by the washing of Water then all
particular Members of the Church must be so Sanctified! but the whole Church
must be so Sanctified: therefore the Individual Members.

'He further writes thus, From Matt. 28.19. Go and Disciple me all Nations
Baptizing them, etc. What Christ has conjoined, man must not separate: Cut
Christ has conjoined Discipling and Captizing, as a standing course to the end
of the World. (as the next verse speaks;) therefore we must not separate them.
Though the Word [for ever] do sometimes signify a limited time in the Old
Testament, viz. till the New World under Christ; yet in the Gospel [till the
end of the World can have no other then the proper Signification without plain
Impudent Violence.

(2) 'Argument 2. from 1. Cor. 12,13. By one Spirit we are all Baptized into
one Body. If Baptism be Gods appointed ordinary way of ingrafting all into the
Body of Christ, then it is a standing Ordinance, as being of a standing use:
but Baptism is so, therefore, etc. the Antecedent will appear plain in the
Text, if you consider, First, that it is real Baptism that is here mentioned;
the Spirit being spoken of as a concurrent cause; Secondly, That it was All
that were thus baptized into the body.

(3) 'From Romans 6.3. If the use of Baptism be to baptize Men into Jesus Christ,
and into his Death, then it is a standing Ordinance to the Church, as being of
a standing use: but the former is in the Text, therefore, etc.

4. 'From Act. 2.38. and 22.16. If Baptism be Instituted for the Remission of
sin, or the Washing away of sin (whether by signifying Sealing or exhibiting)
then it is a standing Ordinance to the Church; (as being to a standing Use and
End, one Age of the Church having no less need of it then another.) But the
Antecedent is in the Text; therefore, etc.

5. 'If the End of Baptism be our Burial and Resurrection with Christ, Col.
2.12. The Churches Salvation, 1 Pet. 3,21. If a Foundation Principle, Heb. 6.2.
The Ordinary way of Initiatior putting on Christ, Gal. 3.27. Then it is of
continual use, and so a standing Ordinance: but it is so, as the Texts cited
expressly say; therefore, etc.

6. 'If Christ himself has Instituted the Ordinance of Baptism in the Word, and
not again Repealed it; then it is a standing Ordinance to the Church; (and no
man must dare to Repeal his Laws) but Christ has Instituted; and let any man
show where he has Repealed it that can; and till then it must be acknowledged
to be still in force.

The Learned and Reverend Dr. Ames in his Marrow of Divinity page 181. says,
'Baptism is the Sacrament of Initiation or Regeneration, representing and
confirming our very ingrafting into Christ, Romans 6.3,5. 1 Cor. 12.13. and p.
182. Baptism is but once to be Administered, because there is but one beginning
of Spiritual Life by Regeneration, as there is but one beginning of Natural Life
by Generation.

Paul Bayne, that Holy Learned man, on Col. 2.11. page 280. says, 'God does
unite us with Christ even by our Baptism, that is, says he, the Believer
Baptized, is by Baptism manifested so before the Church.

Elton on the same place p. 291. 'Baptism is the Sacrament of incision or
ingrafting into Christ, Sealing up our setting into Christ, which is only once,
never after to be done again; for if it did not, then we should have another
ingrafting into Christ, and afterward Nourished in him, therefore we often
receive the Ordinance of the Lords Supper.

Dr. Owen in his Discourse of the Spirit, page 50. where he proving the Divine
Nature, and Personality of the Holy Spirit, thus writes, viz.

Sect. 11. 'All things necessary to this purpose are comprised in the solemn
Form of our initiation into Covenant with God, Matthew. 28.19, Our Lord Jesus
Christ Commands his Apostles to Disciple all Nations, Baptizing them in the
Name of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost: this is the Foundation we
lay of all our Obedience and Profession, which are to be regulated by this
Initial Engagement.

Sect. 14. page 51. Tells us, 'we are Sacredly Initiated or Consecrated, or
Dedicated unto the Service and Worship of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, this
we took upon us in our Baptism, herein lies the Foundation of our Faith and
Profession with that Engagement of our selves unto God, which Constitutes our
Christianity. This is the Pledge of our entering into Covenant with God, and our
giving up our selves unto him in the Solemn Bond of Religion.

Mr. Strong in his Discourse of the Covenants, page 226. Says, 'Baptism is a
Sacrament of Initiation and the Ordinance of visible Admission into the Church;
and that must not be done promiscuously, and without discrimination; for as it
is a sin to keep out those whose Right it is, so its a sin also to admit them
that have no Right, because thereby the Ordinances of Christ are abused and
misplaced, where he never intended them, and for whom he never Instituted them.

And page 306. 'We are said to be Baptized into the Name of them all ( viz.
Father, Son and Spirit) Matthew. 28.20. Baptising them in the name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: Now what is it to be Baptized into the
Name of the Father; its conceived to be taken from the manner of Marriage,
wherein the Wife does Transire in Nomen, in familiam, etc. into the Name and
Family of the Husband: or of Servants, who had their Masters name called upon
them: and therefore no man might be Baptized in the name of a Creature, it is
that which Paul detests, that he should Baptize in his own name; and therefore
the meaning is, to be Baptized in Fidem, in Cultum, into the Faith and Worship
of God, and so you are unto them all, and give up your names unto them all; and
therefore unto each person we owe both Faith and Worship distinctly, all manner
of Duty and Obedience, because we are distinctly Baptized into the Faith of
them all, etc.

Dr. Manton in his Excellent Sermons, on Psalm. 119. ver. 8- p. 45, In the
prosecution of his Doctrine, viz. 'That it is a great advantage to come to a
Resolution in a course of Godliness, says that it is a course God will bless,
he has appointed Ordinances to this end and purpose that we might come to this
Resolution. The Promise is first implicitly made in Baptism, therefore it is
called, 1 Pet. 3.21. the answer of a good Conscience toward God. How so? Why
the Covenant binds mutually on Gods part and on ours; and so do the Seals which
belong to the Covenant. It does not only Seal Pardon and Sanctification on Gods
part, but there is a promise and answer on our part: an answer to what? To the
demands of the Covenant. In the Covenant of Grace, God says I will be your
God, (Baptism Seals that) and we promise to be his People. Now our Answer to
this Demand of God, and to this Interrogatory he puts to us in the Covenant, it
is Sealed by us in Baptism; and it is Renewed in the Lords Supper, etc.

Mr. Buroughs, on Hos. 8.12. Gives us this observation, 'That whatever is
urged to us or Practiced by us in matter of Worship must have warrant out of
the written Word of God (it was sin) and why? Because I have written to them
(says he) the great things of my Law, and they counted it a strange thing
though that which they did had a great deal of seeming Devotion in it, yet it
was otherwise than that which was written in the Law.

'This Question should be put to any that tender to us any way of Worship or
Doctrine of Religion under any specious show whatsoever, where is it written?
Isa. 8.20. If they speak not according to the word, it is because they have no
light in them. Oh they seem to be very judicious and wise, But if they speak
not according to the word, its because there is no light in them, to the
written Law and Testimony, that must be the standard at which all Doctrine and
ways of Worship must be tried, many may put fair colors upon the Way, that it
is for Common Peace, and a great deal of Good may be done by it, and the like.
But is it written? Did I ever command it says God? Policy may say it is fit;
Reason may say it is comely; and Experience may say it is useful: but what does
the written Word say it should be? Nay it is not enough to say that we cannot
say it is forbidden; but where is it written in matters of Worship? This is a
certain Rule, says Tertullian. If it be said it is Lawful, because the
Scripture does not forbid it, it may equally be retorted; it is therefore not
lawful, because the Scripture does not Command it.

And further that Reverend Author, p, 86. Notes from Exodus 39. at least ten
times in that Chapter, ' They did according to what the Lord commanded Moses,
and in verse 43. Moses blessed the people. The people are blessed when in the
matters of Worship they keep unto what is Commanded.

This was the Judgment of that Famous Servant of God, although no man in his
time (as those that knew him in his life can testify) was of a more tender and
bearing spirit to heal Differences then he; yet how Zealous and Careful was he
to advise and inculcate into the minds of Christians, that they should exactly
keep to the written Word in matters of Gods Instituted Worship.

By what is said (Christian Reader) it evidently appears what a value all
Christians in all Ages, yea at this day have had for this great Ordinance of
Baptism, and how Universally Concurrent their Testimonies are, that it is not
only the Sacrament of Initiation, but also to be continued in the Church unto
the end of the World. And because it would swell this small piece beyond its
intended Bulk to use so great a Cloud of Witnesses, we shall add a few General
and Comprehending Testimonies.

1. In the Articles of Religion Published by His Majesty's special Command
1642. Baptism is thus Defined. 'Baptism is not only a Sign of Profession, and
Mark of difference, whereby Christian men are discerned from others that be not
Christened: but it is also a sign of Regeneration or New Birth, whereby as by an
Instrument, they that receive Baptism rightly are Grafted into the Church, the
promises of the forgiveness of sin; and of our Adoption to be the Sons of God
by the Holy Ghost, and visibly Signed and Sealed: Faith is confirmed, and Grace
increased by virtue of Prayer unto God, etc. This is the Judgmen of the Church
of England.

'The Assembly of Divines in their Confession of Faith Printed One thousand six
hundred fifty eight, page 94. Define Baptism a Sacrament of the New Testament
Ordained by Jesus Christ ( Matt. 28.19.) not only for the solemn admission of
the Party baptized into the Visible Church, (1 Cor. 12,13.) But also to be unto
him a Sign and Seal of the Covenant of Grace. (Col. 2.12.) Of his Ingrafting
into Christ. Gall. 3.17.) Of Regeneration. (Tit. 3.5.) Of Remission of Sins.
(Mark 1.4.) And of his giving up unto God through Jesus Christ, to walk in
Newness of Life. (Romans 6.3,4.) Which Sacrament is by Christ's own Appointment to
continue in his Church until the end of the World, Matt. 28.19,20. This is the
Judgment of the Presbyterians; suitable to which they Express themselves in
their Larger Catechism, page 128. and in the Shorter Catechism, page 157.

'The Congregational, (commonly called Independent) Churches, in their
Confession of Faith at the Savoy, where were many of their Elders, Oct. 1658.
Printed 1659. Thus say of Baptism. Baptism is a Sacrament of the New Testament
Ordained by Jesus Christ to be unto the Party baptized a Sign and Seal of the
Covenant of Grace, of his Ingrafting into Christ, of Regeneration, of Remission
of Sins, and of his giving up unto God through Jesus Christ to walk in Newness
of Life; which Ordinance is by Christ's own appointment to be continued in his
Church until the end of the World.

The Churches of hrist comely (though unjustly) called Anabaptists: in their
Confession of Faith; (Fourth Impression Printed 1652) 'Define Baptism an
Ordinance of the New Testament given by Christ, to be dispensed upon Persons
Professing Faith, or that are made Disciples; who upon Profession of Faith, and
desiring of it, ought to be Baptized, and after to partake of the Lords Supper.

Objection, If it should be Objected, To what purpose serve all these
Quotations since the Parties you dispute against do believe and hold, That
Baptism is an Ordinance of Christ and keep up the Practice of it.

Answer, 1. Although they hold and practice it themselves, yet in the Effect
and Conse^uence of this their Opinion, they deny it: For whilst they allege,
That it is not requisite to Church Communion, it must of necessity be
understood, that they judge it not a requisite Duty for a Christian; and
consequently. it is needless and therefore may be laid aside without danger,
which is in effect a total casting of it away: which is not only contradictory
to Scripture, but disagreeable to all other Christians in the World, as has
been fully made out.

2. If they hold Baptism to be a Christian Duty, I would ask, Whether it be the
duty of all Christians, or only some? If of All, how can it be dispensed with
in any? if only of some, viz. such as are convinced of it; it will equally
follow, by the same Reason, that no Ordinance at all, is a Duty to a person
that doubts either the thing it self, or the manner or circumstances of its
practice And if it be not a duty, no man may be blamed for the nonperformance
of it, but indeed would Sin in doing it, and so by consequence, no Ordinance is
binding to all, because there is not one of them, but is in some respect or
other cavill'd at, or at least not rightly understood by some persons that yet
would be esteemed Godly: so that this Opinion opens a gap, not onty for
Exclusion of Baptism, but of any Ordinance whatsoever, under the pretense of a
large Charily to a doubting Person, that is really Holy, or seems so to be. But
the Lord never left his Ordinances upon such terms; For they are not to be
dispen'd with upon any pretense whatsoever without his own special Warrant.

Suitable to what we here Write, Henry Lawrence Esquire A very Judicious and
Learned Writer expresses himself, in his Book of Baptism, page 368. chap. 17.
thus, that there is an order in the Worship of the New Testament: (says he) 'No
Man will deny that has Learned with Paul, To join beholdeng the Order and
Faith of Saints, Coll. 2.5. And now will acknowledge this more then they who
deny themselves of some very considerable Ordinances for want of coming to them
in the right order, as the Lords Supper for want of Church Fellowship: every
thing is seasonable and beautiful in its time, out of which it is disorderly
and evil, To find the Order and Time of Baptism will I conceive be the easiest
thing in all this Inquiry, whether you consider Scripture Rule, Scripture
Example, or Example of the Primitive Church, or indeed of all that ever was, or
the reason of things; For Scripture Rule you have Matthew. 28.19. Make Disciples
and Baptize. Mark 16.16. He that believes and is baptized shall be saved. You
see here the Rank of Baptism, immediately after Teaching, after Believing, it
holds the first place of Ordinances properly Christian, you may see it again in
the Rule of Peter's Preaching, Acts 2.38.

'For the Primitive times we can have no better instances, than what we have of
the Catechuminy, who were excluded not only from the Eucharist, but from the
very sight thereof, etc.

'And of this the Fathers give a Reason, viz. In all respects the Order of the
Mystery is kept, that first by Remission of sins, a Medicine be prepared for
their Wounds, and then the Nourishment of the Heavenly Table be added Ambrose,
etc.

'If you pass from Precept and Example of all times to Reason, there you will
find that whatever makes for the not repeating of Baptism in the ordinary use
of it, makes also for this as fully, or more, that it should be the first.

'For, First if it be not to be repeated, because this is the Seal of
Initiation, Regeneration, and Incorporation, then by the same Reason this must
be first as Initiation, Admission, Incorporation, and Regeneration, are the
first Internal Acts in us, and upon us, by which we are made Christians.

'Secondly, if the signification, and Use of Baptism be for ever and of
constant and perpetual Use, then this Ordinance is to lie as the bottom stone
in which is to have a durable and constant influence into the whole Edifice.

'Thirdly, If this be not to be repeated, because neither in Precept nor
Example you find it so, and never otherwise, or if the ends of Baptism on our
part, be that there shall be a formal external Contract past with God, by which
we are vissibly Handfasted in this Mistical Marriage Or, 2. To distinguish our
selves by this Badge and Charecter of our Profession from the evil world, which
we renounce with all its Works, then certainy this Piece is to be first
Administered before we go further, and the Sacrament of our Spiritual Life and
Birth is to be given before that of our Nourishment: in a word Baptism has
been called of old, and not without Reason, Sacramentorum janua, and is for all
these considerations, which are as many as concur to any one thing to Keep
that Name and Nature still, which is to be the first and Primitive Sacrament,
in which a Converted person, man or woman, is to Communicate. Now then if the
Timing and Order of Instituted Worship be any thing, as it is of great moment,
a great part of it lying in nothing else but the right and Orderly
Administration of Ceremonies; and if the Scripture Rule and Example be any
thing, which is all we have to show for any Practice; then Baptism is to be the
first Sacrament after Beleiving: besides the reason of the thing, that which
makes it unlawful to Baptize before Teaching is, because the Scripture has
ranked it otherwise, that says Teach and Baptize, not Baptize and Teach, as the
Papists and others do, the same Reason will hold for the giving it its
preference in time to any other Ordinance, because its ranked immediately after
Teaching, and before any other thing. Thus far you have the Opinion and Reason
of that Learned Gentleman.

CHAP. V. Wherein the Objections against this Position viz. That none may be
Regularly admitted to the Lords Supper, that are not first Baptized, are
Answered.
Obj. 1. THere is no Rule, or express Warrant of Scripture to Exclude Persons
fearing God, from receiving the Lords Supper, who by virtue of their Faith have
a Right to it.

Answ. This Objection supposes things very dangerous. As,

1. That Holiness without Baptism invests a Right to other Church Ordinances,
which is not to be supposed, for Christ the Lamb of God was Holy in the Highest
Degree, and in him was found no Sin, yet he was Baptized before he entered upon
his Public Ministry, Matt. 3.15,16.
which is a most Illustrious Example, and the Pattern which the Saints
followed; for in a Word, the great Apostle Paul and all those Primitive Saints
Recorded by the Spirit to be Believers, and therefore Holy; were nevertheless
Baptized, which might have been forborne but that it was an indispensable Duty:
and whatsoever Reason may be given, why Holiness without Baptism may serve, the
like may be produced, Why Holiness without any other Ordinance may be
sufficient for a Believer? And unless it be less necessary now for Believers to
perform Gospel Duties, then for Evangelical Saints; or unless it can be made
out, that Baptism was only Appointed for that Age, (as Holy an Age as ever
was,) then the obligation of Practicing that Duty still lies upon All
Christians, which is a Warrant and Rule for the Exclusion of such as will not
submit to it.

2. It supposes, That whatsoever is not forbidden in Scripture, is Lawful; and
so the Receiving of Believers that are not baptized to the Supper, being not
Prohibited, is therefore Lawful.

Now that this is a Pernicious way of Argument, has been largely Demonstrated
about the beginning, as tending to bring all Humane Inventions into Gods
Worship, to which we refer: yet doubtless, it will be granted by all that the
only Warrant we have, (as has been frequently said) for the Practice of Gospel
Duties, must be the express Warrant, or Word of God; according to which we must
walk: and I very well remember, That the Old Nonconformists who faithfully
followed the Lord* according to the Light they had received, rather than they
would kneel at the Sacrament, thought it their Duty to forbear the Practice of
that great Ordinance, giving this as their Reason: To leave (say they) the
Practice of Christ and his Apostles in the manner of Receiving the Sacrament,
and to follow the Practice of Men, in a posture Invented by Men is not safe:
but to kneel at the Sacrament is so, etc. therefore not safe.

And if the Servants of God in those times were so Cautious of doing any thing
that might be an Addition to the Worship of God, although but in a
Circumstance: how much ought Christians Now when the Matter is about the very
Order of the Practice of Ordinances themselves; for here in the Case in hand,
is a most evident leaving the Practice of Christ and his Apostles, and
following the Inventions of Men.

2. The Commission given by Christ Matt. 28.19. Go teach all Nations Baptizing
them, etc. has been an Argument of great weight in the minds of all that
oppose Infant Baptism; the order of the words showing who are to be baptized,
viz. Such as are taught First Teach, then Baptize: and if it be an Argument,
that proves Believers baptism only, It must have its Consideration, That
Baptism must go before the Practice of other Ordinances, as Preaching goes
before Baptism.

We find Act. 1.3. that Jesus Christ was Forty days with his Disciples,
speaking of the things pertaining to the Kingdom of God; and doubtless he was
not wanting in giving them direction concerning the order of his Worship. For
as the Commission Matthew. 28.19. was given after his Resurrection, we may see
his Apostles (as appears by their constant Administrations suitable thereto) did
Practice no other way, as Act. 2.41,42. and several other places fully produced
before. Which Practice in order to the receiving or enjoying of Ordinances, I
take to be a constant and a standing direction for all Churches, in all times,
unless any can show a variation from it, by any of the Primitive Churches
afterward, which cannot be done; I would fain know of him that Preaches the
Gospel to men, what Doctrine he is to Preach to them? is it any other than to
Believe and be Baptized; If no other, (as I judge all will grant) than if in
case the party Believing should question whether Water Baptism be the Ordinance
of Jesus Christ, or if he believes it, is not yet satisfied it is his duty to
be Baptized, but desires he may break Bread with the Church, can this without a
manifest breach of the Rule be Admitted.

The Apostle tells us Gal. 3.27. That so many of you (or as some render it) all
ye that are Baptized into Christ, have put on Christ, that is, they have The
Verb (...) signifies to put on as a Garment. Liegh Crit. Sacr.
put on Christ as a Garment, and by Baptism have put on the visible Profession
of Christ, plainly holding out, that none have put on the visible Profession of
Christ until they be Baptized; the outward Sign, answering to the inward Grace,
so Romans 6.3. Know ye not that we who were Baptized into Jesus Christ, were
Baptized into his Death: which Baptism is a pledge of -- Can it therefore be
judged upon any Reasonable pretense that any man should be Admitted to Walk in
the Practice of the Ordinances of Christ, before he has put on Christ in the
visible Profession of his Name by Baptism.

From the whole of which we infer, in answer to the Objection That our Practice
suitable to these Precepts and Examples, are a sufficient Rule and Warrant for
our not admitting them to the Lords Supper, and to call for Scripture Precepts
or Examples for refusing them, is very absurd; For we may as well call for the
like to Warrant our Separation from the Church of Rome by Name, which can be
produced no more then this, yet it does not follow, that Communion with that
Church, as now it is, is Lawful. Scripture Examples are matter of Fact; and
therefore, there having been no such corrupt Practice crept into the world when
the Scripture was written, therefore there was no occasion for any baptized
Person to disclaim Communion with the Unbaptized; there being no such Cause of
which to make an Example.

Obj. 2. But we admit none to the Supper of the Lord, but those that think they
are Baptized already, and Judge what they received in their Infancy sufficient.

Answer. It is certain that they who believe that the only Subjects of Baptism
are actual Believers, viz. such who upon a Profession of Faith received that
Ordinance, and esteemed no other Baptism valid, cannot judge the Baptism
received in Infancy to be Christ's Baptism, they knowing that the proper Subject
appointed by Christ, viz. a Believer (which is the main part of the Essence of
the Ordinance) is wanting, and certainly the Ground of Churches proceedings, in
admitting persons to the Supper cannot be built upon the imagination of the
party desiring Communion, but upon the knowledge the Church has of it, and its
being tried by the Rule which they are to Walk by. For,

Suppose a Person desires to sit down as a Member of the Church, as thinking he
has a true Faith, and a Right to the Privilege in the Church, when yet he can
give no satisfactory demonstration of either; will any think the Church ought
to receive him because he has that good persuasion of himself, when they
themselves are satisfied that what he declares is insufficient by the Rule, to
make out his Right? Or will any judgment of Charity warrant such a proceeding?
Certainly no; and yet the Reason is the same for the latter, as for the former.
Besides the Consequence to the party that should be so Admitted to the Supper
upon his conceit that he is Baptized is very dangerous, and must needs build
him up in a conceit that he has that which indeed he has not. God of old gave
this charge, that a stumbling block must not be put in the way of the blind,
and surely a greater stumbling block cannot be put in such men's way to hinder
their inquiry after the True Baptism of Christ then to admit of that
supposition, which the Church knows is not true. For having now the enjoyment
of all the privileges of the House of God, they hereby are for ever careless
of making any further Inquiry: and I heartily wish that this may be seriously
considered by those that exercise this groundless Charity.

Again, suppose the Child of a Baptized Person of sufficient Age, that was
brought up in a Godly manner, is Converted and become a Believer, yet was never
Baptized at all, should propose for Communion with the Church, would they admit
him without Baptism, if he desires Communion so? (not being satisfied, that it
is a necessary Duty,) If they would, then it is evident, that they quite
Exclude Baptism out of the Rank of Ordinances; If they do not admit him, then
they place a sufficiency in Infant Baptism, because they grant a Privilege to
him that had it, and deny the same to him that had it not, (whom we do suppose
to be as much a Believer, and as holy as the other) which is expressly against
their own Principle, viz. to esteem Infant Baptism as no Baptism; and therefore
if they hold to it, should place him that was so in infancy baptized, and him
that was never baptized, in the same rank, with respect to the Privilege of
Church Communion.

Object. 3. It is said, Romans 14.1. Him that is weak in the Faith receive you,
and it being but the weakness of such persons to judge their own Baptism
Lawful, yet being such as have faith, this Scripture sufficiently Warrants us
to receive them.

Answ. For the right understanding of this Text, Two things ought to be
considered, which if well weighed may give a clear Answer to this Scripture
Objection. 1. What Weakness this is, which the Apostle here intends. 2. What is
to be understood by Receiving such.


1. The weakness spoken of in the Text, has Relation only to those mistakes
that did attend some of them touching a liberty of eating, or not eating Meats,
or the keeping or not keeping of days which were things in themselves of an
indifferent Nature, the doing or not doing of which, was not Sin, as the
Apostle in that Chapter plainly shows; and has no Relation to the Order of
Worship prescribed by Christ, much less to the Practice or not Practice of
Ordinances, for then the meaning of the Apostle should be, if they did
practice, or not practice, it was all one, there was no Sin in the matter.

2. The Receiving here cannot be meant to receive into the Church as Members,
Because the Apostle Writes this Epistle to the Church, and these weak Members
as a part of that Church; but the Receiving here intended is into the
Affections of each other; that the differences that were amongst them should
not hinder the Law of Love, which they, and every Christian ought to cherish
and Exercise toward each other, let their differences be of what nature they
will: That this must be the Sense of the Apostle, the clear Scope of the whole
Chapter makes evident. But to bring this Text to prove a Lawfulness of
receiving any that are Christians although never so ignorant of the Ordinances,
and Instituted Worship of Christ, and the order prescribed by him is to wring
Blood out of it, and not that precious Truth that is manifested by it.

Object. 4. Whereas some infer from 1 Cor. 12.13. By one Spirit we are all
Baptized into one Body, whether Jews or Gentiles, Bond or Free, and have been
all made to Drink into one Spirit, etc. That Baptism is the Inchurching
Ordinance, the conclusion is impertinent, for not Water Baptism, but the
Baptism of the Spirit is there meant.

Ans. That Baptism was of so constant and Universal use to the Enchurching of
all sorts Ranks and Degrees, is fairly deduced from this Text, however excepted
against; and that none were Inchurched without it, unless any man can find or
name some persons that were neither Jews nor Gentiles, Bond nor Free, which
denotes plainly, that all sorts were received by Baptism: the Jews though
before Circumcised, yet were Baptized; the Gentiles, some times a People a far
off were upon their believing by Baptism received. If free, as Masters, yet not
admitted without it; If Bond, as Servants, yet by this Ordinance they were made
equally of the same Church Privilege by Baptism, Gal. 3.27,28.

And that Water Baptism is here meant is the Judgment of the most Learned
Expositors: and the next words do make it Appear, We have been all made to
Drink into one Spirit. By being baptized into one body and made to Drink into
one Spirit. The Apostle shows the Communion which Believers have with the Holy
Spirit in the Two Ordinances, Baptism and the Lords Supper. For what else can
be intended by Drinking into one Spirit, but the Saints Communion in the
Spirit, in, and by the Supper [Drinking] by a Synecdoche being put both for
Eating and Drinking: And if so, why must we not as well understand the First
Ordinance in its proper Sense for Water Baptism in the former part, as the
Later Ordinance, the Supper in the first part of the Text.

2. If the Baptism of the Spirit had been meant, then the being Baptized into
one Body, and Drinking into one Spirit, must be one and the same thing, but
surely Baptising and Drinking are no more the same, than the Body and the
Spirit are the same, into which they are said respectively to be Baptized, and
to Drink. But it is clear the Apostle hereby intends to mind those Corinthians,
how that by means of the same Spirit working upon all their Hearts, they became
Members of the same Body by Baptism, and that being of the Body, they came to
have Communion in Spirit, or with the Spirit in the Supper.

It cannot be the Baptism of the Spirit, because the Spirit is here set forth
by the Apostle, as the Agent or working Cause, and Baptism as the Effect; and
it is ridiculous to make both Cause and Effect the same thing. It is true the
Scripture speaks elsewhere of a being Baptized with the Spirit, but when it
does so, it still declares either Jesus Christ, or God the Father as the Agent
of Baptising with the Spirit, but never as making the Spirit both the Subject
Matter wherewith, and the Agent whereby, men are Baptized in the same Baptism,
see Matthew. 3.11. Mark 1.8. Luke 3.16. and 24.49. Act. 11.4,5,16.

We find in Scripture that when God charge men for sin, he tells them, They
did that which he commanded not, neither did it enter in his heart. Now that
this was the Order of Administration with respect to these Ordinances, viz. 1.
To Teach, then Baptize, and then Admit to Church Communion, is else where fully
Evidenced from Precept and Example, Matthew. 28.19. Act. 2.41. etc. And if that
be the stated Method of God, and the Universal Practice of the Primitive
Christians, we may Rationally infer that the contrary Practice is a Deviation
from the Divine Rule, and a thing which God Commanded not.

The Apostle according to the Rule of Christ, first at Jerusalem, to put this
Commission in Execution, Luke 24.47. And did Act according to it, and certainly
their punctual Conformity to it, ought to be taken by us as the Interpretation
of this grand Precept, and their Example a sufficient Pattern for succeeding
Christians, unless we will suppose them to depart from it as soon as they began
to Act in pursuance of it, which supposition includes a very strange
Uncharitableness, and a very unbecoming Opinion of these Holy men. For nothing
can be more plain than that Addition to the Church (or Church Fellowship)
followed after Baptism, and did not go before it: and why men now find a
greater good in their own way than in his, is not to be easily resolved.
Baptism in those days did certainly precede Church-Enjoyments, for it was
esteemed (as it still ought to be) a means of implanting men into Christ, or
the Body of Christ the Church, Gal. 3.27. Romans 6.3. Now let it be considered
what a Planting together imports; It must be certainly the first putting of
Christians together, in order to their Growing together in Christ, and yet all
this was done by Baptism: and may we not suppose Trees to grow together before
they are Planted together, as this Spiritual Plantation of Christ, viz. the
Church, or Society of Christians, who were, and should still be Planted
together by Baptism, not into this or that particular Church; but into that one
Church of Christ, which is distributed into several parts and particular
Societies. Hence Baptism is called one of the Principles or beginning Doctrines
of Christ, and part of the Foundation, Heb. 6.1,2. Now there is no House can
stand without its Principle, or can be Erected without a Foundation. See 1 Cor.
12.13. Where we have an account of all being Baptized into one Body, whether
Jews or Gentiles, Bond or Free, which comprehended all Ranks and Degrees of
Christians, as is elsewhere demonstrated.

Obj. 5. The Phrase, Romans 6.3. and Gal. 3.27. [As many] of you as have been
Baptized into Christ, etc. implies that all that were in those Churches of Rome
and Galatia were not Baptized.

Ans. If we consult the Scripture with the Coherence, it will appear how weak
this Objection is.

1. For that Romans 6.3. Let it be considered to whom the Apostle writes: Is it
not to the whole Church, and every individual of them? In verse 1, 2. When he
says, What shall we say then? Shall we continue in sin, that Grace may abound?
God forbid. How shall we that are dead to sin, live any longer therein?? If
these words in the first and second Verse respect the whole Church, as they
must be supposed to do, unless we will conclude that the Apostle did grant a
liberty to some of the Church to continue in sin, and live therein, then these
words, Know ye not that as many of us as were Baptized into Jesus Christ, etc.
Are Interrogatively propounded not only to the same persons, unto whom the
former words relate, but also as an Argument or Reason why none of them should
live any longer in sin, which is the thing from which he was a dissuading not
only some of them, but even all of them in the foregoing verses, and which he
improves in an Argumentative way throughout the greatest part of the Chapter,
and it would not befit the Reason of any ordinary man, much less of a Great
Apostle to make choice a Reason or Motive to infore his Exhortation or
Persuasion, which is of less extent in the tendency and concernment of it, then
are the persons whom he does Exhort or Dehort. Which yet is a piece of
weakness, of which we must suppose this Apostle to be guilty, unless you do
conclude that all those of the Church of Rome were dissuaded from continuing
any longer in sin upon this ground, because they had been all Baptized into the
Death of Christ, viz. a Conformity to his Death, as well as a belief of it. To
conclude, If the whole Church had not been under the Motive, the whole Church
could not be pressed by it as here you see they are.

As for the other Text, Gal. 3.26,27.
Gal 3.26. the Apostle had assured them, viz. them to whom he now writes, To be
all the children of God by Faith in Christ Jesus, that is they were looked upon
as children of God by their confessing and owning of Jesus Christ, of which he
gives this account, verse 27. Because they had put on Christ in Baptism You are
all the children of God by Faith in Christ Jesus, for, or because, as many of
you, as have been Baptized into Christ, have put on Christ: as if he should
say, if the Owning and Professing Christ does denominate men to be the Children
of God, now under the Gospel, as indeed it does, then ye are all the Children
of God, because by being Baptized into Christ, ye have all of you put him on,
that is, so to appear with him, wherever ye become, as you do appear with the
Clothes you wear. But now most certain it is, they could not all of them have
been denominated the Children of God by Faith in Christ, upon account of their
being Baptized into Christ (which yet we see they are) unless they had been all
of them Baptized into Christ indeed.

Besides in what has been said already it does not appear that any in the
Apostles days were inchurched without Baptism. And for any to assert that some,
not all, were Baptized, is to affirm what is void of Scripture, Reason, and
Common Sense. As for any countenance in Scripture, there is none -- And it has
as little in Reason: for if it should be true, it will follow that this Great
Ordinance was a duty to some only, and not to all, and the Reason why it should
be so, will be very difficult to assign, was it because it was commanded to
some only, and not others? If so, let them be instanced by some kind of Record,
who were obliged to the Practice, and who not: was it because some only had
need of it, and others not? or because those glorious mysteries represented by
it, were useless to some, and not to all? Or what other Reason was it? If none
can be assigned, then we may safely conclude that all Church Members were then
Baptized; and ought to be so still.

It is confessed that sometimes the Phrase [As many] has not the same Latitude
of signification as the Phrase [All men] which includes every Individual, the
term [As many] being restrained to matter going before being then Partitive:
But here it has Relation to the whole scope of the Text, and must therefore
intend all, or all of that Church to whom he wrote, to confirm which
Interpretation we find other Texts [As many] must of necessity be so understood
as 1 Timothy 6.1. Let as many servants as are* under the Yoke, count their own
Masters worthy of all Honor: does he thereby suppose or may it be employed that
there were some servants who were not under the Yoke, or that there were some
Servants who were not to count their Masters worthy of all Honor? But which
must be supposed notwithstanding, if this form or manner of speaking (as many
as) be always to be understood to intend the dividing of the entire Number of
Persons spoken unto; which yet to suppose must needs be very absurd.

Object. And if it be said, That this Exhortation, let as many Servants as etc.
does intentionally respect so many Believing Servants as were under to Yoke;
and that therefore in respect of other Believers it is partitive.

Answ. If that be granted there will be more gained than otherwise: for then it
may well be said, that those Texts, Romans 6.3. Gall. 3.27. Intentionally, only
respected those at Rome and Gallatia, who did Believe, and were Baptized; and
therefore is partitive in respect of others, the Inhabitants of those places,
dividing those of the Churches, from others dwelling in the same places, who
were not of those Churches.

Object. 6. If it be Objected from Act. 9.26. That we find not there, when Paul
was presented to the Church at Jerusalem, and Assayed to join himself to the
Disciples, that the Church made any inquiry whether he was Baptized or no, in
order to his Reception amongst them; or that Barnabas in giving satisfaction to
the Apostles and the Church concerning his meetness to be admitted into
Communion with them, so much as mentions his being Baptized, but only declares
unto them, how he had seen the Lord in the way, and that he had spoken to him,
and how he had Preached boldly at Damascus in the Name of Jesus.

Answ. There is no good Reason can be given, or to suppose that Paul was
admitted to Communion with the Church, until the Church had knowledge either
from himself, Barnabus, or some other, of his having obeyed the Gospel in
Embracing the first Principles of it; of which Baptism is one, Heb. 6.2. For
how should they know him to be a Disciple of Christ and so meet for Communion
with them, but by knowing that he had at least done the first things of a
Disciple, of which we find all along the History of the Acts of the Apostles, a
Being Baptized, to be one, and doubtless less satisfaction would not have
served them concerning him, than would concerning another Disciple who had
never appeared in that height of opposition against them, as he had done.

Again, when the Text tells us, That Barnabas declared unto them, how he had
seen the Lord in the way, and had spoken to him; can it be thought he could say
less then what it was, that the Lord had spoke to him? And if so, then how can
it be thought but that the Relation of his being Baptized must needs come in at
his Report to them? inasmuch as that Direction which the Lord gave Paul, about
his going into a Straight street in order to his further Information, touching
the Will of the Lord concerning him, to Rehearse the Carriage of Ananias
toward Saul; and consequently his baptizing of him: unless it should be
supposed, that Barnabas made a broken and imperfect Relation of the Lords
dealing with him, which we cannot do without Judging Barnabas either weak or
careless in that great business: For it cannot be thought that Barnabas used no
more words in this Relation then what are here Recorded by Luke; since we have
frequently, if not for the most part; but the brief Heads of things. Recorded
that were done, and spoken by Christ, the Apostles, and other Disciples, John
21.25. Act. 2.40.

And we find Paul himself in making the Relation of that great Providence of
the Lord toward him in his Conversion, particularly mention his Baptism, Act.
22.5, to 16. and that which was required of him to be found in the Practice of,
before he should go forth in the performance of that great Work he was Called
unto, namely, to Preach the Gospel.

Object. 7. It is Objected, that this was in the Infancy of the Church, and is
no binding Rule to us.

Answ. If that be no Rule to us, let it be shown where there is another Rule?
besides do not all men of any understanding know, that this is the great
Argument brought to Countenance Infant Baptism: And is not this the pretense by
which all those Traditions of Men in the Worship of God are brought in? How
greatly is that place, 1 Cor. 14.40. abused and mistaken? Let all things be
done decently and in Order. From whence men take upon them to prescribe what
they please, and call it Order, imposing the same upon Men's Consciences,
whereas Order and Decency there, must respect that Order which he himself had
prescribed in the foregoing Verses, wherein is shown, what Order ought to be
used in the improvement of those several Gifts which God has given to that
Church, in the Exercise whereof the Church might receive Edification. They
especially that are afraid to comply with the Inventions of men in the Worship
of God in some things, should above all others be careful of bringing in any
Inventions of their own in other things, lest while they build again themselves
the things they Destroy in others; they make themselves Transgressors, and give
that advantage to others they would not willingly do.

Object. 8. A main thing built upon, is, that Union with Christ gives a Right
to all the Ordinances of Christ.

Answ. It is readily granted, that Union with Christ, signified by a visible
Profession of Faith gives a man Right to Baptism, and having this Union and
being baptized, they have a Right to Church Fellowship, and the Lords Supper,
etc. but that by virtue of Union with Christ they have a right to the Lords
Supper; and accordingly to partake of the same before they are Baptized is
Denied from the Reasons already given, nor can it any where be proved.

This may be plainly illustrated by this similitude. A Child, by being the
Eldest Son of his Father, has a Right to his Fathers Estate as Heir thereof, as
soon as his Father is dead, but yet for the actual Possession thereof, there is
required his coming to Age, till which time he cannot Possess that Right; the
Law requiring this as the Order by which he is to come to the enjoyment
thereof. So though Union with Christ gives a man a Right to all the Ordinances
of Christ, yet are they to be enjoyed in that Order which the Law prescribes.

Obj. 9. This is a Dividing Principle, and it is very censorious to judge none
fit for Communion in a Church, but such as are Baptized thereby, Vnchristianing
all other Persons that are of another mind.

Answ. This is no other Principle but what the Scripture does every where
justify, as has been largely proved before. And this Objection is rather
chargeable on the contrary Opinion, as being that which divides the Ordinance
from its proper use and end by putting it out of its place, where God in his
Word has set it. There being no Division made by Principle, but what is made
by the ignorance of the persons that Oppose it about the Rule and Order by
which Christians ought to walk; or by their wilful neglect of that which is
required by the Lord, of those that desire Communion with the Church. For if
the Lord of the Family prescribe an Order by which it should be Governed, can
it be reasonable that his Rule should be broken for the sake of the Servants
Ignorance or wilfulness?

2. We censure none so rigidly as to take upon us to Unchristian or Unchurch
them; all that we do is (in discharge of our Duty to God, and Faithfulness in
our places) to labor to keep the Lords Ordinances in that Purity and Order the
Sacred Records testify they were left in, and in a Spirit of Love and Meekness
to contend earnestly for the Faith once delivered to the Saints; 1 Cor. 11.2.
Jude 3.
which we conceive to be a Duty enjoined upon all Christians, etc.

Obj. 10. It has been Objected from Ephesians. 4.4,5,6. Where under the several
Heads there is in the fourth Head one Baptism. Now says the Objector if we
believe the other six things there mentioned, viz. One Body, one Spirit, even
as ye are called in one Hope of your Calling, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism,
one God and Father of all, etc. and are not found in the Practice of the fourth
Head, viz. one Baptism; what Reason is there that we should be deprived of
Communion in the Lords Supper, for either the neglect of it, and not seeing we
are bound to Practice it? etc.

Answ. It does appear from the Text that this is a Golden Chain linked together
by the Spirit of God himself, the taking of one of which Links away may weaken
the whole: and if the Wisdom of the Spirit has linked or joined them together,
it seems to be great presumption in any to put them a sunder. Therefore let it
be noted that the Apostle verse 3. Exhorts the Church to keep the Unity of the
Spirit in the bond of Peace. In the 4, 5, 6. verses he shows, wherein the Unity
of the Spirit which is to be kept consists, by giving a Character of the True
Apostolic Religion, epitomized under seven Heads. 1. One God and Father of
all, who is above all, and in us all. 2. One Lord the second Adam, the man
Christ Jesus; by whom, and for whom are all things, the great Mediator betwixt
God and Man. 3. One Faith, Believing in this one God, and this one Lord Jesus
the one Mediator. 4. One Baptism, which in all the three Editions thereof has
signified a Profession and Engagement to this one God, and one Mediator by the
Profession of the one Faith. 5. One Spirit proceeding from the Father and the
Son, the great Teacher and Instructor of this one Body into a further Communion
with the Father and the Son. 6. One Body, whereof all the Baptized are
professed Members, and whereto they are completely United by that one Spirit.
7. One hope of their Calling, in believing the Resurrection of the Body, and
Eternal Life, which God has promised to all those that obey him.


From this we may with much Assurance infer, that we are under an indispensable
Obligation to be found in the Practice of this one Baptism, which holds forth
our Interest in, and Profession of this one God and Father, one Lord Jesus
Christ, and one Spirit, into whose Name we are Commanded to be Baptized, Matthew.
28.19. etc. The Objector supposes the bare Belief (without the visible
Profession) of Baptism, is enough; which indeed is not so: because the Nature
and Constitution of this Ordinance is purely Practical by virtue of a positive
Precept, and no pretense of a speculative Belief will excuse the neglect of it;
any more than the neglect of an Exercise of Faith respecting any other of the
six points, which the Holy Spirit has joined with it. The Ancients tell us the
Form of Baptism when they Expound, Ephesians. 4.5. One Law.


Quest. Whereas it may be further Queryed. Whether one Ordinance gives a Right
to the enjoyment of another?

Answ. It is answered, no; For we have before proved that all Ordinances are to
be observed in that Order which the Appointer of them has prescribed; from
which we ought not to vary. For as Circumcision was the first Ordinance to be
Administered before they might be partakers of the Passover although it gave
not a Right to the Passover, yet might not any partake of it (before they were
Circumcised) without sin: So also in the New Testament, Baptism is the first
Ordinance to be Administered by the direction and appointment of God, without
which, the Supper of the Lord may not be received without Sin. All that is
pleaded for by this, is the Orderly observation of the New Testament Ordinances.

Quest. But why should any be debarred the enjoyment of those Ordinances they
have light into, because they want light in others?

Answ. It deserves to be seriously considered, whether the neglect of the
Ordinance of Baptism does not more arise from the want of a heart to obey God
therein, by reason of the contempt put upon it, then for want of Light. Is any
Ordinance of Jesus Christ in the New Testament more plain and clear than this?
Are there not many more instances in the New Testament for the Practice of this
then the Lords Supper? For besides the Institution of it by Jesus Christ,
instanced by the several Evangelists, it is but four times mentioned, viz. Act.
2.42. and 20.7. 1 Cor. 10.16. and 11.23. Whereas we find besides the Commission
given by Jesus Christ, Matthew. 28.19. etc. that it is again enjoined, Act. 2.38.
and 8.38. Act. 10.48. and 16.15.33. Act. 9.18. Act. 18.8. etc. Neither do we
find any one Ordinance of the Gospel so much made use of by the Apostles to
incite Christians to die to sin, and live to Cod, as is largely demonstrated in
the foregoing sheets, to which we refer, etc.

Obj. 11. And whereas it may be Objected that it is Love and not Baptism, that
discovers us to be Christ's Disciples; It is answered.

Answ. We do readily confess that we are commanded to put on love, Coll. 3.14.
which is a great Character of a Disciple of Christ, and it is much to be
Lamented, that there is so little seen among Saints: Yet that cannot be called
Love, which is exercised in opposition to the Order prescribed in the Word, by
which Ordinances ought to be Administered; For as Love is a grace of the Spirit
of Christ; so Ordinances are the appointments of the same Spirit which works
Grace in the Hearts of Christians; All true Gospel Love being Regulated by
Gospel-Rule; and as all men may know the Disciples of Christ by their Love one
to another: so also, it is a Character given by the same Lord, of being a
Disciple when this Love is manifest in keeping his Commandments, John 14.15.
If ye Love me keep my Commandments. ver. 21. He that has my Commandments, and
keeps them, he it is that loves me, and he that loves me, shall be beloved
of my Father, and I will love him and will manifest my self to him. ver. 23.
Jesus answered and said, If any man Love me, he will keep my Words, and my
Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him.
ver. 24. He that loves me not, keeps not my sayings, and the Word which you
hear is not mine, but the Fathers which sent me. Now of these Commandments this
Ordinance of Baptism is not the least, and it seems to savor of little Love in
them that would have Men believe, it is advanced in them above their Brethren
to charge them with want of Love, as the only Reason why they cannot admit
persons to the Supper of the Lord, that never yet Received the Baptism of
Christ. Therefore,

Here we can Appeal to the Searcher of Hearts, That the true Reason is, because
we dare not break that Rule and Order by which we find the Primitive Saints
walked, and not want of Love to them. And the Sense we have of the great
Severity God has showed against those that have made the least Breach upon
that Order which he himself has prescribed.

These things I leave to the serious Consideration of those to whom this brief
Essay may come, desiring they may try all thing, and hold fast that which is
Good.

FINIS.

