A PROPOSAL, SHOWING How this NATION may be vast Gainers by all the Sums of
Money, given to the CROWN, without Lessening the Prerogative.

Humbly Offered to the KING's Most Excellent Majesty; the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal; and to the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, Assembled in Parliament.

By WILLIAM KILLIGREW,

To which is Prefixed, The late Honorable Sir James Sheene's Letter on the
same Subject; And the PROPOSER's Answer.

A LETTER from Sir JAMES SHEENE, (writ by himself Three Weeks before his Death.)
SIR,
I find our Leisure Hours, not happening at the same Time, we cannot Meet so
often as I desire; But, if you please, we may some times Converse on Paper, for
Diversion I have often reflected on our last Discourse of Banks and (...)
England (...) ving found your Printed Proposals, amongst many others; which,
comparing with Yours, I find Yours Metamorphosed, (but not Mended) in almost
all their Designs: And I must Infinitely blame You, for not Reprinting your
Proposals, with the Additions we discoursed of lately; this being a fit Time,
when the whole Nation has approved of Banks, and the Currency of Credit, and
the Usefulness thereof, as well as the Necessity our Coin has brought us to.

Pray, First, do me the Favor, to Answer the following Questions, at your
Leisure.

I. How do you like the Securities Proposed by the other Banks?

II. Do you believe, they will reap Advantages by their Undertakings?

III. Will their Banks make good the Word, NATIONAL, and for the Public Good,
and Accommodation of Trade?

IV. Why do you call your Paper, PROPOSALS, since by your Discourse, I find you
design to do all, and more than the now Banks pretend to do, by adding Clauses
in the Act of Parliament, if your Proposal had succeeded?

V. You tell me, your Security is not only Greater than any of the other Banks,
but greater than any in the known World; and a hundred times more Security,
than would be Necessary, or demanded; Pray show me, how that can be?

VI. And Lastly, I desire your Leave to Reprint your Proposals, with the
Additions, if you will not do it your self; and you will extremely Oblige,

SIR, Your Most Humble Servant, J. SHEENE.

WILLIAM KILLIGREW his Answer to Sir James Sheene's Letter.
SIR,
ACcording to your Desire, I here send you my Proposals, with some Additions,
and your Questions, Answered: You may believe, I am not a little Proud of your
Approbation of my Proposals, which encourages me to Reprint Them my self;
although, I do protest, I do not believe it will be set on Foot, unless I could
back it with a large Stock, or an Estate; which many People take for Sense:
Besides, I have met with strange Objections, which the Objectors positively
Answer Themselves in the Affirmative, without hearing me speak. One Objection
is this, This would be too Easy. Another asks, How will Men, in Power, be able
to Impose on the King, and the People, if this were set on foot? I must
confess, I did not imagine, a Bride could be too Handsome, or her Portion too
well Paid.

I do confess I see my PROPOSALS Metamorphosed in many others, but not Mended;
I will not exclaim against their Industry, who, seeing my Proposals have no
Effect, have made Proposals for their own private Advantage; But, in my
Opinion, very dangerous to the Government: For, if they succeed, so great Power
and Riches will accrue to the Undertakers, or Governors, that they will become
our Masters: We must Vote, Elect, and Choose, as they please; or they will Call
in, and allow no Prolongation, but Enter and Seize.

And, if any Accident hinders their Success, or moved by Interest or Necessity,
to stop Payments, pray, whom can you Sue? May we not be Necessitated to loose
5. 10. 15. or 20 l. per Cent. or more, and be glad we can get any thimg? May
they not have People ready to buy the Bank-Notes of the Necessitous, with the
Bank's-Money.

I must confess, Dr. Hugh Chamberlen's Land-Bank the Best, if he has a Stock in
ready Money to help the Circulation at first; although His is the least
comprehended by the Generality: But still the Profits accrue to a particular
Society, and not for the National Use.

Mr. Robert Murray, who was the First that put my Thoughts on these kind of
Banks, is (at last) become of my Opinion, to set up for a Real National Good,
which heretofore he did not approve of: Now I look on his Design as the Best,
because it is the same with Mine, only in other Words: He talks of the Rational
Part, and I state the Practical Part; which, I believe, he will concur with, as
I do with Him.

I call my Paper, PROPOSALS, because it is not a Bank; nor can I call it a
Cantore, like the General Cantore in the United Provinces; because, This doing
the Duty of Both, and more, it will bear neither of the Names, and would give
our Critics occasion to Exercise their imaginary Wit; it may be Christened, if
it sueceeds: And, having convinced You, I dare boldly say, I do not fear the
Convincing any that will take the Pains to discourse the Matter fairly.

What I have added since my First Printing these Proposals, will, I hope,
answer your other Questions: Which is all, at present, from

SIR, Your most Humble Servant, WILLIAM KILLIGREW.
Note, Sir James Sheene fell Sick, and Dyed Eight Days after this Letter was
writ.



A PROPOSAL, showing how this Nation may be vast Gainers, by all the Sums of
Money given to the Crown, etc.
I Put this Design in Writing, at the Request of several considerable Members
of both Houses of Parliament, in the Reign of King Charles II. when a War was
voted against France; but a Peace being concluded, no Money was given; and
since that, I have had no Opportunity to do my Country the Service I designed
by this Proposal.

But the general Approbation this Paper had from all that saw it, in Three
several Parliaments, and very many considerable Members having declared, that
they could not couch any one Rational Objection against what I here humbly
offer; I have thought fit, in this juncture of Time, to Revive this Design; and
most humbly refer it to the Wisdom of the KING, and both Houses of Parliament.

As I have not the Nomination of the Sums now to be given to the Crown, so I
shall only suppose a Sum of Two Millions; but the Case will hold on all
Occasions, of the same Nature.

I humbly beg Pardon, if I am plain and short; I pretend not to Eloquence; I
shall first set down what I would have done, and then show what Advantage this
Nation will reap by so doing: Lastly, I will Answer all Objections that have
hitherto been made, and shall be ready to Answer any Objection that may
hereafter be made.

I cannot vary from my first Proposals; but have added something on Sir James
Sheene's Letter and Approbation.

PROPOSALS.
I. SUppose, that a Tax be set, that will raise 300000 Pounds per Ann. this Tax
to continue till 2000000 l. is paid, with the Interest and Charges.

II. Let there be an Office erected in the City of London, near the
Royal Exchange; let the Tax of 300000 l. be paid into the said Office, in the
same Species, as they receive it; Because most of the Taxes will be paid in
Money, in small Sums, which they must not change for Bills; yet they must take
Bills, where the Sums amount to so much.

Now, this is necessary to create a Cash, to pay Interest, or Foreign Bills;
which must be composed thus. 7 Commissioners, of which one or more to be
Treasurers, -- -- -- -- 7000 l. per Ann. 1 Secretary, -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 500
l. 10 Clerks, -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 1200 l. 2 Door-Keepers, -- -- -- -- -- --
200 l. 6 Messengers, -- -- -- -- -- 300 l. House-Rent, Fire, Candle, Paper,
etc. -- 800 l. -- -- 10000 l. per Ann.

III. The Tax and Office being framed, it must, by Act of Parliament, be
ordered, that the Office shall be governed thus.

IV. The Office must be open, and the Commissioners must sit from Eight of the
Clock till Twelve every Morning (except Sundays, and Holy Days) and from Two
till Four in the Afternoon.

V. The Office must accommodate all Persons, without Fees or Delays.

VI. The Office must pay every Creditor, in as many Bonds as the Creditor
pleases; and at the Creditor's Choice to have his Name in the Bonds, or Blanks;
saying, Payable to A. B. or to the Bearer: This Last is Best, because of
transferring them.

VII. No Bonds to be above a Hundred Pounds, nor none under Five; for the
lesser the Bonds are, the better they will pass in Trade.

VIII. The Act of Parliament must also make it Treason for the Office to issue
out more in Bond, than is ordered by the said Act; else, like too much Allay in
Coin, the Bonds would be imbased: These Bonds must also be Signed by Three
Commissioners at the least, besides the Secretary.

IX. At the Expiration of every Six Months, the Office must pay the Interest of
every Bond standing out, and according to their Date; and mark those Bonds they
design to pay off, at the Expiration of the next Six Months, by writing on
these Bonds, thus, This Bond shall be paid off, Principal and Interest, this
day Six Months: This must also be Registered in the Folio of those Bonds, in the
Office-Books.

X. The Commissioners must issue out these Bonds or Warrants from the Treasury;
by which Means, the Crown, nor the Treasury, are not lessened, but remain still
the Fountainhead.

XI. These Warrants must be brought by some Person or Persons, Authorized for
that Purpose, to avoid false Warrants. The Treasury must also send a Letter of
Advice, before such Warrants may be accepted.

XII. If any Bonds are Lost, Stolen, or Burned, the Parties concerned must give
Notice thereof to the Office; to the end that the Office may stop them that
bring the Bonds, and give Notice thereof to the Owners: But, if the Bonds are
so Lost, or Burnt, that they come not to the Office, then it must be made
public in the Gazette several times; and if the Bonds appear not in Six
Months, the Officers must give the Owners new Bonds, on good Security, that
they are the Parties whose Names are last Registered in the Office-Books for the
Lost or Burned Bonds.

XIII. The same Act that settles the Office, and the Tax, must declare, That
the Crown has Credit at the Office for Two Millions, payable thus; The Parties,
concerned to receive the Money, shall, on Warrants from the Treasury, receive
the Office-Bonds, and 6 l. per Cent. per Ann. Interest. That the Interest shall
be paid every Six Months, and Six Months warning given before the Principal
shall be paid off: This, because People shall have time to find out other ways
to dispose of their Money, to new Advantages.

XIV. The Act further declaring, That the Office-Bonds shall not only be
transferrable, but Current, as Money, in all Payments whatsoever, even into the
Exchecquer: And it must be made Treason for any of the public Receivers, to
refuse the Office-Bonds, when tendered in the Payments. Counterfeiting of these
Bonds must also be made Capital; although I know, it is impossible to Counterseit
the Bonds, which must be made on a Marbled, or Flourished Paper, fairly Tallied
and Registered in the Office-Books, where the Counterparts must be kept.

On this Paragraph depends the whole Proposals, the Objections, and Sir James
Sheene's Questions: This causes the Bills, or Tallies, to be a new Specy of
Money, superior to Money, made of Gold or Silver: This makes the Security a
hundred times more than ever was proposed or given; because all the Revenues of
the Crown, all our Trade and Consumption, is Security, as well as the Taxes,
set to pay the Principal and Interest, and Charges; which Security, is far more
than I have said, of a hundred times more than was ever given: This unites the
King, and People, by the strongest Bonds; I mean, their Interest, to support
each other: And it was an Argument for the Million-Lottery, That it would
oblige so many Families to be Friends to this Government.

I propose the Bonds on Marbled Paper, because less Burdensome, and easiest to
Register, and turned to their Folio; else a Tally of Wood, or Metal, is as
good.

Now, I ask, If all our late Tallies had been made Current by a Law, how would
our ill-affected, and our Money-Mongers, have imposed on the necessitous; who
have been forced to sell at vast Loss, and intolerable Usury of the Buyers?

Consider the vast Loss our Trade has had of late, by This, and the Bank-Bills,
and what People have suffered for want of their Money: How impudently have Men
been refused their own Money, payable on Demand; not that it is possible, that
the Nation wants Money, or Bullion, to Circulate our Trade.

Many cry out, That our Money, and Bullion, is Exported, never to return; I
wish our Knavery, Usury, Factions, and Self-Interest, were Exported; and am
confident, these Proposals will send away a great part of these Destroyers of
the Public Welfare; a worse People than our Coyners, Clippers, or Robbers.

Pray, Is not a Government obliged to make Laws for the Public Good? And, do
we not daily desire the Increase of Trade? Ought not a Government to oblige the
People to do what is for their Advantage? Who will not force a Mad Man to be
let Blood, and take wholesome Medicines? Is not the Nation in a Distraction
about their Money and Credit? Is not this Method a Wholesome, Secure, and
Infallible Cure for this National Distemper? Why then should not the Government
oblige Men to take this proposed Current Credit, grounded on so Solid, and so
great a Security, and so generally Advantageous?

XV. It must also be made Capital for the Office to make any Use, or Private
Advantage of the Public Cash; and they must order it so, as to have a good
Cash, because many times the Tax may not be paid in, time enough; it may be, a
Month or two later than the Interest is due.

And a considerable Cash may be kept, to answer Foreign Bills, if ready Money
be required: This I add, to answer a Noble Lord's Objection: But, suppose these
Bonds, or Bills, will not pay Foreign Bills, I shall make Use of a Saying of
Dr. Chamberlain, viz. That a Stage-Coach is a good Convenience to a Man, to go
to York; yet that Coach cannot set another Man down at Exeter. And what is
hereafter added, will bring in Cash enough, to answer any Foreign Bills;
besides, how will the Bills be paid, without this Proposal, which must, of
necessity, make Gold and Silver Coin free and common in the Nation?

XVI. These Bonds being thus made Current, and Grounded on a Law, and the
Security of the whole Nation, they will not only be of an Intrinsic Value,
equal with Gold and Silver, but superior to either; and of the same
Consequence, as if so much Money were Imported, and given this Nation, to Trade
with.

XVII. I say, these Bonds will be superior to Gold or Silver, because these
Bonds cannot be Counterfeited, Lost, Stolen, or Burnt, without Recovery; they
will be a new Speices of Money, that will grow in our Coffers, every day
increasing; which Gold nor Silver does not, but is liable to many
Inconveniences; as Thieves, False and Clipped Money, Counterfeiting, Loss of
Time in Counting, and Chargeable to carry in large Sums.

XVIII. These Bonds will soon become our best Payments, and Coin, for every one
will covet them; nor will any scruple to fetch their Payments at the Office,
more than now they do fetch their Money at the Exchequer, or Lombard Street;
and the Bonds must be transferred at the Office, because the Counterparts are
kept there; the Office becomes Witness to the Payments, and avoids Disputes at
Law.

XIX. All Mankind must confess, That Credit grounded on a good and solid
Security, if it can be made current, is not only as good, but better than Money
it self; for Money does no Man good, until he has disposed of it for good
Security: And I desire to know what Security can be offered so great, and of so
Intrinsic a Value, as these Bonds.

Note, There is no end of Security, as long as there is a Fund to support it;
it runs ad infinitum, and we can never be overburthen'd with it; for it stops
when there is no Occasion for it.

The First Years Account stated.

XX. In Bonds the Debt is -- -- -- 2000000 l. For Interest at 5 l. per Cent.
120000 l. 130000l. For the Office Charges -- 10000 l. The Tax comes to -- -- --
300000 l. The Charges -- -- -- -- -- 130000 l. There will rest in Cash -- --
170000 l.

Thus then at Twelve Months end the Interest and Charges of the Office will be
paid, and there will be 170000 l. in Cash; out of which may be paid 150000 l.
of the Bonds, and keep 20000 l. in Cash, and for the future Pay off Part of the
Debt, proportionable every Six Months, keeping still a Cash of 20000, or 30000
l. more or less, as shall be thought fit.

Thus the Debt of 2000000 l. at the Years end, is diminished to 1850000 l. and
will dwindle away in a few Years, by a Rebate of Interest upon Interest; and by
a small Tax, the Nation will not feel.

XXI. Now, in case greater Sums must be given, or a War carried on, which may
require large Sums, and yearly, so long as a War lasts, then the Taxes must be
made proportionable.

But still there will be no necessity ever to set any Tax above what will pay
double or treble the Interest of the Money given to the Crown: And now, let us
see the Advantages that will arise from this Method of giving Money.

Benefits arising to the Crown, and to the Nation, by this way of giving Money.
I. BY this means the Crown receives the entire Sums of Money, given by the
Parliaments; and the Crown has the Money immediately, without staying till the
Taxes come in, or being obliged to take up Money, or buy Stores at hard Rates,
and paying by uncertain Assignments; so that, part by the raising and
collecting the Taxes, part by taking up Money, and buying Goods on Credit; This
will save very near one Third Part of what is given by the Nation; besides the
great Disappointments our Kings have met with by Delays, and the Nation also;
who expect from the Crown the same thing, as if the Crown had the whole Sums
given, and in due time.

II. The Crown will buy all Stores, at least, 20 per Cent. cheaper than
usually; for Men will prefer these Bonds before any Assignments, or Money it
self; because these Bonds will increase in their Coffers, and are not liable to
a Postpone. For the Crown may as easily (...) back the Money paid out ^^ the
Exchecquer, as stop what is given out for Money, and made current by a Law;
besides, these Bonds will be in the Hands and Possession of the People.

III. This Current Credit will do the duty of Gold and Silver; and is the same
thing in all respects, as so much Money, Imported and Distributed, and added to
the general Stock of the Nation; which will increase our Trade proportionably,
as the Crown will soon find, by the Increase of the Revenue; for we have not
Seven Millions in Money, to support our Trade, and Consumption; and by adding
Two or more Millions of this current Credit, we add proportionably to our Trade
and Consumption.

IV. These Bonds will produce a double Gain to the Nation; first, by drawing
out the Money, which lies dead for want of Security; secondly, Men will Trade
with these Bonds, or draw the Interest, which makes the Bonds daily of more
Value, although they lie dead in their Coffers.

V. Our poorer sort of People may improve their small Talents, without the
Expenses of Scriveners, Brokers, and the like, who daily make a Prey of them,
and often let their Money lie dead, and take not always good Security: But, by
this Method, Men may put their Money to a secure Interest, and without Charges,
and have their Money still in their own keeping, ready to make a new Advantage
by it; which they cannot do by our usual ways, nor be secured, that they shall
have their Money or Interest, when it is due.

This Paragraph ought to be well considered; It shows great Advantages.

VI. This undeniable Security will bring Bullion from abroad, as Holland, and
other Places, where they draw but 4 per Cent. and it will disperse our own
Money, which now lies dead, for want of Security, and make it more free and
common amongst us.

VII. Our Retailers, into whose Hands paseth the greatest part of our current
Cash, will Change or Buy these Bonds, as soon as they have but 5 or 10 l. in
their Shops; for they let such Sums lie by them, till they have a Stock, either
to pay a Debt, or go to Market, which they may as well do with these Bonds; by
which they will gain more in the Interest, than their Share of the Tax will
come to; therefore they will pay Taxes with Joy.

VIII. These Bonds (like Money) will pass through five or six Hundred Hands in
the Year, every Trade gaining 10 l. per Cent. as they must needs do, or they
cannot subsist; because most Traders pay 6l. per Cent. for the Money they Trade
with. Now, I will suppose these Bonds, the one with the other, pass through forty
Hands only in a Year, every Trader gaining but 5 l. per Cent. then every 100 l.
in these Bonds produce 200 l. per Ann. gains to the Nation, as long as they are
standing out. If so, then the Nation may well dispense with the Charges of the
Office and Interest, since for 2000000 l. given, the Nation will gain 4000000
l. the first Year, little less the second and third Years: Consider, then, the
Advantage accrues to the Nation on the whole, and before all the Bonds are paid
off.

IX. I could say much more on every Paragraph, in this Paper, but am loath to be
too tedious; besides, this Business requires to be discoursed; and it does not
become me to say more, till commanded.

Note, This Nation would soon be weary of paying a yearly Tax, to support a
Years War; and it is easier to pay 20 s. a Year, for twenty Years successively,
than to pay down 20 l. at once: Now, by this Method, the Taxes will not be
felt, although they last many Years; and, if required, I could name Taxes, that
would scarce be felt.

Thus far, this may be accounted a Cantore, like that of the States General.

A Clause may be added to the Act, Declaring,
That the Office may issue out Bills to any Person, on Lands, Houses,
Ground-Rents, Merchants Goods, or any thing that is a good Security, at per
Cent. and Redeem the same by Parcels, in equal Sums; the Merchancs paying
Warehouse-Room for Bulky Goods, with Money, or Office-Bills, which must be
concealed.

The Office to be obliged to impart no Man's Concerns to any other Person,
unless the Party concerned desire it.

By this; Men will be free from the Charges of Procuration, and
Prolongation-Money; and, by redeeming by Parcels, it will be more easy; and a
great Help to the Borrowers.

Now, we need not fear too many Bills will be standing out; because, if not
necessary, they will not be issued out; and if necessary, the Necessitous ought
to be helped; and, as fast as they Redeem, so much of the Office-Bonds will be
cancelled.

Note, This Addition makes this Office different from a Cantore.

And the Act may further declare,

That a distinct Appartment, in this Office, shall be fitted; where all
Merchants, and Others, may lodge their Cash, as in the Public, or Private
Banks; Provision being made, by the Act, for the Security of such as lodge
their Cash there, against any Objections of our Critics.

And this being under the Security of the Government, Men will not be liable to
such Losses, as has been by Private Banks.

Credit, thus Established, will of necessity make Money more Plentiful, and
Common amongst us.

As it is not my Part, to write how much must be raised, or advise how; I shall
on'y set down some Things, and the Sums Blank. Millions. Suppose the Debts of
the Nation, and Anticipations, that can be paid off, amount to -- -- -- -- --
To carry on the War the Year 97. -- -- -- -- -- The Interest, and Charge, comes
to -- -- -- Then the Taxes must be only double the Interest, -- -- --

Toward this: First, The Excise, if set on Malt, it would be easily Collected,
and with a third part of the Charges the now Excise is Collected, -- -- -- --
The Customs, according to the old Book of Rates, -- The Window-Tax, as it now
is, -- -- -- The Land Tax, if the Excise continue on Beer, -- --

Millions. A Tax on Course Cloth -- -- -- A little on each On Fine Cloth, -- --
On Stuffs, -- -- On Silks and Velvets, -- The Salt-Tax -- -- -- The Paper-Tax,
-- -- -- --

These Taxes, or any other that shall be thought fit, must amount to so much as
will pay what is necessary.

OBJECTIONS Answered.
Obj. I. THIS is a new Project; and England has long been a Glorious Na^^on,
without this Proposal; and new Methods will not be easy,

Answ. This Objector should then wear a Ruff and Trowses, in lieu of
Rowling-Breeches, and a Cravat, which his Great Grandfather never wore; and,
that we have now altered our Habit, is, because the Habit we now wear, is
easier than formerly were worn: Nay, a Government is alterable, when not easy;
and altered for the Better.

Obj. II. Some think this Credit will lessen the Value of Houses and Lands.

Answ. These Objectors allow then the Credit to be good, and better than Houses
or Lands.

Let these Men make the Titles of their Lands and Houses to be Clear and Good,
then this Credit will do them no harm, but the contrary; if we have more Trade
and Credit, Men will become more able to buy Lands and Houses, which are always
preferrable.

Holland has vast Sums standing out in Obligations, or Bonds, transferrable,
but Current; yet so valuable, that I have sold them in London, at 6 per Cent.
and this does not hinder Lands to be at 40 and 50 Years purchase: And it was
this kind of Credit, or Obligations, that raised that State, and supported it.

Obj. III. How secure us against the Misfortune of the Bankers, or a Strong
Hand?

Answ. The Bankers Money was in the Exchecquer; These Bonds will be in the
Hands and Possession of the People: And I have already said, the Crown may as
easily call back the Money, paid out of the Exchecquer, as stop what is paid
out for Money, and made current by a Law. Secondly, The Office will have little
in it, worth seizing; and we may as well fear the Plundering of Lombard Street,
or the City.

Obj. IV. We shall have nothing but Paper-Money.

Answ. If it does the same Duty, it is as good. By adding this Current Credit,
we do not Banish Gold nor Silver, but make it more Free and Common amongst us;
and Men will rather hoard up these Bonds than Money, because this Species
increases in their Coffers.

Obj. V. My own Objection is, That Men will hoard up these Bond^, as the Best
and Securest-Treasure, and so spoil my Design of making them run in Trade.

But, if they do, they must purchase them with Money or Goods; which then will
turn to the same Account.

If more Objections arise, They shall be readily Answered by William Killigrew.


