THE Ax laid to the Root: OR, One BLOW more at the Foundation of Infant
Baptism, and Church Membership. CONTAINING An EXPOSITION of that Metaphorical
Text of Holy Scripture, MAT. 3. 10. Being the Substance of Two SERMONS lately
Preached, with some Additions. Wherein is showed That God made a Twofold
Covenant with Abraham, and that Circumcision appertained not to the Covenant of
Grace, but to the Legal and External Covenant God made with Abraham's Natural
Seed, as such. TOGETHER With an ANSWER to Mr. John Flavel's last Grand
Arguments in his Vindiciarum Vindex, in his Last Reply to Mr. Philip Carry. Also
to Mr. Rothwell's Paedo-Baptismus vindicatur; as to what seems most material.

PART I.

By BENJAMIN KEACH, Pastor of a Church of Christ, meeting at Horsly-down,
Southwark.

Romans 9. 7. Neither because they are the Seed of Abraham, are they all Chil
dren, etc.

-- ver. 8. That is, they which are the children of the Flesh, these are not
the children of God.

Gal. 4. 24. Which things are an Allegory, for these are the two Covenants.

Gal. 3. 29. And if ye be Christ's then are ye Abraham's Seed.

London, Printed for the Author, and are to be sold by John Harris at the
Harrow in the Poultrey 16^^

THE Epistle to the Reader.
WHEN I first entered on this Text, I did not intend the Publication of the
Sermons; it was not at all in my Thoughts: But after I had preached Two of
them, I was earnestly solicited by diverse, to do it; which, at last, I
consented to do. Yet, because some of the Arguments about that Twofold
Covenant God made with Abraham, being before Published, in my Answer to Mr.
Burkit, I was at a stand in my Mind about it: Yet meeting with Mr. John Flavell
's Vindiciarum Vindex, being (as he says) a full Answer to Mr. Philip Carry 's
Exceptions to his Vindiciae legis and Faedoris, together with a late Treatise,
wrote by Mr. Rothwell, called, Paedo-Baptismus Vindicatus, I was resolved (if
the Bookseller would take the Copy) to expose it to public view, finding no
Person taking any notice of either of those late Treatises, by way of Answer.
The former being so much cried up, as a weighty Piece, I thought it was
necessary to Examine and Detect the seeming Force of his chief Arguments; for
though the Author is deceased, yet I fear his Writings on that Subject, may do
some wrong to the Truth, by hindering such gracious Persons reception of it,
who are willing to be informed, because he was a Man of great Parts, Learning,
and (I hope) of Piety: For, by sad Experience, I perceive some People build
their Faith and Belief of Infant Baptism, on the Credit, and great Veneration
they have of the Asserters of it, saying, How should such Men be Mistaken?
which is a poor Argument; and a great Reproach it is to such Persons: For their
Faith, it seems, stands in the Wisdom of Men, and not in the Power of God, or
certain Testimony of his holy Word -- God may, Reader, for some Reasons known
to himself, hide this and some Truths, from some of his faithful Servants, may
be, as a Rebuke to them for their over-valuing of humane Learning, and to the
People too upon the like account; though the Knowledge of the Tongues I esteem
in its place, and could wish, if the Lord saw it good, all Gospel Ministers had
the Knowledge of the Original Languages; but, (as the Apostle says) God has
chosen the foolish things of the world, to confound the wise, 1 Cor. 1. 27. And
base things, and things that are despised has God chosen, yea, things that are
not to bring to naught things that are, ver. 28. That no Flesh should Glory in
his Presence, God makes use of Men that are of no account, in the esteem of the
Learned World, to confound such who are of great Repute. The Truth is, that
great Author has not missed the Mark, only in asserting Paedo-Baptism, and in
his dark Notions, about the Covenant of Circumcision, but also in a Point of
far greater Moment, viz. In asserting in this very Book, the Conditionality of
the Covenant of Grace:

These are his Words, An antecedent Condition, signifying no more than an Act
of ours, which, though it be neither perfect in every Degree, nor in the least
meritorious of the Benefit conferred, nor performed in our own natural
Strength; yet, according to the Constitution of the Covenant, is required of
us, in order to the Blessings consequent thereupon, by virtue of the Promise;
and consequently, the Benefits and Mercies, granted in the Promise, in this
order, are, and must be suspended by the Donor, or Disposer of them, until it
be performed: such a Condition, we affirm Faith to be, etc.

This grand Error (for so I must call it) the Learned and Reverend Mr. Chauncy
(whom God has graciously raised up to defend his blessed Truth, at this
present time, and for whose Labors we have great cause to Praise the holy Name
of Jehovah) takes notice of, in his late Treatise, which is newly come to my
Hand, before I wrote this Epistle, though my Copy is at the Press, p. 128, 129.

Mr. Flavel (says he) was a worthy Man, but it may be, not without some Hay
and Stubble: I wish it do not prove an attempting at another Foundation,
besides Christ, etc. You tell us (says he) what an Antecedent Condition is,
That it signifies no more than an Act of ours, and such is Faith. I suppose you
and he mean, in distinction from a consequent Condition, the Antecedent gains
the Estate, the Lawyers reckon it the Purchase-Money; the Consequent Condition
keeps it, and it is the Quit-rent; which, if it be not duly paid, the Lord can
enter and take the Estate; so that Faith you will have, to be the Antecedent:
Money, deposited and laid down, before you have any of your Spiritual Estate;
and you say, it signifies no more than an Act of ours. I pray, Whose should it
be but ours? if the Condition be to be performed by us; and, Why is this put
in? it signifies no more, unless the meaning be, that Christ's Righteousness
should be shut out, and it should be reckoned, under the Nature of this
Condition, merely as an Act of ours, without Respect to Christ, the Author of
it, and Christ the true Object of it: -- See him at large.

Again (he says) Every faedoral Condition is Ex pacto Meritorious, so that you
may challenge your Bargain upon Performance, if it be but 20 Guineys to
purchase an 100 l. per Annum, so that we have only your Word for it, that it is
not meritorious, when it is so in reality: the nature of the thing speaks it to
the understanding of all Men of Sense. No, no, do not think to wheedle Christ
out of his Merits, and God out of the Honor of his Free Grace, and us, out of
the Comfort of both: You say, it is not performed in our natural Strength: No;
and yet a Condition of a Covenant made with Man: a most unreasonable Thing, to
require a Condition of a Covenant of one, that we know has no Strength to
perform it. If a Rich Man should offer an Estate of 1000 l. a Year to a poor
Man, that he knew was not worth a Groat, provided he fetched him 20 l. of his
own Money, this Act would be reckoned a mocking, and ridiculing this poor
Wretch. God did not require that small Condition of Adam, but that he actually
had strength to perform it; you will say, God will give him ability to perform:
So he did to Adam, previous to the Covenant, etc. See his farther Answer, p.
130. God will, in due time, bring down and abase the Pride of Man; O what a
Doctrine do some Men preach! it is time, indeed, now to lay aside our lesser
Differences, and make Head against such capital Errors. The Foundation seems
now to be struck at --

Reader, since I preached these Sermons, I met with Reverend Mr. Cotton on the
Covenant, who confirms the same thing, concerning the Ax being laid to the Root
of the Trees, Speaking of that Text, Mal. 4. 1. The Day comes that shall leave
them neither Root nor Branch: There are two Things in the Root, (says he)

1st. The First is the Root of Abraham 's Covenant, which this People much
trusted upon, and that is it of which John the Baptist speaks, Now is the Ax is
laid to the Root of the Trees, etc. This is spoken in Mat. 3. 9. after he had
said, Think not to say within your selves, we have Abraham to our Father, ver.
8. So that all their Confidence they had in Abraham 's Covenant, Temple, and
Tabernacle, and such Things, is burnt up, and so they have no Root left them to
stand upon: But,

2dly, There is something more in it; for, with this Spirit of burning, the
Lord, by the Power of this Spirit, does cut us off from any Power of our own
natural or spiritual Gifts, whereby we thought to lay hold on Jesus Christ, and
we are cut off hereby from all Confidence that we have in our own sufficiency,
etc. For there is an usual Confidence that we have in our own state, though the
Lord has cut us off from the righteousness of our Parents, and from boasting
of his Ordinance; yet we think there is some Power left in us. Cotton 's Treaty
of the Cov. p. 177, 178. Again he says, It is spoken of the Ministry of John
the Baptist, which did burn as an Oven, and left them neither the Root of
Abraham 's Covenant, nor the Branches of their own good Works. He cutteth them
off from the Covenant of Abraham; and so by cutting them off from the Root, he
leaves them no ground to trust to, Page 21, 22.

I hope, if this Text be well considered, and our Arguments, in the ensuing
Treatise, no wise and impartial Person will find there is any ground for Men to
plead for Infant Baptism, from the Covenant God made with Abraham. I shall say
no more, but leave what I have said to the Blessing of the God of Truth (who is
coming forth to shake all false Foundations and States; yea, both Heaven and
Earth, that that which cannot be shaken, may remain) and rest thy Servant in
the work of the Gospel,

From my House near Horsly-down, Southwark, this 6th. of March, 1693. BENJAMIN
KEACH.
Reader, My Answer to Mr. Flavel and Mr. Rothwell, I find will not come into
the first Part; but the Second is going to the Press, where you will have it.



THE Ax laid to the Root, etc. OR, One BLOW more at the Foundation of Infant
Baptism, and Church Membership.
MAT. III. 10. And now also the Ax is laid to the Root of the Trees, every Tree
therefore that brings not forth good Fruit; is hewn down and cast into the
Fire.
THIS Text is metaphorical; there is no great difference between a Metaphor and
an express Similitude; and for the better understanding the Mind of God
therein, I shall

1. Open the Scope and Coherence thereof. 2. Explain the Parts and Terms
therein contained. 3. I shall observe some Points of Doctrine reducable
therefrom. 4. Shall improve the Whole by way of Application.
First, From the Scope and Coherence of the Place, it is evident, that John
Baptist endeavors to take off the Jews, particularly the Pharisees and
Sadduces, from the external and legal Covenant God made with Abraham and his
Fleshly-seed, or Offspring. See verse. 7. But when he saw many of the Pharisees
and Sadduces come to his Baptism, he said unto them, O generation of Vipers,
who has warned you to flee from the Wrath to come.

Historians tell us, That there were Three more eminent Religious Sects amongst
the Jews, the First were called Essenes, of whom we do not read in the Holy
Scripture; their main Doctrine was Fate; they (say our Annotators) ascribed all
Things to it. Secondly, The Sadduces were directly opposite to the Essenes,
they ascribed nothing to Fate, but asserted the Liberty and Power of Man's
Will, in the most largest Sense, or in the extravagant Height; they denied the
Immortality of the Soul of Man, the Resurrection, Angels, etc. All which, the
Pharisees owned. See Act. 23. 8.

The Pharisees, were outwardly a very Zealous sort of People; and, though they
were tainted with that false Opinion of the Freedom of Man's Will to do Good,
yet they* ascribed much to the Providence and Grace of God; they were
Interpreters of the Law, and separated themselves from others; they spent much
time in Fasting and Prayer: 1. They held, nevertheless, a Righteousness by the
Works of the Law, by which they thought they were justified and accepted of
God, and so stumbled at the Stumbling-Stone, Romans 9. 32. 2. They gave a very
corrupt Interpretation of the Law. 3. They held many un-written Traditions of
equal force with the Law of God; by which means, they made void the
Commandments of God. 4. They were a mere Hypocritical sort of Men in their
Practices, being very strict and zealous for the smaller Matters of the Law,
and neglected the weightier Things thereof.

Whether these Pharisees and Sadduces came with an intention to be Baptized, or
only out of Curiosity, is hard to be resolved, since it is said, They rejected
the Counsel of God against themselves, being not Baptized by John.

John however, sharply treates them both, calling them a Generation of Vipers,
a sort of Serpents, of whom it is said, they make way into the World through the
Bowels of their Dam. It may be upon this Account, he gave them that Name, or so
called them, who thought through the Bowels (as I may so say of their
Ancestors) or being the Seed of Abraham, or the Offspring of Godly
Progenitors, to come to Heaven; who has warned you to flee from the Wrath to
come. What is the Reason that you come to my Baptism? Whereas some of you think
there is no Resurrection, no Heaven, no Hell, no Angels, nor no Spirits; or,
you, who think you are so Righteous, as you need no Repentance, and so need
fear no wrath to come, From whence comes this to pass that you seem to fear, or
to be afraid of future Wrath, and the Vengeance of an angry God? Bring forth
therefore Fruits meet for Repentance, ver. 8.

O come now and put your selves among the crowd of Poor Sinners, and Godly
Penitent Persons; Repent of your false Doctrines you have taught; Repent of the
corrupt and wicked Notions and Opinions you hold, and of the Vain and
Hypocritical Lives you have led, and think not that a bear Profession of this
will do neither; for you must bring forth Fruits of true Repentance, Fruits of
true Holiness, from a thorough change of Heart that must be wrought in you.

But, (as if he should say) I know your Thoughts, I have heard what a Belief
you are of, you think you are in Covenant with God, and so are faedorally Holy,
and in a saved and safe Condition, because you have Abraham to your Father, you
conclude, that Covenant God made with Abraham, and his natural or fleshly Seed,
was the Covenant of Grace; and so the Promise is sure to you: And therefore, he
adds, ver. 7. And think not to say within your selves, we have Abraham to our
Father: For I say unto you, that God is able of these Stones, to raise up
Children to Abraham.

You promise good to your selves, because you are the natural Offspring of
believing Abraham, you rest upon your Descent from him. The very same Plea we
find they made to our blessed Savior, Joh. 8. 33. We be Abraham 's seed, and
were never in Bondage to any Man. How say thou, ye shall be made Free: We
were never under the Bondage of Sin, as others are; that Covenant made with
Abraham being the Covenant of Grace, we are thereby set at Liberty, and no Man
shall by his Doctrine make us believe the contrary, we are a free People, in
respect of our Souls and spiritual Privileges, (for they could not mean
otherwise, because they had often been in Bondage to Men, in respect of
external Liberty and Freedom: First to Pharaoh King of Egypt, and then to
Nebuchadnezzar, and now were so in Bondage under the Romans) I know (says our
Savior) that ye are Abraham's Seed, according to the Flesh: They were his
Offspring; but that was no spiritual Advantage to them, though it did give them
Right to legal Privileges and Ordinances under the Law, yet it signified
nothing now, it would not profit them under the Gospel Dispensation, they must
be the spiritual Seed of Abraham, and do the Works of Abraham, and walk in his
Steps; which they did not, and therefore the Lord Jesus told them, verse. 44. Ye
are of your Father the Devil, and the Lusts of your Father you will do.

John Baptist, intimates the same thing, when he called them a Generation of
Vipers; though they entitled themselves to the Covenant of Grace, (like as some
do now adays) upon that, in Genesis 17. extended to Abraham's Seed, as well as to
himself, and concluded, they were Members of God's Church, then on Earth, and
could not therefore be denied any Privilege, or Ordinance, that of Right
belonged to Covenant Children: But this great Prophet knew how blind and
deceived they were, not understanding, that there were two Covenants made with
Abraham, and also a Twofold Seed (viz.) a Carnal or Natural, and a Spiritual
Seed: they thought that Promise of God, made with Abraham, must be made of none
Effect, if they should not be owned or allowed to be the Seed of Abraham; but,
(says the Baptists) God is able of these Stones, to raise up Children to
Abraham. If he should turn Stones into Men and Women, who have Abraham's Faith,
they would be certainly the true Seed of Abraham, and not such as they were,
though they naturally proceeded from his Loins, according to the Flesh; or, God
could of the Gentiles raise up Children to Abraham, and so make good his
Promise to him, who said, In thy seed, shall all the nations of the earth be
blessed.

And now farther to convince them, and so to take away, for ever, all their
Hope and Pretenses of Right to Gospel Ordinances, and Church Membership, by
virtue of the Covenant made with Abraham; or, from the Consideration of their
being his natural or fleshly Seed, he in the words I first read to you, says,
And now also the Ax is laid to the Root of the Trees, therefore every Tree
which brings forth not good Fruit, is hewn down and cast into the Fire, verse.
10.

Now, this now referrs to the time here in this Place, sometimes it referrs to
the Matter or Occasion of what is spoken, Now the Ax is laid to the Root of the
Trees; whatever is meant by the Root of the Trees, this is certain, the Ax was
not till now, or until this time so laid, or thus laid to the Root: We cannot
understand what the Holy Ghost intends hereby, unless we observe, and well
consider the Scope and Coherence of the Text, which does clearly unfold the
whole drift and purport of the Baptists. He showed them before in the Context,
that their Plea to Gospel Baptism, was not good nor pleadable, i. e. We are
Abraham's Seed; they might Object, and say,

Obj. All the seed of Abraham, were taken into covenant with God, and all that
sprang from his loins, were members of the visible Church; and had right to the
external rites, ordinances and privileges thereof.

Ans. This John Baptist seems to grant, i. e. That it was so from Abraham's
Time until these Days, or under the Law or old Covenant-Dispensation; they
had, he denies not, a Right to Jewish Church Membership, and Legal Ordinances:
But what of that, Now the Ax is laid to the Root of the Trees; that is, as
Abraham was the Root, or common Covenanting-Father, as concerning the Flesh,
out of which Root, all the Jews, his natural Offspring, sprang; and, upon
which Foundation, they and their natural Church State was founded: Yet, now the
Ax is laid to this Root, i. e. To this Covenant, i. e. The legal, or external
Covenant made with Abraham; and down must the Building fall, when the
Foundation is removed; down goes the Trees, when the Root (out of which they
grew) is cut down. So much as to the Scope and Coherence of the Words.

Secondly, I shall explain the Terms and Parts of the Text:

1. Show farther what is meant by the Root. 2. What is intended by the Trees.
3. What is meant by the Ax. 4. What by laying the Ax to the Root of the Trees,
and by cutting down. 5. What by the Fire, and casting into the Fire.
First, By the Root is meant, that which bears up the Branches, and on which
the Tree and Branches stand and grow; and it is from hence, from this Allusion,
the Baptists makes use of these Words and Expressions. Now the Root, whereof he
speaks, (as I conceive) was that Covenant God made with Abraham, and his
natural Seed, or Offspring; which Covenant did, in a mystical Sense, as
clearly bear up the National Church of Israel, and all the Trees, i. e. Members
or Branches thereof, as a common natural Root does the Tree, or Trees that grow
out of it.

2. And as by Root may be meant that Covenant made with Abraham, and his
natural Seed, (from whence the National Policy, and Church of the Jews sprang,
and was born up, and from whence it grew and was to abide) until the Gospel
Dispensation came in, and was established; so also by the Root may be intended
the Foundation of all their Hopes, Confidence, and outward Privileges: For
that, they (I mean the natural Offspring of Abraham) had great Confidence in
the Flesh, by means of that legal or external Ministration they were under,
cannot be denied, and had many outward Rights and Privileges also, above all
People then in the World; and if so, (I mean if this be granted, which I am
sure cannot be denied) then it follows there was some Root, Ground, or
Foundation, which they had, and upon which they built, and laid Claim to those
outward Ecclesiastical and Civil Rights and Privileges; and that the Ground
Root, or Foundation of all this, was that Covenant God made with Abraham and
his natural Seed, is apparent to all who are not willingly Blind; for before
those Covenant-Tranctions with Abraham, we read not that the People, from whom
Abraham sprang, had any such Rights or Privileges granted to them, and what
outward Privileges God promised them afterward by Moses, it is signified in
diverse Places to be upon the Account of the Covenant made with Abraham, etc.
And according to the exact Time, told by the Lord to Abraham, God brought his
natural Seed out of the Land of Egypt.

This, from the Scope and Coherence of the Words; therefore I must affirm, is
Primarily, and Chiefly intended by the Root of the Trees in this Place: But,

Thirdly, By Root, in a more remote Sense, may be meant the state and standing
of every Ungodly, Unbelieving and Impenitent Person; let their Hopes,
Expectation, and Confidence, be what it will, if he be not a good Tree, a
Believing and True penitent Person, his Root, or Foundation on which he builds,
let it be what it will, cannot secure him, for down he must go with all his
vain Hopes, Works, Expectation and Confidence whatsoever with him, For now is
the Ax laid to the Root of the Trees.

Secondly, By Trees are meant Men and Women, but chiefly the Seed of the Stock
of Abraham, according to the Flesh; of whom the National Church of the Jews was
made up, and did consist; as also, all wicked and unbelieving Persons
whatsoever, who embrace not the Offers of Grace, in the Gospel, or believe not
in Jesus Christ. For, as the Church of God is compared to a good Tree, and
godly Men, in particular, are called good Trees, so is the adulterated Church
of the Jews, compared to an evil Tree; and wicked and ungodly Persons, called,
Evil and corrupt Trees: Yet it might be here noted, that they are in this Place
compared to Fruit Trees, though to such that bring not forth good Fruit, as (by
the Prophet) the Jewish Church is compared to a Vine, and an Olive Tree, though
she brought forth sour Grapes, Isa. 5.

Thirdly, As to the Ax, we all know an Ax is that Instrument used by Men to cut
down Trees, at the Pleasure, or for the Profit of the Owner thereof; by the Ax
here, may be intended diverse Things, by which God may be said to cut down
impenitent Sinners, or unfruitful Churches, or Bodies and Souls of Men. For
cutting down may refer,

1. To the Souls of Men, etc. 2. To their outward Rights and Privileges. 3. To
their Bodies and Souls both. 4. To their external, fleshly and corrupt Church
State.
First, To the Souls of Sinners, which is done by an Act of God's Justice, when
he cuts them off, from profiting by the means of Grace, giving them up to
unbelief and hardness of Heart: And thus he in Judgment dealt with the Jews.

2. By giving them up to blindness of Mind, when they have Ears, and hear not;
Eyes, and see not; Hearts, and understand not; God utterly leaving them to a
seared Conscience, or gives them up to their own Heart's Lusts, and to walk in
their own Counsel. Then they, in respect of their Souls, may be said to be cut
down in Wrath for ever.

3. Or, when he takes away the Kingdom of God from them, i. e. The Dispensation
of the Gospel. Therefore shall the Kingdom of Heaven be taken from you, and
given to another People, etc.

Secondly, It may referr to the cutting down their Religious and Civil Rights,
and Privileges.

1. When God takes away all the external and spiritual Immunities, Blessings
and Favors, a People once enjoyed.

No Gospel more preached to them, no Ministers to preach it, the Hedge of
Protection and Preservation plucked up, and ravenous Beasts let in to devour
them; like as God threatened the National Church of Israel, Isa. 5. The Sun to
shine upon them no more, nor the Clouds to rain upon them. This is a dismal
cutting down.

Thirdly, Their Bodies left to be destroyed by mercyless Enemies, or cut down
by Famine, or Pestilence, as this very People were dealt with, when God brought
in the Romans upon them, and their Souls cut off for their final Unbelief and
Impenitency.

Fourthly, It may referr to the cutting down of their Church State, Sacrifices,
Priesthood, Sabbaths, Temples, and all taken away and overthrown, and another
People, another Seed, and more spiritual Church, constituted and established in
the room thereof. And thus God dealt with this People, i. e. the Church of the
Jews also, they were broken off, or cut down, and the Gentiles were grafted in,
as the Apostle shows at large, Romans 11.

The Ax, by which they are cut down, may be,

First, The Dispensation of God's Providence, or Time; Time is pictured with a
Sithe; but then Man is compared to Grass, but it may be pictured with an Ax,
since Men are compared to Trees; a Sith is no fit Instrument to cut down Trees:
Men, as you have heard, are here compared to Trees, and when once the Time's
set for the Jewish Church to stand, or abide in the World, was expired, Time,
or the Dispensation of God's Providence, like an Ax, cut it down for ever; and
so will the prefixed Time appointed by the Lord, when it is come, even cut down
at the Root, the bloody Idolatrous Church of Rome, when the Beasts 1260 years
are expired, down she shall go with Vengeance; and unless Time lays The Ax at
her Root, and at the Root of all other Corrupt and National Churches, there
will be no cutting them down, nor will there be any, then able to save her or
them: the standing of all Humane and Ecclesiastical States and Constitutions,
are determined by the Almighty, who works all Things according to the Counsel
of his own Will.

2. The Ax also may referr to the Gospel: The Word of God is an Ax to hew and
square some Persons for God's spiritual Building, and to cut down others also,
as Trees that are Rotten, and bear no good Fruit, Therefore (says the Lord) I
have hewn them by the Prophets; and what follows, mark it, I have slain them by
the words of my Mouth, Hos. 6, 5. The Word of God either kills or cures; it is
either a savior of Life unto Life, or the savior of Death unto Death, 2. Cor.
2. 16. Like as Sweetmeats are to some Pleasant and Comfortable, and to others
Pernicious and Deadly.

The Abuse of Gospel Grace cut the Jews down, and so it will all others who
slight and contemn it; the Word either softens, or hardens, like as the Sun,
who shining on the Wax, it softens that; but shining on the Clay, it hardens
that. When the Word comes in Judgment, then it is like an Ax in the Hand of
God's Justice. I find one Learned Man speaking thus on this Place, viz. The
Word of God, which is a spiritual Ax, cutteth down spiritually Wicked Men, and
Hypocrites, like rotten and barren Trees. This is it, which is elsewhere meant
by plucking up, destroying, hardening, etc. Some, (says he) expound this, not
of spiritual Judgments, threatened in his Word against impenitent Sinners, but
of the Power of the Romans, which were the Instruments of God, to destroy
utterly the unfaithful and wicked Generation of the Jews. The former is (says
he) the best Exposition, but I conceive it may referr to both.

3. The Ax may refer to Men, whom God makes use of, as Instruments in his Hand,
to cut down and destroy a Wicked and God-provoking People: Hence wicked Rulers
and Kings, whom God raises up as Instruments in his Hand, to chastise and cut
down a rebellious People, are called His Sword, and the Rod of his Wrath and
Indignation, Psalm. 17. 14. Arise, O Lord, disappoint him, cast him down,
deliver my Soul from the wicked, which is thy Sword. And thus the Assyrian were
an Ax in God's Hand, to use, as he pleased, and the Romans afterward, to the
Jews likewise.

Moreover, God's Israel is called his Ax, Thou art my Battel-Ax, and Weapons of
War; with thee I will break in pieces the Nations, and with thee will I destroy
Kingdoms. God's People, in the last Days, which are now very near, shall be his
Ax, by whom, as Instruments in his Hand, he will destroy Babylon, Jer. 51. 20,
24. And I will render unto Babylon, etc. all the evil they have done to Sion,
in your sight, says the Lord. Reward her as she has rewarded you, double to
her double. Rev. 18. 6. Give her Blood to drink, for she is worthy. The Stone
cut out of the Mountains without Hands, shall break to pieces all the Powers of
the Earth, that oppose Christ's Kingdom, or, that stand in the way of its
Establishment, Dan. 3. 34. 44.

4. By the Ax, may in the general be meant God's Wrath, however it is, or may
be executed, or upon whom; Wrath will sooner, or later, cut down all the
Ungodly, both false Churches, and tyrannical Powers of the Earth, and all who
continue in Unbelief and in Rebellion against God.

The laying the Ax to the Root, discovers the final Fall and Ruin of Sinners,
whether considered as a Church, or as particular Persons, dig up or cut down
the Root, and down falls the Body and all the Branches of the Tree.

Fifthly, and Lastly, Therefore every Tree that brings not forth good Fruit,
shall be hewn down and cast into the Fire. Now he draws a necessary Inferrence
and Conclusion from the Premises.

Every Tree, that is, every Man and Woman, or every Corrupt Church, be they who
they will, either Jew or Gentile, Babylonian or Christian, if not Plants of
God's planting, if not Fruitful to God, if they Answer not his Design and End,
if they bring not forth good Fruit, they shall be hewn down and cast into the
Fire of external and eternal Wrath; a Fire says the Lord, is kindled in my
anger, and it shall burn to the lowest Hell. Wrath ceases, and shall cease on
them here; but at last they shall be cast into Hellfire, where the worm dies
not, and the fire is not quenched, Mark. 9. 46.

1. The Words being thus opened and explained, I shall take notice of two or
three Points of Doctrine.

1. Doct. Now the Dispensation is changed, to be of the natural Root, or of the
National Church of the Jews, or the Seed of Abraham, according to the Flesh, as
such is no Ground of Church Membership; or, it is no Argument to be admitted
into the Gospel Church, or to Gospel-Baptism. 2. Doct. Now in the times of the
Gospel God is, and will be, severe with all ungodly, unbelieving and impenitent
Sinners he strikes at their Root, at the Root of all their Hopes, false Faith,
or fleshly Confidence whatsoever.
It Is the first of these Propositions I shall in the first place insist upon
and as I may be enabled, explain and prosecute amongst you; but the Time being
near gone, let me now with a brief word or two, conclude at this Season.

1. Caution. Take heed on what you build your Hopes of Justification and
Salvation, what is that which bears up your Spirits: for if you are Trees that
grow not out of the true root, Jesus Christ, and the Covenant of Grace; if you
have not Union with the Lord Jesus, or are not built on that Foundation, or
Cornerstone God has laid in Sion, down you fall; for now the ax is laid to
the Root of the Trees.

2. Enquiry. Is not Morality a civil and honest Life, Doing to all as you would
be done unto, the Ground or Foundation of your Hopes? Do you build upon this?
if it be so, tremble: remember Christ says, Except a man be born again, he
cannot see the Kingdom of God. Joh. 3. 3.

If you have no other Ground of Hope, but from your own Moral Righteousness,
when Death comes with his Ax, down you will go, and be cast into the Fire.

3. Consider, All you profane and ungodly Ones, what is that which bears your
Hopes up, what do you build upon; is it not on the mere Mercy of God, or Death
of Christ: God (say you) is gracious, slow to anger, and we therefore have
Hopes, and do trust to that: Christ dyed for Sinners, etc. You say right, God
is merciful; but what then, will you therefore presumptuously go on in ungodly
and wicked Courses, oh! know he is just as well as gracious, and will in no
wise clear the guilty. Exodus 34. 7. Except ye repent therefore, ye shall all
likewise perish, Luke 13. 3. 5. Shall the Goodness of God, which should lead
you to Repentance be thus evilly improved; i. e. to strengthen your Hands, and
encourage you to sin against him, and provoke him? It Is I fear with you as
Solomon speaks. Eccl. 8. 11. Because Sentance against an evil Work is not
executed speedily, therefore the hearts of the sons of men are fully set in
them to do wickedly.

Christ it is true, dyed for Sinners, but you have no True Faith in him, he dyed
to save Sinners from their Sins, and that they might live to him. See my Text,
now the Ax is laid to the Root of the Trees, if you believe not on Christ, if
you are not made new Creatures, 1 Cor. 5. 17. the Ax will cut you down, and
that with Vengeance, and Wrath will at last cast you into the Fire: you must
learn to know the way of Salvation, and how the Mercy of God shines forth in a
Mediator: Christ has satisfied his Justice, and by him you must come to God
out of Christ, he is a consuming fire. Abused Mercy, O Sinner! will be turned
at last into Fury; except you obtain an Interest in Jesus Christ, you are
undone; for the Wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against all ungodliness
and unrighteousness of men, Romans 1.

3. Or are you Self-righteous Persons? Do you build on your own Righteousness,
like the Jews and hypocritical Pharisees; you, may be, think your States Good,
because you are not Swearers, Drunkards, etc. may be, you read, pray, and hear
Sermons, and give to the Poor, and do much good; but if you build your Hopes of
Heaven on these Things; down this Ax will cut you also: Except your
Righteousness exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes, and Pharisees, you shall
in no wise enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew. 5. 20. nay, you must be
found in the Righteousness of Christ, all ours is but dung, Phil. 3. 8, 9. you
must in a word, bring forth good fruit, every Soul of you, or perish, and this
you cannot do, till your Hearts are changed, and so you become good Trees: make
the tree good, and then the fruit will be good; an evil Tree cannot bring forth
good fruit, etc. all Works of unregenerate Persons, yea their Religious Duties,
are but dead Works, not good fruits, nor can they bring forth good Fruits,
unless they are planted by Faith into Jesus Christ: nay, I must tell you that
Gospel-Holiness will not save us, it must be the Righteousness of God by Faith.

Sermon II.
MAT. III. 10. And now also the Ax is laid to the Root of the Trees, every Tree
therefore that brings not forth good Fruit; is hewn down and cast into the
Fire.
THE Proposition I am to prosecute, you may remember is this, considering the
Context, viz. Now the dispensation is changed to be of the natural root or the
Seed of Abraham according to the flesh, is no ground for Church Membership, or
no Argument to be admitted into the Gospel Church, or to Gospel Baptism.

You say you have Abraham to your Father, or you are the Children of Believers,
or you have believing Parents: Well, but what of this, (as if John should say)
this will do you no good now, this will stand you now in no steed, this will
give you no Right to Gospel Ordinances, nor particularly to Gospel Baptism;
'tho' it did to Circumcision, and Legal Ordinances, and Jewish Church
Membership.

For Hager and her Son are cast out, that are the Old Covenant, and the Fleshly
Seed; this old Root and Right, now in Gospel Days is struck at. The Ax is laid
to the Roots of the Trees, i. e. To your old standing on the Old Covenant Root,
as you are the lineal Seed of Abraham: The time is come now, that the Old
Covenant, and Covenant Seed, are to be rooted up, the old House and
Constitution pulled down; God is now about to build a new Temple, and a more
spiritual House, a spiritual Temple of living Stones; and rather then he will
want Materials, he can of these Stones raise up Children unto believing
Abraham, and so make good the Covenant of Grace, or Gospel Covenant made with
him: Now you must be united to a living Foundation, i. e. Believe in Christ,
whose way I am come to prepare, and make ready fit Matter for this new
Building, namely, the Gospel Church, which is not to be, by natural descent
from Abraham as such, but only those who have the Faith of Abraham; yea, that
Faith he had not in Circumcision, but in Uncircumcision, or before he was
Circumcised. You must grow out of a spiritual Root, i. e. Be Married to Christ
(your first Husband, i. e. The Law or Old Covenant is Just at the point of
Death) that so ye may bring forth Fruit to God, Romans 7. 4. But to proceed,

I shall prove this Proposition,

viz. That the Dispensation is now changed, to be of that natural Root or
National Church of the Jews, or the Seed of Abraham, according to the Flesh, is
no ground for Church Membership, no argument for admittance into the Gospel
Church, or to Gospel Baptism.

1. Because it is positively said, that there is a change of the whole Law, i.
e. The Levitical Priesthood, legal Ordinance, legal Church, and legal Church
Membership are changed and gone: that so the betterCovenant, and more spiritual
Church, and Church Membership might be established; For the Priesthood being
changed, there is made of necessity, a change also of the Law. Heb. 7. 12. It Is
so changed, as it is abolished, to make way for this: (as the late Annotators
observe,) the mutation of the Priesthood, indispensably requires the change of
the legal Covenant, which hereafter I shall prove, was not the Covenant of
Grace, but is directly called the Old Covenant; the Covenant of Grace is but
one, and that never changes.

This was made necessary by the Decree of God (as they note) who determined,
that both the Priesthood and Law should expire together like, (say I,) as an
old Will or Testament does, when the Testator has made and confirmed his Last
Will and Testament. When Christ, the Gospel High Priest, had (says our
Annotations) in his own Person and Work, perfected all of it in Heaven, he
roots out that Order of Priesthood, and demolished the Temple and City, to
which he confined the Administration, and scatters the People which would
cleave to it; so as all Designs and Endeavors of Jews, or of Apostate
Christian to repair or restore it, has been ineffectual to this Day. What can
be more clear, Sirs, then this? that the Old House, or Right of
Church Membership, is overturned at the very Root, for

If the Covenant, for Incovenanting the Fleshly Seed is changed or abolished,
and no new Law or new Precept is given forth for the bringing them in again,
What Ground is there left for any wise, seeing, and faithful Man, to Plead for
Infants Church Membership; but it is evident, the former is true, i. e. that
Covenant, by virtue of which, they had Right to Circumcision and Church
Membership; or out of which Root that sprang is gone, changed, and abolished
for ever, and no new Law or Precept is given forth, for the bringing them into
the Gospel Church, as such. To this Text let me add another, which farther
confirms it.

2. For if that first Covenant had been faultless, then should no place have
been sought for the second; but finding fault with them, he says, Behold the
days come, says the Lord, when I will make a new Covenant with the house of
Israel, and the House of Judah, Heb. 8. 7, 8.

It was not faulty in it self, but Holy, Just, and Good; it requiring perfect
Righteousness of him that would be Justified, and therefore, could not give
Life; the Creature being weak and unable to perform the Requirements of it; and
therefore, Paul says, What the law could not do, in that it was weak, through
the flesh, God sending his own Son in likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin
condemned sin in the flesh, Romans 8. 3.

It discovers Sin, and condemns for Sin, but could not justify the Sinner in
God's sight from Sin: He that kept it not perfectly, yea continued not in doing
all Things written therein, was cursed by it: He that was Circumcised, was
bound to keep the whole Law that Rite obliged them, it seems to perform perfect
Obedience; and yet some affirm, it was a Precept of the Gospel Covenant; but
more of this by and by: But say some, Was not Circumsion a Privilege? Did it
not Profit them? The Apostle answers this Question:

For Circumcision verily profits, if thou keep the Law, but if thou be a
breaker of the Law, thy Circumcision is made Uncircumcision: See how the
Apostle brings in Circumcision, verse 23. Thou that make thy boast of the Law,
through breaking the Law, dishonourest thou God. He, it is evident, shows, That
Circumcision appertained to the Law, to the Old Covenant, or Covenant of Works;
for Circumcision profits if thou keep the Law, etc. No Profit, no Advantage
by Circumcision, unless the Circumcised keep the Law; That is, (says the late
Annotations) perfectly, to which Circumcision obliges, Gal 5. 5. Now this
being so, the First Covenant being weak, and faulty, (i. e. through the
insufficiency and weakness of the Creature, he being not able to answer its
just Demands; God in his infinite Mercy sent his own Son, in our Nature and
Stead, to fulfill the Righteousness thereof) he sought and found out the Second
Covenant, and the First is gone, which brings me to the Third Proof of the
Point.

3. Heb. 10. 9. He took away the first, that might establish the second. There
is a First and Second Covenant, or an Old, or a New, the First must not be
confounded with the Second, nor the Second with the First, because quite
different in their Nature, Design and End: The First Covenant was made, it is
true, primarily with the First Adam, and all Mankind in him; that was the First
Original, or Beginning of it; and then to him it did give Life, whilst he stood
by his Obedience to it; but that Ministration of it, of which the Apostle
speaks, and calls the First Covenant, was that which God gave to Abraham's
Seed, according to the Flesh, by Moses. and to assure Abraham, that unto his
Seed should be given that Law, or the Oracles of God, etc. he gave him the
Covenant or Precept of Circumcision, Romans 3. 1, 2. It served as a Pledge of the
Law, and obliged them to keep it; therefore under this old Covenant, or First
Covenant, it is evident, came in Circumcision, and the Policy and National
Church of the Jews, and all other legal and external Rights and Privileges
whatsoever, both the National Church and Church Membership; but when the Root
was struck at, i. e. The First Covenant was took away, all its Rights, Laws,
Privileges and Appurtenances whatsoever, went with it; so that now we (says
the Apostle) know no man after the flesh, 2. Cor. 5. That is, we prefer or
esteem no Man better then others, upon the score of the First Covenant, or
Fleshly Privileges, i. e. being of the Seed of Abraham, or of the Church of
Jews, Old things being past away, and all things being become New, all Types,
Sacrifices, Priest, and Priesthood, legal place of Worship, legal time of
Worship, legal Ministers, and legal maintenance of those Ministers, the legal
Church, and legal Church Membership, were all taken away, when the Covenant was
took away; and thus the Ax is laid to the root of the trees, by the
establishing the Gospel Dispensation, the Antitype being come, and the Heir
come to full Age, God deals with us now, no more, as with Children in Nonage;
but as with Men who are come to Knowledge and Understanding. This I desire may
be considered, that whatsoever was a Type or Shadow, did appertain to the Old
Covenant; and a great Error or Mistake it is, for any to say, the Shadows of the
Ceremonal Law were Gospel, because they pointed to the Gospel; which Mistake I
shall farther clear up hereafter, and proceed to the Fourth Proof.

Gal. 4. 30. Cast out the Bondwoman and her Son.

What is meant by the Bond-women Agar, and Ishmael her Son, you may see, if you
read verse. 23, 24, 25. It is written, that Abraham had two sons, the one by a
bond-maid, the other by a free woman, verse. 22. But he, who was born of the
bond-women, was born after the Flesh; but he of the free woman was by promise.

By being born after the Flesh, is opposed to him that was born by the Promise,
the meaning is Ishmael; though he was Abraham's Seed or Son, according to the
Flesh, yet he was not his Seed nor Son according to the Promise, or Covenant of
Grace, God made with Abraham.

Which things are an Allegory; for these are the two Covenants, the one from
Mount Sinai, which gendereth to bondage. ver. 24.

An Allegory, is that by which another thing or things are meant; or it has a
mystical Signification; more is to be understood then is expressed literally.

i. e. Agar held forth the first Covenant God made with Abraham's fleshly Seed,
and Ishmael the Children of the first Covenant; Sarah signified the Gospel, or
the New Covenant; and Isaac the Children of the New Covenant.

Nevertheless what says the Scripture? Cast out the Bondwoman and her son;
for the son of the Bondwoman shall not be Heir with the son of the free woman.
ver. 30.

The Drift and Scope of the Spirit of God in ^his place is (as I conceive)
First, To show that there were two Covenan^ made with Abraham, (which no doubt
he himself, who is called the Friend of God, well understood) one with his
natural Seed as such; the other with his spiritual Seed as such. Secondly, That
the casting out of the Bondwoman shows the Abrogation of the first Covenant,
and all the external foederal and fleshly Rights and Privileges thereof, and
the casting out of the Seed of the Bondwoman, shows the utter rooting out, and
rejection of the external and political Church State of the Jews. Thirdly, That
none of the fleshly Seed as such, should be Heirs and Partakers with the true
spiritual Seed of Abraham under the Gospel, or have a Being in Abraham's true
spiritual House or Gospel Church.

These Things being so, what reason there is for any to plead for Infants
Church Membership, by virtue of the Covenant made with Abraham, let all Men
consider. See Heb. 8. 13. Therefore from hence I argue, that whatsoever
external Rights or Privileges the Jews had under the old Covenant, it signifies
just nothing to us, under the Dispensation of the Gospel; even no more then a
Legacy bequeathed in a former Will, is pleadible, which is left out in the last
Will and Testament, confirmed by the Death of the Testator.

I would have all Men consider, that whether there is any more ground for Men
from thence to plead for Infant Church Membership, then for others to plead for
Ministers to have the first Fruits, and the Tenths of every Man's increase; or
for me to argue thus, Every Child of a Christian is born a Member of the
Christian Church; because under the Law every Child of the Jews, were born
Members of their Church; (and it must needs be so then, because theirs was a
National Church;) or for every Ministers Son to plead for a Right to the
Ministry: for evident it is, that all the Sons of the Priests under the Law,
had a Right to the Priesthood; (though they were not to enter into the Ministry
until such an Age:) Also particularly to dedicate all our firstborn to the
Lord, because the Jews were required so to do. Nay, I may say more, by the
Covenant of Circumcision Abraham's Natural Offspring had a Right to possess
the Land of Canaan: shall we from thence say, all our Seed have an equal Right
to that Promise; if we could persuade our selves of this, we may think of
another Holy War, and get our Seed their Rightful Possession: the like, as
touching our keeping their Sabbath.

Lastly, And evident it is, all that were Circumcised had an undeniable Right to
eat the Passover (which they that assert Circumcision was a Type of Baptism,
say, also was a Figure of the Lord's Supper) and if so, then it follows by the
same Argument and Parity of Reason, all our Children that are admitted to the
Ordinance of Baptism, may, nay, must be also admitted to the Ordinance of the
Lord's Supper (as indeed they were by the Ancient Fathers, who first brought in
the Practice of Infant Baptism, and so it continued for some Hundred of Years:
see Exodus 12. 45. All the whole Family had a Right to eat the Passover, except
Foreigners, and Hired Servants.

But in a word, The Ax is laid to the root of the trees, all these Jewish
Rights and Privileges are gone with their national, external Church State: for
as the First Covenant, i. e. The Bond woman is cast out, so are all her
Children also.

Obj. How can this be, that the Children of Abraham, and so the Children of
Believers, who are Abraham's Seed, should not have Right to Gospel Privileges
and Baptism, seeing you cannot deny but that it was the Covenant of Grace that
God made with Abraham.

Answ. I have told you already, that there was two Covenants made with Abraham;
the Covenant of Grace was that Covenant which is called the Promise, which God
made with him, and nothing can be more clear, then that the fleshly Seed as
such, (though they proceeded from Abraham's Loins,) were not concerned in that
Covenant or free Promise of Grace.

(...) since this is doubted of by some, and utterly denied by others, viz
(...) (...) was a Twofold Covenant made with Abraham, I shall endea(...)ke
this very plain and evident, though indeed, what I have already sa(...) be
sufficient to unprejudiced Persons: But to proceed, I shall show what Promises
and Privileges appertained to the natural Seed, as such, and what Promises
appertained to his true Spiritual Seed, and none else.

First, I will begin with that Covenant made with Abraham's natural Seed, as
such, I never yet heard, but that the Covenants take their denomination from
the Promises, and the Promises are of Two sorts, quite different in their
Nature, i. e. some Domestic and Civil Promises, especially and absolutely
respecting the House and natural Seed of Abraham and policy of Israel.

Others only respecting those that are Believers in Christ, or Evangelical;
belonging to them the Gospel Covenant belongs.

1. The First that belonged to Abraham's natural Seed as such, that I shall
mention, is that of his multiplying his natural Seed by Isaac. 2. The Birth of
Isaac by Sarah his Wife, Genesis 17. 16, 19. 3. The Continuation of his Covenant,
with all that should proceed from Isaac, according to the Flesh, Genesis 17. 6. 4.
The Coming of Christ out of Isaac. 5. The bringing the natural Seed of Abraham,
by Isaac, out of Egypt. 6. The Promise of giving his natural Seed the Land of
Canaan for their Possession, Genesis 15. 8.
Now pray note Two Things:

First, That as the Covenant of Grace bears the Name of the Promise of God, not
a conditional, but an absolute Promise; so likewise say I, these Promises,
distinct from that free Promise, contain the legal Covenant made with Abraham's
natural Seed.

If you well mind the Nature of these Promises I have mentioned, you cannot so
much as once in the least imagine, any of them were made to his spiritual Seed
as such, I mean, that any of them do, or can concern us Gentile Believers.

Secondly, But to put the Matter out of doubt, pray observe that the Law of
Circumcision is expressly called Gods Covenant; though I know some, to strengthen
their bad Cause, would have it be so called, only by a certain Figure; pray
read Genesis 17. And God said unto Abraham, thou shall keep my covenant, therefore
thou and thy seed after thee, in their Generations, verse. 9. This is my
covenant which ye shall keep between me and you, and thy seed after thee, every
male child among you shall be circumcised, verse. 10. And ye shall circumcise
the flesh of your foreskin, and it shall be a Token of the Covenant betwixt me
and you: and that to this Covenant was promised the Land of Canaan, it is
expressly said in verse. 8. And I will give unto thee, and to thy seed after
thee, the land wherein thou art a stranger, all the land of Canaan for an
everlasting possession, and I will be their God. So in Genesis 15. 8. In that same
day God made a covenant with Abram, (not Abraham) saying, unto thy seed, have I
given this land from the River of Egypt, unto the great River Euphrates.

This Covenant, and these Promises I assert, cannot belong to the spiritual
Seed of Abraham as such, but were Blessings that belonged only to his carnal or
natural Seed, and directly agree with the Covenant made with them by Moses,
viz. The Land of Canaan, Riches, Peace, Plenty, and all other Temporal and
Earthly Blessings, if they kept God's Covenant (with their Church State, and
visible Worship of God among them:) Now the New Covenant it could not be,
because that is established upon better Promises, and no other People had any
Right to those outward Blessings; nor were they made only to the Elect Ones,
who were of his natural Offspring, but to his fleshly Seed as such, as well as
they; upon that Condition, they kept the Covenant of Circumcision, and
conformed themselves to the Law God gave them, which they were obliged to do by
the Covenant of Circumcision, as I showed before.

Secondly, I shall now show you, what those Promises were, that respect the
Covenant of Grace made with Abraham, and his true spiritual Seed, as such.

1. I have made thee a Father of many Nations, (meaning Gentile Belie(...)

2. In thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed, Genesis 12. 3.
Observe here what the Apostle speaks, And the Scripture foreseeing that God
would justify the Heathen through faith, preached the Gospel to Abraham,
saying, In thee shall all nations of the earth be blessed, Gal. 3. 8.

Nay, and it is for ever to be noted, That the Holy Apostle endeavors to do the
very same thing in Gal. 3. 16. which I am now about, viz. To prove, That the
Covenant of Grace was not made with Abraham's fleshly Seed, as such; read the
Text, Now to Abraham and to his seed was the promise made; he says, not to
seeds, as of many (meaning his fleshly Seed, as such) but to thy seed which is
Christ. And then in verse. 29. he concludes, And if ye be Christ's, then are you
Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the Promise.

You must not reckon from Abraham, but from Christ: He must be blind that cannot
discern from hence, that there were Two Covenants made with Abraham. Compare
these Texts with that in Romans 9. 6, 7, 8.

Obj. But the Jews might object (they not seeing nor understanding this Twofold
Covenant) if we are rejected of God, and rooted out, God is unfaithful and his
Promise made of none Effect to Abraham, and it is his seed.

1. Answ. The Apostle Answers, They are not all Israel, which are of Israel.
verse. 6. 2. Neither because they are the seed of Abraham, are they all
Children, ver. 7. That is, though they be all the Seed of Abraham, according to
the Flesh, yet they are not all his spiritual Seed, according to that Covenant
of Grace made with Abraham, all the true spiritual Seed are the Children of
God, as Isaac was, being begotten and brought forth as the product of Almighty
Power, as fruit of God's Free Promise; I will come, and Sarah shall have a Son:
see the Apostle's further answer, That is, they which are born after the Flesh,
these are not the Children of God, but the Children of the Promise are counted
for the Seed, verse. 8.

Martin Luther confirms the same great Truth we contend for: Paul therefore
concludes with this Sentence (says he) that they that are of Faith, are the
Children of Abraham; that corporal Birth, or carnal Seed, make not the Children
of Abraham before God; as if he would say, there is none before God accounted
as the Child of Abraham (who is the Servant of God, whom God has chosen and
made Righteous by Faith) through carnal Generation; but such Children must be
given before God, as he was a Father; but he was a Father of Faith, was
justified, and pleased God, not because he could beget Children after the
Flesh, not because he had Circumcision under the Law, but because he believed
in God. He therefore that will be a Child of the Believing Abraham, must also
himself believe, or else he is not a Child of the Elect; the believing and the
justified Abraham, not the begetting Abraham; which is nothing else, but a Man
conceived, and born, and wrapped in Sin, without the Forgiveness of Sins,
without Faith, without the Holy Ghost, as another Man is, and therefore
Condemned. Such also, are the Children carnally begotten of him, having nothing
in them, like unto their Father, but Flesh and Blood, Sin and Death; therefore
these are also Damned: this glorious boasting then, we are the Seed of Abraham,
is to no purpose. Thus far Luther, on Gal. 3. p. 115.

Thus Mr. Perkins speaks also: The Seed of Abraham (says he) is the Seed, not
of the Flesh but of the Promise; and this Seed is first Christ, and then all
that believe in Christ; for these are given to Abraham by Promise and Election
of God: moreover, the Seed is not many (as Paul observes) but one. It is
Objected, That the Word Seed, is a Name Co-elective, and signifies the whole
Posterity of Abraham. Answ. It does sometimes, (says he) but not always; for
Eve says of Seth, God has given me another Seed: Again, (he says) this one
particular Seed of Abraham is Christ Jesus, here the Name Christ, first and
principally the Mediator, and then Secondly, all Jews and Gentiles believing,
that are fit and grafted into Christ by Faith: St. Paul says, The Children of
the Flesh, those are not the Children of God; but the Children of the Promise,
are the Seed of Abraham. Thus Mr. Perkins.

2. Now nothing is more evident then that by the Promise is meant, the Covenant
of Grace, the Children of the Promise, made with Abraham, are Children of the
New Covenant, and so generally owned by all, our True Protestant Writers; and
this Promise or Covenant we find, was only made with Abraham's spiritual Seed,
as these Two famous Writers, and many more positively affirm.

3. Yet also it is plain, there was a Covenant made with Abraham's natural
Seed, and that they were taken into an external, national Church State, and
Covenant relation with God, and had diverse peculiar Immunities and Privileges
granted to them, as so considered; all which fully evinces, that there was a
Twofold Covenant made with Abraham: Certainly none can suppose, but that their
Church State and Legal Rights were Covenant Blessings, and that they begun in
Abraham; and that too, by those Covenant Transactings, God made him, is so
clear, that nothing need to be said more unto it; and I cannot but wonder that
our eminent Writers, should confound and jumble these Two Covenants together,
as indeed I find generally they do.

Obj. But some will still Object, that though this which I have said be granted,
i. e. That there were Two Covenants made with Abraham, yet say they,
Circumcision was a Gospel Covenant, or did appertain to the Covenant of Grace.

Answ. I answer, and positively affirm, That the Covenant of Circumcision was
part of that legal, old, and external Covenant, which is done away: And this in
the next place I shall fully prove.

1. Because the Law, or Covenant of Circumcision, was, it appears, made in the
Design and End of it, to separate the natural Seed of Abraham in their National
Church, standing from all other Nations of the World, and to give them the Land
of Canaan, and to keep themselves Pure, from mixing among the Pople, from whom
Christ, according to the Flesh was to come: And hence it was, that they were
not to mingle themselves with the Heathens, nor suffer any to join themselves
to them, unless first Circumcised. Will any say that the Covenant of Grace, or
Gospel Covenant, in the Design of it, is to separate all True Believers, and
all their natural Seed (though some of them are the worst of Men, i. e. vile and
ungodly) from all other People in the World, in a Church State? If they should
affirm this, then the Gospel Church, for ever ceases to be Congregational, but
must be National as the Jewish Church was, which is contrary to the Doctrine of
the Church of England (whatever her Practice is) Does not she say, The Church
of God is a company of Godly Christians, among whom the Word of God is truly
preached, and the Sacraments duly and truly administered? and do not the Godly
Independants say the same? Did Christ ever, under the Gospel, constitute any
one Nation, consisting of Believers, and their carnal Offspring (some godly,
and some ungodly) into a Church? read over the New Testament, and see whether
the direct contrary, is not apparent; for they were only such, who believed
were converted and professed Faith in Christ, and so were Baptized, that were
added to the Church; and of such only does the Gospel Church consist.

2. But observe the other part of this Argument, i. e. Circumcision was a token
to Abraham's natural Seed of God's giving unto them the Land of Canaan, see
Genesis 17. 7. And I will establish my covenant between me and thee, and thy seed
after thee, in their generations, etc. And I will give unto thee, and to thy
seed after thee, the land wherein thou art a stranger, all the land of Canaan,
etc. and ye shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskin, and it shall be a
token of the covenant betwixt me and you, verse. 11. The Gospel Covenant, the
Apostle tells us, is established upon better Promises, not an Earthly Canaan,
but Heaven it self: What, though Canaan was a Type of Heaven, that will not mend
the matter, for then it follows that it belonged to the Old typical and
shadowing Covenant: Moreover, if that Covenant was the Gospel Covenant, our
Children have an equal Right to the Land of Canaan, with the natural Seed of
Abraham (as I said before) and then how did that Promise, viz. The Possession
of Canaan belong then to the Jews, as their peculiar Right only.

Arg. 2. Because there were some to whom the Covenant of Grace, or Gospel
Covenant did not belong, were, nevertheless, commanded to be Circumcised, as
Ishmael, Esau, etc. Does the Gospel Covenant appertain to Scoffing Ishmaelites,
and to profane Esau's? No, God told Abraham, his Covenant should not be with
Ishmael. As for Ishmael, I have heard thee, behold I have blessed him, but my
covenant will I establish with Isaac, Genesis 17. 20, 21.

Also, there were others who might be in Abraham's Family; who, no doubt, might
some of them be in the Covenant of Grace, that were not required to be
Circumcised, nor did it belong to them, viz.

1. All his Male Children, who dyed before Eight Days old. 2. All his Female
Children. 3. There was also some other godly Men, in the Days of Abraham, to
whom Circumcision of Right did not belong, as Melchisedec, Lot, Job, etc.
Doubtless, had Circumcision been a Law or Precept of the Covenant of Grace, all
these would God have required to have been Circumcised as well as the others;
but the Truth is, being in the Covenant of Grace, gave no Right at all to any,
no not to the Male Children of Abraham, to Circumcision; but only God's express
and positive Command to him.
Arg. 3. It Is apparent, that the Jews who were comprehended in that legal and
external Covenant, made with Abraham's natural Seed, and were accordingly
Circumcised, were nevertheless denied Gospel Baptism, and their Plea, we are
Abraham 's Seed, was rejected by John Baptist's. Now had Circumcision been a
Gospel Covenant, I see no Reason why John should not admit them; nay, and it is
plain also, that some godly Ones of Abraham's natural Seed, who were
Circumcised, were nevertheless Baptized. What, had they Two Seals of one and
the same Covenant? for Circumcision was in force at that time, when many of
them were Baptized; for many subjected to that Ordinance, before Christ dyed,
and abolished that Rite with the Old Covenant.

1. From hence it appears, that Circumcision was no Gospel Law, nor did it
appertain to the Covenant of Grace; but was part of the Old legal Covenant,
which the Ax was laid to the Root of, and is gone.

2. It also follows from hence, that the Covenant of Grace, was not the
adequate Reason of Circumcision, but the mere positive Command of God to
Abraham, for the Reasons and Designs beforementioned.

From whence I argue thus, That Covenant that was made with, or did of Right
belong unto the fleshly Seed of Abraham, as such, even to ungodly Ones, as well
as to the godly, was not the Covenant of Grace; but the Covenant or Law of
Circumcision, was made with, or did of Right belong unto the Fleshly Seed of
Abraham, as such, even unto ungodly Ones, as well as to the godly: Therefore
the Covenant of Circumcision was not the Covenant of Grace.

I have showed you that Circumcision did belong to Ishmael and to Esau, and to
all Isaac's natural Seed, though ungodly, and to their Male Children also; and I
need not tell you what wicked Men sprang from Isaac's Loins, according to the
Flesh, but let them be ungodly, and not have one dram of New Covenant Grace in
them; yet they were obliged to Circumcise their Male Infants. This is enough
(one would think) to convince our Brethren, and all that differ from us, that
Circumcision did not appertain to the Covenant of Grace, or was no Gospel
Covenant. Also let them take heed (who plead for Pede-Baptism, from the
Covenant of Circumcision) how they any more deny to Baptize the Children of
ungodly Parents, since the Male Infants of ungodly Parents were Circumcised.
The Truth is, it was not to be enquired, Whether the Parents were Believers or
not? whether they had Abraham's Faith, or not? were godly, or not, before their
Children were to be Circumcised? but were they the natural Seed of Abraham?
(that was enough) it was that according to the express and positive Command of
God to Abraham, that gave their Children, if Males, a Right to be Circumcised.

Arg. 4. That Circumcision was no Gospel Law, or Covenant, appears yet further,
because all in the Gospel Covenant, it is expressly said, shall know the Lord,
Jer. 31. 31. Behold the days come, says the Lord, that I will make a new
covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah, not according
to the covenant that I made with their fathers, in the day that I took them out
of the land of Egypt; which my covenant they break, although I was an husband
to them, says the Lord. ver. 32. But this shall be the covenant that I will
make with the house of Israel after those days, says the Lord: I will put my
law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and I will be their
God, and they shall be my people. ver. 33. And they shall teach no more every
man his neighbor, and every man his brother, saying, know the Lord: for they
shall all know me from the least of them unto the greatest of them, says the
Lord, etc.

Pray observe, in the Old Covenant Infants were Members, who did not (when
taken into that Covenant, and made Members of that legal Church) know the Lord,
nor indeed their right Hand from their left. Therefore they, when grown up, had
need to be taught, saying, Know the Lord; and thus, upon this Account, every
one had need to teach his Neighbor and his Brother; but in the Gospel
Covenant, God says, it should not be thus, for that all, whom he would make
that Covenant with, should know him, before they were received as Members of
that Church, though afterward it is granted, they stand in need of further
teaching

And in this respect, the Gospel Covenant, and Gospel Church State, differs, or
is not according to the Old legal and external Covenant, and Church State of
the Jews, as well as in other things; that being a conditional Covenant, the
New Covenant Absolute, I will, and they shall, that was a Covenant of Works,
this of Grace, etc. They shall all know me from the least to the greatest; not
one Infant then be sure is in it, as a Member of the Gospel Church, they are
now required to repent, to believe, to bring forth fruits meet for re^entance.
They must be made Disciples by Teaching as appears by the great Commission,
Mat. 28, 19, 20. before Baptized; who are to be Members of the Gospel Church.

Arg. 5. The Covenant of Circumcision could not be the Gospel Covenant, because
the Terms of it runs according to the Sinai Covenant, which is said, not to be
of faith, but (1) the man that does those things should live in them, Gal. 3.
22. (2) Life was promised to Obedience to it, and Death threatened to
Disobedience. (3) The Promise of the Sinai Covenant, was the Land of Canaan,
Riches, Peace, and Prosperity, to be Blessed in the Basket and Store; and so
runs the Covenant of Circumcision, see Genesis 17. 9, 10, 14. Thou shall keep my
covenant, etc. and I will give unto thee, and to thy seed after thee, the land
of Canaan, etc. ver. 8. And the uncircumcised man-child, whose flesh of his
foreskin is not circumcised, that Soul shall be cu^ off from his People, he
has broken my Covenant, ver. 14. Thus ran the Law and Covenant of
Circumcision, it was Life upon the Condition of Obedience, Death upon
Disobedience, 'twas do and live; but thus runs not the Terms of the New
Covenant, but directly contrariwise, believe, and thou shall be saved, are the
Terms of the Gospel Covenant; from whence I shall draw this Argument.

That Covenant that was in the Nature and Quality of it, as much a Covenant of
Works, as the Sinai Covenant, could not be the Covenant of Grace. But so was
the Law and Covenant of Circumcision. Therefore Circumcision was no Gospel Law
or Covenant.

Arg. 6. The Covenant of Circumcision was of the Letter, and not of the Spirit.
This the Apostle lays down, Romans 3. 29. But he is not a Jew which is one
outward; and circumcision is that of the heart in the spirit, and not in the
letter, whose praise is not of man but of God. Does he not clearly hereby
intimate, that Circumcision of the Flesh was of the Law, and not of the Gospel?
for by Letter, the Law is meant, all Expositors confess, in that parallel Text,
2 Cor. 5. Who has made us able Ministers of the New Testament, not of the
letter but of the spirit, see our late worthy Annotators, by the Letter: Here
(say they) the Apostle understands the Law, or the Law, is called the Letter,
Romans 2. 27. Who by the letter and Circumcision, does transgress the Law. The
Law (say they) in opposition to the Gospel, is called the Letter; and again
they say, the Gospel is called the Spirit, both in opposition to the carnal
Ordinances of the Law, and because Christ is the Matter, Subject, and Argument
of it. The Law kills, but the Gospel gives Life; yet some affirm, that Law
written in Stones was the Gospel, or a dark ministration of it: What Law is it
then that kills? and what was the Covenant of Works, which as such is taken
away? But no more of that: here it is plain, Circumcision was not of the Spirit,
i. e. not of the Gospel, but of the Law.

Arg. 7. That Covenant, in which Faith was not reckoned to Abraham for
Righteousness, was not the Covenant of Grace, or a Gospel Covenant: But the
Apostle shows us, That Faith was not reckoned to Abraham in Circumcision, Romans
4. That faith was reckoned to Abraham, for righteousness, verse 9. How then was
it reckoned when he was in circumcision, or in uncircumcision, not in
circumcision, but in uncircumcision? ver. 10.

What need was there for St. Paul to argue thus against Circumcision, if it
were, as our Brethren say, a Gospel Law, Precept, or Covenant; and remarkable
it is, that the Apostle puts, (in this Chapter) the Law and Circumcision
together, as being of one stamp, or of the same nature, and excludes them both
from the free Promise of God made to Abraham, which I have showed was the Pure
Gospel, or New Covenant: Reader, see Mr. Philip Cory's Solemn Call, where thou will meet with this, and some other of these Arguments largely opened, and his
Reply to Mr. Flavel, both worth thy reading.

Arg. 8. The Law or Covenant of Circumcision, is (as the said worthy Writer
observes) contrary distinguished or opposed) by the Apostle, in Romans 4.) to the
Covenant of Faith, or Gospel Covenant, therefore could not be one, nor of the
same Nature, read 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, and 14, verse^.

Arg. 9. That Covenant or Precept that profited none, unless they kept the Law,
could not belong to the Covenant of Grace; but so the Apostle speaks of
Circumcision, For circumcision verily profits if thou keep the law, Romans 2.
25. That is, as I have observed, if thou keep the Law perfectly, but if thou
break the law, thy circumcision is made uncircumcision, that is of none effect.
It Is strange to me that Circumcision should be a Gospel Covenant, and yet not
profit any, unless they perfectly kept the Law, and also obliged them so to do,
Gal. 5. 3. Could a Man have perfectly kept the Law of the Old Covenant, he
might have thereby been justified in the sight of God, and then no need of a
Christ to have fulfilled the Righteousness of it for us, and in our nature. --
But does a Gospel Precept oblige any to the perfect keeping of the whole Law:
How then could this be a Gospel Precept? O see how the Law and Circumcision
agree, and comport together in their nature, end, use and design, and never
plead for it as a Gospel Precept any more, unless you have a mind to bring your
Selves and Children under the Old Covenant, and the Curse thereof; compare this
with Gal. 5. 3. For I testify to every man among you that is circumcised, that
he is a debtor to do the whole law.

Not as a late Writer says in his Opinion, or in his intention that was
Circumcised, that he was such a Debtor: for it may be justly doubted, Whether
they so thought or not: nay, by the Apostle's Words it seems otherwise, i. e.
They did not think any such thing (though they might seek to be justified by the
Law, and Circumcision, yet not that they thought themselves obliged to keep the
whole Law perfectly) but they who were Circumcised, were verily obliged by
Circumcision, to do the whole Law, when Circumcision was in Force. Whatsoever
Mr. John Flavel has said in his late Book to the contrary, notwithstanding, in
Answer to Mr. Carry: And indeed, the Annotators agree with us herein; thus I
find they express themselves.

Object. But did not the Fathers then, by being Circumcised, acknowledge
themselves Debtors to the Law.

Answ. Yes, they did acknowledge themselves bound to the observation of the
Law, and to endure (upon the breaking of it) the Curse of it, but they were
discharged from this Obligation, by believing in the Lord, Jesus Christ, who
was made a Curse for them.

Arg. 10. The Covenant of Circumcision could not belong to the Gospel Covenant,
because it is called, in express terms, a Yoke of Bondage, Act. 15. 10. Gal. 5.
1, 2. Now therefore why tempt ye God to put a yoke upon the neck of the
disciples, which neither our fathers, nor we, were able to bear.

I wonder any should call Circumcision a Privilege; the Yoke was Circumcision,
which those false Teachers would have put on Men, who were Believers among the
Gentiles; see verse. 1. If the Jews had any Profit, Advantage or Privilege by
it, it was chiefly, because unto them were committed the Oracles of God, or Ten
Commandments, not chiefly, because unto them was given the Covenant of Grace;
for had it been a Gospel Covenant, or a Rite thereof (as our mistaken Opposers
affirm) he would have said so; see his Words, What advantage then has the Jew?
and what profit is there in Circumcision, Romans 3. 1. Much every way, but
chiefly, because unto them were committed the oracles of God, ver. 2. It did
not seal to them the Covenant of Grace, nor assure them of the Blessings
thereof; for so a Seal does all the Blessings and Privileges of that Covenant,
to which it is prefixed, but the direct contrary, i. e. it assured them, That
they should have the Law given to them; the Oracles of God, i. e. The Sinai
Covenant, which Law showed them what a kind of Righteousness it was, God did
require of all Men that would be justified in God's sight; it was not given to
them to give Life, or Righteousness, but to show the exceeding sinfulness of
Sin, and to regulate their Lives, to put a curb upon their Lusts so hateful to
God; as also, to discover unto them, that nothing short of a perfect and
complete Righteousness, could justify the Creature in the sight of God; and so
the Law, through the weakness of the Flesh, laid all Men under Death and
Condemnation, exacting hard Service, but gave no Strength to perform its
Demands; it killed, but could not give Life: And therefore, as it was a
Covenant of Works, (do this and live, or the man that does these things shall
live in them) which Christ abolished it by the Blood of his Cross.

And since it appears by what the Apostle says, That Circumcision obliged
(while it was in Force) to do all the whole Law, which he that did not so do,
was Cursed by it; it is evident, that instead of its being a Covenant of Grace,
or the Seal thereof, it rather sealed the Curses of the Law upon them, for
their Disobedience; and therefore, such a yoke of Bondage, which they nor their
Fathers were able to bear.

Circumcision, it appears then, was an Earnest to Abraham's natural Seed of the
Sinai Covenant; which Law was, ('it is evident comprehended as a Covenant of
Works) in Circumcision, and so Circumcision was a Part or Branch of it; God
then, and at that time, taking his natural Seed into an external Covenant
Relation with himself, was thereby, in his Wisdom, obliged to give the said Law
in Tables of Stone to them, for the Reasons, Use and End, before mentioned; and
as it is by our Apostle frequently in his Epistles hinted, the Apostle (as a
Learned Writer observes) does not here begin a Discourse, nor to the number of
Privileges and Advantages; for he names but one in all, but to the quality of
this Privilege, viz. That it was not an Evangelical, or Gospel Privilege, but
only a Legal or Old Covenant Rite and Privilege; this is the Chief of all the
Advantages the Jews had by Circumcision, i. e. there having thereby an
assurance, that the Law of God, on Mount Sinai, should be given to them: So
much as to the Proof and Demonstration, That Circumcision was no
Gospel-Precept, or Covenant.

Obj. But, perhaps, some may Object, If Infants as such, were not included in
the Covenant of Grace God made with Abraham, how can dying Infants be saved?

1. Answ. I Answer, Must Infants of Believers be comprehended in that Covenant
God made with Abraham? or else, Cannot any dying Infants be saved? How then
were any dying Infants saved before Abraham's Days, or before that Covenant was
made with him?

2. I never said no Infants were included in the Covenant of Grace, God made
with Abraham, but not as such: No doubt, all Elect Persons, both Infants and
the Adult, were included in the Covenant of Grace, and had or shall have the
Blessings of Christ's Blood and Merits; but the Covenant of Grace may be
considered Two manner of ways, or under a Twofold Consideration.

1st. The inward invisible Blessings, Grace, and Privileges of it.

2d. The visible and outward Administration, or Privileges thereof.

1. Now who they be, that are comprehended, or included in the inward, and
invisible Blessings, Grace and Privileges of it, are only known to God, not to
us: But the Gospel, or Covenant of Grace, as to the outward Administration, and
Privileges thereof, only belong to such who know the Lord, or profess Faith in
Jesus Christ; and therefore, all that have a Right to Baptism, and Gospel
Church Membership, must first be made Disciples, by being taught by the Word
and Spirit of God, and so truly believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, according to
the great Commission of our Savior, Mat. 28. 19, 20. and the Practice of
Christ himself, Joh. 4. 1, 2. and of his Apostles, Act. 2. 37. Act. 8. 14, etc.
Act. 10. and Act. 16, etc.

God has many ways (as Dr. Tailor observes) to save dying Infants, which we
know not; he can apply the benefit, and merits of Christ's Blood to them, in
ways we are wholly Ignorant of, and ought not to trouble our Selves with it:
Secret Things belong to God, but revealed Things to us, and to our Children.

3. But if we did know which Infants would dye, who do belong to the Election
of Grace, or are in Covenant with God, yet we ought not to Baptize them,
because we have no Command from Jesus Christ, so to do; for it was not the
Right of Infants to be Circumcised, because they were in the Covenant of Grace
(for then all other godly Men's Children, who lived in Abraham's Days, would
have had the same Right that Abraham's Children had; nor was it the Right of
Abraham's Infants (whether considered as his natural Seed, or spiritual Seed,
as such) but it was their Right only. By that mere express and positive Command
of God, to Abraham, it was, that, I say, gave all his Male Infants a Right to
Circumcision, and nothing else: Now Baptism is also a mere positive Precept, as
Circumcision was then, -- Therefore none have a Right thereto, but such whom
Christ commands to be Baptized, namely Believers; Was Abraham's Females, or his
Males, under Eight Days old, Circumcised? or, Had they any Right unto it, though
they might be in the Covenant of Grace?

11thly, All those that were in the Covenant of Grace, God made with Abraham,
had thereby an undoubted Right to all the Blessings of the said Covenant, and
also had the Privileges, and Blessings thereof, by the Spirit of God Sealed to
them, and were made sure of eternal Life; but all those that were in the
Covenant of Circumcision, God made with Abraham, or were Circumcised, had not,
thereby, an undoubted Right to all the Blessings of the said Covenant; nor had
they the Privileges, and Blessings thereof Sealed to them, nor was eternal Life
made sure to them thereby: Therefore, the Covenant of Circumcision was not the
Covenant of Grace, nor the Seal thereof. The major is clear from Romans 4. 16.
Therefore it is of faith, that it might be by grace, to the end the promise
might be sure to all the seed. What Seed does the Apostle mean? certainly all
Abraham's Seed, that the Covenant of Grace was made with; and none will deny,
but that the Promise here comprehends all the Blessings and Privileges of the
Covenant of Grace; compare this with that in Heb. 6. For, when God made promise
to Abraham, because he could not swear by no greater, he swear by himself, ver.
13. Saying, surely blessing, I will bless thee; and multiplying, I will
multiply thee, ver. 14. And so after he had patiently endured, he obtained the
promise, ver. 15. For men verily swear by the greater, and an oath of
confirmation, is to them an end of all strife, ver. 16. Wherein God is willing,
more abundantly, to show unto the heirs of promise, the immutability of his
counsel, confirmed it by an oath, ver. 17. The Promise here referrs to the
Promise, or Covenant of Grace made with Abraham, and it is as sure to all his
Seed comprehended in that same Covenant, as possibly can be; the very Oath of
God is added, besides his faithful Word to confirm it; as to the minor, sure
none can Dream, that Ishmael, or Esau, or the ungodly Jews that sprung from
(...) Loins, in their Generations, till Christ came, had undoubted Right to,
and Interest in all the Blessings and Privileges of the Covenant of Grace; or
eternal Life, made sure to them: do not we read that some of them were called
Sons of Belial? and of some of them (our Savior says) they were of their
Father, the Devil.

12thly, All those that were in the Covenant of Grace, God made with Abraham,
had thereby a sure and strong Ground of Consolation, that is, Spiritual
Consolation; but many of them (...) were comprehended in the Covenant of
Circumcision, had not thereby a sure and strong Ground of Consolation, that is,
spiritual Consolation, therefore, the Covenant of Circumcision, was not the
Covenant of Grace; see Heb. 6. 18. That by two immutable things, in which it
was impossible for God to lie, we might have strange consolation, who have fled
for refuge, to lay hold upon the hope set before us; which hope we have, as the
anchor of the soul both sure and steadfast, and which enters into that within
the veil. Now certainly, no Man can think, all that the Covenant of
Circumcision did belong unto, had such sure and strong Ground of Consolation
thereby; for Ishmael had none, Esau had none, and Multitudes more of Abraham's
natural Seed.

APPLICATION.
First, I May infer from hence, That they who bring Infants of Believers into
the Gospel Covenant, or Gospel Church, err exceedingly, and are severely to be
reprehended, there being not the least Shadow of Ground, for their Practice
herein from the Covenant God made with Abraham,

Secondly, It also appears from hence, That the main Pillar of Infants Baptism,
is rooted up, the Ax is laid to the Root of the Trees, the external or natural
Offspring of Abraham, or by Descent from an external Faedoral, or Covenant
Relation to him; or as they are the carnal Offspring of Believers.

Thirdly, From hence also I infer, That the Children of Believing Gentiles, as
such, are not the Seed of Abraham, to whom the Covenant of Grace was made: Nay,
let me tell you, that it appears from hence, That the Children of Believing
Gentiles as such, are neither the natural Seed of Abraham, nor his spiritual
Seed; which to open yet more fully, let us now consider all the distinct Sorts
of Abraham's Seed, which, I find, were Fourfold.

1. Christ, personally considered to Abraham and his Seed, was the Promise
made, he says, Not as of seeds as to many, but as of one, and to thy seed
which is Christ, Gal. 3. 16. Now as the Promise referrs to Christ, so the
Infants of believing Gentiles, all will say are not Abraham's Seed.

2. All the Elect, or whole Body of Believers, who have the Faith of Abraham,
and walk in the Steps of Abraham, these are called Abraham's Seed: Now none can
be so blind, as once to suppose, the Children of Believing Gentiles as such,
are the Seed of Abraham. Can Infants believe in God, as Abraham did? or, Can
they walk in his Steps? or, which is more, are their natural Offspring as
such, of the Election of Grace? Does it appear so? or, Does it not appear, to
the contrary? viz. Do not many of their Seed prove wicked and ungodly Persons,
and so liveand dye? Certainly, were they all as such Elected, they should be
all Converted, we are chosen to be Holy, etc. Ephesians. 14. 4. and if you be
Christ's, then are you Abraham 's Seed and Heirs according to the Promise, Gal.
3. 29.

3. There was another i. e. a Natural Seed of Abraham, to whom the Promise was
made; and that was Isaac, Genesis 21. 22. but the Children of believing Gentiles
as such, or as so considered, are not Isaac in that respect, they cannot be the
Seed of Abraham; Isaac was begotten of Abraham's natural Body according to the
Flesh, and all spiritual Isaac's are regenerated Persons. Gal. 4. 28.

4. We read yet of another Natural Seed of Abraham, to whom the Promise of
Grace did not belong, as Ishmael, and the Sons of Keturah, Genesis 15. 5. but as
they were the Seed of Abraham, none will say the Children of beliving Gentiles
are the Seed of Abraham: now I affirm, that there is no mention made of any
other Seed of Abraham but these four sorts, if any man can show a fifth sort,
let him: from hence I shall again draw this Argument, viz. If the Children of
the believing Gentiles as such, are not the natural Seed of Abraham, nor the
spiritual Seed of Abraham; then they can have no Right as such to Baptism, nor
to Church Membership by virtue of being Abraham's Seed: nor are they any ways
as such, concerned in that Covenant-Transaction God made with Abraham; but the
Children of believing Gentiles as such are not the natural Seed of Abraham, nor
the spiritual Covenant of Abraham: therefore they can have no right as such to
Baptism, nor to Church Membership, by virtue of Abraham's Covenant; nor are
they any ways concerned in that Covenant-Transaction God made with Abraham.

Obj. The Athenian Society in p. 2. of their Athenian Gazette affirm, that the
Children of believing Gentiles are the spiritual Seed of Abraham, until by
actual sin unrepented of, they are otherwise.

Answ. To which I answer, (as I have once already) that then some of the true
spiritual Seed of Abraham may eternally perish; for certainly, many Children of
Believers, who when they grow up, proving to be profane, unbelieving and
impenitent Persons, and so live and dye, are eternally lost.

1. Which if so, the Covenant of Grace is not so well ordered in all things,
and sure, as we believe it is, and the Scripture proves it is.

2. It Is also directly contrary to what St. Paul positively affirms in Romans 4.
16. therefore it is of Faith, that it might be by Grace, to the end, the
Promise might be sure to all the Seed, not to that which is of the Law, but to
that which is of the Faith of Abraham, who is the Father of us all. If this be
well considered, the Plea for our Infants, as such, being Abraham's, Seed is
gone for ever: for I from hence argue again, that all that are in that Gospel
Covenant God made with Abraham, or are his spiritual Seed have the Promise of
eternal Life sure to them: but all the Seed of believing Gentiles, as such,
have not the Promise of eternal Life sure to them, therefore the Children of
believing Gentiles as such, are not the spiritual Seed of Abraham.

3. All that are in the Covenant of Grace, I mean all the true spiritual Seed
of Abraham, have the Faith of Abraham, and walk in the steps of Abraham, and
have also all the Privileges of the Gospel Covenant God made with him; but so
have not the natural Seed of believing Gentiles as such, nor are they by Birth,
i. e. by being born of believing Parents in a better Condition than others as
such, being all being born in sin, and in the Covenant of Works: indeed if
Believers Children as such, were in Covenant as soon as begotten or born, then
they are born in the Covenant of Grace; and if so, not the Children of Wrath by
Nature, and if in the Covenant of Grace, then their State is good enough
without Baptism; nor does Baptism bring them into it, and if they say as some
do, that the Children are brought into the Covenant of Grace by Baptism, and so
made the Children of God, Members of Christ, and Inheritors of the Kingdom of
Heaven, then it follows, they had it not by virtue of being in Covenant with
their Parents; and then also it would follow, that it is in the power of Men and
Women to bring their Children into the Covenant of Grace, or keep them out of
it; and so through Negligence or Ignorance, the Parents may damn their
Children; and others have power to save theirs, by getting a Minister to
Baptize them.

But if they do not suppose their Seed as such, are indeed, truly and really in
the Covenant of Grace, what signifies that which they call the Covenant, to
whom the Blessing of the Covenant do not belong? and if it seals not the
Blessings of the Covenant, what does it seal, or what spiritual Advantage do
their Children receive thereby? Either they have the internal Blessings or
Privileges sealed to them, or else the external Privileges thereof, or none at
all: now I cannot believe they judge they have right (as such) to the internal
Blessings and Privileges, for then they must all be saved; unless those to whom
the Promise is sure, (it being confirmed by the Oath of God) may eternally
perish; I know they whom I have to do with, are averse to the Doctrine of
falling from Grace. And if it seals the External Privileges of the Covenant to
them, why are they denied those Privileges? Is not Breaking of Bread, and
Church Fellowship, the chief external Privileges of the Gospel Church? We know
as to bearing the Word, Prayers of the Church, our Children enjoy those
Privileges as far forth, as theirs; besides, if they be not absolutely in the
Covenant, but only conditionally i. e. if they believe they shall, etc. even
what is that more than what the Children of Unbelievers have? shall not they be
received into the Covenant also, if they believe, and close in with Christ?

I cannot learn, that they can inform us of any Benefit their Children above
ours have, who are not baptized, (or other Men's) by their Baptism; or as they
are their Seed as such; though it is evident Abraham's natural Seed had a Right to
many external Privileges under that Dispensation as such; but I shall now
proceed to answer some grand Objection made against what I have said.

Obj. 1. The first is this, viz. There is an exact Parallel or Parity betwixt
Circumcision and Baptism; therefore as Jewish Infants were circumcised, so the
Children of Christian Gentiles may be baptized; thus they argue.

Ans. I must deny that there is such a Parity, or clear Parallel, as they
intimate between Circumcision and Baptism; but if there were, yet the Argument
is good for nothing: but to prove the first, i. e. and that there is no such
Parity, but in most things a Disparity, will now clearly be evinced.

1. Circumcision was a shadow of Christ to come, by whom we receive the great
Antitype of Circumcision, i. e. the Circumcision of the heart, Col. 2. 12, 13.
Baptism is a sign that Christ is already come; d^ad, buried, and raised again.

2. Circumcision was a sign of the Covenant with Abraham's natural Seed, above
all other Nations, and a Token to them of many external Blessings and
Privileges: Baptism is a sign of the inward and peculiar Graces of the Spirit
the Person baptized has received, if a true Subject of that Holy Ordinance.

3. Circumcision only belonged to Abraham's Male Children: Baptism belongs to
all that believe truly in Christ, both Males and Females, who are all one in
Christ Jesus, no difference in that respect, under the Gospel Covenant.

4. Circumcision belongs neither to no Male Children, but those born in
Abraham's House, or such who were bought with his Money, etc. it did not belong
to any other godly Man's Male Children that lived in his days, unless they
joined themselves to his Family; but Baptism belongs to all the Disciples of
Christ, or to all true Believers in all Nations, Mat. 28. 19. 20.

5. Circumcision was to be done precisely on the Eighth Day, not before nor
after. But Baptism is to be done at any time, and is not limited to any precise
day.

6. Circumcision made a visible Impression on the Body, which the Party might
perceive when he came to Age of Understanding. Baptism leaves no Impression on
the Body.

7. Circumcision signified the taking away the sins of the Flesh, (or the
Circumcision of the Heart) Baptism signifies the Death, Burial and Resurrection
of Christ, which Circumcision did not.

What Parity or Parallel there is between them, I know not, unless they say
that Circumcision was the initiating Rite under the Law, and Baptism is the
initiating Rite under the Gospel; to which I answer, if this should be granted,
yet it did not initiate any but Male Children; the Females were initiated
without it, and by the same Parity of Reason, as Dr. Tailor observes, no Female
Infant should be baptized, because none but Males were Circumcised.

If they say there is another Parity, viz. none were to eat the Passover, but
those who were Circumcised; so none are to partake of the Lord's Supper, but
such who are first baptized (we are all baptized into one Body,) yet I must
tell them, all those who are Circumcised, had a Right to eat the Passover, and
why do they not then follow the Parallel and give their Children the Lord's
Supper? as indeed, the First Ancient Fathers did (in the declining State of the
Church) for many Years, they gave Children the Lord's Supper, abusing that
Text, in the case of Baptism, Joh. 3. 5. Unless a Man be Born again of Water,
and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: They taking
Water there, to be meant of Baptismal Water, and thought Baptism, did
regenerate the Children, and wash away Original Sin; and accordingly, they
abused (and mistook) that Text, in Joh. 6. 53. Unless ye eat the flesh of the
son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you; and from hence 'twas,
they gave Infants the Lord's Supper, thinking (as the Papists do) that our
Savior intended the Sacrament of the Supper. I needed not have repeated these
Things, and that which follows, but that Mr. Roth-well of Sussex, in his late
Treatise, still insists on this Argument: you have the same in my Answer to Mr.
Burket. To this I might add a word or two of a Reverend and Learned Person of
our Persuasion in this Matter,

They suppose Baptism came in, or succeeded in the place, or room of
Circumcision; which may (says he) be understood many ways, as

First, That those Persons may be Baptized, that were heretofore Circumcised by
God's Appointment: And, in this sense, the Argument must proceed, if it
conclude, to the purpose; but in this sense it is false, for Females were not
Circumcised, which yet were Baptized, Act. 8. 12, 13, 14. and chap. 16. 14, 15.
and Believers out of Abraham's House, as Lot, Melchisedec, Job, were not to be
Circumcised, but believing Gentiles are universally to be Baptized.

2. (Says he) It may be understood, as if the Rite of Baptism then began, when
the Rite of Circumcision did, or was to end; but this is not to be said
neither; for John Baptist, and Christ's Disciples, Baptized before
Circumcision, of Right, ceased, Joh. 4. 1. 2.

3. He Answers, That of Baptism, succeeding in the Place of Circumcision in
Signification; which, as we have showed in several Respects, it does not.

But Secondly, (as I said) if there were such a Parity, or Parallel, between
Circumcision and Baptism, as they intimate, yet it would not do their Business;
but thus to argue, as the said learned Writer observes, may be very pernicious.

For, (says he) indeed if this Argument be not warily, and restrainedly
understood, an Egg is laid, out of which manifest Judaism, may be hatched; but
if it be taken restrainedly, it no more follows thence; but Baptism and
Circumcision, in some things, hold forth the same, which is more plainly said
of Noah's Ark, 1. Pet. 3. 22. and the Red Sea, and Cloud, 1. Cor. 10. 4. and
yet we do not say, Baptism succeeded into their Place; much less do we infer
any Rite to be instituted in their Stead, respecting the same Person; yea
verily, it is to be seriously thought on.

1. That by such Arguments, drawn from Analogies, not conceived by the Holy
Ghost, but drawn out of our Wit; a new kind of instituting R^tes, (to wit from
Analogies,) are brought in; besides, our Lord's Precepts, and the Apostles
Examples.

2. This being once said, by a like Parity of Reason and Arguing, it will be
lawful to bring into the Church, under other Names and Forms, the whole Burden
of Jewish Rites; yea, almost out of what you will, to conclude what you will;
for, Who shall put a Bound to Men's feigning Analogies, when they go beyond the
Lord's Precepts, and the Apostles Examples? It is well known, That the Divine
Appointment of Tithes to be paid, and many other Things, in the Writings of
Divines, are asserted by this kind of Argument; besides, the Rule of Christ's
Precepts, and his Apostles Examples.

3. Hereby will the Opinion of the Papists be confirmed, who affirm, from 1.
Cor. 10. 11. the Sacraments of the Jews, to be Types of the Sacraments of
Christians, which is rejected by Divines, that dispute against Bellarmine.

4. This manner of Arguing, will countenance the Arguments of the Papists, for
an universal Bishop, because the Jews had a High Priest, and Justify a Linen
Garment at Mass, because there was such among the Jews; and for Holy Water,
Purification of Women, Easter, Penticoast, and many more such Ceremonies, for
which the Papists do, in like manner, argue, as appears out of Durandus's
Rationals, and other Interpreters: Yea, What hinders, but we may give Children
the Lord's Supper, if we argue this way, since Samuel, Jesus Christ, under Age,
were partakers of the Passover? And, of Right, all Males were thrice in the
year to appear before the Lord; and therefore, it is certain they did eat the
Passover, etc.

Least any should take this for a light Suggestion, I will add, That grave,
godly, and learned Men, have often warned, That we are to take heed, that we do
not rashly frame Arguments from Analogies: Among others, in their Learned
Writings, in English, John Pagit, in his Defense of Church Government, Part 1.
Chap. 3. Page 8. and elsewhere. John Ball, in his Reply to The Answer of the
New England Elders Nine Positions. Posit. 2. p. 14.

Lastly, (says he) It is to be considered, again and again, how by these
Argumentations, the Consciences of Men may be freed from the Danger of
Will Worship, and polluting so Remarkable an Ordinance of Christ, as Baptism
is; especially this Care lies on them, who by Prayers, Sermons, Writings,
Covenants, and Oaths, do deter Christians from humane Invention, in God's
Worship diligently, and it is to be hoped Sincerely: thus far this Reverend
Divine.

I now might proceed to Answer diverse others Objections, as

First, Circumcision was a Type of Baptism. [2.] Infants were once in Covenant,
and never cast out. [3.] Circumcision was part of the Ceremonial Law, which was
Dedicated by Blood; therefore, no part of the Covenant of Works, or Old
Covenant. [4.] In Circumcision God gave himself to Abraham, to be his God, and
the God of his Seed. [5.] Circumcision was the Seal of the Righteousness of
Faith. [6.] Circumcision was an Everlasting Covenant. [7.] There is but one
Covenant of Works, and that was made with Adam* [8.] Paul Circumcised Timothy,
therefore Circumcision could not, in it self, oblige to the keeping of the
whole Law. [9] The Root is Holy, therefore the Branches. [10.] The Privileges
of the Gospel are restrained, and narrower then the Privileges of the Law, if
Children are excluded. [11.] The denying Infant Baptism, hinders the Progress
of the Christian Religion, Mr. Rothwell, p. 2.

FINIS. The SECOND PART is in the Press.

