A RATIONAL, Compendious way TO CONVINCE, Without any DISPUTE, All Persons
whatsoever, Dissenting from the TRVE RELIGION.

By J. K.

PSALM. IV. 7. Signatum est super nos lumen vultus tui, Domine.

Printed in the Year 1674.

THE PREFACE.
THE variety of Sects, which daily swarm here in England, has forced me upon
this way of ending Controversies in Religion. No body can confute in particular
the proper Tenets of each Sect, unless he be first well informed what they are:
and our Sects are so numerous, and so various, that to be well informed of the
particular Tenets of each one of them, a man's life is not sufficient. Yea, even
Those, who do profess to be all os the same Religion, are many times so
different one from another, that we can scarce find Two among them, who do
perfectly agree in the Articles of their Faith. Several Religions retain only
the name of what they were when first broached; and should one be perfectly
acquainted with the proper Tenets of the Sects which are now in Vogue, within a
short time he would be to seek; when other new Heresies come into fashion.
Besides, it is one thing to convince a man, that he is in a wrong way, which we
may do by refuting the particular Errors of the Religion he professes; and
another thing to show him which is the True way: which cannot be done, but by
demonstrating unto him the True Religion.

Wherefore I have endeavored, without taking notice of the particular Errors
of each Sect, to find out a Method, whereby to evidence, to all persons
whatsoever, the True Religion. For, this being once evidenced unto them,
whoever strayes from it, may clearly see, not only that he is in the wrong, but
also how he may put himself in the right-Certain it is, that if there be a True
Religion in the world (as we shall evince there is) it may be found out by all
such as are concerned therein; and consequently by all persons whatsoever; For
they are all concerned in finding out the True Religion; since they are all
bound to save their Souls: Nor can they save their Souls, unless they please
God; nor please God, unless they embrace the True Religion: which is only able
to teach them, what they are to do to please God. ( Sine Fide impossible est,
placere Deo, Heb. 11.6.) Nor finally embrace the True Religion, unless they can
find out, and be convinced which it is. And if all persons whatsoever may find
out, which the True Religion is, there must needs be some way, whereby they may
find it out: and this way also must be such, that it may be found out. For what
matters it, that there be a way to find out such a thing, if no Body can find
out which that way is? My endeavor therefore was to find out This way, of
Convincing all persons whatsoever, concerning the True Religion.

Now Natural Reason, and Experience teaches us, that it is not possible to
convince any one by discourse, but out of what the person, with whom we deal,
does admit. For all conviction by discourse must be grounded upon premises: and
nothing can be convinced, or concluded out of premises, unless they be granted.
If every Thing is to be proved, we shall never finish the proof of any Thing.
The art therefore of convincing a person consists in discovering such premises
granted by him, whence is inferred what we pretend to convince him of,

And if the premises be not only granted by our Adversary, but also True in
themselves, they may be effectual, both to convince our Adversary, and evince
the Truth too. But if they be not True in themselves, yet granted to be so,
they may convince him, but can never evince the Truth: And such Arguments are
commenly styled Argumenta ad hominem. Since therefore my design was, not only
to convince the persons, but to evince the Truth also, and to convince all
persons whatsoever, concerning the True Religion, I further resolved, to seek
out Principles True in themselves, pertinent to prove the intent, and such as
no person whatsoever could deny, or question.

But where shall we meet with such Principles? especially since we live in an
Age, wherein a good wit, and a bold wit are accounted Synonima's; and those are
held to be most ingenious, who can deny most. If we apply our selves to the
several Writers of each respective Sect, thinking to convince the professors of
such Sects by the Testimonies of their own Doctors, we shall find, that some
Fancy one Author, some another; though they all profess themselves to be of the
same Religion. Neither will they stand to all the Author, whom they Fancy,
asserts; but to what they please only, and in what sense too they please to
interpret it. Yea; though they promise many times, at the Beginning, to stick
to what such a Doctor, to whom they are devoted, does affirm, in reference to
such a Debate; yet when they are pressed, they fly off, and say, That they
will not pin their Faith upon the sleeve of Luther, Calvin, or any other
particular Doctor of the Protestant Church.

If we make our address to the ancient Fathers of the Church, endeavoring to
evidence, by their Testimonies, the Truth of ours, and the Falsehood of our
Adversaries Religion, this Topic is obnoxious to the same flaws, as the
former. For our Adversaries admit, among the ancient Fathers, only whom they
fancy, and of him only what they fancy, and this only in what sense they fancy:
and though, to amuse the people, they often vapor, that the Fathers, for the
first 600 years after Christ, did stand for them, yet when they are pinched
with clear Testimonies produced out of them, destructive to their particular
Sentiments, they plainly confess, that even the chiefest of the ancient Fathers
were infected with Non-fundamental Errors, (and such Errors only they ascribe
to Bellarmin and other Writers of the Roman Church) and with several
Superstitions of Popery: or they come to slight them all, saying with some
German Lutherans, that one Kemnitius is worth a thousand Austins, or (with
their grand Patriarch Luther) that they do not value a Thousand Cyprians, a
Thousand Austins; nay, nor the whole Universal Church, worth a straw. The same
may be said of Tradition. For they admit the Tradition only of such men, and in
such matters, as they think fit; or when they are urged, they slight it.

If we appeal to the General Councils of the Church, showing that by their
Canons our Tenets are established, and the Errors of our Adversaries condemned;
of eighteen General Councils, they admit only four: Nay, they do not afford any
absolute assent to the Definitions of any General Council whatsoever, but only
a conditional, viz. as far only as they, guided by their own private Spirit, do
judge, that what the Council defines, is agreeable to Scripture. And sure; they
will not deny such an assent, even to what the Council of Trent has defined.

If we betake our Selves to Scripture, producing thence many pregnant proofs in
vindication of the Articles we defend in opposition to the Protestant Church,
though Sectaries boast that Scripture is on their side, yet they allow only of
such Scripture, of such Versions, and of such an Interpretation, as their
private Spirit dictates unto them: So that if we will prove out of Scripture,
as out of a principle admitted by our Adversaries, the Articles of our Faith,
we must prove them out of Scripture, as interpreted according to their private
Spirit; which is impossible. For how can it be possible to evince against a
Zuinglian, for example, out of that place of Scripture, Matthew. 26. This is my
body, the Real Presence of Christ in the Eucharist, if we must take that place
in the sense of a Zuinglian, viz. in a mere Figurative sense?

And since Sectaries will not assent to any thing in matters of Religion,
asserted by Doctors, Fathers, Tradition, or Councils, further then it is
agreeable to Scripture; neither will they assent to Scripture, but as
interpreted by their own private spirit, it follows manif^stly, that the malice
of our Adversaries has rendered all the forementioned Topics (though good in
themselves) as admitted by them, and in the manner they admit them,
insignificant, and ineffectual to prove out of them, as out of premises granted
by our Adversaries, the Tenets of the true Religion; and that whoever makes use
of them as of such, will often be at a loss. Yea, what shall we say to Les
beaux Esprits of our Nation, (the Spawn of Heresy) who openly disavow Doctors,
Fathers, Tradition, Councils, and Scripture?

Wherefore to the end we may argue well against our Adversary, out of a
Principle as granted by him; it is not enough, that such a principle be good,
and pertinent in it self: but it is necessary, that it be granted by our
Adversary, and in such a manner, as that it may be effectual to evince what we
intend.

If, finally we retreat to Natural Reason, endeavoring thereby to make out the
True Religion; though there be no rational man, who will plainly confess that
he renounces all Natural Reason, (for so he would renounce the being a Rational
man, yea such as disallow all other Topics, do most vapor of Natural Reason)
yet many confine it, in several matters, to their own private Notions, and
Fancies.

Notwithstanding, there are some Principles so manifest, and so general, that
no man whatsoever can deny, or question them, without evidently rendering
himself incapable of conferring with any rational man. Such is this Principle,
SOMETHING IS TRUE, which no Sceptique, though never so Extravagant, can call in
question; and whoever should affirm, that NOTHING IS TRUE, would not only
incapacitate himself for all humane conversation, but also grant the very thing
he denies: This Proposition Nothing is True, being of the nature of such, as
falsify themselves, and cut their own throats. Nay, if nothing be true, the
Position our Adversaries pretend to maintain is not True, viz. That the Roman
Church is infected with Errors, and Corruptions.

Our present Method therefore is bottomed upon the forementioned Principle,
Something is true; which I keep in reserve, to the end, that in case other
Principles should fail me, I might have wherein to trust, and whereon to ground
the Conviction of all Dissenters whatsoever from the true Religion. For this
Principle being once agreed unto (as necessarily it must be) I deduce thence
the truth not only of the Roman Catholic Religion, but also of whatsoever she
delivers as an Article of Divine Faith.

This Method is Rational, Compendious, Clear, Easy, and General.

It is Rational; for not only the Foundation, but the Superstructures too, are
squared out by natural Reason.

It is Compendious: for, the whole substance of the Method is comprehended in
six short points; which yet I draw into a narrower Circle.

It is Clear: interwoven only with plain, and general notions, and divested
from all Scholastical questions; which of purpose I have waved: For my
persuasion always has been, That Polemical Debates, wherein we handle matters
of Religion, which we cannot deny without forfeiting our Faith, are not to be
involved with Scholastical Opinions; which we may promiscuously deny, or
defend, without any prejudice to our Religion, For, then the contest comes to
be, not between Catholic, and no-Catholick, but between Catholics and
Catholics: neither do I see what necessity there is, that men should be made
Thomists, Scotists, or Suarists, before they be made Christians, or
Catholics: or why Those, who come to our Religion, should not have the same
liberty, in order to opinions, as Those, who are of our Religion.

It is Easy: For; that one may understand this Method, it is not necessary,
that he be versed in Fathers, Councils, or Scriptures, nor that he has read
Books of Controversy, nor that he be a Philosopher, or a Divine, nor that he
be acquainted with the Latin, Greek, or Hebrew Tongue; nay, nor that he be so
much as able to read. It is only necessary, that he be endowed with Reason, and
that he be able to reflect upon his own Thoughts; which any rational man is
able to do. For my Task, in this Method, only is, among so many general
Notions, which either Nature, or Education, has printed in the hearts of all
men, to trace out such, as being rallied together, will certainly conveigh one
to the True Religion. So that my design is, rather to show every one, how he
may convince himself, than to convince him my self. And though few are willing
to yield to others, in contests of great concern; yet no Body is unwilling to
yield to himself, and his own Notions.

Wherefore, laying aside all Animosities, and Feuds of Disputes, which many
hate so much, we deal fairly, and freely, with our Adversary, making him his
own Book, and only pointing out unto him, by way of an Interrogatory, such
Principles as are material to our intent.

Finally, it is General; for the Satisfaction of all persons, for the
confirmation of all Articles of Faith, and for the confutation of all Errors
against Religion. It is General for the satisfaction of all persons, whether
they be learned, or unlearned, whether they be Christians, or no Christians,
and whether they be of any Religion, or of no Religion. Yea it is General, as
well for such as seek their own Satisfaction in matters of Religion, as for
such as desire to satisfy others. Nor Those, who will make use of This Method,
have any need of Books; much less of great Libraries: and whatever way our
Adversary takes to attaque us, we may force him to our Method. So that whoever
is well acquainted therewith, needs not any particular preparation to encounter
any Adversary, of whatsoever Sect or profession he be.

It is also General, for the Confirmation of all Articles of Faith. For we show
at once the Truth of All such Articles: and not only of such as are now
Articles of Faith, but of such too, as shall hereafter be declared to be so. We
insinuate also, how This Method may be applied to any particular point; wherein
satisfaction is desired. Wherefore, when one is to dispute with another, of
whatsoever Religion he be, if he will adjust himself to This Method, there is
no need to advise him beforehand, of what particular Point they are to Dispute.

Lastly, it is General for the Confutation of all Errors in Religion: not only
of such as have been, or are, but also of such, as shall (perhaps) hereafter be
hatched. So that, though the Heresies of these times should go out of fashion,
(as probably they will) and others come into vogue, there will be no need of
seeking a new Method, or way to confute them.

Many spend much time in seeking out the True Religion, yet never find it: and
the reason is, because they do not take the right way: yea they never enquire,
whether the way they take be right, or not. And let a Thing be never so easy
to be met with, yet if one takes the wrong way, he will never, or scarce ever,
meet with it.

The first enquiry therefore must be about the way, to find out the True
Religion. Our Sectaries commonly run to Scriptures, as the only way so find it
out; and to that Scripture which chance or Education has put into their hands,
without ever examining whether it be true, and entire Scripture, or no. Others
address themselves to the Doctors of the Religion established in the Country,
where they were born; supposing, rather then proving, such a Religion to be
true; and without reflecting, that men will be sure to prefer the Religion they
profess, whether True, or False, before all others. And though I cannot deny,
but that some persons have gotten into the True Religion by chance, or upon
frivolous grounds; and that if they conform thereunto, they will be saved: yet
certainly whoever comes to know, that the inducements he had to embrace the
Religion he is a member of, were very slight, and insignificant, he will, if he
tenders his own Salvation, endeavor to find out Solid Motives: which if he
cannot find in the Religion he hitherto has professed, he is bound to seek them
elsewhere.

I believe, that the Fate of this Discourse will be the same, as that of other
such Discourses, which are grounded upon Reason, viz. that there will be some,
who when they have nothing else to say, will cry out Sophistry, Sophistry. But
we must not be scarred with mere words. Let them legally show, wherein the
Sophistry, or Fallacy, of any of our Arguments does consist; or at least that
they are Sophistical, and Fallacious: and they will do something. But if they
be not able to do neither of these Things; according to the Laws of rational
Discourse, they must confess themselves Non plust, and if to say only, without
any legal proof, That an Argument is Sophistical, be enough to answer it, what
Argument is there. though never so concluding, which may not easily be answered?

And to put an end to this Preface, I entreat such, as shall take the pains to
read this present method, that they would be pleased to peruse it with care,
and diligence. For, even the clearest demonstrations are not understood, unless
they be considered with attention, and that they would suspend their judgment
thereof, till they have read it all over, we having set down after the six
points, wherein the Method consists, several things, which contribute much, to
clear the difficulties, that may occur against it. And since there is no Book
so fortunate, as that it has been approved by all, especially if it treats of
points controverted: nor none so unfortunate, as that it has not been approved
by some: Such as shall approve of this Method, will at a very little expense
have reaped a considerable Fruit, viz. a Compendious way to satisfy
themselves, and others, in matters of Religion: and such as shall not approve
of it, will have no just reason to complain of me, as if I had put them to any
great expense either of Time or Money.

A RATIONAL, Compendious way, TO Convince, without any Dispute, all Persons
whatsoever Dissenting from the TRUE RELIGION.
ALL persons whatsoever, that Dissent from the True Religion, (which we shall
prove to be the Catholic) must be either of no Religion; or of a False
Religion, as is manifest.

If they be of no Religion, either they deny a True God, and consequently a
true Religion, as Atheists: or they grant a True God, but deny a True Religion,
as Deists.

If they be of a False Religion, either they deny a Revealed Religion, but
grant a natural Religion, as Libertines and Latitudinarians: or they grant a
revealed Religion, but deny Christian Religion, as Jews, Turks, and Pagans: or
they grant Christian Religion, but deny Catholic Religion; as rigid
Protestants: or finally, they grant Catholic Religion to be a true Religion,
and free from all Fundamental errors: but withal they affirm, that it teaches
us Articles of Faith, several Errors, and Corruptions; and consequently, that
it is not Free from all Errors and Corruptions whatsoever; as moderate
Protestants.

And because it is impossible to convince any one of his errors, but out of
Principles, or Positions, which he himself does grant, as is evident: we
suppose that there is no body, unless he be manifestly either a Mad man or a
Fool, and by consequence incapable to be discoursed with, who does not grant
SOMETHING TO BE TRVE. For, if nothing be true, then it is not True, that he,
with whom we Dispute, is in his wits; that he is rather a man, than a Block;
that he affirms, or denies, or doubts: Nay, it is not true, that Nothing is
True. For, if this be true, then Something is true.

Upon this Supposition, viz. that there is something True, (which no rational
man can question) I ground this present Method, to convince all persons
whatsoever, dissenting from the true Religion. For, if there be something True,
we shall prove that there is a true God; and if there be a true God, That there
is some true Religion; and if there be some True Religion, that there is some
true revealed Religion; and if there be some true revealed Religion, that
Christian Religion is true; and if Christian Religion be true, that Catholic
Religion; and by consequence Free from all Fundamental Errors, and finally, if
Catholic Religion be true, and free from all Fundamental errors, that it does
not teach as an Article of Faith, any error, or corruption; and consequently,
that it is free from all errors, and corruptions whatsoever. For Catholic
Religion, or Catholic Faith is taken here, as it comprehends all Those
Doctrines, and only Those, which the Catholic Church Delivers, as Articles of
Divine Faith. And thus we shall convince all persons whatsoever, dissenting
from the true Religion and Faith, that is, from the Catholic Religion and
Faith. For all Dissenters imaginable are comprehended in the forementioned
Classes.

I. If there be something True, I prove that there is a True God. For, if there
be some Thing true, let us suppose that it is true, That there is something
better than another; this being an evident Truth assented unto by all rational
men: and whoever denies, that there is something better than another, must
necessarily deny himself to be better than an ass or a block. For, if he be
better, then there is something better, than another. And certainly, whoever
comes to deny himself to be better than an Ass, or a Block, is either a
madman, or a fool; and consequently unworthy to be discoursed with any
further. Now, if there be something better than another, there is something the
best of all Things. For one thing is better then another, because it comes
nearer that, which is the best of all things. And how can it come nearer that,
which is not? It is a common Maxim amongst Philosophers, Supremum in unoquoque
genere est mensura reliquorum in eodem genere. The best, and greatest in each
kind is the measure of the rest in the same kind. For one thing is said to be
better than another in such a kind, because it comes nearer that, which is the
best. A Duke is better in Dignity than an Earl, because he comes nearer the
King; who is the best man of the Kingdom in Dignity. So that unless in each
kind there be admitted something, that is the best, there can be no rule, nor
measure, whereby one Thing may be judged better than another in such a kind.
Wherefore if it be true, that there is something better than another, there
must be something the best of all Things: and if so, then there is a True God.
For the very notion of a true God is Ens Optimum Maximum, the Best and Greatest
of all Things; as all, even Atheists do confess, as we suppose: for unless we
agree about the notion of God, there can be no Dispute between us. Yea, what is
the Best of all Things that exist, is also the best of all Things that are
possible. For nothing possible can exist, or be produced, but by virtue of
something, that does exist: and nothing can produce what is better than it
self, Nemo dat, quod non habet. No body gives what he has not. I conclude
therefore, that if it be true (as certainly it is) that there is something
better than another, there is a true God.

II. If there be a True God, I prove, that there is some True Religion. For, if
there be a True God, we ought to worship him, in what manner he will be
worshipped by us; and obey him, in what matters he will be obeyed by us.
Subjects ought to reverence, and obey their Sovereign, and Servants their
Masters, in what manner, and in what matters they require: and if there be a
true God, the Best and greatest of all things, Ens optimum, Maximum, certainly
he is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, and Supreme Governor of the Universe:
and we are his Subjects, and Servants; as no Body, who grants a True God, can
deny. We ought therefore to respect, and obey God. Yea, what is to be
respected, or who is to be obeyed, if God be not? the Best of All things, the
universal Monarch? If we ought to worship God in what manner he will be
worshipped by us, and obey him in what matters he will be obeyed by us; there
must be some Doctrine teaching us, in what manner God will be worshipped by us,
and in what matters he will be obeyed by us. For how can we worship or obey
God, if we neither know in what manner we are to worship him, nor in what
matters we are to obey him? For, whether God will assign, by Himself, the
particular manner of the worship to be given to him, or will leave the
assignation thereof to men (and he must necessarily do either the one or the
other) we must obey his will; and to obey it, we must know it. And how can we
know it, unless there be some Doctrine, that teaches it? If there be some
Doctrine teaching us in what manner God will be worshipped by us, and in what
matters he will be obeyed by us, there must be some true Religion. For by a
true Religion we understand, according to the common notion thereof, a
Doctrine, that teaches men, in what manner God will be worshipped by them, and
in what matters he will be obeyed by them. Wherefore I conclude, that if there
be a True God (as has been proved) there is some True Religion.

III. If there be some True Religion, I prove, that there is some true revealed
Religion. For, if there be some true Religion, there is some Doctrine teaching
us, in what manner God will be worshipped by us, and in what matters he will be
obeyed by us; for this is the notion of a true Religion, as we have seen. If
there be some such Doctrine, it must be revealed unto us by God. For how can we
know Gods will, unless he reveal it unto us, either immediately by himself, or
mediately by others, commissioned by him? Natural Religion, or the Light of
nature, teaches us only in general, That we are to worship God, in what manner
he will be worshipped by us, and that we are to obey him in what matters he will
be obeyed by us: But it does not tell us (as is manifest) the particular
manner, wherewith he requires we would worship him, nor the particular matters,
wherein he requires we should obey him: which doubtless may be very different.
And of what concern is it, that we know we are to worship and obey God, if we
neither know, how we are to worship him, nor in what we we are to obey him?
Yea, should God be pleased to leave to every one the choice of the manner,
wherein he is to worship him; yet since this would certainly be a very
particular manner of worship, not intimated unto us by the Law of Nature, God
must reveal it. God therefore must reveal unto us, in what particular manner he
will be worshipped by us, and in what particular matters he will be obeyed by
us. And if so; then there is some true revealed Religion; which is nothing
else, but a Doctrine teaching men in what particular manner God will be
worshipped by them, and in what particular matters he will be obeyed by them,
revealed by God. Wherefore I conclude, that if there be some True Religion, (as
has been proved, that there is) there is some true revealed Religion.

IV. If there be some true revealed Religion, I prove, that Christian Religion
is true. For, if there be some true Revealed Religion, certainly, That among
all Religions that pretend to be revealed by God, must be true, which can
evidently show, that it has been miraculously propagated. For a miraculous
propagation cannot be effected without true, and real Miracles; and True and
Real Miracles are Gods Broad Seal, and manifest proofs of the Truth; in whose
Confirmation they are wrought, and a certain kind of Divine Revelation; Because
God can speak as well by works, as by words. All professors of revealed
Religions either pretend to produce true, and real Miracles in confirmation of
their respective Religions, or at least would be glad, if they could produce
them. Yea even Atheists openly profess, that could they be convinced of a true,
and real Miracle, done in Confirmation of a Truth, they should think themselves
bound to submit unto it. Wherefore a true, and real Miracle, according to the
unanimous consent of men, is a pregnant proof of the Thing, in whose
confirmation it is wrought. If that Religion, among all that pretend to be
revealed by God, be True, which can evidently show that it has been
miraculously propagated, certainly, that must be true, which can evidently
show, that though it contains several mysteries, far above the reach of Humane
Reason, and diverse severities, very contrary to humane inclination, yet has
been propagated over a great part of the world, without the help of Arms, or
humane Enticements, by men of themselves very unfit for so great a work;
overcoming other Religions established in the world, which preached liberty and
pleasures. For the propagation of such a Religion, and in such a manner, (to
use St. Augustin's argument) Lib. 22. De Civitat. Dei, cap. 5.
either was effected with Miracles, or without them. If with them, then it was
miraculously propagated: which is what we pretend. If without them; what
greater Miracle than this, viz. that such a Religion should be propagated in
such a manner, and that without any Miracle! If such a Religion propagated in
the manner aforesaid, be true, then certainly Christian Religion is true. For
it is evident, as even the enemies of Christianity do confess, that Christian
Religion has been propagated over a great part of the world, that it contains
several Mysteries, as the Trinity, Incarnation, Resurrection, and others, far
above the reach of humane reason; and diverse severities, as to embrace
crosses, to love our enemies, to mortify our passions, and others, very
contrary to humane inclination; that it overcame Paganism established in the
world, which preached liberty and pleasures: and finally, that being such, it
was propagated without the help of Arms, or humane Enticements, by the
Apostles, and other Apostolical men, very unfit of themselves for so great a
work. All this (I say) is granted even by the enemies of Christianity; and is
manifest from Authentic History, and constant Tradition: and should our
Adversaries deny any of the forementioned circumstances, they may be proved
against them out of the same Topics, and with the same Evidence, as other
ancient matters of Fact; which to deny, or question, even to them, would seem a
madness. Wherefore I conclude, that if there be some true revealed Religion,
(as has been proved) Christian Religion is true.

V. If Christian Religion be true, I prove, that Catholic Religion is true.
By Catholic Religion I understand Roman Catholic, as will appear by my
proofs: and there is no other Catholic Religion, but the Roman. If Christian
Religion be true, it may solidly be proved against the enemies thereof; as we
have proved it already, and as all professors of Christianity do grant.
Otherwise, why should they preach it, if they cannot prove it? If Christian
Religion may be solidly proved; a Religion, that has the same proofs as
Christianity has, or any of them, that are Solid; must needs be true. For it is
impossible, that there should be any solid, or real proof of a Falsity,
according to that Principle, Ex vero tantum non sequitur falsum. From Truth
alone no Falsity can be deduced. If a Religion that has the same proofs as
Christianity has, be true, then Catholic Religion is true; for it has the
same proofs as Christianity: which will manifestly appear, if one reflects upon
the grounds, whereby Christians do commonly show the truth of Christianity
against her enemies. And because our Adversaries in this point, do profess
themselves to be Christians, we ask them, why they are, or what rational
inducement they have to be Christians? or (which comes to the same) what solid
proof can they produce to show the Truth of Christianity against the enemies
thereof? advertising them, that it cannot be a solid proof of the Truth of
Christianity, that which agrees to Judaism, Paganism, or Mahometism, which we,
as Christians, believe to be false Religions: And how can we persuade our
selves, that Christian Religion is true, if we have no better proofs for it,
than are for a Religion, which we firmly believe to be false? And let us
suppose, That our Adversaries choose the reason abovementioned, of the
miraculous propagation of Christianity; which is a common, solid, and evident
proof: the same would be, should they produce any other solid proof of
Christianity. For it may be easily applied to Catholic Religion. Now, if the
truth of Christian Religion be solidly proved, because it was propagated in the
manner above insinuated, the Truth also of Catholic Religion is solidly
proved by the like propagation. For, the Roman Catholic Religion (as even our
Adversaries do confess, who blame her upon that account) does contain, besides
the general principles of Christianity beforementioned, very hard mysteries
above the reach of humane reason; as (for instance) Transubstantiation, which
thwarts (as they say) all Sense and Reason; and very hard Precepts, and
Counsels, contrary to humane inclination, as Vows, Fasts, Consession,
Prohibition for Priests to Marry, etc.

Moreover, the Roman Catholic Religion, even as containing such Doctrines as
our Adversaries style errors, and corruptions, has been propagated over a great
part of the world, without the help of Arms, or humane Enticements, by men, who
were commonly Strangers, and very unfit of themselves, to reclaim, as they did,
so vast a multitude of people from Paganism, established among them, which
preached Liberty and Pleasures, to Christian and Catholic Religion, which
preaches Mortification, and Severities. So St. Augustine the Monk converted
England, and St. Xaverius diverse Nations among the Indians; and several others
have done the like in other Countries; who were Roman Catholics, and preached
the Roman Catholic Religion: All which is granted by most of our Adversaries;
and against such, as shall deny any of the abovementioned circumstances, they
may be made as manifest out of Authentic History, and Tradition, as we, or
they, can make manifest against Pagans, the like circumstances, in the
propagation of Christian Religion: and whatever exception they make against
this proof, or others commonly alleged for Catholic Religion, was, or might
be made by the enemies of Christianity, against the like proofs alleged for
Christian Religion: (and certainly there cannot be a solid exception made
against a Truth:) and what they would answer the enemies of Christianity in
that case, if they answer solidly, we answer the same. Now (to use St.
Augustins Argument) the propagation of the Roman Catholic Religion in the
manner aforesaid, either was done with Miracles, or without them. If with them,
then it was miraculously propagated, and consequently is true: if without them,
what greater Miracle than this, viz. That such a Religion should be propagated
in such a manner, and that without any Miracle? Wherefore since we have the
same proofs, and grounds, for Catholic Religion, as for Christian; if we will
proceed rationally, we must be both Catholics, and Christians; or otherwise
we can neither be Christians, nor Catholics. And therefore I conclude, that
if Christian Religion be true, as has been proved, Catholic Religion is true.

VI. If Catholic Religion be true, I prove, that it teaches nothing
whatsoever, as an Article of Faith, which is not True, or which is an error, or
corruption. For, if Catholic Religion be true, it is free from all
Fundamental, and Essential Errors, as is manifest: all such Errors being
destructive to the very Being of a True Religion. If Catholic Religion be
Free from all Fundamental Errors, it does not err against any Fundamental point
of Religion. For a Fundamental error in Religion is nothing else, but an error
against a Fundamental point of Religion. If Catholic Religion does not err
against any Fundamental point of Religion, then it does not err against this
point, viz. That God is not the Author of any error, or corruption whatsoever;
this being, doubtless, a Fundamental point of Religion; as all, who admit any
Religion, do consess. If Catholic Religion does not err against the
forementioned point, it does not teach God to be the Author of any error, or
corruption, whatsoever, or of any thing whatsoever, which is either an error,
or corruption: for to teach this, is to err against the forementioned point; as
is evident. If Catholic Religion does not teach God to be the Author of any
error or corruption whatsoever, it does not teach any thing whatsoever as an
Article of Faith, which is either an error, or corruption. For to teach a Thing
as an Article of Faith, is to teach God to be the Author of it, or that it has
been delivered by God; as all do grant. Now since it is manifest, according to
the unanimous consent of both Catholics, and Protestants, (who blame us upon
this account) that the Roman Catholic Religion teaches, as Articles of Faith,
Purgatory, Transubstantiation, Invocation of Saints, Veneration of Images,
Adoration of Christ in the Eucharist, Infallibility of the Roman Catholic
Church, its perpetuity to the end of the world, our Canon of Scripture, and
other Doctrinal Points controverted between us, and them; it must needs follow,
that none of these Points are either errors or corruptions. In the like manner
we may conclude the same of any particular Point, which comes under debate: as
(for instance) I prove Transubstantiation to be no error, nor corruption. The
Roman Catholic Religion does not teach any thing as an Article of Faith,
which is either an error, or a corruption; as has been shown; otherwise it
would not be a True Religion. But the Roman Catholic Religion does teach, as
an Article of Faith, Transubstantiation, as all do confess. Therefore
Transubstantiation is no error, nor corruption. Wherefore I conclude, That if
Catholic Religion be true (as has been proved) it teaches nothing as an
Article of Faith, (neither does it, as here it is taken, teach any thing, but
what it teaches as such) which is either an error, or a corruption: and
consequently it is free from all errors, and corruptions whatsoever: which is
what we pretended to prove.

And to draw into a closer Circle all the forementioned proofs, supposing that
it is true, That there is something better than another, the proof of a true
Deity runs thus. If there be something better than another, there is something
the best of All Things. If there be something the Best of All Things, there is
a True God. Therefore if there be something better than another, as certainly
there is, there is a true God.

A True Deity supposed, the proof of a True Religion is framed in this manner.
If we ought to Worship God in what manner he will be worshipped by us, and obey
him in what matters he will be obeyed by us, there must be some Doctrine,
teaching us, in what manner God will be worshipped by us, and in what matters
he will be obeyed by us. If there be some such Doctrine, then there is some
true Religion. Therefore if we ought to worship God, in what manner he will be
worshipped by us, and to obey him, in what matters he will be obeyed by us,
(as, a True Deity supposed, doubtless we ought) there is some True Religion.

Supposing that there is some True Religion, the proof of some true revealed
Religion, is as follows. If there be some Doctrine teaching us, in what manner
God will be worshipped by us, and in what matters he will be obeyed by us, it
must be revealed by God: if there be some such Doctrine revealed by God, there
is some true revealed Religion. Therefore, if there be some Doctrine teaching
us, in what manner God will be worshipped by us, and in what matters he will be
obeyed by us, (as evidently there is, a True Religion being supposed) there is
some true revealed Religion.

Supposing that there is some true revealed Religion, the proof of Christian
Religion goes thus. If among all Religions which pretend to be revealed by God,
that must be true, which has been miraculously propagated; certainly, that must
be true; which, though containing several Mysteries, far above the reach of
Humane Reason, and diverse severities very contrary to Humane Inclination, yet
has been propagated over a great part of the world, without the help of Arms,
or humane Enticements, by men very unfit of themselves for so great a work; and
has overcome other Religions established in the world, which preached liberty
and pleasures: If such a Religion, propagated in such a manner, be true, then
Christian Religion is true. Therefore, if among all Religions, which pretend to
be revealed by God, that must be true, which has been miracuculously
propagated; (as certainly it must, supposing that there is some true revealed
Religion) Christian Religion is true.

Supposing that Christian Religion is true, and that the forementioned reason
is solid, as doubtless it is; the proof of Catholic Religion is thus. If
Christian Religion be true, because propagated in the manner aforesaid, a
Religion, that though containing as high Mysteries, and as hard Precepts as
Christianity, yet has been propagated in the like manner, must needs be true.
If so, then Catholic Religion is True. Therefore, if Christian Religion be
true, because propagated in the manner aforesaid (as beyond Debate it is in the
forementioned supposition) Catholic Religion is True.

Finally, supposing Catholic Religion to be true, we proved, That it does not
teach any thing as an Article of Faith, which is not true, in this manner. If
Catholic Religion be true, it does not err against any Fundamental Point; if
so, it does not teach any Thing as an Article of Faith, which is not true.
Therefore, if Catholic Religion be true, as it is in the present supposition,
it does not teach any thing as an Article of Faith, which is not true; or which
is an error or corruption.

All these particular Propositions have been expounded more at large in the
former six Points.

But because many of our Adversaries do admit several of the forementioned
points; and because it is not necessary to prove what our Adversary of his own
accord does admit, you may begin with the sixth, and last point, and ask your
Adversary, whether he grants the Roman Catholic Religion to be a true
Religion? If he grants it, then prove, according to the manner there set down,
that it teaches nothing as an Article of Faith, which is not true; or which is
an error, or corruption. If he denies it, then ask him, whether he grants
Christian Religion to be true; If he grants it, then prove, in conformity to
the way contained in the fifth Point, that Catholic Religion is true. If he
denies it, then ask him, whether he grants any revealed Religion to be true? If
he grants it, then show, according to the Argument framed in the fourth Point,
that Christian Religion is true. If he denies it, then ask him, whether he
grants any true Religion? If he grants it, then prove, according to the
Discourse formed in the third Point, that there is some true revealed Religion.
If he denies it, then ask him, whether he grants a True God? If he grants it,
then prove, according to the Argument proposed in the second Point, that there
is some true Religion. If he denies it, then ask him in the last place, whether
he grants that there is something true? as (for example) that there is
something better than another? which he must grant, unless he be a Mad man, or
a Fool; and consequently incapable to be dealt with by Discourses: and then
prove, according to the Argument couched in the first Point, that there is a
true God: proceeding always forwards, till you have shown, that the Roman
Catholic Religion is exempt from all errors and corruptions whatsoever: which
is the drift of this short Discourse.

And since no Body does, or can dissent from the Catholic Religion, but upon
the account of some Doctrine taught by it as an Article of Faith, which the
Dissenter judges to be an error, or corruption; what more can be required to
convince the judgment of all Dissenters whatsoever from the True and Catholic
Religion, than to prove (as we have done, in the forementioned points) that it
does not teach any Thing whatsoever, as an Article of Divine Faith, which is
either an error, or corruption.

From the forementioned Method we may infer by several consequences, (since
one error produces another) that whoever denies the Catholic Religion to be
free from all errors, and corruptions whatsoever, must needs deny himself to be
better then a Mad man, or a Fool. For, if Catholic Religion be not free from
all errors and corruptions whatsoever, it must teach something as an Article of
Faith, which is either an error, or corruption. If it does teach something as
an Article of Faith, which is either an error, or corruption, it is not Free
from all Fundamental Errors: if it be not Free from all Fundamental Errors, it
is not True: if it be not true, Christian Religion is not True: if Christian
Religion be not True, no revealed Religion is True: if no revealed Religion be
true, no Religion is True: if no Religion be True, there is no True God: if
there be no True God, there is nothing the Best of All Things: if there be
nothing the Best of all Things, there is nothing better than another: and
finally, if there be nothing better than another, the person, with whom we
dispute, is no better than a Mad man, or a Fool. So that, whoever denies the
Catholic Religion to be free from all errors and corruptions whatsoever, will
be forced, unless he recants, to deny himself to be better than a Mad man, or a
Fool: which before any rational man will be forced to do, certainly, he will
recall the error, from which such vast absurdities are deduced; and openly
confess, that the Catholic Religion, or Faith, is free from all errors, and
corruptions imaginable. And though the last Proposition be deduced from several
precedent consequences; yet this Method is common even among Mathematicians,
who are thought by all to proceed a most concluding, and demonstrative way.

Moreover, according to the same Method, we may show the Truth of any Point,
delivered by the Roman Catholic Religion, as an Article of Faith, whether it
be speculative or practical; of little, or great moment, hard and above the
reach of Natural Reason; or easy and suitable to Humane understanding. For the
Catholic Religion (as we have proved) does teach nothing as an Article of
Faith, which is not true: and sure, it is against the very essence of a true
Religion, (such as the Catholic Religion is) to father upon God any thing that
that is not true, speculative or practical, little or great, hard or easy; and
to teach a Thing as an Article of Faith, is to father it upon God. And though
Catholics be commanded many Things by their Ecclesiastical Superiors, (as
Fasting upon Fridays, annual Confession, and such like) which are no Articles
of Faith; yet it is an Article of Catholic Faith, that we are bound to obey
our lawful Superiors, whether Ecclesiastical or Civil.

And as concerning the hardness of some Mysteries, taught by the Roman
Catholic Religion as Articles of Faith, it can be no Argument to prove that it
is not a true Religion. For, certain it is, that God does know very high, and
hard Mysteries, far above the reach of humane understanding, and contrary to
the notions of Things here below. If he does know them, he may reveal them. If
he may reveal them, then a true Religion (since it must be revealed by God) may
contain such mysteries. And if a True Religion may contain such Mysteries, it
can be no good argument that a Religion is not true, because it does contain
very high, and hard Mysteries, above the reach of humane understanding, and
contrary to the notions of Things, which humane reason comprehends. Yea, the
harder the Mysteries are, which the Roman Catholic Religion does contain, the
more miraculous is the propagation thereof. For easy Things are believed with
ease; but hard Things are not believed without great difficulty: And the more
miraculous the propagation of the Roman Catholic Religion is, the more reason
there is to believe, that it is a true Religion.

In the like manner, following the same Method, we may evince, that the Roman
Catholic Religion is, not only a True Religion, but the true Religion; and
that the Roman Catholic Church is, not only a True Church, but the true
Church: (By a true Church we understand a Congregation of men that profess a
true Religion; and by the true Church we understand the Congregation of all
such, as profess the true Religion; and a true Church and a true Religion are
taken, as con-distinguished from a false Church, and a false Religion:) That
out of the Roman Church there is no Salvation, and that no Church, which is not
a Member of the Roman Church, is a Member of the True Church: For all these
Points are delivered as Articles of Faith by the Roman Church; as both we, and
our Adversaries do confess. That it is, not only a True Religion, but also a
sound Religion. For, what more can be required for the soundness thereof, than
that it should not teach any corruption whatsoever? as we have proved it does
not. That it is entirely a true Religion, containing all Things necessary to be
believed, and all Things necessary to be done, in order to Salvation; either
necessitate medii, or necessitate praecepti. For this also it delivers as an
Article of Faith. Yea, half a Religion is not a true Religion; as half a man,
viz. the Body alone of a man, is not a true man. That it is, not only True,
whatsoever the Roman Church delivers as an Article of Faith, and as revealed by
God, but also it is true, That it is an Article of Faith, and revealed by God:
as for example, not only the Mystery of the Trinity is true; but also it is
true, that it is revealed. For it is an Article of Faith, that those Books,
wherein the Mystery of the Trinity is contained, and declared to be so, are the
True Word, and Revelation of God. So that one would be an Heretic, not only if
he should deny the Mystery of the Trinity, but also if he should deny it to be
revealed: and as one cannot be a true, and loyal Subject, who counterfeits the
Kings Hand and Seal; so that Religion cannot be true, which Counterfeits Gods
Word, delivering (in order to authorize any Thing whatsoever) Things as
revealed by him, which he never revealed. Finally, that whatsoever the Roman
Catholic Religion, or Church, teaches as an Article of Faith, is not only
true, but infallibly true. For, among other Points, that it delivers as
Articles of Faith, (and consequently are true) one is its own Infallibility in
matters of Faith; as all do grant. It is therefore true, that the Roman
Religion is Infallible in such matters: and if so, then it must necessarily
follow, that whatsoever it declares as a matter of Faith, is infallibly true.
For, it is impossible, that the Sentence of an Infallible Judge should be false.

Besides, since we have shown that the Roman Catholic Church is free from all
Fundamental errors, it is inferred,

1. That it does not err against any Fundamental Point whatsoever, either
mediately, or immediately. For, an error does not cease to be Fundamental,
because it is only mediately, and by consequence, opposite to a Fundamental
Point. For to be mediately opposite to a point, is to be opposite to that
point, and another point also, whereon the Truth of the former depends. A
Disease, or Wound does not cease to be mortal, because it infers only mediately
the death of a man, destroying immediately only the Dispositions necessary for
the conservation of his life; which being once destroyed, there follows the
separation between the Body and the Soul; wherein the Death of man formally
consists.

2. That it cannot be said, That the Roman Catholic Religion does not err
against any Fundamental point, precisely because it holds all the Fundamental
points of the True Religion. For a Religion may contradict it self, and err
against that very point, which it holds. Certainly, a Religion, which should
deny Christ to be God, would err Fundamentally; and consequently, would be no
true Religion; though it should, contradicting it self, hold at the same time;
that Christ is God, and all other positive points of the True Religion. To the
truth therefore of a Religion it is requisite, not only that it holds all
Fundamental points of the true Religion; but also, that it does not deny any of
them, neither mediately, nor immediately; observing, what is related of St.
John Baptist, [Joan. 1.30] Confessus est, and non negavit: He confessed, and did
not deny.

3. That it cannot be affirmed, That a Religion is true, and consequently, that
it does not err against any Fundamental point, because some, who profess it,
are excused by Invincible Ignorance. For, invincible ignorance, though it
excuses him, who has it, from erring maliciously, yet it does not excuse him
from erring; nor the Religion, which should contain such an error, from being
erroneous, and heretical too, if the point, against which it errs, be an
Article of Faith. Sure, a man that should say That Christ is not God, would err
Fundamentally, whether he said it out of ignorance, or malice: and a Religion,
that should teach such an error, would be an Heretical Religion, and err
against a Fundamental point, viz. the Divinity of Christ.

4. That a Religion, which teaches God to be the Author of any Thing, that is
really an error, must needs err against a Fundamental point, though it teaches
such a Thing as a Truth. For, to err, is to teach a Thing as a Truth, which
really is an error. The Arrians, doubtless, erred against a Fundamental point,
by teaching that Christ was not God; which was really an error, though they
thought it to be a Truth. Wherefore the Roman Catholic Religion cannot be free
from all Fundamental errors, unless whatsoever it teaches as an Article of
Faith be really true; and not only judged by the Church to be so.

According to the same Method we convince at once the Truth of all our Articles
of Faith. For we have showed, that whatsoever the Roman Church teaches as an
Article of Faith, is true; otherwise, it would not be a true Church; and that
there is no Article of Faith, which is not delivered as such by the Roman
Church; otherwise it would not be entirely true. Whence we avoid the tedious
way of Treating Controversies, (for which the whole life of man is scarce
sufficient) viz. of proving each point of Controversy by it self, and out of
its own proper reasons: though I do not hinder, but that we may prove some
particular points this way also; yet we have insinuated above in the sixth
Point, how we may apply this general way, to decide any particular question
concerning matters of Faith; wherein the party, with whom we deal, desires
satisfaction.

Again, the same Method will teach us, how we may, with ease, discover all
Heresies whatsoever. For it is easy to know, what Doctrines are delivered by
the Roman Catholic Church, (which we have proved to be, not only a true, but
the true Church) as Articles of Faith; either out of the Canons of General
Councils, admitted by that Church, or out of the Authentic Catechisms, or
Professions of Faith, used among Catholics; or finally out of the unanimous
consent of Catholic Doctors: and if there be a Debate among Catholic Writers,
whether such a Doctrine be delivered by the Roman Catholic Church as an
Article of Faith; we oblige no Body to look upon it as an Article of Faith of
that Church: nay, the contest between Catholics and no Catholics is not,
whether such Doctrines be Articles of the Catholic Faith, or not, but whether
they be errors or truths. Now, if one knows, what Doctrines are delivered by
the Catholic Church, as Articles of Faith, he may easily know, what
Propositions are immediately opposite to such Doctrines. As for example, if one
knows, that Purgatory is delivered as an Article of Faith by the Catholic
Church, he cannot but see, that No-Purgatory, (or the denial of Purgatory) is
immediately opposite to such an Article. And if one knows, what Propositions
are immediately opposite to such Doctrines, as the Catholic Church delivers as
Articles of Faith, he knows also, what Propositions are Formal Heresies. For
all Formal Here sies whatsoever are immediately opposite to some Doctrine,
taught by the True Church ( i. e. the Catholic) as an Article of Faith.

Moreover, if one knows; what other Propositions do necessarily infer any
Formal Hetesie, he knows also, what Propositions are virtual Heresies. For a'l
virtual Heresy must necessarily infer a Formal Heresy. And because the Roman
Catholic Church is, not only now the True Church, but will be till the worlds
end; (for among other things, which she delivers as Articles of Faith, one is
her own perpetuity) by help of this Method we are taught, not only what
Heresies now are, or have been; but also what Heresies shall be hereafter: if
it happens, that any new Heresies be broached. For all Heresies whatsoever
must, necessarily be contrary to some Doctrine delivered by the Catholic
Church, as an Article of Faith.

Yet further, by the means of this Method we may solve all Objections against
the Truth of the Roman Catholic Church, or any Doctrine delivered by it as an
Article of Faith; showing in general, That whatsoever is, or can be objected
against us in this kind, either from Reason, or Authority, is false, or
Incouclusive. For, if the Roman Catholic Church be a True Church, and if
whatsoever she teaches as an Article of Faith, be True, as we have evinced; it
follows evidently, that what ever is, or can be, objected against our Church,
or any Article thereof, must necessarily be either False, or Inconclusive. For
it is a manifest principle of Logic, That there can be no True, Solid, and
Real Proof against a Truth, or of a Falsity. True it is, that this Method does
not instruct us, how we are to answer in particular every. Objection against
the Truth of the Roman Church, and of the Doctrines which she delivers as
Articles of Faith. But this is not necessary, to the end we may remain fully
satisfied, concerning the Falsity or Inconclusiveness of whatsoever is objected
against her, or her Articles. All men are firmly persuaded, that there is Local
Motion, and that we move from one place to another, as reason, and experience,
do evidently demonstrate; and consequently, according to the Principle just now
insinuated, they are cervain, that whatsoever is objected against Local Motion,
although it seem never so hard, is either False, or Inclusive. Yet very few can
show directly, even with probability, and perhaps no Body with evidence, how
and why each Objection in particular against Local Motion, is either False, or
Inconclusive. And generally speaking, one may be certain (as several obvious
instances do evince) that such a Thing is so, without knowing, or being able to
assign, either the particular manner, how it is so; or the direct and proper
reason, why it is so: and consequently one may be fully satisfied, that such an
objection is either False, or Inconclusive, though he be not able to give the
proper, and direct reason why it is so.

And although I must needs confess, that there are several other ways, to
demonstrate the Truth of the Roman Catholic Religion; as there may be many
reasons, and all of them very good, to prove the same Truth: yet it is easy to
force our Adversary to come to this Method. For, all Methods whatsoever, to
prove the true Religion, or any other verity, are grounded, either upon Reason,
or Authority. If our Adversary will be tried by Reason, the way we have taken
in this Method, in order to find out the true Religion, is built upon Reason.
For Reason shows us, that there is something better than another; and that if
there be something better than another, there is a God, and that if there be a
God, there is a True Religion: and thus Reason guides us downwards, through the
forementioned Points, till it has proved, That the Roman Catholic Religion
delivers nothing as an Article of Faith, which is not true: and that then we
are to believe her in whatsoever she teaches as such.

But if our Adversary will be tried by Authority, either of Scriptures, or
General Councils, or ancient Fathers, or Modern Writers, This Trial, if it be
well managed, must depend upon the knowledge of the True Church, and True
Religion. For certainly, no Body, in matters of Religion, is bound to be tried
by the Scriptures, Councils, or Doctors of a False Religion. We cannot in
prudence require of a Christian to stand, in Debates of Religion, to the
Decisions of the Alchoran, the Scripture of the Turks; or to the Decrees of
their Councils, and Doctors. Wherefore, when men appeal to Scriptures,
Councils, or Doctors, for the determination of Religious Debates, doubtless,
their intention is to appeal to such Scriptures, and Councils (and such alone,
and to all such) as are admitted by the True Church; and to such Doctors only,
as are Members of the True Religion. And how can we know, what Scriptures, or
what Councils, are admitted by the True Church; or what Doctors are Members of
the True Religion; unless we know, which is the True Church, and which is the
True Religion? For what Saint Augustine said of the Church in order to the
Scripture, Ego vero Evangelio non crederem, nisi me Ecclesiae Catholicae
commoveret authoritas; [Aug. lib. Epist. cont. Manich. cap. 5.] may be extended
to Councils, and Doctors. For the present True Church decides, not only what
ancient Councils, and Doctors have been Orthodox, but also what modern
Councils, and Doctors are so. We force therefore our Adversary to the
investigation of the True Religion; and then we may set upon him, according to
the Method abovementioned.

Moreover, when one appeals to Scriptures, Councils, or Fathers, sure he
appeals to them as rightly understood. For who will be tried by Scriptures,
Councils, or Fathers, understood in a wrong sense? Now if there arise a
contest, as commonly there does, between us and our Adversaries, concerning the
right meaning of the places, alleged out of Scripture, (the same is of places
alleged out of Councils, or Fathers) certainly the Judge to decide this
Debate, must appertain to the True Religion. For, who will make his application
to an Atheist, to decide matters of Religion? or what Christian will go to a
Turk, or a Jew, to determine matters belonging to Christianity?

In like manner, when one appeals to the private Spirit in matters of Religion,
sure he will not appeal to the private Spirit of an Atheist; or, if he be a
Christian, to the private Spirit of a Jew, a Turk, or an Heretic. His
intention therefore is to appeal to the private Spirit of such as are of the
True Religion: and we cannot be ascertain^d, who, or what appertains to the
True Religion, unless we be informed which the True Religion is.

And thus we force our Adversary again, to make enquiry into the True Religion;
and then we may attack him after our own way: asking him, whether he grants the
Roman Catholic Religion to be a true Religion? if he grants it, we may show,
according to what we hinted above, That the Roman Catholic Religion is the
true Religion; and if so, that to her appertains the judgment of Controversy,
and of the true, and genuine sense of Scriptures, Councils, and Fathers. Whence
I conclude, that till we have found out, which is the true Religion, scarce any
other Thing under Debate, appertaining to Religion, can be proved. And when
that is found out, all other Things appertaining to Religion are proved without
difficulty.

And here I cannot but reflect upon the unreasonableness of our Adversaries,
who will tie us to certain Topics, without giving us leave to make use of
others, of no less force. Some will have us show them in the First Four General
Councils, or in the Fathers of the First 600 years after Christ, in express
terms, all the Points, which we defend in opposition to the Protestant Church;
and unless we can do it, they proclaim the victory against us. And why might
not we, in the same manner, require of them to show us in the Apostles Creed
all their Thirty Nine Articles? or in the First Chapter of St. Matthew's
Gospel, all the Mysteries of Christian Religion? we admit, beside the Four
First General Councils, several others of equal Authority: and beside, the
Fathers of the First 600 years, other Fathers, and Doctors.

Others will have All Controversies decided by express Scripture, and by their
Scriptures only, and with their versions, and interpreted according to their
sense, without hearkening either to Councils, or Fathers, or any other Topics,
though very solid and effectual: whereas any good, and solid argument, let it
be drawn from any Topic whatsoever, is sufficient to evince a Truth: and no
Body can, with reason, require more of his Adversary, than that he should prove
solidly the Thesis, which he undertakes to defend. Neither is it necessary,
That all Truths should be evidenced out of every place.

Wherefore it is not Prudence to permit; that our Adversary should prescribe us
the manner, wherein we are to attack him: it is better to force him to fight
our way. For though, perhaps, the way he proposes unto us, may be apt enough;
yet another may be more advantageous: and an adversary may, with more ease,
find, in a way wherein he is versed, Cavils, wherewith to elude our Arguments,
though never so good; then if he be brought into a road, wherein he is not
acquainted.

Yet because they may have no occasion to quarrel with us, as if we did refuse
to be tried by Scripture, we profess, that we are not unwilling to be tried by
it. But then it must be with These Conditions; which no rational man can look
upon as absurd, viz. By True Scripture, By the whole Canon of Scripture, By the
True Versions thereof, and by Scripture rightly understood. The same may be
said of Councils, and Fathers.

We have made frequent mention in this Discourse, of Fundamental points of the
True Religion, yet we do not require of our Adversaries (that which they are
loath to do) to exhibit unto us a Catalogue of all such Points. What we require
of them is only, That they grant this point to be Fundamental, and Essential,
to a True Religion, viz. God is not the Author of any error, or corruption,
whatsoever, or, whatsoever God reveals, is true. And sure, no Body, who grants
any true Religion, yea any True Deity, can refuse to grant This position. For
it is certain, that there are some Points determinately Fundamental, and
Essential to a true Religion: and if there be and such, why not this? The very
Foundation of Divine Faith consists in this Principle, That God does neither
deceive, nor is deceived, in any Thing whatsoever: and consequently, that he is
not the Author of any error, great or little, and that what ever he reveals is
true. Otherwise one might say, Though God has revealed such a Thing, perhaps it
is not so, as he has revealed it: which doutbless would be a manifest
Blasphemy. Yea, the reason, why we ought to believe God, before man, is,
because men do many times deceive, and are many times more deceived. But God
does never deceive, nor is deceived.

We have mentioned also several times, Natural and Revealed Religion. By
Natural Religion we understand Those necessary common Principles of Morality,
relating to our duty toward God, our selves, and our Neighbor, which Nature
has printed in the hearts of men; and are usually styled The Law of Nature.
Such are these Principles. Do as you would be done by. Worship God. Honor your
Parents. Obey your Superiors. Fly Evil. Do Good, and such like. Natural
Religion also does inform us concerning several Attributes of God, as that he
is Supreme Governor of the Universe, That he is not idle in the world, That he
complies with his Character, and consequently that he rules and governs the
world; That he is just and merciful; and consequently, that he will reward
those, who do well, and punish such as do ill. By a revealed Religion is
signified a Religion, that contains either some high Mysteries, seated above
the, Sphere of Humane Reason, or some particular manner of worshipping God, or
some particular matters, wherein we are to obey him; freely revealed unto us by
God.

Now God may manifest his will unto men diverse ways, either by Writings, Words,
or other Signs, by positive Injunctions, or by Silence (as men also may
manifest their will) by himself, or by others Commissioned by him, whether
Angels, or Men: or he may manifest his will partly by Writing, and partly in
Words; or by Writings, or Words so clear, that any one may understand them; or
so obscure, that to understand them there is need of an Expositor. He may also
determine by himself the particular manner, wherein he will be worshipped, and
the particular matters, wherein he will be obeyed; or he may assign others to
determine them: and though it be Free for God to choose this, or that way of
governing men, yet supposing there are men, he must needs lay hold of some way,
or other, to manifest unto them his pleasure: otherwise he would not comply
with this Character of being Governor of the world: and consequently there
must be some Religion freely revealed by God.

Besides, out of that common notion of God, assented unto by All Ens Optimum
Maximum, the Best of all Things, (though we may prove the Existency of a Deity
by other Notions, agreed upon by the parties) we may easily deduce several
Attributes of God. For God is the Best of all Things in all kind of
Perfections: Because, as there is one better than another in Wisdom, Goodness,
Power, and other Perfections; so there must be something the Best of all, in
All kind of Perfections; which we term God.

If God be the Best of all in Wisdom, Power, Goodness, and in all kind of
perfections, it follows that he is Free from all kind of imperfections. For an
imperfection, in any kind whatsoever, consists in a defi^iency from what is
best in that kind: and therefore imperfection is commonly defined Defectus a
summo. Since therefore it is impossible, That what is the Best in all kind of
perfections, should be deficient from being the Best in any kind, we conclude,
that God is free from all imperfections whatsoever: and if so, then he is
infinitely perfect in all kind of perfections. For all limitation in perfection
must proceed from some imperfection in that kind. If therefore God be free from
all imperfection in what kind soever, it necessarily follows, that he is
infinitely, and without limitation perfect in all kind of perfections, and
consequently that he is not constituted of Things imperfect: and hence may be
inferred the simplicity of the Divine Essence.

Moreover, since one thing is better than another, because it comes nearer
that, which is the Best; and since it is impossible, that any thing should come
nearer that which is the Best, than what really, and by identity is the Best;
we conclude, that what is the Best, cannot increase; and what cannot increase,
is infinite. For, whatsoever is finite, and limitated, may increase.

Notwithstanding it is not necessary, before we have found out the True
Religion, that we should know any other Attributes of God, or any other
properties of the True Religion, besides Those only, the knowledge whereof is
precisely requisite for the Discovery of the True Religion, and are admitted by
such as we deal with: the rest the True Religion will teach us.

If one desire to know, why should one Thing be said to be better than another,
because it comes nearer what is the best, rather than because it goes further
from what is the worst, the reason is, because perfection consists in
Positives; imperfection in Negatives: and according to the Natural Order of
Things, Negatives are to be explicated by their Positives, and not on the
contrary: as Darkness is expounded by Light, and not Light by Darkness. So that
the worst is rightly expounded by the greatest distance from the Best: whereas
the Best is explained by the Greatest conjunction with that, which contains all
perfection. Yea, if there must be something the worst of all Things, why must
there not he something the Best of All Things? and consequently a True God?
which is what we pretended to prove in the First point.

And because we desire to deal fairly, and freely with our Adversaries; when we
Dispute with such as profess themselves to be Christians, we give them leave to
assign any solid inducement whatsoever, why they are Christians, with the
Advertisement insinuated, Point the fifth, I do not ask them, what it is to be
Christians, but why they are so: and sure, no Christian will be ashamed to tell
any one, what inducement he has to be a Christian. And to propose this question
to them, may contribute much to ground them well in Christian Religion. For
there are Christians, who have scarce ever reflected, not only what it is to be
Christians, but neither why they are so.

Some will tell us, that they are Christians, because they were bred, and born
amongst Christians, or because they live under a Christian Prince. But these
Motives are frivolous. For though such circumstances have been the occasion,
why many are Christians, yet they cannot be a prudent Motive, why they are so.
For a Turk, who is born a Turk, and lives under the Turkish Government, has the
same reason to be a Turk.

Others, who have never reflected, why they are Christistians, ask me, what
inducements I have to be a Christian: and though this be not to answer the
question themselves, but to have me answer for them; yet to satisfy them, I
may propose the forementioned miraculous propagation, or some other solid
Reason; which being once approved of by them, may easily be applied to Catholck
Religion.

Others will say, That they are Christians, (and this is the common answer of
Protestants) because such Books, which they believe to be the Word of God;
interpreted in such a sense, as they believe they are to be interpreted in,
inform them of the Divinity of our Savior, and of other Mysteries of
Christianity. But a Jew has the same reason to be a Jew; because such Books,
which he believes to be the Word of God, interpreted in such a s^nse, as he
believes they are to be interpreted in, tell him, that Christ is not God, nor
the Messiah.

Besides, it cannot be a good rule to arrive to the right sense of Scripture,
to interpret it according to each ones private reason. For if it were a good
rule, who ever should adjust himself thereunto, would interpret Scripture in a
right sense: which is manifestly false. For Two, who interpret Scripture in
contradictory senses, may Both follow their own private reason, as is evident:
and yet it is certain, that either the one, or the other of these Two would not
interpret Scripture in a right sense. For it is impossible, that Two
Contradictory senses should Both be right, and intended by the Holy Ghost; who
cannot contradict himself: and that only is the true sense of Scripture, which
was intended by the Holy Ghost. We challenge therefore our Adversaries to
produce any solid inducements for one to be a Christian, which does not prove
that he should be a Catholic: So that with Truth we may say, No Catholic, No
Christian.

Wherefore my main Task in this work, is, to show, that what proofs are
alleged for Christian Religion, may be alleged for Catholic Religion; and by
consequence that we have the same inducements to be Catholics, as to be
Christians; and that what Objections are made against Catholic Religion, are,
or may be, made against Christian Religion: and accordingly that we have the
same Motives to be No Christians, as to be No Catholics. And it would be
absurd to say, That we ought not to urge Sectaries upon this Topic, for fear,
lest they should deny Christian Religion to be true, rather than grant the
Truth of Catholic Religion. For in the like manner they might say, That we
ought not to urge Sectaries out of Scripture (or any other Principle granted by
them) for sear, lest ^hey should deny Scripture, rather than assent to the
Tenets of our Church. By Christian Religion, I understand the Religion preached
by Christ and his Apostles: which, among other Things, taught as an Article of
Faith, that it would continue to be the true Religion till the worlds end: and
consequently, if it was ever true, it is still true: and since, certainly, it
cannot be found but among Christians, I conclude, that only among Christians,
the true Religion is to be found.

Neither can I omit here to take notice of a certain kind of men, who term
themselves Virtuosi, or the Wits of the Nation, that deny all matters of Fact,
unless they perceive them by their own senses; and admit nothing else, but what
Natural Reason does demonstrate unto them. So that they deny both Divine and
Humane Faith, all the Mysteries of Christianity, and all revealed Religions.
But the Absurdity of this opinion is manifest. For, as concerning what they
assert in reference to matters of Fact, we may tell them, that, according to
their Principles, we cannot believe, That they think what they say, neither can
they believe, That we think what we say. For their Thoughts to us, and our
Thoughts to them, are matters of Fact, seated beyond the pale of the Senses;
and consequently, if their Principles be good, no Body ought to treat with
them, nor they with any Body: For no Body ought, in prudence, to deal with him,
whom he can never believe, that he thinks what he says. Whence all Humane
Conversation would be cast off; which is against the very nature of man. For
man is defined, by Philosophers, Animal Sociabile. Yea, the signification of
Words, Characters, and other arbitrary Signs, wherewith we expound to others
our Thoughts, do depend upon Humane Faith, and upon the persuasion we have,
that the First Inventers, and Masters of Languages, intended, that by such
words such Things should be signified; and so, by denying all Humane Faith,
they render void the Instruments of Humane Conversation. Moreover, no Servant
ought to obey their commands, no Body ought to condescend to their requests.
For, no Body, according to their Maxims, can believe that they intend, what
they seem to command; nor that they desire what they ask, the actual
intentions, and desires of men, being matters of Fact, which do not fall within
the verge of our Senses. And sure, no Body ought in reason, to obey the
commands of a Superior, unless he believe, that he seriously intends what he
commands; nor condescend to the request of a Friend, unless he believes, that
he desires what he asks.

Again, such men as These, if they stand to their Tenets, cannot believe, that
they have any right, or title, to the Estates, or Prerogatives, which they
possess. For the right to such Estates, and Prerogatives, does (as we suppose)
consist, in that they descend from such Ancestors, who entailed upon their
Heirs, such Lands, or Titles: and according to their Maxims they cannot believe
that they descend from such Ancestors. For they never perceived it with their
Senses. Why therefore may not one take away their Estates, since they can plead
no right to them? Finally, their actions do manifestly contradict This their
assertion. For they scarce do, or say any thing, great or little, wherein they
do not govern themselves by the humane Faith of some thing or other; as they
Themselves may easily be convinced of, if they will be pleased to reflect upon
their own actions.

Now concerning what they affirm of Natural Reason, to which they will needs
seem to be so much devoted; there can be nothing more contrary to Natural
Reason, than to persuade our selves, that we ought to believe nothing above it.
For though Natural Reason does not demonstrate unto us Those Mysteries, which
are above its reach, yet it does demonstrate that there are such Mysteries.
For, what is more clear to our Natural Reason, than that God does know things
above our Natural Reason? Otherwise he would not be infinitely Wise; as he
would not be infinitely Powerful, if he could not do Things above our Natural
Forces. If he knows such Mysteries, Natural Reason Demonstrates, either that he
may reveal them unto us immediately by himself, or that he may Commission men
to that intent; otherwise he would not be infinitely Powerful: and that if he
does reveal them unto us, either by himself, or by men, whom he has
commissioned to that purpose; we ought to believe them; otherwise he would not
be of infinite Authority.

Whence I conclude, out of the Principles of Nature, that we may be bound to
believe Mysteries above the reach of Natural Reason. For if God does reveal
them, we are bound to believe them: But he may reveal them; therefore we may be
bound to believe them. Hence it follows, that his consequence is Null, (though
so common in the mouths of the Virtuosi) viz. Such a Mystery is above the reach
of Natural Reason; Therefore we are not not bound (or we cannot be bound) to
believe it. Again, if God can commission men to preach unto us Mysteries, above
the reach of our Natural Reason, he may attend them with such Marks and Signs,
as may evidence unto such as are concerned therein, that they are commissioned
by God unto them. For, of what value is a Commission, unless the
Authenticateness thereof may be made evident? And here I leave these Authors to
think with themselves, what Signs, or Marks they would prudently require, to be
persuaded, that such men have been commissioned by God to preach a Religion;
and we engage to evince, That such Marks did concur in Christ, and his
Apostles, and several other Preachers of Christian, and Catholic Religion;
with this Advertisement, that they cannot rationally require a greater evidence
of Gods commands, to think themselves bound to obey them, than of the Kings
Commands, in order to submit unto them, even in matters, wherein their Lives,
and Fortunes are concerned: For the greater Obligation of obeying God before
men, does not necessarily consist in the greater evidence of his Commands, but
in the greater Dignity and Authority of his Person.

Perhaps, some may object, That if we can find out the True Revealed Religion
by the light of Nature, without being guided therein, by the True Religion, or
Church, why may we not find out All the Articles of the True Religion, and
Church, without being guided thereby, and without the previous knowledge
thereof, by the light, only, of Natural Reason?

To this I answer, that with as much reason I might ask our Adversaries, why we
may not build the Superstructures without laying first the Foundation, as we
can lay the Foundation, without laying first another Foundation? or, as we can
go by our selves to a Master to be taught by him, why can we not learn by our
selves, what ever such a Master can teach us? or, as by o^r selves we make
application to the Judges, constituted by the King, to know the True Sense of
the Law, in intricate places; why may we not understand the True sense of those
places, without making any such application? Certainly, there is no Body, who
does not plainly see, that such questions are frivolous.

And such, doubtless, is the forementioned question our Adversary proposes unto
us. For the True Church is the Pillar, and Foundation of Faith, the. Mistress of
what we are to believe, and of what we are to do, in order to salvation; and
the Judge in Controversies of of Religion. Yea, we might ask our Adversaries,
why they might not find out all Mysteries of Faith, without the help of
Scripture, as they find out Scripture without the previous knowledge thereof.

And because our Adversaries will have Scripture to be the Sole Judge of all
Religious Controversies, let them reflect, that as, without all question, there
would be a great Confusion in a Kingdom, wherein every one must decide all
pleas relating unto him, by the written Law, understood according to his
private reason, without being bound to submit to the Sentence of any living
Judge, constituted by the Supreme Governor: So, doubtless, there cannot but be
a horrid confusion in a Church, where every one is permitted to decide all
Debates in Religion by Scripture, (or the Written Law of God) understood
according to his private Reason; without being bound to submit to the Decision
of any living Judge.

Yea, the very Constitution, and practice of the Church of England, and of
other Protestant Churches, does evidently prove, That Scripture is not the
Judge of Controversies, nor so clear, that any one, who reads it, or hears it
read, may, without the help of any Expositor, or living Judge, manifestly
understand whatsoever is necessary to be believed, or done by him, in order to
Salvation: and that whatsoever any one, by reading of Scripture, or hearing it
read, does not clearly understand, it is no matter whether he understands it,
or not. For it is a common practice amongst the Members of the Church of
England, who are persuaded that their Church is a True Church, in difficulties
that arise about the true meaning of Scriptures, to make their address, (and to
think they ought to do so) to the Doctors of their Church, to receive from them
the solution of such Difficulties. Now if every one by himself clearly
understands, in Scripture, whatsoever is necessary unto him for his salvation;
and whatsoever he does, not by himself, clearly understand in Scripture, it is
no matter whether he ever understands it, or not, what need has he to make his
address to the Doctors of his Church, to be instructed by them concerning the
meaning of Scriptures? For he needs not their instruction, for what he
understands clearly by himself, as is manifest; nor for what he does not
clearly understand by himself: For, according to their Doctrine he needs not
understand such Things at all. The same may be applied to their writing so many
Volumes, to prove out of Scripture several chief Mysteries of our Faith. For
what need is there of such Writings, if Scripture be clear to every one, in all
Things necessary to Salvation?

The Church also of England, and other Protestant Churches, do Constitute
Ministers, and Doctors, to Preach unto the People, and to teach them such
Things, as are necessary unto them, for to save their Souls; and vast Revenues
are allowed them upon this account. Now, if Scripture does teach all Things
necessary to Salvation, so clearly, that any one, without the assistance of a
Teacher, may manifestly understand them; and what he does not manifestly
understand, without the assistance of a Teacher, it is no matter, whether he
understands it or not, why should they Constitute Preachers, and Teachers? or
why should they assign such vast Revenues, for an employment, which, whether he
who has it, does ever exercise, or not, it is no matter? The Practice therefore,
and Constitution of the English Church, and of other Protestant Churches, does
evidently evince, That Scripture is not so clear that any one, without the help
of an Expositor, may with ease understand whatever is necessary in order to
Salvation; and that what he does not understand so, he never needs to
understand it at all. And if Scripture cannot decide clearly, by it self, all
Debates concerning matters necessary to Salvation, certainly the chief and
ultimate Decision of such Debates belongs to the Church: from whom we may
expect a new Declaration, and Definition (if occasion requires) to make clear
those Things, which before were doubtful: Whereas we can never expect any new
Scripture to that purpose.

Besides, it is certain, that God never intended to write such a Scripture, as
No Body should depend of another for the right intelligence thereof: otherwise
he would have penned it in all vulgar Languages, or in a Language, that all
should understand: which, certainly, he did not. As therefore they must depend
upon the Skill, and Fidelity of the Translator in order to have the True
Scripture; why may they not depend also upon the honesty, and learning of an
Expositor, in order to attain the right Sense thereof?

Wherefore, unless Protestants will condemn the common Practice, and even the
very Constitution of their own Churches, and render insignificant the main, and
almost only employment of their Pastors; they cannot believe Scripture to be
so clear, even in necessary Points, as they seem to make it: especially since
they are not ignorant, that Scripture it self does plainly tell them, 2 Pet.
3.16. that many hard and obscure Things are contained in Scriptures; wherein
the very Salvation of men is deeply concerned. And since Protestants make their
address, as daily experience does teach us, to their Church, and to the Doctors
thereof, in Points controverted, it is an evident sign, that they are persuaded,
that the voice of the Church is clearer in such points, than Scripture. For no
Body can in prudence seek out the right, and clear intelligence, of a Thing
that is obscure, by what is as much, or more obscure.

And since moreover, Natural reason does teach us, that we ought to begin with
what is clear, to arrive to the right Intelligence of what is obscure, I
conclude, that the natural order of Things does require, that we should seek
out the True Scripture, and True Sense thereof, by the Church; rather than the
True Church by the Scripture.

From what has been set down in the progress of this Discourse, it is manifest,
that our Adversaries cannot, with any show of probability, object against us a
vicious Circle, wherewith they pretend to puzzle many Catholic Writers; as if
they did prove the Scripture by the Church, and the Church by the Scripture.
For though we show the Truth of Scripture, and all other Articles of the Roman
Faith by the Truth of the Roman Church, yet we show the Truth of the Roman
Church, not by the Scripture, but by its miraculous propagation; and its
miraculous propagation, by the common consent of our Adversaries, by constant
Tradition, and by Natural Reason. For our Adversaries grant, and constant
Tradition shows, That the Roman Catholic Religion is a hard Religion; and yet
that it has been propagated in the manner abovesaid: and then Natural Reason
does teach us, That such a propagation of such a Religion could not be effected
without the particular, and miraculous assistance of God.

Some perhaps will desire to know, what connection we admit between the Motives,
and Inducements, which we have to persuade our selves, that the Roman Catholic
Religion is True, and between the Truth thereof? or what Certainty we have of
the Existency of such Motives and Inducements? and whether this Connection and
Certainty, be Moral or Metaphysical? To avoid Scholastic Nicities, I answer
(supposing, that such as propose this Question, do profess themselves
Christians) that the Connection between the Inducements we have to be
Catholics, and the Truth of Catholic Religion; and the Certainty we have
concerning the Existency of such Inducements; is the same, as the connection
between the Inducements we have to be Christians, and the Truth of Christian
Religion; and the certainty concerning the existency of such Inducements. So
that we have the same kind of Certainty concerning the Truth of the Roman
Catholic Church, and the particular Tenets thereof, as concerning the Truth of
Christian Religion, and the general Tenets of Christianity: and the same
question may be proposed to any professor of Christianity; yea, to the
professors of any revealed Religion. So that the difficulty is not proper unto
us, but common to all such, as allow any revealed Religion; and consequently
they are all equally bound to solve it.

I answer again, that the forementioned Connection, and Certainty, is at least
Moral, (I do not say, that it is not Metaphysical) and such, as to deny, or
question it, would be a madness: in the same manner, as it is morally certain,
that there have been in the world such men, as Julius Caesar, William the
Conqueror, and Henry the Eighth, and that they did such, and such Actions, as
are constantly reported by the writers of their Lives, and commonly believed
without any hesitation, and whoever should call in question any of These
Things, would be looked upon as a Mad man. Wherefore as it would be a madness
to say, perhaps, there has never been in the world such a man as William the
Conqueror, perhaps he never was in England, perhaps he did not subdue England
by his Arms: So in like manner, it would be a folly to affirm, perhaps, there
have never been in the world such men, as Christ and his Apostles, perhaps they
never preached Christianity, perhaps they never Converted Nations from Paganism
to Christianism, perhaps they never did any of Those Miracuous Actions, which
are commonly recorded of them, and constantly believed by Christians.

The same may be applied to several Preachers of Catholic Religion. So,
doubtless, it would be a madness to question, whether there has ever been such
a man as Saint Francis Xaverius, or whether he ever preached Catholic
Religion, or ever converted any people to it, or whether he ever did any of
Those stupendous actions, which are commonly related of him, and credited by
Catholics. For we have at least as much evidence, or the same kind of
evidence, for these latter actions of Christ, his Apostles, and other
Apostolical men, as for those former actions of William the Conqueror, Henry
the Eighth, or Julius Caesar. Neither were the Miracles of Christ, his
Apostles, and other Apostolical men, less palpable to such, as were standers
by, and from whom they were handed down to us: nor so hard to God, the
principal Agent of them, nor more rare in themselves, than the famous Exploits
of William the Conqueror, and others; and consequently they are not less
credible.

Now whoever comes to deny, or question Things morally certain, (which to deny,
or question, is a madness) he will come also to deny, or question, Things
Metaphysically certain. For, what is there, that a Mad man will not deny, or
question? So that, if one will not be Mad, nor Obstiante, Moral Certainty will
be enough to convince him. But if one is resolved to be Mad, or Obstinate;
neither Physical, nor Metaphysical certainty will suffice. And so we see, that
as some have denied, or questioned Things Morally Certain, so others have
denied, or questioned Things Physically or Metaphysically certain: For, there
is no Madness without a Patron. Nulla fotuitas absque patrono.

Besides, our Adversaries (sure) will never confess, That it is Morally
certain, that whatever the Roman Catholic Religion delivers as an Article of
Faith, is True; or that the Mysteries of Transubstantiation, Purgatory, and the
like, are as certainly true, as that there has been such a man as Henry the
Eighth. Wherefore, it will be enough, if we can bring Sectaries to grant, that
all the Mysteries of our Faith are morally certain. Yea, if in this Syllogism
(so frequent in Disputes concerning the Resolution of Faith) viz.

Whatsoever God has revealed, is True, and cannot in any case possible be
otherwise.

But God has revealed the Mysteries of the Incarnation, the Transubstantiation,
the Real Presence, and the other Articles of our Faith.

Ergo, the Mysteries of the Incarnation, and the other Articles of our Faith,
are True, and cannot in any case possible be otherwise. If (I say) the Minor of
the forementioned Syllogism be granted, or shown to be, at least morally
certain, it will be a madness to deny, or question, not only the Truth of the
Articles of our Faith; but also their incapacity to be false, in any case
imaginable. And what more, than this, can rationally be required, to evidence
the Truth of our Faith, and Religion?

And, to close up the whole Discourse; I am confident, that nothing material
can be objected against This Method, which has not been answered: though,
perhaps, more compendiously, than some would desire. Whatever else may occur,
contrary unto it, any moderate wit will be able to solve.

FINIS.
Imprimatur,

G. Jane R. P. D. HEN. Episc. Land. a Sac. Dom.
March 20. 1676./7.

