AN ANSWER TO Mr. Marlow's Appendix. Wherein his Arguments to prove that
Singing of Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, was performed in the Primitive
Church by a Special or an Extraordinary Gift, and therefore not to be practiced
in these Days, Are Examined, and clearly Detected.

Also some Reflections on what he speaks on the word mnos, Hymnos: And on his
undue Quotations of diverse Learned Men. By a Learned Hand.

Psalm. 119. 141. I am small and despised: yet do not I forget thy Precepts. 1
Cor. 14. 22. Wherefore Tongues are for a Sign, not to them that believe, but to
them that believe not: but Prophesying serves not for them that believe not,
but for them that believe. By B. KEACH.

London, Printed for the Author, and sold by John Hancock in Castle-Alley on
the West side of the Royal Exchange, and by the Author at his House near
Horselydown in Southwark. 1691.

To all the Saints and Churches of Jesus Christ, Christian Salutation.
Honored, and Beloved;
IT grieves me I have further occasion to trouble you after this manner: I know
not what should move Mr. Marlow to write his Appendix, just at a time when he
was told I was writing an Answer to his first Discourse: he might have had a
little Patience, and have staid till my Treatise was published, whereby he
might the better have perceived, whether what he wrote the last Year would
abide the Test or Trial of God's Word or not: This is therefore his second
Attempt in public against God's holy Ordinance of singing of Psalms, Hymns,
etc. before any body appeared visibly to oppose, or put a stop to his undue
Proceedings. For what Call he had to begin this Controversy at such an
unseasonable time, I know not; but since he has done it, certainly none can see
any just cause to blame me for standing up in the Defense of that Truth of
Jesus Christ, which I am so well satisfied about, and established in, and that
too as it is practiced by the Church, to whom I am related as an unworthy
Member, and above twenty Baptized Congregations besides in this Nation. Tho
before I went about it, I offered my Brethren (him or any other) a sober and
friendly Conference in the Spirit of Meekness, which I could not obtain, tho I
did not give such a public Challenge as my Brother intimates in that strange
Epistle he has wrote to me; but upon the coming forth of his Book, I was
troubled, and would have had it been discoursed in the General Assembly, but
that was not consented to; and then I told my honored and Reverend Brethren my
purpose was to give an Answer to his Book, but did not enter upon it till I was
urged by several, and particularly by Mr. Marlow himself, before diverse
Witnesses, in such kind of words as these, i. e. Answer me like a Man. Whether
he is answered like a Man, or but like a Child, is left to your Consideration,
it is done according to that Light and Ability God has been pleased to bestow
upon me.

But if he, or any of his Helpers, do see cause to reply, they must answer such
Persons who have wrote upon this Truth, like Men, and Men too of great Parts,
Learning and Piety, or let them not trouble me nor the World any more. As
touching his Epistle to the Churches, I shall take but little notice of it, nor
of that he has writ to my self, since in my Judgment, neither of them signify
much; you are Men of greater Wisdom than to be frightn^ed out of an Ordinance,
or deterred from seeking after the Knowledge of it, with these scurrilous Names
of Error, Apostasy, Human Tradition, prelimited Forms, mischievous Error,
Carnal Forms, Carnal Worship, etc. These are hard Words, and do not bespeak a
trembling Heart, nor a humble Spirit, and better becomes a Man that pretends to
Infallibility. But what some Men want of sound Arguments, they think to make up
by hard Words and Confidence; but this will never do with you. How has our
Practice of baptizing Believers, etc. been branded with the reproachful Name of
Error? and it is very observable how some Men of far greater Parts and Ability
than my Brothers or mine, either have cried out against the Reign of Christ,
Conversion of the Gentiles, and calling of the Jews, as a gross Error, as
witness Mr. Richard Baxter particularly of late. It Is Arguments I know you look
for, and if you find those of Mr. Marlow's to prevail against what I have said,
do not regard what I have wrote in the least; for I would have your Faith (as
the Apostle speaks) to stand in the Power of God, and not in the Wisdom of Men.
The smallness of the Number of our Churches who are in the Practice of this
Ordinance, I also know will signify nothing with you, provided it be proved to
be a Truth of Jesus Christ: What tho there was not one of our Churches that had
Light in it, it would certainly the more concern them to enquire after it. And
tho he has so coursly saluted me, etc. yet I am not concerned at it further,
than to bewail his Confidence and Ignorance, to say no worse, I know no Men in
any Age, who appeared first to vindicate a Truth, which others call an Error,
but have met with the same Usage I meet withal from our Brother; who, I hope,
is a good Man, and means well, yet is he strangely beclouded. As I have been a
Preacher up of Spiritual Worship (as he says) and that too more than thirty
Years (tho a poor and unworthy one;) so through the Grace of God, I hope shall
continue to do unto the end of my days; and it is only Spiritual Worship, you
may perceive, I plead for, in contending for singing of Psalms, Hymns, and
Spiritual Songs, none of which three can be without their special and
particular form. But must they needs be therefore carnal and humane Forms which
appertain unto them? I see it is time to stand up for the Form of Ordinances,
for the Form of Doctrine, and for the Form of sound Words; for if we must part
with singing of Psalms, Hymns, etc. from his pretended Arguments about Forms,
all external Ordinances must go as well as that of Singing: In a word, we must
give up our whole visible Profession, and wait for those extraordinary Gifts of
the Spirit that were in the Primitive Time, if we must not sing till we have
that extraordinary Gift to do it, which some had in the Apostles Days, and the
like in discharge of every Gospel-Ordinance, which were to abide in the Church
to the end of the World.

He may as well therefore say, I do but counterfeit that excellent Gift in
Preaching (when I preach) which was in the Primitive Gospel Church, as thus to
charge me in the case of our singing by the ordinary Gifts of the Spirit: Read
his Epistle to me, Append. p. 15.

It seems to me as if my Brother does not understand the nature of Moral
Duties, or natural Worship, but mistakes, and thinks natural or moral Worship
must needs be carnal, tho we never plead for the performance of any Duties that
are moral naturally in themselves, without the help and assistance of God's
Spirit, and the Graces thereof in our Hearts. Is it not part of natural
Religion and Worship, to fear God, to love God, and trust in God, and that too
with all our Hearts, and with all our Souls, and with all our Strength, and
love our Neighbors as our selves? etc. These Duties appertain to natural
Religion; yet without the divine Help and Influences of the Spirit, we can do
none of them in a right manner; no more, say I, can we pray, nor sing the
Praises of God, which are Duties comprehended in our fearing, honoring,
worshipping, and loving of him. And whereas Mr. Marlow reflects on me, as if I
singled out my self more than others in London, in pushing on this practice of
Singing. I must tell him, I have abundance of Peace in my Spirit in what I have
done therein: And if our People (I mean, the Church to whom I belong) are one
of the first Churches of our Persuasion in this City, found in the practice of
this Sacred Ordinance, I am satisfied it will be to their great Honor, (and
not to their Reproach) and that not only in succeeding Ages, but also in the
Day of Jesus Christ.

But, blessed be God, the greatest number of our worthy London-Elders are as
well satisfied in this Truth as my self, and many of their People too, and will
generally, I doubt not, in a little time get into the practice of it. Our
Reverend Brother Knowllys it is known is clear in it, and has practiced it for
some Years, though at present it is not used in his Congregation. He told me
lately, he is about to write in Vindication thereof, which he intends to
publish in a short time, if the Lord please to spare his Life.

And whereas Mr. Marlow affirms, as if I had brought Singing into our
Congregation, to the grief and trouble of many of our Members; it is false, for
it is known the Church has been in this practice near twenty Years after
Breaking of Bread, and near 14 Years on Thanksgiving-days in a mixed
Congregation. And what was done of late in bringing it in after Sermon on the
Lord's Days, was done by a regular Act of the Church in a solemn manner: And
though some of our worthy Brethren and Sisters are at present somewhat
dissatisfied with it, yet I doubt not but will in a little time see their
Mistakes, if such busy Men as he do not in an undue manner blow up Coals of
Contention amongst us.

Can any sober Christian think he has done well to publish the Private Affairs
of a Particular Church to the whole World? It seems to some as if he has hopes
there will be a Breach in the Church, upon the Account of our Singing the
Praises of God; but I hope he will find our worthy Brethren understand
themselves better than to go about to impose on the Church or Consciences of
their Brethren, or to strive to pull down that which the Church and themselves
too, have been a building for so many Years. Can there be a Man so left of God
as to countenance any Persons to make a Schism in a Congragation, because they
cannot forgo a Duty they have so long been satisfied in the practice of, and so
the whole Body to submit to the Sentiments of a few Persons, as if they had
Power over our Faith? We do not say our dissatisfied Brethren shall sing with
us, or we will have no fellowship with them; no, God forbid we should impose on
their Consciences. We do not look upon Singing, etc. an Essential of Communion;
it is not for the being, but for the comfort and well-being of a Church. We have
told our Brethren (since we sing not till after our last Prayer) if they cannot
sing with us, nay, nor stay with the Church whilst we do sing, they may go
forth, and we will not be offended.

Should any countenance, through a hot and unaccountable zeal, such a Schism,
it would make strange Confusion in our Churches. And since he thus publicly
hints at this private Case amongst us, I had I thought a clear Call to open the
matter plainly as it is, to clear my self and the Church, to all who may read
his Epistle and this my Answer, for we have done nothing we have the least
cause to be ashamed of, or unable to justify in the sight of God or Man.

I shall add one word to the consideration of the Brethren of our Church, I
doubt not but they will consider it.

1. If they look upon us as equal in Knowledge and Uprightness toward God with
themselves, they may see we have the same ground to be offended with them in
diminishing from God's Word, as they may be with us, for adding (as possibly
they think) to God's Word.

2. And let them consider it is a horrid Evil to break the Bond of Spiritual
Union, and unawares to wound the Body of Christ.

Whose Work is it thus to do, but the Devil's? and what a reproach does it
bring upon the Truth? and how grievous is it to all truly Godly Ones, and
grateful to the Enemies of our Sacred Profession? Besides, upon such a trifle,
can it be so heinous a Crime to be found often in that Duty, which they with us
have so often and long been in the practice of, and in a mixed Assembly too,
many and many times? Besides, brought in by almost an unanimous Agreement in a
solemn Church-Meeting, there being not, above five or six that showed any
public dissent, nor they neither signifying any such dissatisfaction, i. e.
that if we sang at such Times, they could not bear it; nor do I hear they do
desire us now to decline the said practice. Love will cover a greater Fault
than this, for they may see cause to believe it is not Self-Interest, but the
Glory of God we wholly aim at. But to return.

The truth is, I wonder any should be taken with his Book, for I never saw any
thing come out in Print upon any controvertible Truth, that has less of
Argument in it, or more of Confidence. And it is not my Thoughts alone, nor more
destructive Mediums made use of to the whole of the external Parts of Religion.
Nay, one told me very lately, that one of our dissatisfied Members intimated to
him, as if our Bible was not truly or rightly translated; and it seems to rise
from what Mr. Marlow has asserted in his Book about the word Hymnos. I feared
that would be the Effect of his Attempt, if any Body regarded what he has said
upon that account.

But, pray, what Call has he to rebuke me, after this public manner,
especially before the whole World? If I had done any thing amiss in his
Judgment in that Matter, I could wish he had had more Wisdom and Prudence, or
else lest the Controversy to some more discreet and abler Pen.

I cannot forget the two Brethren that oppoposed Singing the Praises of God,
and would not comply with the Church, (though they did not separate themselves
from the Church) when first the practice of it was received amongst us near
twenty Years ago. One of them soon after brought a great Reproach upon Religion
by immoral Actions, and came to nothing, and the other sometime after turned
Quaker, and to my Face denied the Resurrection of his Body, etc.

As to that way Mr. Marlow speaks of praising of God in Prayer, without singing
of Praises, as being more suitable (as he thinks) to the ordinary Gifts of the
Spirit. I must tell him, God's Word is our Rule; and since God does require his
People to celebrate his Praises by singing Psalms, Hymns, etc. doubtless that
suits as well with the ordinary Gifts of the Spirit, as such Gifts suit with
Prayer, Preaching, etc. And I fear one day he will not be found able to give
any good account of himself in his bold Attempt, in seeking to rob God of his
glorious Praise by singing to him, as he has enjoined us to do; nor do I fear,
but through the Help and Authority of God's Word, I shall, in the Day of
Christ, stand with Joy and Confidence before him, upon this respect, when
possibly he may be ashamed, if he has not sincere Repentance for what he has
done.

Is it not a false Assertion for him to say as he does, (in his Epistle to me)
That as to our way of Vocal Singing together, there is neither Command nor
Example for it, either in the Old or New Testament? I shall leave it to the
Consideration of all wise and sober Men. Certainly all will conclude the Man is
strangely left of God, especially considering he builds his main Confidence
from a remote and indirect signification of a Greek Word, and yet, as I am
told, understands not that Language neither.

My Portion is, I perceive, to undergo hard Censures from Men; but it is no more
than my Blessed Master met with; and what am I that I should complain? One
said, He was a good Man: but others said, Nay, but he has a Devil, and
deceives the People. John ^. 12, 20.

The Lord increase Love among all the Saints, and a bearing and forbearing, a
gentle and Christian Spirit. We all know but in part. And O that the Lord would
be pleased to deliver Men, who profess the Gospel, from that horrid Sin of
backbiting of their Neighbors, and from that bitter and unaccountable Spirit
of Prejudice that seems to be gotten into the Hearts of some; from whence they
seem to tear the Names of their Brethren to pieces through undue Offenses.
These thnigs are matter of Lamentation, and I fear the forerunner of a dismal
Hour that is coming upon us. Cannot Christians have the Liberty of their
Consciences from their Brethren, to practice a Truth according to their Light,
without being charged and censured after this manner, with Carnal Forms, and
mischievous Error? etc. I shall not retain you longer, but desire you, whoever
you are, impartially to read and well weigh my sober Reply to my Brother's
Appendix: I am glad it came forth before all my Treatise was printed off,
though it is true it makes the Price more than I intended.

There is a Reverend and Learned Friend, who meeting with Mr. Marlow's
Appendix, finding him quoting learned Authors in an undue and unaccountable
manner, to little purpose, (which because, it might possibly amuse the
Unlearned and more unwary Reader) he has, in love to this Sacred Truth, and to
deliver the Souls of Men and Women from Mistakes, made some Reflections on what
he has wrote on that account, at the close of this Reply. If the Lord please to
bless what I and my Reverend Friend have said to the further clearing up the
Truth, I shall not be troubled at my Pains nor Charge. I have been forced to
repeat some things twice or thrice, by reason of his leading me in such an
unusual Path. This is all at present,

From him who is your unworthy Brother in the Gospel and Service of Jesus
Christ, B. Keach.

AN ANSWER To Mr. Marlow's APPENDIX.
FIrst of all you tell us, That to praise God, or praising of God, is not
confined to Songs of Praise; but that there are other ways and manner of
praising of him than such melodious Singing.

Answer. We never yet asserted there was no other way or manner to praise God,
than by singing of his Praise. Nor is there a Man who affirms any such thing
that I know of; but it is one thing to own those other ways of praising of God,
and another thing for you utterly to deny this way, or the way we use in
singing his Praise.

But I must tell you, most Learned Men, nay, all that I have met with, do
conclude, the Disciples, or those Children you speak of Matthew. 21. 16. Luke 19.
37. did sing those Hosanna's to the Son of David, as I have showed in the first
Chapter of the foregoing Treatise.

I perceive you have now at last raised the Auxiliaries against this Blessed
Truth of Jesus Christ. But as a worthy Brother hinted the other day, Dr. Owen
is a pressed Man, and as forced in so, he does you no service at all, as will
appear by what follows; but more especially by what my worthy Friend has wrote
at the close of this our Answer.

The Doctor, from Heb. 2. 12. from the Greek word Hymneso se, I will hymn thee,
i. e. I will praise thee; says, (1.) what Christ will do, viz. He will sing
Praise to God. (2.) Where he will do it, i. e. in the midst of the
Congregation. The expression of both these (he says) is accommodated unto the
Declaration of God's Name, and praising of him in the Temple. The singing of
Hymns of Praise unto God in the great Congregation, was then a principal part
of his Worship, etc.

2. That cheerfulness and alacrity of the Spirit of Christ in this Work, he
would do it with Joy and Singing. These are the Doctor's words, as cited by
you, Appendix, page 4. And thus did Christ sing with his Disciples, in that
great Representative Church, as our Annotators call it.

Now what is this to your purpose? the Doctor tells you, that Hymneso se is
Singing Praises to God: And how do you know but Christ might also often sing in
the Temple, and in other great Congregations, though we do not read of it,
since it is said, that many other things did Jesus that are not written? Joh.
21. 25.

1. Especially considering, since it was prophesied of him, that in the great
Congregation he should sing God's Praise.

2. Because, as the Doctor observes, Singing in the Temple was one great part
of God's Worship; from whence it is not likely our Savior should neglect that
part. Moreover, he positively affirms, Christ did, with cheerfulness and joy,
give Praise to God by Singing. It Is well known Dr. Owen owned no other Singing
than what we do; he does nowhere talk of the Essence of Singing in our Spirit,
and so exclude vocal or proper Singing.

1. He acknowledges Singing, is Praising of God, so do we; and say, it is one of
the highest ways of Praising him too.

2. He intimates there are other ways of praising of God, besides Singing his
Praise; though it clearly holds forth that our Savior would praise God that
way, namely, by Singing. And you would do well to observe what our late Learned
Annotators speak upon that of Heb. 2. 12. these are their words. Christ and
they are of one Father, (that is, the Saints are here called his Brethren) he
by Nature, and they by Grace, and from one Humane Parent, Luke 3. 23, 38. and
both of one Flesh; He solemnly sung and Praised his Father with them (say they)
at his Supper, Matthew. 26. 30. in that Representative Church, Mark 14. 26.

Yet we, as I said before, do readily grant, as the Doctor intimates, those
other ways of Praising of God, and that Prayer, the Word of Faith, and the
Fruits of Obedience, has a tendency to the Praise of God: But if the Doctor,
and some other Learned Men, should intimate, that that Greek word Hymnos should
in a remote sense signify Praising of God without Singing: we ask, Whether any
of them say those ways of Praises, without Singing, is the immediate, genuine,
direct and primary signification of the word?

All your Helpers will fail you here. There are other Greek words to express
those other ways of Praise to God besides Hymnos. You are upon a dangerous
Rock; you make it your Business to trouble our People with the signification of
the Greek word Hymnos, a Hymn, (though you understand not that Language) just
after the same manner that the Pedobaptists do with the word Baptizo; say they,
it signifies washing, as well as dipping, which learned Fisher grants. But how?
Take his words, It Is (says he) so taken improperly, indirectly, collaterally,
by the by, or remotely, it so signifys, viz. a washing: But (says he) the
direct, immediate genuine and primary signification of the word Baptizo, is
Immersion, Dipping, or to dip, etc. You, it seems, take the same way to destroy
the Ordinance of Singing God's Praises, as they take to destroy the Ordinance
of Baptism: But this will do your business no better than that will do theirs;
Dipping is Washing, but every Washing is not Dipping. Theirs is (as Mr. Fisher
observes) an improper, remote, or indirect Baptism, that they infer from the
improper Signification of the Greek word Baptizo, and so no true Baptism at
all. So you, asserting from those Learned Men, that the Greek word Hymnos
signifies a mere or common praising of God in Prayer: it is, say I, but an
improper, indirect and remote sort of Singing of God's Praise, that the Word
will admit of in that sense, and so no Singing at all.

If you discourse with learned Persons, they will tell you, that some Greek
words do, in an improper or remote sense, bear several Significations; but the
direct, genuine, and proper signification of the Word is Singing, or, they
sung. And now do you not think you are greatly to blame to make such a stir
upon a word you understand not, after the manner you have done, and thereby
cause Doubts to arise in the Minds of poor weak Christians about the
Translation of the Holy Bible, and render our Famous and Learned Translators
unfaithful? But I hope our People will not regard or mind what you unadvisedly
have wrote and said upon this Account. Have not the Translators, (who compared
diverse Greek Copies together,) been more faithful to give the proper, genuine
and direct signification of the Word, they hymned, they sung an Hymn, than from
the remote sense, they said Grace, or gave Thanks? We read he gave Thanks when
he took the Bread, etc. the word there in the Greek is, he Hymned. I have often
said, to sing to God in aright manner, is praising of God, but all praising of
God is not singing his Praises; therefore they that translate the word, they
praised God, speak the Truth, but they do not speak all the Truth.

But if our Savior and his Disciples did no more than in an ordinary manner
give Thanks, as we do after Supper, our Translators do affirm a false thing, to
say they sung an Hymn, as elsewhere I have more fully demonstrated; because
Singing is more, and a different thing from saying of Grace, as you hint an old
Dutch Translation reads it.

But not to muster up a multitude of learned Men, as I might do, who exactly
agree with our Translators on that word, take (once again) what Dr. Du-Veil
does affirm, (who understood, as I am informed, all the Oriental Tongues) in
his literal Explanation of the Acts of the Apostles, Acts 16. 25. (tho I quoted
him before) citing Ruff Presbyter of Aquilia, in the Title of the 72d Psalm
says, Hymns are Songs which contain the Praise of God: If it be Praise and not
of God, it is not a Hymn; if it be Praise, and of God, if it be not sung, it is
not an Hymn; it must therefore (says he) that it may be an Hymn, have these
three things [Praise] [and of God] [and a Song]: therefore Paul and Silas,
says the Doctor, sung Praises to God for the Honor put upon them, in that
they suffered innocently for promoting the Glory of Christ. Many of the Learned
Men you quote, say Hymnos is Praise, you need not say any more to that, we all
own and grant it; but yet also say the proper and genuine Signification of it,
is praising of God by Singing. Now this being so, you basely abuse the
Translators, ( Append. p. 12.) in saying, Surely it must be granted that the
word sung and sing in those four Scriptures were imprudent Additions to those
sacred Texts. These are your words. It Is a shame a Man of your Learning should
(to defend your own Fantasy) charge the faithful and renowned Translators after
this sort. These things being so, What Authority have you to say our Savior
and his Disciples did not sing? or, what reason has any sober or Godly
Christian to believe you, if you so boldly affirm it? Therefore I, upon good
Authority, in opposition to what you say, p. 12. that therefore from the
Signification of the word Hymnos, there is a good and sacred Foundation or
Warrant for such vocal melodious singing at or after the Lord's Supper, seeing
the word does bear that as the direct and proper Signification of it.

And also we say that what Christ did was a Rule for us in that of Singing, as
well as in taking the Bread and breaking it, and blessing it, and taking the
Cup, etc. Must not we sing the Praises of Christ who have the Spirit but in
measure, because Christ had the Spirit without measure?

And because the Primitive Gospel Church had the extraordinary Gifts of the
Spirit in Prayer, Preaching, and Singing also, must we not pray, preach, nor
sing? if we must not do one of them, we must do none of them: And therefore in
opposition to what you say, Page 13. of your Appendix, If the Practice of
Christ and the Primitive Church, does not bind us to the Observation of one
Ordinance, viz. that of Singing, it binds us to the Observation of none; it is
time to look about us, for your manner of arguing, I do declare, (as 'twas
intimated to me the other day by my Reverend Brother Knowles) tends to the
overthrow of all Gospel Ordinances whatsoever; therefore I warn all my Brethren
to take heed how they hearken to you in this matter, as they tender the Glory
of God, and the Establishment of all Gospel Worship and Ordinances.

But to proceed: It Is an easy thing (for any wary Reader, who is not willing to
be deceived) to perceive the Man has a bad Cause in hand, and that he reasons
not like a wise and enlightened understanding Christian.

Which does fully appear, if we consider the false and preposterous Mediums or
Ways he takes to make out what he pretends to prove.

1. For one while he seems to assert, that the Essence of Singing, which is (he
says) in our Spirit, that will serve our turn in discharge of the Duty of
singing forth God's Praises, without employing our Tongues or bodily Organs in
it, which, as I have again and again said, does as well exclude vocal Praying
and Preaching, etc. as Singing. See Page 8. of his first Treatise.

2. Then again at another time, because there are other ways to praise God
besides singing of his Praises, we must not sing his Praises at all. Appendix,
p. 4, 5.

3. At another time he seems to exclude all Singing out of the Bible, from an
improper Signification of a Greek word, and strives to make it out 'twas only
common Praises or Thanksgiving in Prayer. See the Epistle to me, and Appendix,
p. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

And so quarrels with the Translators of the holy Bible, as if they wanted
Skill in the Greek Tongue, or else Faithfulness in rendering the Word, they sung
an Hymn, which he tells you they should have rendered, they gave Thanks, or
said Grace. But further, to clear our Godly, Learned and Pious Translators of
the Bible; let it be considered how carefully they were in other Cases,
particularly in respect of the word Baptizo, which they never ventured to
translate Rantizo, sprinkling, to favor their own Practice, but rather chose
to leave the word in the Original Tongue, and not translate it at all, than to
give a false Signification of it.

4. But lest all these Tricks and Shifts should fail him, he flies to another
broken Refuge, viz. intimating that the Ordinance of Singing does not belong to
us now, but may be practiced by the Saints hereafter in the thousand Years
Reign, or seventh thousand Years of this World. Which is a very doubtful Point,
I mean, whether there will be such a thousand Years Reign or not, in his sense;
and yet this Duty lies amongst other Gospel Ordinances and Precepts given out
by the Spirit, and enjoined on the Churches, which is enough to shake the Faith
of our People in respect of other Ordinances, which they have as much reason to
say, may not belong to us, but shall be practiced in time to come, when the
Church (as the Seekers say) shall attain its first or original Purity. See Page
27. of his Discourse.

5. And lastly, like a wary and foreseeing Man, to be sure to carry his Cause,
he retires to his last Fort and Strong-hold, and affirms, That the Ordinance of
singing of Psalms, Hymns, etc. was only in the Primitive Time performed by an
extraordinary Gift; and unless we have such a Gift, we must not sing the
Praises of God now in these days.

Tho I have said enough to detect this fond Conceit, yet since he leads me in
this Path, I must, I perceive, reply again, as I have already done, that this
Objection lies equally against Prayer, Preaching, and interpreting the
Scripture, etc. since all these Gospel-Duties and Ordinances in the Primitive
and Apostolical Days, were performed by the said extraodinary Gifts of the
Spirit.

If he could make this appear, there was no need for him to trouble us with the
Greek word, nor with any of his other Mediums he uses to exclude
Gospel-Singing; it cannot but appear by this last shift, he acknowledges that
Singing is somewhat more than that Praising of God he speaks of: But these
things betray the Man's Integrity, or rather his Weakness, and show he does not
argue, but plays the part of a Sophister, though not a cunning One, because his
Nakedness plainly appears to the meanest Capacity, through his pitiful
threadbare Covering. For if he had thought his other Mediums would have served
his turn, or held the Test, we should not have, I am persuaded, heard any of
this: But however, we will come to examine his pretended Arguments he brings to
prove this Assertion.

His first Argument, to prove Singing was always performed from a special Gift,
is in Appendix, page 14.

For as the Grace of Joy is the Fruit of the Spirit, ( says he) and as God had
promised the Oil, viz. the Spirit of Joy for Mourning; so the Primitive Church
had some earnest of it, and did rejoice in hope of the Glory of God; and
through the abundance of the Spirit wherewith she was baptized, her Ministers
delivered the Word of God in extraordinary ways and manners, viz. by
Prophesying, Tongues, and melodious Singing.

Answ. 1. Have not Believers now the Holy Spirit, as well as they had it then,
though not in such an extraordinary manner? And have not we the Fruit of it, i.
e. Joy, Peace, etc. in believing? Also you mistake your self, Joy does not
appertain to the Gifts of the Spirit, but it is a Fruit of the Graces of the
Spirit. Do not the Saints now rejoice in hope of the Glory of God, as well as
they did then?

There is no such cause or ground from the Reception of Tongues, or the
extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit, (as you intimate) to sing the Praises of
God; For many (our Savior says) shall say in that Day, We have prophesied in
thy Name, and in thy Name have cast out Devils, and in thy Name have done many
wonderful Works. To whom he will say, Depart from me, I know ye not. And the
Apostle says, Though I speak with Tongues of Men and Angels, and have not
Charity, I am become as sounding Brass, or a tinkling Cymbal, 1 Cor. 13. 1.

From whence it appears that inward Joy and Peace of which you speak, as the
Cause of Singing in the Apostles Times, did not flow from that extraordinary
Gift of the Spirit, but from the saving Graces of the Spirit; either it flows
from the consideration of common or external Mercies and Blessings, wherein all
are concerned to sing the Praises of God, who gives them fruitful Seasons,
filling their Hearts with Joy and Gladness; or else it flows from those special
and internal Blessings which only concern the Saints, viz. Union with God,
Communion with God, Faith, Love, etc. Tongues were for a Sign, not for them who
believe, but for them who believe not, 1 Cor. 14. 22. Extraordinary Gifts were
to convince Unbelievers of the Truth, and not for the Joy and Comfort of such
who did believe. Men that have the Gift of Tongues, may be graceless, and so
without Christ, and perish eternally in Hell; therefore the extraordinary Gift
of the Spirit fits not, tunes not the Heart nor Tongue to sing the Praises of
God. You may as well deny the Saints may not, ought not in these our Days
rejoice in God, nay, not praise him in any other manner of ways, as well as not
sing, from this Argument you make use of here on this account.

Therefore it follows that you strangely mistake, page 15. Appendix, in
intimating, when Paul exhorts the Saints to covet after the best Gifts, he
means the extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit; for certainly those are the best
Gifts that most tend to the edification of the Church, which Tongues could not
be said to do. And in the very next words he speaks of a more excellent way,
viz. that of Charity or Love, which refers to the Graces of the Spirit. And of
so little use were those special or extraordinary Gifts to the Church, that if
there were no Interpreter, they were to be silent, and not use them in the
Church at all who were that way gifted.

2. You confound Tongues (which did appertain to all sorts of Gifts) with
Prophecy and Singing: He that had a Doctrine, might have the Gift of Tongues to
bring it forth; so might he that had the Gift of Prophecy, and he also that had
the Gift to Interpret; and so might he also that had the extraordinary Gift to
bring forth a Psalm. And, pray, why must ordinary praising of God be now
admitted? and Preaching, Prophesying, and Interpreting the Scripture by the
ordinary Gifts of the Spirit be still allowed, and yet Singing by the same
ordinary Gifts must not be admitted? What Reason do you give for this? Is not
this to darken Counsel with words without Knowledge?

I have demonstrated, that the End of those extraordinary Gifts that were then
in the Church in the Administration of every Duty and Ordinance, was to confirm
the ordinary practice of all those Ordinances, and so to continue them in the
Church to the end of the World. And God has equally honored and confirmed
Singing of Psalms, etc. to continue, and the practice thereof to abide, as of
any other Ordinance.

You need not therefore spend your time to prove the Apostles Prayed, Preached,
Prophesied, and also Sung by an extraordinary Gift; we acknowledge it, but say,
this is no more against our Singing, than against our Praying, etc. who have
not now those special Gifts.

2. He that had a Psalm of David, might bring it forth in an unknown Tongue, as
well as he that had a Doctrine, and so not to the Edification of the Church:
For if he brought out a Psalm of David in an unknown Tongue, who could sing
with him? But if he had been to sing alone, the Melody might have refreshed
those who sung not, as some say they have been in hearing the French
Protestants sing, who understand not their Language. But to prevent this, the
Apostle Paul resolved when he sung, he would sing with the Spirit, and with the
Understanding also, because it is the Matter sung that is fruitful to the
Understanding: and what is the Melody without that?

Your third Reason or Argument is taken from that in Ephesians. 5. 18. Be ye filled
with the Spirit, speaking to your selves, etc.

Answ. Does not the Apostle pray that God would fill all the Saints with Joy
and Peace? Romans 15. 13. And pray, that they might be filled with the Fruits of
Righteousness? Now singing flows from that Joy that all the Saints ought to
labor after; and also from the Fruits of Righteousness, we have an equal need
to be filled with the Spirit, to pray, to meditate, to praise God, and to
preach and hear the Word, as well as to sing Psalms and Hymns, etc.

But you say, page 18. That the Gifts of the Holy Spirit were not given alike
to every Member of the Church.

Answ. It Is granted: But does it follow, because some had the extraordinary
Gift of the Spirit to pray, must not the others who had not those Gifts, no
more than we have them now, not pray at all? Brother, I am grieved to see how
you are deceived, and would ^eceive others: But as they who had not the
extraordinary Gift of the Spirit to pray, were, notwithstanding, to pray; so
they who had not the extraordinary or special Gift to sing, were, nevertheless,
to sing the Praises of God. What you speak, page 18. about the diversity of
Gifts, but the same Spirit, from 1 Cor. 12. is rather more against the
performance of those other Duties and Ordinances than Singing, because Singing
is not there mentioned. But all that you say there, has been answered already;
so is what you infer from Col. 3. 16. Ephesians. 5. 19. For to think the Apostle
refers to the special Gift of Singing in those places, is of a pernicious
tendency; for you may as well say the same of all other Precepts enjoined on
the Churches, and so free us from all Gospel-Obedience for want of such Gifts.
Why must not Spiritual Songs be allowed, as well as Psalms and Hymns? What do
you mean in page 23?

Brother, you were better be silent till you can distinguish better between
Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, and the manner of the bringing of them
forth by a special Gift. A Doctrine may be as Spiritual that is precomposed, as
that which was brought forth by a special Gift; so may an Hymn, or Spiritual
Song, though it is by the ordinary Gifts or Help of the Spirit precomposed;
there cannot be an Hymn, nor Spiritual Song, without its Form; but if it be a
Spiritual Song, it has a Spiritual Form. The very word may convince yo^ of your
Error; if the Song be taken out of Christ's Spiritual and Sacred Word, the Form
is Spiritual; and if it be sung with a gracious Heart and Tongue, it is
doubtless Spiritual Worship and acceptable to God.

I shall conclude this Section of yours with one honest and plain Argument.

That Assertion or Notion against Singing the Praises of God, that has a
natural tendency in it to overthrow the practice of all Gospel Ordinances, as
well as singing the Praises of God, is a vile and pernicious Assertion or
Notion. But for a Man to assert, the Saints and People of God now in these
days, ought not to sing Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, because we have not
that special or extraordinary Gift of the Spirit to do it, has a natural
tendency in it to overthrow the practice of all Gospel Ordinances in these
days. Ergo. That Assertion is vile and pernicious.

The Major cannot be denied: the Minor I have abundantly proved in this
Treatise.

In Sect. 4. You seem to Answer what we say about Singing being a moral Duty.
Which you say, Is the refuge of some who cannot maintain their practice of
formal Singing by Gospel-Institution. Append. page 27.

Answ. You mistake; we need no Gospel-Institution, it is as clear a Precept in
these Scriptures, Ephesians. 5. 19. Col. 3. 16. as any we have in the
New Testament. But we say Singing the Praises of God is more than a mere
positive Duty.

What you further say under this Head, does but betrary your own Ignorance
about moral Precepts, and needs no Answer, I having fully explained it in this
Treatise. Is it absurd and irrational for us to make the Moral Law, or Light of
Nature, a Rule to exert the Worship of God? see Append. p. 28. It Is not so much
the matter of Moral Duties, as the manner of the performance of them, that
renders them Spiritual; and for the more orderly and spiritual performance of
such Duties, that are in their own nature Moral, they are brought under
Gospel-institution, as Prayer, Preaching, and Singing the Praises of God are;
and therefore all Moral Duties must be discharged by the help of the Spirit,
and with Grace in the Heart, if accepted of God.

In page 33. of your Appendix, you repeat your former Objection against Women's
Singing in the Church, because the Apostle says, he suffered not a Woman to
teach, nor usurp Authority over the Man, but to be in silence.

So that Christ ( say you) makes it an usurpation of Authority, for a Woman to
teach, or to speak, or any ways to break her Silence in the Church.

But then (say you) it is objected, These Scriptures that forbid Women's teaching
and speaking in the Church, do intend only that they should not be the Mouth of
the Church, as in Prayer and Doctrine, etc.

To this Objection against your Exposition of these Scriptures, you give your
Answers.

1. That such a sense as this we speak of, is against the Letter of these Texts.

2. By asserting that in Singing together, there is Teaching, Instruction and
Admonition, page 34.

Answ. This kind of arguing against Women's Singing we have all ready fully
refuted; but for the sake of our good Women, and to detect this falsity, I
shall add a word or two further in way of Reply. It Is a hard case that Women
should be debarred to speak in any sense, or any ways to Break Silence in the
Church, as you affirm through a mistake of the Text.

1. For then they must not ask a Friend how he or she does when in the
Congregation.

2. She must not be suffered to be an Evidence in the Church against any
Offender, in the case of Discipline.

3. Then she must not ask, where the Text is, if she comes too late, for that
is in some sense a speaking and breaking Silence.

4. Nor must she then say Amen at the close of Prayer, for that is a breaking
Silence.

5. Which is worst of all, she must not in the Church give an account of her
Conversion, or declare how the Lord was pleased to work upon her Heart: for I
have showed in that Act there is much instruction, nay, it is so full of
teaching to others, that what some pious Women have spoke in the Church upon
this account, God has blessed to the Conversion of Sinners, as well as it has
refreshed and sweetly comforted diverse Believers; and therefore herein you
abuse the sense of the Holy Ghost, and indeed are not, I fear, fit to be a
Teacher of others, but to learn in silence your self.

2. The way therefore to understand this as well as other Scriptures, is to
have recourse to the main drift or purport of the Spirit of God therein. And
evident it is, the main thing the Apostle drives at in both these places, or
does intend, is this, viz. That Women ought not to be allowed to take part in
the ordinary Ministration of preaching the Gospel, or ministerially, or
authoritatively to preach the Word: because he that has received a just Call so
to do, may and ought to exhort and command in the Name of our Lord Jesus with
all Authority, Tit. 2. 15. and this Work therefore Women should not take upon
them, because they must be in Subjection, and not usurp Authority over the Man.
To take the bare letter of the Text, without showing the scope and drift of the
Spirit of God in it, would make sad work, as I might show from many Scriptures,
and has occasioned many abominable Errors, any Heresies, to abound in the World.

3. As to that teaching which is in Singing, it does not lie in a Ministerial
way, and therefore not intended by the Spirit of God here; Preaching or
Teaching is not Singing, nor Singing Preaching or Teaching, though there is a
Teaching in it. You must learn better to distinguish between different Duties
and Ordinances, before you take upon you to teach others. Read what I have
before said, and also what Mr. Cotton, Sidenham, etc. have said, as you will
find it repeated in this Treatise, in respect of the Nature of Teaching and
Admonition that is in the Ordinance of Singing, and you may further see how you
miss and abuse these Scriptures: for he or she that reads the Scripture may be
said in some sense to teach, there is much teaching in it; yet sure a Woman may
be suffered to do this, as a case may present it self, both in the Church, or
at home either, in her Husbands presence, and not be deemed to usurp Authority
over him: for the Usurpation the Apostle speaks of, respects a Woman's own
Husband (if not chiefly) as well as others; and therefore if she must not sing
in the Church, so by your Argument she must not sing nor read the Scripture at
home in the presence of her Husband, because there is a kind of teaching in
both those Duties; and if she should, as you intimate, she would not only break
Silence, but usurp Authority over the Man, i. e. her Head and Husband, which is
forbid. The Lord deliver poor Women, and Men too, from such kind of Doctrine as
this.

4. It Is evident the Apostle lays no other restraint upon Women than what the
Law laid them under, they are to be silent, or it is not (says he) permitted
unto them to speak; but they are commanded to be under Obedience, as also says
the Law, 1 Cor. 14. 34. And it is as clear, they were always under the Law
suffered to sing in the Congregation as well as the Men, therefore it was not
such a Speaking or Teaching as is in Singing, that Paul intends in those
Scriptures.

5. Whereas you affirm, that Women were not admitted to pray nor prophesy in
the Church neither in the Old nor New Testament, is doubless false, as our late
Annotators well observed on 1 Cor. 14. 34. which is the very Text you mention,
take their words;

This Rule must not (say they) be restrained to ordinary prophesying: for
certainly, if the Spirit of Prophesy came upon a Woman in the Church, she might
speak. Anna, who was a Prophetess in the Temple, gave Thanks to the Lord, and
spoke of him to all them that looked for the Redemption of Israel: and I cannot
tell how Philip's Daughters prophesied, if they did not speak in the presence
of many. The reason given why Women should be silent, is, because they are
commanded to be in Obedience. A Woman (say they) might say, Amen, to the
public Prayers, and also sing with the Congregation to the Honor and Glory of
God, but for her to speak in an ordinary course of Prophesy to instruct People,
etc. she is forbidden. The Apostle, says a Friend (in a Manuscript) does not
prohibit all manner of speaking, for that is directly contrary to 1 Cor. 11. 5,
6. where Women are admitted to pray and prophesy: for Prayer, they may say,
Amen to the public Prayers of the Church: and for Prophesy they may sing
Psalms, the Apostle using the Expression according to the Ideum of the Jews, 1 Samuel 19. 20, 21. 1 Samuel 10. 5. they shall prophesy; and for they shall
prophesy, the Called. Paraphras. reads, they shall sing, and thou shall praise
with them. Vid. Wilson's Dict. Dr. Hammond's Annotat. on 1 Cor. 11. 5. and so
it is used 1 Chronicles. 25. 1, 2, 3.

The Prohibition, says he, is not restrained only to Church Assemblies, but
holds good in all places, and at all times, and intends a Subjection of Women
to their Husbands, as plainly appears by comparing 1 Cor. 14. 35. with 1 Timothy
2. 12, 13. with the occasion and scope of the Text, and is of no greater
Restraint now, than lay on them under the Law, 1 Cor. 14. 34. where they were
permitted to sing.

Object. But say you, If we should say such a vocal Singing together is for a
Teaching, then where are the Hearers, if all be Teachers? etc. Appendix, p. 35.

Answ. We have showed you Singing is a distinct thing from that which is called
Teaching or Preaching, tho in Singing there is a Teaching, but chiefly we speak
to our own selves, as the Apostle exhorts, in Psalms, etc. and the matter of
the Psalm or Hymn is full of Teaching and Admonition, yet it is the Matter sung
which teaches, rather than the Singers may be said to do it: nor is it any
Contradiction to say when I teach others, yet I am thereby taught and
admonished my self.

So that if it were admitted to be a common or ordinary Teaching, which must
not be allowed, and all might be said to teach, etc. yet nevertheless all are
Hearers also, and are in a sweet manner taught, admonished and instructed in
singing the Word of Christ, in Psalms, Hymns, and spiritual Songs, as elsewhere
I have showed: Nor is it any Contradiction to say, according to the sense of
the Apostle, Women must keep silence in the Church, and yet suffer them to
sing, etc. no more than it contradicts their Silence, when they speak at other
times, which they are allowed to do.

In Sect. 6. You speak of those prophetical places of the Psalms, etc. urged by
us for Singing under the Gospel-days, where all the Earth is exhorted to sing
unto the Lord, Psalm. 96. 1. Psalm. 95. 1, 2. Psalm. 100. 1, etc.

1. This you would have refer to the preaching of the Gospel, i. e. as the
Apostles sound went forth into all the Earth, Romans 10. 18. confounding
Preaching and Singing together one time, and Prayer and Singing at another.

2. You would have it chiefly to refer to the seventh thousand Years of the
World, or Reign of Christ; hinting in your first Part as if then there shall be
a Singing, besides the Essence of it in their Spirits: but if that thousand
Years you speak of, shall be before the end of the World, or
Gospel Dispensation, pray where lie those Precepts that will authorize them in
those days to sing, and yet do not authorize, or warrant us to sing now? Shall
they have a new Bible for those Times? But if the Precepts for Singing then are
contained in our holy Scripture, and yet do not belong to us; it is good for us
to consider, whether other Precepts written therein, do not wholly refer to
those Times too, nay, all Ordinances, till the Spirit comes down in an
extraordinary manner; and so now we must throw off all Gospel-Administrations,
and turn Seekers. I am sorry to see such Stuff as this published to the World.
But what I have said or cited from the Writings of other Godly Men, in respect
of those Prophetical Psalms, and other places of Scripture that enjoin the
Gentile-Churches to sing the Praises of the Lord, I would have you and others
consider well of, before you write again.

In Sect. 7. you heap up a company of confused words to no purpose, about
premeditated Matter for Prayer, to oppose premeditated Hymns, etc. Append. page
38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, etc.

Answ. 1. The Form of Prayer Christ has left us, is a Rule for us in Prayer;
and we may premeditate what we intend to lay before the Lord, it appears from
thence; and so is the Word of Christ our general Rule, by which we must
premeditate and precompose our Spiritual Hymns and Songs.

2. But Prayer and Singing differ the one from the other; we may use other
words in Prayer than what we premeditated, as the Spirit of God may help us.
But we are limited by God's Word to sing David's Psalms, or else Hymns and
Spiritual Songs, composed out of the Word of God. Now let them be either, they
must be so many words and no more, or else none can sing with him that has the
Hymn. Now we say, the extraordinary Influences for Singing, Preaching,
Interpreting, etc. are gone; therefore every Ordinance must be performed by the
ordinary Gifts and Influences of the Spirit, or else we must have none at all.

Was Singing, or any other Ordinance performed in the Gospel-Days by an
extraordinary Spirit, not performed then also, and afterward as well and as
acceptable to God by the ordinary Gifts? Show, if you can, that other
Ordinances which had such special Gifts then to attend them as well as Singing,
do notwithstanding remain Ordinances, and yet Singing of Psalms and Hymns does
not so continue.

If therefore a Man should premeditate every word of his Sermon by the
Assistance of the Spirit, who dares to say he speaks not by the Help of the
Holy Ghost, or that his Sermon is not part of Spiritual Worship? It Is no matter
whether we have our Sermons or our Hymns, mediately or immediately, composed
and brought forth, provided they be Spiritual, and done by the help of the
Spirit. But to close all, Are not David's Psalms part of Spiritual Worship? and
are not the Churches exhorted to sing them?

In Sect. 8. Appendix, page 43, 44, etc. in answer to what we say, That our
Psalms and Hymns are Spiritual, though precomposed, you say,

1. That such Forms are not Spiritual Worship, because Singing in the Primitive
Gospel Times, was from the special Gift of the Spirit.

2. Though (say you) the Matter of precomposed Forms of Singing be Spiritual
yet the Heart must be Spiritual too, or Grace and Melody must be in exercise in
performing of them: The Grace of Joy must be raised in the Soul to the height
of Melody, and so break forth; Or to that purpose you speak, page 44, 45.

Answ. 1. We need no more the special Gift in Singing, to render our Singing
Spiritual, than those special Gifts in Preaching to render our Sermons
Spiritual.

2. As to have Grace in our Hearts, not only in the Habit, but also in the
Exercise in Singing, we acknowledge it is necessary to a right performance of
it: And so it is in Prayer, Preaching, and all other Spiritual Duties of
Religion. And let me tell you, we need no greater assistance of the Spirit in
Singing, than in Praying or Rejoicing; therefore what signifies that which you
say page 45. Viz.

The least exercise of true Grace in our Hearts in Prayer, gives Essence or
Being to Prayer; so the least exercise of gracious melodious Joy, gives Essence
to inward Singing? And (say you) as we ought not vocally to pray in the Public
Worship of God in the Church, without a sufficient Gift of the Spirit; so also
we ought not vocally to sing in the Church, unless it be by a sufficient Gift
of the Spirit. And seeing we have not such a Gift, we are not capable of vocal
Spiritual Singing. And so we must be contented, as you intimate in page 46.
with the Essence of it in our Spirits only.

Answ. By this way of arguing you may lay Godly Christians under Temptations
about Prayer, especially in the Church, because they may plead they have not
the Gift; whereas the Grace of Prayer, viz. a broken Heart, is that which God
chiefly looks at, and so should we too. This makes no more against Singing,
than it does against Praying. And thus I must argue upon you, If I have not the
special Gift of Singing, I must content my self with the Essence of it in my
Heart, and yet (as I have showed) the essence of it is not in the Heart as it
is in the Voice; and so since if I have not the special Gift of Prayer, I must
be contented with the Essence of Prayer, only Heart-Prayer, and not pray
vocally at all.

But you intimate, that none ought to sing but such who are in the full
assurance of the Love of God. But you might as well say, none ought to rejoice
in the Lord, nor to praise him, but such only, as well as to say what you do
here against their Singing who want that assurance.

But you hint, in page 46. as if we must be satisfied with your Essence of
Singing, viz. inward joy in the Heart, till we come to the primitive perfection
of Divine Worship, etc.

Answ. We doubt not, through Grace, but we are come to such perfection of
Divine Worship, as to know what Gospel Worship is, and also that we ought not
to neglect one Ordinance more than another; because we are not arrived to the
height of Perfection. I am sure the way you would lead poor Souls in, is not to
bring them forward toward perfection in Worship, but to keep them back, and
hinder them in pressing on to that which some have not yet attained unto.

Moreover, your folly appears too much in calling our Singing, an Irregular way
of Worship, unless you had more strength of Argument to convince your Reader
what you say is true. May be, if you had Truth on your side, you might have
answered like a Man: But I am satisfied, all wise Men will say, there appears
nothing less than Argument. In both parts of your Book there are many words
indeed, but little else as I can see.

If what I have said have no more strength of Argument and Scripture, and good
Sense in it for Singing of Psalms, etc. than appears in your Book against it, I
do entreat my Reader to reject what I have said, and esteem it as worth
nothing; but if it be otherwise, viz. upright, even words of Truth, O then ye
Saints receive this Ordinance, and let what I have said by the assistance of
God's Spirit, be as Goards, and as Nails fastened by the Master of Assemblies,
which are given from one Shepherd, Prove. 12. 10, 13.

One word more to those Texts in Paul's Epistles, Ephesians. 5. 19. Col. 3. 16.
where he enjoins those Churches to admonish one another in Psalms, Hymns, and
Spiritual Songs, etc. Can any Man suppose in these words the Apostle exhorts
Ministers to preach, and so sing in Preaching, or to admonish one another to
pray, and so to sing in Prayer?

How absurd would it be to affirm either? Why then, say I, he can mean nothing
else but this Ordinance of Singing, etc.

Object: But say some, Did not the Lord's People of Old in their Captivity,
say, How can we sing one of the Lord's Songs in a strange Land? Psalm. 137. 4.

Answ. 1. Under that Dispensation, the Lord's People had a special and peculiar
Right to Temporal Blessings; and when they were deprived of them, and in Exile,
they might not see they had that cause to sing the Praises of God. But our
Promises and Privileges are better and more inward, and Spiritual: And
therefore under the Gospel-Days, we find the Saints sung in the midst of their
greatest Sufferings; for as our Sufferings do abound in us, so our Consolation
also abounds by Christ, 2 Cor. 1. 5.

2. I know not but we nevertheless might see cause to refuse, as they did to
sing the Lord's Song, at the taunting and reproachful Requests of an insulting
Enemy; the Lord's People are not to do the Lord's Work at the Devil's
Instigation.

3. But blessed be God, we are not in Exile, we are delivered like Men that
dreamed; our Liberty and Mercies are great, if we do not sin them away.

In the last place, consider how acceptable and well-pleasing to God his
Praises are in a Song; read Psalm. 69. 30. I will praise the Name of God with a
Song; and will magnify him with Thanksgiving. Verse. 31. This also shall please
the Lord better than an Ox or Bullock that has Horns and Hoofs.

Two things you may observe from hence.

1. That to sing God's Praises, is acceptable to him.

2. That it is no Ceremonial Rite, but in it self a Moral Duty.

Sacrifices appertained to the Ceremonial Law, and though acceptable to God in
their Nature and Design, yet Moral Duties have always had the preference. He
has showed thee, O Man, what is good, (i. e. that excells, that which God most
delights in) to do justly, love Mercy, etc. Mic. 6. 8. And this of praising God
in a Song, seems from hence to be a Duty of the same Nature; it is not only
acceptable, but very acceptable, it pleases God better than shadowy Ordinances,
or the Offering of an Ox or Bullock.

The^^ few things, Brethren, I thought good to add at the Close, that you may
stick close to this Heavenly Ordinance, and not be removed by the subtle
opposition of any Men whatsoever. Remember there is no Truth of Christ but has
met with its Opposers; but though we cannot as yet agree to sing the Praises of
God together, yet let us love one another, and let not the practicing or
non-practising of this Duty (for want of Light) break our Communion one with
another, nor make a Breach in our Affections. Let us walk as we have attained;
If any be otherwise minded, God may reveal it to them, Phil. 3. 15. Let us live
holy Lives; and not sing God's Praises, and soon forget his Works; that so
though we cannot all sing together on Earth, yet may so walk to the Praise of
his Glory, that we may sing his Praises together in Heaven.

FINIS.
Some Reflections on Mr. Marlow's undue Citations of several Learned Men;
showing the genuine and proper Signification of the word Hymnos. By another
Hand.
THE Foundation of Singing Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs in the Public
Assembly of the Saints, is too firmly laid in Scripture, and in the Judgment
and Practice of Christians in general, to be shaken by the New Notions of some
few amongst us, whom I hope the Lord in his time will lead into the knowledge
of this Truth, and make them sensible of their injurous Attempts to overthrow
and remove it, particularly Mr. Marlow in his late Book and Appendix, which are
answered in the preceding Tract; and no more is intended in these few Pages,
but some short Remarks on the two first Sections of the Appendix. In the first
whereof he would not have Praising God, confined to Songs of Praise, or Vocal
and Melodious Singing. For my part I know not where he will find an Antagonist
in this Point; for without Controversy it will be generally granted, that all
Creatures, according to their Natures and Capacities, are obliged to praise
their great and bountiful Creator; and the allowance hereof does not in the
least injure the Duty, which he strenuously pleads against.

As for his long Citation out of the Learned Dr. Owen on Heb. 2. 12. to me
seems very little for his purpose, for the Doctor, after he had made some
Reflections on the Translation of the former part of the Verse, says, in the
rest of the words, viz. (...), i. e. in the midst of the Church I will sing
Praise unto thee: the Original Heb. Psalm. 22. 24. is expressly rendered; for
though (...) be rendered simply to Praise, yet its most frequent use, when it
respects God as its Object, is to praise by Hymns or Psalms, as the Apostle
here (...), sibi hymnos canam, I will sing Hymns unto thee; or, te hymnis
celebrabo, I will praise thee with Hymns; which was the principal way of
setting forth God's Praise under the Old Testament. Here the Doctor shows the
genuine and proper signification of the word (...); and although the Doctor in
his Exposition of this place, extends the sense of the word to its utmost
latitude, that it might include all ways whereby our blessed Mediator was to
Praise the Father: yet certainly he never intended to exclude that particular
way principally pointed at both in the Hebrew and Greek word, which we find in
the evangelical History so directly and expressly accomplished, Mat. 26. 30.
Mark 14. 26. as were also all other things prophesied concerning him; yet I
grant that the Prophecy had not its full and complete accomplishment therein;
for the Design of Christ in the whole Administration of his Mediatorial
Kingdom, is to set forth the Praise and Glory of his Father; and every Member
of his Mystical Body should concur with him in this Work, in all the Modes
wherein it can possibly be performed; because God is to be served with all our
strength and might.

Moreover, it is evident that the Doctor never intended to undermine or
overthrow the Duty of Singing; for herein he would have opposed his own
Judgment, which he has published to the World in the account he gives of the
several parts of Gospel Worship, where he makes Singing one, though he terms it
a fond Imagination for any to think that God cannot be praised in the Church
without it; and I doubt not but that all sober Christians agree with the Doctor
therein.

I shall now pass to ^he second Section, and consider some parts of it, which I
was desired to take notice of. Mr. Marlow begins with the word (...), which,
whatever he pretends concerning the generality of its signification, most
properly denotes a Song of Praise; And what he cites out of the Learned
Ainsworth on Psalm. 3. to favor his Purpose, will not serve it at all; for he
there intends nothing less than a Song of Praise, which is fitly composed to be
sung, as will appear to any one who considers the whole Paragraph without
Prejudice; and this import of the word is agreeable to the common sense of
Learned Men, notwithstanding what is cited to the contrary. His first Citation
is out of Constantin's Lexicon, whence he tells us that Hymenaeus is a Nuptial
Song. And what if it be, it is altogether impertinent in the present Enquiry;
for this is a word of another Family, and descends from (...), a word well
known amongst Learned Anatomists. And if he consults any of them, he may soon
know the full meaning of it, and also the reason why Hymenaeus is used for a
Nuptial Song. This word being thus dismissed, as foreign to our present Purpose;
we may consider (...) and (...), which according to Constantine, as cited by
him, primarily and chiefly signify an Hymn or Copy of Verses, made to Praise,
and to sing such an Hymn or Verse. And as for the latter word, he says also, it
is used for saying or pronouncing such an Hymn; and the reason may be, because
saying or pronouncing is necessarily included in Singing: for Singing is but a
particular Mode of saying or pronouncing. And if it was not thus, I might say
it is the common fate of all Words to be stretched beyond their prime and most
proper Signification; and who can help it, seeing that the Wit and Fancy of
Men, are such luxuriant things, that will make bold sometimes, not only with
Words, but Persons too. The Object of an Hymn, and Hymning, according to their
usage in profane Authors, has been extended, with the like liberty, both to
Men and Things, though the primary Object was their Gods. Now I shall pass by
two or three lines of unintelligible stuff, Viz. Hymno, etiam Kateuphemismon
pro conqueror, i. e. hymno; also Kateuphemismon is put for Conqueror, to
complain, Only with this Caution to the Author, that when he makes his next
Essay to show his Scholarship in Print, he would take better care, lest he meet
with a more severe Observator. As to what he further says of the use of the
word (...), to reproach, to accuse, to complain, etc. I readily allow; but then
he must take notice that all this was done in Verse, composed and sung to these
ends; and the use of the word to these ends, does not at all prejudice its
primary signification, which is to Praise with Songs. And whatever the
quick-sighted Author thinks he sees in Constantine or Sympson concerning its
signifyng simply to Praise, for my part I can see no such thing, either in them
or other Authors, which I shall now inspect. (...) is rendered by Scapula,
Carmine celebro, praise in Verse, Hymnis decanto, I sing in Hymns: and (...)
celebratio quae fit hymnis ^el carmine, i. e. praising by Hymns or Verse;
^ecantatio laudum, a singing of Praises, Greg. Naz. (...) is rendered by Scap.
Hymnus, Carmen, i. e. Hymn or Verse, and sometimes peculiarly signifies carmen
in honorem Dei, Verse composed for the honor of God. Thus we find (...). i. e.
a Hymn to the Praise of Apollo. Hymnus est cantilena conti^ens laudem Dei, i.
e. an Hymn is a Song containing the Praise of God. Minsh. The same Author
derives it from (...), which Hesych varies by (...), which properly signifies
to sing. Vid. Mart. Lex and Gl. Cyril. Isid. lib. 6. 19.

Now I shall enquire into the usage of this Word in the holy Scripture, and
shall follow his Method therein.

The first Instance which he gives as serviceable to his Design is, Psalm. 78.
63. where he supposes the LXXII Translators were not acquainted with (...), as
a Song of Praise, or Marriage-Song, which is more than he can tell; for it is
very probable they mistook the Radix (...), he grieved, or rather (...) he
lamented, for (...) and so translated (...), did not lament. Of this you see
more in Musc. on the place. But such as took the Radix (...) have translated
the words otherwise, as Jun. and Term. Non Epithalami^ celebratae sunt, i. e.
were not honored with a Wedding-Song; and to this sense the words are rendered
in six or seven Translations more Here the Antecedent is put for the
Consequent* viz. Praising or honoring with a Nuptial-Song for Marriage it
self. Hence appears the Unskilfulness of this Author, and his Ignorance in
imposing upon his Reader.

Next he comes to Mr. L. in his Critica Sacra, where you will find Mr. L.
giving this sense of the word (...), that it is Carnem sed peculiariter in
honorem Dei, i. e. Verse, but peculiarly designed for the Honor of God. This
is agreeable to what was said before from other Authors. And further to confirm
this sense of the word, I might here add, Zanch. Daven. Beza, etc. Then he
proceeds to the word (...), which he renders Hymnum cano I sing an Hymn; this
word is used Mat. 26. 30. Mark 14. 26. Acts 16. 25. Heb. 2. 12. and in all
these places is rendered by Beza (who was eminently skilled in the Greek Tongue)
after the same manner, and on Mat. 26. 30. he commends Erasmus for correcting
the vulgar Latin, in changing dicto Hymno, the Hymn being said, to cum
cecinissent Hymnum, i. e. when they had sung an Hymn. On ver. 20. he gives an
account out of Josephus of the Jews manner in eating the Passover, and closing
it with an Hymn, consisting of Psalm 113. and the five immediately following,
which the Jews call their Magnum Hallelujah, their great Song of Praise to God;
and it is the Opinion of many Learned Men, that Christ sang this with his
Disciples, tho Grotius thinks that Christ made another on that occasion. Now as
to the three Authors Mr. M. mentions out of Mr. L. who differ in their version
of these words, we may justly suppose that by Praises, they mean Praises in
Verse, and by saying Praises, they mean such a saying as was accompanied with
singing, otherwise their rendering may be censured as improper.

Now Mr. M. proceeds to (...) Isa. 25. 1. which is derived of (...), and in the
Conjugation Hiphil, signifies has praised, or confessed; and, as it is in
other words, the sense must be governed by the Context; and so in this place
the word (...) tho rendered by Arias Montanus, I will confess, yet if he does
not mean such a Confession as was to be made by singing the Song of Praise to
God, for his manifold Benefits bestowed upon his Church, his Version is not so
agreeable to the Context, as that of the Septuagint, who render it (...), I
will sing Praise; and the like may be said of his Version, Isa. 12. 4.

What is said in the third Paragraph, and beginning of the fourth, concerning
the rendering those words before mentioned, and some others, is of little
importance in clearing the present Controversy, seeing it is granted already
that God may be praised without Singing, tho Singing is a principal way of
setting forth the Praise of God, as Dr. Owen says. And certainly that which is
the principal way of praising God, ought not to be excluded by Christians;
neither can we think that these Translators had any design to do it, seeing
they use such words as include this as well as other ways of praising God. And
whereas Mr. M. thinks he has got clear and undeniable Evidence for his simple
praising God only, he has got none at all, unless three be not contained in
the number four, because one is. Solomon says, The wringing of the Nose brings
forth Blood; and straining the words of these Translators, may bring forth a
sense which they never intended. I see no such restrictive terms used by them,
which may reasonably be thought to restrain the Duty of Praising God to the
particular mode of this Author; but if they did intend it, I could (if the
Bounds of my Paper would admit it) produce six or seven Translators who are
generally esteemed by learned Men very accurate, who have rendered the words
for that way of praising God which is pleaded for in the foregoing Treatise.

The Author which Mr. M. cites out of Marlorate on Mat. 26. 30. pretends it is
uncertain with what words they praised God; that is, whether it was with the
common Passeover-Hymn, or some other of Christ's own, which might be more
suitable to the occasion; and whether they sang this Praise, or spoke it simply,
the following words of the Author not being well rendered by Mr. Tymme, I shall
set down, they are these, Graecum verbum laudem quidem, maxim quae Deo
debetur, includit; non autem necessario evincit, quod cecinerint, i. e. the
Greek word indeed includes Praise, chiefly that which is due to God. But
undoubtedly it does evince, that they sang, 1. From the genuine Signification
of the Original Word. And, 2. From the current of Learned Men who go this way.

To conclude; I sincerely desire that the Lord would make this Friend sensible
of the Evil and Vanity of this Attempt, to remove out of the Church this part
of Religious Worship, which has been kept up so many Ages, both under the Law,
and under the Gospel.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THere is in the Press, and will be published next Week, a Treatise Entitled,
Spiritual Melody, containing some hundred of Sacred Scripture-Hymns, chiefly on
Metaphorical Scriptures, as they lie in a Book Entitled, (...), A Key to open
Scripture Metaphors, (formerly published by this Author, with many others on
several Occasions) as they have been sung in diverse Congregations. Composed and
now published by B. Keach, at the earnest Request and Desire of several
Christian Friends. Printed for J. Hancock, and to be sold at his Shop in
Castle-Alley, on the West side of the Royal Exchange in Cornhil.

THere is almost ready for the Press, an Exposition on all the Parables, and
express Similitudes in the Four Evangelists. It will be above one hundreed
Sheets: The PROPOSALS whereof, with a Specimen, which will contain two Sermons,
(an Exemplar of the whole Work) will be on the Parabolical Saying of our
Savior in Mat. 12. 43. When the unclean Spirit is gone out of a Man, etc.
Written by the foresaid Author; and will (God willing) be published in a very
short time.


