THE Religious Loyalist: OR, A GOOD CHRISTIAN Taught How to be a Faithful
SERVANT BOTH TO GOD and the KING. IN A Uisitation-Sermon Preached at Coles-hill
in Warwickshire, Aug. 28, 1685. At the Triennial Visitation of my Lords Grace
of Canterbury, During the Suspension of the Bp. of Litchfield and Coventry.

By John Kettlewell, Vicar of Coles-Hill.

Imprimatur,

Hen. Maurice R. Arch. Cant. a sacris,
Dec. 23, 1685.


LONDON: Printed for Robert Kettlewell, at the Hand and Scepter against St.
Dunstan' s Church in Fleet street. 1686.

TO THE READER.
READER,
THE first and greatest Duty in Religion, is sincere Piety toward God. And
next to that is Submission to Gods Vicegerent, which all men have Obligation
enough to practice, to make their Passage easy, and secure through this world,
as well as to save their Souls in that which is to come. To recommend both
these Duties to all men's care, is the business of this Sermon. I have
endeavored to be Plain and Particular in such necessary Points, to render it
more helpful to men's Practice And the plainness and Honesty of this Discourse,
together with the great need our Age has to be often admonished and instructed
in these Subjects, was that, I presume, which moved several Worthy persons who
were pleased with it from the Pulpit, to desire I would make it more public
from the Press. I have yielded to their request in hope it can do no hurt, and
may do some good. And if thereby any be more instrcted or settled in these
important Matters, God will receive some Glory, this Church and State some
Quiet and Establishment, their own Souls some Benefit by it, and then I have my
end.

MATTHEW. 22. 21. Render therefore unto Caesar, the things which are Cesar's; and
unto God, the things which are God's.
THese Words are our Savior's Answer to a Question which some Malcontents
and Religious Zealots among the Jews put to him, whether Tribute was to be paid
to the Roman Emperors, who were the Rulers God had set over them at that time.
And they contain the just Bounds of Pious and Religious Loyalty, teaching us
how to maintain an inviolable Duty both to God and the King. Religion toward
God is the chief concern of all wise and good men, especially of us who are the
Ministers of it. And Loyalty and due Allegiance to the King, will always be the
care of all that duly fear God, or desire to live at quiet. Both these are
indispensibly required, and in themselves can very well consist together: But
yet in the practice of the World, men's Fears for the one, are most apt to bear
them against the other. And because we have so fresh an instance of this in the
late Rebellion among our selves, I think it may be very ^it at this season to
show men, how they are to express their care for God, and that without
Rebelling; and also how they are to show their assection to their Sovereign,
and that without deserting, or any ways injuring true Religion.

Sometimes Princes profess a Wrong Religion; nay, sometimes they set themselves
against the True, and persecute Gods Servants. And when at any time this is the
Case, our duty to God* and the King seem as if they were at odds, and look like
irreconcilable and inconsistent things. And then men oft-times think themselves
exempt from one of them, because they cannot serve two Masters of contrary
Interests, so that either in Zeal for Religion, they cast off all duty to their
Prince, and turn Bigoted Rebels; or else in compliance with their Prince, they
throw aside true Religion and their Duty toward God, and turn Irreligious
Time-servers. But the true determination of the Case, our Savior tells us, is
to do neither of these. When Princes happen to have any mis-perswasions about
Religion, we must still pay them all civil Subjection and Obedience. But our
Loyalty must not carry us to embrace their Errors, but at the same time we
must keep true to Religion and Gods Service. Render, etc.

In discoursing upon these words, I shall

1. Show on what ground these Inquirers thought themselves exempt, and what was
the cause of this Question.

2. Unfold the plain determination our Savior here gives of it, and show what
is implied in religious Loyalty and true Christian Subjection, so as that there
may be no just cause of Offense, either to God, or to the King. Render, etc.

1. I shall show on what ground these Inquirers thought themselves exempt, and
what was the cause of this Question.

Now that was because they thought they ought not to be subject to a Prince of
a Foreign Religion.

This Sect, who sought satisfaction in this point, were not against all
Subjection, as if they would be lawless, and introduce a perfect License,
having no controuler but themselves. They would submit to a Prince of their own
Nation, as their Forefathers had done to Saul, David, and Solomon: Yea, they
would submit to a Prince of a Foreign Nation, provided he would embrace their
Religion and way of Worship, and espouse Judaism. And thus these very Inquirers
did at this time: For Herod was a Forreigner, by Country an Idumaean, not
Jewish born; but because Idumaea when it was conquered was cast into the same
Province with Judaea, and especially because he turned Proselyte to Judaism,
and became an eminent Professor and great Assertor of their Law and Religion,
they made no dispute at all of being subject unto him, the Herodians, i. e. the
Court-doctors and Favorers of Herod, coming along with the Pharisees to ask
our Lord this Question, as we are told v. 16.

But they were against paying subjection to Heathens, who worshipped other
Gods, and were not of the same Religion with themselves. The Soverain Lord of
all is Almighty God, and Princes are only Officers of his whom he has deputed;
and they would not esteem any one a right Vicegerent but that worshipped the
same God as they did, (...) says Antiqu. l. 18. c. 2.
Josephus of them, i. e. The only Lord and Leader they owned was God, and
Governors that owned him; and so they would not submit to any profane Dominion
which had renounced him, as the Romans did at that time: So that they cast off
the Yoke, not because they would have none over them, but because they would
not be subject to a Heathen. The Founder of this Sect, which Josephus calls the
Fourth Sect, was Judas Gaulonites, who rose in Galilee in the days of the
Taxing under Cyrenius, and is called by Gamaliel Judas of Galilee, Acts 5. 37.
He was followed by those Galileans whom, because of their rejecting the Roman
Yoke, Pilate the Roman-governour came upon, and slew as they were a
Sacrificing, Luke 13. 1. His Followers lay much among the Pharisees, those
zealous Assertors of the Mosaic Law and Jewish Liberties, with whom, as Ibid.
Josephus notes, they accord in all things. And they were Pharisees who came to
Christ, desiring to be resolved in this point, v. 15, 16.

Thus did they fancy they ought not to be subject to the Roman Emperors,
because they were of another Religion: And this being a main point, and our
blessed Lord being a Doctor of greatest Name and Reputation among them, they
come to him for a confirmation of it. As for other Rabbis, they told him they
were Temporizers and Court-flatterers, men of good Understanding, it may be,
but of low Spirits, who although they had the wit to see this truth, had yet
the corrupt carnal Policy to conceal and dissemble it, because it was
dangerous; especially having so fresh an instance of the Roman Severity on the
Abettors of it, as Pilates slaughter of the Galileans. But as for himself, they
believed him to be not only skilful, but true and bold too, and that in his
Answers he would speak the truth of things, not what was like to please
persons. And therefore in this case they would not apply themselves to others,
from whom they could look for nothing but Art and Secular Compliances, but to
him, from whom they had so just reason to expect the truth it self. Master, say
they, we know that thou art true, and teach the way of God in truth, neither
carest thou for any man, for thou regardest not the person of men. Tell us
therefore what think thou, Is it lawful to give tribute unto Caesar, or not?
v. 16, 17.

This opinion then was the occasion of this Question. I proceed now

2. To unfold the plain determination, which our Savior gives of it, and to
show what is implied in Religious Loyalty and true Christian Subjection, so as
that there may be no just cause of offense, either to God, or the King. Render,
etc.

Now this determination consists in these two things.

1. That we pay all due respect and just obedience to our Prince, whatever
Religion he be of, so that the Pretense of Religion must never make us ill
Subjects. Render unto Caesar the things which are Cesars. But still

2. That at the same time we reserve all due service, and subjection to
Almighty God; so that when Princes happen to err in Religion, the pretense of
Loyalty must never draw us to embrace their Errors, and become irreligious.
Render unto God the things which are Gods.

1. He tells us we must pay all due Respect and just Obedience to our Prince,
whatever Religion he be of; so that the pretense of Religion must never make us
ill Subjects. Render unto Caesar, etc.

Now the things of Caesar, or those Duties which we are to pay our Prince, I
shall comprehend under these three Heads.

1. Inward Love and Reverence. 2. Respectful Speeches and Expressions. 3.
Obedient and Submissive Practice.
1. To a Prince all Subjects are bound to pay inward Love and Reverence.

They must bear an inward Love and Kindness, and stand well affected to their
Power and Persons. And the natural effect of this will be, that they wish well
to them, and sincerely desire the ease and happiness of their Reign: That they
endeavor to accomplish their own desires, and make their Reigns easy by their
quietness, and dutiful behavior toward them: That they be forward to observe
their Virtues, and to commend what is good in them, for that shows affection:
That they be prone to conceal, or extenuate what would bring them to shame, for
that is true love and tenderness toward any person: That they be candid in
construing what is done or said by them, and turn all, so far as things will
reasonably bear, to such a sense, as may cherish and maintain a good opinion of
them, and the like. These are real Fruits of Love, and proper Trials of our
Kindness toward any person; and therefore are the true effects, and surest
signs of our being well affected toward them.

They must also pay them an inward Reverence, because of their Power and
Preeminence. Render fear to whom fear, honor to whom honor, says St* Paul,
speaking of the dues of Kings, Romans 13. 7. And this Reverence we shall be
thought to show, when we do not pragmatically intrude our selves into their
Affairs, but by letting them alone to their own care, show, we think them fit
to manage their own business. When we pay a modest deference to their Councils,
which we have neither opportunity, nor skill to judge of, and which therefore
we cannot Censure, without great Arrogance and Sauciness. And lastly, when we
behave our selves in their Presence after a respectful sort, not with
sleightful and contemptuous Deportment, but with such becoming care, as
manifests an awe for them dwelling upon our Spirits.

2. To a Prince all Subjects are bound to pay respectful Speeches and
Expressions. They must not use blunt Reproofs and unmannerly Rudeness, when at
any time they are addressing to themselves. Is it fit, says Elihu in Job, to
say to a King, thou art wicked? and to Princes, you are ungodly? Job. 34. 18.
Nor must they use irreverent and reproachful Speech when at any time they
discourse of them with others. This implies two things, One is, that they do
not speak evil of their Persons, being forward to tax, and aggravate their
Faults: The other is, that they do not complain and envy against their
Administrations, delighting to lay out the Grievances of State, and misguidance
of Affairs. Both these were the sins of the Gnostics, who brought the greatest
scandal upon our Religion in the first days. They were always finding fault, as
St. Jude says, with the public Managements, being Murmerers and Complainers,
v. 16. and boldly vilifying and reproaching the Persons of their Governors:
They despise Dominions, says he, and speak evil of Dignities. Whereas Michael
the Archangel, when he contended with the Devil himself about the body of
Moses, durst not bring against him a railing accusation, but said, the Lord
rebuke thee, treating Authority with decent Speech, even when it was lodged in
the Prince of Darkness, v. 8, 9.

Thus must all good Subjects refrain from speaking evil of the persons of their
Governors, and inveighing against the public Grievances and
Maladministration of Affairs. And this they are bound to do, not as if the
Persons and Conduct of all Rulers were so right, that no fault could be found
in them; for there will be Personal Faults, and Public Miscarriages so long as
Governors are Men: But because when there are things blameworthy, in charity
to their Persons, and dutiful regard to their Power, we must not speak evil of
them, and inveigh against them for them. When St. Paul called Ananias whited
Wall, it was a true Reproach, for he had deserved that Name by his hypocritical
and unjust usage. But though the Reflection was true, yet he confesses it was
Criminal, because it is written, thou shall not speak evil of the Ruler of thy
people, Acts. 23. 3, 5.

3. To their Governors all Subjects are bound to pay an obedient and
submissive Practice. Under this I comprehend three things. 1. That they pay
faithfully all legal Tributes. 2. That they obey readily all their just Laws.
And 3. that when they cannot obey, they suffer patiently without making
Insurrections.

1. They must pay faithfully all legal Tributes, which are imposed on them by
their Country Laws and Authentic Customs; and which are as much the Princes
Property, not to be withheld, or defalcated, without fraud and dishonesty, as
every private man's Estate and Inheritance is his. Render to all their dues,
tribute to whom tribute, custom to whom custom is due, says St. Paul, Romans 13.
7. This the Primitive Christians did with exemplary fidelity and exactness,
being as Conscientiously fearful to withold any just Payment from their
Prince, as from their Neighbors. They durst not pay, indeed, what was exacted
of them for Idolatrous Uses, because that had been to contribute toward the
Worship and Service of Idols. But Caetera Vectigalia Gratias Christianis agent,
etc. says Tertullian, i. e. As to all other Customs, which are every where
fraudulently concealed or withheld by the Gentiles, we Christians are so
strict in paying them, that though the Gentiles pay Taxes for Idolatrous uses,
which the Religion of us Christians will not suffer us to do, yet our
punctualness in discharging all State-taxes so far exceeds theirs, that we pay
as much into the Checquer for civil Impositions, as the Heathens do for those,
and for Idolatrous too, Tert. Apol. c. 42.

2. They must readily obey all their just Laws. Put them in mind to be subject
to Principalities and Powers, says St. Paul, and to obey Magistrates, Tit. 3.
1. And this Obedience is due, whenever they command Lawful things, i. e.
things unforbidden by a higher power, and which have no Law of God against
them. To show a thing Lawful, it is unreasonable to ask where there is a
command in Scripture, and a Law of God for it: For such a Law commanding it,
would not make it a thing Lawful which may be done, but a thing necessary which
must be done, and cannot be let alone. But to the lawfulness of things, it is
enough that God has said nothing of them, and that there be no Law of his
against them. This is security enough that they may be done without sin, or any
offense to him: For he is never offended, and we never sin, nor shall ever
suffer, but for breaking some Law, and doing something that he has forbidden.
Whosoever commits sin, trangresses a Law, says St. John, for sin is the
transgression of a Law, 1 John 3. 4. And there must always be a Law, says St.
Paul, that works wrath; for where there is no Law, there is no transgression,
Romans 4. 15. So that whenever they enjoin unforbidden things, they enjoin
Lawful ones, which no good Subjects must dispute and question, but peaceably
and readily perform

3. When unlawful things are enjoined, which they cannot honestly obey, they
must suffer with Patience, and not seek to stave off Sufferings by making
Insurrections. Whilst there is any help in Law to prevent unjust Sufferings,
men may claim their Legal Privileges in their own defense, as St. Acts 22. 25.
etc. 16. 37.
Paul did before the Heathen Magistrates. Or if Laws give no redress, they may
have recourse to Prayers and Tears, or any other peaceable Arts to still a
Princes Rage, and melt him into Justice. But if all peaceable methods fail, and
there appear no hope of protection but in Force, the Case is helpless in Humane
means, and must be left to God to redress it. Rebellion is a thing, which no
necessity can excuse, nor any pretense can authorize: They that resist, says
St. Paul, shall receive to themselves damnation, Romans 13. 2. Which was spoken,
when the Christians had felt some, and daily feared and expected greater
Sufferings; and bound up their hands, when the Scepter presently after was
swayed by a man, Nero I mean, who invaded honest men's Estates to supply his own
profuseness, and embrued his hands in the Blood of any he had a Pique against,
without any regard to Law or Justice; and was a professed Enemy of the true God,
and raised the first Persecution against the Christians, as appears from Tacit.
Annal 15. and Suet. in Vita Ner.
Tacitus and Suetonius, two approved Historians of those times: And these are
the fairest pretenses, that can ever be urged in this case; so that if they
cannot secure us in flying to Arms against our Governors, nothing else can.

All these are the things of Caesar: and whether Princes are good or bad, they
are all due to them. For the ground of their being due, is not the moral
Endowments of Princes, because they are men well qualified; but their Power and
Authority, because they are the Vicegerents and Ordinance of God. This God
assigns as the reason of our Duty; not that a Prince is circumspect or
Successful, Wise, or Holy, but that he is his Deputy. I have given the Kingdom
to Nebuchadnezzar, says he, wherefore all Nations must serve him, Jer. 27. 6,
7, 8. The Powers are ordained of God, therefore he that resists shall receive
damnation, Romans 13. 1, 2. and he is the Minister of God, wherefore you must
needs be subject, v. 4, 5. Inde Potestas Caesari unde Spiritus, illuc
suspicientes Christiani, etc. It is because God that gave him Breath has vested
him with Power, that we honor and obey the Emperor, says Tertullian, Apol. c.
30, 31. So that all this Love and Reverence, this respectful Speech and
submissive Practice are due, as to the Best, so to the Worst of Princes. They
must be paid, not only where Kings Rule well, and are wisely sollicitous for
the Public; but also where they lie steeped in Pleasure, and hate Business,
and not only neglect, but oppress the State. They are due to Princes of the
most opposite Religions: for this is the very Case determined in the Text; the
Jews denying Tribute, as was said, to the Roman Emperors, because they were
Heathens. Nay, they are due, not only to Princes that profess a false
Religion, but also to those who impose it, and Persecute the true Religion. For
so Nero did, if not before; yet at least, soon after St. Paul, under the pain
of Damnation, had required all Christians to be Subject, Romans 13. And so also
did the other persecuting Emperors that succeeded him, when the Christians
were a noble spectacle of Bleeding, but persevering and unconquerable Loyalty
to all the world.

As for this trial of Persecutions, God be thanked it is not our case: For our
Laws protect the true Religion, and punish all that dissent from it. And our
King has graciously assured us, that he will govern by Laws, yea preserve the
Government and Laws themselves, both in Church and State, as they are now
established.

But where that is truly the Case, as it was with the Christians in the
Apostles days, and the Primitive Persecutions; and as it is still with the
Foreign Protestants in Popish Countries, but especially in France. Yet will
not this Persecution of the true Religion, exempt Subjects from any Branch of
the foresaid Duties. They must bear Honor and Reverence, and speak of them
with Respect, as well as with Truth and Justice, and pay faithfully all Legal
Tributes, and obey cheerfully all their just Laws, and live quietly under them,
without raising any Commotions to defend and secure even their Religion and
themselves, under all Princes, under a Nero, Dioclesian, or Julian, that not
only profess, but espouse and forcibly propagate a false Religion, as well as
under the best and most Orthodox and Christian Kings. So that the pretense of
Religion can never authorize any men to be ill Subjects. Render unto Caesar the
things which are Cesars, says our Savior in this very case to those who
inquired how they should behave themselves under Princes of a wrong Religion.

But whilst we are thus careful to pay all due Respect, and just Obedience to
our Prince, whatever Religion he be of, so that the pretense of Religion never
make us ill Subjects. We must take care still further,

2. To reserve at the same time all due Service and Subjection to Almighty God;
so that when at any time Princes happen to err in Religion, the pretense of
Loyalty must never draw us to embrace their Errors, and become irreligious.
When we do any thing else in compliance with Sovereign Princes, yet must we not
sin against God for their sakes: For Princes, how high soever they are above
us, are yet under him as his mere Deputies and Romans 13. 4.
Ministers, and he is still the Sovereign Prince; so that our respect to them
must never carry us to his prejudice, Render unto God the things which are
Gods, is the other part of our Saviors Answer in this case.

The things of God are the things of Religion. And the Religion, which God
prescribes, is not always the same with that which the Prince does. In our own
case, God be thanked, they meet. For our Laws fetch Religion from the
Scriptures, and establish the same that Christ himself has there established.
And our King has given us his Royal Word, that he will govern by Laws, and
maintain them, and always defend and support the Church of England. But in
other places among our neighbor Nations, the Laws of Religion, and the Laws of
the Land, thwart and oppose each other. And so they did when our Religion was
first planted, in the days of the Apostles; and so they continued to do in the
succeeding Ages, and may still happen to do in all times. But when that is the
case, this close adherence to the Rules of true Religion is still the
inviolable Right of God, and no Powers on Earth must ever drive us from them.

Now the things of God, or those things which are due to him in Religion, I
shall reduce to these three Heads.

1. A belief of his Revelations. 2. Worshipping him according to his own Rules.
3. The service of a good Life, and an upright Practice.
1. The first thing of Religion due to God, is a belief of his Revelations.
Whatsoever he declares, we must all give absolute credit to, because all that
believe a God, believe he is infinitely true, and can never deceive men. Nay,
in matters of Religion and Salvation we must give credit to him alone, because
he only knows the terms of his own Mercy, and how he will bring us all to
Heaven. In these Points, we are not to believe an Apostle himself, if he should
not speak from him: For they, as St. 2 Cor. 1. 24.
Paul said, had not dominion over men's Faith, to make them believe any thing;
but were only as Messengers and 1 Cor. 4. 1. and 9. 17.
Dispensers of Gods Word, and so could declare nothing but what he had told
them. And much less should we believe either him or an Angel from Heaven, if he
should not only speak to us without Book, but against it, and contradict Gods
own Revelation: Though an Angel from Heaven preach any other Gospel than what
we have preached unto you, (...), let him be accursed, i. e. look on him as if
he were anathematized, and come not near him, nor give any heed to him, more
than you would to one that is thrown out among Heathens and publicly
excommunicated, Gal. 1. 8. So that if the Laws of any Country require men to
give their assent to ridiculous and absurd Opinions, as they do among Heathens
and Mahometans; or to believe quite contrary to the Scriptures, as they do in
Italy and France, where all men are compelled to believe Transubstantiation,
and to profess a Church Infallible, which had evidently embraced and taught a
number of Falsehoods: they not only need not, but they ought not to comply with
them. They must trust God before any Princes on earth when they happen to
contradict him. It is Gods Prerogative to govern our Faith, and that must not
be given up to any others.

2. A second thing in Religion due to God, is worshipping him according to his
own Rules. This is another of Gods Rights. For his adorable Excellencies, and
Sovereignty over us, claim our Worship; and he himself alone can prescribe it.
The end of it is to honor and please him; and what will do that is best known
to himself; so that his Worship must be of his own prescribing, and we must
never attempt to worship him in a way forbidden. And therefore if any Powers on
earth should command us to worship God in a way contrary to what he has
required, therein they are not to be obeyed. Thus the Heathens required the
Primitive Christians to Sacrifice to their Gods, and to Swear by the Emperors
Genius. And thus in France, and in other Popish Countries, the poor Protestants
are required, among other things of like sort, to pray to Saints, and adore
Images, and worship the Host, and take up with a maimed Sacrament receiving the
Bread only without the Cup, and address to God in a Latin Service which they
do not understand, and from whence they can expect to reap no profit. All these
ways of Worship are directly opposite and contradictory to Gods Rules; and
therefore were justly and necessarily rejected by Gods faithful Servants. For
here, notwithstanding their Princes Command, they might and ought to reserve
themselves to Almighty God, this being his Province.

3. A third thing of Religion due to God, is the Service of a good Life, and an
upright Practice. This is what God indispensibly requires of men in all
Religions, and which they must be most careful to pay to him inviolably in all
times. So that if any Powers should require to be served by Fraud or Falsehood,
by Rapine or Bloodshed, if they would have men stop at no bounds, nor scruple
at any wickedness which serves their ends; their Subjects or Dependants must
not hearken, but here obey God who is a greater King than they.

These are the things of Religion; and these are reserved to God as his things,
which are put without the control of Princes; so that we must not comply when
at any time they invade them. Thus the three Children would not worship the
Golden Image, for all the strictness of the Kings Commandment, Dan. 3. 4, 15,
16, 18. and Daniel would not omit his daily Prayers to God, notwithstanding
thereby at his utmost peril, he broke Darius's Royal Edict, Dan. 6. 7, ad 10.
And when Christ had commanded the Apostles Matthew. 28. 19, 20.
to go and preach to all Nations, they would not desist when the Jews forbid
it, saying, Whether it be right in the sight of God, to hearken unto you more
than unto God judge ye, Acts 4. 17, 18, 19. and the Primitive Christians, those
renowned Patterns of Loyalty, though they would never raise Rebellions against
their Princes, yet stood out in a continual and invincible breach of their
wicked Laws, refusing obstinately either to Curse Christ, or to Sacrifice to
Idols, when they were required thereto by their Heathen Governors. When any
Kings Laws run thus against Gods Laws, noncompliance and holding out is a
grace, which the more resolved it is, the better it is. Nay, that Boldness and
undaunted Face in opposition, which in case of lawful Impositions, is a most
criminal Impudence, is in this case a peculiar Gift of the Holy Ghost, which
was begged by the Apostles when under the Threatenings of the Jewish Rulers, they
desired Grace to speak the word with boldness, Acts 4. 29. which, according to
that Prayer, was afterward most eminent in themselves and the Primitive
Confessors; which God still bestowed when he called men to suffer for him in
after Ages: and which I doubt not but he will still bestow when he shall please
to call any Churches to suffer for him, to the end of the World.

Thus are the things of Religion Gods things, wherein all men are still to
follow him, though the Powers of the World being erroneously mislead, should
have the misfortune both to practice themselves, and to enjoin their Subjects
too to practice otherwise.

The only Caution I think fit to be added in this case is, that we do not make
those things Religion which are not so, as not Kneeling at the Communion, not
using the Cross in Baptism, not joining in a Form of Prayers, and the like.
True Religion does not stick at these and such like indifferent things: For God
makes Religion, and he has no where forbid the use of them, but may be served
by them as truly, and oft-times more becomingly than without them. So that when
our Governors require only such things as these, they entrench not at all
upon Religion and the Rights of God, but we may lawfully obey them, and then we
must do it. If they command against him, in that we are to desert them, because
we are to follow him in Religion. But then we must take care, that what we call
Religion be not a point of man's Invention, that it be some Article of the holy
Scriptures, and not of our own Fancy, some thing which is a Religion of Gods,
and not of our own making.

Thus must we hold firm to God in things of Religion; and therefore as the
pretense of Religion must never lead any to be ill Subjects: So neither, when
Princes happen to be mislead in Religion, must the pretense of Loyalty ever
draw them to err and be ill Christians. When Subjects are most Loyal to their
Prince, in paying him all Honor, and Obedience, and submissive Carriage, they
must not embrace his Errors, nor conform to his Opinion and Practice in
Religion, if they happen to be different from what the Scripture teaches. This
is no act of disloyalty to a Prince, to be true to Almighty God, and both to
believe and practice as he would have us. All Loyalty to the King must consist
with true Religion toward God, since the King is only God's Vicegerent. This
was the belief of our Savior Christ, and of his Apostles, and of all the
Saints and Servants of God in all Ages. And it will always be the opinion of
every man, whose Conscience is not debauched with Atheistical Principles, but
knows he has a God as well as a King to serve.

Having thus stated what are the things of God, and what the things of Caesar,
and shown how the pretended care and zeal for the one can never exempt us from
the other; I shall now very briefly exhort you to a careful observance of what
has been delivered, and so conclude.

Since God and the King then must both have what belongs to them; and God, who
is most jealous of his own Honor, will not have men's Zeal even for that to
transport them against the just Rights of Caesar; let me exhort all that hear me
to have a watchful eye to both these, and that what God has put together, they
would not set asunder. Be careful to give God all the Honor that is due to
him, and to do it with Constancy, Zeal, and Affection. But when you are most
zealous for the Honor of God, be careful to preserve an inviolable Duty to
your Prince too, who is Gods Vicegerent. Show your selves hearty and steady
Protestants, that is Gods Cause, wherein you may and should be zealous; but at
the same time be sure to show your selves good Subjects, and good Christians.
Let not your Zeal for Protestancy bereave you of your Loyalty or Christianity,
and make you forget either your Duty to your Governors, or that Charity which
you owe your Neighbors; even those who are most opposite in Religion to your
selves. This is to act by a Primitive Spirit like sincere Servants of Christ,
and true Members of the Church of England; to whose Eternal Honor it may be
said, that the Clergy, and true Members of it, beyond what is ordinary in other
Churches, are careful to show such a just and well-governed Zeal for Almighty
God, as dare not fly in the Face of the King, or be unchristianly violent
against their Brethren for Gods sake. They are, and by their Principles should
be zealous against Popery. But at the same time they are zealous against
Rebellion and Disloyalty, one of the most mischievous things in Popery, and
against all unchristian usage and uncharitableness to men of different
Persuasions, which the unbridled Zeal of Papists and Sectaries too commonly
transports them to.

And then, as for you my Reverend Brethren, who are entrusted with the Ministry
of Religion, let me particularly recommend the things of God and Religion to
your care, that you would labor to make men true to God, that they may be true
to the King for Gods sake. Stir them up, not only to like Religion, or to be
Lukewarm, which God Rev. 3. 16.
told the Church of Laodicea was loathsome; but to be concerned and zealous in
it. And that they may not be all Heat without Light, nor their Zeal outrun
their Knowledge; endeavor to possess them with right Notions of it, letting
them see that Religion lies in Faith and Practice, in Believing all the
Articles of the Creed, and Keeping the Commandments and Laws of God. Suffer
them not to place Religion in little things, to embrace Shadows for a
Substance, and to think either to please or displease God by such frivolous and
inconsiderable things, as are unworthy of any Wise man's Notice; which needless
Scrupulosity of Mind, will not only prove a Snare to themselves, but
inevitably render them troublesome to their Governors, and very detrimental to
the Public Peace. And when they are thus rightly instructed in Religion, and
made true to Almighty God; be diligent to weed out all Seditious Principles, to
make Civil Subjection as necessary a part of their Religion, and as much a
Point of Conscience, as Prayers and Gods immediate Service. In a word, to let
them see the Necessity, the Duty, and the Benefit of being inviolably Loyal and
true to the King too.

I know the Judgments of great numbers are preposessed on the wrong side, and
leavened with ill Principles, instilled by cunning Seducers into many
well-meaning but unwary Minds, both about the things of God, and of the King
too. For as for the things of the King, through an habitual and indulged
License, many are come without regret to question any thing that is in favor
of their Governors; to put remote and Imaginary Cases, in Bar of present,
real, and unquestionable Duties; to Cavil and Dispute Power, when they should
be showing Obedience; nay, to avow such Principles as inevitably unsettle any
State, and authorize the most barefaced Rebellions, as, God knows, we have
newly felt by sad Experience; which would have been much sadder still, had not
the Wisdom and Goodness of God confounded the Craft, and defeated the
mischievousness of men, in our late happy, speedy, and, in appearance, entire
Deliverance from them. And then as for Religion, great numbers of those who are
concerned for it, either place it in trifling Truths, or in grounless and
untrue Opinions; and where they are most mistaken, they are usually most
confident and concerned, and show more Zeal for those empty and unprofitable
Nothings where they think wrong, than for all the grand and importan Truths of
their Religion where they believe right. These ill Weeds have in too many
marred the Soil which I am entreating you to cultivate. And what pains it may
have cost others to sow these evil Seeds, and give them root, I know not: But
now they are in posession, and are rivited in the Minds of Men, I know it will
cost you much Pains and Patience too, to pluck them out. But this, my Reverend
Brethren, though it will exercise your care, yet must not discourage it. Let
not us show less diligence to cure Men's Minds, than others have done to corrupt
them. Let not the goodness of our Cause suffer through our remisness, and want
of care in managing it. Substantial Religion and Loyalty are true and mighty,
and will prevail at last. But without your care and pains, who are appointed
Advocates for them, and are of all men, as most concerned, so best sitted to
uphold them, they will not be prevalent. May the Almighty God daily increase
your Zeal, and both direct your Labors, and prosper them in so good a Work:
That you may not only be rewarded for the honesty of your Endeavors, when
Jesus Christ the Chief Shepherd, and Bishop of the Church, as St. Peter 1 Pet.
5. 4. and 1 Pet. 2. 25.
styles him, shall come at last; but may at present see the Fruit, and rejoice
in the Success of them too. Amen.

FINIS.
Books lately Printed for Robert Kettlewell at the Hand and Scepter in
Fleet Street.
THE Measures of Christian Obedience: Or, a Discourse showing what Obedience is
indispensably necessary to a Regenerate state, and what Defects are consistent
with it, for the promotion of Piety, and the peace of troubled Consciences. By
John Kettlewell Vicar of Coles-hill in Warwickshire; the second Edition
corrected. In Quarto, price bound 8 s.

2. An Help and Exhortation to Worthy Communicating: Or, a Treatise describing
the Meaning, worthy Reception, Duty and Benefits of the Holy Sacrament, and
answering the Doubts of Conscience, and other Reasons, which most generally
detain men from it; together with suitable Devotions added. By John Kettlewel,
Vicar of Coles-hill in Warwickshire. In Twelves, price bound 3 s.

3. A Journey into Greece, by Sir George Wheeler, in company of Dr. Spon of
Lions, in six Books. Containing, 1. A Voyage from Venice to Constantinople. 2.
An Account of Constantinople, and the adjacent Places. 3. A Voyage through the
Lesser Asia. 4. A Voyage from Zant through several parts of Greece to Athens.
5. An Account of Athens. 6. Several Journeys from Athens into Attica, Corinth,
Boeotia, etc. With variety of Sculptures. In Folio, price bound 15 s.

4. A Vindication of the Primitive Christians in point of Obedience to their
Prince, against the Calumnies of a Book, entitled, The Life of Julian, written
by Ecebolius the Sophist. As also, The Doctrine of Passive Obedience cleared,
in defense of Dr. Hicks. Together with an Appendix, being a more full and
distinct Answer to Mr. Thomas Hunt's Preface and Post script. Unto all which is
added, the Life of Julian enlarged. In Octavo, price bound 2 s. 6 d.

5. The Paradoxal Discourses of F. M. Van Helmont, concerning the Macrocosm and
Microcosm of the Greater and Lesser World, and their Union. Set down in Writing
by J. B. and now published. In Octavo, price bound 3 s. 6 d.


