THE MEASURES OF Christian Obedience. OR, A DISCOURSE SHOWING What Obedience is
indispensably necessary to a Regenerate State, and what Defects are consistent
with it; FOR The Promotion of Piety, and the Peace of Troubled Consciences

By JOHN KETTLEWELL, Fellow of Lincoln-College in Oxford.

LONDON, Printed by J. Macock, for Robert Kettlewell, at the Hand and Scepter
over against St Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet, MDCLXXXI.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, AND RIGHT REVEREND FATHER in GOD, HENRY LORD BISHOP
of LONDON, And One of His Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council, etc.
MY LORD,
HAving published this Treatise to promote, as much as in me lies, an entire
Practice of our Blessed Saviors Precepts, and a comfortable expectation of his
Rewards amongst us; I have presumed to address it to Your Lordship, hoping it
will find Acceptance in Your Pious Judgment for the sake of those things which
are contained in it, and because Your Lordship is a most eminent Example as a
Christian, and a most discreetly zealous and diligent Promoter as a Bishop of
the Subject of it.

In this Work my Great Design has been to press men to a conscientious regard
of their whole Duty, and to show them how much contentment, and cheerfulness of
Spirit they have reason to enjoy in the careful observance of it. And these are
ends so excellent, as may well excuse the imperfections of any honest
Endeavors, which shall be put forth in order to them. For what greater service
can be done to our Blessed Lord, than to exalt his Authority in the hearts and
lives of all his Followers? What greater honor can be brought to Religion,
than to promote a pious practice, and thereupon a constant joy and cheerfulness
in the minds of all its Professors? And what more faithful kindness can be
shown to the Souls of Men, than clearly to lay before them, and most earnestly
to press upon them such things as will give them peace and comfortable
expectations of God's love and favor in this World, and secure their eternal
happiness in that which is to come? And since I have directed all the Parts,
and every thing that I have said in the following Discourse, to these ends; I
am willing to hope, that, notwithstanding all its defects, I have therein done
no unacceptable service to my Savior, and to all good men, who will be much
readier to encourage any honest tendences to this purpose, than to reprove, and
throw them by, for the sake of those weaknesses, and that want of skill, which
shall be found in them.

In this hope, my Lord, I make bold to Present it to Your Lordship, whose great
and most exemplary Virtue will not, I believe, be averse from Patronizing that,
which tends even in a low degree to further and promote it. I pray God preserve
Your Lordship, and continue You, what You now are, an Illustrious Pattern of
all Private and Political Virtues to this Your Native Country. That Religion
may still be adorned, and this distressed Church supported, by that
exemplariness of an upright Conversation, that great Prudence, and unwearied
Diligence, and undaunted Courage, and most wise and steady Zeal, which Your
Lordship has always shown in Your High Station for the things of God committed
to Your Care, and which have rendered You greatly serviceable to Your Savior,
and a most valuable Blessing to this poor Church and Nation. This, my Lord, is
the most hearty Prayer of,

Your Lordships in all humble, and dutiful Observance, JOHN KETTLEWELL.

THE PREFACE.
READER,
THE design of this ensuing Treatise is to increase the piety, and promote the
peace of all sincerely honest Consciences, by stating plainly and fully what
are the terms indispensably required of all Christian men to their eternal
pardon and salvation.

In this I have endeavored to be as clear, and particular as possibly I could.
For I write upon a Subject wherein all men are infinitely concerned; and
therefore I have studied to write so as all might understand me. I have carried
on my Discourse all along with a particular eye to the benefit of the plain and
unlearned Reader, and suited things, as far as their nature would bear, and my
skill would reach, to ordinary and vulgar apprehensions. And that they might
have nothing to hinder or offend them in their progress, I have been
industriously careful through the Body of the whole Book to insert nothing of
the learned languages; but wheresoever any thing of that seemed fit to be added
for the sake of others, I have preserved the Text unmixt, and cast it into the
Margin. In the whole Work my study has been to speak things useful and
necessary to be known, that the weight and worth of the matter might purchase a
favorable censure for all the defects of Art, which shall be found in the
composure.

By what I have here offered upon this Subject, I doubt not but it will appear,
that although our Religion is most strictly pure, and nobly virtuous; yet is it
by no means melancholy, or apt in its own nature to engender tormenting fears
and endless scruples. For the Terms of pardon and salvation are no intricate or
uncertain, but a fixed and easy thing: They are neither over-hard for our
active powers, nor dark and inevident to our understandings: so that by the
assistance of God's Grace we may perform them, and be very well assured of it
when we do. God exacts an honest, but not an unerring obedience; he bears with
our weaknesses, though not with our wilful failings: and this is ground enough
whereupon to secure peace, and yet in no wise to supplant piety, since although
our Religion is so exactly holy as utterly to dash all wicked men's presuming
hopes; yet is it so indulgent still as to tempt no man, who is honestly
obedient, to despair.

In pursuit of this Argument what piety is indispensably required, and what
failings shall be indulged, that men may know when to hope and when to fear,
and neither foster a peace without piety, nor fancy such a rigor in piety as
leaves no room for peace, I have proceeded as particularly and perspicuously as
possibly I could; being unwilling in a matter of this importance to leave my
Reader either in doubt by an account which is too general and ambiguous, or in
darkness by such as is obscure. And to give a prospect of the whole business, I
have laid things down in this order in five Books.

In the first Book I have shown what the condition of happiness is in general;
viz. our obedience to the Laws of the Gospel, it being that whereby at the last
Day we must all be judged to live eternally. And because some are tempted to
think obedience needless when they read of pardon and hapiness promised to
other things, as Faith, Repentance, etc. I have shown particularly of those
Speeches that they are metonymical, and that life and mercy are not promised to
them as they are separate from obedience, but only as they effect and imply it.

But obedience being a general word, and men's great backwardness to it rendering
them very slow to run it out into all those Particulars which are contained in
it: to bring this Discourse yet nearer, and set it home upon their Consciences,
I proceed in the second Book to show what those Laws are in particular which we
are bound to obey, what is the nature of those several virtues and vices which
are enjoined or forbidden by them; and from what expectations, and under what
forfeitures we are bound to obey them. This indeed I found to be a toilsome
work, and the most tedious part of this whole enquiry: but I thought it
extremely needful to a through piety, and a well-grounded peace, and that made
me that I would not pass it over. For in the business of Duty and Obedience,
men will ordinarily go no further than they needs must, but stand their ground,
and dispute it out so long as they have any post in reserve to which they can
still retreat. First, They do not believe that this or that particular virtue,
which is urged upon them, is a Law of God; or, if they are forced to believe
that, they think it is not so necessary that Heaven and eternal life should
depend upon it; or if at last they are made to see that too, yet still they are
in ignorance or error about the nature of it, and so have no sense of guilt,
or remorse of mind when they transgress and act against it. And therefore to
make every particular Law have a full force upon them, both its nature and
necessity must be evidently laid before them. They must be showed what that is
which it requires, and under what penalties it requires it. And then their
Consciences are awakened, and their fears are raised, and so the Law is set in
its full force to oblige them to its performance. Thus necessary is such a
particular Discourse upon the several Laws of God and Instances of Duty to a
pious performance of them; and it is no less necessary to a peaceable assurance
in them that do. For unless a man knows the several instances of Duty, and
understands what is meant by them; he cannot discern when he keeps, or when he
breaks them, and so can have no comfort, or promise himself any reward upon his
performance of them.

In the third Book I proceed to show what sort of obedience is indispensably
required of us to all the particular Laws which are described in the Second.
And the necessary qualifications of it I reduce to two; viz. sincerity, and
integrity. In discoursing upon which I endeavor to set out all the Parts, and
state the just bounds of this obedience; and to examine those pretenses, and
confute those false grounds whereby men, who are unwilling to perform it, seek
to evade or undermine it.

And having in the three first Books proceeded thus far in asserting the
necessity, and setting out the true compass and just extent of piety; I go on
to consult more directly the interests of peace in those two that follow.

In the fourth Book I show what defects are consistent with that indispensable
pitch of piety before described, and what destroy it. And this being a Point
whereupon the peace of Consciences so nearly depends, I have been particular in
the explication of it, and large in the proof. Those sins which are
inconsistent with it, and destroy a state of Grace, are such as are voluntary
and wilful: whereof some only destroy the state of acceptance for the present;
but others either greatly wound, or utterly extinguish that habitual Virtue
which should restore us to it for the time to come. But others there are which
are allowed by it, and do not overthrow it; viz. all such defects as are
involuntary, whether they be sins of innocent unwilled ignorance, or
inconsideration. In discoursing whereupon, as I have been studious to explain
them so particularly that no honest heart might fall into fears and doubts
about them; so have I been careful withal to add such marks and limitations to
them, that no wilfully ignorant or inconsiderate Sinners may take encouragement
thence to presume.

In the fifth Book I show what is the remedy for all sin, and the
Gospel-instrument of reconciliation; that so when at any time men are possessed
with just fears by being fallen into real danger, they may again be restored to
peace in their own minds by being first restored to Gods pardon. And having
proceeded thus far in showing what measures and degrees of piety God will exact
of us, what failings he will connive at in us, and upon what terms, when once
we have offended him, he will be again reconciled to us: I have gone in the
last place to remove several causeless grounds of scruple, which make good men
fear where no fear is, and condemn themselves when God will graciously acquit
them.

These are the matters treated on in the ensuing Discourse, which was at first
drawn up to serve the spiritual necessities of a truly pious soul, and which I
have now sent abroad into the world, being made to believe it will not be
altogether unserviceable to the Public. If thereby I may promote the great end
of my Lord and Savior, in contributing to the growth of piety and the peace of
consciences; I shall think my self most happy in having been a Furtherer,
though in a low degree, of so noble and excellent a Design. But whatever the
success in that be, I am sure I shall have the reward of a religious Design,
and an honest endeavor, from him who estimates our pains, not by their events,
which are not in our own power, but by their natural tendency, and our
intentions, which are. In which confidence I send it out into the world,
depending upon his Grace to set it home upon the Conscience, and make it
effectual to guide the practice, and secure the comfort both of thee and me.
For which end I hope I shall have the hearty prayers of all good men,
especially of those, if any such there be, who shall receive benefit by this
Treatise.

THE CONTENTS.
The INTRODUCTION.
The Contents.
Religious men inquisitive after their future state. Three Articles of
Christian belief cause such inquisitiveness. The Articles of Eternal Life, and
the Resurrection, make men desire satisfaction. The Article of the last
Judgment encourages the search, and points out a way toward it. A proposal of
the present Design, and the matters treated of in the ensuing Discourse. page 1

BOOK. I. Of the indispensable Condition of happiness in the general.
CHAP. I. Of Obedience, the general Condition of happiness.
The Contents.
OBedience the indispensable Condition of happiness. The Laws of the Gospel are
given as a Rule to it. The Promises are all upon condition of it, and intended
to encourage it. All the threatenings are now denounced, and will be executed
upon the disobedient. Of those other things whereto pardon is promised, as well
as to Obedience. Of Metonymy's. Of the Principles Of humane actions. Of
Principles of Obedience. All those speeches metonymical, where Obedience is not
expressed, and yet pardon is promised. p. 8

CHAP. II. Of pardon promised to Faith, Knowledge and being in Christ.
The Contents.
Of pardon and happiness promised to Faith and Knowledge. Of the nature of Faith
in general Of natural, Jewish, and Christian Faith. Of this last as ^ustifying
and saving. Of the fitness of Christian Faith and Knowledge to produce
Obedience. Pardon promised to them no further than they are productive of it.
Of pardon promised to being in Christ. Christ sometimes signifies the Christian
Religion, sometimes the Christian Church Being in Christ, is being of Christ's
Religion, or a Member of Christ's Church. The fitness of these to effect
Obedience. Pardon promised to them no further than they do. 20

CHAP. III. Of pardon promised to Repentance.
The Contents.
Of pardon promised to Repentance, Regeneration, a New Nature, a New Creature.
The nature of Repentance, it includes amendment and obedience. The nature of
Regeneration and a New Creature. Its fitness to produce Obedience. Some men's
repentance ineffectual. The folly of it. Pardon promised to Repentance and
Regeneration no further than they effect Obedience. In the case of dying
Penitents a change of mind accepted without a change of practice. That only
where God sees a change of practice would ensue upon it. This would seldom
happen upon death bed resolutions and Repentance. The general ineffectiveness
of this shown by experien^s. Two reasons of it. 1. Because it proceeds
ordinarily upon an inconstant temporary Principle, viz. nearness of Death, and
present fears of it. Though it always begins there, yet sometimes it grows up
upon a Principle that is more lasting; viz. a conviction of the absolute
necessity of Heaven and a Holy Life. 2. Because it is ordinarily in a weak and
incompetent degree. All TRVE resolution is not able to reform men. Sick bed
resolutions generally unable. Such ineffective resolutions unavailing to men's
pardon. 34

CHAP. IV. Of pardon promised to Confession of Sins, and to Conversion.
The Contents.
Of pardon promised to confession of sins. The nature and qualifications of a
saving Confession. Its fitness to make us forsake sin. The ineffectiveness of
most men's confessions. The folly and impiety of it. Pardon promised to
confession no further than it produces Obedience. Of pardon promised to
conversion. The nature of conversion. It includes Obedience, and is but another
name for it. 55

CHAP. V. Of pardon promised to Prayer.
The Contents.
Of pardon promised to Prayer. Of the influence which our Prayers have upon our
Obedience. Of the presumption or idleness of most men's prayers. Of the
impudence, hypocrisy, and uselessness of such Petitions. Then our prayers are
heard, when they are according to Gods will: when we pray for pardon in
Repentance, and for strength and assistance in the use of our own endeavors.
Pardon promised to Prayer no further than it effects this Obedience, and
penitential endeavor. 64

CHAP. VI. Of pardon promised to our fear of God, and trust in him.
The Contents.
Of pardon promised to our fear of God, and trust in him. Of the influence
which men's fears have upon their endeavors, and how they carry on ignorant
minds into superstition, but well-informed judgments to obedience. Of the
influence of men's trust in God upon their obedience. The ineffectiveness of
most men's trust. Of the presumption and infidelity of such confidence. That
pardon is promised to fear and trust so far only as we obey with them. 76

CHAP. VII. Of pardon promised to the love of God, and of our Neighbor.
The Contents.
Of pardon promised to the love of God, and of our Neighbor. Of the fitness of
an universal love to produce an universal obedience. That pardon is promised to
it for this reason. The Conclusion. 85

BOOK II. Of the Laws of the Gospel, which are the Rule of this Obedience in
particular.
CHAP. I. Of the particular Laws comprehended under the Duty of Sobriety.
The Contents.
A Division of our Duty into three general Virtues, Piety, Sobriety,
Righteousness. Of the nature of Sobriety. The particular Laws commanding and
prohibiting under this first Member. A larger explication of the nature of
Mortification. 94

CHAP. II. Of LOVE the Epitome of Duty toward God and men, and of the
particular Laws comprehended under Piety toward God.
The Contents.
Of the Duties of Piety and Righteousness, both comprehended in one general
Duty, LOVE. It the Epitome of our Duty. The great happiness of a good nature.
The kind temper of the Christian Religion. Of the effects of LOVE. The great
Duty to God is Honor. The outward expression whereof is Worship. The great
offense is dishonor. Of the several Duties and transgressions contained under
both. 106

CHAP. III. Of the particular Duties contained under Justice and Charity.
The Contents.
Of the particular Duties contained under Justice and Charity. Both are only
expressions of Love, which is the fulfilling of the Law. Of the particular sins
against both. Of scandal. Of the combination of Justice and Charity in a state
that results from both, viz. peace. Of the several Duties comprehended under
it. Of the particular sins reducible to unpeaceableness. Of the latitude of the
word Neighbor, to whom all these dutiful expressions are due. Its narrowness
in the Jewish sense. Its universality in the Christian. 114

CHAP. IV. Of our Duties to men in particular Relations.
The Contents.
Of our Duties to other men in particular Relations. The Duties enjoined, and
the sins prohibited toward Kings and Princes, Bishops and other Ministers. The
particular Duties and sins in the relation of Husband and Wife, Parents and
Children, Brethren and Sisters, Masters and Servants. Of the two Sacraments,
and Repentance. A recital of all particular Duties enjoined, and sins
prohibited to Christians. Of the harmlesness of a defective enumeration, the
Duties of the Gospel being suggested not only outwardly in Books, but inwardly
by men's own passions and consciences. 134

CHAP. V. Of the Sanction of the foregoing Laws.
The Contents.
Of the Sanction of all the forementioned particular Laws. That they are bound
upon us by our hopes of Heaven, and our fears of Hell. Of the Sanction of all
the particular affirmative or commanding Laws. 168

CHAP. VI. Of the Sanction of all the forbidding Laws.
The Contents.
Of the Sanction of all the negative or forbidding Laws particularly. The
perfection of the Christian Law. How our Duty exceeds that of the Heathens
under the revelations of Nature. And that of the Jews under the additional
light of Moses's Law. 190

BOOK III. What degrees and manner of Obedience is required to all the Laws
forementioned.
CHAP. I. Of Sincerity.
The Contents.
THE first qualification of an acceptable obedience, that it be sincere. Two
things implied in sincerity, truth or undissembledness, and purity or
unmixedness of our service. Of the first Notion of sincerity, as opposite to
hyyocrisie, or doing what God commands out of a real intention and design to
serve him. Of a twofold intention, actual and express; or habitual and
implicit. Of intention in general, and of these two in particular. Where an
actual intention is necessary, and where an habitual is sufficient to our
Obedience. Of the second Notion of sincerity, as it notes purity of our service
in opposition to mixture and corrupt alloy. This Point stated, viz. What
intention of our good together with Gods service is consistent with an
acceptable and sincere Obedience, and what destroys it. Integrity of our
Obedience a sure mark whereby to judge whether it be sincere or no. 211

CHAP. II. Of the second qualification of al acceptable obedience, viz.
integrity.
The Contents.
Of the second qualification of an acceptable Obedience, viz. integrity. The
Notion of integrity or uprightness. A three fold integrity. Of the integrity of
our powers and faculties. Or of the Obedience with our minds, affections,
wills, and bodily powers. How God is to be obeyed with the first faculty, our
minds or understandings. God is to be obeyed with the second faculty, our
affections. This Question stated, How God and his Laws, which are spiritual
things, are proportionate Objects for our love and affections, which are bodily
faculties. Of the difference betwixt our love of God, and of the World: that
this is more warm and sensible; that more lasting and powerful. An account of
what measures of Obedience in our minds and affections, is necessary to the
acceptance of our service. That contrivances and consultations for evil things,
and such mere apprehensions as are particularly forbidden, are deadly and
damning; but that all other bare apprehensions; and that all our affections
after good or evil things will be rewarded or punished, not merely for
themselves, but only as they are Causes and Principles of good or evil choice
and practice. God to be obeyed with the third faculty, our wills. He cannot be
served without them. Men are guilty of sin if they choose it and consent to it,
though they cannot act it. All this service of our inward faculties is in order
to our outward works and operations. 240

CHAP. III. Of Obedience with the fourth faculty, viz. our executive or bodily
powers, and outward operations.
The Contents.
God is to be obeyed with the fourth faculty, viz. our executive or bodily
powers, and outward operations. The great difficulty of Obedience in this
instance. Four false grounds whereupon men shift off the necessity of this
service with their works and actions. First, A hope to be saved for a true
belief or orthodox opinions, Men's confidence in this represented The folly of
it. Orthodox Faith and Professions no further available, than they produce
obedient works and actions. Secondly, A hope of salvation upon an Obedience of
idle desires and ineffective wishes. An opinion of some Casuists, That a desire
of Grace is Grace, refuted This stated, and a distinct explication of what is
promised to the desire of Obedience, and what to Obedience it self. The
pretense for this acceptance of idle desires from Gal. 5.17. considered. An
account when the will and desire is taken for the deed and performance. That
Text 2 Cor. 8.11, 12. plainly vindicated. Thirdly, A hope of being saved
notwithstanding they do sin, because they are ensnared into it through the
strength of temptations. The folly of this. Our own lusts make temptations
strong. The Grace of the Gospel is sufficient to overcome them. Fourthly, A
hope of being excused because they transgress with an unwilling mind. These
men's state represented. Unwillingness in sin a mitigation, but no sufficient
excuse. Some struggling in most actions both of good and bad men. The strife of
the Flesh and Spirit. Two sorts of men feel nothing of it, viz. the Saints in
Heaven after the Resurrection, and some profligate Sinners here now on Earth.
All good men, and the generality of evil are subject to it in this life. Men's
peremptory will and last choice determines their condition. 259

CHAP. IV. A further pursuit of this last ground of shifting off the obedience
of our actions, in an Exposition of the 7th Chapter to the Romans.
The Contents.
A further purs^it of this last ground of false confidence. The Plea for it
from Romans 7. represented. This refuted A M^t^schematism usual with Saint Paul
in an odiou Topi^k The Apostle shown not to spe^k of h^mself in that Chapter*
because of several things there spoken which are not truly applicable to him.
This evidenced in sundry instances. Nor to have spoken in the person of any
regenerate man, which is proved by the same reason, and manifested in sundry
Particulars. But to have personated a struggling, but as yet unregenerated Jew,
who had no further assistance against his lusts, but the weak and ineffective
Law of Moses. This shown from the order and design of that Chapter. This whole
matter represented in a Paraphrase upon the seventh Chapter, with part of the
sixth and the eighth. Two Reasons of the inability of Moses's Law to make men
wholly obedient; and the perfection, as to them, of the Law of Christ, viz.
First, The promise of eternal life. Secondly, The promise of the Spirit. Both
these were wanting in the Law; and are most clearly supplied in the Gospel. The
Jews had the assistance of the Spirit, not by virtue of any Article in their
Law; but by the gracious Covenant of the Gospel, which has been confirmed with
the world ever since Adam. The Law mentioned in Scripture as a weak and mean
instrument upon the account of these defects. This weakness of the Law set off
particularly in this seventh to the Romans. No hopes to any man who acts sin
from this Chapter; but plain declarations of the necessity of a w^rking
obedience shown in several expressions of it to that purpose. A proof of the
necessity of this fourth part of integrity, the obedience of our ex^cutive
powers in our work^ and actions; and the insignificancy of all the rest when it
is wanting. 283

CHAP. V. Of the second sort of integrity, an integrity of times and seasons.
The Contents.
Of the second sort of integrity, viz. that of times and seasons. Of the
unconstancy of many men's obedience. Perseverance necessary unto bliss. The
desperate case of Apostates, both as to the difficulty of their recovery from
sin, and the greatness of their punishment. 325

CHAP. VI. Of the third fort of integrity, viz. that of the object; or of
obedience to all the particular Laws and parts of Duty.
The Contents.
Of the partiality of men's Obedience from their love of some particular sins.
Three pretenses whereby they justify the allowed practice of some sins, whilst
they are obedient in some other instances. The first pretense is the
preservation of their Religion and themselves in times of persecution. A
particular account of men's disobedience under this pretense. The vanity of it
shown from the following considerations. Religion needs not to be rescued from
persecution. The freedom of outward means of Religion is restrained by it, but
the substance of Religion it self is not. It is extended in some parts, and
ennobled in all by sufferings. Where it needs to be defended, disobedience is
no fit means to preserve it, because God cannot be honored, nor Religion
served by it. Religion and the love of God is only the color; but the true and
real cause of such disobedience is a want of Religion, and too great a love of
men's own selves. Men are liable to be deceived by this pretense from a wrong
Notion of Religion for religious opinions and professions. A true Notion of
Religion for religious practice upon a religious belief, as it implies both
faith and obedience. The danger of disobedience upon this pretense. The
practice of all religious men in this case. Of Religion in the narrow
acceptance, for religious professions and opinions. The commendable way of
men's preserving it. First, By acting within their own sphere. Secondly, By the
use only of lawful means. Thirdly, By a zeal in the first place for the
practice of religious Laws, and next to that for the free profession of
religious opinions. 330

CHAP. VII. Of the two remaining pretenses for a partial obedience.
The Contents.
The second pretense for the allowed practice of some sins whilst men obey in
others, is the serving of their necessities by sinful arts in times of
indigence. An account of men's disobedience upon this pretense. The vanity of
it, and the danger of disobeying through it. A third pretense is bodily temper
and complexion, age, and way of life. A representation of men's disobedience
upon this pretense. The vanity of it, and the danger of sinning through it. No
justifying Plea for disobedience from our age. Nor from our way of life. Nor
from our natural temper and complexion, So that this integrity of the Object is
excusable upon no pretense. It was always required to men's acceptance. 355

CHAP. VIII. Of obeying with all the heart, and all the soul, etc.
The Contents.
Of obeying God with all the heart, and with all the strength, etc. It includes
not all desire and endeavor after other things, but it implies, First,
Sincerity. Secondly, Fervency. Thirdly, Integrity, or obeying, not some but,
all the Laws of God. These three include all that is contained in it; which is
shown from their obedience, who are said in Scripture to have fulfilled it.
Integrity implies sincerity and fervency, and love with all the heart is
explained in the places where it is mentioned, by loving him entirely.
Sincerity and uprightness the Conditions of an acceptable Obedience. This a
hard Condition in the degeneracy of our manners; but that is our own fault. It
was easy and universally performed by the primitive Christians. This shown
from the Characters of the Apostles, and of the primitive Writers. Hence it was
that they could despise Death, and even provoke Martyrdom. Some Pleas from our
impotence against the strictness of this Obedience, which are considered in the
next Book. 370

BOOK IV. Showing what defects are consistent with a regenerate state, and
dispensed with in the Gospel.
CHAP. I. Showing in general that some sins are consistent with a state of
Grace.
The Contents.
SOme failings consistent with a state of Grace. This shown in the general;
First, From the necessity of humane Nature, which cannot live without them.
Secondly, From sundry examples of pious men, who had right to life whilst they
lived in them. 385

CHAP. II. Of the nature of these consistent slips more particularly.
The Contents.
Our unchosen sins are consistent with a state of Grace, but our wilful and
chosen ones destroy it. All things are made good or evil, a matter of reward or
punishment, by a Law. Laws are given for the guidance and reward only of our
voluntary and chosen actions. This proved, first from the clear reason of the
thing. Where it is inferred from the nature of Laws, which is to oblige; from
that way that all Laws have of obliging, which is not by forcing, but
persuading men; from the dueness of rewards and punishments, commendations and
reproofs; from the applause or accusations of men's own Consciences upon their
obedience or transgressions. Secondly, From the express declarations of
Scripture. 396

CHAP. III. Of the nature and danger of voluntary sins.
The Contents.
The nature of a wilful and a deliberate sin. Why it is called a despising of
Gods Law, a sinning presumptuously, and with a high hand. Wilful sins of two
sorts, viz. some chosen directly and expressly, others only indirectly and by
interpretation. Of direct and interpretative volition. Things chosen in the
latter way justly imputable. Of the voluntary causes of inconsideration in sins
of commission, which are drunkenness, an indulged passion, or a habit of sin.
Of the power of these to make men inconsiderate. The cause of inconsideration
in sins of omission, viz. Neglect of the means of acquiring Virtue. Of the
voluntariness of all these causes. Of the voluntariness of drunkenness; when it
may be looked upon as involuntary. Of the voluntariness of an indulged passion;
men's great error lies in indulging the beginnings of sin. Of the voluntariness
and crying guilt of a habit of sin. Of the voluntariness of men's neglect of the
means of Virtue. No wilful sin is consistent with a state of Grace, but all are
damning. A distinct account of the effect of wilful sins, viz. when they only
destroy our acceptance for the present, and when moreover they greatly wound
and endanger that habitual Virtue which is the foundation of it, and which
should again restore us to it for the time to come. These last are particularly
taken notice of in the accounts of God. 409

CHAP. IV. Of the nature of involuntary sins, and of their consistence with a
state of salvation.
The Contents.
Of involuntary actions. Of what account the forced actions of the Body are in
Morals. Two causes of involuntariness. First, The violence of men's passions. It
does not excuse. Secondly, The ignorance of their understandings. This is the
cause of all our consistent failings, and the sins that are involuntary upon
this account are consistent with a state of salvation. This proved, 1. From
their unavoidableness; The causes of it; in what sense any particular sin among
them is said to be avoidable. 2. From the nature of God. A representation of
God's nature from his own Word. and men's experience. The Argument drawn from it
for the consistence of such failings. 3. From the nature and declarations of
the Gospel. It is fitted to beget a cheerful and filial confidence, and
therefore is called the Spirit of Adoption. The Argument from this. The
Scripture Declarations and Examples in this matter. These Arguments summed up.
440

CHAP. V. Of these involuntary and consistent sins particularly; and of the
first cause of innocent involuntariness, viz. ignorance.
The Contents.
A twofold knowledge necessary to choice, viz. a general understanding, and
particular consideration. Consistent sins are either sins of ignorance, or of
inconsideration. Of sins involuntary through ignorance of the general Law which
makes a Duty. How there is still room for it in the World. Of crying sins,
which are against natural Conscience, no man can be innocently ignorant. Of
what others he may. This ignorance is necessary to all men for some time, and
to some for all their lives. Men's sins upon it are not damning. Of sins
involuntary through our ignorance of the present actions being included in the
known Law, and meant by it. The causes of this ignorance. First, The difference
between good and evil in some actions being not in kind, but only in degree.
Secondly, The limitedness of most Laws which admit of exceptions, Thirdly, The
indirect obligations which pass upon several indifferent actions. Fourthly, The
clashing of several Laws, whence one is transgressed in pursuit of another; the
great error upon this score i^ in the case of zeal. Fifthly, The clashing of
Laws with opinions or prejudices. 461

CHAP. VI. Of Prejudice.
The Contents.
The nature of prejudice. It a cause of ignorance of our Duty. The difference
betwixt things being proposed to a free and empty, and to a prejudiced or
prepossessed mind. An evident proposal sufficient to make a free mind
understand its Duty; but besides it, a confutation of its repugnant prejudice
is necessary to a mind that is prepossessed. An account of several Opinions
which make men ignorant of several instances of Duty. One prejudice, that
nothing is lawful in Gods Worship, but what is authorized by an express
command, or example of Scripture; the acts of sin that are justified by this
prejudice. Another that all private men are public Protectors of Religion, and
the Christian Faith; the acts of sin justified by this Opinions. Other Opinions
cause a sinful neglect of the Sacraments. These are incident to some honest and
obedient hearts. An account of other prejudices, as that Christ is a Temporal
King; the acts of disobedience authorized by this Opinion. That a good end will
justify an evil action; the acts of sin upon this persuasion. That Dominion is
founded in Grace; the disobedient acts avowed by this Principle These are more
disobedient and damning. The case stated, what prejudices are consistent with,
and what destroy salvation. Some prejudices get into men's minds, not through a
disobedient heart, but through weakness of understanding, and fallibility of
the means of knowledge. These are consistent with a state of salvation. An
instance of this in the prejudice of the Apostles about preaching of the Gospel
to all Nations. Other prejudices get into men's minds through damning lusts or
sins. A brief account of the influence of men's lusts and vices upon their
Opinions. This is illustrated in the Gnostics. They were famous for
covetousness, and worldly compliances; and for impure lusts, and excess in
bodily pleasures. The effect of these in producing agreeable Opinions. Another
of their vices was a turbulent and seditious humor. Their Opinion was
answerable. A further illustration of it from the Pharisees. An account of
their vices, and the influence which they had in begetting vile persuasions.
This influence of men's lust upon their judgments proved from the Scriptures.
The damnableness of such prejudices as enter this way. Certain marks whereby to
judge when prejudices proceed from unmortified lusts. As first, If the sin
whereto the prejudice serves, is unmortified in them. Secondly, If it lie so
near to the prejudice, that we could not but see that it ministered to it, when
we embraced it. Thirdly, Though it lie more remote, if we still adhere to it
when we plainly see that some unquestionable and notorious Laws are evacuated,
or infringed by it. A Rule to prevent disobedient prejudices; viz. Let Laws be
the Rule whereby to judge of truth in opinions, not opinions the Rule whereby
to measure the Obligation of Laws. Some Reasons of this, viz. Because Laws are
more plain and certain, but opinions are more difficult and dubious: Obedience
to Laws is the end of revealed truth, and so fit to measure it, not to be
measured by it. 480

CHAP. VII. A sixth cause of ignorance of the present actions being
comprehended under a known Law. And of the excusableness of our transgressions
upon both these sorts of ignorance.
The Contents.
All the forementioned causes of ignorance of our present actions being
included in the known Law, are such to knowing and learned men. Besides them,
the difficult and obscure nature of several sins is a general cause of it to
the rude and unlearned. Sins upon this ignorance, as well as upon ignorance of
the Law it self, unchosen, and so consistent with a state of Grace and
Salvation. Where there is something of choice in it they extenuate the sin and
abate the punishment, though they do not wholly excuse it. The excuse for these
actions is only whilst we are plainly ignorant: they are damning when we are
enlightened so far as to doubt of them, but pardonable whilst we are in
darkness or error. This excuse is for both the modes of ignorance, 1.
Forgetfulness; 2. Error. All this pardon hitherto discoursed of upon the
account of ignorance of either sort, is no further than the ignorance it self
is involuntary. The wilfulness of some men's ignorance. The several steps in
voluntary ignorance. The causes of it, Two things required to render ignorance
involuntary, 1. An honest heart, 2. An honest industry. What measures necessary
to the acceptance of this industry. Gods candor in judging of its sufficiency.
This Discourse upon this first cause of an innocent involuntariness, viz.
ignorance, summed up. 522

CHAP. VIII. Of sins consistent through the second Cause of an innocent
involuntariness, viz. inconsideration.
The Contents.
Consideration is necessary to choice. Some sins are inconsiderate. Three
innocent causes of inconsideration: 1. Suddenness and surprise of opportunity.
An account of this. The involuntariness of it. Slips upon it are consistent. 2.
Weariness of our thinking powers or understandings. An account of this; and of
its involuntariness. The consistence of our transgressions by reason of it. 3.
Discomposure or disturbance of them. An account of this. The causes of it are
Drunkenness, or a strong Passion. Drunkenness is always our own fault. Our
Passions grow strong in us sometimes by our own indulgence, and then they are
our damning sin, and we must suffer for the evil that we commit under them:
sometimes through the suddenness, and greatness of outward Objects; and then
they are pardonable, and our inconsiderate slips upon them are excusable. The
passions which have good for their Object, as Love, Desire, etc. cannot by any
force of outward objects be so suddenly forced upon us. But the passions which
have evil, as grief, anger, and fear especially, often are. The reason of this
difference. Inconsideration upon the latter excusable, but not upon the former.
This difference made by our Savior in a case where both were criminal.
Excusable slips upon discomposure of our thinking powers, are such as proceed
from an unwill'd sudden grief or anger, but especially from a sudden fear. No
fear is involuntary but what is sudden, and sins upon deliberate fear are
damning; but upon unwill'd sudden fear, grief, or anger, consistent with
salvation. Cautions about inconsiderate sins to prevent false confidence. No
sin is innocently inconsiderate: 1. Where we have time and an undisturbed
understanding. 2. Where the sin is mischievous, or greatly criminal. 3. When we
do not strive against it. We must endeavor against all involuntary failings,
though we cannot resolve against them. 4. When we are not sorry after we have
committed it, nor beg pardon for it. 5. When it is committed with observation.
A summary repetition of this fourth Book. 544

BOOK V. Of those Remedies which restore men to a state of Salvation when they
are fallen from it; and of some needless Scruples concerning it.
CHAP. I. Of Repentance which restores us to God's Favor after Sins of all
sorts.
The Contents.
THE rigor of the Mosaic Law is taken away by Christ, who came to preach
Pardon upon Repentance where that denounced an unavoidable punishment.
Repentance is the great Remedy. God heartily desires men's Repentance, and
promises Forgiveness to it. This has been preached in all times. The Remedy for
our unknown sins. They are incapable of a particular Prayer and Repentance, but
are forgiven upon a general one. The Remedy of wilful sins is a particular
Repentance. That is available for their pardon; for wilful sins after Baptism,
as well as before it. Two places, which seem to deny all pardon to wilful sins
after Baptism, cleared; the wilful sin, Heb. 10.26, is not any wilful
transgression of any particular Law of Christ, which have all been pardoned;
but a wilful apostasy from his whole Religion, which is proved from sundry
things there spoken of it. The falling away mentioned Heb. 6, is like wise
apostasy from Christianity, which is shown from those things which they are
said to fall from, and those others which are said to be implied in their
falling. An account of the desperate state of these men. The state of some
habitual Sinners desperate and irreclaimable, by reason their period of Grace
is over, but this is no discouragement to any man's Repentance. 568

CHAP. II. Of Reconciliation, and Restitution upon those Sins, whereby we have
offended or injured our Brethren.
The Contents.
Of the necessity of Reconciliation upon Sins whereby we have offended, and of
Restitution upon others whereby we have injured our Brethren. In sin three
things considerable, the offense against God, and the offense and injury
against men. Sins whereby God alone is offended, are sufficiently repented of,
and pardonable upon reformation and amendment. Those whereby we have also
offended, or injured our Brethren, are not sufficiently repented of, or
pardonable upon that alone, unless moreover we seek to be reconciled, and make
restitution. These two means of pardon, for affronts, and injuries against men,
are necessary fruits of a sincere and sufficient repentance. Of sins whereby we
have justly offended our Brethren. Their ill effects represented, which are to
be redressed by penitential acknowledgments* and seeking to be reconciled.
These penitential acknowledgments necessary only to appease these, whom by our
sin we have offended; and so unnecessary, when they know nothing of our
offense. Where they do, Reconciliation is necessary so far only as it can be
had, and where we have an opportunity of seeking it. This Discourse upon
Reconciliation summed up. Of sins of injustice, whereby we have injured men.
Reparation ordinarily necessary to a sincere, and always to a sufficient
Repentance of them. It Is necessary moreover in it self, as an instance of
strict Justice. An account of particular injuries, how to be repaired where the
injured persons can, and how where they cannot receive it. Restitution
necessary whether our Brethren know themselves to be injured by us, or no. It
is due only upon sins of injustice. Of the perfect right which we have to
things of strict Justice, and of the imperfect right which we have to things of
Charity, whence the performance of them is sometimes called righteousness. In
sins of in justice, reparation due so far only as we can, and according as we
have opportunity to make it. In judging of a just opportunity, caution given
that we be neither too strict, so as more than needs to prejudice our selves;
nor too loose, so as to over-charge our Neighbors. This Discourse of
reparation upon injuries summed up. 601

CHAP. III. Of the Remedy for involuntary sins.
The Contents.
Involuntary sins imply something of our own fault, and so it is fit we should
be sorry for them, and beg pardon. They had a remedy under Moses's Law, and
have now likewise under Christ's Gospel. We are qualified for their pardon, not
by a particular repentance and reformation: but in the general, by our
obedience in all our wilful and chosen actions; in particular, by our prayers
for Gods pardon, and our Charity and forgiveness of the sins of other men. This
Discourse of Repentance summed up. An Application to particular Offenders,
whether voluntary or involuntary. A Summary of all that has been hitherto
discoursed. 623

CHAP. IV. Of such groundless Scruples as make safe, but weak Minds doubt of
their Title to Salvation.
The Contents.
Pious minds scrupulous. Their condition is safe even then, but uncomfortable.
Several needless grounds of their fears. 1. Ineffective desires of evil. This
represented. No man otherwise good shall be condemned for ineffective lusts and
thoughts of evil, These are considerable either as to their first birth, or
indulged continuance. The first stirrings of lusts after evil things are
unavoidable. The after-entertainment is by our own indulgence. Even these are
uncondemning so long as they neither are consented to, nor fulfilled, being in
themselves not deadly under the Gospel, but a temptation to deadly and damning
sins. The way whereby sin wins upon men, and the nature and force of
temptation. To be tempted is no sin, which is proved from the nature of
temptation, from Adams being tempted before be sinned, and from Christ's being
tempted, who knew no sin. Degrees in temptation or in lusts of evil. Some are
checked quickly, and are not permitted long to parley. This happens only in
grown men and perfect Christians, and that too not in all instances. These
certainly are not damning. Others stay longer, and strive and contend with our
mind or conscience, although at last they are vanquished by it. This happens
ordinarily to younger Converts, and in extraordinary temptations to grown
Christians. These still are uncondemning, which is shown from Gal. 5.16, 17;
and from the instance of our Savior Christ. What lusts and desires of evil are
damning. They are condemning when they make us consent to a damning sin. A
distinct account of the several s^eps to a sinful action. A proof of this, that
from their gaining of our consent in all the after-steps they are mortal. Our
lusts must be mortified to that degree, as to be disabled from carrying us on
th^s far. This is done when men become true Christians. The better men are, the
less difficulty and self-denial do they find in mortification. Watchfulness and
strife still necessary. The danger of indulging to temptations, or to lusts and
desires of evil. This Point summed up. 63^

CHAP. V. Of two other causes of groundless Scruple to good Souls.
The Contents.
A second cause of scruple is their u^affectedness or distraction sometimes in
their prayers. Of the necessity of fixedness and fervency in Devotion when we
can, and of Gods readiness to dispense with them when we cannot enjoy them.
Attention disturbed often whether we will or no. A particular cause of it in
fervent prayers. Fervency and affection not depending so much upon the command
of our wills, as upon the temper of our Bodies. Fervency is unconstant in them
whose temper is fit for it. God measures us not by the fixedness of our
thoughts, or the warmth of our tempers, but by the choice of our wills and the
obedience of our lives. Other qualifications in prayer are sufficient to have
our prayers heard when these are wanting. Yea, those Virtues which make our
prayers acceptable, are more eminently shown in our Obedience, so that it would
bring down to us the blessings of prayer, should it prove in those respects
defective. A third cause of scruple is the danger of idle or impertinent words
mentioned Mat. 12.36. The scruples upon this represented. The practical error
of a morose behavior incurred upon it. This discountenanced by the light of
Nature, and by Christianity. The benefits and place of serious Discourse.
Pleasurable conversation a great Field of Virtue. The idle words Mat. 12, not
every vain and useless; but false, slanderous and reproachful words; this
proved from the place. 664

CHAP. VI. Of the sin against the Holy Ghost, which is a fourth cause of
scruple.
The Contents.
Some good men's fear upon this account. What is meant in Scripture by the Holy
Ghost. Holy Ghost or Spirit is taken for the gifts or effects of it; whether
they be first ordinary, either in our minds or understandings, or in our wills
and tempers; or secondly, extraordinary and miraculous. Extraordinary gifts of
all sorts proceed from one and the same Spirit or Holy Ghost; upon which
account any of them indifferently are sometimes called Spirit, sometimes Holy
Ghost. Holy Ghost and Spirit are frequently distinguished, and then by Holy
Ghost is meant extraordinary gifts respecting the understanding; by Spirit
extraordinary gifts respecting the executive powers. The sum of the
explication of this Holy Ghost. What sin against it is unpardonable. To sin
against the Holy Ghost is to dishonor him. This is done in every act of sin,
but these are not unpardonable. What the unpardonable sin is. Of sin against
the ordinary endowments of the Holy Ghost, whether of mind or will; the several
degrees in this, all of them are pardonable. Of sin against the Spirit.
Blaspheming of this comes very near it, and was the sin of the Pharisees, Mat.
12; but it was pardonable. Of sinning against the Holy Ghost. The Holy Ghost
the last means of reducing men to believe the Gospel, that Covenant of
Repentance. The sin against it is unpardonable, because such Sinners are
irreclamable. All dishonor of this is not unpardonable; for Simon Magus
dishonored it in actions, who was yet capable of pardon; but only a
blaspheming of it in words. No man is guilty of it whilst he continues
Christian. 681

CHAP. VII. The Conclusion.
The Contents.
Some other causless scruples. The Point of growth in Grace more largely
stated. A summary repetition of this whole Discourse. They may dye with courage
whose Conscience does not accuse them. This accusation must not be for idle
words, distractions in Prayer, etc. but for a wilful transgression of some Law
of Pieey, Sobriety, etc. above mentioned. It must further be particular and
express, not general and roving. If an honest man's heart condemn him not for
some such unrepented sins, God never will. 700

THE INTRODUCTION.
ROMANS viij.1. There is no Condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who
walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit.


The Contents.
Religious men inquisitive after their future State. Three Articles of
Christian belief cause such inquisitiveness. The Articles of Eternal Life, and
the Resurrection, make men desire satisfaction. The Article of the last
Judgment encourages the search, and points out a way toward it. A proposal of
the present design and the matters treated of in the ensuing Discourse.

AMong all those things which employ the minds of Religious and Considerate
men, there is none that is so much a matter of their thoughtful care and
solicitous enquiries, as their Eternal happiness or Misery in the next World.

For in Christ's Religion there are three great Articles, which being believed,
and seriously considered by a nature restlessly desirous of its own happiness
(and such ours is) must needs render it very inquisitive after some security of
its future good estate, and they are these; The Immortality of the Soul, the
Resurrection of the Body, and the great Day of Doom or last Judgment. Whosoever
is firmly persuaded of these three, as every man is, or at least pretends to
be, who professes himself a Christian, he assuredly believes that when this
Life is over, both his Body and Soul shall live again, and be endlessly
Delighted or Tormented, Comforted or Distressed in the next world, according as
their condition is when they leave this. For by the Doctrine of Eternal Life he
is assured that his Soul shall live, and be adjudged to an Eternal bliss or
misery. By the Article of the Resurrection he is persuaded that his Body, with
all its powers, shall spring out of the dust, and be again enlivened with its
ancient Soul, to be a sharer of its state, and jointly to undergo an endless
train of most exquisite woes or pleasures. And since it is the very frame and
fundamental principle of our Natures studiously to pursue Pleasure, and to fly
as fast from Pain, to seek good and to avoid evil: These states of future
Happiness and Misery, are such as no man, who sees and believes them, can
possibly be unaffected with, or unconcerned in. But whosoever in his own
thoughts views and beholds them, must needs find all his faculties awake, and
through an innate care, and natural instinct, solicitously inquisitive after
that lot which shall fall to their own share.

Now if this endless happiness and misery both of Soul and Body in the next
world were only casual and contingent, the gift of blind chance, or partial and
arbitrary favor; then would the belief of it perplex us indeed with fears and
misgiving thoughts, but never encourage us on to any exact care or diligent
enquiry. It would be in vain for us to seek what we could never find, and
downright folly to endeavor after satisfaction and certainty in things which
are utterly casual and Arbitrary. For what comes by chance is neither foreseen
by us, nor subject to us. And what is given arbitrarily, without all rule or
reason, is as fickle and unconstant as Arbitrary will it self is. It cannot be
prevented by any endeavors, because it does not regard them; Neither can it be
collected beforehand from any fixed rule or reason, seeing it observes none. And
what neither our greatest wisdom can foretell, nor our exactest care prevent, it
is wholly to no purpose to make a matter of our study and enquiry.

But as for the Everlasting happiness or misery of our Souls and Bodies in the
other Life, and at the Resurrection, they are not left at random, nor fall out
by accident; but are dispensed by a wise hand, and according to a fixed and
established rule. For it is God who distributes them, and this distribution is
in Judgment; and the procedure in that is by Laws, and those laws are
unalterably fixed for us, and most plainly declared and published to us in the
Gospel. So that now it is no impossible, no nor extreme difficult thing for us
to understand which shall be our own state in the next world. For the laws are
well known, proclaimed daily to every ear, by a whole order of men set apart
for that purpose; their sense and meaning is obvious to any common
understanding; and the Judgment according to them at that day will be true and
faithful. God will Absolve all those whom his Gospel acquits, but Condemn every
man whom it accuses. There will be no perverting of Justice through fear or
favor, no Sentence passed through partiality or ill will; but a Trial every
way unbyassed and incorrupt, where Every one shall receive according to the
things done in the body, 2 Cor. 5.10. And Judgment shall pass upon all men
according to their works, Romans 2.6.

And thus as the belief of the two former Articles, the immortal state either
of Bliss or Misery for our Souls, and the Resurrection of our Bodies, will
inflame us with restless desires: so if we seriously believe it, will this
third Article of the great and general Judgment possess us with sure hopes of
being satisfied in this great enquiry, which of the two States will fall to our
own share.

And as this belief of the last Judgment will be the most effectual means to
encourage, so will it be withal the surest to guide our Enquiries after it. It
chalks us out a method for our search, and directs us to the readiest course
for satisfaction. For if the happiness and misery of the next world is to be
dispensed to every man for a reward or punishment, according to the direction
of those Laws which promise or threaten them: then have we nothing more to do
in this enquiry, but to examine well what those laws are, what obedience they
require, what allowances and mitigations they will bear, and what lot and
condition they assign us. For in that day we shall be looked upon to be what
they declare us; and be doomed to that state which they pronounce for us. What
they speak to us all now, that the Judge of all the world will pronounce upon
us all then: their sentence shall be his, and what they denounce he will
execute. He will judge us by no other measure but his own Laws; those very Laws
which he has taken so much care to proclaim to us, and continually to press
upon us; which he has put into every one of our hands, and made to be sounding
daily in our ears; the laws and sanctions of the Gospel. Our blessed Savior
Christ the Judge himself has told us this long ago, The word that I have
spoken, the same shall judge men at the last day, Joh. 12.48. And his great
Apostle Paul has again confirmed it, Romans 2. God shall judge the world at that
day according to my Gospel, verse. 16. If we perform what those Laws
peremptorily require, they now already declare us blessed, and such at the last
day will Christ pronounce us. But if by sinning against them we fall short of
it, they denounce nothing but everlasting woes and miseries, and those he will
execute: For he tells us plainly, that when he shall come to judgment in the
Glory of his Father with his holy Angels, he will reward every man according to
his works, Mat. 16.27. To them who, by patient continuance in well-doing, seek
for glory and immortality, he will give eternal life, Romans 2.7. But to them who
obey not the Truth, but obey unrighteousness, indignation, and wrath,
tribulation and anguish, and that upon every man, whether he be Jew or Gentile,
verse. 8, 9. For all this shall be acted in the greatest integrity, without
preferring one before an other. It is only the difference in men's works, which
shall difference their conditions; but they who have been equal in their sins,
shall be equal also in their sufferings. For at the appearance of Jesus Christ,
God, as St Peter tells us, without any respect of persons judges according to
every man's work, 1 Pet. 1.7.17.

The way then whereby to satisfy our selves in this great matter, is this, To
look well into the Gospel, there to learn what we should be; and into our own
hearts and lives, there to see what indeed we are; and thence to conclude what
in the next world, whether in a state of Life or Death, we shall be.

And to show this to every man, and to let him see now beforehand how he stands
prepared for the next world, and whether, if he should be called away presently
to the Bar of that Judgment, he would be everlastingly acquitted or condemned
in it, is my present business and design. It is to let us see our Eternal
Condition before we enter on it, and to make it evident to every man, who is
both capable and willing to be instructed, what shall be his endless doom of
Life or Death before the Judge pronounce it.

And since the Rule of that Court whereby we must all be tried, and which must
measure out to us either Life or Death, is, as we have seen, none other than
the Gospel of our Judge and Savior Jesus Christ: that I may manage this
enquiry with the greater light and clearness, I will proceed in this method.

First, I will enquire, What is that condition of our happiness or misery,
which the Gospel indispensably exacts.

Secondly, What are its mitigations and allowances, those defects which it
pardons and bears with.

And when at any time we fall short of this condition, and thereby forfeit all
right and title to that happiness and pardon which is promised to us upon it:
Then

Thirdly, What are those remedies and means of recovery, which it points us out
for restoring our selves again unto a state of Grace and Favor, and whereupon
we shall be reconciled.

And having by this means discovered what in the great and general judgment
shall really and truly determine our last estate, what shall be connived at in
it; and, when once it is lost, what shall restore to it: I shall in the

Fourth and last place Remove those groundless doubts and scruples, which
perplex the minds of good and safe, but yet erring and misguided people
concerni^^ it.

And having in this manner cleared up all th^se things relating to our last
doom, and shew^^ ^oth what in the Judgment shall be indispensably required to
our salvation; what Defects do not overthrow, but consist with it; what
Remedies when it is wounded or lost, can heal and restore us to it; and what,
and of how great consideration those things really are, which being wrong
understood, do often create causless fears and jealousies in good peoples minds
about it: Having, I say, clearly accounted for all these, I suppose I may think
I have said enough to show men their Future State, and fairly take leave of
this Argument.

BOOK I. Of the indispensable condition of happiness in the general.
CHAP. I. Of Obedience, the general condition of happiness.
The CONTENTS.
Obedience the indispensable condition of happiness. The Laws of the Gospel are
given as a Rule to it. The Promises are all upon condition of it, and intended
to encourage it. All the threatenings are now denounced, and will be executed
upon the disobedient. Of those other things whereto Pardon is promised, as well
as to obedience. Of Metonymy's. Of the Principles of Humane Actions. Of
Principles of Obedience. All those speeches metonymical, where obedience is not
expressed, and yet pardon is promised.

THat Condition which the Gospel indispensably requires of us, and which is to
mete out to us our last doom of Bliss or Misery, is in the General our
Obedience. When we are brought to that Bar, and stand to be judged according to
those Laws which are proclaimed to us in the Gospel, it is only our having kept
them, and Repented of all such transgressions of them as we have wilfully been
guilty of, which can capacitate us to be rewarded by them. For it is just with
them, as it is with all other Laws, they never promise any thing but to
obedience, but threaten and punish all that disobey. Whosoever breaks and
despises them is guilty, they do not comfort but accuse, not acquit but condemn
him. For there is no Law that is wisely ordered, but is sufficiently guarded
against affront, and backed with such punishments as will make it every man's
interest to fulfill and keep it. The evil threatened, must always by far exceed
the pleasure that is reaped by disobedience; so that no man may have any
temptation sufficient to bear him out in Sin, or ever hope to be a gainer by
his transgression.

This is the tenor of all wise laws, whose enactors have both wit and power
sufficient to defend them. They have dreadful Punishments annexed to them,
which take place upon disobedience; they encourage and reward the obedient, but
severely punish all that dare presume to disobey.

And this is most eminently seen in all the Laws of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ. He gave them for the compleatest Rules to men's Lives, and has annexed
to them most glorious Promises to encourage our obedience, but has made them
breath out nothing but woes, and intolerable punishments to all that disobey.

He has given them for Rules of Life, and annexed Rewards as encouragements to
obedience. He never intended his Laws for an entertainment of our eyes, but for
a Rule for our Actions; not for a matter of talk and discourse, but of
practice; not to be complemented by words of honor, and lofty expressions, but
to be owned in our lives, and served by obedience. He is our King, and issues
out his Laws as the instruments of his Government: he is our Lord, and they are
Rulers for his Service. They must be guides of our Lives and Actions; it is not
enough to know and talk of them, but as ever we hope to live by them we must do
and keep them. For in the end they will be available to no man's happiness, but
his who has conscientiously performed them. In Christ Jesus, or the Christian
Religion, says St Paul, nothing avails but keeping of the Commandments of God,
1 Cor. 7.19. Blessed are they, says St John, who do the Commandments, for they
only have right to the Tree of Life, Rev. 22.14. It is not an idle wish, or
ineffectual endeavor; but a thorough practice and performance of Christ's Laws
which can continue us in his Love, and approve us Righteous in his Judgment. If
ye keep my Commandments, says he, ye shall abide in my Love, Joh. 15.10. Let no
man deceive you, for it is he only that 1 John 2.17-29.
does Righteousness, who in Gods account is Righteous, 1 John 3.7. They only
are pronounced Righteous and Sons of God in the Gospels estimation, who walk
after the spirit, Romans 8.4. who are led by the spirit, verse. 14. who bring
forth the Fruits of the Spirit, (all words expressing Action and Practice) Gal.
5.16-22. No man therefore will be acquitted and rewarded at that Bar barely for
knowing and (...). Cl^m. To. 1. Epist. ad Cor. c. 30.
discoursing, for wishing or desiring: but only for working and obeying. Such
only the Gospel reckons for true servants now; his servants ye are, not whom
you confess in words, but whom in actions you obey, Romans 6.16. And such only he
will honor and reward then. For it is not every one who fawns upon me in his
words whilst he reproaches me in his actions; who says unto me, Lord, Lord,
that shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; but he only who does the will of
my Father which is in Heaven: Which will he had just then proclaimed to them in
that Volume of Christian Laws, which was published in the Sermon upon the
Mount, whereof this is in part the conclusion, Matt. 7.21. He tells us that
when the Son of Man shall come to judgment, he will reward every man according
to his works, Matt. 16.27. and he repeats it again in his declaration to St
John, Behold I come quickly, and my reward is with me, to give every man
according as his work shall be, Rev. 22.12 And so it was in that Prophetic
sight of the Last Judgment, which this same Apostle had vouchsafed him, Rev.
20. For there, as we are told, when the Sea gave up the Dead which were in it;
and Death and Hell delivered up the Dead which were in them; and they all both
small and great stood before the Throne, and him that sat thereon: they were
judged every man according to his WORKS, verse. 11, 12, 13.

His Laws then Christ has given us, not for talk and discourse, but for action
and practice; and his Promises he has annexed to them; not as rewards of
idleness, but only of active service and obedience: Wherein if men fail, Gods
Rewards belong not to them: they can make no claim or colorable pretense to
them because they cannot show that which is to be rewarded by him.

Nay further, if men disobey, they are not only excluded from all glorious
hopes; but are moreover put into a desperate state of fears and dreadful
expectations. For God has backed his Laws with threatenings as well as promises:
and as they propose most noble rewards to all that are obedient; so likewise do
they breath out most intolerable punishments to all that disobey. For every Man
at the last day will be declared a Child of wrath, who is a son of
disobedience; and he shall most certainly be Damned who dies without amendment
and Repentance, in works which are wilfully and deliberately sinful. Christ's
Gospel has already judged this long beforehand; and at that day he will
confirm it. When the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven with his mighty
Angels: i. e. when he shall come with his Royal attendance to judge the world,
He will take vengeance, says St Paul, on all them that OBEY not his Gospel, who
shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8, 9. When he comes in state with the ten thousands of his Saints,
it will be to execute Judgment upon all that are ungodly, for all the ungodly
DEEDS which they have committed, Jude 14, 15. And when our Lord himself gives a
relation of his proceedings at that day, he tells us that whosoever they be, or
whatsoever they may pretend, if their works have been disobedient, they shall
hear no sentence from him but what consigns them to Eternal Punishment. I will
profess thus unto them, says he, I never knew you: Depart from me, ye that WORK
iniquity, Matt. 7.23.

This will be the method of Christ's Judgment; and these the measures of his
Sentence: he will pronounce Mercy and Life upon all that are obedient, but
Death and Hell to all that disobey.

And indeed it were hight of folly and madness to expect he should do
otherwise, and to fancy that when he comes to judge us, as St Paul says,
according to the Laws of his Gospel, he should absolve and reward us, when in
our works and actions we have transgressed them. For this were to thwart his
own rule, and to go cross to his own measures; it were to encourage those, whom
his laws threaten; to acquit such as they condemn: and, in one word, not to
judge according to them, as he has expressly declared he will, but against them.

If we would know then what condition we shall be adjudged to in the next
world, we must examine what our obedience has been in this. We can have no
assurance of a favorable Sentence in that Court, but only the doing of our
duty. Our last doom shall turn, not upon our knowing or not knowing, our
willing or not willing; but upon our obeying or disobeying. It is in vain to
cast about for other marks, and to seek after other evidences: nothing less
than this performance of our duty can avail us unto life; and by the merits of
Christ, and the grace of his Gospel, it shall.

And thus we see in the general what those terms and that condition are, which,
to mete out our last doom of Bliss or Misery, the Gospel indispensably exacts
of us. It is nothing less than a working service and obedience, the enquiry to
be made at that day being only this, whether we have done what was commanded
us. If we have performed what was required of us, we shall be pronounced
Righteous, and sentenced to Eternal Life: but if we have wilfully transgressed,
and wrought wickedness; without amendment and repentance, we shall then be
declared, incorrigible Sinners, and adjudged to Everlasting Death.

This indeed is a very great truth, but yet such as very few are willing to see
and to consider of. For obedience is a very laborious service, and a painful
task; and they are not many in number who will be content to undergo it. And if
a man may have no just hopes upon any thing less than it, the case of most
dying men is desperate. But as men will live and dye in sin, so will they live
and dye in hopes too. And therefore they catch at softer terms, and build upon
an easier condition. And because the Gospel promises Salvation, and a happy
sentence to faith, love, repentance, our being in Christ, our knowing Christ,
and other things besides obedience: they conclude that they shall be acquitted
at that Bar upon the account of any, or all of these, though they do not obey
with them. They make Faith, Love, Repentance and the rest, to be something
separate from obedience; something which will save them, when that is wanting.
So that if they be in Christ, if they know and believe with the mind, and love
and repent in their hearts; their hope is to be absolved at the last day, be
their lives and actions never so disobedient.

But this is a most dangerous and damning error. For it makes men secure from
danger, till they are past all possibility of recovering out of it; and causes
them to trust to a false support so long, till it lets them drop into Hell, and
sink down in damnation.

And although it be sufficiently evident from what has been already said, that
our obedience is that only thing which will be admitted as a just plea, and as
a qualification able to save us in that Court: yet because I would fully
subvert all these false grounds, whereupon men support their pernicious hopes
and sinful lives together, I will go on to prove it still further.

And this will be most plainly effected by showing that all those other terms
and conditions, whereto the Gospel sometimes promises pardon and happiness,
concenter all in this, and save us no otherwise than by being springs and
principles of our obedience. They are not opposed to our doing of our duty, and
keeping the Commandments; but imply it. For when pardon is promised to Faith,
to Love, to Repentance, or any thing else; it is never promised to them as
separate from obedience, but as containing it. Obedience is that still for
which a man is saved and pardoned; it is not excluded from them, but expressed
by them.

In order to a clearer apprehension of the truth of this, I think fit to
observe that there is an ordinary figure and form of speech very usual both
with God and men, which the Rhetoricians call a Metonymie or Transnomination,
and that is a transferring of a word, which is the particular Name of one
thing, to express an other. The use of it is this, that in things which have a
near relation and dependence upon each other, as particularly the cause and its
effect have, the particular name of either may many times signify both, so
that when the name only of one is expressed, yet really both are meant and
intended. And then by that word, which in its proper sense stands only for the
effect, we are to understand, not it alone, but together with it the cause also
that produced it: and by that which properly signifies the cause, we are to
mean, not the bare cause alone, but, besides it, the effect which flows from it
likewise.

As for the latter of these, the bare naming of the cause when we intend,
together with it, to express its natural consequent and effect too; because it
is that which chiefly concerns our present business, I will set down some
instances of it which daily occur in common speech. If we advise a man to trust
his Physician or his Lawyer, our meaning is not barely that he should give
credit to them; but together with that, that he show the effect of such credit,
in following and observing them. If we are earnest with any man to hearken to
some advice that is given him, we intend not by harkening to express barely his
giving ear to it, but besides that his suffering the effects of such attention
in practicing and obeying it. And thus we commonly say that we have got a Cold,
when we mean a Disease upon cold; or a Surfeit, when we understand a sickness
upon Surfeiting. In these, and many other instances which might be mentioned,
we daily find that in the speech and usage of men, the cause alone is often times
named, when the effect is withal intended, and accordingly understood, to be
expressed; and that both are meant, when barely one is spoken. The effect does
so hang upon its cause, and so naturally and evidently follow after it, that we
look upon it as a needless thing to express its coming after, when once we have
named its cause which goes before: but we ordinarily judge it to be
sufficiently mentioned, when we have expressed that cause which as is evident
to us all, produces and infers it.

And as it is thus in the speech of men, so is it in the language of God too.
He talks to us in our own way, and uses such forms of speech and figurative
expressions, as are in common use among our selves. And to seek no further for
instances of this, than these that lie before us, he expresses our works and
obedience by our knowledge, our repentance, our love, and such other causes and
principles as effect and produce it.

For we must take notice of this also, that our outward works and actions
depend upon a train of powers within us, which, as springs and causes of them,
order and effect them. For our passions excite to them; our understandings
consider of them and direct them; our wills command and choose them; and then
afterward, in pursuance of all these, our bodily powers execute and exert
them. The actions of a man flow from all the ingredients of the humane nature,
each principle contributes its share, and bears a part toward it. For from the
constitution of our natural frame, our actions are placed wholly in the power
of our own wills; and our wills are set in a middle station, to be moved by our
appetites and passions, and guided and directed by our minds or intellects. We
do and perform nothing but what we will; neither do we will any thing but what
we know and desire; what our reason and passion inclines and directs to. And
because these three inward faculties, our minds, and wills, and passions, give
being and beginning to our outward works and practice: therefore are they, by
the Masters of moral Philosophy and Divinity, ordinarily called the Causes and
Principles of Humane Actions.

But these three principles of humane actions in genecal lie not more open to
produce good than evil. They are all under the unrestrained power of our own
free will: it is that which determines them either for God or against him; but
in themselves they are indifferently fitted, and serve equally to bring forth
acts of Obedience, or of disobedience and sin. To make these principles
therefore of works or actions in general, to become principles of good works
and obedience, there are other nearer tempers and qualifications required,
which may determine them, that in themselves are free to both, to effect one,
and be Authors of such actions only whereby we serve and obey God. And this is
done by the nearer and more immediate efficiency of Faith, Repentance, Love,
and the like. For he who knows Gods Laws, and believes his Gospel with his
understanding; who in his heart loves God, and hates Sin; whose will is utterly
resolved for good, and against evil: he it is, whose faculties in themselves
indifferent are thus determinately disposed, who is ready and prepared to
perform his duty. His Faith directs him to those Laws which he is to obey, and
to all the powerful motives to Obedience: it shows him how it is bound upon him
by all the Joys of Heaven, and by all the Pains of Hell, and this quickens his
passions, and confirms all good resolutions, and makes him in his will and
heart to purpose and desire it. And when both his mind, his will, and passions,
which were before indifferent, are thus gained over and determinately fixed for
it; in the efficiency of inward principles there is no more to be done, but he
is in the ready way to work and perform it in outward operation. So that as our
minds, wills, and passions, are principles of humane actions in general,
whether good or evil: these nearer dispositions, our Faith, Repentance, etc.
are principles particularly of good works and obedience.

And since our obedient actions proceed in this manner from the power and
efficiency of these principles: God, according to our own way of expressing
things, is wont many times only to name them, when he intends withal to express
our obedience it self which results from them. Although he barely mention one,
yet he understands both; and in speaking of the cause, he would be taken to
imply the effect likewise. Thus when he promises Pardon and Salvation to our
knowledge and belief of his Gospel, to our Repentance from our Sins, to our
Love and Fear of God, which, with several others, are those preparatory
dispositions that fix and determine our minds, wills, and passions, indifferent
in themselves, to effect Obedient actions; he does not in any wise intend that
these shall Save us, and procure Pardon for us without Obedience, but only by
signifying and implying it. Wheresoever Mercy and Salvation at the last day are
promised, and this condition of our working and obeying is not mentioned, it is
always meant and understood. That which such mercy was promised to, is either
the cause of our Obedience, or the effect and sign of it; the speech is
metonymical, and more was meant by it than was expressed. Though the word was
not named, yet the thing was intended; for obedience is ever requisite to
pardon, and nothing has Mercy promised to it in the last Judgment, but what
some way or other is a sign of it, or produces and effects it.

This I might well take for granted upon the strength of that proof which has
been already urged for our Obedience being the sole condition of our being
acquitted at that day. But because the interest of souls is so much concerned
in it, I will be yet more particular, and proceed to show further that this
sense and explication of all such places is the very same that God himself has
expressly put upon them. For concerning all those things, whereto he has
promised a favorable sentence at the last Judgment, he assures us that they
are of no account with him, nor will be owned as a good plea at that Bar when
they are separate from Obedience, but then only when they effect and work it.
But when he says that Faith, Repentance, Love, or any other thing shall save
us, he means not all, or any, but only a working Faith, an obedient Repentance,
an active Love; a Faith, Love, and Repentance, which do not overlook Obedience,
but accompany and produce it. So that first or last Obedience is still that
wherein all the rest must concenter and agree, that alone condition which our
judge will accept, and which we may safely trust to. And this will fully appear
by running over the particulars.

CHAP. II. Of Pardon promised to Faith, Knowledge and being in Christ.
The CONTENTS.
Of Pardon and happiness promised to Faith and Knowledge. Of the nature of
Faith in general. Of natural, Jewish, and Christian Faith. Of this last as
justifying and saving. Of the fitness of Christian Faith and Knowledge to
produce Obedience. Pardon promised to them no further than they are productive
of it. Of Pardon promised to being in Christ. Christ sometimes signifies the
Christian Religion, sometimes the Christian Church. Being in Christ, is being
of Christ's Religion, or a member of Christ's Church. The fitness of these to
effect Obedience. Pardon promised to them no further than they do.

FIRST this condition of our acceptance which is to mete out to us our last
doom of Bliss and Mercy, and whereto Life and Pardon are promised at the last
day, is sometimes called knowledge, or, what is only a more particular way of
knowing, a knowing upon witness or testimony, Faith. By, or upon the account
of, his knowledge, or the knowledge of him, shall my Righteous Servant, when he
sits to judge them, justify many, says God of our Judge and Savior Christ by
the Prophet Isaiah, Isa. 53.11. And this is Life Eternal, says our Lord
himself, to know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent,
Joh. 17.3. And then as for Faith, which is the particular way of knowledge
among us Christians, who owe all that we know in order to Heaven and happiness
to the witness and testimony of Jesus Christ, the places which promise Life and
Pardon unto it are to be met with in abundance. Whosoever believes on me, says
our Savior, shall not perish, but have Everlasting Life, Joh. 3.15, 16. And
again, This is the will of him that sent me, that whosoever believes on me may
have Everlasting Life, Joh. 6.40. And when he sends out his Apostles after his
Resurrection to proclaim the terms of Mercy and Salvation to all the world, he
bids them say, Whosoever believes and is Baptized shall be saved, Mar. 16.16.

Faith or belief in the general, is a thinking something to be true upon the
testimony of those persons who declare it. And herein it differs from other
sorts of knowledge, because in them we believe upon the evidence and apparent
reason of the things themselves; but in this upon the witness and authority of
those persons who reveal them. For then we are said to know, when we assent
upon the Authority of things; but then to believe, when we assent upon the
Authority of persons; when not the evidence of the things revealed, but the
word and testimony of the revealer make us give credit to his Revelation.

This is the nature of Faith in general, it is a giving credit to a thing, or
taking it to be true upon the testimony or authority of such persons as declare
it. And according to the difference of this testimony, our Faith upon it is
differenced and distinguished also. For if we believe any thing upon the bare
word of a man, it is an Humane; if upon the bare word and testimony of God, it
is a Divine Faith.

Divine Faith then is nothing else, but a belief of Divine Revelations, a
taking any thing to be true because God has told us it is so. And therefore we
may be said to have Divine Faith of as many things as God has any way attested
or revealed to us. And for Gods Revelations, they have been derived to us in
several ways, and by several instruments.

For some things God has revealed to us by the light of Nature. That light came
from him, and is his Revelation. For the spirit of a Man is the Candle of the
Lord, which, as St John says in another case of our Savior, enlightens every
man that comes into the world, Joh. 1.9. And in this general sense of Faith,
for a natural Faith or a belief of all natural Revelations; all matters of
knowledge are likewise matters of Faith, because at last all natural light and
evidence of things rests upon Gods Revelation; that very evidence being no
otherwise a proof to us that things are true, than we are assured that God is
the Author of it, and that it is his Testimony and declaration to them that
they are so. And by this way of Revelation, this natural light, God has
declared to us two great foundations of all Religion, his own existence, and
his Providence; that there is a God, and that he will love and reward all such
as serve and worship him. The belief of which Articles so testified, St Paul
affirms to be a part of Faith; yea a part so fundamental as is absolutely
necessary to our pleasing of God and to all Religion: without Faith, says he,
it is impossible to please God, for he who comes to God must believe that HE
IS, and that he is A REWARDER of them that diligently seek him, Heb. 11.6.

Other things God has revealed, not by the light of nature, seeing they are
such things as that alone could never have discovered to us, but either by his
own immediate voice or inspiration, or by the mediation and message of inspired
men.

By the former he revealed to Noah the Drowning of the old world, Genesis 6.13.
the belief whereof is called Noah's Faith, Heb. 11.7. To Abraham his having a
numerous Issue by his Wife Sarah, when as yet they had no Child, and in all
appearance were too old ever to expect one, Genesis 15.5, 6 and Chap. 17.17, 19.
the belief whereof is likewise called Abraham's Faith, Heb. 11.17, 18, 19. To
Moses his passing over all the houses of the Israelites, where he should see
the Blood of the Paschal Lamb sprinkled for a Token, when he would slay all the
Firstborn throughout all the Land of Egypt, Exodus 12.12, 13. the belief of
which Revelation is also called the Faith of Moses, Heb. 11.28.

By the latter he revealed his will more largely to the whole people of Israel
by the mouth and Gal. 3.19.
mediation of his Servant Moses; and because both God and Man concurred in this
Testimony, their belief of his message was their Faith, not in God only, but
together with him in his Servant Moses too. For because the Law and Religion
which they received, though it came originally from God, was yet derived down
to them immediately by his Ministry, and they knew no otherwise what God had
spoken to them than by his Testimony and upon his Authority: therefore are they
said in believing and embracing that Divine Law, which was delivered to them by
Moses, to believe, not the Lord alone, but also his Servant Moses, Exodus 14.31.
Joh. 5.46. to be Baptized into Moses, 1 Cor. 10.2. to be Moses's Disciples,
Joh. 9.28. to trust or place their hope in Moses, Joh. 5.45. to obey or hearken
unto Moses, Luke 16.31.

But the most clear and full Revelation that God ever made of his will to men,
was by the message and mediation of his own Son, Jesus Christ. For God who at
sundry times, and in diverse manners spoke in times past to the Jews by Moses
and to the Fathers by the Prophets; has in these last days spoken unto us by
his Son, Heb. 1.1. And the belief of his Gospel, or taking for certain Truths
upon his Authority all those things which he has declared to us in Gods Name,
is called the Christian, as the other was the Mosaic Faith. For he being the
great Author and deriver of this last and greatest Revelation of God down to
us, and our belief of it being upon his immediate Authority, he being, as St
Paul says, the Author and finisher of our Faith, Heb. 12.2. Our belief of it
is called, not only Faith toward God, Heb. 6.1. but also Faith toward our
Lord Jesus Christ, Acts 20.21. And because the knowledge of our whole Religion
got into our minds this way, upon our submission to Christ's Authority, and our
Faith or belief of his Testimony; therefore is our Religion it self most
commonly in the Scriptures called our Faith. The Preaching of it is called
Preaching the Faith, Gal. 1.23. the hearing of it, hearing of Faith, Gal. 3.2.
the profession of it, a profession of Faith, Heb. 10.23. the contending for it,
a striving for the Faith, Phil. 1.27. the erring in it, an erring from the
Faith, 1 Timothy 6.10. the falling from it, a making shipwreck of the Faith, 1 Timothy 1.19. obedience to it, the obedience of Faith, Romans 1.5. and the
Righteousness required in it, and effected by it, the Righteousness of Faith,
Romans 4.11.13.

So that in like manner as the Mosaic Faith was a belief of the Divinity of
the Mosaic Law and Religion, upon the Authority of Moses: the Christian Faith
is a belief of the Divine institution of our Christian Religion upon the
Authority of Christ. It is a taking upon his word all those things for truths
of God, which he has declared to us in Gods Name. A belief begot in us by
virtue of his Testimony, that all his Doctrines are Gods Truths; that all his
Laws are Gods Precepts; that all his promises are Gods Promises; and that all
his threats are Gods threatenings: in sum, that that whole Religion and Gospel
which Christ has delivered to us in Gods Name, is the very Religion and Word of
God.

The belief of all this upon the Authority of Christ makes our Faith Christian;
and the good effects of it upon our hearts and lives make it justifying and
saving. For when by virtue of this Faith we truly Repent and sincerely obey,
which is the great condition, as we have seen, whereupon at the last day we
must all be pardoned and justified Eternally; it is a justifying: as when by
virtue of it we are saved and delivered from the dominion and service of our
Sins, which as the Angel has Matt 1.21.
assured us, are those principal evils that Christ came to save us from, it is
a saving Faith.

This is the nature of our Christian knowledge, and our Christian Faith. And as
for it now, it is the very fundamental cause and natural spring of all our
Christian service and obedience. For it is because we believe Jesus to be the
Lord, because we know those Laws which he has given us, and give credit to him
when he tells us of the insupportable punishments which he will one day inflict
for sin, and of the glorious rewards which he will confer upon obedience: It is
by means of our knowledge and belief of all these in our minds, I say, that we
serve and obey him in our outward actions. It is our knowledge and belief that
lets us see the reasonableness of his Precepts, the power of his Assistances,
the glory of his Rewards, and the terror of his Punishments; and in all
respects convinces us of the beauty and profit of Obedience. And this sight and
conviction in our minds cannot well miss of gaining our hearts and resolutions.
For the belief of his endless judgments will raise our fears; the belief of his
infinite rewards will quicken our hopes; the belief of his inexpressible
kindness will kindle our love; and by all these our souls will be led Captive
into eager desires, and firm resolutions, and be fully purposed to keep Gods
Laws, that so they may avoid that terrible Death which he threatens, and attain
those matchless joys which he promises to our Obedience. And when once, by
means of this faith and knowledge, Gods Laws have gained both our wills and
passions, which are the inward springs and causes of them, they cannot fail of
being obeyed in our works and actions which are produced by them. But we shall
quickly go on to perform what we resolve, and to do what we desire; and so in
very deed fulfill and obey them. Upon which account of our Christian Faith
having so mighty an influence upon our Christian and obedient practice, our
obedience it self, as being the effect of it and produced by it, is called the
obedience of Faith, Romans 16.26. The Righteousness which it exacts of us, and
Jam. 2.22. (...).
cooperates to work in us, the Righteousness of Faith, Gal 5.5. Our Christian
warfar or striving against Sin, is called the good sight of Faith, 1 Timothy, 6.12.
And because in this contest our great succors which protect us, and keep us
from fainting, and at last make us victorious, are some points or promises of
our Religious belief: therefore it is styled a shield, and a breast plate of
Faith, 1 Thessalonians. 5.8. and St John affirms plainly that this is the victory over
the world, even our Faith, 1 John 5.4.

And for this reason it is, because our Faith and knowledge are so powerful a
cause and principle of our Obedience, that God speaks so great things of them,
and has made such valuable promises to them. He never intends to reward the
Faith and knowledge of our minds, further than they (...); Clem. Romans Ep. 1. ad
Cor. c. 31.
effect the obedience of our actions. It is only when they are carried on to
this effect, when they become an obedient knowledge, and a Quid est ^ide liter
Christo credere ^ est fideliter Dei mandata servare. Salvian de Gub. l. 3. p.
67. Ed. Oxon. (...). Clem. Romans 1. Ep. ad Cor. c. 10.
working Faith, that they confer a right to the promised reward, and are
available to our Salvation. For when in the places mentioned, or in any other,
God promises that he who knows Christ, or believes in Christ shall live; he
speaks metonymically, and means Faith and knowledge with this effect of a
working service and obedience.

As for knowledge, it is plain that God accepts it no otherwise than as it
effects obedience, nor can we any otherwise confide in it. Hereby alone, says
St John, we know that we know him, in that sense of knowledge whereto God has
promised life and pardon, if we keep his Commandments. But he that says I know
him, and for all that keeps not his Commandments, he is a liar, and the truth
is not in him, 1 John 2.3, 4.

And then as for Faith, no man is interpreted to have that Faith which is made
the condition of our pardon and acceptance, but he who is acted by it, and in
his works is obedient to it. The Faith, says St Paul, which in Christ Jesus or
the Christian Religion avails any thing to that Righteousness which all
Christians hope for, is that only which works by Love, Gal. 5.5, 6. It begins
the change within, by purifying of our hearts and desires, Acts 15.9. and
thence goes on to perfect it in our outward works and actions. And unless it
proceed to this, it will never be able to bear us out, and to justify us at
Gods Bar: for there, as St James tells us, by our Matt. 25.34, 35, 3^, etc.
works we must all be justified, and not by a Faith only which works nothing,
Jam. 2.24. Such alas! will be wholly useless, and of no consideration in that
Court; it will not any way profit, and then certainly it cannot save us. For
what does it profit, my Brethren, though a man be able to say, either here or
hereafter, he has Faith, and has not works? will that be allowed a sufficient
plea in Gods Judgment? shall that Faith save him? no surely, it never will,
Jam. 2.14. This unworking Faith is not that effectual Faith which the Gospel
encourages, but its worthless shell and liveless carcass. For will thou know, O
vain man, that faith without works is dead? Even as the body without the spirit
is dead, so faith without works is dead also, verse. 20, 26. It is Faith only in
an imperfect degree, and a weak unprofitable measure; for it is not arrived to
a perfect pitch, to that complete state whereto the Gospel does at present
promise Life, and Christ will at the last Day award it, till it shows it self
in action, and our lives express the power of it. Our Father Abraham, says St
James, was justified by works, produced by Faith, when, in an unstagger'd
belief that God would make good his promise of a numerous issue by his Son
Isaac, though it were by raising him up again from the Heb. 1.17, 19.
dead, he would obey his command which seemed quite to overthrow it, and
offered up his Son upon the Altar. See thou how his Faith in Gods Power and
Promise wrought prevalently over all opposition (...), wrought to his works or
to make him work.
, to the production of that his strange work; and by this justifying work upon
it was his Faith made perfect? verse. 21, 22.

So that when all is done, we see that there is no Life or Pardon promised to
any Faith or knowledge which are separate from Obedience, but to such only as
cooperate to them, and imply them. There is no belief wherewith our Judge at
the last day will be satisfied, or wherein we are safe; which either he will
accept, or we may trust to, if our dutiful works are wanting. So that this is,
and ever will be, as St Paul says, a faithful saying, and such as every good
Christian man ought constantly to receive or affirm, that they who have Faith,
or have believed in God, be careful to maintain obedience and good works,
because it is they which at the last day must do all men good, are good and
profitable unto men, Tit. 3.8.

Secondly, This condition of our acceptance, whereto the Gospel promises a
happy sentence of Life and Pardon in the last judgment, is sometimes called
Being in Christ. There is no condemnation, says St Paul, to them who are in
Christ Jesus, Romans 8.1.

The word Christ we must know, many times in Scripture signifies the Religion
of Christ. Thus the Law is said to be a Schoolmaster to bring us to Christ, i.
e. the imperfect rule of the Mosaic Religion was fitted for the minority of
the world, and intended to train men up, as Children are by School Discipline,
for the more perfect and manly institution of the Christian, Gal. 3.24. And
thus we read of Preaching Christ, that is the Christian Religion, Phil. 1.15.
And St Paul tells the Ephesians of their learning Christ and hearing him, i. e.
his Gospel and Doctrine. Ye have not so learned Christ, if so be ye have heard
him, and been taught by him, or (...).
in him, Ephesians. 4.20, 21. Heard him, and been taught by him: i. e. not by his
person, for he never went beyond Judea, being sent, as he said, to none but the
lost sheep of the house of Israel, Mat. 15.24. and therefore never traveled so
far as Ephesus; but by, and in his Doctrine or Religion. And this is a most
usual form of speech, to call any institution or profession by the name of its
first Author. The Doctrine and Religion which was delivered to the Jews by
Moses, is called by his Name. For St Paul speaks of Moses being read, i. e. the
Law of Moses, 2 Cor. 3.15. and of the Israelites being baptized into Moses, i.
e. the Mosaic Religion, 1 Cor. 10.2. And our Lord himself tells the Jews in
the Parable of the Rich Man, that they have Moses and the Prophets, and bids
them hear them, Luke 6.29. where he cannot mean their persons, in regard they
were dead long before, and got without the reach of their hearing; but their
Writings and Religion.

And as Christ many times signifies the Christian Religion, so is being in
Christ the very same with being of his Religion, or being a Christian. Thus St
Paul tells us of Andronicus and Junia, who embraced the Christian Doctrine
whilst he persecuted and opposed it, that they were in Christ, i. e. in Christ's
Religion, before him, Romans 16.7. They who dyed in the profession of the
Christian Faith, are said to be fallen asleep in Christ, 1 Cor. 15.18. The veil
of Moses is done away in Christ, 2 Cor. 3.14. The veil of Moses, i. e. the
types and obscure shadows of the Mosaical Religion, are done away in Christ, i.
e. by the plain clearness of the Christian. Thus I knew a man in Christ, is no
more than I knew a Christian man, 2 Cor. 12.2. and the Churches of Judea in
Christ, are the very same as the Christian Churches among the Jews, Gal. 1.22.
So when we read that in Christ Jesus neither Circumcision avails any thing,
nor Uncircumcision; but a new Creature, Gal. 6.15. the meaning is only this,
that what price soever the Religion of Moses put upon this outward Rite of
Circumsion, and those other Jewish observances whereof it was the federal
undertaking: yet the Religion of Christ does not regard them at all, but that
all which can avail us in it is only a new Creature. And to the same sense St
Peter speaks of a good conversation in Christ, i. e. in Christ's Religion, 1
Pet. 3.16. And to name no more instances in a case so evident, we read not only
of men, but likewise of bonds in Christ; i. e. of men's being bound for the
Religion and Faith of Christ. My bonds in Christ, says St Paul, are manifest in
all the Palace, and in all other places, Phil. 1.13.

But besides this sense of the words, our being in Christ, for our being of the
Christian Religion; there is another very near it, which it is pertinent to our
present business to observe; and that is our being in the Christian Church.
Thus St Paul says that we being many members, are yet one body, or Corporation
in Christ, or in the Society and Church of Christians, wherein we are every one
members one of another, Romans 12.5. And Gods gathering together all particular
Christians scattered over the world into one Catholic Church or Society, is
called his gathering together in one all things in Christ, Ephesians. 1.10. Thus our
admission into Christ's Church by baptism, is called our being engraffed or
implanted into him. We have been planted together, says the Apostle, in the
likeness of his death; or in Baptismal immersion, which is a representation of
burial after death, Romans 6.5.

As for our Being in Christ then, which sets us beyond the reach of danger and
condemnation, it is the same as our being of the Christian Religion, and
members of the Christian Church.

And this Communion and membership of Christ's Church, and profession of his
Religion, is a most ready and effectual means to make men practice and obey it.
For to be in the Church of Christ, is to live under the preaching of his word,
the solemn return of Holy Prayers, the Administration of Blessed Sacraments,
the counsel and direction of wise Guides, the Authority of good examples, the
correction and discipline of Church Governors, and all the other outward means
of Grace and Obedience. And then the profession and owning of his Religion, if
it be true and undissembled, implies our Faith and belief of it; which is the
great and only expedient that Christ could think of for the reformation of a
wicked world; and which, as we have already seen, is a most effectual means and
sure principle of good life and practice.

And because our being in Christ, i. e. our profession of Christ's Religion, and
Communion and Society with Christ's Church, is so powerful a principle of our
obedient service; therefore has God promised to it that Life and Pardon which
is the inseparable reward of Obedience it self. He does not in any wise intend
that every man who bears the Name of Christ, and is of his retinue, that will
make a bare profession of his service in calling of him Lord, Lord, without any
real works and performance, shall have right to these Rewards when he comes to
Judgment. Not every one that says unto me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven; but he only who does the will of my Father which is in
Heaven, Matt. 7.21. Nay in the next verse he goes higher, Many will say unto me
in that day, Have we not done more than barely professed thy Name, have we not
done thee high and honorable service, viz. prophesied in thy Name, and in thy
Name cast out Devils, and in thy Name done many wondrous works? And then will I
profess unto them, I never knew you, depart from me, you are no such Ne^
Christianus esse videtur, qui Christiani nominis opus non agit. Salvian. de
Gub. l* 4. p. Ed. Ox. 90.
Christians as I own, for whatsoever your names and professions be, ye are of
their number that in their lives work iniquity, verse. 22, 23. When God assures
us by St Paul therefore that there is no Condemnation to them that are in
Christ, or in Christ's Church and Religion; he means to them that are so in
them, as thereby to become obedient. He speaks metonymically, and implies our
works and actions, as well as that Communion and profession which signifies
them, and ought to produce them.

And in this the Scriptures are express, He that KEEPS his Commandments dwells
in Christ, and Christ in him, says St John, 1 Ep. 3.24. It is nothing less than
our fulfilling of his Laws who is head of that body whereunto we join our
selves as members; and our being indeed what we pretend, and obeying the rules
of that Religion which we profess, that will at the last day be interpreted for
our being in him in such sort as qualifies us to be saved by him. Whosoever KEEPS
his word, says the same Apostle, in him is the love of God made perfect, and
hereby, by this perfection of love in Obedience, we know that we are in him: So
that whosoever he be that says he abides in him, he ought himself also so to
walk even as he walked, 1 John 2.5, 6. The necessity of connection between these
two, viz. being a member of Christ's Church, and a good Man; between professing
of Christ's Religion, and obeying it; was so evident, and so well known and
allowed of in the first times of Christianity, that both were understood, when
either was mentioned. To put on Christ in the Apostles days, was the same as to
make no provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof, Romans 13.14. And
to learn Christ, was but another phrase for to put off concerning their former
CONVERSATION the old man, which is corrupt according to the deceitful Lusts;
and to put on the new man, which after the similitude of God is created in
righteousness and true holiness, Ephesians. 4.20, 22, 24. A Christian and a keeper of
Gods Laws, were then only two words for the same thing. For they thought
nothing could be a greater contradiction, than for a man to profess himself a
servant of Christ, and yet to pay him no Obedience; to own the Name of a
Christian, and yet to lead the life of a Heathen. The time past of our lives,
says St Peter, or that time before we became Christians, must suffice us
wherein to have wrought the will of the Gentiles, 1 Pet. 4.3. But when once we
have listed our selves in Christ's service, and are called upon by his Name, we
must renounce all our former ways, and depart from all iniquity, 2 Timothy 2.19.

So that in the language of those first times, and in the meaning of the
Scriptures, men's being in Christ is by no means separate from obedience, but
implies it. To talk of an interest in him, without fulfilling of his Laws, is
but vain Cant and unprofitable speech. It is to talk without Book, and to use a
Scripture phrase, but against the Scriptures meaning. For at the last day, when
Christ comes to expound his own Gospel, we shall hear him pronounce, what it
has already in plain words declared to us, that no man is savingly in Christ
who is out with his Laws; but that he only is so in him, as to be secure from
all Condemnation, who has kept his Commandments and faithfully obeyed him.

CHAP. III. Of Pardon promised to Repentance.
The CONTENTS.
Of Pardon promised to Repentance, Regeneration, a New Nature, a New Creature.
The Nature of Repentance, it includes amendment and Obedience. The Nature of
Regeneration and a New Creature. Its fitness to produce Obedience. Some men's
Repentance ineffectual. The folly of it. Pardon promised to Repentance and
Regeneration no further than they effect Obedience. In the case of dying
Penitents a change of mind accepted without a change of practice. That only
where God sees a change of Practice would ensue upon it. This would seldom
happen upon deathbed resolutions and Repentance. The general ineffectiveness
of this shown by experience. Two reasons of it. 1. Because it proceeds
ordinarily upon an inconstant temporary principle, viz. nearness of Death and
present fears of it. Though it always begins there, yet sometimes it grows up
upon a principle that is more lasting, viz. a conviction of the absolute
necessity of Heaven and a Holy Life. 2. Because it is ordinarily in a weak and
incompetent degree. All TRVE resolution is not able to reform Men. Sickbed
resolutions generally unable. Such ineffective resolutions unavailing to men's
Pardon.

THirdly, That condition which the Gospel exacts of us as the terms whereupon
we must hope to find Life and Pardon at the last day, is oft-times called
Repentance, Regeneration, a New Creature, or a New Nature. Christ's forerunner,
John the Baptist, came preaching Repentance for the remission of sins, Luke
3.3. And when Christ himself commissions his Apostles to publish his Gospel
over all the world, their instructions are to preach Repentance and remission
of Sins in his Name to all Nations, beginning at Jerusalem, Luke 24.47. And
according to this order they practiced. Repent, says St Peter in his first
Sermon, and be baptized for the remission of sins, Acts 2.38. And again, Repent
that your sins may be blotted out, Acts 3.19. And then as for Regeneration, a
New Creature, and a New Nature; they are such qualifications as fit us for
Eternal Life, and without which we shall never be admitted to it. It is, says
our Savior to Nicodemus, a man's being born again that must capacitate him to
enter into the Kingdom of God, Joh. 3.3. In Christ Jesus, or the Christian
Religion says St Paul, neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor
Uncircumcision, but a NEW CREATVRE, Gal. 6.15. The condition required of all
men to Life and Pardon, as the truth is in Jesus, is this, that they put off
the OLD MAN, and be RENEWED in the spirit of their mind; and that they put on
the NEW MAN, which after the similitude of God is Created in righteousness and
true holiness, Ephesians. 4.21, 22, 23, 24.

Repentance in the constant and plain notion of the Scriptures, is such a
virtuous alteration of the mind and purpose, as begets a like virtuous change
in the life and practice. It begins in our thoughts and resolutions, and is
made perfect in our works and actions. It first casts all false principles and
foolish judgments of the desireableness of sin, and the dreadfulness of virtue;
all opinions that hinder a good life, and encourage wickedness; all inveagling
thoughts and bewitching imaginations; all firm purposes and studied
contrivances of evil out of our minds: and thereby purges all wickedness and
disobedience out of our lives and actions.

It implies a change of mind, as is well noted by the Greek (...).
name for Repentance, which is very expressive of its nature. For it signifies
an alteration of the mind, a transformation of our thoughts and counsels; and
is the same that St Paul calls a being renewed in the spirit of our mind, Ephesians.
4.23. And this God expressly calls for when he summons the wicked to
repentance, Isa. 55. Let the wicked man forsake his thoughts, and turn them
from his sin unto the Lord, and then he will have mercy upon him, verse. 7.

It includes also an alteration of the life and practice, a forbearing to
repeat the sin which we repent of. And this is a natural effect of the former,
in as much as our works and actions will still go along with our studies and
contrivances, our purposes and resolutions. Now this part of repentance from
sin, viz. a leaving or forsaking of it, is its prime ingredient, and the chief
thing which the Scriptures express by it; it is the main end, whereto the
former serves only as the principle and instrument. Godly sorrow, or the grief
and trouble of our minds for having offended God, working, as St Paul says,
that Repentance which will never fail us, nor ever need to be repented of, 2
Cor. 7.10. And that Repentance includes this alteration of our lives, as well
as that other of our minds, the Scriptures plainly express to us, when they
style it a Repentance FROM dead works, Heb. 6.1. a TVRNING away from all
transgressions, and doing that which is lawful and right, Ezekiel. 18.27, 30. A
CONVERSION FROM darkness unto light, Acts 26.18. a putting AWAY the evil of our
DOINGS, by ceasing to DO evil, and learning to DO well, Isa. 1.16, 17.

These two changes, a change of mind and a change of practice, make up the
essence, and integrate the nature of a saving Repentance. It implies first a
change in our minds and tempers, and upon that a correspondent change in our
lives and actions.

Now as for the former of these, this change of our minds and tempers in new
thoughts, new counsels, new desires and resolutions: this virtuous alteration
both in our wills and understandings, which are those two powers that make up
our rational nature, is that which the Scriptures call our new nature; the
begetting of which in us is called our Noah's preaching Righteousness and
Repentance before the flood, 2 Pet. 2.5. and 1 Pet. 3.20. is thus expessed by
St. Clement, (...). 1. Epist. ad Cor. c. 9.
regeneration, or our being born again. For the tempers and inclinations of our
souls, are usually in our common discourse called our nature. A man of a loving
condescensive disposition, is called a man of a good nature; and one of a sour
revengeful temper, is called a man of an ill nature. And the change from one to
the other is called a change of Nature, a making of him a new Creature, and a
new man. And thus we are daily wont to say of any person, who from wicked and
sinful inclinations is changed to a disposition which is virtuous and holy,
that he is become a new man. And as this is our language, so is it the
Scriptures too. For our putting on the tempers and habitual inclinations of
righteousness and true holiness, is called our putting on the new man, Ephesians.
4.24. The alteration from an unbelieving and uncharitable, to a believing
loving temper, to a Faith that works by love, St Paul calls a New Creature,
Gal. 5.6. compared with Chap. 6. verse. 15. And as for the renovation it self,
it is called a regeneration or new birth; the Author of it, a Father; and the
persons so renewed, his Sons or Children. All which are expressed to us by St
John, when he tells us of all those which have received such virtuous and holy
dispositions from God, as make them resemble him and like unto him, that they
are the Sons of God, 1 John 3.2. and born of him, 1 John 5.1, 4. In like manner
as the Disciples of the Prophets among the Jews, because they received those
qualifications from their institution whereby they were made like unto them,
are usually in the Old Testament called Prophetarum Filii. And in the like
sense among the Gentiles, Poetarum Filii.
Sons of the Prophets.

Now this first part of Repentance, or this inward change of mind and purpose,
which is called a New Creature and a New nature; is a most direct cause and
natural Author of a like change in our outward works, and of an obedient
service. For it cuts off the very root of all Transgression, and plants that of
Obedience instead of it. It makes us now in obeying, to follow our own temper
and inclination; and our doing of Gods will to become our desire, as well as it
is our duty. So that now when we perform Gods commands, we do nothing more than
follow the natural tendencies of our own souls; our duty is become our choice
and delight, and it is not without pains and difficulty that we can either
omit, or transgress it. For it is an equal force and violence to a renewed and
obedient nature to act sin, as it is for a wicked and debauched one to work
obedience. He whose nature carries him on to love and pity, can as hardly be
rigorous and cruel; as he on the contrary can abstain from cruelty, whose
nature is harsh and revengeful. To act against nature any way is not without
difficulty, and to follow it is always easy. And if it be changed from sin and
disobedience, to obedience and holiness; it is then as truly a self-denial to
sin and transgress, as it was before to perform and obey. Nay if this
alteration gets up to a full growth, and obedience become perfectly our nature:
it is then not only uneasy, but even almost impossible to sin against it. For
then we shall be arrived to that pitch which St John's words express, when he
says that he who is born of God, or formed into this new nature which makes him
like unto, and comes from God, CANNOT sin, 1 John 3.9.

So that if Obedience has got this hank of us, if by this first part of
Repentance, or this new nature, it be engraffed in our tempers and
inclinations; and become the employment of our thoughts, the desire of our
hearts, and the matter of our firm purposes and resolutions: it cannot miss of
our works and actions. It has won the principles that command them; so that
nothing more is needful to be done toward their procurement, but they will be
sure to follow after them.

Now because Repentance in its whole nature implies Obedience as its chief
ingredient; and because the first part of it, viz. a change of mind, which is
called a new nature, or a new creature, is so natural a principle, and so
powerful a cause to work and effect it: therefore, and upon no other reason,
does God in the Scriptures so far encourage them. He means not in any wise at
the last day to acquit and reward men upon such repentance and new birth as is
void of obedient works and actions; but upon such only as include or effect
them.

It Is true, indeed, the wicked and disobedient, who will not reform and obey,
but would notwithstanding have right to Life and Pardon, call something else
repentance, which is void of all amendment and obedience. If they confess their
sin, and are sad upon it, if they wring their hands, and beat their breasts,
and then, giving it hard names and reproachful titles, beg God to forgive them;
they think they have done an acceptable service, and sufficiently repented of
it. They take no care to keep off from it, provided they continue to bewail and
confess it. For although they bring in before God large Catalogues of sins, yet
they never strive to lessen them. But when they profess to him how they have
deserved his wrath and Eternal judgment; they want nothing but opportunity
still further to provoke it. When they acknowledge how vilely they have
affronted him in the breach of his Laws, they are still ready to repeat it. All
the hard names which they give their sins, are false and forced expressions,
they mean no hurt to them all the while. For although they revile them in their
words, yet they honor and applaud them in their practice. They are still in
love with them at their next meeting, and for all the ill language which they
gave them when they spoke of them before God, they will embrace them upon the
first occasion, and repeat them upon every return of temptation.

But can any considerate man think that such a Repentance as this shall avail
him before God, and save him from perishing when Christ comes to judgment?
Surely he must know nothing, either of Gods nature, or of his word, who can be
imposed upon so grossly. For God by the necessity of his very nature perfectly
hates all sin, and so can never be reconciled to any man barely for telling him
that he is a sinner. To inform him only that we have rebelled against him, is
to acquaint him that we are his enemies, whom, to vindicate himself, and the
Authority of his Government, he should destroy and ruin, not cherish and
protect. The Gospel declares that he will take severe and endless vengeance on
all that dye unreformed, and finally disobedient: and then to own our
disobedience to his face, without a true turn and a firm purpose of
reformation, is to bid him maintain his Law, and execute his Sentence; to
provoke justice, and not to appease it; to hasten and assure our misery, but by
no means to prevent or retard it.

But that Repentance whereupon God will Pardon us, and that Regeneration which
he will eternally Reward, is such only as either includes, or ends in Obedience
and reformation. When he graciously proclaims, that whosoever repents him of
his former sins, and is born again, shall be saved; he means whosoever does the
one, and is the other, and obeys with them. His speech is metonymical, he
intends obedience, and the thing implies it, although his words do not express
it. For all the while it is only a repentance which is obedient, and a new
Nature that is operative which in the last judgment he will eternally reward,
and pronounce for ever Blessed.

For of repentance he tells us plainly, how that which he means when he
promises Life and Pardon to it, is such only as implies a forsaking in our
works and actions those Sins which we repent of. It is a Repentance FROM dead
works, Heb. 6.1. A forbearing to act what we confess is evil. They repented
not, says he, of the works of their hands, in making and worshipping Idols,
that they should not ANY LONGER worship them, Rev. 9.20. And because it
includes a turn and a change of our works and actions, from Sin and
Transgression, to Virtue and Obedience; therefore is it expressed by forsaking
and Jer. 8.6. So St. Clement uses the words (...) and (...) promiscuously.
(...). And what in the Septuagint, whom he follows in Citations, is expressed
by (...), Ezekiel. 33.11. (...), etc. he, giving the sense, though not the words,
according to the Apostolical usage, expresses thus, -- (...), Clem. Romans 1. Ep.
ad Cor. c. 7.8. And agreeably to this, the compilers of our Liturgy in the
Sentences before Morning Service in our Old Common Prayer Books, translate
Matt. 3.2. Repent ye, for the Kingdom of God is at hand; thus -- Amend your
lives, for the Kingdom, etc. As on the other side, they expound Ezekiel. 18.21. If
the wicked turn from all his sins that he has committed, and keep all my
statutes, and do that which is lawful and right, etc. thus -- At what time
soever a sinner repents, etc.
returning. Repent and TVRN to God, and do works meet for Repentance, Acts
26.20. Repent and turn from all your transgressions, and so iniquity shall not
be your ruin, Ezekiel. 18.30. For it is only when the wicked man TVRNETH away
from his wickedness that he has committed, and in his works DOES that which is
lawful and right, that he shall save his soul alive, verse. 27.

Let no man therefore think that he ever savingly repents of any damning sin,
so long as he perseveres to practice and repeat it. ^his Repentance must
deliver him from sin, before it rescue him from suffering; for it is then only
when the wicked man forsakes his way, and returns unto the Lord, that God will
have mercy upon him and abundantly pardon, Isa. 55.7.

And as for that part of Repentance, viz. Regeneration, a New Nature, or a New
Creature; God tells us plainly that he accepts of them no further than they are
principles of a new service, and we obey with them. The new Creature in Christ's
Religion, is a being Created, as St. Paul speaks, unto good WORKS, which God
has before ordained for us that we should walk in them, Ephesians. 2.10. It is our
actions which must evidence our nature; the tree, says our Savior, is known by
its fruits; so that we must either make the fruit good as well as the tree is
good, or, if the fruit be evil, the tree will be known to be so too, Matt.
12.33. For do men gather Grapes of Thorns, or Figs of Thistles? Even so a good
tree CANNOT bring forth evil fruit, neither CAN a corrupt tree bring forth good
fruit: by their fruits therefore you shall know them, Matt. 7.16, 17, 18.
Nothing less than a good life will be allowed, either by God or Men, for a
sufficient proof of a good heart; nor any thing below a new Conversation and
Obedience, will pass for a good evidence of a new Nature. Does a Fountain send
forth at the same place sweet water and bitter, says St James; can the
Fig Tree bear Olive-berries or a Vine Figs? Who is a wise man, and endued with
knowledge among you? Let HIM show out of a good CONVERSATION his works with
meekness of wisdom, Jam. 3.11, 12, 13. Let no man therefore dare to think
himself regenerate and born of God, so long as he is disobedient, and his works
are sinful. For whosoever is born of God does not COMMIT sin, because his seed,
his new nature, remains in him; and through the determining power and
strength of that, he is almost come to this that he cannot sin; it is become
the bent of his nature to do otherwise, he is born of God, Joh. 3.9. If any man
therefore would pass a true judgment upon his nature, whether it be the new or
old Man; from God, or from the Devil; let him consult his works and actions,
those undissembling effects of it, and from thence he may have a sure evidence
which will not deceive him. For in this, as St John goes on in the next words,
is manifested who are Children of God, and who are Children of the Devil;
whosoever DOES not Righteousness is not of God, verse. 10.

So that when Christ comes to judge us according to his Gospel, we see plainly
that no repentance will bear us out, nor any pretended regeneration or new
Nature avail us unto life, but that only which either implies, or ends in our
Obedience. For no man can with any show of reason hope to be acquitted and
rewarded at that Bar, but he that repents unto amendment, that is Created unto
good works, and is born again, to a new practice and obedience.

One case indeed there is, wherein a new birth will surely save a man without a
new practice; and that is when a man is forthwith called away upon the change,
before any opportunities of action come. Some men are listed into Gods service
late, at the eleventh hour of the day, Matt. 20.6. They have just time to
become obedient in will and purpose, but not in life and practice; they have no
leisure left them to work in, but the night comes suddenly upon them, when all
the time of labor is at an end. And this is the case of all dying Penitents.

And here indeed the will shall be accepted for the deed. For in heart and mind
such Penitents are become Gods honest servants; their desires are in great
strength, and their inward purposes are come up to effectual degrees, that want
nothing but time wherein to show themselves, and are sufficient, whenever an
opportunity should occur, to beget a change of life, and to make their actions
answer them. So that if they are destitute of an entire obedience, and have not
as yet evidenced their change of nature in their change of practice; that is
not for want of inward readiness but of outward opportunities; and therefore it
is not so' much their fault as their unhappiness. And when God sees it is thus,
he takes the inward will and choice, for the outward service and performance.
He judges us by our wills, which are in our own power; and not by chance and
fortune, which are utterly without it. This he does in evil actions, as shall
be shown afterward; the will in them is taken for the deed, and if once our
hearts are effectually resolved and fully set upon them, in his account we are
guilty of them, though by some intervening accidents we are hindered from
committing them. And since, Quid planius quam quod voluntas pro facto
reput^tur, ubi factum excl^dic necessitas? nisi forte putetur in malo, quam in
bono efficacior inveniri voluntas apud Deum, qui charitas est; and
promptioresset ad ulciscendum, quam ad remunerandum misericors and miserator
Dominus. Bernard. Ep. ad Hugonem de Sancto Victore quae est Ep. 77. p. op. 1458.
as St Bernard argues undeniably in this matter, he is much more prone to pity
than he is to punish, and had far rather interpret things to our profit than to
our prejudice: we may be sure that our obedient purposes shall have as much
force to the full as our disobedient have, and that an effectual will in them,
when nothing but time is wanting to perform in, shall pass for the deed
likewise. God is by no means forward to seek our hurt, and to take advantages
of our necessities; but in this, and all other cases, where there is first an
effectually willing mind, and nothing but opportunity is wanting to an
answerable practice, he takes, as St Paul says, the will for the deed, and
accepts men according to that sufficient and effectual desire which they have;
and not according to that outward performance, which through some unhappy and
preventing accidents, they have not, 2 Cor. 8.12.

And of this we have a clear instance in one dying Penitent, the Thief upon the
Cross. His return was late indeed, he begun not to befit himself for the next
world, till he was in his departure out of this. His conversion was in his very
last hour, under the pangs of Death, and at the instant of Execution. But when
Christ saw that his change of heart was true, full, and sufficient; and needed
nothing but opportunity to show it self effectual; he tells him that it should
serve his turn, and secure his happiness. Because he would have been obedient
in his practice if he had lived to it, he shall be rewarded at the last day as
if he had. For this very day, says he, shall thou be with me in Paradise, Luke
23.42.

Thus available, I say, a new nature and an inward change is, although it want
an outward practice, when it is sufficient and effectual to produce it, and
would certainly effect it, if there were but time and opportunity allowed for
it.

But then here is the dangerous state and deplorable case of all such dying
Penitents, that it is twenty to one, if they defer repentance to their
deathbed, that all the change which then appears in them is not so sufficient,
nor would, were there a due time allowed for it, prove so effectual. And of
this we have a clear argument, in that among all the holy vows and pious
purposes, which are begun by men upon a sickbed, when they are in sight of
death and expect a dissolution; there are so few that continue with them, and
prove effectual to make their lives and actions answer them when they recover.
There is not, I believe, one unconverted Christian in five hundred, but will
show some signs of sorrow, and put up devout Prayers, and make holy vows and
purposes when he apprehends himself about to dye: and yet of all them who are
raised up again, it is a very small and inconsiderable number that make good
those vows, and effect what they had resolved upon. And now if these men had
dyed when they thus repented, in what a miserable state had they been! For this
change in their will and purpose is no further available to their Salvation,
than it would be effectual to a like change in their lives and practice. God
accepts the holiness of the mind only as it is a holy principle, and imputes
the reward of obedience to it no farther than he foresees, that if he allowed
time, obedience would ensue upon it. The will is never taken for the deed, but
when it is able to effect it, when the deed would be sure to follow so soon as
an opportunity were offered for it. And this God sees before hand, although we
do not: he is able to judge of the sincerity of men's desires, and of the
sufficiency of their purposes before their following works declare them. And
according to what he foresees they would afterward effect; he either accepts,
or rejects them. But when men's after-works come as a clear evidence of the
unsincerity, or insufficiency of their sickbed resolutions; they may see
plainly themselves, what God saw long before, that all the change of mind,
which was then wrought, was utterly insignificant and unavailing. When they
trusted to it, they relied upon a broken reed; their confidence upon it was ill
grounded, and if they had dyed with it, it would most certainly have deceived
them.

Thus utterly uncertain and uncomfortable a thing is a mere unworking change,
and a late deathbed Repentance. It may sometimes prove sufficient to beget an
after-change of practice, and when God sees it would, he will undoubtedly
accept it. But it very seldom does, and no man who dies in it can possibly tell
whether it would or no. It is very great odds that it would prove too weak; so
that although there be some, yet is there very small hope that any dying man
can place in it.

And that which renders it ordinarily so insufficient, and thereupon so
uncertain and uncomfortable, is either,

First, Because it generally proceeds from an unconstant, temporary principle:
Or,

Secondly, Because, when the principle is genuine and lasting, it is still too
weak and in an incompetent measure and degree.

1. That penitential grief and change of mind which is wrought upon a
Deathbed, is ordinarily ineffective, and insufficient to produce a constant
change of life and practice, because it generally proceeds from an inconstant
and temporary principle. It is commonly founded upon a reason that does not
hold in all times, a reason that is good in sickness, but not in health; that
concludes for a Pious change, whilst we are under our sickbed sorrows; but not
when, being freed from them, we come under the pleasure of temptations. For the
great and general motive which makes all those, who never thought of reforming
in all their lives before, to resolve upon it when they are on their Deathbed;
is plainly the nearness of the next world, and their apprehension of their
sudden death and departure. Could they hope to live longer, they would sin
still. But they look upon themselves as going to Judgment, and they have so
much Conscience left in them, as to believe that there is a Hell for the
impenitent; and their own self-love is extremely startled at that, and makes
them run to any shelter: So that they make many fearful confessions, and
fervent Prayers, and Holy purposes, and say and do any thing whereby they may
quiet their present fears, and catch at any comfortable hopes of avoiding it.
The ordinary cause then of all this work, is not any love of God, or hatred of
Sin; but only a fear of Punishment. And that too not a fear of it at a
distance, and as at some removes from them; but only as near at hand, and just
hanging over them. But now as for this apparent nearness of Death, and this
confounding fear upon it; it is plainly a short and transient, an unconstant,
temporary Principle. It is a reason to them no longer than they are sick; for
when they recover and are well again, Death is as far off, and they are become
again as fearless as ever. They are got out of its neighborhood, and it gives
them no further trouble: So that all their former fears abate, and their
virtuous resolutions fall, as beginning now to want that which first gave life
to them, and should support them. And now when opportunities of Sin are
offered, and the pleasurable baits of Temptations invite; they have nothing
left that is able to resist them. Whilst they were sick, they were not capable
to be tempted; and then Death being near, it enabled them to purpose well, and
to make a pious resolution. But now, since they are well, Temptations are
become as strong as ever; and the thoughts of Death being far removed, they
have no resolutions that can withstand them, but are quickly changed again into
the same men, as sensual and sinful as they were before.

Indeed it sometimes happens, that those souls which were at first awakened by
such a transient, temporary motive; go on to others afterward, that are more
fixed and lasting: and then they are furnished with Armor in all times, and
have a motive that may bear them out when Death is far off, as well as when
it is near at hand; in time of health, as well as in time of sickness. For they
who were at first affrighted into a change of mind and holy purposes, by the
near approach of Death and Judgment, go on sometimes to confirm their
resolutions upon more lasting principles. They think themselves into a deep
sense of that ingratitude toward God which is in Sin, and of its
mischievousness to their own selves; how it robs them of all that Eternal Good
which their hearts desire, and brings them under all those insupportable and
endless evils which they fear: all which it does for the purchase of some
light, empty, and transient Pleasures, which are vastly below the joys of
Heaven; and for the avoidance of some short pain and uneasiness, which are
infinitely nothing in comparison of the Pains of Hell. And these thoughts give
them a firm and lasting conviction of the utter necessity of renouncing all
evil courses, which are so destructive; and of leading a holy and obedient
life, which are so infinitely becoming them, and beneficial to them. And this
conviction now can beget and preserve a resolution that is sufficient and
effectual, victorious and prevailing. It will be a reason to them to resolve
and practice at all times, in sickness and in health; when they are not
tempted, and also when they are. For Heaven and the Love of God is always a
necessary end, and Obedience is always a necessary means or instrument. So that
if Men resolve upon a conviction of this necessity, they resolve upon a reason
that may well hold always. They will constantly have the highest reason to be
so convinced; and still to repeat and fortify their resolution upon such
conviction; and to act and practice that which they have so wisely resolved.
And when a Sick-mans change is built upon this ground, and proceeds upon this
motive; it may be permanent and fixed, effectual and prevailing. As it is in all
those who are Converted by Sickness and Afflictions, that great, and usually
last means which God makes use of for the reclaiming of sinful Men.

But generally Men's sickbed purposes go no further than the first ground. They
always begin upon the fears of present Death, and the near approach of
Judgment; and though sometimes they go higher still, yet ordinarily they rest
there; so that they have no change longer than their sickness lasts. And this
Repentance is certainly insufficient; this will can never be accepted for the
deed; because if they were allowed to recover again, and to live on till an
opportunity of Doing came, the good will and purpose would be quite lost, and
able to effect nothing.

But although a Deathbed change should proceed upon both these grounds, and
the dying men should resolve to amend, both upon the sense of sudden Death,
which will maintain their resolution so long as it is near, and also upon a
conviction of the absolute necessity of Heaven and a Holy Life, which may make
them resolve still when the present danger is over: yet may their Repentance
after all be insufficient and avail nothing. For a Deathbed Repentance when it
does proceed upon a genuine and lasting motive, is still often times ineffectual,
because the change is,

2. In too weak and incompetent a measure and degree. It is not every degree
even of true and undissembled resolution that will overcome a man's Lusts, and
strengthen him to such a pitch as to make him prevail over all Temptations. A
thousand good resolutions go to Hell, because although they are sincere and
true, yet they are weak and ineffectual. For how many men are there who resolve
against their sins, who do not yet get quit of them? They purpose to leave
them; but for all that they live still in them: their mind and will is against
them; but yet they continue to work and practice them. When once men have got
violent lusts, and vicious habits, and Sin by a long use is become almost a
second nature to them: it is not every measure, no nor every moderate degree of
resolution that can mortify and overcome them. For a weak resolution is
quickly overthrown, men's Lusts are too hard for it, and quite overbear it: it
may make some resistance, create some trouble, and cause some delay; but that
is all that it can do: it can only contend and struggle, but it is not able to
overcome. This is plain from every Religious Man's experience; and this St Paul
sets down expressly in his character of the unregenerate striver in the seventh
Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans. For there was a real change in his mind,
without a change in his practice; a resolution without effect; and a will
without performance: the violence of his Lusts was too hard for the convictions
of his Conscience, and led him Captive, even against his will, into a course of
Sin and disobedience. With the MIND, says he, I serve the Law of God, but with
the FLESH the Law of Sin, v. 25. What I DO, I ALLOW not; for what I WOULD that
I DO not; but what I HATE, that I DO, v. 15, 19. To WILL is present with me,
but how to PERFORM that which is good I find not, v. 18. For the Law of my
MEMBERS wars against the Law of my MIND, and brings me into CAPTIVITY to the
Law of Sin, v. 23.

Thus weak and unable, ineffective and idle, are many true and real
resolutions. They have not strength enough to do their work; the opposition is
greater than they can overcome; so that they are able to make no alteration,
but for all this change of mind, men will continue wicked and disobedient in
their practice still.

And of this sort generally, even when they proceed upon a genuine and lasting
motive, are the Penitential purposes of Dying-men. For, alas! when Men have
lived all their Lives in a course of Sin, and their minds have been always
taken up with it, and their hearts wholly inslaved to it: it is no easy matter
to bring them off, and to fill them with such firmness of purpose, and strength
of pious resolution as would be able effectually to mortify and subdue it.
This is a most laborious work, and a difficult undertaking. It requires much
time, and the freedom of all our faculties. For how hard a thing is it, even
for men in health, when their thoughts are free, distracted by no business,
interrupted by no pain, and disturbed by no disease or other hindrance, to work
themselves up to an effectual and prevailing resolution against any one Sin
which they have been habitually inured, and for a long time enslaved to? And
even of them who do at last effectually resolve against it, how few are there
who came to such a pitch of resolution at the first trial? No, their proceeding
is gradual, they go on from step to step; every following resolution is more
firm, and stronger than that which went before; till after several repetitions
and advances, they arrive at last to a degree and pitch of holy purpose so
complete as can effect that virtuous change of life and action which they aim
at. So that their spiritual Life is not brought on to perfection in a moment,
more than their natural; but requires much time, and much exercise: for as
their sinful habits were not at first acquired, so neither are they to be
conquered by one action, but by many. And since the process in Repentance, even
from one single Sin, is so long and tedious ere it has arrived to a saving
pitch, and so difficult to a healthy man, who has nothing to trouble and
distract him: what must an universal reformation be to a dying person, whose
time is short, and much disturbed; who cannot repeat many resolutions, nor make
a trial of the force and power of any one, and who is most likely to be weak
and languid in all those good purposes which he makes, by reason that his
thoughts are heavy, and his attention broken, and all his faculties are
oppressed with pain, and become weary and unactive through a wasting Disease?
Surely if the first resolutions of healthy Men are generally so ineffective and
insufficient; these purposes of dying Penitents, which in all advantages for a
strong and prevailing resolution fall much below them, must needs be generally
of this ineffective sort too.

And when they are so, they stand us in no stead in Gods account, but are
utterly unavailable to any man's Salvation. A man who only purposes, but does
not practice; who barely wills, but is not able to perform; is in the way to
life indeed, but he is far from having yet attained to it. He is still in a sad
case, and under a damning Sentence. For he is, as St Paul says in that seventh
Chapter to the Romans where he describes him, slain by Sin, verse. 11. It works
death in him, verse. 13. he is yet under, as the Law of Sin, so the body of
Death too, verse. 24. But the change of mind which God requires of us, is such
as works a change of practice. If he sees it sufficient to effect that, he
accepts it indeed before the effect follows: he takes the will for the deed,
when he sees the will is so strong as that upon any fit occasion it would
produce it; and upon this account he accepted the dying Thief, Luke 23.42. But
if it be only an impotent and ineffective will, and he discerns plainly that no
obedient works would follow it: it is no such will as he rewards, and for such
Penitents, he will by no means absolve, but utterly condemn them.

And since the change of mind and penitential purposes of dying persons, even
when they are upon genuine and lasting grounds, so as in the following parts of
a man's life, if God should please to spare him, they would do something; would
yet be weak and insufficient, and so unable to do enough: here is still a
further reason of the ordinary insufficiency of such Repentance, and why those
dying men will not ordinarily be saved by it, but perish notwithstanding it.

To conclude this point then, we see that it is possible for such New Birth to
save a Man, as has not yet produced a New practice; and for dying Penitents to
be accepted upon a change of mind, without a like change of life and actions.
This I say is possible, it sometimes is, and sometimes has been done: but this
indeed is very rare and very seldom, so that no Man in his sober wits, who has
time before him, will dare to trust to it. And the sum of all is this, That to
men who are so unhappy as to be brought into it, it has, as is expressed in
Quid dicam nescio, quid promittam penitus ignoro; revocare ab inquisitione
ultimi remedii periclitantes, durum and impium; spondere autem aliquid in tam
sera cautione, temerarium. Salv. de Avaritia, l. 1. p. 363. Ed. Oxon.
Salvians determination, just so much hope as may excite a good endeavor: but
to men who are yet out of it, it is altogether so desperate, as utterly to
discourage all delay.

CHAP. IV. Of Pardon promised to Confession of Sins, and to Conversion.
The CONTENTS.
Of Pardon promised to Confession of Sins. The nature and qualifications of a
Saving Confession. Its fitness to make us forsake Sin. The ineffectiveness of
most men's Confessions. The folly and impiety of it. Pardon promised to
Confession no further than it produces Obedience. Of Pardon promised to
Conversion. The nature of Conversion. It includes Obedience, and is but another
name for it.

FOurthly, That condition of Life and Pardon which the Gospel indispensably
exacts of us, and whereupon at the last day Christ will accept and reward us,
is sometimes called Confession of our Sins to God. When we acknowledge them,
God will be sure to pardon them; he has engaged his word and faithfulness for
it, and so cannot recede from it: If we Levit. 26.40.42.
confess our Sins, says St John, God is just and FAITHFVL to forgive us our
Sins, 1 John 1.9.

Now as for this Confession of our Sins, whereupon God promises mercifully to
forgive them, it is not a bare naming of them, or giving in an Historical
Catalogue of them to Almighty God, that he may know them and be informed of
them. No, he sees all our thoughts afar off, and our actions long before. We
cannot inform him when we lay open our transgressions before him; for we could
never find any place wherein to act them so retired, but it was under his eye;
nor any time and circumstances so secret, as to escape his knowledge. So that
our Confession cannot be to instruct him; but only to shame, and to humble, and
to work other effects in our own selves. And therefore it must not be a bare
recital of such offenses as we have committed; but an acknowledgment duly
qualified, and accompanied with such tempers of mind, as will lead us on to
forsake and amend them.

It is a Confessing of them with shame, with an humble debasement, and sense of
our unworthiness, who could ever be so vile as to be guilty of them. And such
was Ezra's Confession, Ezra 9. O my God, says he, I am ASHAMED and blush to
lift up my face to thee my God, for our iniquities are increased over our head,
and our trespasses are grown up unto the Heavens, verse. 6.

It is an acknowledgment of them with hatred and detestation, as things that
are utterly odious and loathsome to us, which therefore we are prone to fly
from, as from what is most offensive. And such is that Confession whereunto God
directs the Jews by his Prophet Ezekiel, Ye shall remember your ways, says he,
and all your doings wherein ye have been defiled; and ye shall LOATH your
selves in your own sight for all your evils that you have committed, Ezekiel
20.43.

It is a recital of them with sorrow of mind, and a troubled heart; with such
pain as we use to feel in those things which most afflict us: which therefore
we are forward to avoid, as what creates the greatest torment. And such was
that of St Peter, who when he remembered, and made mention of his Sin to God,
wept, says the Text, bitterly, Matt. 26.75. And of David, who tells us in the
38. Psalm, that when he declares to God his iniquity, he will be SORRY for his
Sin, verse. 18.

It is a Confession of them, with a resolution, upon all this shame and sorrow
which we have undergone for them, never more to be reconciled to them, or to
act them over again and repeat them. A Confession of the mouth, that is
accompanied with a turn and change of the heart, which is now set as much
against them, as formerly it was inclined to them. And such was that Confession
which Wise Solomon durst recommend to Gods mercy, and beg him to accept of for
men's Pardon and Forgiveness. If they Repent, says he, and say we have done
perversely, we have committed wickedness: and so RETVRN unto thee with all their
hearts, and all their soul: then hear their prayer, and forgive thy people that
have sinned against thee, and all their transgressions wherein they have
transgressed, 1 Kings 8.47, 48, 49, 50.

It is such an acknowledgment of our Sins, lastly, as undoes, so far as is
possible, all that which we had done wickedly; and makes all just and
sufficient recompense* and satisfaction for them. And this is that
acknowledgment of all Sins of injustice, which God himself prescribes. When a
Man or Woman, says he, shall commit any sin of injury and wrong, that men
commit one against another, to do a trespass thereby against the Lord, and that
person be guilty: then shall they confess their Sin that they have done, and
shall RECOMPENSE their Trespass with the principle thereof, or the thing it
self which they took away wrongfully, and shall add moreover unto it a fifth
part more thereof, and give it unto him against whom they trespassed, Numb.
5.6, 7.

Now a Confession of our Sins thus qualified, viz. a Confession of them with
blushing and being ashamed of them; with an implacable hatred and loathing
indignation of them, with bitter sorrow for them; with firm purpose and
resolution against them, and with all possible endeavors to undo them by
making just recompense and satisfaction: A Confession, I say, thus attended is
a most natural cause, and powerful principle of our leaving and forsaking them.
The four first concomitant tempers, are all most effectual causes of better
obedience and reformation; and the last, viz. making of satisfaction, is an
instance and effect of it. Shame, and sorrow, and hatred are the great rules
and measures of what we shall forsake, the prime springs and directors of all
aversation and avoidance. Nothing is more natural for us, than to be slow to do
that we are ashamed of; to avoid what we hate; to turn away from that which
grieves and torments us. So that if once disobedience fall under these
passions, it has lost all its interest, and will surely be excluded from the
service of our works and actions. Our passions oppose it, and our wills are set
against it: and when both these are not only got loose from it, but also most
resolutely contend with it; it is wholly bereft of all its power, and can do
nothing in us. We have no temptation to pursue it further; we are weary of it,
and offended at it, and so are sure to leave and forsake it.

And because this Confession, thus qualified and attended as we have seen, is
so genuine a cause of better obedience and reformation: therefore alone it is
that so great things are spoken of it. When God says he that confesses his sin
shall find mercy, he means he that confesses and forsakes it, that acknowledges
his offenses in such sort, as to renounce them and become obedient. His speech
is m^tonymical, he implies Obedience, although he does not mention it. For no
Confession of sin will serve any man's turn at the last day, except he leave it,
and in his life and actions bid adieu to it.

The world indeed, abounds with another sort of Confession, which costs less,
and effects nothing. They confess their sins without shame, and relate them
without sorrow, and name them without hatred; they recite them to God without
resolving against them, and acknowledge them daily without any amends, or
making any recompense and satisfaction for them. For they cannot but be hardened
against shame, who day by day, if not several times every day, have the face to
tell God that they have rebelled against him; and yet never endeavor to come
with another story by disavowing and forsaking their Rebellion. They must needs
be void of sorrow for sin, who will never keep back from it: it cannot but
please them, so long as they continue to pursue it. For they would not
continually repeat their pain, and at every turn act over again their own
torment and vexation. It is beyond all doubt that they do not hate but entirely
love disobedience, so long as they slip no opportunities of acting it. They are
plainly resolved upon it, whilst they are most firmly fixed, and forward to
embrace it. And since notwithstanding all their hideous Confessions, they stand
ready still to close with their Sin upon the first meeting, and to repeat what
they confessed upon the next occasion; it is plain that their hearts were never
against it, whatever their words were. They only showed their wit, but not
their passions or persuasion; they declaimed against it, but all the while they
meant no hurt to it. For even whilst they inveighed against the baseness, the
loathsomness, the destructiveness of their Sin; their own heart did not believe
it. They did no more but spare God their tongues, and speak what he pleased:
but for their souls and actions, they reserved them for their Lusts, and would
like and do what they pleased themselves.

But can any man be so blind as to think, that such a Confession of Sins as
this can in any wise please God, and procure his Pardon? Has he any kindness
for our Sins, that he should take delight to hear them spoken of? Are they so
acceptable a service, that we may hope to gain his favor barely by reciting
them in his presence? No, he hates them as things that are most loathsome to
him, and will not endure to have them mentioned without real detestation. Is
any man so weak as to think that he honors God, merely by reckoning up his own
offenses? That he gives glory unto him by declaring to his face how vilely he
has affronted and despised him? To Confess thus, is to Novum monstri genus,
^adem pene omnes j^giter fa^iu^t, quae fecisse se plangunt; and qui intrant
Ecclesiasticam Domum ut mala anti ^ua d^fleant, exeunt ut moliantur -- Et sic
oration eorum RIXA est magis Criminum, quam exoratrix. Salvian de Gub. l. 3. p.
89. Ed. Oxon.
reproach him to his face, and boldly to defy him. It is a telling of him that
we have disobeyed, and are resolved to go on in it: an open profession and
avowing of our Rebellion, without any real signs or approach to amendment and
due subjection. It is a transgressing barefaced, an addition of impudence to
sin; a continuing daily to Rebel against him, and yet coming as daily into his
very presence to declare and own our continued Rebellions. And this now is not
to supplicate, but to defy; not to beg peace, but to declare enmity; it is by
no means the way to soften and appease, but a most effectual course to
exasperate, and implacably to provoke him.

But then to go on still further, and to pretend to him that we are sorry at
our heart, and loath our selves for having sinned against him, and are resolved
to do so no more; when really, as our after-actions (which are the truest
interpreters of our hearts and minds) declare, there is no such thing: this is
to add mockery to sin, and a fresh affront to our former disobedience. It is
most grossly to play the hypocrite, and in the most fulsome fashion to
dissemble with him. It is an endeavoring to put tricks upon the Almighty; a
trial of his skill; a seeking to delude and impose upon an infinitely wise and
all-seeing God, by such thin pretenses as cannot but be seen through and
discovered by any ordinary Man. But let no Man vainly deceive himself, for God
is not mocked; nor can all the arts of Earth and Hell out-wit and go beyond
him. No, he sees clearly through all this hypocrisy, and he will most severely
punish it. And when he comes to judge of men's Confessions at the last day, he
will then, in the face of all the world, distinguish reality from complement;
an acknowledgment of Repentance, from one of form and custom; and will for ever
reward the first, whilst he punishes Eternally the latter. He will Pardon no
Confession of our Sins at that day, but only such as is sorrowful, penitent,
and obedient; we must amend those faults that we confess, before we can with
reason hope that he will accept us.

And for this the Scripture is clear. It is only our returning upon Confession
that shall be rewarded and forgiven. If they Repent, says Solomon, and SAY, we
have done perversely, we have committed wickedness; and so RETVRN unto the Lord
with all their heart and all their soul: Then HEAR their Prayer, and forgive
thy people that have sinned against thee, 1 King 8.47, 48, 49, 50. And to name
but one place more, these words of Solomon are full and home to the purpose, He
who Confesses, and FORSAKES his Sin shall find mercy, Prove. 28.13.

That Confession of our Sins then whereupon Christ our Judge will at the last
day accept and Pardon us, is such only as ends in Reformation and Obedience.
The service of our lives must go along with that of our lips; we must do as we
say, and avoid what we condemn, before we can safely trust, that God will
Sentence us to that Mercy and Life, which are not the rewards of idle
acknowledgments, but only of a confessing obedience.

Fifthly, This Gospel condition of Life and Pardon is sometimes called
Conversion. Without this we can have no hopes of happiness; For except ye be
CONVERTED, says our Savior, and become as little Children, as void as they are
of all former impressions and courses, and free to enter upon new ones, ye
shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Matt. 18.3. But if our Conversion
goes before, Gods Pardon is sure to follow after; that being the duty, and this
the reward. Repent, and be CONVERTED, says the Apostle Peter, that your Sins
may be blotted out, Act. 3.19. Conversion sets us without the reach of Death,
and beyond the precincts of Damnation; for he who Converts a Sinner from the
error of his way, does save a Soul from DEATH, Jam. 5.20.

Now our Conversion from Sin to God, is nothing else but our Obedience in
another word. For it denotes a turn and a change, not only of our wills and
desires; but withal, and that principally, of our works and actions. For our
course of actions is in the familiar, and customary use of the Scriptures
called our way; our Conversation, walking; and our particular actions, so many
several steps: and our turning out of a course of Sin and Transgression, into a
course of Righteousness and Obedience, being like the turning out of a wrong
way into a right, is called our turning from Sin, and our turning to God, i. e.
in one word our Conversion. So that to be Converted, is nothing else in the
Scripture language but to have the course of our works or actions turned, and
from workers of sin, to become workers of obedience.

When Mercy and Life then are promised to our Conversion; they are not made
over to any thing which is separate from Obedience, but to that only which
denotes it, and is but another name for it. We are not Converted until we obey;
so that Obedience still is that which must procure our peace, and capacitate us
for Pardon and happiness when Christ comes to judge us.

CHAP. V. Of Pardon promised to Prayer.
The CONTENTS.
Of Pardon promised to Prayer. Of the influence which our Prayers have upon our
Obedience. Of the presumption or idleness of most men's Prayers. Of the
impudence, hypocrisy, and uselessness of such Petitions. Then our Prayers are
heard, when they are according to Gods will: when we pray for Pardon in
Repentance, and for strength and assistance in the use of our own endeavors.
Pardon promised to Prayer no further than it effects this Obedience, and
penitential endeavor.

SIxthly, That condition whereto the Gospel promises a gracious sentence of
Mercy and Life, is sometimes called Prayer, or calling upon God. The Lord is
nigh unto all them that call upon him, says David, to all that call upon him in
truth, Psalm. 145.18. Thou Lord art good and ready to forgive, and plenteous in
mercy to all that call upon thee, Psalm. 86.5. For so surpassing is his goodness
and the riches of his grace, that any thing may be had of him for asking; to
them who desire it, he can deny nothing. Ask, and it shall be given you, says
our Savior, for EVERY one that asks receives, Matt. 7.7, 8. And that in all
things equally, one as well as another, if they do not distrust him and
disbelieve his Love. For ALL things, WHATSOEVER you shall ask in Prayer
BELIEVING, you shall receive, Matt. 21.22. So that if men want any thing which
they desire that God would bestow upon them, it is because they do not beg it
of him. Ye have not, says St James, because ye ask not, Jam. 4.2. For not only
the overflowing goodness of Gods own nature, but, besides that, the interest of
his Son Jesus Christ our MEDIATOR at his right hand, gives us a full security
in all our requests, that we shall obtain any thing which we ask in his name.
Ask any thing, says he, in my name, and I will do it, Joh. 14.14. Nay so dear
is he to Almighty God, that although he himself should not move in it, yet
through the strength of Gods inexpressible love to him, they who beg in his
name can miss of nothing. In that day, says he, after I am taken from you, you
shall ask ME nothing: Verily, verily, I say unto you, whatsoever you shall ask
the FATHER in MY NAME, he will give it you. And I say not that I will PRAY the
Father for you, for the Father himself loves you, BECAUSE ye have loved me,
Joh. 16.23, 26, 27. And seeing, as the Apostle says, that we have so great and
powerful a High Priest at Gods right hand, whether our suit be for pardon, or
strength, or for whatsoever else; Let us come boldly to the throne of grace,
that we may obtain Mercy for pardon of past sins, and find grace to prevent
future, and to help in time of need, or in the most (...).
fitting season, Heb. 4.14, 16.

Now our Prayers and calling upon God, are a mighty means and instrument of our
serving and obeying him. And as all the forementioned means had a natural
fitness and tendency, to make us do the will of God: so have our Prayers a
supernatural, and help us to fulfill the Divine Laws, not so much through any
efficacy of their own nature, as through the aids of divine grace. For we have
great difficulties to conflict with, and great hindrances to overcome in the
doing of our duty. There is much hardship in a holy course to make us
unwilling; and if we have a will to it, we yet find much weakness in our selves
that renders us unable to continue in good living, and to perform constantly
all those good things which God has commanded us. For we have much ignorance of
what we should do, and much other business besides it: and as for that moreover
which we do know, we are apt many times to forget it; or through the throng of
other things, through suddenness, and surprise, not to consider of it when we
should use it; or when in our minds we do clearly see it, yet full often we
cannot bring over our wills to choose and embrace it. For our lusts and
passions prove many times of more force with our wills, than our reason and
Religion; and we are either born down by the weight and strength, or wearied
with the tediousness and length of a temptation.

And now to supply all these defects, and to support us in the doing of our
duty notwithstanding all these infirmities, we have an absolute necessity of
the help and assistance of Gods grace. We want the good timeing of his
providence, to have temptations assault us when we are best able to overcome
them, and our duties stay for us when we may most easily perform them. We stand
in need of the suggestions of his spirit to cure our forgetfulness; of the aids
of his grace to enlighten our minds, and clear up our notions, and bend our
wills, and establish our resolutions; and so to make us unmovable in a good
course. So that we have an utter necessity of his help, both in the disposals
of his providence, and in the concurrence of his spirit, to enable us to obey
his Laws, and make us, as St Paul says, both to will, and to do what he
requires of us, Phil. 2.13.

But now it is our Prayers which bring all these divine aids down unto us. They
obtain for us a good providence, and a powerful spirit, which in spite of all
our natural weaknesses shall work out our Obedience. God will not deny us these
when we ask them. For, as our Savior argues unanswerably, If ye being EVIL
will yet give GOOD gifts to your Children: how much more shall your heavenly
Father, whose GOODNESS infinitely exceeds yours, and who cannot be tainted with
any of your ILLNESS, give the HOLY SPIRIT, that best of gifts, to them that ask
him, Luke 11.13. And since our Prayers procure such a never failing aid, and so
Almighty an assistance for us; they must needs be a certain cause and
instrument of our active service and obedience. They imply in us an hearty
desire of having, and fetch down to us a sufficient power of doing our duty,
and keeping Gods Commandments. And when there is both a preparedness in us to
use, and a readiness in God to give us grace sufficient with it to do his will,
there is nothing further wanting to our performance of it.

And forasmuch as our Prayers imply the one, and procure the other; because
they fetch down Divine aids, and express our forwardness to obey with them:
therefore have they so much favor shown them, and Life and Pardon promised to
them. For God never intends to reward an idle and unobeying Prayer, but such
only as is industrious and obedient. Our Prayers must first make us do what he
commands, before they obtain those mercies for us which he promises. For when
he tells us that they who call upon him shall find favor and mercy, he speaks
metonymically, he includes obedience, although he does not express it. He means
them only who pray for Such were the old Jewish forms of Prayer for PARDON,
whether with Sacrifice, or without it: with Sacrifice -- Obsecro, Domine,
(...), deliqui, (...), hoc aut illud seci; nunc aut^m POENITENTIAM ago, sitque
(...) ha^^ (...) m^a. Without Sacrifice -- Obsecro, Domine, peccavi, deliqui,
rebellavi, hoc aut illud feci; nunc mei me facti POENITET, PVDETQVE, neque
unquam ITERVM ad id REVERTAR, as they are cited out of Maimonides by the famous
Dr. Outram in his Book de Sacrificiis l. 1. c. 15.
mercy and pardon, and obey in order to it; and who ask for grace and strength,
and work with it after it is granted. No prayers are of any account with him
but the prayers of the obedient; so that if ever we expect to be saved by them
at the last day, we must obey with them.

The Prayers indeed which are generally offered up to God, have little of this
in them. For if men pray for mercy and pardon, they take no care to come
furnished with Repentance and Obedience, which is that indispensable condition
whereupon the Gospel does encourage us to ask and hope for Pardon. And if they
pray for any virtue or grace, they expect it should drop into them without any
endeavors of their own, and will take no pains to cooperate with and use it.
Their prayers for Mercy are generally presumptuous, and their prayers for Grace
unendeavouring and idle. Obedience all the while is the least in all their
thoughts and has the least of all their care. For their petitions are all put
up for pardon whilst they continue in their sins; or for virtue and grace
whilst they put forth no endeavors. All their Religion is only to be often
upon their knees, to keep up Prayers in their Families morning and evening; to
send up a great many Lord forgive me's, Christ help me's; they are a praying
and desiring, but not a working and obeying people. They are of a sordid
niggardly Religion, which would receive all, and give nothing: their petitions
look altogether on the reward, but quite overlook the duty; they would take all
from God, but do nothing for him.

But this is such a way of praying as will most certainly delude men, but can
never do them good. It is inconsiderate hope and downright folly to expect that
ever God should hear our prayers for Pardon, whilst we continue in our sins.
For since he has so frequently, so plainly, and so peremptorily declared, That
at the last day he will Pardon none but the penitent and obedient: it is
impudent incredulity to beg pardon, whilst, without any amends, we continue to
sin and disobey. It is to desire of him that he would break his word, that he
would Pardon and acquit us when his Gospel condemns us. It is to beg of him
that he would frame another Religion, and another Law than that of his Son
Jesus; a Religion that would save us, when that kills and destroys us. By such
asking forgiveness from him, whilst we go on in rebelling against him, we do as
good as desire that he would cease to be governor of the world, and leave us
to our own selves; that we might have no law but our own wills; that we might
do what he forbids, without undergoing what he threatens. We only ask leave to
sin; and crave a liberty to transgress, without suffering; and desire that we
might break his Laws, but that he would not punish us. And what man now dare
presume, that such shameless desires as these should be granted to him? That
God should desert his Laws, and alter his Religion, and cast off his government
over men when they request it? For in very deed we see, that to desire him to
forgive us, whilst we are going on in our sins, is in effect to put up all
these frontless, and abominably impudent petitions to him.

And then as for the other sort of petitions, our asking for any virtue or
grace, without putting forth any endeavors after it, it is as certain to meet
with no good answer as the other. For to pray thus is plainly to play the
hypocrite with God Almighty, and flatly to dissemble with him. It is to beg
what we do not care for; to ask what we refuse; to pretend desire (for all
praying is desiring) for that which we account is worth no endeavor. And what
a miserable piece of falsehood is this now, when a man makes his actions most
palpably to give the lie to his words? He tells God that he earnestly desires
his help to work in him a pure heart; but yet he will do nothing for it, nor
avoid the least occasion of uncleanness. He begs his grace to assist him to a
meek and patient spirit: but when he is off his knees his work is done, for he
never after uses any means to procure it, or takes any care to nourish and
preserve those degrees of it which he has already. Surely any man of common
understanding must needs see, that such desires as these were never in his
heart, but only from the teeth forward. In reality he cares not what becomes of
the graces which he has prayed for, and was no farther concerned about them,
than that he might be able barely to say that he had asked them. Or at best, if
he did desire them at all; yet was his desire far from that degree which he
pretends; it was a weak wish, rather than a desire; an imperfect inclination,
that could effect nothing. It may be he had rather have that grace which he
asks, than go without it; but he had rather want it than be at any pains for
it. He loves and desires the least ease, far more than the virtue; and is
resolved to keep that, although he loses this. So that although he do think the
grace which he prays for to be worth something, yet he esteems it next to
nothing; he judges it to be worth no pains, and deserving no endeavor, and so
has either no desires of it at all, or such weak and feeble ones as are just as
good as none.

Yea it is well if many times his heart is not set against those very graces
that he begs whilst he is asking of them, which is more than barely being
unconcerned for them. For how often does it happen that a man prays for
charity, whilst he is in love with malice; that he begs sobriety, whilst his
heart is upon drunkenness; that he asks justice, whilst his affections hanker
after deceitfulness and wrong? This, in very deed, is the case of most, if not
of all impenitent and wicked men. For they love their Sins, and resolve to
continue in them; and yet even then pray for such Graces as are contrary to
them. Now here it is plain that their heart does not go along with their
tongues: they are not willing to lose that, which they pray to God they may
leave; and are afraid to receive that, which they beg to have. They only
pretend desire, but are possessed in truth with hatred and aversation.

And then as for all the good promises which they make to God in their Prayers,
viz. That if he will forgive them, they will never do so any more; but become
new men, and watch more carefully, and sin more seldom, and obey more
constantly and universally; so long as their Prayers are thus unendeavouring
and idle, all this is but mere wind, vain hypocrisy, and deceitful talk. For
if, when their prayers are over, they take no care still to perform that
obedience which they promised whilst they were at them; is it not clear to
every eye that all is cheat and falsehood, and that they lie and dissemble in
these their promises, as well as we saw they did in their professions? All
their engagements are stark naught, they meant no such thing whilst they made
them, nor ever after think upon them to make them good and fulfill them.

And can any man now be so intolerably weak and shamefully blind, as to imagine
that God should reward such idle talk, as all these unendeavouring prayers for
grace are, and give a blessing upon such hypocritical din and feigned language?
To dissemble thus with God Almighty is not to honor, but to abuse him: and so
fits us, not for any expressions of his love, but only of his wrath and
indignation. It is to pass affronts, instead of begging kindness; to make a
mockery of his condescensions; and to turn that sacred and inestimable liberty,
which he has graciously indulged mankind, of making known their desires to him
for a supply and satisfaction of them, into a fraudulent trick and opprobrious
couzenage. And since all these unendeavouring prayers for Gods grace, are an
hypocrisy so gross, and a mockery so reproachful; we must needs conclude that
he will utterly reject them, as well as our prayers for pardon whilst we
continue in our sins; and instead of granting and fulfilling, deride and avenge
them.

But if ever we hope to have our Prayers heard the true and only way is to
observe St John's rule, of asking only what is according to Gods will. For
this, says he, is the confidence which we have in him, that if we ask any thing
according to his will, he hears us, 1 John 5.14. And what that will of God is
concerning any of those things which we have to pray for; we can learn no where
but from his Holy Gospel. Now in that we are plainly told, that as for Pardon,
his peremptory will is, That no man shall meet with it but he only who has
Repented and obeyed him. REPENT, says St Peter, that your sins may be blotted
out, Acts 3.19. And except you REPENT, says our Savior, you shall all Perish,
Luke 13.3. For when we are all brought to Christ's Tribunal at the great day, to
be there Eternally acquitted or condemned; we are taught in the most express
words, that Judgment shall pass upon every man according to his WORKS, Rev.
20.12, 13 So that if we would ask pardon and forgiveness according to Gods
will; and in such sort as he has promised to grant it, and we may justly hope
to receive it; we must desire it in (...), etc Clem. Romans 1. Ep. ad Cor. c. 9.
Repentance, and in true resolutions and readiness to obey. And then as for
strength and grace to enable us to overcome any sin, and to perform any virtue;
we are expressly informed that his will is to grant to such persons only, as
endeavor after those graces which they pray for, and are careful to exercise
and work with them. God will not bestow new grace upon us, till he see that we
have made good use of what he has bestowed already. We must improve those
talents which have formerly been entrusted with us, before he will think us
qualified to receive more. For so we are taught in the Parable of those Men who
had received the talents, Matt. 25. As a conclusion whereof, we have this laid
down as a rule of divine dispensations: To him that has, i. e. has wrought
with, and made use of that talent of grace which was granted to him, as those
servants had done who are mentioned verse. 20, 22. to him shall be given still
more, and he shall have more abundance: But from him that has not, i. e. has
not exercised and improved that wherewith he has already been entrusted, as
that wicked Servant had not done, who had hid it, verse. 25. so far is he from
receiving more, that, like as it was from the idle unworking servant, verse. 28.
from him shall be taken even what he has, verse. 29. And in that very place
where St Paul tells us, that God works in us both to will, and to do; he
acquaints us moreover that the way whereby he does that is, by blessing our own
endeavors, and giving success to our own working; and accordingly uses it as
an argument thereunto, work out your own salvation; and doubt not but you will
be able to go through with it, for it is God that prospers your endeavors,
and, by giving strength and success to them, works in you both to will and to
do, Phil. 2.12, 13. So that if we would ask grace and strength according to
Gods will, and in such sort as he will grant them; at the time of Praying we
must sincerely resolve; and when our Prayer is over, we must carefully and
honestly endeavor after them. An Jam. 5.16.
effectual desire shall serve our turn; and a working Prayer shall procure a
blessing: but besides it no other will.

Whatever therefore vain and wicked people may imagine; there is no Prayer that
will avail them when obedience is wanting. If we pray for pardon and mercy, God
will by no means hear us unless our hearts are penitent, and our lives
obedient. And in our Prayers for forgiveness, we must pray for obedience too.
We must be as sollicitous for the doing of our duty, as for the receiving of
our reward; and never in our Prayers omit to ask for that, which Christ thought
fit to give us as the highest instance of those things which we are to pray
for, viz. the Holy Spirit, Luke 11.13. And when we do pray for that, or for any
particular graces of it; we see that we have not done our work barely by
desiring it, till we go on also to endeavor after it. We must resolve when we
pray to seek that grace which we ask for; and we must effectually labor after
it, in the diligent use of all those means whereby it is either acquired or
increased, when our Prayer is over. All the way it is only our obedience which
can effectually recommend our prayers; so that whenever we ask for any thing,
if we would have any just hope of receiving it, we must be sure to obey with it.

And for this the Scriptures are express and plain. If I regard iniquity in my
heart, says the Psalmist, the Lord will not HEAR me, Psalm. 66.18. And God
himself says the same by his Prophet Isaiah in words most full and forcible.
When you spread forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you; yea when you
make many Prayers, I will not hear; your hands are full of blood. Wash you,
make you clean, put away the EVIL of your DOINGS from before mine eyes, cease
to DO evil, learn to DO well; seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the
fatherless, plead for the widow. When you have done this, you are fit to be
hearkened to, come now and let us reason together; pray for Pardon, and I will
forgive you, and though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be white as snow,
Isa. 1.15, 16, 17, 18. So long as men persist in their sins, it is in vain for
them to hope that God should ever accept their Prayers. For he that turns away
his ear, says the Wise Man, from HEARING the Law; even his PRAYER shall be an
abomination, Prove. 28.9. But if any man would have his Prayers granted, he must
take care to have his life obedient. For the eyes of the Lord are over the
Righteous, says St Peter, and his ears are open to THEIR Prayers: but the FACE
of the Lord is against them that DO evil, 1 Pet. 3.12. The acceptableness of a
Christians Prayers, consists, as St Paul intimates, in lifting up holy hands, 1 Timothy 2.8. Before God will Pardon any man upon his Prayers, Christ's Gospel must
absolve him; it must promise, before God perform with him. No man has any other
assurance that he shall receive what he desires, but his having done what God
commands. Whatsoever we ask we receive of him, says St John, because we KEEP
his Commandments, and DO those things that are pleasing in his sight, 1 John
3.21, 22.

And by all this it clearly appears, that no Prayers will avail us unto life
and pardon at the last day, unless we keep Gods Commandments, and obey with
them. There is no grace to be obtained without endeavors; nor any pardon to be
purchased without obedience. God will not hear us, if we refuse to hearken unto
him. Nothing can maintain a good understanding betwixt God and us, but only the
DOING of our duty: upon this condition he will grant us any thing, but without
it we can procure nothing. So that after all it is only our Obedience which can
make our Prayers available; and if ever we expect that God should grant them,
we must be sure to work and obey with them.

CHAP. VI. Of Pardon promised to our fear of God, and trust in him.
The CONTENTS.
Of Pardon promised to our fear of God, and trust in him. Of the influence
which men's fears have upon their endeavors, and how they carry on ignorant
minds into Superstition, but well informed judgments to Obedience. Of the
influence of men's trust in God upon their Obedience. The ineffectiveness of
most men's trust. Of the presumption and infidelity of such confidence. That
Pardon is promised to fear and trust so far only as we obey with them.

SEventhly, That condition whereupon we shall be Eternally accepted at the last
day, is sometimes called our fear of God, and sometimes our trust and hope in
him.

As for our fear of God, it is made the great means of our Pardon and
acceptance. I will teach you the good and right way to your bliss and
happiness, said Samuel to the Israelites; only fear the Lord, and in virtue of
that fear, serve him, 1 Samuel 12.24, 25. This fear has given right to pardon in
all times, and will eternally secure it. For Gods mercy is on them that fear
him, from generation to generation, Luke 1.50. Ps. 115.11, 13^
From everlasting to everlasting, Psalm. 103.17. So that well might Solomon say,
The Fear of the Lord is a Fountain of life, Prove. 14.27. and that he surely
knew it will go well with them that fear the Lord, Eccles. 8.12.

And then as for our Hope, or Trust in God; great things are spoken of it.
Blessed is he, says the Psalmist, who makes the Lord his Trust, Psalm. 40.4.
He is secure from all effects of his wrath and anger; for the Lord takes
pleasure in them that hope in his mercy, Psalm. 147.11. In particular, our
relying on Christ and confiding in him for our pardon and eternal salvation, is
said to be that which will never fail or deceive us. For he that hops or
believes on him, says St Paul, shall never be ashamed, by a misplaced
confidence or expectation, Romans 10.11.

Now our fear of God, and our hope or trust in his mercy, are of all our
passions the most active Causes and powerful Springs of our good works and
obedience.

As for our fears, no passion puts us upon so much pains and industry as they
do. They make us act to the utmost of our power, and do all that is to be done
to get protection from that evil which excites them. For fear has the deepest
root in our natural self-love, and desire of our own preservation; being raised
in us by the nearness of such things as either utterly destroy, or in some
degree impair it. And therefore in them the activity of our self-love is shown
to the utmost; as vehemently as we desire and endeavor to preserve ourselves
and our own ease; so vehemently must we desire and endeavor likewise to remove
the matter of our fears, which hangs over us to destroy, or to torment us.

The most natural effect of fear then is a most vigorous endeavor by all means
to remove that evil which we are afraid of. And according as this may be done
several ways; so does our passion of fear exert it self after several manners.
If we think the evil may be conquered, it pushes us on to fight and subdue it.
If it be above our strength, but may yet for all that be avoided; it puts us
upon all means of concealment or escape; and makes us seek either to lie hid,
or to fly from it. But if there is neither any prospect of withstanding the
power, nor of escaping the eye of him who is ready to inflict it; as there
never can be when God, who is both Almighty and Alseeing, is the Person feared;
then it hurries us on by all means to regain his favor and good will, that
thereby we may prevent it. And in Times of Ignorance, when men had great fears
and little knowledge, when they were grievously afraid of God, but knew not what
things he loved and delighted in, nor wherewith they might please him; this
fear of God put them upon all the nonsensical services, and foolish
propitiations of Superstition. But where God has plainly and clearly revealed
his will, and manifested to all that it is their obedience alone that can
continue them in his favor, or restore them to it after they have lost it:
here the only effect of fear, must needs be that which is known to be the only
means of favor, viz. our keeping of his Commandments, or obedience. So that
our fear of God is a most sure principle and effectual means of our serving and
obeying him.

And then as for our hope, or trust in Gods mercy, it is a most natural cause
of our doing our Duty likewise. For all hope implies both desire and a
likelihood of getting that which is desired; which two are all that is at any
time needful to make us vigorously endeavor after it. For if men will be at no
pains for a thing, it is either because they have little or no desire of it, or
no probability of succeeding in it. But when once they are pushed on by an
eager desire, it is only despair that can dull their endeavors in pursuit of
it. So that if we hope for mercy, we shall be at some pains for it, and by an
active service and obedience seek to procure it.

Indeed when the good thing that is hoped for needs no labor of ours, but our
naked trust and reliance is all that on our sides is required to it; our hope
will effect no endeavor after it, because none is necessary to obtain it. But
as for that eternal life and pardon, which Christ's Gospel proposes to our
hopes; they are offered us only upon certain Terms and Conditions, and will
never be attained by us without our Service and Obedience. And seeing obedience
here is the necessary means to the acquisition of that which we desire, the
same desire and hope which carries us on toward mercy and life, must spur us
on withal to works of duty and obedience also. They must be a Spring of
industry and good endeavor, because they make us resolve to procure that,
which is not to be got without them.

And in regard our fear of God, and our hope or trust in his mercy, are such
powerful Principles of our obedience to his Laws; therefore are Pardon and
Life, which are the rewards of Obedience, so frequently promised to them. God
never intends to reward an idle fear, or an unactive and careless trust; but
such only as are industrious and obedient.

It Is true indeed the generality of men have taken up a dangerous error;
especially in the latter of these, and are bold and presumptuous in their hopes
at the same time that they are most wicked and disobedient in their lives and
practice. They find no service of their own works wherein they may be
confident, and therefore they fly from them to Gods Goodness. They know this
full well by themselves, that they are wicked; but they know withal, that God
is gracious, and their hope is, that He will be merciful to them
notwithstanding their sins. They find themselves condemned indeed by his
Gospel; but their trust is to be relieved by his Nature; they are punishable
and wretched by his Laws, but they expect to be saved by his pity and kindness.
The Revelations of his Word, it is true, breathe out nothing to them but Death;
but their hope is, that he will be better than his Word, and that through the
infiniteness of his mercy, they shall at last be adjudged to pardon and eternal
life.

But such bold hopes and presumptuous confidences as these, are the ready way
to provoke and offend God, but by no means to atone and appease him. For thus
to hope in his Mercy against the plain Declarations of his Will, is to chashier
those measures of life which he has given us, and, by usurping the place of
Judge and Governor of the World, to make others of our own. It is plainly to
oppose his Essence to his Gospel, by making it bless those whom this condemns,
and to become Infidels to his Religion and Truth, under color of promoting his
Mercy and Goodness. It reproacheth his Nature under a pretense of Honoring it,
by making his Virtues enterfere, and his Excellencies inconsistent, and robbing
him of one most glorious Attribute to exalt another. But when he comes at last
to judge the World, he will effectually assert the truth of his Gospel, and
vindicate the Honor of his injured Attributes; in passing a just censure, and
inflicting a most severe punishment on all such blasphemous presumptions as
these are. For it is not an idle trust in God, or ineffective recumbency and
reliance on Christ for salvation that shall avail any man at that Day. No, if
they have despised his Laws, and their lives are disobedient, let them be as
presumptuous as they please with God, and as bold as they will with their
Savior, they shall certainly go to Hell in the midst of all their high flown
hopes and daring confidences. For God will be as good as his Word, and punish
disobedience according as he has threatened it. It is not only in his Word, but
in his very Nature, that he hates and abhors sin: so that he can never be
brought to reward and encourage it, being determined by his Natural
Inclination, as well as by the Truth of his Gospel, eternally to punish and
avenge it. He is not a God, says the Psalmist, who has pleasure in
wickedness; no, as an Argument of that, he will not endure it in his Presence,
Evil shall not dwell with him. The foolish, or disobedient, shall not be
suffered to stand in his sight, for he hates all the Workers of iniquity,
Psalm. 5.4, 5.

No man therefore must dare to place his hope and trust in God, till in his
works he honestly obeys him. It is only our doing what he requires, that can
give us sufficient grounds to expect the performance of those mercies which he
promises. A faithful obedience is the only firm foundation of a sure Trust, we
must keep his Commandments before we can safely confide in him.

When God says then that he who fears the Lord shall be blessed, and that he
who trusts and hopes in him shall not finally be ashamed; he speaks not of such
fear and trust as are separate from obedience, but of such only as are
conjoined with it. The Phrase is metonymical, our obedient works are employed,
although they are not expressly mentioned; for we must obey him through fear,
and do what he commands us in hopes of obtaining those mercies which he
promises, or else we shall never attain those blessings which we hope for.

And for this the Testimonies of the Scriptures are many and plain.

For as for our fear of God, it is of no account with him further than it makes
us obedient. The fear of the Lord, says Solomon, is to hate evil, Prove. 8.13.
It must be an instrument of amendment and reformation; a fear whereby men
depart from evil, Prove. 16.6. A means of perfecting our obedience and holy
living; for that is St Paul's Character of it, when he tells us of PERFECTING
holiness in the fear of the Lord, 2 Cor. 7.1. and of WORKING out our own
SALVATION with fear and trembling, Phil. 2.12. It is only when obedience thus
follows upon our fear, and is effected by it; that God accepts and rewards it.
I will teach you the right way to pardon and happiness, said Samuel, Fear the
Lord, and, together with that, SERVE him, 1 Samuel 12.24, 25. For if we would
hear the conclusion of the whole matter, as says the Wise Man, we must fear
God and keep his Commandments; this obedience and fear together is the whole
Duty of man, Eccles. 12.13. No man therefore can lay a just claim to Gods mercy
at the last day; but he who has feared him in such sort, as out of that
religious fear entirely to obey him. But whosoever fears so, mercy shall rest
on him for ever. For the mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting
on them that fear him, provided that out of that fear they keep his Covenant,
and his Commandments to DO them, Psalm. 103.17, 18.

And then for our trust and hope in Gods mercy, it is no saving trust, but a
blasphemous and bold presumption, if we hope in him whilst we are disobedient
and rebellious against him. A good man's trust is only in promised mercies,
which are never made to such as wilfully and impenitently transgress Gods Laws,
but only to those who honestly obey them. It is a trust, as the Psalmist
speaks, in Gods Word, and not against it, Psalm. 119.42. And because that word
denounces nothing but woes and threatenings to all wicked men, therefore, as he
speaks in another place, shall the righteous alone trust in him, Psalm. 64.10.
The hope of a Christian is not absolute, but suspended upon his performance of
certain terms; a hope upon his active service and obedience. So that whosoever
has it, and expects not to be disappointed in it, must purify himself, as St
John tells us, 1 John 3.3. Disobedience, so long as men continue in it, is a
most desperate and forlorn Condition, there being no just hope to any man but
in well-doing. It is, says St Paul, in teaching us to deny all ungodliness and
worldly lusts, and to live godlily, soberly and righteously in this present
world, that the Gospel encourages us to look for the fulfilling of our blessed
hope, Tit. 2.12, 13. And the way to hold fast the confidence and joy of a just
hope in Christ firm unto the end, he informs the Hebrews, is only by hearing,
and thereupon obeying Gods voice, and not hardening their hearts, as the
Israelites did, in the provocation, or those transgressions wherewith they
provoked him, in the day of their temptation in the wilderness, Heb. 3.6, 7, 8.
And the full assurance of hope, as he again declares to them, is no otherwise
to be upheld but by men's diligence in obeying, and in the work and labor of
love; which implies the whole of our obedience, Heb. 6.10, 11. So that, as the
Psalmist says, they must trust in the Lord, and, together with that, do good,
who are to receive mercy from him, Psalm. 37.3.

If men therefore will dare to sin, and yet presume; affront God Majesty, and
still trust in his Mercy: they must needs deceive their own Souls to their
utter destruction. For it is a vain confidence and an impudent presumption in
any man to rely upon Gods goodness for the pardon of his sins, without
repenting of them, and obeying him; whenas he has plainly told us, That his
goodness it self shall pity and pardon none but the Penitent and Obedient. He
trusts to a false hope, and leans upon a broken Reed; for as long as his
transgressions continue to separate between him and his God, whatever God CAN
do, yet certainly he WILL not save him. The Lords hand, says the Prophet
Isaiah to the afflicted Jews, is not shortened that it cannot save, nor his ear
heavy that it cannot hear: but your iniquities have separated between you and
your God, and your sins have hid his face from you, that he will not hear. For
your hand's are defiled with blood, and your fingers with iniquity, your lips
have spoken lies, your tongue has muttered perverseness: none calls for
Justice, nor any pleads for Truth; and since your disobedience is so heinous,
your hopes must needs be false, you TRUST in vanity, Isai. 59.1, 2, 3, 4.
Christ himself never dyed to reconcile God to men's sins, and to procure hopes
of pardon for the finally impenitent and unperswadably disobedient. So that no
man may ever think himself delivered to act wickedness; or wilfully transgress
Gods Laws, and still dare to trust in him. But if any are so bold and
frontless, Christ will rebuke them at the last Day, as God does the
presumptuous Jews by the Prophet Jeremiah; Behold, says he, you trust in lying
words which cannot profit you. Will you steal, murder, and commit adultery,
and swear falsely, and notwithstanding all that, come and stand before me in
this house which is called by my Name, as Men that own my service, and dare
trust in my love, and say, as in effect you do by such usage, we are delivered
to do all these abominations? Dare you by thus presuming upon my favor in the
midst of all your transgressions, make me become a Patron and Protector of your
villainies? And is this house which is called by my Name, become a Den or
Receptacle and Sanctuary of Robbers in your eyes? Behold I, even I, have seen
it, says the Lord; and that surely not to encourage and reward, but most
severely to punish it; for I will utterly cast you out of my sight, Jer. 7.8,
9, 10, 11, 15. God will by no means endure to have his own most holy Nature
become a support to sin, nor his Religion to be made a refuge for disobedience,
nor his Mercy and Goodness a Sanctuary to wicked and unholy men. So that no man
must dare to hope and trust in him, but he only who honestly observes his Laws
and uprightly obeys him.

That fear of God then, and trust in his mercy which the Gospel encourages, and
Christ our Judge will at the last Day accept of, is not a fear and trust
without obedience, but such only as implies it. We must serve him in fear, and
obey him through hope, as ever we expect he should acquit and pardon us. For no
fears or hopes will avail us unto bliss, but those that amend our lives, and
effect in us an honest service and obedience.

CHAP. VII. Of Pardon promised to the love of God, and of our Neighbor.
The CONTENTS.
Of Pardon promised to the love of God, and of our Neighbor. Of the fitness of
an universal love to produce an universal obedience. That pardon is promised to
it for this Reason. The Conclusion.

EIghthly, That condition which the Gospel indispensably requires of us to our
pardon and happiness, is sometimes called Love. For of this St Paul says
plainly, that it is the fulfilling of the Law, Romans 13.10. It is the great
condition of Life, the standing Terms of mercy and happiness. We have the same
Apostles word for it of our love of God. Those things which neither eye has
seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man to conceive, are
prepared for them who LOVE God, 1 Cor. 2.9. And again, Chap. 8. If any man love
God, the same is known or accepted of him, verse. 3. And St John says as much of
the love of our Neighbor. Beloved, let us LOVE one another, for LOVE is of
God, and every one that loves is born of God, and knows God, 1 John 4.7. And
again, God is Love, and manifested his Love in giving Christ to dye for us. And
if we love one another, God dwells in us. For hereby, by this mark and
evidence, we know that we dwell in him, and he in us; because he has given us
of this loving temper and Spirit of his, ver. 8, 9, 12, 13. And to the same
purpose he speaks fully in the third Chapter of that first Epistle, We know,
says he, that we have passed from death unto life; because we LOVE the
BRETHREN, ver. 14.

Now our hearty love both of God and men, is a most natural and easy Principle
of an entire service and obedience. For the most genuine and proper effect of
Love, is to seek the satisfaction and delight of the persons beloved. It is
careful in nothing to behave it self unseemly, but to keep back from every
thing that may offend, and forward in all such services as may any ways
pleasure and content them. If they rejoice, it congratulates; if they mourn, it
grieves with them. If they are in distress, it affords succor; if in want,
supply; in doubts, it ministers counsel; in business, dispatch. It is always
full and teeming with good offices, and transforms it self into all shapes
whereby it may procure their satisfaction, and render their condition
comfortable and easy to them. So that it exerts it self in pity to the
miserable, in protection to the oppressed, in relief to the indigent, in
counsel to the ignorant, in encouragement to the good, in kind reproof to the
evil, in thanks for kindnesses, in patience and forbearance upon sufferings, in
forgiveness of wrong and injuries: In one word it is an universal Source and
Spring of all works of Justice, Charity, Humility and Peace. Now the Body of
our Religion is made up of these Duties. For what does the Lord thy God require
of thee, O man, says the Prophet Micah, but to do justly, to love mercy, and
to walk humbly with thy God, Mic. 6.8. Those things which God has adopted into
his Service, and made the matter of our duty toward one another, are nothing
else but these natural effects of love and kindness, and expressions of good
nature toward all men. All the Precepts of Religion only forbid our doing
evil, and require our doing good to all the World. And since, as the Apostle
argues, love seeks all things that are good, and works no evil to our
Neighbor; therefore Love must needs be the fulfilling of those Laws which
concern them. This Commandment, for instance, as he illustrates it, Thou shall
not commit Adultery; thou shall not kill; thou shall not steal; thou shall not
bear false witness; thou shall not covet: all these, and if there be any other
Commandment relating to our Brethren, it is briefly comprehended in this
Saying, Thou shall LOVE they Neighbor as thy self. For LOVE works none of
all these ills to our Neighbor, therefore LOVE is the fulfilling of the Law,
Romans 13.9, 10.

Thus does our Love of our Neighbor fulfill all those particular Laws which
contain our Duty toward them: and in like manner our Love of God fulfils all
those other Precepts which comprehend our Duty toward him. For all that he
requires of us toward himself, is neither more nor less than to honor and
worship him; to do nothing in all our behavior that savours of disrespect
toward him; nor by any thought, word or action to disgrace or contemn him. But
now nothing renders any person so secure from contempt, as our love and
affection for him. Affront and reproach are a great part of enmity and despite,
and so can never proceed from us toward those whom we love and value. But this
is always certain, that if we are kindly affected toward any person, we shall
not fail to express a due honor of him, and bear him a just respect and
veneration. So that if we do indeed love God, he is secure from all affront;
and disobedience being a most consummate reproach, since our Love will not
permit us to dishonor, it can never suffer us to disobey him.

Thus mighty and powerful, easy and natural a Principle of an universal
obedience, both toward God and men, is an universal Love: it does the work
without difficulty, and carries us on to obey with ease; in as much as all the
particular Precepts and Instances of obedience, are but so many genuine
effects, and proper expressions of it. The effects of our love are the parts of
our obedience; the products of our Duty and Religion, as well as of our
passion. So that it is a most natural Spring of our obedient service, because
it prompts us to the very same things, to which God has bound and obliged us by
his Precepts.

But besides this way of an universal love's influencing an universal
obedience, through this coincidence of the effects of Love and the instances of
Duty; our Love of God, who is our King and Governor, were a sure principle of
our obedience to him, were his Precepts instanced, not in the same things which
are the effects of a general Love, which is the true Case; but in things
different from them. For although our love would not prompt us to perform them
by its natural tendency toward them, and for their own sakes: yet it would
through submission and duty, and for his sake who enjoined them. It would make
us deny our selves to pleasure him; and produce other effects than our own
temper enclines us to, to do him service. For as Love is for doing hurt to
none; so least of all to Governors: it will give to every one their own, but
to them most especially. Now Duty and Service is that which we owe to our
Rulers; and the proper way of Love's exerting it self in that, is by obedience.
If we love, we shall be industrious to please; and the only way of pleasing
them, is by doing what they command us. For there is no such offense to a
Governor, as the transgression of his Laws; no injury like that of opposing
his Will, and despising his Authority. To do this is to renounce all
subjection, and to cast off his Yoke; and so is not to express love, but to
declare enmity; not affectionately to own, but in open malice to defy him.
But if any man would contribute to his delight, there is no way for that but by
a performance of his pleasure: it is nothing but our obedience that can add to
his contentment, or evidence our Love. For disobedience to our Governors is
clearly the most professed hatred, as the observance of our Duty is the most
allowed instance of friendship and good will.

So that Love is a Spring and Principle of our Obedience, not only because the
Commandment and it run parallel, and the instances of Gods Laws are the same
with the effects of a general Love; but also because our love of God would make
us obey him, even in such instances of Duty as differ from them. For all that
aversion which we have to the thing commanded, would be outweighed by our
desire to please him who commands it: and although we should neglect it upon
its own; yet for his sake we should certainly fulfill and perform it.

And because our Love of God and men is so natural a Spring, and so sweet and
easy a Principle to produce in us a perfect and entire obedience to all those
Laws which concern either, or to any other: therefore has God promised so nobly
to reward it. He never intends to crown an idle and unworking love; but such
only as is active and industrious. For when he says that he who loves God and
men is known of God, and accepted by him, and born of him; and that God dwells
in him, and has prepared Heaven for him: he speaks metonymically, and means all
the while a love with these religious effects, a love that is productive of an
entire service and obedience.

And to this Point the Scriptures speak fully. For as for our love of God
himself, and of our Savior Christ; that is plainly of no account in his
judgment, but when it makes us keep his Commands, and become industriously
obedient. If ye LOVE me, says Christ, keep my Commandments; for he that has
my Commandments, and KEEPS them, he it is that loves me; and he only who so
loves me, in obeying me, shall be beloved of my Father, and I will love him,
John 14.15, 21. Whosoever keeps Gods Word, says St John, in him verily is the
love of God made perfect: and hereby it is, by this perfection of Love in
Obedience, that we know we are in him, 1 John 2.5. But if we have only a
pretended verbal love, or an inward passion for God, and show no Signs or
Effects of it in our obedient works and actions: we shall be as far from being
accepted by him, as we are from any true and real service of him. He will look
upon all our Professions only as vain speech, and downright flattery: but will
not esteem it as having any thing of sober truth and reality. For whosoever
has this Worlds goods, and sees his Brother has need, and obeys not Gods
Command of showing mercy (and the Case is the same in other Instances) but
shuts up his bowels of compassion from him; how dwells the love of God in
him? 1 John 3.17.

And then as for our love of our Brethren; it does not at all avail us unto
Mercy and Life, unless it make us perform all those things which are required
of us, by the Laws of Justice, Charity and Beneficence toward them. My little
Children, says St John, let us not love only in word, and in tongue; but in
deed also and in truth. For it is hereby, by this operative love, that we know
we are of the truth, and shall assure our hearts in full confidence of his
mercy before him, 1 John 3.18, 19. Our love to them is to be manifested as
Christ's was to us, viz. in good effects and a real service; yea, when occasion
requires it, and their eternal weal may be very much promoted, and their Faith
confirmed by it, in giving up our selves to Martyrdom, and laying down our own
lives for their advantage. Hereby, says this same Apostle, perceive we the love
of God, because he laid down his life for us. And if we would be reputed to
have that love which, as we are told at the fourteenth Verse, wafts us over
from Death unto Life; we ought, upon a fit occasion, not to flinch from the
most costly service, but even to lay down our very St Clemens Retells us of
these hights of Charity, which were practiced in his Time, (...), 1 Ep. ad Cor.
c. 55. And the Parabolani or men who hazarded their own lives to redeem the
lives of others, were very numerous among the Christians in the first times.
Which Office St. Paul tells us Priscilla and Aquila, and E^aphroditas had done
for him, Romans 16.3, 4. Phil. 2.30. This practice is a most excellent Comment
upon this Text.
lives for the Brethren, 1 John 3.16. It is only this obedient and operative
love of men which will be owned by Christ our Judge, and confer a just claim to
Life and Pardon at the last Day. Our Love will not be rewarded as a thing that
is absolute in it self, but only as an Instrument; in as much as it makes us,
as St Paul says, to fulfill the whole Law which makes any thing an instance of
Duty toward them, Romans 13.8. But if we only profess love to them in kind words
and tender expressions, but show none in our works and actions; this idle,
useless love will be of no account to us, nor benefit us more than it profits
them. For if a Brother, or a Sister, says St James, be naked and destitute of
daily food; and one of you gives them only some good words, and says unto them,
Depart in peace, be ye warmed with Cloths, and filled with Food; but
notwithstanding all this affectionate language, ye give them not in the mean
while those things which are needful for the Body; what does it profit? Nothing
at all surely, nor will it ever advantage your selves as an instance of that
mercy which rejoices against judgment, Verse 13. more than it profits them,
James 2.15, 16.

So that when Christ comes to Judgment at the last Day, we see plainly that no
love either of God or men will avail us; but only that which has kept the
Commandments; we shall never be acquitted at that Bar upon a pretense of love
without obedience: for all that can possibly stand us in any stead there, is a
loving service, a love which has made us careful and diligent to obey.

And thus at last we have fully seen, that as for all those other things
besides obedience, whereunto the Gospel promises pardon and happiness; they are
by no means available to our bliss when they are separate from obedience, but
then only when they effect and imply it. They all aim at it, and end in it, and
are of no account in Gods Judgment further than they produce it. It is not
either our knowing Christ, or our believing Christ, or our being in Christ, or
our trusting in Christ, or our loving Christ, or our fears of God, or our
confessions of sins, or our pouring out many prayers; or any thing else that
will save us whilst we disobey. No, at the last Day we shall certainly be
damned notwithstanding them, if the obedience of our works is wanting. It is
only a working service that will please our Judge, and which can possibly
secure us: if we are able in that Court to produce that, it will clear us, but
without it nothing else will. Christ's Gospel, whereby all of us must stand or
fall at that Day, has fully declared this already; and Christ himself will then
confirm it. So that it is in vain to cast about for other marks, and to seek
after other Evidences for our title to bliss and happiness; nothing less than
our Repentance and Obedience will avail us unto life, and through the merits of
Christ, and the Grace of his Gospel it shall.

And now at last we see clearly what that Condition is which the Gospel
indispensably requires of us, and which is to mete out to us our last doom of
bliss or misery; that in the general it is nothing else, neither more nor less
than our obedience.

BOOK II. Of the Laws of the Gospel, which are the Rule of this Obedience in
particular.
CHAP. I. Of the particular Laws comprehended under the Duty of Sobriety.
The CONTENTS.
A Division of our Duty into three general Virtues, Piety, Sobriety,
Righteousness. Of the nature of Sobriety. The particular Laws commanding and
prohibiting under this first Member. A larger explication of the nature of
Mortification.

BUT in regard our working and obeying is that whereupon all our hopes and
happiness, our security and comfort hangs; it is very necessary that after all
which has been hitherto discoursed of it in the general, we go on still
further, and enquire of it more particularly. For if it be our Obedience or
Disobedience that must dispense Life or Death to us, and eternally save or
destroy us at the last Day; then whosoever would know beforehand what shall be
his final Sentence, must enquire what is his present state, and what have been
his past actions, whether in them he have obeyed or no. And the way to
understand that, is first to know what those Laws are whereto his obedience is
due, and in what manner and degrees he is to obey them: and when once he has
informed himself in these, he may quickly learn from the Testimony of his own
heart and Conscience, whether he has performed that Obedience which is
indispensably required to his happiness, or has fallen short of it.

And to give the best assistance that I can in so weighty a Case, I will here
proceed to enquire further in this Obedience, and show concerning it these two
things; I. What those Laws are which under the Sanctions of Life or Death the
Gospel binds us to obey; And, II. What degrees and manner of obedience is
indispensably required to them.


I. Then I will enquire what those Laws are, whereby at the last Day we must
all be judged, and which under the Sanction of Life or Death the Gospel binds
us to obey. And that I may render this enquiry as useful as I can, I will set
down, as I go along, the meaning and explication of those several Virtues and
Vices, which are either required or forbidden in the particular Laws, that so
we may more truly and readily understand whether the Virtues have been
performed, or the Vices incurred; and whether thereby the Laws have been broken
or kept by us.

As for the Laws and Commands of God, they are all reduced by St Paul to three
Heads. For either they require something from us toward God himself, and so
are contained in works of piety; or toward our Neighbors, all which are
comprehended in works of righteousness; or toward our own selves, as all those
Precepts do which are taken up in works of sobriety. In these three general
Virtues is comprised the Sum of our Christian Duty, even all that is required
by the Gospel as the Condition of Salvation. For the Gospel, says he, or that
Grace of God which brings us the welcome offers of Salvation, has appeared now
to all men, teaching us, as ever we expect that salvation which it tenders to
us, that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should LIVE SOBERLY, GODLY,
and RIGHTEOVSLY in this present world, Tit. 2.11, 12.

I begin with that which contains all our Duty toward our selves, viz.
Sobriety.

Sobriety is in the general, Such a regulation of all our actions, whether they
concern our Bodies or our Souls, as makes it appear that they are guided by a
So (...), the Greek name for sobriety, is fetched by the Greek Lexicons from
(...) and (...), from its preserving and evidencing a sound Mind or Reason.
sound mind presiding in Flesh, and that the animal Body which they flow from,
is under the Command of a spiritual Reason. It is a doing what is becoming and
fit for such Creatures as are Soul as well as Body, that have a wise and
discerning Spirit which should govern and give Laws in this lump of Flesh. So
that Sobriety is a taking care, and giving what is due and becoming to both the
Parts of our Natures, viz. our Bodies and our Souls.

As for our Bodies, all the things in the world which affect them are of a
limited goodness or illness; but yet, in their desires and aversations of them,
they do not of themselves know any Limits: So that in their desires and
actions, that dueness and decency which Sobriety prescribes, is keeping within
due bounds or moderation.

And this Moderation is either, 1. Of their desires and use of such things as
gratify and delight them; whether that inveigling delight, which causes such
excess of use and desire, be 1. In Meats, and our desire and use of them, both
as to their quantity and quality, is moderated by Temperance. 2. In Drinks, and
the like moderation there is by Sobriety, more particularly so called. 3. In
other bodily pleasures, which are particularly called Lust, and our bodily
desires and use of them are moderated by Chastity. And the (...), is that
whereby a man (...) Andron. Rh. lib. (...).
ability to contain our selves, and to restrain the violence of our desires
herein, is called Continence. 4. In Riches and Honors, and the desire and use
of these are moderated by contempt of the world and contentedness.


In our bodily desires, and use of all these things, by reason of the unbridled
temper of our bodily Appetites, which stop at no bounds, nor ever know when
they have enough, we are in great danger to exceed: and therefore our desires
and use of them stand in need to be moderated and retrenched by these Virtues,
that it may appear we understand and act, not as brute Beasts, who have nothing
else but bodily appetite to guide them; but as men, who have wise Souls
presiding in Flesh to keep within decency and due bounds the exorbitant
inclinations of our Bodies. Which Souls moreover, as we show by such actions,
are of an immortal and invaluable nature, whose interest therefore is
infinitely dearer to us, and calls incomparably more for our care and pains,
than our Bodies either do, or in reason ought to call for

2. Of their aversation and avoidance of such things as grieve and trouble
them. Whether that matter of our bodily avoidance be 1. The troubles and losses
that are laid in the way of our Duty; and our avoidance of these is moderated
by the Duty of taking up the Cross. 2. The irksome pains which we take in going
through it, and performing it; and our avoidance of this is moderated by the
Virtues of diligence and watchfulness. 3. The great evils which we have already
fallen under, and are suffering for it; and our avoidance and flight of these
is moderated and restrained by patience.



Our hatred and avoidance of all these evils, which in themselves are naturally
prone to be excessive, are so to be moderated and overruled by these Virtues,
that all the world may see we are not acted as the brute Beast, by mere sense
and appetite, which know no Rules of decency, nor stop at any limits; but know
and do as becomes men, who are endowed with spiritual and discerning Souls,
which understand how to give Laws, and prescribe Rules of decency to our
fleshly Appetites, and whose sins are far worse evils than any or all the
sufferings which can befall our Bodies: So that to keep back from them, we will
not avoid and fly from these, but willingly embrace and undergo them.

And to enable us the better thus to moderate all the desires and aversations,
and to keep perfectly under Command, and within just bounds these naturally
extravagant tendencies and propensions of our Flesh: we must curb and keep it
in, and dead in great degrees, not only its immoderate and excessive, but also
its innocent eagerness and inclinations, lest they become a Snare to us, and
acquire so much strength by our indulgence of them, as will carry us on to
gratify them at other times when they are not innocent, but sinful; which, but
for such curbing and conquest of them, they would be sure to do. And this is
done by the general Virtues of mortification and self-denial.

The great matter indeed, and principle Object of mortification and
self-denial, is our sinful appetites, and such disobedient actions as we are
tempted and drawn into by the untamed inclinations of our Bodies. And this St
Paul affirms is an indispensable Duty, and a Virtue of absolute necessity unto
life. If ye live after the Flesh, says he, you shall dye; but if you through
the Spirit do mortify the DEEDS of the Body, you shall live, Romans 8.13.

But as our sinful and disobedient appetites are the prime Object of all
religious self-denial and mortification, and that which is absolutely
necessary, as the end: so likewise are our innocent appetites an inferior
object of it, and our mortification of them is a necessary means and
instrument, without which we shall never be able to mortify the other. For a
free allowance of our bodily desires in all things lawful, and an unlimited
gratification of them in all instances whatsoever where they are innocent;
would certainly prove a Snare to us, and betray us into a like indulgence and
satisfaction of them in some Cases where they are sinful and disobedient. And
the reason of this is plain, because if we should gratify them in all things
where we may lawfully, and never deny them any thing but what is sinful; they
must needs come by long use and indulgence to rule in us, and to have a great
Power and Empire over us. We shall find it a matter of great difficulty to put
them by, and a very painful task to deny them any thing; so that whithersoever
they lead us, it is odds but we shall follow them. But now as for their Parts,
they make no difference between an innocent and a sinful enjoyment: they do not
distinguish things into good and evil; they are not moved by Law and decency,
but pleasure; and desire what is delightsom and agrees with them, whether it
happen to be allowed to them, or forbidden. If by a customary gratification
therefore, and indulgence of them in any thing, even in instances that are
innocent and lawful, we suffer our bodily appetites to grow strong in us, and
to get the guidance and management of us; they will overruled us in instances
that are prohibited, as well as in those that are allowed; and make us fulfill
them in things sinful, as well as in things innocent. So that if we would be
sure to conquer and subdue them in all such instances as are sinful, we must
take care that they grow not strong upon us in any instances whatsoever; but
infeeble them, and keep them low, and make them tame and governable, ready to
come or go at our own pleasure. And this now is a piece of Command and Mastery,
which is never to be hoped for in gratifying and indulging them in any sort of
instances, but only by mortifying and denying them in all. For this power of
denying them at our own pleasure cannot otherwise be attained, but by a long
use and custom of denials: we must learn to deny and mortify them in
particular Instances, before we can in any reason hope to deny them for
altogether.

And this mortification and denial of our lawful and innocent bodily appetites,
being thus plainly necessary to the denial and mortification of our sinful and
unlawful bodily desires and actions; our Lord Christ, who best understood the
necessities of our natures, what instruments were most necessary, and what
means most proportionate for us, has enacted it into a Law. So that now it is
every man's duty to mortify and deny not only all sinful bodily actions and
desires; but, so far as is necessary unto that, all such as are innocent and
lawful also. And according to the different degrees of men's progress herein,
are their different perfections in Virtue, and their different measures of
security and assurance that they shall continue in it. It being only the
unmortifiedness of their fleshly desires which can prove a Snare to them, and a
dangerous temptation; Every man, as St James says, being tempted then, when he
is drawn away of his own Lusts, and enticed, Jam. 1.14.

And all the forenamed Virtues, viz. Temperance, Sobriety, Chastity, etc. are
Duties incumbent upon us, and implied in that care which this general Virtue
Sobriety takes of our meaner Part, our Bodies.

And then as for what more directly concerns our Souls, that dueness and
decency which Sobriety prescribes in their actions, and toward them, is
either, 1. In thinking no better of our selves than we deserve, but having a
just sense of all our weaknesses and defects; which is humility and lowliness
of mind. 2. In taking all that just care and thoughtfulness after their future
good and happiness, which their worth requires; which is heavenly-mindedness,
or contriving and designing for the things of Heaven.


So that those particular Laws of God, which command something to be done by us
toward our own selves, both as to our Bodies, and our Souls, and which are all
comprised under the general Name, Sobriety; are these,

The Law of humility, of heavenly-mindedness, of temperance, of sobriety, of
chastity, of continence, of contempt of the world, and contentment with our
present condition, of courage and taking up the Cross, of diligence and
watchfulness, of patience, of mortification and self-denial.

And as he has commanded us to exercise all these Virtues toward our own
selves; so has he as strictly forbid us to act those Vices which are contrary
to them: as are these that follow.

First, To humility, or lowliness of mind, is opposed, 1. An over-high conceit
of our own excellence and pre-eminence above others, making us set our selves
and strive to appear above them, and (...) is (...), Theoph. Char. Ethic. c. 25.
contemn and despise them as persons that are below us: which is pride. 2. An
outward expression of this, in making a false show of more excellence than
indeed we have, whether in religions, natural, or civil endowments, which
implies (...) and (...) are reckoned by Arist. as the extremities of veracity
and species of a he. (...) he says is one, who is (...), Ethic. ad Nicom. l. 2.
c. 7. and l. 4. c. 7. Theop^^a^^^s defines it to be a ^aising a greater opinion
of us than we really deserve. (...), Char. Ethic. 24. And Hesych. explains
(...), i. e. (...).
hypocrisy joined with pride; and is called arrogance, ostentation, boasting.
3. An industrious affecting in all things, by setting out our own praise, and
exposing our achievements, to get the honor and praise of others answerable
to the conceit which we have of our own selves; which is vainglory. 4. A
restless pursuit of honor and great Places, which we conceit our selves to be
worthy of, which is Ambition.


And the effects of this pride and elation of mind are, 1. In our behavior, a
scornful and contemptuous disrespect and sleight of others; which is
haughtiness. And if it go on to an unusual and enormous degree, it is
insolence. And this haughtine's when it is expressed in a commanding way, as if
we had Lordship and Authority over them, is imperiousness. Which, when it is
shown in exacting their submission to our dogms or opinions, is dogmaticalness,
or impatience of contradiction. 2. In our Speeches of others, an envious
depression and disparagement of them, the better to set off our own selves;
which is backbiting. 3. In our conversation a mixture of pride and envy, or an
(...) Hesych.
envious provoking strife of out-doing others and being better thought of our
selves, or of hindering their designs, lest they should enjoy what we, who in
our own opinion deserve it better, are deprived of; which is emulation.


Secondly, To heavenly-mindedness, is opposed an over-industrious care of
present things; or being wholly or chiefly taken up with this World; which is
worldliness.

Thirdly, To moderation is opposed luxury or excess. And as that moderation
which sobriety prescribed was either in meats, or drinks, etc. so is this
breach of sobriety in excess likewise. For,

First, To temperance is opposed intemperance, which when it is a Luxury, 1. In
the quantity of Meat, is called Gluttony. 2. In the deliciousness or quality of
it, it is called Voluptuousness.


Secondly, To sobriety, or a moderate and undisturbing use of Drink, is opposed
a stupifying and intoxicating use of it, which is Drunkenness. And this when it
is accompanied with (...), Hesych.
boisterousness, unchaste Songs, and riotous mirth; is called revelling.

Thirdly, To Chastity is opposed unchastness; and that weakness which betrays
us into it, viz. our subjection to our bodily Lusts, and inability to contain
them within due bounds, is called incontinence: Which issues out and expresses
it self, 1. In preparatory enticements, by an indulgence to provoking gestures,
touches, words, or actions; which is called lasciviousness or wantonness. The
particular expression whereof in obscene and (...), Hesych.
shameful words, is filthiness. And if they be uttered in picquancy of wit, and
smartness of conceit, it is foolish or (...)* Hesych.
obscene Jesting. 2. In the acting or execution of it; which may be done, 1. By
one person, upon their own Body alone; and then it is impurity or uncleanness.
2. By two persons, each with other. Which if they are both men, is called
Sodomy; and by St Paul, Romans 1.27. Men with men working that which is unseemly;
and the persons who are guilty of it are called the abominable, Rev. 21.8. And
the persons suffering themselves to be so abused, are called the effeminate.



But if they be Man and Woman, then either, 1. One, or both are married to
another; and so it is Adultery. 2. Both are unmarried, and so it is Fornication.
Which if it be, 1. By the joint-consent of both, is Whoredom, or bare
Fornication; and this, when the Parties are too nearly allied, is called
Incest. 2. By forcing of one; and then it is Rape or ravishing. Which Vice St
Paul expresses by that (...).
word which we translate Extortioners, 1 Cor. 5.11. and Chap. 6.10.



Fourthly, To contempt of the world and contentment with our present condition,
is opposed covetousness, which is an immoderate love of the world, or an
unsatisfiedness with what we have, and an (...).
insatiable desire of more; and grudging or repining.

Fifthly, To taking up the Cross is opposed our being scandalized, or turned
out of the way of Duty and Obedience, by reason of it; or a politic and
selfish deserting of our Duty to avoid it.

Sixthly, To diligence and watchfulness in doing of our Duty, is opposed a
heedlesness of it, and remiss application to it; which is carelessness and
idleness.

Seventhly, To patience in suffering for it, is opposed an immoderate dread of
pain, and dishonest avoidance of it; which is softness and fearfulness.

Eighthly, To mortification and self-denial, is opposed self-love and
self-pleasing; which as it is an industrious care to please and gratify our
bodily senses, is called sensuality; and as it is a ready and constant serving
and obeying the lusts and desires of the Flesh; especially, when they carry us
against the Commands of God, is called carnality.

These are those Vices and breaches of Duty toward our selves, which Gods Laws
have prohibited under the pains of Death and Hell: as the other were such
Virtues as under the same penalty he exacts of us.

So that in the general Law of Sobriety we see are contained all these
following, whether commanding or forbidding Laws.

The commanding Law of humility, of heavenly-mindedness, of temperance, of
sobriety, of charity, of continence, of contempt of the World and contentment,
of courage and taking up the Cross, of diligence and watchfulness, of patience,
of mortification and self-denial.

And opposite to these the forbidding Law, against pride, against arrogance or
ostentation, against vainglory, against ambition, against haughtiness, against
insolence, against imperiousness, against dogmaticalness, against envious
backbiting, against emulation, against worldliness, against intemperance,
against gluttony, against voluptuousness, against drunkenness, against
revelling, against incontinence, against lasciviousness or wantonness, against
filthiness, against obscene Jestings, against impurity or uncleanness, against
Sodomy, against effeminateness, against adultery, against fornication, against
whoredom, against incest, against rape, against covetousness, against grudging
and repining, against refusing or being scandaled at the Cross, against
idleness and carelessness, against fearfulness and softness, against self-love,
against carnality, against sensuality.

CHAP. II. Of LOVE the Epitome of Duty toward God and Men, and of the
particular Laws comprehended under Piety toward God.
The CONTENTS.
Of the Duties of Piety and Righteousness, both comprehended in one general
Duty, LOVE. It the Epitome of our Duty. The great happiness of a good nature.
The kind temper of the Christian Religion. Of the effects of LOVE. The great
Duty to God is Honor. The outward expression whereof is worship. The great
offense is dishonor. Of the several Duties and transgressions contained under
both.

FOR the two remaining Members in St Paul's Division, viz. Godliness or Piety,
and Righteousness, which require something from us to God or to our Neighbor;
they may yet be reduced into a narrower compass, and are both comprised in that
one word LOVE. For all that ever God requires of us, either to himself or
toward other men, is only heartily and effectually to LOVE them. And this
abridgment of our whole Duty, in respect of these two remaining parts of it
toward God and man, into that one compendious Law of LOVE, is no more than
what our Savior Christ and his Apostle Paul have already made to our hands.
For hear how they speak of it: Jesus says unto the Lawyer, Thou shall LOVE the
Lord thy God with all thy heart, and all thy soul, and all thy mind. This is
the first and great Commandment: and the second is like unto it, Thou shall
love thy Neighbor as thy self. On these two, which in the thing commanded,
LOVE, are but one, hang all the Law (of the ten Commandments, viz. which meddle
not with our Duty toward our selves, but only toward God and our Neighbor)
and the Prophets, Matthew. 22.37, 38, 39, 40. And St Paul speaks home to the same
purpose: By love, says he, serve one another; for all the LAW is fulfilled in
one word, even this, Thou shall LOVE thy Neighbor as thy self, Gal. 5.13, 14.
And speaking again of the Laws concerning our Neighbor, he tells us that LOVE
works no ill to his Neighbor, and therefore Love is the fulfilling of the
Law, Romans 13.10.

Thus rare and heavenly a Religion is that of our Savior Christ: a Religion
that is not content to have only great and eminent measures of goodness in it,
but is perfectly made up of LOVE and good Nature. All that it requires from us
is only to be kind-hearted, and full of good Offices both toward God and men.
Every man of a loving good nature is inclined by his temper to do all that is
demanded by Gods Law; so that he has nothing remaining to turn his temper into
obedience, but to direct his intention, and to exert all the effects of love
for the sake of Gods Command, which he is otherwise strongly excited to by the
natural propensions of his own mind. His passion and his God require the same
service, and that which is only a natural fruit of the first, may become, if he
so design it, a piece of Religion and Obedience to the latter. For the
particular effects of Love, are the particulars of our Duty. Love is the great
and general Law, as ill will and enmity are the prime transgression: and the
instances of Love are the instances of our obedience, as all the particular
effects of ill will are those very instances wherein we disobey. So that by
running over all the special effects of love or ill will, we may quickly find
what are the Particulars of Duty and Transgression.

Now the prime and most immediate Effects of Love are, 1. To do no evil to the
persons beloved, nor to take away from them any thing which is theirs, and
which they have a right to. And this founds all the Duties of Justice. But 2.
To do all good offices and show kindness to them, which founds all the Duties
of Charity.


And these two take in our whole Duty, both in Piety toward God, and also in
Righteousness toward men.

1. The proper and genuine effect of love to God is to do no evil, but in great
readiness to do all the good and service which we can for him: in which two are
implied all the branches of piety, which is the great and general Duty toward
him.

To be kind and serviceable to God is nothing more than to honor him. For his
Nature is so perfect and self-sufficient that it cannot receive; and ours so
impotent and poor that we cannot give any thing else but honor to him. As on
the other side, to do evil to him is only to dishonor him. For he is out of
our power as for any other injury, and there is no way possible left for us to
reach him, but only by our contumelious usage and disrespect of him.

To do no evil, I say, but to be kind and serviceable to God, is nothing more
but to honor him. It implies our having in our minds honorable opinions of
him, and expressing in our carriage and behavior a respect and acknowledgment
of those glorious Attributes and Perfections which are in him. The former, viz.
the high opinion of his Excellencies, those particularly which are instances of
Power and Goodness, in our minds, is called Honor. The latter, viz. the
expressions of this honorable opinion and acknowledgment in our thoughts,
words or actions, is called worship.

And this worship is an acknowledgment either, 1. Of his Truth and Knowledge,
in believing his Word, and taking things upon his Authority, seeing he neither
can be deceived himself, nor will deceive us; which is Faith. 2. Of his Power
and Goodness, 1. In our good will or kind affection for him as a most
beneficial and lovely Being, which is called LOVE. And this as it effects a
warm concernedness for his honor, chiefly when any thing opposes it, is zeal.
2. In relying on him for the supply of our wants, as one that is most able and
ready to relieve them which is trust and dependence. A particular effec^
whereof is a hopeful making known our desires to him in begging such good
things at his hands as we stand in need of; which is Prayer.
3. Of his bounty and beneficence, in a grateful sense and affectionate owning
that all the good things which we receive proceed from him; which is
thankfulness. 4. Of his Power and Justice, in an awful backwardness to offend
him, in regard he will not excuse, and can most severely punish all Offenders;
which is fear. 5. Of his Wisdom, and Rule or Authority. 1. In acquiescing in
his Disposals, as being most wise and most authentic; which is submission or
resignedness. 2. In performing his Commands, as requiring things most fit for
us, and most due from us; which is obedience.



These are those particular effects which flow from our love of God, and which
make up that part of Duty which he requires from us toward himself.

And opposite to this love of God and these effects and expressions of it,
which are made our Duty, and particularly commanded under this Head; are our
hatred and ill will at him, with all the particular ways of expressing it,
which are the contrary instances of sin, and those very Vices that are
forbidden.

Now God, as I said, being out of our reach as to any possible way of being
injured by us or suffering evil from us, otherwise than by our vilifying him,
and lessening of his honor: the prime effect of our hatred of him can be no
other than our dishonouring him. And this may be instanced, 1. In denying
either his Being or Existence, that he is God; which is Atheism: or his
Cognizance and Government of the World; which is Epicurism or denying
Providence. 2. In thinking or speaking reproachfully of him, which is
blasphemy. And this, when it is such a disfiguration of his Being or Nature, as
makes him an arbitrary, foolish and (...), says Theophras^us, is (...), Char.
Eth. c. 17. (...), Maximus Tyrius Dissirt 4. Agreeably whereto Plutarch says in
Alexandro, (...).
odious God; is superstition. 3. In having other Gods besides him; or
worshipping him alone by false and The Idolatrous Images mentioned Isa. 44. are
called a Lie, v. 20. and Hos. 7.1. Jer. 13.25. In which sense it is true of the
Romans, that in changing the Glory of the incorruptible God into an Image made
like to a corruptible man; they turned the truth of God into a Lie, Romans 1.23,
25.
lying Similitudes and limiting Resemblances (as are all material Images) not
in true and spiritual manner as he is a God; which is Idolatry. And for the
former sort of Idolatry, viz. worshipping other Gods besides him, if it be a
worshipping of wicked Spirits, and that by contracting with them; it is
witchcraft or sorcery. 4. In acting cross to all his honorable Attributes and
Perfections, and behaving our selves in such disrespectful sort, as instead of
honoring and acknowledging, does disown and reproach them.


And these Actings are either, 1. Inwardly in our minds, when by some work of
theirs we deny or reproach either, 1. His Truth and Knowledge, by giving no
heed, nor taking any notice of what he says; but continuing ignorant of his
word and pleasure; which the Apostle calls foolishness: An effect whereof is
acting against it rashly and inconsiderately; which is headiness. Or, when we
do know it, by giving no credit or assent to it, but doubting or distrusting
it; which is unbelief. 2. His Power and Goodness. 1. By our ill will and wishes
to him, when we grieve at any thing that makes for him, and take delight in
such things as we our selves or others can devise either against himself, or
against Virtue and Goodness, which, as bearing his own Image, he ownes above
all things and is most tender of; and this is called hating of God. Which as
it is shown in an unconcernedness at such things as dishonor and affront him or
his Religion; is coldness or want of zeal. 2. By our distrust of him and his
Providence, when we dare not rely upon him for a supply of those things which
we stand in need of, as if he were either careless, and mattered not what
becomes of us; or envious, and grudged to have any of those good things which
we want, to befall us; which is distrust. One effect whereof is our omitting to
seek unto him, as expecting nothing from him; which is not praying to him.
3. His bounty and beneficence, by an utter disregard of what he does for us,
when we either wholly overlook or after some small time forget it, and are not
touched with any grateful sense or affectionate resentments upon it; which is
unthankfulness. 4. His Power and Justice, by a bold venturing upon any thing
that offends him, as if we neither valued his favor nor displeasure; which is
fearlessness.
2. Outwardly, In our lives and practice, when by something in them we reproach
and vilify either, 1. His Wisdom and Authority. 1. In disputing and striving
against his Disposals, when we quarrel at them as unwisely ordered, and would
correct and better them our selves; which is contumacy or repining. 2. In
breaking his Commands, when we reject his pleasure, and prefer our own; which
is disobedience.
2. His Name, when we use it irreverently, by invoking or calling upon him to
judge us according to our faithfulness in what we speak, either customarily and
lightly, upon trivial or no occasions; which is common swearing: Or falsely,
when we either at present mean, or afterward perform no such thing as we
promised or affirmed before him; which is perjury. 3. His Word, or Ministers,
or other things consecrated to him, when we treat and use them as vile and
common things, in a careless, unmannerly way, or, as it often happens, in mirth
and mockery; which is profaneness.



And these are such expressions and effects of our hatred of God, as make up
the Body of impiety or transgressions immediately against God himself, all
which he has most strictly forbidden.

So that for our whole Duty toward God, which is implied in the general Law of
piety or godliness, it contains in it all these effects of LOVE, which are
commanded Duties; as ungodliness or impiety contains all these expressions of
hatred, which are so many particular forbidden sins.

The Laws commanding are the Law of honor, of worship, of faith, of love, of
zeal, of trust and dependence, of prayer, of thankfulness, of fear, of
submission and resignedness, of obedience.

And the Laws forbidding, are the Law against dishonor, against atheism,
against denying Providence, against blasphemy, against superstition, against
idolatry, against witchcraft and sorcery, against foolishness, against
headiness, against unbelief, against hating God, against want of zeal, against
distrust of him, against not praying to him, against unthankfulness, against
fearlesness, against contumacy or repining, against disobedience, against
common swearing, against perjury, against profaneness.

And then as for the

2. Sort of Love, our love to men; it implies in it all the Duties contained in
the third Branch of St Paul's Division, viz. righteousness; as shall be shown
in the next Chapter.

CHAP. III. Of the particular Duties contained under Justice and Charity.
The CONTENTS.
Of the particular Duties contained under Justice and Charity. Both are only
expressions of Love, which is the fulfilling of the Law. Of the particular sins
against both. Of scandal. Of the combination of Justice and Charity in a state
that results from both, viz. Peace. Of the several Duties comprehended under
it. Of the particular sins reducible to unpeaceableness. Of the latitude of the
word Neighbor, to whom all these dutiful expressions are due. Its narrowness
in the Jewish sense. Its universality in the Christian.

FOR the third general Duty, righteousness, or our Duty toward our Neighbor;
our love of men will lead us into the several Laws which it contains. For the
first effect of love, our doing no hurt or injury to any man, founds all the
Laws of Justice; and the latter, our doing good and showing all kindness,
founds all the particular Laws of Charity; in which two are comprehended all
those several Duties which God has enjoined toward other men.

The first, I say, founds all the particular Laws of Justice. For in that we do
no evil or injury to our Neighbor, nor hurt him by prejudicing his just
Rights, or taking away from him any thing that is his; is implied that we do
not wrong or endammage him,

1. In his Life, by taking it away either, 1. In private force and violent
assassination, which is murder. 2. Under color of Justice, by a false charge
of capital crimes; which is false witness.


2. In his reputation, by sullying or impairing it through a lying and false
imputation of disparaging things to him; which is slander or calumny.

3. In his belief and expectation, by reproaching and abusing it either, 1. By
deceiving him against his Right to his hurt in a false speech of what is past
or present; which is lying. 2. By frustrating his expectations, which were
raised by our promise of something that is to come; which is unfaithfulness or
perfidy.


4. In his Bed, by invading that which the Contract of Marriage has made
inviolable; which is adultery.

5. In his Goods or Estate, and all wrong herein proceeds from our
unsatisfiedness with our own, and our greedy longing and ungovernable desire of
that which is his; which is covetousness. The effects and instances whereof
are, 1. In taking away from him that which is his, either, 1. Directly, By
secret or open force, and without his knowledge and consent; which is stealing
or robbery. 2. Indirectly, or by forcing his allowance, and extorting a
necessitated consent from him. Which is done by taking advantage, 1. Of his
impotence, and inability to resist and contend with us; which is oppression. 2.
Of his necessity, when he cannot be without something which we have, and so is
forced to take it upon our own terms; which is extortion and depressing in
bargaining. 3. Of his ignorance, when we outwit him, and trepan and overreach
him in Bargaining and Commerce; which is circumvention, fraud or deceit. The
wiliness and subtle Art wherein is called craftiness.

2. In denying all kindnesses and good things to him, in unmercifulness,
uncharitableness, etc. Of which I shall discourse under the next Head.


All these Particulars of Justice now mentioned, are natural effects of love to
our Neighbor, in as much as it makes us keep off from offering any injury or
doing any evil to him. Upon which account St Paul says of it, that as for these
particular Laws of Justice, it fulfils them all. Which he shows by an induction
of such Particulars as I have named. He that loves another, says he, has
fulfilled the Law, viz. that part of it which requires Duties of Justice
toward others. For this, Thou shall not commit adultery, thou shall not kill,
thou shall not steal, thou shall not bear false witness, thou shall not covet;
which are the five last Commandments of the Decalogue: and if there be any
other Commandment, it is briefly comprehended in this Saying, Thou shall love
thy Neighbor as thy self. Now Love works no ill, neither these nor any
other, to his Neighbor; therefore Love is the fulfilling of the Law, Romans
13.8, ^, 10.

And as this first effect of Love to our Neighbor, viz. its keeping us back
from offering any injury or doing any evil to him, contain in it all the Laws
of Justice: so does its other effect, our doing all good offices, and showing
kindness to them, comprehend in it all the particular Laws of Charity wherewith
we stand obliged toward other men.

Love is not only innocent and harmless, and careful to create no trouble, nor
occasion any prejudice; but moreover it is all kindness, benevolence and good
nature, and diligent in creating all the pleasure and delight it can to its
beloved.

Now this goodness, kind-heartedness, or desire to please and delight others,
will be an universal cause of beneficence or doing good to them, and make us
cast to please them in so many ways, and advantage them in so many relations,
as we can at any time be placed in. In particular it will effect these Virtues
in the Cases following:

1. As to what we see them to be in themselves, and in this respect it produces
in us, 1. If they are worthy and virtuous, a great opinion and venerable esteem
for them; which is honor. 2. If they have honest hearts, but yet are weak in
judgment and knowledge, a compassionate sense of their weakness, and an
endeavor to relieve them; which is pity and succor.

And if this weakness be instanced in judging those things to be a matter of
sin, and so unlawful for them to do, which no Law of God has forbidden; and
which therefore we, who better understand it, see plainly that we lawfully may
do; and our practice of it before them, who, distrusting their own skill, are
swayed more by our example than their own opinions, would draw them on to
practice it too, though their own Conscience condemns it, which would be to
them a sin; in this Case the way of Loves affording pity and succor, is by
making us forgo the lawful practice of it at that time; which is restraining
of our Christian Liberty for our Brothers edification.

For this Virtue there was great place in the Apostles Times among the
Christianized Jews. For the Jewish Law placed Religion in forbearing certain
sorts of Meats as unclean and unlawful; and particularly in abstaining from
Meats offered to, and set before an Idol God, as it was in the Gentile
Sacrifices. And the simpler sort and weaker people, who had all along placed so
much Religion in these things, could not be brought over without much patience
of instruction, and a long usage, to know and see that Liberty which, upon
their becoming Christians, they had obtained either to use or forbear them. And
whilst the judgments and opinions of many good people were in these things thus
weak; the Apostles that they might secure the innocence of their practice under
their error, and prevent their being scandalized or drawn on to do what
themselves condemned as evil through the authority of other men's examples, whom
they looked upon as wiser Christians, are wont very much to press this part of
Charity, our using of our Christian Liberty, not in all things for our own
ease, but for our weak Brethrens edification. Particularly St Paul is earnest
in it, Romans 14. 1 Cor. 8.

3. If they are wicked and vicious, this kind-heartedness will effect in us a
pious admonition to reduce and reclaim them; which is friendly reproof.

And whether they be good or evil, weak or strong; it will produce an
affectionate tenderness and near concern for them, such as we have for those of
our own Kindred; which is brotherly kindness.




2. As to what we see them receive from others. And in this respect this
kindness and desire to please effects in us, 1. If it were good, an expression
of pleasure and rejoicing in it; which is Congratulation. 2. If evil, then 1.
If we cannot redress and remove it, it will make us help to bear it in concern
and sorrow for it; which is compassion. 2. If we can, it makes us relieve and
ease them of it. Which it does if the evil be 1. Of want, by supplying it
according to our power; which is Alms and Distribution. 2. Of disgrace, by
endeavoring to hide and smother it where it is deserved; which is covering and
concealing of our Brethrens defects: and by confuting and wiping it off where
we know they have not deserved it; which is vindicating our Neighbors
reputation.




3. As to that place and quality which they bear in respect of us, this
kindness and desire to please will exert it self, if they are persons 1. Below
us, in a freedom of access and easiness of being spoke with; which is
affability or graciousness. 2. Equal to us or below us, in a readiness (...),
says Andronicus Rhodius, is (...), lib. (...).
to do good Offices, and to make their concern our own; which is courteousness
or officiousness. And in pursuit of this in stooping down to some things below
our Rank and Quality, either in words or actions; which is condescension.

And if this courtesy be used toward Strangers, and expressed in entertaining
them at our own house; it is hospitality.

3. Toward all men whomsoever we converse with, it will beget, 1. A quietness
of temper, and tameness of intercourse; which is called gentleness. 2. A fair
interpretation, and putting the best sense upon any thing that is done or
spoken; which is candor. 3. A maintenance of good agreement and correspondence;
which is unity.



4. And as to what we our selves receive from others; this kindness of nature
and desire to please will produce, 1. If it were good, a grateful sense and
affectionate resentment of it, with a longing desire to requite it; which is
thankfulness. 2. If evil and injury; then it will effect, 1. A (...) is a
Virtue that makes us (...), Andron. Rhod. lib. (...).
slowness to take provocation, and to be angry at it; which is meekness or
lenity. 2. When the wrong is such that we may justly and reasonably be angered
at it, an easiness of being entreated, and a readiness to be appeased; which is
placableness. 3. And for the requital of the wrong, if it were, 1. Only an
affront or light injury, it makes us seek none, but pardon and put it up; which
is forgiving injuries. And instead of that, to render in return to it kindness,
and such good Offices as are in our power, as praying to God for them, and
blessing, or speaking all the good which we can of them as often as we have
occasion to mention them, always are, which is doing good to enemies; or, as
our Savior says, blessing them that curse us, and praying for our enemies,
Matthew. 5.44. 2. Too burdensome or scandalous to be past over, so that it is fit
to punish it: then in exacting, 1. Punishment, as being an unpleasant work, it
makes us bear long before we come to it; which is long-suffering. 2.
Satisfaction, it suffers us not to go to the utmost of what might be exacted;
but through a care of our enemies, as well as of our selves, to take up with
such a competency as is no more than they can bear; which is mercifulness.





These are such particular Laws of Charity, as naturally flow from this effect
of love to men, our kindness and desire to benefit and please them. And all
these effects of love are parts of Duty, and those several Precepts which God
has commanded us to keep and obey.

And as our love of men with this effect of it our desire to benefit and
pleasure them, includes in it all the instances of Charity: so does our hatred
of them with a delight to spite and trouble them, which naturally flows from
it, comprehend in it all the contrary instances of uncharitableness.

For this ill will and habitual hatefulness of temper will effect in us,
opposite to goodness and a desire to please and delight others, an universal
mischievousness, or forwardness to make others work, to put them to (...),
Should. (...) meo judicio est vitium animi, quo hamo inclinatur ad nocendum aliis
etiam sine causa, sed ex quadam in maium proclivitate; qualis est malitia
Daemonis; quem ea de causa (...) appellamus, Tolet. in Cap. 1. Ep. ad Romans v.
29.
pains and trouble, and create them sorrow; which is called wickedness. And
this will express it self in creating our Neighbor discontent and vexation, in
all those ways wherein we are concerned with him, or conversant about him.

For instance,

1. As for any thing which we see he has, 1. Of Virtue and Goodness; instead of
honoring, it will make us wish ill to him, and set him at naught; which is
hating and despising him. 2. Of weakness and ignorance; it will make us not to
restrain our selves at all in the use of our Christian Liberty, for his sake;
but to act to the utmost of what is lawful, though he be scandalized by it, or
encouraged, upon the authority of our example, to commit what his own
Conscience tells him is a sin; which is scandalizing or making him to offend.


2. As for what we see him do or receive; if it be 1. Good, it expresses it
self in grief and trouble at it; which is envy or an evil eye. 2. Evil, instead
of raising pity and compassion, it makes us to take a pleasure in it, and to be
glad of it; which is rejoicing in evil.


And if the evil be 1. Of want, it will effect a refusal of all supply; which
is uncharitableness. 2. Of disgrace; then if it were 1. Unjust and undeserved,
it lets it stick without any endeavors to wipe it off; which is not
vindicating him. 2. Just and truly chargeable, or but any way suspicious,
instead of concealing it, publishes and proclaims it in disparaging Characters
and Representations of him; which sort of detraction is evil speaking.



This in the general, as it is shown in a forwardness to pass Sentence against
men, in undervaluing and disparaging judgments upon what they do or say,
overlooking all the Virtues, and detecting only the faults and failings of it;
is censoriousness.

In the objecting and publishing whereof, from the different manners and ends
of the publication, it passes under several names.

For as for the manner, if that Publication be 1. In their absence, in a
softer, and, as it often happens, in a more secret way, under a pretense of
favor and kindness to them to get a greater regard to what we say against
them; it is backbiting. Which when it is not published aloud, nor spoke out for
any or all of the Company indifferently to hear; but is told in secret to some
one or more; it is whispering. 2. Either in their absence, or openly and before
their face, in a more violent and severer way, being expressed in Maledictio si
petulantius jactatur, convitium est, Cic. Orat. pro M. Caelio.
bitter words, and great vehemence; it is railing or reviling.

And as for the end, if that disparaging publication be 1. To make them
infamous, by objecting to them, 1. Our own favors; it is upbraiding. 2. Their
failings; it is reproaching.
2. To make them ridiculous, by exposing their lesser and more innocent
infirmities, or such as have in them more of shame than mischief; it is called
mocking.





3. As for that Place and Quality which they bear in respect of us, this
forwardness to vex and distaste them will have these effects.

1. If they are persons below us, it will exert it self in making us stately
and hard to be spoken with, contrary to affability; which is difficulty of
access. And if this inferiority be, as we apprehend, in Parts or Endowments, it
will effect a contemptuous and undervaluing behavior toward them, expressed
either in words or actions, for our sport or interest; which is affront or
contumely. 2. If equal to us, or below us, in an averseness to all good
offices, and an utter unconcernedness for them, which is opposite to courtesy,
and may be called uncourteousness. And as a further effect of this, a scorning
to stoop down to any thing below us, whereby we may serve or pleasure them;
which is a mixture of pride and ill nature, opposite to condescension, and may
be called stiffness. And if this uncourteousness be toward Strangers, and
expressed in denying them entertainment when a reasonable occasion calls for
it; it is unhospitableness. 3. Toward all men with whom we converse, it will
beget, 1. A frowardness of temper, and imperious churlishness of intercourse
opposite to gentleness; which is surliness. 2. A cross interpretation, and
(...), Arist. N^^t. l. 2. c. 13.
perverting to an ill sense all that is done or spoken, opposite to candor;
which is malignity. 3. An unquietness of behavior in picking quarrels and
creating difference; which is turbulen^e and unquietness.

4. As for what we receive from them, it will produce, 1. If it were good and
beneficial, an utter disregard of it and unconcernedness for him who did it;
which is unthankfulness. 2. If evil and injury, then 1. A hasty catching at the
smallest provocation, and a sudden violent displeasure upon it; which is
passionateness, anger or fierceness. The expressions whereof are, 1. In strife
of arguing and debate, variance. 2. In earnestness and violent degree of heat,
bitterness. 3. In loudness and noise of words, clamor or brawling.
2. When it is once admitted, a retaining a lasting impression of it in our
minds, and malicious thoughts and designs against him that did it; which is
hatred, wrath, enmity or malice. 3. A great difficulty in laying this conceived
grudge aside, and being appeased when they seek for a reconcilement; which is
implacableness. 4. An impatient desire of requiting the injury, and returning
it upon him that offered it; which is revenge. Some particular expressions
whereof are, instead of blessing or good language, and praying for them, a
return of cursing or reproachful speech and imprecation.



And in effecting this requital, it will produce in exacting, 1. Punishment, as
being a most pleasant and desired work, hastiness and impatience, opposite to
long-suffering. 2. Satifaction, a going to the utmost limits of power and
extremities of infliction; which is rigor.


And all these Particulars, as they are most natural effects and expressions of
ill will and hatred toward our Neighbor, are transgressions also of the Law
of Charity, and so many several instances of disobedience, which under this
Head of uncharitableness God has most straightly forbidden.

So that in this general Law of love to men are contained all the following,
whether commanding or forbidding Laws.

The Laws commanding are the Law of Justice in all its instances, which will
appear by the contrary prohibitions; of Charity, wherein are implied the Law of
goodness or kindness, of honor, of pity and succor, of restraining our
Christian Liberty for our weak Brothers edification, of friendly reproof, of
brotherly kindness, of congratulation, of compassion, of alms and
distribution, of covering and concealing their defects, of vindicating their
reputation, of affability or graciousness, of courtesy and officiousness, of
condescension, of hospitality, of gentleness, of candor, of unity, of
thankfulness, of meekness or lenity, of placableness, of forgiving injuries, of
doing good to enemies, and, when nothing more is in our power, praying for
them, and blessing or speaking what is good of them when we take occasion to
mention them, of long-suffering, of mercifulness.

And opposite to these the forbidding Laws are, The Law against injustice with
all its Train, which are the Law against murder, against false witness,
against slander or calumny, against lying, against unfaithfulness or perfidy,
against adultery, against covetousness, against stealing or robbery, against
oppression, against extortion and depressing in bargaining, against
circumvention and deceit, against craftiness.

And the Law against uncharitableness, with all its Particulars, which are, the
Law against maliciousness or hatefulness, against wickedness, against despising
and hating them that are good, against giving scandal to weak Brethren, against
envy or an evil eye, against rejoicing in evil, against uncharitableness in
alms, against not vindicating an innocent man's reputation, against
evil-speaking, against censoriousness, against backbiting, against whispering,
against railing or reviling, against upbraiding, against reproaching, against
mocking, against difficulty of access, against contumely or affront, against
uncourteousness, against stiffness or uncondescension, against
unhospitableness, against surliness, against malignity, against turbulence and
unquietness, against unthankfulness, against anger and passionateness, against
debate and variance, against bitterness, against clamor and brawling, against
hatred and malice, against implacableness, against revenge, against cursing or
reproaching enemies, and imprecation of them, against hastiness to punish,
against rigor.

All which Instances and Opposites both of Justice and Charity, are most
natural effects of Love and Hatred toward other men, and so many Particulars
of Duty and of sin.

And from both these general Laws of Justice and Charity to our Neighbor, or
our keeping off from all things that may offend and injure, and doing all that
may please or any way delight him; will result that state of good agreement and
intercourse of friendliness, which is called peace. Which, as it implies an
union of minds oposite to Controversies and Disputes, is called unanimity; and,
as containing an agreeableness and mutual correspondence of hearts and
affections, concord.

In order to the procurement of this peace is required, 1. In the temper, such
a mixture of Love and quietness as renders men tame and contented under the
present state of things, and averse from contention and controversy; which is
peaceableness. 2. In the practice, a doing such things as, 1. Prevent strife,
whether that be done, 1. Toward our Equals and Inferiors, by complying and
bearing with their weaknesses, and going down from our own liberty where the
exercise of it would give offense and cause difference; which is condescension
and compliance. 2. Toward our Governors, by keeping within our own sphere,
and meddling only with those things which are parts of our own Duty, not
incroaching upon their Office, or thrusting our selves into their
Administration; which is doing our own business.
2. Compose and put an end to it, and this is done by making amends and
recompencing that contumely or wrong which occasioned it; which is satisfaction
for injuries.



And a care not only thus to preserve peace our selves, but also to maintain it
amongst others; by an industrious endeavor to keep up a right understanding
and agreement amongst men, and, when they happen to differ, to reconcile them
and make them friends again; is peacemaking.

And then from the two general transgressions opposite to these, viz. injustice
and uncharitableness to our Neighbor, or an industrious averseness from all
things that may please and advantage; and a forwardness in all things to hurt
and vex him, will arise that state of difference and intercourse of ill
Offices, that is called enmity: which, as it implies a separation and clashing
of hearts and affections, is called discord.

To the production of this evil state concur 1. In the temper such a mixture of
heat and ill nature as renders men restless under their present state, and
pleased and delighted in scuffling and strife; which is unpeaceableness. 2. In
the practice, a doing such things as at first raise and engender, and
afterward foment and maintain it; and of this sort, besides all the instances
of wrong and injustice which we heard of before, is 1. An envious strife of
being better thought of, and out-doing one another; which is emulation or
provoking one another. 2. A going beyond our own place or business, and either
usurping upon other men's Offices, or sawcily intermedling with their affairs;
which is pragmaticalness, or being busy bodies. And this, when it is taken up
in reporting between the Parties at odds such things as we have heard or seen,
which are fit still more to exasperate their minds, and to widen the breach; is
tale-bearing. Which when it is of things, not only seen, but even suspected,
and in a secret dissembled manner; is whispering.

And if the difference was at first occasioned by injury and wrong, that which
goes most directly to continue it, is avowing what was done, and making no
amendment; which is not satisfying for injuries.





And for the outward effects and exdressions of this enmity and discord; it
shows it self, 1. In a struggling for mastery and victory; which is strife or
contention. 2. In separating themselves into Parties and Companies, according
to the difference of their love or hatred and their espoused interests; which
is Division or Faction. And this in religious affairs, when the obstinate
espousal that leads on to it is of damnable opinions, is heresy; when of
needlessly separated Parties, it is schism. 3. A rude concourse of Parties in
scuffling and blows; which is tumult.


So that besides all the Particulars above mentioned, which are contained under
the general Heads, Justice and Charity, there is included moreover in this
third Head of Duty, righteousness, all these Laws of peace which results from
the combination of them both.

And the effects of love or commanding Laws in this, are the Law of peace and
concord with all its Train; as are the Law of peaceableness, of condescension
and compliance, of doing our own business, of satisfying for injuries, of
peacemaking.

And opposite to them the effects of hatred, or forbidding Laws, are the Law
against enmity and discord with all its Particulars, as are the Law against
unpeaceableness, against emulation or provoking one another, against
pragmaticalness or being busy bodies, against tale-bearing, against
whispering, against not satisfying for injuries, against strife or contention,
against division and faction in the State, against heresy and against schism
in the Church, against tumult.

So that in this third Branch of Duty, righteousness, or our Duty toward our
Neighbor, are implied all these several, whether commanding or forbidding
Laws, which are comprehended under these three general Virtues, viz. Justice,
Charity and Peace.

And as for all the things which are commanded or forbidden by all these Laws,
they are due to our Neighbor in the greatest latitude and utmost generality of
that Name, as it signifies any whom we have to do with of all mankind.

The Jews indeed were of a narrower Spirit, and of a more contracted kindness.
They thought themselves bound to exercise all that Justice and Charity which
their Law required, toward the men of their own Nation, or such of the
Gentiles, who leaving their heathen Idolatries would become Proselytes, and
turn to their Religion. But as for all the world besides, they accounted
themselves disobliged from all expressions of kindness and good affection
toward them; nay even from all intercourse of common civility, and
conversation with them. They would not so much as come under their Roof, or eat
with them at the same Table, or either give or receive any civilities or
friendly expressions from them. St Peter, when he entered into the house of
Cornelius, a Gentile Centurion, told them that they all knew very well how it
is not LAWFVL for any man that is a JEW to KEEP COMPANY, or COME IN unto one of
ANOTHER NATION: for which cause he himself had not come to them, had not God
taught him to correct his Country-custom, and to call no man, of what Nation
soever, common or unclean, Acts 10.28. And upon the account of this freedom
which he then took, the Christian Jews who were of the Circumcision contended
with him when he came up to Jerusalem, reproving him for this, That he went in
to men uncircumcised, and did eat with them, Acts 11.2, 3. The Woman of Samaria
wondered, that Jesus, being a Jew, should vouchsafe to ask so much as a Cup of
cold water from her who was a Samaritan; this being the stiffness of the Jewish
Principle, To have no dealings with the Samaritans, John 4.9. Nay, to that
height of unkindness had they arrived, as to deny even the most common Offices
of humanity and Charity, to show the way, or give directions for a journey to
any Gentile man: Which several of the learned Non monstrare vias eadem nisi
sacra colenti: Quaesitum ad fontem solos deducere verpos, Juv. Sat. 14. Apud
ipsos sides obstinata, misericordia in promptu: sed adversus omnes alios
hostile odium, Tacit. Hist. l. 5.
Heathens have smartly reproved, and most justly complained of. All which they
did upon a supposition that the Neighbor, to whom love and kindness was
required by their Law, was only a Fellow-Jew, a Brother-Israelite, and a man of
their own Nation. Which narrow and contracted sense they thought they had good
reason to fix upon it from an expression in their own Law, Lev. 19. where, in
the repetition of this great and general Duty of Love to our Neighbor, the
Word Neighbor is set in conjunction with and explained by one of the Children
of their own People. For thus it is said, Thou shall not avenge nor bear any
grudge against the Children of thy People, but thou shall love thy Neighbor as
thy self, verse 18.

Thus limited and confined was the Jewish Love; God had chosen them out of all
the Nations of the World for a peculiar people, and had hedged them in from the
rest of mankind by peculiar Laws and a peculiar Government. And upon this they
concluded, that whatsover God required of them, he did it as their political
King, and as the particular Head of the Jewish Nation; and that he intended
those Laws which he gave them as Rules for their behavior toward their own
Brethren, and Fellow Subjects, not toward Strangers of Foreign Nations.

But as for our Lord and Sovereign Jesus Christ, he is a Governor, and has
enacted all his Laws, not for the guidance of any one Nation or People, but of
all the world. He told his Disciples when he sent them out to preach the
Gospel, That all power was given to him both in Heaven and in Earth; and
thereupon commissioned them to go out, and proclaim his Laws, not to the Jews
alone, but to all Nations, Matthew. 28.18, 19. And by this universality of his
Empire he has taken away the partition wall which was between Jews and
Gentiles, having made them both one, Ephesians. 2.14. So that now there can be no
further color or pretense for a limited and restrained affection; all the
World by this means being now again made one People, Fellow Subjects, and
Brethren, and Neighbors unto one another.

Whatever the Jews conceived of their Laws therefore, it is plain that all the
Laws of Christ, which command all manner of Justice, Charity and Peaceableness,
and forbid all expressions of uncharitableness, injury and unpeaceableness
toward our Neighbors, make these things due to all mankind. It is not either
distance of Country, nor contrariety of interest, no nor, what is most of all
presumed to exempt us from the obligation of these Duties, diversity of opinion
or persuasion in matters of Religion, which takes away from any man his right
to all that kindness and advantage from us, which all these forementioned Laws
give him. But of whatsoever Country, Calling, or Religion he be, he is the
Neighbor here meant, to whom all these instances of Love, which are the
particular Laws of Duty, must be performed.

And this our Savior has determined once for all in his Answer to the Lawyer,
Luke 10. For when he put the Question to him, Who is my Neighbor, to whom the
Law commands all these things to be done? ver. 29. Jesus answers him by a
Parable, that it is every man in the World whom he may at any time have to do
with, although he be never so much a Stranger, nay of a party and opinion in
Religion never so contrary unto his. For what Religion was ever more odious
unto any one, than the Samaritan was to the Jews? So great a detestation had
they of it, that when they would give a Name of the vilest ignominy and
greatest hatred to Christ himself, they told him he was a Samaritan, and joined
with it such a farther Character as they thought would best suit with it, his
being possessed with a Devil. Say we not well, answered they, that thou art a
Samaritan, and have a Devil? John 8.48. But yet for all this height of enmity
between the Jews and Samaritans, he tells the Jewish Lawyer, who demanded of
him who was his Neighbor, that a Jewish man fell among Thieves, who wounded
him, and left him half dead; and that a Samaritan coming by had compassion on
him, and bound up his wounds, and took care of him. Hereby insinuating, That
any man, though so contrary to him in Religion as these two were to one
another, is the Neighbor whom the Law intends; and therefore in full answer to
his Question, he bids him, Go, and do so likewise, Luke 10.30 to 38.

CHAP. IV. Of our Duties to men in particular Relations.
The CONTENTS.
Of our Duties to other men in particular Relations. The Duties enjoined, and
the sins prohibited toward Kings and Princes, Bishops and other Ministers. The
particular duties and sins in the relation of Husband and Wife, Parents and
Children, Brethren and Sisters, Masters and Servants. Of the two Sacraments,
and Repentance. A recital of all particular Duties enjoined, and sins
prohibited to Christians. Of the harmlesness of a defective enumeration, the
Duties of the Gospel being suggested not only outwardly in Books, but inwardly
by men's own Passions and Consciences.

BUT besides all these Laws contained in the general Command of Love to our
Neighbor, which require something of us to be performed or forborne toward all
mankind; there are yet some more particular instances of it, which make some
things due from us, not as we are left at random toward all men indifferently,
but as we stand more peculiarly related toward some; whether that relation be
1. Public and Political, of Prince and Subjects, Ministers and People. 2. More
Private and Domestic; as is that between 1. Husband and Wife. 2. Parents and
Children. 3. Brethren and Sisters. 4. Master and Servants.



For in all these special Relations Love to our Neighbor exerts it self in
special effects; which are all such peculiar Laws as bind us, not toward all
men indifferently, but only toward them whom we stand so related to.

To begin with the first.

1. The first relation from whence result several effects of Love, and
instances of Duty toward some particular men distinct from what we owe to the
rest of all mankind; is that which is between us and our Public or Political
Governors and Rulers. And because we are Members of two great Societies; one a
Society in things outward and temporal for our happiness in this world, which
is called the State; and the other in things sacred, spiritual and eternal, for
our happiness in the next world, which is the Church; and God has his
Representatives and Vicegerents in them both: therefore under this Head are two
sorts of effects of Love and instances of Duty.

1. Toward Civil Governors, viz. Kings and Princes. 2. Toward
Ecclesiastical, viz. Bishops and Ministers.
1. Then toward our Public Civil Governors, our Kings and Princes, the
fruits of Love, both in abstaining from all evil, and showing all kindness and
good will to them; will be as follows.

1. Since they are both placed above us and set over us, our Love to them will
produce in us both an opinion of their pre-eminence and excellence, as being
Gods Deputies and Viceroys here on Earth, which is honor; and the bearing of
an awful regard and behavior toward them, as to such who can of right command
and punish us, which is reverence. 2. A readiness and resolved industry to
maintain and support them in their persons and Government, either 1. By doing
such things toward it as are in our own power, viz. 1. For the maintenance of
their grandeur, in a willing payment of such contributions as are appointed for
it; which is paying Tribute and Customs. 2. For the preservation of their Lives
or Reigns, by revealing to them such Plots or Practices as make against them,
and by endeavoring all that in us lies, according to our promises and
obligations of allegiance, to maintain and preserve them; which is fidelity or
loyalty.
2. For things that are above our power, by recommending them earnestly to
Almighty God, that he would bestow them on them; which is praying for them.
3. A more direct owning of their Authority and Presidence over us, by carrying
suitably, 1. To the things which they command, in doing or performing them;
which is obedience. 2. To the penalties, which upon our omission or
transgression they impose; by a quiet suffering and resting under them; which
is subjection.

All these are effects of love to Kings and Princes, and so many particular
Commands of God, and Instances of Duty in this relation.

And opposite to them are all the contrary effects and prohibitions of hatred
and ill will toward them.

For from our averseness to all good Offices, and our readiness to create
offense and evil to them, which are the natural effects of our hatred of them,
will flow, 1. Our having undervaluing and lessening thoughts of them in our
minds, by looking only or chiefly upon their failings and defects, and
esteeming them no better than common men; which is dishonor. And if this be
expressed in a lightness and contemptuousness of behavior toward them, which
argues us to have no fear or awe of them, but to neglect and despise them; it is
irreverence. Which, when it breaks out further into reproachful Speeches, and a
discovery or inveighing against their defects, is, as St Jude calls it,
speaking evil of Dignities, Jude 8. 2. A seeking through our envy and ill will
to them, to lessen or destroy their Persons or Power; or at least to withdraw
all our own contributions toward the maintenance and support of them; by
denying, 1. Such things as are in our own power, 1. Toward the sustaining of
their splendour and grandeur, in refusing to bear our share of the charge
toward it, in paying Taxes and Tribute. 2. Toward the preservation of their
Lives and Government, in not helping and defending them, but either plotting
and endeavoring our selves to give away their lives and Kingdoms unto others;
or consenting to, and concealing them that do so, contrary to our obligations
and promises of allegiance; which is traiterousness.
2. Such things as being above our power might yet be obtained for them from
God at our request; which is neglecting to pray for them.
3. A more direct disowning and casting off their Power and Authority over us,
by going cross, 1. To their Commands, in omitting what they enjoin, or doing
against it; which is disobedience. 2. To their inflictions and penalties, by
not submitting and subjecting our selves to them, but violently resisting and
opposing them; which is called by St Paul resisting of Power, or (...).
standing up against it, Romans 13.2. And this when it is made by great Numbers,
and goes on to extremities, when men are, as the Apostle there says, (...).
set in array and posture of defense against it, and ready by force of Arms to
contend and wage War with it; is Rebellion.



And all these are effects of hatred to Princes, and instances of disobedience
in this relation.

So that as to this part of our Duty, our relation of Subjects toward our
Sovereign Kings and Princes, the effects of Love or Laws commanding are the Law
of honor to Kings, of reverence, of paying tribute and customs, of fidelity,
of praying for them, of obedience, of subjection.

And opposite to them the effects of hatred, or forbidding Laws, are the Law
against dishonor, against irreverence, against speaking evil of Dignities,
against refusing Tribute and Taxes, against traiterousness, against neglecting
to pray for Kings, against disobedience, against resisting lawful Powers and
Authority, against rebellion.

And then,

2. For the other sort of public Governors, viz. those of the Church, as are
Bishops and other Ministers, the effects of Love in showing all kindness, and
keeping back from all evil and offense toward them, will be as follows.

1. A good and awful opinion of them, and of their Office in our minds; looking
on them as men that bear the great Character of Ambassadors from Christ, as St
Paul calls them, 2 Cor. 5.20; and are commissioned by God to treat with us in a
matter of incomparably the highest concernment, viz. our eternal salvation: and
this is honor, or esteeming them highly in love, though not for their personal
worth, yet for their works sake, 1 Thessalonians. 5.13. Which honor is expressed, 1.
By such an awfulness of behavior, and respectful, loving carriage toward
them, as argues in us a just sense of the Greatness and Majesty of Christ whom
they represent, and of the goodness of that Concern which they come about;
which is reverence. 2. By making such outward provisions for them as may at
least set them above, and secure them from contempt, although it keep them
below envy; and that is the honor of maintenance, whereof St Paul speaks, 1 Timothy 5.17. And as for those things which are not in our power to conferr upon
them, by recommending them to Gods bounty, in praying for them.
2. As to our Lives, a careful heed and observance of those things which, as
the Ministers of Christ, and in his Name, they teach and enjoin us; which is
obedience.
So that in our love to our spiritual Rulers, the Bishops and Ministers of
Christ's Church, are implied all these particular effects which are so many
commanding Laws, viz. the Law of honor, or having them highly in esteem for
their works sake, of reverence, of maintenance, of praying for them, of
obedience.

And opposite to all these are the effects of hatred, or doing nothing toward
them that may benefit and please, but all things that may any way vex and
offend them. In particular, 1. In our minds, a low and disparaging opinion of
them, looking on them as persons of no worth or value, and setting at naught
both them and their Office; which is dishonor, or setting them at naught for
their works sake. And this is outwardly expressed, 1. In words, by vilifying
and undervaluing them, either in picking up and proclaiming their faults and
failings to reproach their Persons, or in talking to disparage and debase their
Office; which is speaking evil of Ministers. And if this be in smart jests and
opprobrious mirth, to render them and their Calling ridiculous, it is mocking
them. 2. In contemptuous and sleightful behavior toward them, thereby showing
that we have no regard or value for them; which is irreverence. 3. In denying
them all outward maintenance, such as should preserve them from meanness and
contempt; which is not providing for them. And if this be instanced in taking
away from them either by force or fraud, those just Dues of Tithes, etc. which
our Country Laws have confirmed to them; it is stealing of consecrated things,
or sacrilege.

And as for those things which must be derived to them by Gods peculiar Bounty
and Providence, a neglect to seek them at Gods hands on their behalf; which is
not praying for them.


2. In our lives and actions, a proud neglect or rejecting of what they impose,
and acting against those things which, in the name of Christ, and as his
Messengers, they enjoin us; which is disobedience.


So that in our hatred of public Rulers in the Church, the Bishops and
Ministers of Christ, are implied all these effects, which are so many
particular forbidden sins, viz. the Law against dishonor or setting at naught
our Bishops and Ministers, especially for their works sake, against speaking
evil of them, against mocking them, against irreverence to them, against not
providing for them, against sacrilege or stealing from them, against not
praying for them, against disobedience.

And these are the several effects of love and hatred, and the particular
commanding and forbidding Laws which God has given us for the measure of our
more especial Duties to this first sort of Neighbors, our public Governors
both in Church and State.

And,

2. As for the other sort of relation, which founds some special Duties
distinct from those which we owe to all mankind in common, viz. that which is
more private and domestic; in as much as a Family is compounded of several
states and conditions of people, whereof some are Parents, some Children, some
Masters, and some Servants; it includes in it these four, 1. That of Husband
and Wife. 2. That of Parents and Children. 3. That of Brethren and Sisters. 4.
That of Masters and Servants.


1. The first and principal domestic relation, wherein Love has some peculiar
effects that bind us then particularly when we are in that condition, is the
relation betwixt Husband and Wife. And here Love through its forwardness to
delight and benefit, and its great averseness in any thing to give offense,
will have these effects.

1. Such as are mutual and common to them both; as are, 1. A most tender care
and heightened kindness, arising from the most intimate union and nearness that
is betwixt them; which expresses it self chiefly, 1. In the partaking in each
others bliss and misery, or being both equally concerned in those things which
befall either; which is communicating in each others condition. 2. In the
bearing with each others infirmities, and not falling into hard thoughts and
estrangedness upon them. 3. For those things which are not in their power to
bestow, in seeking them mutually on each others behalf from God by prayer.
2. A faithful performance of that appropriate use of each others Bed, which
they promised mutually at marriage; and this is fidelity.
2. Such as are particular, and concern them in special, one toward the other;
either, 1. The Husband toward the Wife.

And because the relation of a Husband implies power and dominion, that these
may be rendered as easy and grateful as may be, the effect of Love here will be
such a tempering and sweetning of them, as makes them contribute as much as may
be to her pleasure and contentment; which it does by making him, 1. When it is
for her benefit, to employ all his power and authority to procure her
necessaries and due conveniences; which is providing for her, or giving
honor, i. e. (...).
maintenance to her, because She is the weaker Vessel, as St Peter says, and so
unable to provide it for her self, 1 Pet. 3.7; and also to guard off all
inconvenience and injury from her; which is protection of her. 2. When it is
over her as his Subject, to lay them in great measure aside, and to win her
rather by the sweetness of love than by the force of authority; which is
flexible, winning Government. And this as it causes him to yield to her in
several things, which in strictness of power he might stand upon, is compliance
and condescension.


2. The Wife toward the Husband.

And the relation of a Wife implying subjection and dependence, the effects of
Love which does nothing that affronts or injures, but all things that may any
ways pleasure and delight, will be, 1. An opinion of his pre-eminence and
authority over her, which is honor. And this as it is joined with a fear of
offending him, that expresses it self in respectful carriage; is reverence. 2.
A free and forward dispatch of all such things as she knows he either likes or
requires; which is observance and obedience. 3. In undergoing restraint, a
cheerful submission of her self to his pleasure; which is subjection.


So that in this relation of Husband and Wife, the effects of Love or Laws
commanding, are, on both sides, the Law of mutual concern and communicating in
each others bliss or misery, of bearing each others infirmities, of prayer, of
fidelity: On the Husbands toward his Wife, the Law of providing for her, of
protecting her, of flexible, winning Government, of compliance and
condescension: On the Wives toward her Husband, the Law of honor, of
reverence, of observance and obedience, of subjection.

And opposite to these the effects of ill will and hatred in this relation,
will be as follows: 1. Such as are mutual and common unto both; asare, 1. An
unaffectedness in each others condition, and an insensibleness in one part of
those things which befall the other; which is unconcernedness in each others
condition. 2. A not bearing each others infirmities, but either cutting out
work and exercise for them by doing or speaking such things as are fit to
irritate; which is provocation: Or being ill-affected toward each other upon
them; which, as it is expressed in a privation of all that tenderness of love
and kindness which should result from the intimate nearness of their relation,
is estrangedness: and as proceeding higher to ill will, and expressions of an
imbittered mind, as it causes for the present wrangling and debate; it is
strife or contention: and as festring into an habitual displeasure and lasting
regret, it is hatred or enmity; and as breaking out in a proclamation of each
others weaknesses, evil speaking, or publishing each others infirmities. 3. As
doing no good to each other themselves, so seeking none from God, which is not
praying for each other. 4. An avoidance of each others Bed, and being false to
the Marriage Covenant about it; which is adultery. But if this unfaithfulness
really be not, but through the suspicious temper of one side is only
groundlesly presumed; it is jealousy.
2. Such as are peculiar, and concern one particularly toward the other,
either, 1. The Husband toward the Wife, and here the effects of hatred will
be, 1. A neglecting to use his power for her benefit, through an insensibleness
of her wants, and regardlesness of what hardships she struggles with; either as
to necessaries or conveniences, which is not providing for her, or not
maintaining her; or as to injuries and affronts, which is not protecting her.
2. Using all his authority over her by a harsh and magisterial peremptoriness
of Command; which is imperiousness; or by an unyielding, inflexibleness of will
and pleasure; which is uncompliance, uncondescension.
2. The Wife toward the Husband; where it will produce a light and low opinion
of him; which is dishonor; which being joined with a contemptuous and fearless
behavior toward him, is irreverence. And this will effect, 1. A backwardness
and utter averseness to do unbidden what will delight and please him, which is
non-observance; or what is commanded by him, which is disobedience. 2. A
refusal or open reluctance in undergoing that restraint which he imposes; which
is casting off his yoke, or unsubjection.




So that in this relation of Husband and Wife, the effects of hatred, or Laws
forbidding, are, to both Parties, the Law against unconcernedness in each
others condition, against not bearing each others infirmities, against
provoking one another, against estrangedness, against strife and contention,
against hatred and enmity, against publishing each others infirmities, against
not praying for each other, against adultery, against jealousy. To the Husband
toward the Wife, the Law against not maintaining her, against not protecting
her, against imperiousness, against uncompliance or uncondescension. To the
Wife toward her Husband, the Law against dishonor, against irreverence,
against unobservance, against disobedience, against casting off his yoke, or
unsubjection.

2. The second domestic relation is that of Parents and Children, and in this
the effects of Love, and particulars of Duty are either, 1. On the Parents side
toward their Children, as are, 1. From the extraordinary nearness that their
Children have to them, being parts even of their own Bodies, that most
heightened tenderness and kindness, which, because it is found in all Animals
in nature toward their own Offspring; is called natural affection. 2. From
their Childrens helplesness and wants, their care over them. Which is taken up,
1. With respect to this world, and that in behalf, 1. Of their Bodies, by
providing for them all due necessaries and conveniences, both whilst they are
under them, and against the time that they go out from them; which is
provision, maintenance. 2. Of their whole persons both Body and Soul, by
training them up in the best ways they can, whereby to render them profitable
in their station, and useful Members of Society; which is good and honest
education. In the management whereof, the using of their power over them, not
in a rigorous and austere, but a tender obliging way; is loving Government.
2. With respect to the next world, and that is by causing them to be duly
instructed in Religion, and stamped with virtuous impressions; which St Paul
calls bringing them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, Ephesians. 6.4.

And for those things which they cannot procure for them by themselves; begging
of them from Gods bounty by prayer for them.



2. On the Childrens side toward their Parents, where, besides the Duty of
natural affection common to them with the Parents, Love effects, 1. An opinion
of their pre-eminence and authority over them, which is honor: and this when
it is joined with an awful regard to them, and a fear of offending them; is
reverence. 2. Whilst they are under them, a ready cheerfulness in performing
all that they command, which is obedience: and in bearing and undergoing all
that they impose, which is submission or subjection. 3. When either they are
under them, or gone from them, a readiness upon occasion to requite all their
care and kindness in supporting and relieving them; which the Apostle calls
requiting their Parents, 1 Timothy 5.4. 4. And in such things wherewith they
cannot supply them of themselves, entreating God on their behalf; which is
praying for them.



So that the effects of Love and instances of Duty in this relation, are from
the Parents toward their Children, the Law of natural affection, of
maintenance and provision, of honest education, of loving Government, of
bringing them up in the institution and fear of God, of prayer for them: from
the Children toward their Parents, the Law of honor, of reverence, of
obedience, of subjection, of requiting upon occasion their care and kindness,
of prayer for them.

And opposite to these effects of Love which are so many commanded Duties, the
effects of hatred in this relation, which are so many particular forbidden
sins, are these that follow: 1. In Parents toward their Children, it will
produce a coldness of heart and unconcernedness for them, which is being void
of natural affection: Which will effect, 1. As to their care for them, a
neglecting to provide for their present maintenance or future support; which is
condemned by St Paul under the name of not providing for those of our own
house, 1 Timothy 5.8. 2. As to their Government and Conduct of them, an untoward
exercise and employment of it where there is no just need, or a neglect of it
where there is. For it will produce, 1. As to things that are good and
necessary for the Children, an utter carelessness of them, when the Parents
neglect to teach and inure them to such things as may render them dutiful to
God, and useful in Society; and contrariwise accustom and bring them up in
idleness, vanity, or wickedness; which is irreligious or evil education. 2. As
to things that are unnecessary and indifferent; a great strictness and
severity, whether it be in commanding or imposing things without reason,
necessity, or convenience; or convenient things with imperious harshness or
unreasonable rigor, only out of wantonness of authority and plenitude of
power, which instead of exciting them to a cheerful obedience, is apt to move
in them an irksome regret; which is provoking them to anger.
3. And instead of praying for them, not praying at all, or using passionate
and modish curses or imprecations; which is imprecating or praying against them.
2. In Children toward their Parents, it will cause, besides the want of
natural affection, 1. A low esteem and undervaluing opinion of them in their
minds; which is dishonor. And this, if it be joined with a contemptuous
disregard, and fearless behavior toward them; is irreverence: Which is
expressed, 1. In disowning or disregarding them by reason of their meanness;
which is being ashamed of them. 2. In entertaining their weaknesses and
infirmities, not with pity and sorrow, but with sport and delight, turning them
into a matter of mirth and laughter. This is a mixture of hatred and scorn, and
is called mocking them. 3. In divulging in words, and, instead of concealing
and excusing, publishing their faults and defects with reproaching of them, and
inveighing against them upon the account of them; which is malediction, or
cursing of them.
2. Whilst they are under them, a spiting and going cross, 1. To their
Commands, by not performing what they require, but doing against it; which is
disobedience. 2. To their impositions, by not submitting to that restraint and
burden which they lay upon them; which is contumaciousness, or casting off
subjection. 3. To their interest, by embezilling or secret wasting of their
substance; which is robbing them.
3. When either they are under them, or gone from them, not recompencing their
care and kindness by their relief and service when their Parents need requires
it; which is not requiting them. 4. And instead of praying for them, not
praying at all, or hasty wishing ill to them; which is imprecation.



So that the effects of hatred in this relation or forbidding Laws are, to the
Parents, the Law against want of natural affection, against not providing for
those of their own house, against irreligious and evil education, against
provoking their Children to anger, against not praying for them, and
imprecation of them. To the Children, besides that against want of natural
affection, the Law against dishonor, against irreverence, against being
ashamed of their Parents, against mocking them, against cursing or reproach,
and speaking evil of them, against disobedience, against contumaciousness,
against robbing them, against not praying for them, or imprecation of them.

3. The third sort of domestic relation that includes some instances of Love
that are not due toward all men indifferently, but peculiarly toward some; is
the relation of Brethren and Sisters.

And these being so nearly allied, and partaking of the same blood; Love
betwixt them will exert it self, 1. In a most passionate concern and tender
affection for each other; which, because we seem to be carried on to it by the
very force and instinct of our nature, without any help of reason, or need of
being argued up to it, is called natural affection. 2. And as an effect of
this, a helping each other by a reciprocal service, and, when occasion
requires, by communicating mutually of their substance; which St Paul calls a
providing for those of our own Family, 1 Timothy 5.8. And in those things which
they cannot afford themselves, seeking them mutually for each other by prayer.


And opposite to these are the effects of hatred betwixt them, which will
effect, 1. An unconcernedness for each other, or a want of natural affection.
2. A not helping of each others needs, or not providing for them: and not
praying to God in each others behalf, but making ill wishes mutually; which is
imprecation.


So that the effects of Love or commanding Laws in this relation, are the Law
of natural affection, of providing for our Brethren, of praying for them: and
opposite to them the effects of hatred or forbidding Laws, are the Law against
want of natural affection, against not providing for our Brethren, against not
praying for them, and imprecation or praying against them.

4. The fourth and last relation, is that of Masters and Servants. And in this
the effects of Love are either, 1. From the Masters to the Servants. Where Love
will produce, 1. A care of their Servants, as of Members of their own Families;
both, 1. Of their Bodies, in provision and maintenance. 2. Of their Souls, in
religious instruction and admonition.
2. A Government of them that is not harsh and severe, but kind and gentle,
such as we expect and desire that God, who is our Master, should use over us;
which therefore is called by the Apostle our dealing justly and equally with
them, i. e. so as we would have our Master to deal with us, Col. 4.1. In
particular observing, 1. In our Commands to them, Mercy as well as Justice; in
requiring nothing that God forbids, which is unlawful; nothing for
imperiousness and commands sake, only that we may create them work though we
our selves receive no benefit; which is unprofitable: and even where we are
advantaged by it, nothing lastly which is either above, or at least very hard
and oppressive to their power and strength; which is unproportionable. And this
is kindness and equity in commanding. 2. In our threatenings and punishments,
tenderness and pity; in not threatening and punishing out of will and power, or
either more or oftener than need requires, which the Apostle calls forbearing,
or moderating threatening, Ephesians. 6.9. 3. In our rewards, paying them punctually
and justly what they have wrought for; which is punctual payment of the wages
of the Hireling. 4. And besides all the kindness which we can do for them our
selves, whether by rewarding or promoting them, procuring moreover all the good
which we can for them at Gods hands, by praying for them.

2. From the Servants to the Masters.


And the nature of service being a setting over all our powers and abilities
for the time, to their benefit whom we are to serve; the effects of Love in
this relation will be, 1. An opinion and esteem in the mind of their Masters
pre-eminence and lordship over them; which is honor. And this being joined
with an awfulness and fear of offending him, who has both Authority to command
and Power to punish; is reverence. 2. In things which they know he desires and
delights in, a forward care and ready industry to please him by doing them
before they are bidden; which is observance. And this among other things
effects, 1. As for his, or his Families defects at home, concealing or excusing
them. 2. As for his reputation abroad, when it is injured, vindicating and
defending it.
3. A care of their Masters Goods, and carrying suitably to his pleasure;
always exercising, 1. In those things which their Master intrusts them with, a
true discharge of that trust, and the things committed to it; which is
fidelity. 2. In those things which their Master commands, a ready performance
and execution of them; which is obedience. The vigorous application of
themselves to the dispatch whereof, is diligence. Which they are to show, not
only from the terror of their Master so long as his eye is over them, which
the Apostle calls eye-service; but from the ready willingness of their own
minds, which will make them do it whether he be with them or absent from them;
which in the same place is called obeying with good will and from the heart,
Ephesians. 6.6, 7. 3. In those things which he imposes and inflicts, whether they
be just, or even injust, if light and tolerable, a quiet and uncontending
submission; which is patience and subjection.
4. And in those things wherein they cannot advantage him themselves,
commending him to Almighty God, by prayer for him.


So that the effects of Love or commanding Laws in this relation, are, on the
Masters side, the Law of maintenance, of religious instruction, of a just and
equal Government of them, of kindness and equity in commanding, of forbearance
and moderation in threatening, of punctual payment of the wages of the Hireling,
of praying for them: On the Servants, the Law of honor, of reverence, of
observance, of concealing and excusing their Masters defects, of vindicating
their injured reputation, of fidelity, of obedience, of diligence, of willing
and hearty service, of patient submission and subjection, of praying for them.

And opposite to these are all the effects of hatred, which will be instanced
in these Particulars.

1. From the Masters toward their Servants, it will produce, 1. A carelessness
of what becomes of their Servants, whether as to, 1. Their Bodies, in not duly
maintaining or providing for them. 2. Their Souls, in not catechizing or
instructing of them.
2. A Government of them which is cruel and rigorous: and this being a dealing
otherwise with them than we are willing to be dealt with our selves; is unequal
Government. Which is expressed, 1. In the injustice and severity of our
Commands, when we enjoin what God forbids, which is unlawful; or what tends not
to benefit our selves, but only to vex and trouble them; which is unprofitable:
or what is either above their strength or exceeding hard for it; which is
unproportionable: And this is unjustness, and wantonness, and rigor in
commanding: which, if it be acted in a contemptuous haughtiness and peremptory
way; is imperiousness. 2. In the injustice and hardship of our threatenings and
punishments, when we use them without occasion, or more than needs when there
is occasion for them; which is immoderate threatening, or punishing. And this,
as it vents it self in bitter words, and vehemence of vilifying expressions, a
fault that is incident to proud, hasty Folk and lordly Masters, is railing at
them. 3. In the dishonesty and dilatoriness of our Rewards, when we either pay
not at all that which was covenanted for their service, or cut it short, or
delay it long when their necessity calls for it instantly; which is defrauding
or keeping back the wages of the Hireling.
3. And besides all the kindness which we deny them our selves, neglecting to
seek for any thing for them at Gods hands, by not praying for them; or cursing
and imprecating them, which is praying against them.
2. From the Servants toward their Masters; where the effects of hatred are,
1. A disesteem and contemptuous opinion of their Masters, as persons of no
worth or pre-eminence above themselves, which is dishonor. And this, when it
is evidenced in a careless and disrespectful behavior toward them, which
argues them to stand in no fear or awe of them; is irreverence. 2. An
industrious neglect of such things as they know are pleasing and acceptable to
him; and venturing upon others that will disgust and offend him; which is
non-observance: two particular expressions whereof are, 1. As to his or his
families defects at home; a publishing and aggravation of them. 2. As to his
reputation abroad, a suffering it to lie under imputations that are undeserved;
which is not vindicating him.
3. An endamagement of their Masters Goods, Concerns, and Authority, by
showing, 1. In what their Master intrusts them, falseness or nonperformance;
which is unfaithfulness.

And if it be instanced in making away such Goods or Money as were committed to
them, 1. To their own luxury and pleasure, by such ways as our Savior sets
down of eating, drinking, and keeping ill company, Matthew. 24.49; it is
wastfulness of their Masters Goods. 2. To their own private profit and secret
enrichment; it is purloining.


2. In what their Masters command, a careless omission of it, or acting against
it; which is disobedience. Whether this be expressed, 1. In questioning and
disputing the fitness and convenience of what they enjoin, instead of doing and
performing it; which St Paul calls answering again, or (...).
speaking against and contradicting it, Tit. 2.9. 2. In a slow and lazy
application of themselves to it, when they do set about it; which is
slothfulness. 3. In a laborious dispatch of what they are commanded only whilst
their Masters eye is over them, but slackning all again when he is gone from
them; doing all things out of dread, but nothing out of choice and good will;
which is eye-service.
3. In what their Master imposes or inflicts, a not enduring or resting under
it; which is contumacy or resistance.
4. And in such things as God is to bestow on them, a not seeking to him by
prayer on their behalf; but praying against them.

So that the effects of ill will and hatred, or Laws forbidding in this
relation, are, on the Masters side, the Law against not providing maintenance
for his Servant, against not catechizing or instructing him, against unequal
Government, against unjustness, wantonness and rigor in commanding, against
imperiousness, against immoderate threatening, against railing, against
defrauding or keeping back the wages of the Hireling, against not praying for
him, and imprecation or praying against him: and on the Servants side the Law
against dishonor of his Master, against irreverence, against non-observance,
against publishing or aggravating his Masters faults, against not vindicating
his injured reputation, against unfaithfulness, against wasting his Goods,
against purloining, against disobedience, against answering again, against
slothfulness, against eye-service, against contumacy or resistance, against not
praying for them, and imprecation or praying against them.

And thus we have seen what are the particular effects of love and hatred both
toward all men in general, and also toward all in those several relations
wherein we stand concerned with one another in the World. And in them are
contained all the particular Commands and Prohibitions, which make up this
third Branch of Duty, viz. righteousness, or our Duty toward our Neighbor.
All that God requires of us toward other men, is only to have a hearty
kindness for them, and in this manner to express it. And all that he forbids is
only our hatred of them, with all the forementioned effects of it. So that in
the abovenamed instances and effects of Love, in Justice, Charity, Peace, with
those others in the relations now recited, is comprised the whole of this last
Member of St Paul's Division, righteousness.

Thus at last we have seen what are all the particular instances of those three
general Laws, sobriety, piety, and righteousness; wherein, if we add two or
three more, is comprised the Body of our whole Duty.

If we add two or three more, I say; for besides the several Laws already
mentioned, there are three particular Duties yet remaining of a more positive
and arbitrary nature, which Christ has bound all Christians to observe; and
they are the Law of Baptism, of the Lords Supper, and of Repentance.

Baptism is our incorporation into the Church of Christ; or our entrance into
the Gospel Covenant, or into all the duties and privileges of Christians, by
means of the outward Ceremony of washing or sprinkling in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

The Eucharist or Lords Supper is our Federal Vow, or repetition of that
engagement which we made at Baptism, of performing faith, repentance and
obedience unto God; in expectation of remission of sins, eternal happiness, and
those other promises which by Christ's death are procured for us upon these
terms: which engagement we solemnly make to God at our eating Bread and
drinking Wine, in remembrance and commemoration of Christ's dying for us.

Repentance is a forsaking of sin, or an amendment of any evil way upon a
sorrowful sense, and just apprehension of its making us offend God, and
subjecting us to the danger of death and damnation.

And if to all the forementioned instances of those three grand Virtues, which
by the Apostle, Tit. 2.12, 13, are made the sum of our Christian Duty, we join
these three positive and additional Laws; we have all that whereby God will
judge us at the last Day, even all those particular Laws whereto our obedience
is required as necessary to salvation.

And thus we have seen what those particulars Laws are, which the Gospel
indispensably requires us to obey. They are no other than those very instances
which I have been all this while recounting and describing. But because the
Catalogue of them hitherto has been broken and interrupted, and therefore
cannot be run over so easily as might be desired in a matter of that
importance; I will here repeat them all again for the greater ease of all such
pious souls as desire to try themselves by them, and place them all in one
view, and all together.

The commanding Laws then whereby at the last Day we must all be judged, are
these that follow:

The Law of sobriety toward our selves, with all its Train, which are the Law
of humility, of heavenly-mindedness, of temperance, of sobriety, of chastity,
of continence, of contempt of the world and contentment, of courage and taking
up the Cross, of diligence and watchfulness, of patience, of mortification and
self-denial.

The Law of piety toward God with all its Branches, which are the Law of
honor, of worship, of faith and knowledge, of love, of zeal, of trust and
dependence, of prayer, of thankfulness, of fear, of submission and
resignedness, of obedience.

The Law of Justice toward men in all its parts, which will be seen by the
contrary prohibitions of injustice.

The Law of Charity in all its instances; which are the Law of goodness or
kindness, of honor for our Brethrens Virtues, of pity and succor, of
restraining our Christian Liberty for our weak Brothers edification, of
friendly reproof, of brotherly kindness, of congratulation, of compassion, of
alms and distribution, of covering and concealing their defects, of
vindicating their reputation, of affability or graciousness, of courtesy and
officiousness, of condescension, of hospitality, of gentleness, of candor, of
unity, of thankfulness, of meekness or lenity, of placableness, of forgiving
injuries, of doing good to enemies, and, when nothing more is in our power,
praying for them, and blessing or speaking what is good of them, when we take
occasion to mention them, of long-suffering, of mercifulness.

The Law of Peace and Concord with all its Train; as are, the Law of
peaceableness, of condescension and compliance, of doing our own business, of
satisfying for injuries, of peacemaking.

The Law of love to Kings and Princes in all its Particulars; which are, the
Law of honor, of reverence, of paying Tribute and Customs, of fidelity, of
praying for them, of obedience, of subjection.

The Law of love to our Bishops and Ministers with all its expressions; which
are, the Law of honor, or having them highly in esteem for their works sake,
of reverence, of maintenance, of praying for them, of obedience.

The Law of Love in the particular relation of Husband and Wife with all its
Branches; which are, on both sides, the Law of mutual concern, and
communicating in each others bliss or misery, of bearing each others
infirmities, of prayer, of fidelity: On the Husbands toward his Wife, the Law
of providing for her, of protecting her, of flexible and winning Government, of
compliance and condescension: On the Wives toward her Husband, the Law of
honor, of reverence, of observance and obedience, of subjection.

The Law of Love in the particular relation of Parents and Children with its
several effects; which are, from the Parents toward their Children, the Law of
natural affection, of maintenance and provision, of honest education, of loving
Government, of bringing them up in the institution and fear of God, of prayer
for them: From the Children toward their Parents, besides the Duty of natural
affection common to both, the Law of honor, of reverence, of obedience, of
subjection, of requiting upon occasion their care and kindness, of prayer for
them.

The Law of Love in the particular relation of Brethren and Sisters with all
its instances; which are the Law of natural affection, of providing for our
Brethren, of praying for them.

The Law of Love in the particular relation of Master and Servant, with its
several expressions; which are, on the Masters side, the Law of maintenance, of
religious instruction, of a just and equal Government of them, of kindness and
equity in commanding, of forbearance and moderation in threatening, of punctual
payment of the wages of the Hireling, of praying for them: On the Servants, the
Law of honor, of reverence, of observance, of concealing and excusing their
Masters defects, of vindicating their injured reputation, of fidelity, of
obedience, of diligence, of willing and hearty service, of patient submission
and subjection, of praying for them.

To all which we may add the two arbitrary institutions and positive Laws of
the Gospel, Baptism, and the Eucharist or Lords Supper; and when we transgress
in any of the instances forementioned, that great and only remedy of Christ's
Religion, the Law of repentance.

This, so far as I can call to mind at present, is a just enumeration of those
particular Injunctions and Commands of God, whereto our obedience is
indispensably required, and whereby at the last Day we must all be judged
either to live or dye eternally.

But supposing that some particular instances of Love and Duty are omitted in
this Catalogue; yet need this be prejudicial to no man's happiness, since that
defect will be otherwise supplied. For as for such omitted instances, where
there is an occasion for them, and an opportunity offered to exercise them,
men's own reason and passion will represent and suggest them for a rule of
obedience; and when they wilfully transgress them, their own Conscience must
needs check and reprove them, which will be sufficient to them for a rule of
trial. For all the Laws of this second, which is the Gospel Covenant, are so
agreeably suited to our natural reason and conscience, that every man's own mind
may be a sufficient Monitor. What our own understanding tells us is fit and
becoming us that we should do; that has God bound upon us by his Laws, and made
it our Duty to do. His Precepts are the very same with the best results and
purest dictates of our own reason; so that every pious and honest Conscience
cannot but of it self approve all that God has enjoined it. Which God himself
has clearly intimated, when he says of all the Laws of the second, which is the
Gospel Covenant, that he will put the Laws contained in it into their minds,
and write them in their hearts; so that in regard they have them so legible
within themselves, they shall not need to be still enquiring of others, and to
teach every man his Neighbor, and every man his Brother, saying, Know the
Lord; and that in this or that particular you must serve him; for all shall
know him and his Laws without any other Monitor than their own Conscience, from
the least to the greatest, Heb. 8.10, 11.

Besides, as for all the Laws of piety toward God, and of righteousness
toward men, which make up by far the greatest part of our Duty; they are only
so many several effects and various expressions of our Love to them. So that he
who acts nothing against love, breaks none of all these Laws, but keeps them
every one. Whereof Christ himself (who has given these Laws, and who is to
judge of our obedience to them) and his Apostle Paul have given us sufficient
assurance, when they both affirm of Love, that, as to these two general parts
of Duty, it is the fulfilling of the Law. And therefore any man that knows what
Love is, may quickly understand what is Law; and when he is about to venture
upon any action, it is but asking his own soul whether it be against Love, and
he has his Answer whether or no it be against Duty.

And since whenever we have occasion for it, we shall be admonished of our
Duty both these ways, both from our reason and our passion, though this
Catalogue prove defective in some instances, and omit it: that defect can be of
no danger, seeing it will be otherwise supplied. We may by its help know those
Duties which it mentions; and by the help of the other two, those Particulars
wherein it fails us. So that we shall still be sufficiently directed in our
Duty, and showed what we should do; and when we sin against it wilfully, our
own Conscience is privy to it, which will enable us to examine also whether
indeed we have done it, or no.

This then may suffice for a particular enumeration of all the commanding Laws
of God, whereto our obedience is required as an indispensable condition of our
life and happiness.

And as for all the forbidding Laws, which contain those things which under the
highest pains of death and misery we are indispensably required to abstain
from; they are these that follow:

The Law against unsoberness toward our selves, with all its particulars;
which are, the Law against pride, against arrogance or ostentation, against
vainglory, against ambition, against haughtiness, against insolence, against
imperiousness, against dogmaticalness, against envious backbiting, against
emulation, against worldliness, against intemperance, against gluttony, against
voluptuousness, against drunkenness, against revelling, against incontinence,
against lasciviousness or wantonness, against filthiness, against obscene
Jestings, against impurity or uncleanness, against sodomy, against
effeminateness, against adultery, against fornication, against whoredom,
against incest, against rape, against covetousness, against grudging and
repining, against refusing or being scandaled at the Cross, against idleness
and carelessness, against fearfulness and softness, against self-love, against
carnality, against sensuality.

The Law against impiety toward God, with all its Retinue; which are, the Law
against dishonor, against atheism, against denying Providence, against
blasphemy, against superstition, against idolatry, against witchcraft and
sorcery, against foolishness, against headiness, against unbelief, against
hating God, against want of zeal, against distrust of him, against not praying
to him, against unthankfulness, against fearlesness, against contumacy or
repining, against disobedience, against common swearing, against perjury,
against profaneness.

The Law against injustice toward men in all its instances; which are, the Law
against murder, against false witness, against slander or calumny, against
lying, against unfaithfulness or perfidy, against adultery, against
covetousness, against stealing or robbing, against oppression, against
extortion and depressing in bargaining, against circumvention and deceit,
against craftiness.

The Law against uncharitableness with all its Train; which are, the Law
against maliciousness or hatefulness, against wickedness, against despising and
hating them that are good, against giving scandal to weak Brethren, against
envy or an evil eye, against rejoicing in evil, against uncharitableness in
alms, against not vindicating an innocent man's reputation, against evil
speaking, against censoriousness, against backbiting, against whispering,
against railing or reviling, against upbraiding, against reproaching, against
mocking, against difficulty of access, against contumely or affront, against
uncourteousness, against stiffness or uncondescension, against
unhospitableness, against surliness, against malignity, against turbulence and
unquietness, against unthankfulness, against anger and passionateness, against
debate and variance, against bitterness, against clamor and brawling, against
hatred and malice, against implacableness, against revenge, against cursing and
reproaching enemies and imprecation of them, against hastiness to punish,
against rigor.

The Law against enmity and discord with all its Dependants; which are, the Law
against unpeaceableness, against emulation or provoking one another, against
pragmaticalness or being busy Bodies, against tale-bearing, aagainst
whispering, against not satisfying for injuries, against strife or contention,
against division and faction in the State, against heresy, and against schism
in the Church, against tumult.

The Law against hatred in the particular relation of Subjects toward their
Princes, with the several effects of it; which are, the Law against dishonor,
against irreverence, against speaking evil of Dignities, against refusing
Tribute and Taxes, against traiterousness, against neglecting to pray for
Kings, against disobedience, against resisting lawful Powers and Authority,
against rebellion.

The Law against hatred to our Ecclesiastical Governors, Bishops and
Ministers, with all the particulars implied in it; which are, the Law against
dishonor of our Bishops and Ministers, especially against setting them at
naught for their works sake, against irreverence to them, against speaking evil
of them, against mocking them, against not providing for them, against
sacrilege or stealing from them, against not praying for them, against
disobedience.

The Law against hatred in the relation of Husband and Wife with all its
Particulars; which are on both sides the Law against unconcernedness in each
others condition, against not bearing each others infirmities, against
provoking one another, against estrangedness, against strife or contention,
against hatred and enmity, against publishing each others infirmities, against
not praying for each other, against adultery, against jealousy: On the
Husbands toward the Wife, the Law against not maintaining her, against not
protecting her, against imperiousness, against uncompliance or uncondescension:
On the Wives toward her Husband, the Law against dishonor, against
irreverence, against unobservance, against disobedience, against casting off
his yoke or unsubjection.

The Law against hatred in the particular relation of Parents and Children with
all its Instances; which are on both sides, the Law against want of natural
affection, against not praying for each other, and imprecation: On the Parents
side, the Law against not providing for those of their own house, against
irreligious and evil education, against harsh Government or provoking their
Children to anger: On the Childrens, the Law against dishonor, against
irreverence, against being ashamed of their Parents, against mocking them,
against cursing or reproach and speaking evil of them, against disobedience,
against contumaciousness, against robbing them.

The Law against hatred in the particular relation of Brethren and Sisters with
its effects; which are, the Law against want of natural affection, against not
providing for our Brethren, against not praying for them, against imprecation
or praying against them.

The Law against hatred in the particular relation of Master and Servant with
all its expressions; which are, on the Masters side, the Law against not
providing maintenance for his Servant, against not catechizing or instructing
him, against unequal Government, against unjustness, wantonness, and rigor in
commanding, against imperiousness, against immoderate threatening, against
railing at him, against defrauding or keeping back the wages of the Hireling,
against not praying for him, against imprecation: And on the Servants, the Law
against dishonor of his Master, against irreverence, against non-observance,
against publishing or aggravating his Masters faults, against not vindicating
his injured reputation, against unfaithfulness, against wasting his Goods,
against purloining, against disobedience, against answering again, against
slothfulness, against eye-service, against contumacy and resistance, against
not praying for him, against imprecation or praying against him.

To all which we must add the two positive and arbitrary prohibitions of the
Gospel, the Law against neglecting Baptism, and the Lords Supper. And when we
wilfully transgress any one, or more of the Commands foregoing, a perseverance
in it without amending it; which is impenitence.

And these are those particular prohibitions whereto our obedience is
indispensably required by the Gospel, and whereby at the last Day we must all
be judged.

And for the performance of all these Commands, and keeping back from all these
prohibitions, when it is become any man's habitual course and practice; it is
ofttimes expressed by the general word holiness; as the contrary is by
unholiness.

CHAP. V. Of the Sanction of the foregoing Laws.
The CONTENTS.
Of the Sanction of all the forementioned particular Laws. That they are bound
upon us by our hopes of Heaven, and our fears of Hell. Of the Sanction of all
the particular affirmative or commanding Laws.

NOW it is upon our obedience of all those Laws which are mentioned in the
foregoing Chapters, that all our well-grounded hope of pardon, and a happy
Sentence at the last Day depends. They are that Rule which God has fixed for the
Proceedings at that Judgment whereby all of us will be doomed to live or dye
eternally. There is not any one of them left naked and unguarded for men to
transgress at pleasure, and yet to go unpunished: but the performance of every
one is made necessary unto life, and the unrepented transgression of it
threatened with eternal damnation.

And that it is so is plain from this, because almost the whole Body of them,
viz. all those which are employed in piety toward God, and in Justice, Charity
and peaceableness toward men, are nothing else but instances and effects of
Love, which is plainly necessary, and that in the greatest latitude. For the
words of the Command are as comprehensive as can be. That thou may inherit
eternal life, thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all
thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy mind; which plainly take
in our whole affection toward God, and every part and expression of it: and
thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self, which again implies all instances of
love toward other men, seeing toward our own selves not any one is wanting:
This do, and thou shall live, Luke 10.25, 27, 28. So that in showing of them
all that they are natural effects of an universal love, I have shown withal
that they are necessary means of life and conditions of salvation.

This is a plain mark, whereby it is obvious and easy for us all to understand
what Laws are necessary terms of life. For every man's heart can inform him what
are the natural effects of love, they being such things as the meanest reason
may discern, nay such as every man's affection will suggest to him. And because
they are so, the Apostles themselves when they set down Catalogues of
indispensable Laws, never descend to reckon up all particulars: but having
plainly declared the absolute necessity of an ample and universal love in the
general, they content themselves with naming some few instances of it, and
leave the rest, which are like unto them, to be suggested to us by our own
minds. And the same course they take in recounting those sins which are
opposite to them, and which, without repentance, will certainly destroy us.
Thus, for instance, in St Paul's Catalogue of damning sins, Gal. 5. he does not
trouble himself to name all particulars* but having mentioned several of them
he concludes with this general intimation of the rest -- and such like, verse.
21.

This way then of showing the necessity of all the forementioned Laws, by
showing expressly that Love in the general is plainly necessary, and leaving it
to men's own minds to collect of them all severally that they are natural
effects of it; is sufficient in it self, and such as the Apostles of our Lord
are wont to take up with: But because our belief of the necessity of our
obedience in all the preceding particulars is of so great moment, and it is so
infinitely our concern to be fixed and settled in it; I will here set down such
express declarations of it in every one of them as are to be met with in the
Scriptures.

And to begin with the several Classes of them in the same order wherein they
are laid down; for sobriety, and all the particular Laws comprehended under it,
we have their sanction set down, and the necessity of our obedience to them to
our life and pardon expressed in the following Scriptures.

For the Law of humility and lowliness of mind, take these:

Put on as necessary qualifications of the elect of God, holy and beloved,
Humility.
humbleness of mind, Col. 3.12. It is this poverty and lowliness of Spirit
which must prepare us for eternal happiness. Blessed are the poor in Spirit,
Matthew. 5.3. For, as our Savior says, it is by learning of him who is meek and
lowly that we shall find both here and hereafter rest to our souls, Matthew.
11.29.

And for all the rest, their Sanction is expressed in these ensuing places.

Labor not for the meat that perishes, but for that which endures to
everlasting life, John 6.27. Heavenly-mindedness.
This is a necessary evidence of our being risen with Christ now at present; If
ye be risen with Christ seek those things which are above, where Christ sits
at the right hand of God. Set your affections on things above, and not on
things on the earth, Col. 3.1, 2; and a necessary condition to our being
blessed with him for ever hereafter; the blessedness which our Savior
pronounces being to those which hunger and thirst after righteousness, Matthew.
5.6.

Add to temperance patience, Temperance, Patience.
for he that lacks these is blind, and shall not be looked on as a new man,
seeing he has forgot that he was purged from his old sins, 2 Pet. 1.6, 9. The
fruit of the Spirit, says St Paul, Continence.
is temperance or (...).
continence, and it is against this among others, that there is no Law to
condemn it, Gal. 5.23. And to the Hebrews he says, that they have need of
patience to inherit the promises of life and happiness, Heb. 10.36; and
therefore they must not cast away, but hold fast their confidence, or
courageous and (...).
open owning even of a suffering Religion, which has great recompense of
reward, ver. 35. It bring to them only who by patient continuance in well-doing
seek for glory and immortality, that God will give eternal life, Romans 2.7.

Dearly Beloved, Chastity.
I beseech you as Strangers and Pilgrims abstain from fleshly lusts, which war
against the soul, to vanquish and destroy it, 1 Pet. 2.11. This abstinence is
one chief thing which we were called to at our Call to Christianity. God has
not called us to uncleanness, says St Paul, but unto holiness, or (...).
purity and cleanness. For this is the will of God which you are first to
perform before you expect his reward, your purity or sanctification, and
particularly in one instance, wherein you are so generally defective, that you
abstain from fornication, and every one of you possess his Vessel or Body in
purity or sanctification and honor. And this Commandment you know we gave you
by the Lord Jesus's order, so that whosoever among you despises it, despises
not man, but God, 1 Thessalonians. 4.2, 3, 4, 7, 8. For the wisdom which comes from
above, and which must carry us thither, is in the first place pure or (...).
chaste, James 3.17.

Love not the world, nor the things of the world; for if any man love the
world, Contempt of the world.
the love of the Father is not in him, 1 John 2.15. For the esteem and
friendship of the world is in very deed downright enmity with God. Whosoever
therefore will be a friend of the world, is the enemy of God, James 4.4.
Godliness, if it be joined with contentment, is great gain, says St Paul, 1 Timothy 6.6. And our being content with such things as we have, Contentment.
is reckoned a part of that Grace whereby we must serve God acceptably, and be
secured from his wrath, who, where he is angered, is a consuming fire, Heb.
12.28. to the fifth Verse of the thirteenth Chapter.

Self-denial. Taking up the Cross.
Christ said unto them all, If any man will come after me, and be accounted one
of my Disciples, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross, and follow me,
Luke 9.23. Mortification.
If ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the Body, says St Paul, you
shall live, Romans 8.13. Yea, its affections and desires, as well as its sinful
actions, are to be deaded and brought under. For they that are Christ's, whom
he will own for his at the last Day, and reward accordingly, have crucified the
Flesh with the affections and Romans 13.14.
lusts or desires thereof, Gal. 5.24.

They who would not be accounted in Gods judgment as Children of the night and
of darkness, Sobriety.
St Paul says plainly, Watchfulness.
must watch and be sober, 1 Thessalonians. 5.5, 6. For watching is necessary unto
bliss, Blessed is that Servant whom his Lord when he comes shall find
watching, Luke 12.37. Diligence.
And give diligence to make your calling and election sure, says St Peter, for
this is one of those things which if you do, you shall never fall either from
your duty, or your reward, 2 Pet. 1.10.

Thus are all the particular Laws recited in the first Class, sobriety,
expressly bound upon us by all our hopes of Heaven; and our obedience to them
plainly necessary to our life and pardon when we come to be judged according to
them.

And the Sanction is the same for all the Particulars of the second Class, our
piety toward God, Piety.
as will appear by the following Scriptures.

Them that honor me, says God, I will honor, Honor.
or make honorable; but they who despise me, shall, on the other hand, be as
lightly set by, 1 Samuel 2.30. Worship.
And if any man be a worshipper of God, him, said the man who had received his
sight most truly, he hears, John 9.31.

He that believes and is baptized shall be saved, Faith.
but he that believes not shall be damned. Mark 16.16. For this is the will of
him that sent me, says our Savior, that whosoever believes on me may have
everlasting life, John 6.40. And what we hear of Faith is also said of
Knowledge: For this is life eternal, says Christ, Knowledge.
to know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent, John
17.3.

The good things which neither eye has seen, nor ear has heard, i. e. the
joys of Heaven, are laid up for those who love God, 1 Cor. 2.9. And if any man
love God, Love.
the same is known or accepted by him, 1 Cor. 8.3.

It is he who believes Christ's promises, or hopes on him, Hope.
that shall never be ashamed, Romans 10.11. And we trust in God, says St Paul,
who is the Savior of all men, Trust.
especially of those that believe or trust in him, 1 Timothy 4.10. And a cheerful
dependence upon Gods Providence for our food, and maintenance, Dependence.
etc. and not being sollicitous about them, is one of the Particulars of
Christ's Law, Matthew. 6.25, the sanction whereof is expressed in the fifth
Chapter in these words, He who breaks the least o^ these Commandments, shall be
least in the Kingdom o^ Heaven, i. e. according to the Hebrew manner of
speaking, he shall be none at all, ver. 19.

Prayer.
Pray without ceasing, 1 Thessalonians. 5.17. It is this that must bring all blessings
down upon us. For the promise is, Ask and you shall have, Matthew. 7.7. But no
Petition being put up, no Grant can in reason be expected, You have not, says
St James, because you ask not, James 4.2.

Fear.
Gods mercy is on all that fear him, Luke 1.50. I will warn you, says our
Savior, whom you shall fear; fear God, who after he has killed has yet
further power to cast you into Hell; if you are fearless and contemptuous, I
say unto you, Fear him, Luke 12.5.

Thankfulness.
In every thing give thanks, for this is the will of God concerning you, 1 Thessalonians. 5.18. It is one part of our walking as Children of the light, to give
thanks always, and in all things, to God the Father in the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 5.8, 20. And the Apostle's exhortation is, Offer to God
the Sacrifice of Praise continually, giving thanks to his Name; and that
because we have no abiding City, but seek one to come, Heb. 13.14, 15.

Zeal.
The Church of Laodicea, to the end that she may be rich and clothed, is
advised to be zealous and to repent, Rev. 3.18, 19. And one effect of a godly
sorrow and a saving repentance, St Paul says, is zeal for God and goodness, 2
Cor. 7.11.

Obedience.
In Christ Jesus or the Christian Religion, neither Circumcision Gal. 5.6. and
6.13.
avails any thing, nor Uncircumcision; but keeping of the Commandments of
God, 1 Cor. 7.19. For it is this only that gives right to life and happiness,
Blessed are they that do his Commandments, that they may have right to the Tree
of Life, Rev. 22.14.

S^bjection or Resignedness.
Our Fathers after the flesh corrected us, and we gave them reverence, and
shall we not much rather be in subjection to the Father of Spirits, and live?
Heb. 12.9.

And thus are all the Particulars of this second Class of Duties, Piety, bound
upon us with the same sanction as the former, and our obedience to them all
made necessary to our being pardoned at the last Day, and eternally rewarded by
them.

And the same is further true of the Duties of the third Class, righteousness
toward our Neighbor. Righteousness.


For as for the necessity of Justice, St Paul is clear, Justice.
Owe no man any thing, but to love one another, Romans 13.8. For if you wrong and
defraud one another, says the same Apostle, know that the unrighteous shall
not inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6.8, 9.

And as for all the particular Laws of Charity, Charity.
their necessity will appear from what follows.

Be kindly affectioned one to another, Goodness or Kindness. Brotherly kindness.

Honor of our Brethren for their Virtues. Vindicating their injured
reputation. Almsgiving. Hospitality. Speaking well of enemies. Congratulatio^.
Compassion. Unity.

Assability. Condescension.


as if you were of the same blood and (...).
near Kindred, with brotherly love, in honor Phil. 2.3.
preferring one another for your Virtues before your selves; and much more
vindicating each other from the unjust aspersions of others. Distributing or
(...).
communicating to the necessity of Saints; given to, or earnestly (...).
pursuing hospitality; Bless or (...).
speak well of them which persecute you; Bless, and curse not. Rejoice with
them that do rejoice, in congratulation; and weep with them that weep, in Gal.
6.2. and 1 Pet. 3.8, 11, 12.
compassion. Be of the same mind one toward another; mind not state and high
things, but be affable and condescend, by (...).
going even out of your way to bear them company, to men of low estate.
Recompense to no man evil for evil; but if thine enemy hunger, feed him; if he
thirst, Doing good to enemies.
give him drink, Romans 12.10, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 20. All which Precepts, with
several others delivered in that Chapter, he gave in Command, as he tells them,
through the Grace or Authority of Apostleship, which is here and Romans 1.5. and
15.15. Ephesians. 3.8.
elsewhere called Grace, given unto him, ver. 3; and that is a plain proof of
their indispensable necessity. For he that despises you Apostles, says our
Savior, despises me, Luke 10.16. And if the transgression and disobedience of
the Law of Moses spoken to him only by Angels in the Mount, received a just
recompense of reward, such Offenders dying Heb. 10.28.
without mercy; how shall we escape the same death or greater if we neglect,
and much more if we despise, so great a means of salvation as Christ's Gospel
and his Laws are, which was at first spoken to us by the Lord Jesus himself,
who is far above all Angels, and was afterward confirmed to us by his
Apostles, or them that heard him, Heb. 2.2, 3.

Gentleness. Placableness. Mercifulness.
The wisdom from above, and which must bring us thither, is gentle, easy to be
entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, James 3.17. And St Paul bids the
Colossians to put on as the elect of God, holy and beloved, these Virtues; viz.
bowels of James 2.13.
mercies, kindness or (...).
courtesy, Courtesy. Meekness. Long-suffering. Forgiving injuries.
meekness, long-suffering or forbearing one another, and Mat. 6.14, 15.
forgiving one another; If any man has a quarrel against any, even as Christ
forgave you, so do ye, Col. 3.12, 13, 15. The fruits of the Spirit, says the
same Apostle, are love, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, meekness; against
such there is no condemning force of any Law, Gal. 5.22, 23.

The description which St Paul gives of Charity is this, Charity suffers long
in great meekness before it be provoked, and is kind or 1 Pet. 3.8.12.
courteous toward all men; is not puffed up with supercilious and haughty
behavior, for men do not assume state over those persons whom they love,
Affability.
but is lowly and affable; does not behave it self unseemly or (...).
contumeliously, but with much respect and civility; seeks not her own Praise
and Glory at other men's cost or discredit; is not easily provoked or not
provoked to the (...).

Mercifulness.


height, but mixes mercifulness with anger, opposite to rigor; rejoices or
(...).
congratulates the truth or sincerity and integrity of men; and as for their
infirmities, it bears or (...).
covers and conceals all things that are defective; believes all things to
their advantage, Covering men's defects.
in putting the most candid and favorable sense upon any thing which they do
or say; Candor.
and where there is no excuse for the present, it hops all things good for
the future; and for injuries offered to it self, it is not hasty and
vindictive, Patience*
but patiently endures all things, 1 Cor. 13.4, 5, 6, 7. And for the necessity
of that Charity which includes all these, St Paul is express in the same
Chapter; when he tells us that although he have all faith and all knowledge, and
bestow all his goods to feed the poor, yea and give his Body to be burned in
Martyrdom; if still he have not Charity in all these other effects, and in that
latitude wherein it is here described, it profits him nothing, ver. 2, 3.

I say unto you, Love your enemies, bless or (...). Speaking good of enemies.

Doing good (...) them.

Praying for(...) them.


speak all the good you can of them that curse or reproach you, do good to them
that hate you, and pray for them who despitefully use you, and persecute you,
that by this means you may be the Children of your Father which is in Heaven,
Matthew. 5.44, 45. Which Laws are of the number of those which are contained in
Christ's Sermon on the Mount, at the beginning whereof he declared, that
whosoever should break the least of his Commandments which he was then about to
deliver, and should teach men to do so too; he should be least or none at all
in the Kingdom of Heaven, ver. 19.

Thou shall not hate thy Brother in thy heart; thou shall in any wise rebuke
thy Neighbor, Friendly reproof.
and not suffer sin to rest upon him: I am the Lord, who will surely punish
thee, if thou neglect this, Lev. 19.17, 18. But when any man by such charitable
admonition does convent a Sinner from the error of his way, let him for his
encouragement know this, says St James, that he shall save a soul of him who is
reproved from death, and besides that, shall hide also a multitude of his own
sins, James 5.19, 20. And as for the method of performing this, what course we
are to take, and how far we are to proceed in it: our Savior has set that
down, according to what had obtained in the Their practice in this Case is thus
described; Qui arguit socium suum, debet primum hoc sacere placide inter se and
ipsum solum verbis mollibus, ita ut non pudesaciat eum. Si resipiscit, b^xe
est; sin, debet eum acriter arguere, and pudesacere inter se and ipsum. Si non
resipiscit, debet adhibere Socios, ipsumque coram illis pudore afficere; si nec
modo qui^^uam proficit, debet eum pud^sacere coram multis, ejusque delictum
publicare. Nam certe detegendi sunt Hypocrit^e. Lib. Musar. as it is ci^ed by
Dru^^^^, Not. ad loc.
Jewish custom, Matthew. 18. For there in the case of Verse 21.
private injuries, which are no fit Subject of Church censures that are
exercised only upon open and scandalous Sinners, he prescribes thus; If thy
Brother shall trespass against thee, take this course to reclaim him: Go first
and tell him of his fault privately between thee and him alone; if he shall
hear thee, and amend upon thy admonition, thy work is done, and without any
more ado thou have gained thy Brother. But if he be not to be won thus easily,
and will not hear thee admonishing him thus privately by thy self alone; then
give not over, but go one step further; take with thee one or two more to join
with thee in thy admonition, that by the authority of their concurrence he may
be the more prevailed upon, and that the reproof now appearing, not in thy
mouth alone, but also in the mouths of thy two or three Witnesses, every word
may have the more effect, and be the firmlier established. And if he shall be
incorrigible still, and neglect to hear both thee and them too; yet give him
not over for a lost man, but try one means more, which is the last that I
enjoin thee: Pick out a select Assembly and choice Company of men, who are more
in number than thou tookest before, and tell it unto that Church or (...).
Assembly, and reprove him before all them. But if he prove obstinate against
this last means, and neglect to hear them; then thou have discharged thy self,
and need to look no further after him, but may let him be unto thee
thenceforward as a lost and hardened man, whose Conversion thou art no longer
bound in vain to labor after, such as we are wont to express by a heathen man
and a Publican, ver. 15, 16, 17.

Take heed lest by any means this Christian Liberty of yours become a stumbling
Block or scandal to those that are weak, by seducing and encouraging them,
Restraining our Christian Liberty for our weak Brothers edification.
on the authority of your example, to do that against their Conscience, which
you, who know more, do according to it; and so through thy knowledge shall the
weak Brother perish, for whom Christ dyed: But when ye sin so against the
Brethren, and by such unrestrained liberty wound their weak Consciences, you
sin against Christ, 1 Cor 8.9, 11, 12. It is a most uncharitable thing, and
without Charity all things else will profit nothing, 1 Cor. 13.3; For if thy
Brother be grieved or scandalized with thy liberty in meat or other things; now
walk thou not charitably if for all that thou abstain not from it; destroy
not him therefore with thy meat, for whom Christ dyed, Romans 14.15. But if any
man will still be prone to give offense, his Sentence is severe and dreadful.
Romans 14.22.
For he that shall offend or scandalize one of these little Ones which believe
in me; it were better for him that a Millstone were hanged about his neck, and
that he were drowned in the depth of the Sea, Matthew. 18.6.

And thus are all the particular Laws of Charity and Justice also imposed with
the same strictness, and under the same necessity with the former.

And that the sanction is the same in the Particulars of the next Class, viz.
Peace; Peace.
will appear by what follows.

Follow peace with all men, Peace.
without which no man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12.14. It is not enough that we
accept of it when it is offered, but we must enquire it out, and seek after it;
nay if it be denied us at first, we must endeavor after it still, and ensue it
when it flies from us; and that not coldly or carelessly, with weak desires, or
little industry; but with the greatest concern and utmost diligence that
possibly we can. He that will love life and see good days, says St Peter, let
him seek peace and ensue it, 1 Pet. 3.10, 11. Be of the same 1 Pet. 3.8. Phil.
2.1, 2. Concord. Condescension.
mind, says St Paul among those Laws which he enjoins by his Apostolical
Authority, Romans 12. one toward another; mind not high things, but condescend
to men of low estate. If it be possible, and as much as in you lies,
Peaceableness.
live peaceably with all men, ver. 16, 18. Yea, we must pay dear for it rather
than want it, and bear long, and suffer much from men before we contend with
them, and use all arts and show all kindness to pacify and reconcile them. Not
rendering evil for evil, or railing for railing; but contrariwise blessing or
benediction, knowing this, That we are thereunto called in Christianity, that
from our Lord Christ, who was so exemplary for it, we should inherit this
Virtue of (...).
speaking well and kindly of men, or blessing, 1 Pet. 3.9. I say unto you, says
our Savior, resist not the evil or injurious (...).
man, which is the way to inflame and consummate contention, but whosoever
shall smite thee on thy right cheek, Forbearance or Long-suffering.
turn to him the other also; and if any man will sue thee at the Law, and take
away thy Coat, bear a little more, and rather than contend with him, let him
have thy Cloak also, Mat. 5.39, 40. Which Precepts, with all the others
delivered in that Sermon, are bound upon us, as was observed, under the
forfeiture of all right to happiness and Heaven, ver. 19.

The wisdom which comes from above, and which must raise us thither, is
peaceable, says St James, Jam. 3.17. And St Paul reckons it as one of the
Commandments which were given to the Thessalonians by the Lord Jesus, that they
should study, even so as to be (...) Quietness.
ambitious of it, to be quiet or to acquiesce in their present state, and not
to interrupt the quiet and tranquillity of other men, Doing our own business.
and to do their own business, 1 Thessalonians. 4.2, 11.

The method of procuring pardon for injustice is prescribed thus in the Law of
Moses; Satisfying for injuries.
If a man commit a trespass against another man, and be guilty, he shall come
and recompense his trespass with the Principle thereof, and over and above
that, Luke 19.8.
add unto it the fifth part thereof more, and give it unto him against whom he
has trespassed, Numb. 5.6, 7. And Christ, although he do not define the
particular proportion of the compensation, does yet establish this satisfaction
and reconciliation of our selves to our injured Brother in the general, as an
indispensable Duty, without which nothing, not our very Prayers or Oblations,
shall be accepted. If thou bring thy gift to the Altar, and there remembrest
that thy Brother has ought against thee, having been injured by thee; leave
there thy gift, and go thy way, first be reconciled to thy Brother, by giving
him satisfaction for thy offense, and then come and offer thy gift, Matthew.
5.23, 24. Which Command is moreover one of those whose sanctions is the loss of
Heaven, ver. 19.

Blessed are the Peacemakers; for they shall be, Peacemaking.
called the Children of God, Matthew. 5.9.

And thus we see of all the Laws which make any thing due to God, our selves,
or all mankind in general; whether they are instances of sobriety, piety,
justice, charity, or peace: that our obedience unto them all is made necessary
unto life, and that they are bound upon us by all our hopes of happiness and
Heaven.

And the sanction is the same for all those Laws which make some things due in
particular relations likewise.

For as for the Laws that bind us in the particular relation of Subjects to our
Kings, Laws in the relation of Subjects to our Kings.
their sanction appears plainly from these places:

Let every soul be subject to the higher Powers; for there is no Power but of
God; Subjection.
whosoever therefore resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God: and
they that resist shall receive to themselves damnation. Wherefore you must
needs be subject, not only for wrath, but also for Conscience sake. Render
therefore to all their Dues; as these following are to Kings, Paying Tribute
and Custom.
Tribute to whom Tribute is due, Custom to whom Custom, Fear or Reverence to
whom Fear, Reverence and Honor.
Honor to whom 1 Pet. 2.17.
Honor, Romans 13.1, 2, 5, 7. And all these are only part of that Catalogue of
Laws, which he begins to reckon up, and declares to them by his Apostolical
Authority, chap. ^2. ver. 3.

These things speak and exhort, rebuke with all Authority, and let no man
despise thee, who shall surely be punished as a Contemner of Christ if he do.
Obedience.
Put them in mind to be subject to Principalities and Powers, to 1 Pet. 2.13,
14, 15.
obey Magistrates, Tit. 2. ver. ult. and chap. 3. ver. 1.

Prayer for Kings.
I exhort therefore first of all that prayers of all sorts, supplications,
intercessions, petitions, and giving of thanks be made for all Kings, and such
as are in Authority; for this is in it self, and will render us good and
acceptable in the sight of God our Savior, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2, 3; and a proof
moreover of that good conscience which Timothy is charged to keep, chap. 1.
ver. 19.

And for Fidelity and Allegiance, this may suffice to show its necessity, that
among the men of corrupt minds, who are reprobate concerning the Faith, and who
should render the last times perilous, St Paul reckons Traitor^* 2 Timothy 3.1,
4, 8.

So that as for all the forementioned Duties of this relation, we see their
indispensable necessity, and that as ever we hope to be saved by them, we must
perform and obey them.

And so it is in the particular Laws of the next relation, that of people
toward their spiritual Governors, Laws in the relation of people to their
Pastors.
viz. their Bishops and Ministers, as is plain from these Texts following:

We beseech you, Brethren, Honor and Reverence for their works sake.
to know them who labor among you, and are set over you in the Lord, and to
esteem or honor them very highly, or (...).
more than abundantly, in love for their works sake, 1 Thessalonians. 5.12, 13. And
this is one of those Precepts which are pressed upon them as they would be
Children of light, and not of darkness, ver. 5; and as they are to avoid wrath
and to obtain salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ, ver. 9.

Let him who is taught or (...).
catechized in the Word, communicate unto him that teaches or catechizeth in
all 1 Timothy 5.17, 18. 1 Cor. 9.4, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13, 14.

Maintenance of Ministers. Obedience. Prayer for men.


good things. Be not deceived, God is not mocked; for whatsoever a man sows
in this and other things, that shall he also reap, Gal. 6.6, 7.

(...), Ignat. Ep. ad Smyrn. Ed. Voss. p. 6.
Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves; for they watch
for your souls. Pray for us, Heb. 13.17, 18. Which are part of those Precepts
that are enjoined as the way whereby to serve God acceptably, who is a
consuming fire to destroy and devour all that dare offend him, chap. 12.2. last
verses.

And for the necessity of the several Laws in the particular relation of
Husband and Wife; Laws in the relation of Husband and Wife.
that will appear by what follows.

For as for that love which is strictly required betwixt them, it ought, says
St Paul, agreeably to the words of God at the institution of Marriage, They two
shall be one Flesh, to be such as people have for their own Bodies, Ephesians.
5.28, 31. Which cannot imply less than an affectionate concern, Communicating
in each others bliss or misery.
and communicating in each others joy or sorrow; for if one member of a man's
Body suffer, all the rest, as the Apostle observes, suffer with it; and if one
be honored, all the rest rejoice with it: the Members all having the same care
one for another, 1 Cor. 12.25, 26. Bearing each others infirmities.

Praying for each other.


And also a bearing with each others infirmities, as every man will do with
those of his own Body; and praying for each other. And for particular Duties,
we are told in the same fifth Chapter to the Ephesians, that the Husband must
condescend and comply with his Wife, On the Husbands side, Condescension and
Compliance.
and part, not only with his own self-will but, even with his own life to serve
her. Husbands love your Wives, says he, even as Christ loved the Church, and
gave himself for it. So ought men to love their Wives as their own Bodies. And
how that is, we all experience, for no man ever yet hated his own Flesh,
Providing for her.

Protecting her.


but protecteth it and provideth well and duly for it, or nourishes and
cherishes it, ver. 25, 28, 29. In which love of his Wife as of his own Flesh,
Flexible, winning Government.
is implied moreover that his Government of her be Col. 3.19.
flexible and obliging; nothing being more contrary to our self-love, than to
be commanded in peremptoriness and rigor. On the Wives side,

Observance.


And then as for the particular Duties of the Wife, she is bid to be observant,
or to take care how to please her Husband, 1 Cor. 7.34. To submit her will to
his, and to be ready to perform what he enjoins, Subjection.
as she is to do what God commands her. Wives submit your selves unto your own
Husbands, as unto the Lord: for the Husband is the Head of the Wife, as Christ
is of the Church: therefore as the Church is subject unto Christ; so let the
Wives be unto their own Tit. 2.5.15.
Husbands in every thing, Ephesians. 5.22, 23, 24. And this submission she must
show in respectful carriage, and such behavior as argues in her a fear to give
offense, Let the Wife see that she reverence her Husband, Reverence.
ver. 33. And all these Commands enjoining Duties both on one side and on the
other, which are delivered in that Chapter, are required as part of our walking
as Children of the light, and proving what is acceptable unto the Lord, ver. 8,
10.

Marriage is honorable, and the Bed undefiled; but Whoremongers and Adulterers
God will judge, Heb. 13.4. Fidelity on both sides.


Wives are to be taught to be obedient to their own Husbands, Obedience on the
Wives.
that the Word of God or Doctrine of the Gospel be not blasphemed, Tit. 2.5.
Let Wives be in subjection to their own Husbands. For with this in old time the
holy women adorned themselves, even as Sarah obeyed Abraham, calling and
observing him as her Lord, whose Daughters ye are as long as you do well, and
imitate her, but no longer, 1 Pet. 3.5, 6.

So that all the Laws in this relation are enjoined under the same necessity,
and confirmed with the same sanction as the former.

And as for the Particulars of the next relation, Laws in the relation of
Parents and Children.
they are imposed with the same strictness.

For natural affection, the want of it St Paul affirms plainly makes men 2 Timothy
3.3.
worthy of death, Romans 1.31.

The Children ought not to lay up (...). On the Parents side,

Maintenance or Provision.


Treasure or provide for the Parents, but the Parents for the Children, 2 Cor.
12.14. And if any man provide not for his own house, he has denied the Faith
of Christ, which indispensably enjoins it, nay despising such a notorious and
necessary Precept of mere Nature, he is worse than any honest Infidel, 1 Timothy
5.8.

Fathers provoke not your Children to wrath against you by a harsh and austere
Government of them, Loving Government.
but rule them in kindness and love; and bring them up in the nurture and
admonition of the Lord. Religious ^ducation.
And ye Children on the other side Col. ^.20, 21.
obey your Parents in the Lord, for this is right. Mat. 15.4. Obedience on the
Childrens side. Honor.
Honor your Father and Mother, that it may be well with you, Ephesians. 6.1, 2, 3,
4. Which Precepts are of the number of those which he imposes on them as parts
of their walking as Children of the light, and proving what is acceptable unto
the Lord, Chap. 5.8, 10.

If any man have Children or Nephews, let them first learn to show piety at
home, and requite their Parents, for this is good and acceptable to God.
Requiting their Parents.
But if any man provide not for his own, especially those of his own house or
Family, as Parents are in the first place, he has denied the Faith, and in his
unnatural actions is worse than an honest Infidel, 1 Timothy 5.4, 8.

And thus are all the Laws of this relation likewise established in the
greatest strictness, and our obedience to them made plainly necessary to our
bliss and happiness.

Laws in the relation of Brethren and Sisters.
And as for the particular Laws of natural affection, and communicating upon
occasion to each other of their Substance in the relation of Brethren and
Sisters; they are proved to be necessary in the proof of the former: For the
same places which require them in that relation, require them in this also.

Laws in the relation of Masters and Servants.

On the Masters side,

Maintenance.


And then as for the Particulars of the last relation, viz. that of Masters and
Servants; they are of equal necessity with all the foregoing.

If any man provide not for his own house, whereof Servants are one part, he
has denied the Faith, and is worse than an Infidel, 1 Timothy 5.8.

Just and equal Government.
Masters, give unto your Servants that which is just and equal, knowing that ye
also have a Master in Heaven, who will punish your unequal dealing toward
them, Col. 4.1. If I despise the cause of my manservant, or of my maidservant
when they argue in their own defense, and contend with me; what then shall I do
when God rises up? and when he visits, what shall I answer him? Job 31.13, 14.

P^nctual payment of the wages of the Hireling.
Thou shall not oppress an hired Servant that is poor and needy, whether he be
of thy Brethren, a Jew, or a Stranger, of the Gentiles. At his Lev. 19.13.
Day thou shall give him his hire, neither shall the Sun go down upon it; for
he is poor, and sets his heart upon it, Deuteronomy. 24.14, 15. Jer. 22.13.
Weep and howl, O ye rich men, says St James, for the miseries that shall come
upon you; for behold the hire of the Laborers, who have reaped down your
Fields, and which is of you keept back by fraud, cries against you, and the
Cries are entered into the ears of the Lord, who hearkens to them, and in great
Justice will one Day avenge them, James 5.1, 4.

Ye Masters do the same things (viz. good, Religious instruction.
whether as to their Bodies, in providing for them, or to their Souls, in
religious instruction, with a good will, in expectation of a reward from the
Lord) to your Servants, forbearing threatening; knowing that your Master also is
in Heaven, Forbearing threatening.
who has threatened you if ye neglect this necessary Duty, neither is there any
respect of persons with him, Ephesians. 6.8, 9.

Let as many Servants as are under the Yoke, On the Servants side,

Honor.


count their own Masters worthy of all honor, that the name of God be not
blasphemed, as certainly it would upon their contrary practice. And if any man
teach otherwise, he is proud, knowing nothing, 1 Timothy 6.1, 3, 4.

Servants obey in all things your Masters according to the Flesh; not with
eye-service, Obedience.
but in singleness or (...).
sincerity of heart, without fraud or double dealing, as persons fearing God.
And whatsoever you do, Hearty service.
do it heartily, as to the Lord, not to men; knowing that of the Lord you shall
receive the reward of the inheritance for such your obedient practice, for, in
thus serving them, you serve the Lord Christ, Col. 3.22, 23, 24. Servants obey
your Masters with fear and trembling; Reverence.
not with eye-service, as Men-pleasers, but from the heart, with goodwill,
doing service as to the Lord, who commands this of you, and not only to men;
knowing that whatsoever good or ill in this particular any man does* the same
shall he receive of the Lord, Ephesians 6.5, 6, 7, 8.

Exhort Servants to be obedient to their own M^sters, Observance.
and to please them well by all manner of observance in all things, Vindicating
their inj^red reputation. Concealing their defects. Fidelity.
either as to their reputation in vindicating it when it is injured, or
concealing such defects as would stain and fully it, or their other interests:
showing all good fidelity. For the Grace of God which brings salvation has
appeared to all men, teaching them, as ever they hope to be saved by it, That
denying all ungodliness and worldly lusts, whereof the contrary practices to
these are the effect and offspring, they should live soberly, etc. Tit. 2.9,
10, 11, 12, 13. And moreover, these Precepts are part of that sound Doctrine,
which Titus is required to speak, ver. 1. in opposition to their Doctrine, who
in the Verse before are said to be abominable, disobedient, and to every good
work reprobate.

Servants be subject to your own Masters, with all fear or reverence; not only
to the good and gentle, but also to the (...).
hard or hasty and froward. For this is thankworthy, if for Conscience toward
God you patiently endure grief, suffering wrongfully. This is acceptable to
God, and likewise necessary for you; for even hereunto were you called, that
you may be like to Christ who has left you an example of such patient
suffering, for this end, that you might follow his steps, 1 Pet. 2.18, 19, 20,
21, etc.

And thus are all the particular Laws of this last relation imposed in the same
strictness of obligation, and under the same severe sanction with all the rest
that went before.

And as for the Law of Baptism, and of the Lords Supper, and of Repentance and
amendment whenever we fail in any of the former, which are all the commanding
Laws yet remaining; their necessity will appear from the Scriptures following.

Baptism.
Except a man be born again of Water as well as of the Spirit, he cannot enter
into the Kingdom of God, says Christ to Nicodemus, John 3.5. And when Christ
sends his Apostles out to preach to all the World, that Doctrine which he
commissions them to declare is this, He that believes and is baptized, shall
be saved, Mark 16.16.

Take, eat, this is my Body: Lords Supper.
Do this in remembrance of me. For as often as you eat this Bread, and drink
this Cup, you do show forth the Lords death, which you must do, till he come
the second time to judge us, and to punish all impenitent Transgressors as well
of this as of all his other Precepts, 1 Cor. 11.24, 25, 26. And this Command,
he further says, he received of the Lord to deliver to them, ver. 23. And for
the fuller proof of the necessity of this Sacrament, that is very remarkable,
which, as some have observed, the Jewish Doctors have taken notice of, viz.
that whereas God forbad twenty three things under pain of being cut off from
the people to them who committed them; yet in the whole Old Testament there are
but two things commanded under that penalty to those who should neglect them;
and they are Circumcision and the Passover, which are Types and Figures of, and
answer to our two Sacraments, Baptism and the Lords Supper. And for that
necessity particularly of the Passover among the Jews, which answers to the
Eucharist among us Christians, where, as the Apostle says, Christ our Passover
is sacrificed for us, 1 Cor. 5.7. we have a plain Text at the institution of
it, Exodus 12. Whosoever, in the Feast of the Passover, eats leavened Bread
from the first Day to the eleventh Day; that soul shall be cut off from Israel,
ver. 15.

Repentance and remission of sins thereupon is commanded to be preached to all
Nations, Luke 24.47. Repentance.
And as Christ ordered, so his Apostles practiced. Repent, says St Peter in his
first Sermon, and be baptized for the remission of sins, Acts 2.38. But without
this there is no mercy for any wilful Offenders; for except you repent, says
our Savior, you shall all perish, Luke 13.3.

And thus we have seen of all the commanding Laws particularly, that our
obedience to every one of them is plainly necessary to our salvation. They are
that Rule which God has fixed to measure out to us either Life or Death, and
which at the last Day we must all be eternally acquitted or condemned by.

CHAP. VI. Of the Sanction of all the forbidding Laws.
The CONTENTS.
Of the Sanction of all the negative or forbidding Laws particularly. The
perfection of the Christian Law. How our Duty exceeds that of the Heathens
under the revelations of Nature. And that of the Jews under the additional
light of Moses's Law.

AS for all the Vices opposite to the several Virtues in the foregoing Chapter,
which are the number of the negative or forbidding Laws; they must needs be
under the same sanction, and our observance of them be bound upon us by the
same necessity with our observance of the former. For whatsoever any of the
particular Laws commanding any Virtues threaten, they denounce against these
opposite Vices, which are the several transgressions of them. So that in
showing the severe sanction and necessity of the one, I have shown it
sufficiently of the other also.

And this might very well excuse me all further trouble in searching after an
express sanction of every particular forbidding Law.

But on the other side I consider, that men are infinitely concerned to be
fully convinced of the particular necessity of abstaining from every Vice, as
well as of performing every Virtue And that there is much more force to work
this full Conviction in an express and particular proof, than there can be in a
general and implicit intimation. And because I would shun no pains which may
be likely to quicken the obedience, or secure the interests even of any one
soul; I will not leave it to men's selves to collect and infer this necessity,
although the meanest capacities may do it without any great difficulty, but
proceed still to set down such sanctions of all the particular forbidding Laws,
as I meet with in the Scriptures.

And to take the several Classes of them in that order wherein they are
described above, Vnsoberness.
for the penalties threatened to all the Particulars of unsoberness, they will
appear from the places following.

The works of the Flesh are manifest, says St Paul, which are adultery,
fornication, Mat. 5.28, 30.
uncleanness, Adultery. Fornication. Uncleanness. Lasciviousness. Drunkenness.
Revelling. Emulation.
lasciviousness, Luke 21.34.
drunkenness, revelling, emulations, of the which I tell you, that they who do
such things shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. And besides these, if we live
in the Spirit, without which there is no hopes of happiness, Romans 8.6; let us
not be desirous of (...), Clem. Romans 1. Ep. ad Cor. c. 30.

Effeminateness. Sodomy. Ravishers.


vainglory, provoking one another, Vainglory.
Gal. 5.19, 20, 21, 25, 26.

Neither the effeminate, those that (...).
suffer themselves to be unnaturally abused, nor the abusers of themselves with
mankind, nor extortioners, or (...).
ravishers and men that commit 1 Cor. 5.11. and 6.10.
rapes, shall inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10.

Fearfulness.
But the fearful and soft, the abominable, or (...).

Whoredom.


abusers of themselves with mankind, and whoremongers, shall have their part in
the Lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death, Rev.
21.8.

Filthiness. Obscene Jesting.
Let not filthiness, nor (...).
foolish or Col. 3.8.
obscene talking, nor jesting in (...).
filthy jests be so much as named among you. Covetiusness.
For this ye know, that no whoremonger, or covetous man, etc. has any
inheritance in the Kingdom of God, and of Christ. Let no man deceive you, for
these things sake comes the wrath of God upon the Children of disobedience,
Ephesians. 5.3, 4, 5, 6.

Carnality.
In the last Days perilous times shall come, for men shall be lovers of
themselves, or of their own Romans 8.6, 18. 1 Timothy 5.6.
Flesh, Covetousness. Pride. Arrogance. Incontinence. Haughtiness. Insolence.
Sensuality.
covetous, proud, Boasters, or (...).
arrogant, incontinent, high-minded, or (...).
enormously haughty in behavior or insolent, lovers of pleasures more than
lovers of God, or Jude 19.
sensual, having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof: from such
turn away, for they are men of corrupt minds, and reprobate concerning the
faith, 2 Timothy 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 8.

Backbiters.
Being filled with covetousness, Back-biters, Boasters, or (...).
arrogant, which in the judgment of God are worthy of death, Romans 1.29, 30, 32.

Gluttony.
The Servant that shall begin to eat and to drink with the drunken, shall have
his portion appointed with Hypocrites, in the place where there shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth, Matthew. 24.49, 51.

Many are enemies of the Cross of Christ, whose God is their Belly,
Voluptuousness. Worldliness.
which they carefully serve in voluptuous eating, who are altogether James 4.4.
worldly, and mind earthly things; whose end is destruction, Phil. 3.18, 19. Ye
have lived in pleasure on the earth, and been wanton; or ye have (...).
lived deliciously, and fared luxuriously: Ye Ye have nourished or (...).
fed your hearts, as men use to do Cattle which they intend for the Shambles
against or in a day of slaughter. Weep therefore and howl for the miseries that
shall come upon you, James 5.1, 5.

Love not the world, Ambition.
nor covet and ambitiously pursue the rich and splendid things of the world.
But if any man do love the world, I declare this concerning him, that the Love
of the Father is not in him, 1 John 2.15.

Blessed is he who shall not be offended in me, or not (...).
scandalized and turned out of the way and profession of my Religion, through
any difficulties or persecutions that befall him in it, Matthew. 11.6. Refusing of
t^^ Cross.
For he who will save his life in this world, by fleshly policy and wicked
compliances against his Duty, shall lose it in the world to come; but whosoever
shall lose his life, or other temporal enjoyments for my sake, or for an honest
owning of my Laws and Religion, that same man shall find it, Matthew. 16.25.

And for the prohibitions of the second Class, impiety, Impiety.
we have their penalty expressed in the Texts ensuing.

The works of the Flesh are manifest, Exodus 20.4, 5.

Idolatry. Witchcraft.


idolatry, witchcraft; of which I tell you, that they who do such things shall
not inherit the Kingdom of God, Gal. 5.19, 20, 21.

But the Mark 16.16. Unbelief. Sorcery.
unbelievers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, shall have their part in the Lake
which burns with fire and brimstone; which is the second death, Rev. 21.8.

The wicked man has said in his heart, God hides his face, he will never Psalm.
64.5, ^. Denying Providence.
see what men do, and therefore he will not require an account of it. But thou
Lord do behold mischief and spite, and that too to punish and requite it with
thy hand, Psalm. 10.11, 13, 14.

Being haters of God, without Mark 7.22. Tit. 3.3. Hating God. Foolishness.
understanding or foolish, which in the judgment of God are worthy of death,
Romans 1.30, 31, 32.

In the last days perilous times shall come, for men shall be Matt. 15.19, 20.

Blasphemy. Unthankfulness. Headiness. Dishonor.


Blasphemers, unthankful, unholy, heady; and these are men of corrupt minds,
and reprobate concerning the faith* 2 Timothy 3.1, 2, 4, 8.

They that despise and dishonor me, shall be lightly set by, 1 Samuel 2.30*

Want of zeal.
Because thou have no zeal for me, but art lukewarm, and neither hot nor cold;
I will spew thee, as men do warm water, which the Stomach loathes and nauseates,
out of my mouth, Rev. 3.16. If we deny him, he also will deny us, 2 Timothy 2.12.
And our being ashamed of, and not owning and maintaining him and his Religion,
although it be at a time when impiety is barefaced, in an adulterous and sinful
Generation, is intepreted by him for such damnable denial of him. For what is
called denying me and my words, Matthew. 10.33; is upon another occasion repeated
in St Mark, and expressed by being ashamed of them, Mark 8.38.

Perjury.
Ye have heard that it has been said in old time, Thou shall not forswear or
Deuteronomy. 5.11.
perjure thy self, but shall perform unto the Lord thy Vows. But in addition to
this I say unto you, Swear not at all in your common James 5.12.
converse, but let your communication or ordinary discourse be yea, Common
swearing.
yea, and nay, nay; for whatsoever is more than these, comes of evil, Matthew.
5.33, 34, 37. And these Precepts are of the number of those whereof Christ had
expressly said, ver. 19. He who breaks the least of these Commandments, shall be
least or none at all in the Kingdom of Heaven.

Disobedience.
The Law, with its terrors and severe sanctions, is not made for a righteous
man, who would do what it requires without them; but for the lawless and
disobedient, for ungodly, Profaneness.
for unholy and profane, for perjured persons, that by means of its dreadful
punishments it might either fright them from sinning, or take vengeance on them
after they should have sinned against it, 1 Timothy 1.9, 10.

Woe unto him that strives through 1 Cor. 10.10 11.

Contumacy. Injustice.


contumacious and repining carriage with his Maker, Isai. 45.9.

And for the necessity of observing the prohibitions of the third Head,
injustice toward men, take these places:

The works of the Flesh are manifest, adultery, Adultery. Murder.
murder; of which I tell you, that they who do such things shall not inherit
the Kingdom of God, Gal. 5.19, 21.

Being filled with all unrighteousness, covetousness, deceit,
covenant-breakers, or perfidious, Covetousness. Deceit. Per^idy.
who in the judgment of God are worthy of death, Romans 1.29, 30, 31, 32.

This is the will of God, Circumvention. Oppression.
That no man go beyond and defraud his Brother in any matter, or way
whatsoever, whether it be extortion, oppression, or plain 1 Pet. 2.1, 2, 3.
couzenage; for the Lord is the avenger of all such, as we also have forwarned
you, and testified, 1 Thessalonians. 4.3, 6.

Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? Be not
deceived, neither thieves, Stealing or t^ievery.
nor covetous shall inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10.

In the last Days perilous times shall come; for men shall be Truce Breakers,
false Accusers, Slander.
or Slanderers and Calumniators; from such turn away, for they are men of
corrupt minds, and reprobate concerning the faith, 2 Timothy 3.1, 2, 3, 5, 8.

Out of the heart proceed thefts, false witness, murders; these defile or
pollute the man, False witness.
and so exclude him from Heaven, where nothing can ever enter that is unholy
and unclean, Matthew. 15.19, 20.

Thou have greedily gained of thy Neighbor by Lev. 25.14. Luke 18.11.
Extortion.
extortion, therefore I have smitten my hand at thy dishonest gain. Can thy
heart endure, or thy hands be strong in the day when I shall deal with thee,
Ezekiel. 22.12, 13, 14.

All 1 Pet. 2.12. Lying.
Liars shall have their part in the Lake which burns with fire and brimstone,
which is the second death, Rev. 21.8.

Incharitableness.
And as for all the Particulars of uncharitableness, we have their sanction in
these Scriptures following:

Being filled with wickedness, maliciousness, full of 1 Timothy 6.4, 5.

Maliciousness.


envy, malignity, whisperers, back-biters, Matthew. 6.14.
despightful or (...). Wickedness. Envy.

Malignity. Whispering. Backbiting. Implacableness. Unmercifulness.
Cont^inely. Revenge.


contumelious, implacable, unmerciful; who in the judgment of God are all
worthy of death, Romans 1.29, 30, 31.

Recompense to no man evil for evil, avenge not your selves; but rather,
instead of that, give place unto wrath, Romans 12.17, 19. For if ye forgive not,
but revenge upon men their trespasses; neither will your heavenly Father
forgive you your trespasses, Matthew. 6.15. Deal thus therefore with your
enemies, not rendering evil for evil, or railing for railing; but contrariwise
blessing or benediction, knowing this, That hereunto are ye called in
Christianity, to inherit from Christ's example this Virtue of blessing or
speaking well of them, ^^^roaching en^mies.
who revile you. And this is no indifferent thing. For he that will love life,
and see good days, must thus refrain his tongue from evil, 1 Pet. 3.9, 10.

Let all Matthew. 5.22.
bitterness, and anger, and wrath or hatred, and clamor or brawling, and 1
Pet. 2.1, 2, 3.
evil speaking, Bitterness. Anger. Wrath. Clamor. Evil-speaking. Malice.
be put away from you, with all malice, Ephesians. 4.31. And that if you have been
taught as the truth is in Jesus, to put off the old man, and to put on the new,
ver. 20, 21, 22, 24.

Exhort and rebuke with all authority, and let no man despise thee, lest in
doing so he be judged as a Despiser of Christ also, Luke 10.16. Put them in
mind to speak evil of no man, to be no Brawlers or (...).
Quarrellers; but gentle, showing all meekness, opposite to surliness, unto all
men, S^rline^s.
Tit. 2. ult. and Chap. 3.1, 2.

In the last days perilous times shall come; for men shall be unthankful,
fierce, Despisers and (...). Unthankfulness. Despising and hating good men.
Haters of those that are good. From such turn away, for they are men of
corrupt minds, and reprobate concerning the faith, 2 Timothy 3.1, 2, 3, 5, 8.

Charity suffers long before it be provoked, Has^iness to punish.
and so is not hasty to punish; and is also kind or (...).
courteous, and so not uncourteous; Vncourteousness.
Charity is not puffed up, does not (...).
swell and exalt it self above others in stateliness or difficulty of access
and uncondescension, Difficulty of access.

Vncondescension.

Contumely.


but is condescensive and affable; does not behave it self unseemly or (...).
contumeliously; seeks not her own praise or pleasure at other men's loss or
shame, and therefore neither mocks, nor upbraids, nor reproaches any; Mocking.
Vpbraiding. Reproaching.
is not provoked easily, or not unto the (...). Rigor.
height; but mixes mercifulness with anger in exacting punishment, which is
opposite to rigor; thinks or (...).
imputes no evils or vices to men, who are guilty of them, in railing and
reproach; but kindly overlooks or lessens them, as we are wont to do with
persons whom we love; Rejoicing in evil.
rejoiceth not in evil, and least of all in the highest sort of it, iniquity of
men, 1 Cor. 13.4, 5, 6. And without this Charity all other things whatsoever
will at the last Day profit nothing, ver. 3.

The works of the Flesh are manifest, which are hatred, Variance or Debate.
envying, variance or 2 Cor. 12.20.
debate, Gal. 5.19, 20, 21.

Be not deceived, no revilers shall enter into the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6.9,
10. I write unto you, Railing or reviling.
that if any Christian Brother be a railer, to excommunicate him, and with such
an one to use no conversation, no not so much as to eat, 1 Cor. 5.11. And our
Lord himself has determined, whatsoever you shall bind by excommunication on
earth, shall be bound also in Heaven, Matthew. 18.18.

Judge not, Censoriousness.
or be not forward to pass Steph. MS, reads, (...). Make not your self a Judge
to censure and give Sentence against any one, and you shall not have Sentence
given against you.
undervaluing and censorious judgments upon what other men do or say, that you
be not judged. For with what judgment you judge others, you shall be judged
your selves, both by God and men, who will repay you in your own kind, Matthew.
7.1, 2. Which Precept we must note moreover is one of those whereof Christ
affirms, That whosoever breaks the least of them shall be least in the Kingdom
of Heaven, Chap. 5. ver. 19.

At the Day of Judgment Christ will say unto the uncharitable, Depart from me
ye cursed into everlasting fire. For in my poor Members I was hungry,
Incharitableness in Alms.
and you gave me no meat; thirsty, and you gave me no drink; naked, and you
gave me no clothes; a Stranger, and you were unhospitable, Vnhospitableness.
and took me not in. For in as much as ye refused it and did it not to the very
least of these, ye did it not to me, Matthew. 25.41, 42, 43, 45.

Woe unto the world because of offenses or (...).
scandals; for it must needs be that offenses come, but woe unto that man by
whom the offense or scandal comes, Scandalizing weak Brethren.
Matthew. 18.7.

Discord.
And as for all the prohibiting Laws in the sin of discord, their penalty is
expressed in these places:

The works of the flesh are manifest, which are these, hatred or (...).
Emulation or provoking one another.

Strife or contention.

Seditions. Heresies. Schism. Vnpeaceableness.


enmity, variance, emulation, strife or contention, seditions or divisions,
heresies, envyings; of the which I tell you, that they who do such things shall
not inherit the Kingdom of God, Gal. 5.19, 20, 21. And if we live in the
Spirit, let us not be desirous of vainglory, provoking one another, ver. 25,
26.

Mark those which are turbulent and contentious, or cause divisions and
offenses among you, contrary to the Doctrine which you have learned, and (...),
Ignat. Ep. ad Phil. Ed. Voss. p. 40.
avoid them. For they that are such, serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, Romans
16.17, 18. Whereas there is among you strife and divisions, are ye not carnal?
1 Cor. 3.3. And what the punishment of that is, we are told in plain terms; for
to be carnally minded is death, Romans 8.6, 13.

Study, so as to be (...).

Vnpeaceablenes^.


ambitious of it, to be quiet, which directly forbids all unpeaceableness, and
to do your own business, not 2 Thessalonians. 3.11, 12. 1 Pet. 4.15. B^sie Bodies.
busying your selves in other men's matters. Which are of the number of those
Commands that were given them by the Lord Jesus; so that he who despises them,
despises not men, but God, 1 Thessalonians. 4.2, 8, 11.

Thou shall not go up and down as a Tare-bearer among thy people: I am the
Lord, Tale-bearing.
to judge and punish any man that does, Lev. 19.16.

I fear when I come, there will be found among you debates, tumults; and I
shall be forced to bewail many, Tumults.
or excommunicate them with mourning over them as over a dead Body at a
Funeral, which was the custom of the Apostles times, 2 Cor. 12.20, 21.

And as for the prohibitions in the particular relation of Subjects to our
Sovereign Princes, Laws in the relation of Subjects to our Sovereigns.
Dishonor. Irreverence. Speaking evil of Dignities.
their sanction is expressed in the Texts ensuing.

The filthy Dreamers who despise dominion, which implies both dishonor and
irreverence of it, and speak evil of Dignities, were before ordained to
condemnation, Jude 4, 8, 9.

Let every soul be subject to the higher Powers; Resisting lawful Powers.
Rebellion. Refusing Tribute and Taxes.
for they that resist and rebel against the men in power and authority, shall
receive to themselves damnation. Render therefore, in fear of that penalty,
Tribute to whom Tribute, and Custom to whom Custom is due, Romans 13.1, 2, 5, 6,
7.

Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man, and be obedient to it for the
Lords sake, from whom you shall receive a severe recompense of all your
disobedience; Disobedience.
whether it be to the King himself as supreme, or unto lower Officers and
deputed Governors, as unto those who are sent by him, 1 Pet. 2.13, 14.

In the last Days perilous times shall come, for men shall be fierce,
traitors, etc. from such turn away, Traitors.
for they are men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the faith, 2 Timothy 3.1,
4, 5, 8.

Laws in the relation of people to their Pastors.
And as for the particular prohibitions in the relation of people to their
Bishops and Pastors, their penalty is the same with the others already
mentioned.

Dishonor. Irreverence. Evil-speaking. Mocking. Setting them at naught for
their works sake. Disobedience.
He that despises you, either your persons by dishonor, irreverence, evil
speaking, mocking, setting you at naught for your works sake, or your Message
and Commands by disobedience; in Gods account despises me also, whose
Messengers and Ambassadors you are; and in like manner he that despises me,
depiseth him withal who sent me, Luke 10.16.

Do you not know that they which minister in the Jewish Worship and Temple
about holy things, live of the maintenance of the Temple? Not providing for
them, or not maintaining them.
and that they which wait in sacrificing at the Altar, are Partakers of some
portion of the Sacrifices with the Altar? Even so has God ordained amongst us,
like as he did among them, that they who preach the Gospel, should for that
have a due maintenance and livelihood, and Gal. 6.6. Matthew. 10.10. 1 Timothy 5.17,
18.
live of the Gospel. And say I this as a man, only from common reason, equity
and custom; or says not God, by a peremptory way of Command in the Law, the
same also? For there it is written, Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox
which treads out the Corn. Which is said not for the Oxen alone, but for our
sakes no doubt, that we might not grudge the Labourer his hire, 1 Cor. 9.8, 9,
10, 11, 13, 14. And as he who should despise this Law under Moses, could not
escape death; so much less can we, since Christ has made it one of his Laws, if
we despise it now, Heb. 2.2, 3.

Thou that say a man should not steal, do thou steal? Thou that abhorrest
Idols, Sacrilege.
do thou commit sacrilege? By such scandalous sins as these the name of God
is blasphemed among the Gentiles through you, as it is written, etc. Romans 2.21,
22, 24.

And as for the prohibitions in the relation of Husband and Wife, their
sanction is the same also. Laws in the relation of Husband and Wife.
Vnconcernedness.

Estrangedness. Not bearing each others infirmities.

Provoking one another.

Publishing their mutual defects.




No man ever yet hated his own Flesh, so as to be estranged to it, or
unconcerned for it, or not to bear with its infirmities, but by rubbing upon
every sore place to vex and provoke it; or not to hide and conceal its
weaknesses, but to publish and discover them. And as unnatural is this usage
between Man and Wife, for they two are one flesh, Ephesians. 5.29, 31. Which
prohibition of hatred between Man and Wife as between a Man and his own Flesh,
is set down as a necessary part of ceasing to be darkness, and becoming light
in the Lord, ver. 8.

No Adulterer shall inherit the Kingdom of God, Adultery.
Gal. 5.19, 21.

Husbands love your Wives, On the Husbands side, Imperiousness. Vncompliance.
and be not bitter or passionate, uncomplying and imperious against them. And
this you must do, as you would be accounted the holy and elect of God, Col.
3.12, 19.

He that provides not convenient maintenance, Not maintaining his Wife.
especially for his own house, whereof the Wife is the chief Member, has
denied the faith of Christ, and is worse than an Infidel, 1 Timothy 5.8.

Teach Wives to be obedient to their own Husbands, Disobedience of the Wives.
lest if they disobey them, the Word of God* or the Christian Religion, be
blasphemed for such disobedience of Women that profess it, Tit. 2.5.

And as for the prohibitions in the relation of Parents and Children, what
their sanction is, Laws in the relation of Parents and Children.
these places will inform us.

In the last days perilous times will come; for men will be without To. 1.31,
32.
natural affection, Want of natural affection.

Disobedience in Children.


disobedient to Parents; from such turn away, for they are people of corrupt
minds, and reprobate concerning the faith, 2 Timothy 3.1, 2, 3, 5, 8.

They who provide not for their own house, and especially for so near a part of
it as their own Children are, Parents not providing for their Children.
have denied the Faith, and are become worse than Infidels, 1 Timothy 5.8.

Provoking them to anger.
Fathers provoke not your Children to wrath, and hatefulness of you by a
rigorous and harsh Government of them, Irreligious education.
but bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, Ephesians. 6.4. Which
are part of those Precepts, our obedience whereof is necessarily required to
our being accepted as Children of the light, chap. 5. ver. 8.

He that Prove. 20.20. Genesis 9.22, 25. Reproaching Parents.

Contempt, and mocking them.


curses, by reproaching and publishing the shame of his Father and Mother,
shall surely be put to death, Exodus 21.17.

The eye that mocketh at his Father, and despises to obey his Mother, although
the offense be not come so far as words, but is only a scornful and
contemptuous look, a jeering and abusive Countenance; the Ravens of the valley
shall pick it out, and the young Eagles shall eat it, Prove. 30.17.

He that robs Father and Mother, and says it is no transgression, Robbing
them.
but an innocent action, in regard he takes nothing but what either is, or one
day will be his own; the same is the Companion of a Destroyer, i. e. he
deserves to dye as well as a Murderer, Prove. 28.24.

Contumacy.
If a man have a stubborn or contumacious and rebellious Son, who will not obey
the voice of his Father or Mother when they have chastened him; let them bring
him to the Elders or Rulers of his City, and to the Gates, wherein were the
Courts of Judicature, of his place, and let him be stoned to death, Deuteronomy.
21.18, 19, 20, 21.

Laws in the relation of Brethren and Sisters.

Want of natural affection.


And as for the prohibitions in the relation of Brethren and Sisters, we have
their penalty established in these words:

Without natural affection, who in the judgment of God are worthy of death,
Romans 1.31, 32.

He that provides not for his own, is worse than an Infidel, 1 Timothy 5.8.

And as for the prohibitions in the last relation, viz. that of Masters and
Servants, Laws in the relation of Masters and Servants.

On the Masters side,

Vnjustness, and rigor in commanding.

Unequal Government of them.


their sanction is expressed in the places following:

Masters, give unto your Servants that which is just and equal, knowing that
you your selves also have a Master in Heaven (who will recompense your
injustice, rigor and unequal Government of them upon your own heads, as Christ
has plainly showed us in the Parable of the Servants, Matthew. 18. from ver. 23.
to the end of the Chapter) Col. 4.1.

Masters, love your Servants, forbearing threatening, and, Immoderate
threatening. Railing at them.
what is near akin to it, opprobrious language or railing; knowing that your
Master also is in Heaven, who, in judging and punishing such offenses as these,
is no respecter of persons, Ephesians. 6.9.

If any man provide not for his own house or Family, Not maintaining them.
whereof his Servants are one part, he is worse than an Infidel, 1 Timothy 5.8.

Weep and howl, O ye rich men, Defrauding the hireling of his wages.
for the miseries that shall come upon you. For the hire of the Laborers,
which is of you kept back by fraud, cries against you for vengeance, and the
Cries are entered into the ears of the Lord, who will most severely punish this
injustice, Jam. 5.1, 4.

Exhort Servants to be obedient to their own Masters, On the Servants side,

Disobedience. Vnob^ervance. Answering again.

Purloining. Vnfaithf^lness.


and not to be unobservant of them, but to give all diligence to please them
well in all things. Not answering again, not purloining; not being false or
unfaithful in any matter, but showing all good fidelity. These things speak and
exhort with all authority, let no man dare, under the pain of Gods high
displeasure, to despise thee, Tit. 2.9, 10, 15. Which things, amongst others,
he is bid to teach, in opposition to some who vented contrary Doctrines, who
upon the account of those Rules which they gave their Followers opposite to
these, are called abominable, disobedient, and to every good work reprobate,
Chap. 1.16.

Let as many Servants as are under the Yoke, count their own Masters worthy of
all honor, Dishonor. Irreverence. Publishing or aggravating their Masters
faults.
and not despise and dishonor them by their irreverent behavior, publishing
their faults and wounding their reputation; that the Name of God and the
Christian Doctrine be not blasphemed or evil spoken of through the contrary
usage. If any man teach otherwise, he is proud, knowing nothing, 1 Timothy 6.1, 2,
3, 4.

Servants obey your Masters, not with eye-service, but heartily and in
singleness or (...).
simplicity of heart, Eye-service.
without acting double, viz. something whilst their eye is over you, but
nothing when it is off you; which you are bound to do, not only out of a dread
of your Masters anger, but as fearing God, who will be sure to punish you,
although your Master should not take notice of you, Col. 3.22.

Contumacy.
Servants, he not stubborn and contumacious, but subject to your Masters with
all fear and reverence; and that not only to the good and gentle, or (...).
equitable and moderate, but also to the hasty and morose or froward. For if
when you do well and suffer for it, you yet take it patiently; this is truly
thank-worthy and acceptable to God. And indeed hereunto are you called in
Christianity, to suffer many times unjustly, but still with patience, as Christ
did, that hereafter you may reign with him also, 1 Pet. 2.18, 19, 20, 21.

Thus is our observation of these particular prohibitions plainly necessary
unto life, and indispensably required to mercy and salvation. And as for that
small remainder of them which are not expressly insisted on in this proof, their
necessity is sufficiently evidenced by the indispensableness of the opposite
Commands, which in the proof of the affirmative Laws is shown expressly.

As to all the particular Laws then recited in the foregoing Catalogues,
whether they be affirmative or negative, Commands or Prohibitions; it is plain
that they are all bound upon us by the severest sanction, no less than our
fears of Hell and hopes of Heaven. They are the adaequate and complete matter
of that obedience which is to secure for us a happy Sentence. At the last Day
we must all stand or fall by them; where they promise, God will bestow rewards;
but if they threaten, he will eternally condemn us.

And thus at length it plainly appears what those particular Laws are, which
under the sanctions of Life or Death the Gospel indispensably binds us to obey.
And upon the whole we see, That when we become Christians we are not turned
loose and set at liberty to do what we list; but are put under a most strict
Rule, and bound up by a most exalted purity, and a most complete and perfect
love. The height of our Duty is answerable to the greatness of our Privileges
and advantages; For as never any people had so much Luke 12.48.
Grace given to them as we Christians have by the Gospel, so never was there of
any so much Duty required.

The poor Heathens, who knew nothing more, either of Gods Laws, or of his
rewards and encouragements, than they could argue themselves into a belief of
by the strength of their own wit and reason; knew nothing of, nor shall at the
last Day be condemned for the transgression of several of those Commands which
we shall dye for. So far were they from thinking that in the judgment of God
lasciviousness, uncleanness, Placet Stoicis suo quamque rem nomine appellare.
Sic en^m disserunt, nihil esse obscoenum, nihil turpe dictu, etc. Cic. Ep. ad
Famil. l. 9. Ep. 22. quae est ad L. Papyrium Petum.
filthy talk, and obscene jests, deserved death, that as wise men as any among
them did not believe it of To prevent Adulteries, this sage Cato advises to,
Quidam notus homo cum exiret Fornice, Macte virtute esto, inquit Se^tentia Dia
Catonis, etc. Horat. lib. 1. Ser. Sat. 2. Nemo hic prohib^t, nec vetat, quin
quod palam est venale, si argentum est, emas. Nemo ire quenquam publica
prohibet via; dum ne per fundum septum facias semitam, dumtete abstineas nupta,
vidua, Virgin, Juventute and Pueris liberis, ama quod lubet, Plautus de usu
Meretricum in Curculione, Act 1. Scen. 1.

And Cicero in his defense of Marcus Coelius: Vincat aliquando [in
adolescentibus] cupiditas rationem, dummodo parcat juventus pudicitiae suae, ne
spoliet alienam, etc. Si quis Mer^triciis amoribus interdictum juventuti putet,
est ille quidem valde severus, abhorret non modo ab hujus seculi licentia,
verum etiam a majorum consuetudine ac concessis. Quando enim hoc non factum
est? Quando reprehensum? Quando non permissum? Cic. Orat. pro M. Coelio. Upon
the account of this Gentile opinion of the lawfulness of Fornication, and
because they reputed it as an indifferent thing, although really and in it self
it were most necessary, it is sorted amongst other indifferent things in the
Canons made for the Gentile World at the Council of Jerusalem, Acts 15.20, 28,
29.


Fornication and Whoredom it self. They were in no fear of being called to
account then, and being found liable to eternal punishment, for being angry at
an enemy, for Minerva in Homer, when she advises Achilles to cease the Quarrel
with Agamemnon, and to keep off from fighting and blows; does yet allow him
this liberty, (...).
cursing or reproaching, for praying to the Gods against him, nay nor for other
higher acts of malice and revenge. They never dreamed of being condemned for
censoriousness, uncourteousness, surliness, malignity, mockery, upbraiding,
reproach; and least of all for scandalizing an ignorant and weak Neighbor, or
not relieving an enemy, for not taking up the Cross, or not mortifying their
own Bodies. Nullam aliam Virtus mercedem laborum periculorumque desiderat,
praeter hanc Laudis and Gloriae: qua quidem detracta, quid est quod in hoc tam
exiguo vitae curriculo, and tam brevi tantis nos in laboribus exerceamus? Cic.
Orat. pro Arch Poet. sub finem.
Vainglory and emulation they looked upon as deserving commendation rather
than reproof: and boasting and ostentation, when it had no mixture of ill
design, but was only for boastings sake, even they who would find fault with it
rebuked only as a (...) [which is his d^finition of (...)] (...), Arist. Eth.
Nicom. l 4. c. 7.
vanity, but not as a mortal crime. The most that any of them could say of
these, or of several others, which it would be too tedious to mention, was that
it would be a point of praise for men to observe them, but not of duty; they
might be advised to it by a sage Philosopher, but not imposed and commanded by
a Judge and Lawgiver.

Thus dark and defective was that sense of Duty which governed the heathen
World. The privilege of a clear and full revelation of it, which God in great
degrees afforded the Jews under the Law of Moses, and us Christians in the
compleatest measures under the Gospel of Christ, was a Grace and Favor which
he did not vouchsafe them. He showed, as the Psalmist says, his Word unto
Jacob, and his Statutes unto Israel; but he has not dealt so with any of the
heathen Nations; for as for his Judgments, or those Laws which we are to be
judged by, they have not known several of them, Psalm. 147.19, 20.

And since not only the poor and ignorant, but even the more wise and learned
sort of Heathens were thus void of knowledge in the simplicity of their hearts,
and did not discern several of those to be Laws of God, which every one of us
may discern most clearly if we will: although we must stand or fall by them,
yet they shall not; but when they are brought to Judgment, they shall go
unpunished for their transgressions of them, because they did not know them.
They shall not be condemned for acting against they knew not what, nor suffer
for the breach of such Laws as were not sufficiently published and proclaimed
to them. They that sinned without our Law, shall also perish, not by it, but
without our Law, according to the Sentence of such other Laws as are, not ours
but, their own; and it is only as many as have sinned in or under our Law, that
shall be judged and condemned by the Law, Romans 2.12. Whatsoever they may suffer
then for their transgressions of their own plain natural Laws, which all of
them might have known that had a mind to it: they shall not be punished for
their ignorant breach of such as are peculiarly ours, but that part of their
offenses shall be overlooked, and graciously connived at. For those times of
ignorance, says the Apostle, God winked or connived at, Acts 17.30.

And as for the Jews, although they had a stricter Rule and a more perfect
Precept, answerable to their clearer light and expresser promises; yet were
many Plus tunc indulgentiae erat, and plus licentiae: tunc esus carnium
praedicabatur, nunc abstinentia: tunc in omni vita jejuniorum paucissimi dies,
nunc quasi unum jejunium Vita omnis: tunclaesis ultio suppetebat, nunc
patientia: tunc irascentibus Lex ministra, nunc adversaria: tunc accusatori
gladiumporrigebat, nunc Charitatem: tunc etiam earnali illecebrae Lex
indulgebat, nunc evangelium nec aspectui: tunc corporeae volup^ates habebant
quandam licentiam, nunc jubentur etiam oculi custodire censuram: tunc ad multas
Vxores recipiendas unius Mariti torum Lex dilatabat: nunc etiam ad unam
exciudendam casti affecte;tus devotione constringit. Superest enim, inquit
Apostolus, ut qui habent Vxore^, etc. 1 Cor. 7.29, 30, 31. says Salvian of the
strictness of the Christian above the Jewish Law, de avaritia, l. 2. p. 383.
Ed. Oxon. The reason whereof he adds p. 385. Majora solvimus, quia majora
debemus. Judaei hab^bant rerum umbram, nos veritatem: Judaei suerunt servi, nos
adoptivi, etc.
things still for the Matthew. 19.8.
hardness of their hearts, indulged to them; for which without repentance we
shall smart most severely if we are guilty of them. A man might be innocent in
the charge made against him by the Law of Moses, although he should return ill
for ill, or Matthew. 5.38.
retaliate injuries, and curse and pray against his enemies. And this their
most righteous persons, and greatest Prophets, even Psalm. 5.8, 10. and 7.6. and
28.24. and 35.8. and 109. from ver. 1. to the 20. all which Curses appear to be
directed against his Adversaries, ver. 20.
David himself, who was the man after Gods own heart, have done frequently.
They had no express Law threatening death to bare sensuality and worldliness;
but the very constitution of their Law, which consisted mainly, if not wholly,
in temporal promises, seemed much to encourage it. They were in no danger of
being damned by Moses for not bearing with the infirmities and weaknesses of
their wives, since their Law it self allowed them to put them away when they
did not please them; yea and, even whilst they continued with them, to marry,
and take others to them. For all which, with others that might be mentioned,
although we Christians are liable to damnation, yet they were not. For they
will be judged at the last Day according to their obedience to their own Laws,
not to ours. As many as have sinned in the Law of Moses, says the Apostle,
shall be judged by that Law, Romans 2.12.

But as for us Christians, we must walk by a more perfect Rule, and live up to
a nobler pitch than ordinarily either Jew or Gentile did; or at the last day we
shall be eternally condemned. For take even those Sects among the Jews, which
in the judgment of St Acts 26.5.
Paul are the strictest of any in their Religion, viz. the Scribes and
Pharisees; and yet, as our Savior himself has peremptorily and plainly
affirmed, our obedience must of necessity surpass theirs. Except your
righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, you shall
in no case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew. 5.20.

In the accounts of our Religion we are guilty and punishable, when no other
Law would take hold of us. For by the Gospel of Christ, as we have seen, we
shall be damned not only for Adultery, Fornication and Whoredom; but also for
uncleanness, for lasciviousness; nay, for filthy jests and obscene discourses.
We are liable to dye, non only for drunkenness and revellings, for gluttony and
surfeiting; but also for carnality, sensuality, and voluptuousness. There is
enough against us to condemn us, although we do not kill our enemy, if we hate
him, or rail at him, nay if we refuse to do good to him, to speak well of him,
or to pray for him. We are strictly charged not only that we should not lie and
slander, but moreover that we should not so much as revile or reproach, or
mock, or upbraid, or censure, or speak evil. We are severely threatened, not
only if we offer violence to our Neighbor; but if we are surly toward him, if
we are hasty and fierce with him, if we are stately, uncondescensive, or
uncourteous to him. So far must we be from fighting and blows, from seditions
and tumults; that under the highest penalties we must abstain from clamor and
brawling, from debate and variance, from unquietness, yea from pragmaticalness,
or busying our selves in others men's matters. We must keep back from dishonor,
irreverence, and speaking evil of Dignities, whilst we submit to them; as well
as from disobedience, and resistance of our lawful Prince in open rebellion. To
extort, depress, or circumvent our Brother in any matter, is an Article of our
Condemnation, as well as direct theft, and downright robbery. To refuse the
Cross, to scandalize a weak Brother, to envy our Neighbors praise, and to be
vainglorious, arrogant, and forward upon all occasions to boast and set off
our own; are all mortal sins in the accounts of our Law, and such as subject
the impenitent Actors of them to eternal destruction.

These, and all the other instances set down in the foregoing Catalogues, which
are too many to mention here, let us plainly see the height of that holiness,
and the perfection of that love which we are to live or dye by. Our Law is the
most perfect Rule that ever the World heard of; and, as ever we hope for mercy
and bliss, ours is to be the most perfect obedience. For as all these Laws,
which under the pains of Death we are bound to obey, are most Heavenly and
Divine; so is that a most perfect obedience which is indispensably required to
them. Which will more fully appear by clearing up what I am to show in the next
Book, viz. What degrees and manner of obedience is indispensably required to
them.

BOOK III. What degrees and manner of Obedience is required to all the Laws
forementioned.
CHAP. I. Of Sincerity.
The CONTENTS.
The first qualification of an acceptable Obedience, that it be sincere. Two
things implied in sincerity, truth or undissembledness, and purity or
unmixedness of our service. Of the first Notion of sincerity, as opposite to
hypocrisy, or doing what God commands out of a real intention and design to
serve him. Of a twofold intention, actual and express; or habitual and
implicit. Of intention in general, and of these two in particular. Where an
actual intention is necessary, and where an habitual is sufficient to our
obedience. Of the second Notion of sincerity, as it notes purity of our service
in opposition to mixture and corrupt alloy. This Point stated, viz. What
intention of our good together with Gods service is consistent with an
acceptable and sincere Obedience, and what destroys it. Integrity of our
Obedience a sure mark whereby to judge whether it be sincere or no.

THE Qualifications which must render our obedience acceptable to Almighty God,
and make it avail us unto life and pardon at the last Day, are comprehended in
these two; 1. Sincerity. 2. Integrity.


1. To render our obedience to the forementioned Laws of God acceptable and
available to our salvation at the last Day; it is necessary that it be sincere.

Sincerity is a (...) qu. (...): that being true, and not counterfeit, does not
fear the light, but is willing to be tried in the brightest Sun. And the
Apostle joins these two, (...), opposing sincerity to fraud, and a double
heart, and making it the same with simplicity, 2 Cor. 1.12. And again he joins
it with Truth, The unleavened ^read of sincerity and truth, 1 Cor. 5.8. And so
sincerus by the Latin Grammarians is derived from (...) and (...), as
signifying the same with cum cord, heartily and unfeignedly.
true and undissembled service of God, opposite to hypocrisy, or a false and
feigned pretense of obeying him, when in reality we only serve our own selves.

For we must take notice, that God has been so gracious to us in choosing out
the instances of our Duty and of his Commands, as to adopt for the most part
those particular sorts of actions into the matter of our obedience, which by
the natural Order and Constitution of things make for our own present pleasure,
reputation, or interest. And every one of these, from the first and fundamental
principle of our Natures, self-love, are sufficient inducement to us to
practice them, although God had never laid his Commands upon them. So that
although we have no kindness at all for God, nor would do any thing for his
sake; yet shall we observe many things which he enjoins us, not for his
pleasure, but our own. Thus, for instance, may we be chaste, and sober, and
practice all other Virtues that are gainful, not because we love God; but only
because we love money. We may be just and honest, and seemingly religious; not
for the sake of a Commandment, but of our own credit, because the contrary
practice would wound our good Name in the world, and stain our reputation. And
now when our own lusts and vices, our carnal pleasures, and temporal advantages
strike in after this manner with Gods Laws, and command the same service which
he enjoins us; we may pretend, if we will, and as too often we do, that all is
for his sake, and that these performances, which are really owing to our own
self-interests, come from us upon the account of Religion and Obedience. And
when we falsify and feign thus, it is flat dissimulation. It is no more but
acting the part of an obedient and religious man, seeing, like an (...) is
joined with (...), Matthew. 6.5.

Which is an intimation of its being taken from public Plays and Theaters.


Actor on the Stage, we are that person whom we represent, not in inward truth
and reality, but only in outward show and appearance, which is the very nature
of hypocrisy.

But for a man to be sincere in Gods service, is the same as really to intend
that obedience which he professes. It is inwardly and truly to will and do that
for his sake, which in outward show and appearance we would be thought to do.
It is nothing else, as the Psalmist says, but truth in the inward parts, Psalm.
51.6; the having our inward design and intention to agree with our outward
profession; and being verily and indeed those obedient persons which we pretend
to be.

And as for this sincerity of our performance of what God requires, viz. our
doing it for his sake, and because he commands it: it is altogether necessary
to make such performance become obedience, and to qualify us for the rewards
of those that obey. For without it we do not observe Si pro arbitrio suo S^rvi
Dominis obtem^^rant, nec in iis quidem, in quibus o^t^mp^rarint, obs^quuntur.
Quando enim Servus ex Domini jussis ea sacit tantummodo quae vu^^ ^^cere; jam
non Dominicam implet voluntatem sed suam, Salvian. de Gub. Dei. l. 3. p. 79.
Ed. Oxon.
Gods will, but our own; his Command had no share in what we did, because it
had been done although he had said nothing; so that in our performance of it we
served not him, but our own selves. And what has God to thank us for, if we do
nothing but our own pleasure? Wherein do we serve him, by acting only according
to our own liking? That cannot be charged on him which is not designed for him;
and if we do what he commands no otherwise than thus, it is all one as if we
had done nothing.

But if ever we expect that God should judge us at the last Day to have obeyed
him, we must be sincere in our obedient performances. For the Lord looks not
on the Romans 2.28, 29.
outward appearance and pretense, says Samuel, but he looks on the inward
intention and design, which is the heart, 1 Samuel 16.7. He saves, as the
Psalmist tells us, the upright in heart, Psalm. 7.10. And again, As for the
upright in heart, they, and they alone, shall glory, Psalm. 64.10. For it is not
from the bare outward appearance and profession, but from the heart, says
Solomon, that proceed the issues of life, Prove. 4.23. And this is plainly
declared in the express words of the Law it self. For it accepts not a
heartless service, nor accounts it self obeyed by what was never intended for
it. But thus it bespeaks us: The Lord thy God requires thee to serve him with
all thy Matthew. 22.36, 37, 38.
heart, and with all thy soul. For he is a great God, a mighty and a terrible
to all that do otherwise, and who in his Judgment regards not persons, nor
to corrupt him takes rewards, Deuteronomy. 10.12, 17. And the Apostle tells the
Philippians, that their being sincere is the way to be without offense till the
Day of Christ, Phil. 1.10.

And thus we see, that to render our obedience acceptable at the last Day, it
is absolutely necessary that it be sincere and unfeigned. We must do what Gods
Laws prescribe, not only because our own credit or interest sometimes requires
it, but because God has commanded it. In all our obedient performances our
heart and design must go along with him, before ever he will recompense and
reward us.

So that it is plain we cannot obey God, either against our will and intention,
or without them; seeing our wills and intentions themselves are the very life
and soul of our obedience. The prime part of our Duty consists in the directing
of our Design: for even that which is done agreeably to Gods Command must be
aimed and intended for him, or else it will never be owned and approved by him.

But that we may the better judge of this sincerity of our service which is
measured by our intention and design; we must take notice of a twofold
intention. For it is either,

1. Actual and express. Or,

2. Habitual and implicit. Now it is this latter which is always and
indispensably required to the sincerity of our service; but as for the former,
it is not always necessary, though oftentimes it be.

Intention is the tendency of the soul toward some end which it likes, and
which it thinks to compass and endeavor after. And this is one prime requisite
in the actions of men, and that which distinguishes our operations from the
actions of brute Beasts; for what they do, proceeds from the necessary force of
uncontriving Nature and instinct; but what we, from reason and design.

And the cause of this difference is this, Because God has given the brute
Beasts no higher Guide and Commander of their actions, than appetite and
passion, whose motions are not chosen with freedom, and raised in them by
reason and thought; but merely by the necessitating force of outward objects
themselves, and those impressions which they make upon them. For they act
altogether through love and hatred, hopes and fears; and they love and hate,
not through reason and discourse, but through the natural and mechanical
suitableness or offensiveness of those objects which they act for.

But as for us men, he has put all our actions under the power and in the
disposal, not of outward things, but of something within us, even our own free
will. They are not imposed upon us by the force of any thing without us, but
are freely chosen by us; we are not their Instruments, but their Authors; they
flow from our own pleasure and undetermined choice.

Now as our actions are at the disposal and command of our wills; so do our
wills themselves command and dispose of them, not blindly and by chance, but
always for some reason, and upon some design. For in themselves they are
indifferent, to make us either omit or act, neglect or exert them. And
therefore to determine our wills one way rather than the other, to act them
rather than to let them alone, they must be moved and persuaded by such
Arguments as are fit to win upon them. Now that which can move and gain upon
our wills, is only goodness. We will and desire nothing but what we think is
good for us, and which tends some way or other to better and advantage us. For
what we believe is insignificant and useless, we contemn; and what is hurtful
and evil, from the first Principle of our Natures, self-love, we straightway
entertain with hatred and avoidance, but never with love and good will. So that
whenever we will and choose to act, rather than to sit still; it is always for
some end which we propose to our selves, and by reason of some good or other
which we expect to get by it. For no man will be at pains for nothing, or
labor without aiming at any recompense; but some end or goodness there must
still be, which is to move our wills, and make them choose rather to act, than
to sit idle. All our Actions therefore are only as means, and there is always
some end or other of them which we propose to our selves to reap from them;
something which we like, and which we think they tend to, that makes us employ
our Powers in the production of them. And this eying or aiming at the End or
Motive whereunto we see our Action tends, and for the sake whereof we set about
it, is our Intention of it.

Thus we see that all our Actions agree in this, that they are chosen for the
sake of some end, and exerted upon some intention and design.

But in the manner of this Intention there is some difference: For sometimes in
acting we actually and expressly think of, and look up to that End or Good which
we are moved by, and act for, and operate in direct order, and respect to it;
which is an actual and express intention. But at other times we do not look
expressly further than the act it self; but through a settled Intention before
made, and, as to its full force in determining of our Wills toward that Good
which we act for, yet continuing; we readily do what tends toward it, without
ever expressly eying or designing of it. Our former Intention was so full and so
effectual, that it has determined our choice of the action so far, as that our
Wills need nothing more to make them command that it be done, than to be
offered the opportunity of doing it. They are sufficiently moved by the End for
which the Action is to be undertaken, and their constant temper and inclination
is to bend after it. So that when a particular Action occurs, which is to be
chosen for the sake of it, they need not actually to think of it, and look up
to it; but are sufficiently inclined to act in order to it, through their
habitual tendency and propension toward it. And this being no express
intuition, and particular designing of the end which we act for, but only a
settled tendency and inclination in the soul after it, which through long use
and custom is become its constant temper and habitual; it may be called an
habitual, or implicit intention.

Now both these sorts of Intention have their place, as in all our other
Actions, so particularly in those of Virtue and Obedience. For sometimes our
performances of those things which God requires are studied and deliberate; we
pause at them before we exert them, and think and persuade our selves into the
production of them. And in regard the great motive or end of exerting them,
(viz.) Gods command and injunction of them, is the great Argument to win us
over to them; when we take time and ponder so, we act through a particular and
express intention. But then at other times we do what God enjoins before we are
aware; we need not deliberate about it, or argue our selves into the practice
of it; but stand ready to perform it as soon as opportunity is offered. And
here the will being already inclined of it self to exert the action, because
God has commanded it, it needs no arguments to move, nor any express intuition
of the end to persuade it, but indeliberately chooses to obey out of its own
habitual temper, and implicit intention.

And as for the cause of this difference of our Intention in doing those things
which God commands; it is plainly the different degrees and perfection of our
Obedience. For when our Virtue and Obedience are of small strength, and in an
imperfect degree; there our Lusts have a considerable Power with us, as well as
our Religion; and although they have not force enough eventually to hinder, yet
they have so much as will suffice them to contend with, and to oppose the doing
of our duty: So that even when we do obey in this state, and close with Gods
command, it is by a strife and a war, by conflict and victory. Now here our
wills are in doubt what way they shall determine their choice, for they are
canvassed and beset on both sides, both by God and by our own Flesh, by our
Duty and our Appetites. And to enable Religion to prevail with them in this
conflict above our Passions, there is a necessity of representing all its
force, and of setting all its motives before them, that thereby they may be
induced to strike in with it, and to choose what it commands. But now as for
the main end and motive of all our Religious Services, it is Gods having
enjoined and commanded them. It is for his sake, that we perform them; that we
may endear our selves to him by doing of his pleasure. So that to enable us to
choose obedience to Gods Laws, rather than to our own Lusts, we must set him
and his command before us. They are the end for which we are to work, the
motive and argument that must bear us out, and make us effectually willing to
do what we are required. In this state then of strong lusts and imperfect
obedience, to enable us to choose to do what God injoyns, when our own Lusts do
powerfully incline us to do the contrary; we have need of an actual thought and
intuition of God and his command, which is the great end and motive that must
determine us for him, and bear down all that opposition which our Lusts make
against him: So that all the obedience which we perform here, is through a
particular and express intention.

But then on the other side, when our Virtue and Obedience is of full growth,
and we are so accustomed to do what God requires, that now we find no
reluctance or opposition to it, but use has made it become, not so much our
considerate choice, as our natural and indeliberate performance; here our wills
are ready of themselves to embrace the instance wherein we are to obey as soon
as it is offered: We need not to consider and think our selves into a choice
and practice of that which is commanded; for our natural bent and habitual
tendency is toward it, and nothing more is wanting to our performance of it,
than our being showed it. The Action of Obedience is chosen before it is
offered, and all our Principles of working stand ready and prepared for it. For
the intention of serving God is confirmed without all reserve; and the decree
of our wills is past already to perform what we have intended; so that as soon
as ever an opportunity for obedience is presented, we have nothing left to
deliberate and consider of, but without all doubtings or delay go on to work
and practice it. And all this, as I said, is a genuine and direct effect of our
Obedience having acquired great degrees of strength, and becoming customary and
habitual. For Custom, as it is truly said, is a second Nature; such things as
have been long used by us, stick as close to us, and flow as easily, as
quickly, as indeliberately and naturally from us, as those things that are born
with us. They do not stay for our particular contrivance and designation of
them, but run before it. A man by long custom shall have his fingers move so
fast upon a Lute, that thought it self shall not be able to keep time with
them, and answer every stop with a particular intention and command of it. An
habitual Swearer, when occasion is offered, or without any, will rap out Oaths
when he is not aware; and so little many times was there of actual contrivance
and express design in it, that when he has done he does not know it. And the
case is the same in other habitual sinners, whose transgressions, proceeding
not so much from a particular and express choice, as from an habitual temper,
and even natural inclination, are unconsidered and indeliberate. And therefore
when our Obedience it self is become customary, and use has wrought it into our
very Nature; we have no need, upon every return of opportunity, to eye Gods
command which is the end, and to intend his service as a motive to our wills,
to engage them to choose the Action before us which tends to it. We stay not to
bethink our selves what it tends to, and who is to be served by it, and after
that to intend expressly to serve him in it. No, all these were done to our
hands before the time of obeying came, so that now when we have the
opportunity, we do not busy our selves in exciting them, but in this habitual
state of things, and perfection of obedience, act ordinarily in the force of
them, which is obeying through an habitual and implicit intention.

And now from what has been said of this Perfection, and customariness of our
obedience, being the cause of our obeying only through an habitual intention;
it plainly appears, that not the actual, but habitual intention of serving God,
is that which is always, and indispensably required to a sincere service of
him. Indeed when we pause, and deliberate, and take several things into our
consideration, a particular intention of his service is necessary to make what
we do upon such deliberation an acceptable obedience: For if in the
deliberation our choice was doubtful as to the event; such particularity of
intention was necessary to make us choose the Action of obedience; and if it
were doubtful as to the motive, when other things sufficient to make us act as
we did, (as the service of our Lusts or Interests) concurred to it as well as
Gods Command; then is it necessary to make us choose the acceptable service of
obedience. But for that intention, I say, which is not only here in this case,
or some others, but universally, and in all, indispensably necessary to the
sincerity of our obedience, it is an habitual intention. For the very reason
why we do not intend his service particularly and expressly, but only habitually
and implicitly, is because our obedience has arrived to good perfection, and
long use and custom has made it, not so much at every turn our considerate
choice and contrivance, as our unstudied inclination and very nature. Now this
exaltation of Obedience into a natural temper is so far from rendering it
unsincere, and making God look upon it as none at all; that in very deed it is
the height and perfection of that which his Gospel commands us to aspire and
aim at. For there our Duty is expressed by our being Joh. 3.3.
born again, by our becoming Ephesians. 4.24. Coloss. 3.10.
New Men, Gal. 6.15. 2 Cor. 5.17.
and New Creatures, and by our being made 2 Pet. 1.4. Mat. 5.48.
partakers of the Divine Nature, and so like unto God himself, who is carried
on to all actions of Virtue and Holiness, not by the motives of Reason and
Argument, but by the exact and infinite goodness of his own Nature it self.

So that in measuring the sincerity of our Obedience by the reality of our
intention and design for Gods service, we see that we are not always to exact
of our selves a particular and express intention, because God requires it not;
but may, and often must, when our Obedience becomes natural and habitual, take
up with an intention that is so too.

But for the fuller understanding of this condition of our Obedience,
Sincerity, we must consider, not only the reality and undissembledness of our
service and intention, which have been discoursed of hitherto, but their
uncorruptness, and unmixedness likewise. And this, as well as the former, is
sometimes signified by sincerity, which is used to denote, not Truth only and
reality in opposition to Fiction and Hypocrisy; but Thus sincerum mel, is
honey without any mixture of wax in it; and sincerum is explained by the
Grammarians to signify the same as sine cera.
Purity also, in opposition to mixture and alloy. And thus we read of the
sincere milk of the Word, (i. e.) the pure and unmixed parts of it, or the
Christian Doctrine as freed from all adulterate mixtures of Gnostick Impurities
and Jewish Observances, which were those compositions, wherewith in the
Apostles times so many went about to corrupt the Word of God, 1 Pet. 2.2.

So that to serve God sincerely in this sense, is to perform what he commands
us for his sake, and with a design to please him, without mixing therewith any
by-ends of our own, or intending our own self interests together with him.

But this we are to understand with much restriction. For it is not all
intention of Pleasure, Profit, or other Interest to our selves in the
performance of Gods commands which he has forbidden us: We may design to
advantage our selves by our Obedience, and be sincere still; provided that this
design be only upon those spiritual and eternal advantages which God himself
promises to the obedient; or upon temporal ones so far as they minister to
Obedience, and are subordinate under it. But that mixture of intention only is
corrupt and unsincere, when together with our intention of serving God, we join
another intention of serving sin, or when we design some temporal ends as much,
or more than we do Gods service, which makes our self interest, instead of
being subservient to Obedience, to become fit to oppose and undermine it.

First, I say, God has not forbidden us all intention of our own advantage in
the performance of his Commandments. When he requires us to obey him, he does
not prohibit all Love of our own selves, and regard to our own self interests;
which will appear from all these Reasons, both because some eye at our own
good, and respect to our own advantage is of that nature that it cannot be
forbidden us; because Gods Laws themselves have offered and proposed it to us;
because the necessity of our faith to our obedience shows plainly that it
cannot be denied us; and because the best men that ever were have not been able
to obey without it, and yet their obedience has been most graciously accepted.

First, Some respect to our own good, and intention to advantage our selves by
our obedience is of that nature that it cannot be forbidden us. It cannot fall
under a Law, or be a matter of a Commandment, because it can never be performed.

As for any one particular advantage, and self-interest indeed, we may deny our
selves in it, and therefore any Law may very well require it. For we have many
particular self-interests to serve, and they clash and interfere among
themselves; and so long as we are in pursuit of any one, by virtue of it we are
able to restrain and deny our selves in any other. And thus all men daily deny
their Ease for their Interests, and their Gain for their Liberty, and their
Liberty for their Lives. And all good men daily overruled that Love which they
have for their Bodies, by that higher and stronger love which they have for
their Souls, and deny themselves in any Temporal Interests, to secure their
Eternal. And because all men have this power of denying their own Self-love in
small instances, to serve it in greater, and of parting with any goods and
advantages of this world, to purchase to themselves incomparably better in the
next; God has enacted the denial of our selves, in all such particular
Interests as hinder our Obedience into a Religious Duty, and made it
universally obliging to all the world.

But as for the casting off this love of our selves, and respect to our own
advantage, not only as to some particular interests, whilst our eye is upon
others, but as to all self-interests whatsoever; this in the matter of Duty and
Obedience, no man can perform, and therefore no Law can command it. For in that
Constitution of Nature, which God has given us, self-love is the first and
overruling Principle. It has a share almost in all our actions, and influences
all our faculties; so that in all that variety of operations which flow from
us, there are very few wherein we have no eye at our own advantage.

In some actions, it is true, we are influenced chiefly, and almost wholly by
our love of others, which is a noble and a generous Principle. For there are
several good Offices which we daily do to others, in doing whereof we no way
prejudice our selves; and these our love of others makes us perform, and our
own self-love does not withstand it; which is seen in all the Offices of
humanity and common courtesy. And other things again there are wherein we
advantage them, though it be considerably to our own trouble, and our own
hindrance: and here, although our own self-love oppose it self, yet our love of
them prevails and overrules it; as is daily shown in the Offices of Christian
Charity and particular friendship. In these Cases our love of others and of our
selves are separate; our kindness for them shows it self in such things,
wherein our own self-love is either not concerned at all, or wherein it is
opposed and overpowered: so that here we are not influenced and governed by
it. And if this were the Case in all our obedient actions, there might be more
pretense for performing them purely out of love to God, without mixing
therewith any love of our own selves.

But in them quite contrary our love of God and of our selves are neither
repugnant, nor so much as separate; but most closely conjoined. For God has
made the same things the matter both of our Duty and of our interest; so that
in serving him we do in the highest measure serve our own selves too. And in
this Case, where our own self-love is so much concerned, and has not the love
of God to oppose and overruled it, but to jump in and conspire with it; it is
not possible but that we shall be influenced and acted by it. For it naturally
issues out upon our own good, and here it has an object in the highest
advancement, and there is nothing to hinder or restrain it. So that whatsoever
we may do through a bare abstracted love of others, without any regard to our
own selves, in those Cases where our own self-love and it are separate, or
repugnant: yet in the matter of obedience, where they are so close conjoined,
and Gods service is so infinitely our own interest; it is plain that we cannot
be wholly free from it. For since in obeying we do that which we know is most
highly advantageous to us, we are not able perfectly to abstract our thoughts,
but we shall intend whether we will or no to be advantaged by it.

And since no man can wholly abstain from intending his own advantage in Gods
service, no Law can require it. It is no fit matter of a prohibition, nor
capable of being retrenched by a Commandment; being it is at no man's choice
whether or no he shall observe it. So that God must work a Change in his own
Creation, and form us into something different from what we are, before he can
in reason demand it of us.

2. Some respect to our own advantage in performing what God commands is lawful
and allowable in us; because Gods Laws themselves do authorize and propose it
to us.

God has not required us to serve him for nothing, but has offered us an
abundant recompense for all our labor, and added such allurements to his Laws
as infinitely surpass all the difficulties of our Duty. He has proposed every
thing to us that may any way work upon our self-love, and care for our own
advantage; whether it be the promises of good to entice, or the threats of evil
to affright us into obedience.

For thus says our Law, Verily, verily, (I double the Asseveration, that you
may give the greater credit to it) I say unto you, He that keeps my Sayings
or Commands, shall never see death, John 8.51. To my Sheep that follow me, and
hear or obey my voice, I will give eternal life, John 10.27, 28. Blessed are
they that do his Commandments, for they shall have right to the Tree of Life,
and enter in through the Gate into the City, Rev. 22.14. But on the other side,
The wrath of God comes upon the Children of disobedience, Col. 3.6. For at the
Day of Judgment, when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven with the
Guards and Attendance of his mighty Angels; then will he in flaming fire take
vengeance on them that obey not the Gospel, who shall be punished with
everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8, 9.

Thus have we in Christ's Laws, to omit other things, a promise made to us of
Heaven and endless joys to induce us to obedience; and a threatening of Hell and
eternal misery denounced to us, to make us afraid to disobey. And these make
our obedience to become infinitely our greatest self-interest, and render it
impossible for us not to serve our own advantage in the highest measure, if we
do obey at all.

And since Gods Laws themselves propose such incomparable Arguments, to
persuade us to obedience, they can never forbid us to have an eye to them, or
to be excited to obedience by them. For the very end why God annexes such
allurements to his Commands, is, that they may be a motive to win our choice,
and make us willing to obey them. But now our wills are moved by nothing
further than they desire it, and intend to purchase it. We cannot be drawn by
it longer than we have an eye to it, nor can we endeavor after it further than
we design to obtain it. For we must always design the end before we choose the
means, since it is only for the sake and hopes of that, that the trouble of
these is undertaken. So that if any thing must be the final cause and
encouragement of our endeavor, it must be the matter of our intention and
design also. And therefore seeing God himself has placed such infinite
advantages and self-interests at the end of our Duty, to persuade and excite us
to a willing performance of it; it is evident he designs first of all that we
should have an eye to them in obeying, because otherwise it is not possible
that we should be moved by them.

Nay, so far is God from forbidding all respect to our own advantage, in our
obedient performances of his Laws; that

3. In asserting so clearly as he has done the necessity of faith to our
obedience, he plainly tells us that, If we must obey at all, it cannot be
denied us.

Faith is a most necessary Principle of all natural as well as Gospel service.
For without faith, says St Paul, it is impossible for any man, whether he be
Heathen or Christian, to please God; because he that comes to God in
whatsoever Religion, must believe thus much of him at least, that he is, and
also that he is a rewarder of all them that seek him, without an eye whereat no
man would ever be persuaded to seek after him, Heb. 11.6. And as for the belief
of the Gospel in particular, which is the faith of us Christians; so necessary
is it to make us obey the Laws of Christ, that our obedience, as being effected
by it, is called the obedience of faith, Romans 16.26; and disobedient men in the
Scripture language are ordinarily styled unbelievers; and disobedience,
unbelief.

But now what is there in our faith so indispensably necessary to effect this
obedience, but our belief, as St Paul says, of Gods readiness to reward us, and
of those advantageous promises which the Gospel proposes to us upon our
performance of it? And how is it possible for our belief of them to carry us on
to obey, further than we concern our selves for those things which are
promised* and intend by such obedience to procure them? The Gospel indeed has
furnished us with all manner of Motives, if we will believe it, without which
it is not possible that we should be moved by it. It tells us of a most
surpassing love and infinite kindness, which God and Christ have shown to us;
and if we believe this, it is fit to raise in us a most exalted love, which
will make us perform any thing for their sakes out of very gratitude. Now this
is a most noble and ingenuous Principle of obedience, which although it have
something, has yet the least of self-love in it. But it is weak and
insufficient, unable of it self to carry us far, and to bear us through our
whole Duty. And therefore besides it, for a perfect supply of all our wants, we
have in it moreover the greatest good things, and such as we are most in love
with, promised to our obedience; and the greatest evils, such as we most fear,
threatened if we disobey. And if we believe these, we must take obedience to be
our highest, not service only but, self-interest; and that no temptation can
either promise or threaten so much to our own self-love, as God does. And this
indeed carries us through all, and makes us obey entirely. It overcomes every
difficulty, and overballances all contrary inticements. But this it does only
so far as we intend to purchase all those surpassing advantages by our
obedience which infinitely exceed all those other inticements that are attained
by men who disobey.

And as this respect to our own advantage in our obedient performances is
nothing more than the condition of our Nature absolutely requires, than the
necessity of Faith supposes, and than Gods Law it self offers and proposes to
us; so neither is it any thing more

4. Than the best men have always used, who yet were graciously accepted upon
such obedience. For just Noah obeyed Gods Law through the fear of that
destruction which it threatened, and with a design of escaping it himself, when
all the wicked of the World should be overwhelmed in it. Noah, says the Text,
was moved with fear to the preparing of his Ark, as God had commanded, and to
the saving of his house thereby. And for that very reason, because he believed
Gods threatening, and was effectually afraid of it, he is in that very place
called an Heir of the righteousness which is by Faith, Heb. 11.7. The obedience
of Moses is ascribed in plain words to his design upon those rewards which God
had promised, and which he hoped to compass by it. For he had respect, says
the Apostle, to the recompense of reward, Heb. 11.26. And to put it beyond all
doubt that this respect to our own advantage in our performance of Gods Laws,
is not only the necessity of some men, but, as I said before, the very frame
and constitution of the humane nature: we are told that it was found in it in
the highest advancement, which it either ever did or possibly can receive; I
mean in our Savior Christ himself. For even of his obedience, and of the
highest instance of it, his death it self; the Apostle assures us that it was
performed through a design upon his own advantage as well as upon that Glory
which would thereby redound to God. It was, says he, for the sake of the joy
that was set before him, that he endured the Cross, and despised the shame of
it, Heb. 12.2.

Thus upon all these accounts it appears, that the having respect to our own
advantage in our obedience to Gods Laws, is not only an innocent, but an
absolutely necessary thing. God can never be offended with it, because the
necessity of our nature requires it, because his own Laws propose it, because
our faith is made effectual by it, and lastly because the best men that ever
lived have stood in need of it, and obeyed through it.

And since some respect to our own good, and intention of our own advantage in
Gods service is so plainly lawful; that surely must be such where the good
things which we intend for our selves are only those spiritual and eternal
advantages which his own Law has promised to the obedient, or other temporal
ones, so far as they minister to obedience, and are subordinate under it.

For the spiritual and eternal advantages which we are to reap by our
obedience, they are the forgiveness of our sins, the peace of Conscience, the
assistance of the Spirit, and the joys of Heaven; together with deliverance
from all the contrary evils of guilt and Hell. And these God himself has
expressly promised to us upon our obedience, to persuade us into a performance
of it. He uses them as Arguments to us to gain our choice, which they must do
by actuating our intention. He proposes them to our aims, that they may
enliven our endeavors; and annexes them to our obedience for this end, that we
may be won to perform it for their sakes, when we should not barely for its
own. So that it must needs be lawful for every man to intend these in Gods
service, because God himself has proposed them expressly in his Laws to every
man's intention.

And as for the temporal advantages which accrue to us from Gods service, they
are length of days, and health of Body, and riches, and honor, or good
reputation; with a freedom from all the opposite evils of sickness and death
and shame and poverty. And these also are promised to the obedient. Let thine
heart keep my Commandments, says Wisdom; for length of days, and long life,
and peace shall they add unto thee, Prove. 3.1, 2. And as length of days is in
her right hand, so in her left are riches and honor, ver. 16. The memory of
the just shall be blessed, when the name of the wicked shall rot, Prove. 10.7.
There neither is, nor shall be any want to them that fear the Lord. For though
the Lions, that seem best able to get it, and are most careless how they come
by it, do lack, and suffer hunger; yet they that seek the Lord shall not want
any good thing, Psalm. 34.9, 10.

But if there were no express promises of these temporal advantages proposed to
us upon our obedience in God's Word; yet were it enough to warrant our
intention of them, that God has annexed them to it in the very order of things
and course of Nature. For according to the ordinary course and constitution of
the World, Sobriety, Justice, Peaceableness, Diligence, and other instances of
Virtue and Obedience, are naturally fitted to bring down all these temporal
advantages upon us. And this Course of Nature and Order of things is of Gods
establishment. It is as much his appointment, as are the promises and
revelations of his Gospel. For he is the Author of the World, as well as of
the Bible. He made the Frame and Order of it to be what now it is, and after he
had formed it, he saw that all was very good, Genesis 1.31. His Word and Works are
both his own, and the advantages of Virtue and Obedience in the one are as much
of his appointment as in the other.

So that as for our temporal advantages also, which are much improved and
ministered to by our obedience, they are such as God has given us for motives
and encouragements in his service. He has set before us things present as well
as future, to quicken us in our performances of his Commandments, and has
appointed us to intend both, because otherwise it is not possible that we
should be quick^ned and excited by them.

But the only thing which we are to take care of in this matter, is, that as
these temporal advantages are established by God, whether in the course of
Nature, or in the express revelations of his Word, as motives and inducements
to Obedience: So we use them accordingly as helps and instruments to enable us
to obey. We must make them assistant and subservient to those Laws which they
are annexed to; they are to minister to them, but by no means to exalt
themselves above them, or to make against them. For they are offered and
authorized by God no further than they make for him; Obedience to his Laws is
the chief thing which he intends; and these good fruits and advantageous
effects of it, are laid only as baits and allurements to excite us on to it.
But if once they lose this serviceableness and subordination to the doing of
Gods will, they lose all that can warrant them, and all the place which he has
assigned for them; and make our performance of Gods Commands to be no Obedience
to him, nor to give right to any recompense or reward from him. For, as I said,
then

Secondly, our intention of our own advantage in Gods service is forbidden, and
renders our obedient performances corrupt and unsincere; when together with our
intention of serving God, we join another intention of serving sin; or when we
design some temporal ends as much, or more than we design Gods service, which
makes our self-interest, instead of being subservient to obedience, to become
fit to oppose and undermine it.

Sometimes, I say, together with their intention of serving God, men join
another intention of serving sin. And this is done in these and the like cases;
(viz.) If a man prosecutes a malefactor, which is an action agreeable to the
command of Justice, out of the sinful end of spite and revenge, as well as out
of a purpose of Obedience. If a Priest shall take Confessions from women with a
design of Lust, as well as of Religion. If a man shall be temperate and sober,
chaste and industrious, out of a principle of covetousness, as much as out of
Duty. If he do, as our Savior tells us the Pharisees did, make long Prayers,
and other professions of Religion, to enable him the better and without
suspicion to devour widows houses, as well as to serve God. In these instances,
and in all others that are like unto them, there is a mixture of light and
darkness, of good and evil design. Men join God with Belial, and Obedience with
something of a quite contrary nature, intending at once to serve both the Lord,
and their Sins too.

But as for their performances which flow from such a mixture of design as
this, they will in no wise be owned as an obedient, but punished as a sinful
service. For that evil motive which is mixed with the good, is such as God has
expressly threatened. He has plainly declared that he will damn men eternally for
Revenge, for Lust, for Covetousness and Rapine, and for all those actions that
proceed from them. So that as for such performances as arise from such sinful
principles, they are judged already, and the dreadful sentence is long ago
gone out against them.

And then as for their mixing this damnable design of sin, with a design of
obedience to God in the same action; so far is that from lessening, that it is
rather an aggravation of their crime. For it adds to all that evil which it
contains within it self, a profanation also of what is holy, or an abuse of
what is sacred; and together with the service of the sin, joins an immediate
and direct affront of God too.

At other times, I say, men design some temporal ends for themselves as much,
or more than they design Gods service. And this also renders their performances
unsincere, and qualifies their own temporal self-interests, instead of being
subservient to obedience, to oppose and undermine it.

Their temporal advantages they intend sometimes as much as they do Gods
service. They make them equal and coordinate, and are moved by the one as much
as by the other. Their love for the world is as great as their love for God,
and they are induced to perform what he commands them as much for its sake, as
they are for his.

Now this is an indignity which God will by no means endure. For it is plainly
an intolerable degradation of him, and a bringing him down to nothing more than
an equal amiableness with those earthly pleasures, and temporal interests,
which we join in co-ordination with him. It is a setting up the world for his
rival, and making the Creature equal in our estimation to him who is the
Creator and Lord of all. But the peremptory words of his Law are, -- Thou shall
have no other Gods before me, or in my presence, Exodus 20.3. He will be served
and respected above all; and to bring other things into competition with him*
he looks upon to be the same thing as to renounce him. For he is jealous of the
pre-eminence of his service above all other things, as a husband is of his
wives love to him above all other men; I the Lord, says he, am a jealous God,
Exodus 20.5.

And since this intending of our temporal advantages equally to Gods service,
is looked upon to be so great an affront and degradation of him; the making
them superior to him, and being won more for their sakes than for his, must do
so much rather. For this is a setting up other things above him, and is like
making and serving of another God. Upon which account, as some expound it,
Covetousness, which is a loving and serving of Riches more than God, is called
Idolatry, Col. 3.5.

And when any Temporal Interest of our own has got as great power over us, or
greater than God himself has; as it makes for the performance of his Command at
one time; so will it at another be as ready to make against it. For although
our Duty and our Interest do ordinarily strike in together, yet always they do
not; but are sometimes divided. And then this hank, which our own advantage has
got over us, will not determine us for God, but contest with him. It will make
us neglect his Service, that we may serve our selves; and carry us on to
transgress his Commands, whenever we may thereby promote our own worldly
interests.

So that the intending to serve our sins together with our intending to serve
God; or the intention of our own temporal interests in a degree either equal or
superior to our intention of obedience to him; by both which ways all worldly
advantages are qualified to oppose him: this mixture of intention, I say, makes
our performance of his Commands to be no acceptable obedience, but an unsincere
service, and a damning sin.

As for that unmixedness of intention therefore which is implied in sincerity,
and which is necessary to the acceptance of our obedience of all the
forementioned Laws; it excludes not all intention of our own advantage together
with Gods service. No, to have respect to the spiritual and eternal advantages
which in Gods Laws themselves are expressly promised to our obedience, is always
lawful: and to have an eye upon those temporal advantages which will accrue to
us by obeying is lawful so far, as we intend them, not in a degree, either
equal to Gods service, or superior to it, by both which ways they are empowered
to undermine it. But then only our mixing a design of our own self-interest,
together with our design of serving God, makes our service unsincere and our
damning sin, when together with our design of serving God we join a design of
serving sin; or when we design some temporal ends of our own as much, or more
than we design obedience unto him.

And therefore it is a vain fear wherewith many good people are wont to perplex
their souls, when they doubt of the sincerity of their obedience, because it
was performed with an eye at their own advantage; through their fears of Hell,
or their hopes of Heaven. For whatsoever some, out of a mistaken zeal for God's
honor, may have said to the contrary; this is not only innocent, but, as I
have shown, plainly necessary. If they scruple at this, they must scruple
eternally. For it is not their choice, but their very Nature to act thus, and
they cannot help it. This, I say, is their very Nature, and they must leave off
to be men before they can get quit of it. Men may speak loftily, and talk of
obeying purely for God's sake, without seeking any thing at all for themselves.
But this is mere talk, and empty rant, that can never come beyond words, or
appear in action. For they must be made something else than what they are,
before they can practice it. If any man doubts then whether God will accept his
obedience, because in obeying he had an eye at his own self interest; he doubts
whether God will accept him because he obeys as a man. Noah, and Abraham, and
Moses, nay Christ himself might have doubted at this rate; for in their
obedience they all intended their own good as well as God's Glory, and had
respect unto the recompense of reward. If this be a sufficient ground of
scruple, every Christian man must of necessity scruple without end. For all our
obedience is an obedience of Faith; and our faith or belief of Heaven and Hell
makes us choose to obey, in making us first to intend by such obedience to
obtain the one, and escape the other. So that either our own nature, and
Christ's Gospel must be changed into something different from what they are: or
we must acknowledge that such honest intention of our own good, as I have
mentioned, is lawful for us in God's service, since it is made so necessary and
unavoidable for us in the one, and so much encouraged by the other.

And thus at last we see what is the first requisite to an acceptable
obedience, viz. sincerity. And that it implies both the reality of our
intention in Gods service or our performing it truly for Gods sake, as we
pretend to do; and also the uncorruptness of it, or our performing it for his
sake more than for any thing else whatsoever, and without regard to any other
advantages of our own, than such as are allowed by him, and are subordinate
under him.

But in regard the degrees of our intention and design are not so obvious and
easily d^sc^verable in themselves, but are better known to us in their fruits
and effects than in their own natures: for ^he greater ease in judging whether
we do intend God^s Service most of all or no, I shall, before I conclude this
Point, lay down a plain and certain mark, whence any man of common apprehension
may easily discern wheth^^ (...) does indeed design God's service most, and
wh^^^er his heart and obedience be sincere or no.

And the Rule which I shall lay down whereby certainly to try and examine that,
is this, If our obedience be entire, it cannot but be sincere likewise. For he
that obeys God in all times and i^ all instances, cannot but serve him with
both these ingredients of sincerity, viz. Truth and Pre-eminence. He must needs
intend God's service really, and above all; who intends it so, as to serve him
constantly, and universally. And the reason is this, Because although our
temporal interest and present advantage be for the most part united with Gods
service, yet always it is not; but sometimes in all instances of obedience, and
at most times in some, it is separated and divided from it. So that as long as
we are true to our own Principle of acting, which we may safely conclude we
always are, if we either design not God's service at all through hypocrisy, or
design it not above all through a corrupt mixture of intention; at those times,
when these instances happen, we shall not be acted by the Command; but through
the love of our own interest, which we intend really, and design more, we shall
certainly act against it. For our actions go where our wills lead them; and our
wills always follow that which is the prevailing motive to them, and has most
power with them. And therefore if we still choose God's service in all its
parts, and in all times, whether it make for our present advantage, or against
it: we may be assured that we intend his service truly, and also that we intend
it most; since we serve him when no bye-interests of our own can be served, and
disserve all other interests for his sake. He must needs be our highest aim;
because, where we may please him, though no secular advantages concur, we choose
any thing; and where he would be offended, though all other advantages invite,
we choose nothing.

So that in the matter of obedience, our integrity is the great and last
measure of our acceptance. And if upon examination we find that our obedience
is entire, we need not doubt but that it is sincere also.

And this is that very mark, from which, according to that version of the
Psalms which is used in our Liturgy, the Psalmist himself concludes concerning
the obedience of the Israelites. For he collects it to have been a dissembled
and unsincere, because it was not a whole and entire service. They did but
flatter him with their mouth, says he, and dissembled with him in their
tongue; for their heart was not whole or entire with him, Psalm. 78.36, 37.

To clear up this enquiry then, What qualifications of our obedience to all the
forementioned Laws of God, must render it acceptable to him, and available to
our salvation at the last day; I shall proceed to discourse of the second
condition of all acceptable obedience, viz. integrity; of which in the next
Chapter.

CHAP. II. Of the second qualification of all acceptable obedience, viz.
integrity.
The CONTENTS.
Of the second qualification of an acceptable obedience, viz. integrity. The
Notion of integrity or uprightness. A threefold integrity. Of the integrity of
our powers and faculties. Or of the obedience with our minds, affections,
wills, and bodily powers. How God is to be obeyed with the first faculty, our
minds or understandings. God is to be obeyed with the second faculty, our
affections. This Question stated, How God and his Laws, which are spiritual
things, are proportionate objects for our love and affections, which are bodily
faculties. Of the difference betwixt our love of God, and of the World: that
this is more warm and sensible; that more lasting and powerful. An account of
what measures of obedience in our minds and affections, is necessary to the
acceptance of our service. That contrivances and consultations for evil things,
and such mere apprehensions as are particularly forbidden, are deadly and
damning: but that all other bare apprehensions; and that all our affections
after good or evil things will be rewarded or punished, not merely for
themselves, but only as they are Causes and Principles of good or evil choice
and practice. God to be obeyed with the third faculty, our wills. He cannot be
served without them. Men are guilty of sin if they choose it and consent to it,
though they cannot act it. All this service of our inward faculties is in order
to our outward works and operations.

INtegrity of obedience is such a perfection and compleatness of it, as
excludes all maimedness and defects. Which is well intimated by St James, when
he explains entire by wanting nothing; Let patience have her perfect work, that
ye may be perfect and entire, which you will be by wanting nothing, Jam. 1.4.

And this in another word is ordinarily expressed in Scripture by uprightness.
For in the most common Metaphor of the holy Books our course of life is called
our way; our actions, steps; and our doing, walking. And, to carry on the
Metaphor, our course of obedience is called our right or straight path; our
course of sin and transgressions a crooked path; our committing sin, stumbling
and falling; and our doing our duty, walking uprightly. So that for a man to be
upright in God's ways, is, not to stumble or fall by sin and disobedience; i.
e. to be perfect and entire, or wanting nothing in our obedient performances.

Now this integrity or uprightness which is necessary to our obedience that it
may stand us in stead at the last Day, is threefold.

1. An integrity of our powers or faculties, which I call an integrity of the
Subject.

2. An integrity of seasons and opportunities, which is an integrity of Time.

3. An integrity of the particular Laws of Duty, and instances of obedience,
which is an integrity of the Object.

And all these are necessary to render our performance of God's Laws an
acceptable service. For if ever we expect that he should reward our obedience
at the last Day, we must take care beforehand that it be the obedience of our
whole man, in all times, to the whole Law of God. To begin with it.

1. That our obedience of the forementioned Laws may avail us to life and
pardon at the last Day, we must take care to obey with all our powers and
faculties, which is an integrity of the Subject. And for this the very Letter
of the Law is express. For when the Lawyer asks, What shall I do to inherit
eternal life? Christ sends him to what is written in the Law, and repeats that
to him for an Answer; Mark 12.30.
Thou shall love (and serve, as it is Deuteronomy. 11.13.) the Lord thy God with all
thy heart or will, and with all thy soul or affections, and with all thy
strength or executive and bodily powers, and with all thy mind or
understanding, Luke 10.25, 26, 27, 28. Obedience with all these powers and with
our whole Nature, is the means of life, and the indispensable condition of our
eternal happiness.

First, We must keep all Gods Commandments with our minds or understandings. It
is a dangerous conceit for any man to fancy that he may be as sinful as he
will in his thoughts, so long as he only loves and chooses, projects and
contrives for the forbidden instance in his mind; but does not proceed so far
as to obey it in his outward practice. For at the last Day we must be called to
account, and justified or condemned by the counsels and imaginations of our
minds, as well as by the works of our lives. For not only the works and
practice, but also the thoughts of the wicked, or of wickedness, are an
abomination to the Lord, Prove. 15.26. The thought of foolishness is sin, Prove.
24.9. And since God forbids and hates them; as ever we hope for his favor, we
must repent of them and forsake them. Let the wicked man forsake his thoughts,
says the Prophet, and turn them from his sin unto the Lord; and then he will
have mercy upon him, and abundantly pardon him, Isai. 55.7. For the warfare
that God has set us, after which we are to attain the reward of eternal
happiness, is a casting down imaginations, as the Apostle tells us, and
bringing into captivity every rebellious thought to the obedience of Christ, 2
Cor. 10.4, 5.

In particular, this obedience of our minds to the Law of God must be, as a
doing what he enjoins, so likewise a keeping off from every thing which he
forbids.

First, In our imaginations. We must not fancy it in our minds with love and
delight, nor indulge to any thoughts of it with such pleasure as may be a bait
to our choice, and weaken our aversation and hatred of it, and thereby ensnare
us into the practice of it. Our warfare, as we have heard from the Apostle,
must not be against actions only, but against imaginations also, and insnaring
phancies of evil; casting down rebellious imaginations, and making every
thought obedient to the Laws of Christ, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. And in the old world,
when the imaginations of men's thoughts were always evil, it repented the Lord
that he had made man, insomuch as he resolved to destroy him, Genesis 6.5, 6, 7.

Secondly, In our counsels and contrivances. We must not study what means are
fittest, what times are best, and what manner is most advantageous for the
acting of our sins. They must no more have our care and contrivance, than our
service and obedience. For if we cast about in our thoughts, and consult about
the most commodious way of committing any sin; although all our designs be
defeated before we come to any effect, yet shall we be damned for our
contrivance, as well as we should for the complete action. And this our Lord
himself has plainly determined in one instance, and the Case is the same in all
the rest. For of the contrivances and machinations of murder he assures us,
That they, as well as murder it self, are of the number of those things which
pollute a man, and so utterly unfit him for Heaven, where nothing can ever
enter that is polluted or unclean. Out of the heart, says he, proceed evil
thoughts or (...).

Which being set immediately before (...), and the sins here being reckoned up
according to the order of the ten Commandments, determine the wicked
machinations to this particular, viz. murtherous only.


murtherous machinations, and besides them, complete murders, adulteries, etc.
and these defile the man, Matthew. 15 19.

And as for that particular sort of contriving for sin, which is the height and
perfection of villainy; viz. the inventing of new, and before unknown ways of
transgressing: it, of all others, is sure to meet with the severest punishment,
and to thrust men down into the deepest Abyss of Hell. Of this sort are all
invention of new Oaths, new Nicknames or evil speakings, new frauds and
methods of couzenage, new incentives of lust, new modes of drinking, and arts
of intemperance. But of these, and of all others that are like unto them, God
will one day exact a most rigorous and terrible account: For he that devises
to do evil, says Solomon, although he himself does not act, but only devise
it, he shall be called and dealt with as a mischievous and wicked person, Prove.
24.8. And St Paul's words are full to this purpose. For he tells us expressly,
that in the judgment of God inventers of evil things shall be declared worthy
of death, Romans 1.30, 32.

As for our minds or understandings then, they are one faculty which is plainly
implied in the Integrity of our service, and without the obedience whereof at
the last day God will not accept us.

And another faculty implied in it likewise is,

Secondly, Our Soul or Affections. It is a vain thing for any man to love and
set his heart upon any particular sin, and yet for all that to expect that God
should love and reward him. If I regard iniquity in my heart, says the
Psalmist, the Lord will not hear me, Psalm. 66.18. No man, as our Savior says,
can serve two masters, for if he love the one, for his sake, when their
interests enterfere, he will hate the other; so that we cannot serve God, if
with our affections we continue to serve sin, Mat. 6.24. To pretend obedience
to God, and yet to love what he sorbids, to make a show of his service, and yet
in our very hearts to hanker after his vilest enemies whom above all things his
soul abhors: this surely is not honestly to serve, but grossly to collogue, and
slatly to dissemble with him. For in very deed, if any man love sin, he sides
with Gods enemy; but for the service and fear of the Lord, it is to hate evil,
Prove. 8.13. If ever we expect that God should accept our works, we must offer
up our affections with them. For if our hearts go along with our lusts, whilst
our practice is against them; we serve God only against our wills; we submit to
him as a slave does to a tyrannous Lord, not through any kindness for him, but
through a hateful fear of him. We utterly dislike what he bids us, but yet we
do it, only because we dare not do otherwise. But now this is such a way of
performing obedience, as God will never endure to accept of. For he scorns to
be served by a slavish fear, and an unwilling mind; he will never look upon a
heartless sacrifice; but it is the affection that we do it with, which makes
him set a price upon any thing that we do; and our love that he regards more
than our performance. For this is that very thing which was thought fit to be
mentioned in the command it self. Thou shall love the Lord with all thy heart,
with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, Mat. 22.37.

It Is true indeed, we do not find our affection so quick and sensible for God
and his Laws, as it uses to be for the things of the world, neither can we
reasonably expect it should. For our affections are bodily powers, and it is
their very nature, as Philosophy instructs us, to be a vehement sensation upon
some certain commotions of our bodily spirits; so that God and his Laws, which
are things immaterial and insensible, are no proper and proportionate object
for them. For it is only matter that is able of it self to affect matter; and
material and sensible objects, which can excite our material and sensitive
passions and appetites. One bodily faculty is no more fit in its own nature to
be moved by a spiritual object than another: and we may as well expect that our
eye should see, or our fingers handle it; as that our affections should of
themselves issue out upon it, either to love, or desire, or delight in it.

So that considering things barely in themselves, I say, and the natural
agreeableness that is betwixt them, which is the ground of their natural
operations; it is only bodily pain or pleasure that is of it self fit to move
our bodily passions. But as for spiritual and insensible objects, such as God
and Virtue are, whatever fitness to work upon our affections they may have upon
other accounts, yet in themselves they have none. Virtue and Obedience, which
are spiritual things, may gain upon our wills and understandings, which are
spiritual and rational faculties; but upon our bodily appetites and affections
for their own sakes barely they never can.

But that which makes our affections to issue out upon God and Virtue, is not
the spiritual nature of God and Virtue themselves; but those sensible and
bodily things which flow from them, and are annexed to them. For although God
be immaterial in himself, yet infinite are those material and bodily delights
which we receive from him. And although Virtue and Obedience are in their own
natures spiritual and insensible, yet exceeding great, and exceeding many are
the sensible goods and pleasures that are annexed to them. For Heaven, and
eternal life, which are promised to our obedience, will give a full delight,
not only to our souls and spirits, but even to all our senses likewise. It will
endlesly entertain our eyes with most splendid sights and glorious objects; it
will feast our ears with melodious songs, and most ravishing halelujahs, and
refresh our whole bodies with a most exalted and everlasting ease and pleasure.
As on the other side, hell and eternal misery, which are the established
punishment of all sin and disobedience, will bring not only upon our spirits,
but upon our bodies too as full a scene of most exquisite pain and sorrow. For
so violent and intolerable will the torments of our bodies there be, that God
could find nothing too high to set them out by, but has expressed them by one
of the most raging and tormenting things in nature, eternal fire.

Now as for Heaven and Hell, they indeed are such things as can of themselves
stir our affections and bodily passions with a witness. When they are set
before us, they are able to make us love God and our Duty above all things
else, and to hate nothing so much as Sin and Disobedience. For no Sin can
promise us so much bodily delight, as is to be enjoyed in Heaven; neither can
Obedience in any possible instance expose us to so great bodily pains, as the
damned for ever undergo in Hell. So that when once Heaven and Hell are proposed
to our affections, and act upon them, they will prevail with them more than any
thing else can, and make nothing so dear to them as the performance of their
duty, nor any thing so hateful as the transgression of it.

And thus may God and Virtue become a fit object even of our bodily passions,
and a most cogent matter of love, desire and joy; as on the contrary sin and
wickedness are of sorrow, slight and hatred. They are most powerful to excite
all these affections, although not in their bare spiritual selves, yet in their
bodily dependants, and annexed consequences. For the greatest bodily joys shall
one day crown our Obedience, and the acutest bodily torments will certainly
befall us if we disobey. And these, although as yet they are at a distance, and
future to us, are most fit to work upon us, and most strongly to affect us. For
we are Creatures endowed with understanding, and have Reason given to us to set
future things before us, and to think our selves into passions and affections,
and not to be idle and altogether passive, like the brute and unreasonable
Creatures, and suffer the bare force of outward and present objects to excite
them in us: So that with our bodily affections we may love, and delight in God
and Religion, which are spiritual things, because of their bodily joys and
attendancies; and sensibly hate and grieve at our sins and disobedience, which
are moral and immaterial evils; because of their sensible pains and punishment.
And we may love the one and hate the other above all things else, because no
bodily joys are in any the least comparison so great as those which are laid up
for the good in heaven, nor any bodily pains so tormenting, as those which are
prepared for the damned in hell. And since God has given to our bodily
affections even in their own way, the greatest motives to love him above all,
and above all things to hate sin; it is the highest Reason that he should
require it of us, and demand the preeminent service, not only of our spirits,
but also of our lower soul or affections also.

But although our bodily affections, when they are employed about Vice and
Virtue which are spiritual things, by reason of this supereminence of sensitive
rewards in the one, and punishments in the other, be more strong and powerful,
yet are they not, as I said, so warm and sensible as they use to be, when they
issue out upon sensible and bodily objects. We feel one in our own souls, and
are affected in them much more violently, than we are in the other. And that it
must needs be so is plain: For our affections for worldly things are raised in
us by the things themselves, and by those impressions which they make upon us;
and they act to the highest, and according to the utmost of their power. But
our affections for spiritual things are to be raised in us by our own Reason,
we are to argue and think our selves up to them, and our thoughts are free, and
go no further than we please to suffer them. And indeed we find so much
difficulty in fixing them upon any thing, and there are so many other things
obtruding daily upon them to divert and call them off from these; that we
seldom stay so long upon them, or are so well acquainted with them, as to be
wrought up into a very warm and inflamed affection for them.

Besides, what is the chief Reason of all, that Good and Evil in worldly things
which affects us is present with us, and therefore our passions for, or against
them are raised in us by our sense and feeling. But as for spiritual things,
and those bodily joys and sorrows that are annexed to them, for the sake
whereof we are sensibly affected with them; they are not present with us, but
future and at a distance; and therefore our passion for them cannot be raised
by our sense, whose object are only present things, but merely by our fancy and
imagination. But now as for the sensible warmth and violence of a passion, it
is nothing near so quick when it is excited by fancy, as when it is produced by
sense. For no man is so feelingly affected with hearing a sad story, as he
would be by seeing of it. A man will be moved abundantly less by imagining a
battle, a murder, or any other dreadful thing, than by beholding it: And the
reason is, because the impressions upon our sense are quick and violent, and
their warmth is communicated to our affections which are raised by them:
whereas our imaginations are calm and faint in comparison, and the passions
which flow from them partake of their temper, and are more cold and less
perceptible: So that our passions for worldly things being passions upon sense,
and our passions for things spiritual with their bodily pain or pleasure
annexed, being only upon fancy and imagination; we must needs be more warmly
and sensibly, although not more powerfully affected with the things of this
world, than of the other.

But that which is to distinguish our passion for God and Virtue above all
things else, from our passion for worldly things, is not the warmth and
sensibleness, but the power and continuance of it. For it must be a prevalent
affection, which does more service, although it make less noise. It must be
such a settled and overpowering Love, answerable to the prevailing strength, and
surpassing greatness of its motive, as gets the upper hand in competition, and
makes us, when we must despise one to disregard all things else, and to adhere
to Gods service, what other things soever be lost by it: What it wants in
warmth, it has in permanency and power; it sticks faster to us, and can do more
with us than our love of any thing besides. For in our affections we must needs
prefer God and his service before every other thing when they stand in
competition; or we have none of that Love with the whole soul which the
Commandment requires of us; as will be shown more fully Chap. 8.
afterward.

And because our thoughts and affections have in them a great latitude, and in
a matter of so high concern every good soul will be inquisitive after some
determinate accounts of that compass and degree of them which is necessary to
our acceptance: before I conclude this Point, I will set down what measures of
obedience in these two faculties, what thoughts and imaginations of our minds,
and what degrees of love and delight in our affections, shall be judged
sufficient at the last Day to save or to destroy us.

As for our thoughts, there is one more elaborate and perfect sort of them,
viz. our counsels and contrivances. And when they are employed about the
compassing of forbidden things, they are our sin, and, without repentance, will
certainly prove our condemnation. For he that devises to do evil, says
Solomon, he shall be called and dealt with as a mischievous person, Prove. 24.8.
The machinations of murder are joined in guilt and punishment with murtherous
actions themselves, Matthew. 15.19. And as for that particular sort of
Contrivers, the inventers of evil things, they are pronounced by St Paul to be
worthy of death, Romans 1.30, 32.

And as for other of our thoughts which are not come up to the height of a
contrivance or consultation, but are only simple apprehensions; some of them
also are properly and directly good or evil, and an Article of our life or
death. God has imposed several Laws, which he has backed both with threats and
promises, upon our very thoughts themselves. Of which sort there are some to be
met with under all the three general Parts of Duty, viz. to God, our Neighbor,
and our selves. For our thoughts of God are bound up by the Law of honor,
which forbids us to lessen or profane him by dishonorable Notions and
Opinions; our thoughts of our Neighbor by the Laws of Charity and Candor,
which suffer us not either to reproach or injure him by under-valuing Ideas, or
groundless suspicions; and our thoughts of our own selves by the Law of
humility, which prohibits us to be exal^ed in our own conceits through false
and over-high apprehensions of our own excellence. Pious and charitable
opinions both of God and men, and humble and lowly conceits of our own selves,
are Duties incumbent upon our very minds themselves. And all the opposite vices
of impious and reproachful Ideas of God; of censorious, suspicious and
lessening thoughts of other men; and of proud and arrogant conceits of our own
worth; are transgressions within the sphere and compass even of our
understandings. For the exercise of the first is not only a Cause and
Principle, but a part and instance also of obedience, and an Article of life:
as the exercise of the other is an instance of disobedience, and an Article
also of damnation.

As for these Instances then, of bare thought and naked apprehension, they are
essential parts and necessary instances of an acceptable obedience; and the
wilful transgression of any one of them, without repentance, is dangerous and
damning.

So that as for all our perfected and studied thoughts of evil, viz. our
counsels and contrivances; and as for all such simple thoughts and ^ore
apprehensions as have particular Laws imposed upon them; they are not only
principles, but parts and instances of disobedience; and if we are guilty of
them, unless we retract them by repentance, we shall be condemned for them.

But then there are several other bare imaginations and simple apprehensions,
which are not under any of these particular Laws, that are imposed upon our
thoughts themselves, but are employed upon things commanded or forbidden by any
of the other Laws forementioned. And as for all these apprehensions, in
themselves they are neither sin nor Duty, nor a matter either of reward or
punishment; but so far only as they are causes and principles either of a
sinful or obedient choice and practice of those good or evil things, which they
are employed upon.

In themselves, I say, these mere apprehensions are neither sin nor Duty. We
may perceive sin in our minds, and have it in a thought or notion, without ever
being guilty of it, or liable to answer for it. For the Sun shines upon a
Dunghill without being defiled by it: and God sees all the wickedness in Hell,
but is not tainted with it. And so long as we sojourn in a World of iniquity,
every good man must needs know and behold all the vices of the Earth; but bare
understanding of them does not make him partake with them, or subject to be
punished for them.

But to make these mere apprehensions and imaginations either of good or evil
an instance of obedience or disobedience; they must be See this slated Lib. 5.
Cap. 3.
causes and principles of an obedient or disobedient choice or practice. For
our inward thoughts and imaginations are Springs and Principles both of our
inward choice, and also of our outward operations. And the service which God
requires of them is the service of the principle. He demands the obedience of
our minds as a means, and in order to a further obedience of our hearts and
actions. He expects that we should think so long and so often upon the
absoluteness of his authority, the kindness of his Nature, the reasonableness
of his Commands, the glory of his rewards, and the terror of his punishments;
till in our hearts we choose those things which he has commanded, and perform
them in our works and practice. For our thoughts of him, and of his Laws, are
not in themselves Obedience, but only a Spring and Principle of it, and a good
step and degree toward it. Our knowledge shall be judged an acceptable service
as it carries us on to performance, but no otherwise. For hereby alone, says St
John, we know that we know him with such knowledge as shall be accepted by him,
if we keep his Commandments, 1 John 2.3. And on the other side, our bare
imaginations and apprehensions of some forbidden sin are then only disobedient,
when they carry us on to choose or practice those things that are sinful. We
must go on from thought to choice or practice before the vices thought of
become our own, and our apprehensions of sin become themselves sinful. For the
thoughts of sin have the sinfulness of means and causes; they are sinful so far
as they help on either our consent or performance. So our Savior has
determined in one instance, viz. that of lustful looks and apprehensions,
Matthew. 5. He that looks upon a woman so long as to lust after her or to consent
in his heart to the enjoyment of her, he has committed Adultery with her
already in his heart, ver. 28.

As for our thoughts and imaginations then, we see what obedience in them is
required to our acceptance, and when they are disobedient and will destroy us.
For our counsels and contrivances of evil are always sinful; and so are all
such simple thoughts and apprehensions as have particular Laws imposed upon
them. And as for our imaginations and apprehensions of things commanded or
forbidden by any other Laws; they are imperfect things, and not fully grown up
to the perfect Stature either of obedience or of disobedience; So that they are
neither punished nor rewarded in themselves; but so far only as they are causes
and principles of an obedient or disobedient choice or actions.

And then as for our affections, their measures are the very same with those
already mentioned of our bare imaginations and simple apprehensions. For their
service and obedience is that of the principle, and their Sentence shall be
according to those effects, either in our wills or practice, which flow from it.

If we love and desire obedience, so far as to choose and act it; this degree of
affection will gain us God's love and favor, and secure his rewards; but less
than it no other shall. He that keeps my Commandments, says Christ, he it is
that loves me, and they only who so love me in obeying me, shall be beloved
again of my Father, and I will love them, John 14.15, 21.

But if our love and desire of evil things carry us on to See this stated Book
5. Chap. 3.
choose or act any instance of disobedience, for the sake of that which is loved
and desired; then are our affections sinful, and such as will destroy us. The
desire of evil is not so truly the state of mortal sin, as of dangerous
temptation, it is not deadly in it self, but kills by carrying us on to a
sinful and deadly choice and actions. For when once it has got to that degree,
it is obnoxious to a dreadful Sentence. Whereof the Psalmist gives us one
instance in the love of violence. Him that loves violence, the soul of the
Lord hates, Psalm. 11.5. And St John says the same of the love of lying, and
the Case is alike in every other sin. Without in outer darkness, are
murderers, and whatsoever loves or makes a lie, Rev. 22.15.

And thus we see what measure of obedience is required in these two faculties,
and what kinds and degrees of thoughts and affections are to be used or
restrained to make theirs an acceptable Service. For we must abstain from all
evil counsels and contrivances; from all simple apprehensions which are
particularly forbidden, and put in use all such as are particularly enjoined:
and as for all other our bare thoughts and imaginations, and all our affections
and desires, we must fix them upon our Duty so long, till they make us perform
it; and never suffer them to issue out upon evil so far, till they carry us on
either to choose or practice it.

But besides these two faculties, viz. our minds and affections, there is yet
another whose service is necessary to render ours an acceptable obedience; and
that is,

Thirdly, Our hearts or wills also.

It is an absurd Dream for any man to think of serving God without his will,
because without that none of his actions can be called his own. For that only
is imputed to us, which is chosen by us, and which it was in the power of our
own wills either to promote or hinder; no man deserving praise or being liable
to answer for what he could not help. But of all persons God most of all
regards our hearts in all our performances. He perfectly discerns them, and he
estimates our services according to them. So that it is not possible for any of
us to obey him unwillingly, in regard the choice of our will and heart it self
is that which renders any action a saving and acceptable obedience. For out of
the heart, as Solomon says, proceed the issues of life, Prove. 4.23.

The choice then as well as the practice of our Duty is plainly necessary to
render it available to our salvation. But on the other side if we choose sin,
although we miss of opportunity to act it, the bare choice, without the
practice, is sufficient to our condemnation. For even by that, when we proceed
no further, our heart has gone astray from God, and we are polluted by the sin
which we resolve upon in our own choice; since out of the heart, as our Savior
tells us, proceeds the pollution of the man, Matthew. 15.19, 20. We may commit
all sort of transgressions, and incurr the punishment of them merely by
consenting to them inwardly in our hearts, without ever completing them in our
outward operation. For our Lord himself has thus determined it in one instance,
and the Case is the same in all the rest. Whosoever looks upon a woman to lust
after her, or so long till his heart consent to commit lewdness with her if he
could, he, though he never meet with an Cum ab homine mala ressola necessitate
non agitur, ipsa rei turpis cupi^itas pro action damnatur, Salvian de Prove. l.
6. p. 205. Ed. Oxon.
opportunity to act it, or before any, has committed adultery with her already
in his heart, Matthew. 5.28.

No man then may venture to will and choose any one sin, and yet presume he is
innocent. For if fear, or shame, or interest, or other bye-motive and worldly
end, or want of opportunity, hinder him from the outward acting and completing
of his sin; yet if his heart stands for it, and all the while he wills and
chooses it, he is guilty in the Accounts of God as if he had committed it. We
disobey in willing as well as in doing, and shall suffer for a wicked choice,
as well as for a wicked practice. So that as ever we hope to have our obedience
to the forementioned Laws avail us unto life and pardon at the last Day, we
must take care to perform it, as with our minds and affections, so with our
hearts or wills likewise.

As for these three faculties therefore, viz. our minds, our wills, and our
affections; they must necessarily be devoted to God's service, to make up an
entire obedience. As ever we hope for Heaven, we must employ our minds upon God
and his Laws so far at least, till we love them in our souls, and choose them in
our hearts with full purpose and resolution of performing them. Our
understandings must consider of our duty, and of the motives to obedience so
long, and so well, till our affections are inflamed with a desire of it, and
our wills are firmly resolved upon it. And as ever we expect to escape the
torments of Hell, we must take care that we entertain no thoughts or desires of
any sin so long, till in our hearts we become concerned for it, and willing to
fulfill it. But if we will look on it, it must be in order to loath and disdain
it. We must consider how disingenuous, how shameful, and how mischievous a
thing it is; and indulge to no apprehensions of it in our minds, that are like
to ensnare either our choice or practice; nor dwell upon any but those that are
apt to kindle our indignation and zeal against it, and arm our wills with full
purpose to overcome it.

This must be the use and exercise of all our inward powers and principles of
action. They must be used as instruments of good life, and made the great
Springs and productive Causes of all virtuous practice and obedience. It is
this holy and obedient practice that is the end, whereto all these obedient
thoughts, desires and resolutions are directed; so that if they fall short of
this, they miss of their chief effect, and appear to be weak and idle things,
that are insignificant and useless.

CHAP. III. Of Obedience with the fourth faculty, viz. our executive or bodily
powers, and outward operations.
The CONTENTS.
God is to be obeyed with the fourth faculty, viz. our executive or bodily
powers, and outward operations. The great difficulty of Obedience in this
instance. Four false grounds whereupon men shift off the necessity of this
service with their works and actions. First, A hope to be saved for a true
belief or orthodox opinions. Men's confidence in this represented. The folly of
it. Orthodox faith and professions no further available, than they produce
obedient works and actions. Secondly, A hope of salvation upon an obedience of
idle desires and ineffective wishes. An opinion of some Casuists, That a desire
of Grace is Grace, refuted. This stated, and a distinct explication of what is
promised to the desire of Obedience, and what to Obedience it self. The
pretense for this acceptance of idle desires from Gal. 5.17. considered. An
account when the will and desire is taken for the deed and performance. That
Text 2 Cor. 8.11, 12. plainly vindicated. Thirdly, A hope of being saved
notwithstanding they do sin, because they are ensnared into it through the
strength of temptations. The folly of this. Our own lusts make temptations
strong. The Grace of the Gospel is sufficient to overcome them. Fourthly, A
hope of being excused because they transgress with an unwilling mind. These
men's state represented. Unwillingness in sin a mitigation, but no sufficient
excuse. Some struggling in most actions both of good and bad men. The strife of
the Flesh and Spirit. Two sorts of men feel nothing of it, viz. the Saints in
Heaven after the Resurrection, and some prostigate sinners here now on Earth.
All good men, and the generality of evil are subject to it in this life. Men's
peremptory will and last choice determines their condition.

A Fourth faculty that is indispensably necessary to the integrity of our
Obedience, and which is the chief end and perfection, and gets acceptance for
all the rest, is our strength, or bodily and executive powers.

For the completion and crown of all, we must do as well as think and desire,
and our obedient choice must end in an obedient practice. For all our inward
motions are in order to outward operations, they must go on to good effects,
before they are fit for the great reward; we must work as well as desire, and
not only will, but do our duty, because upon nothing less than that we shall at
the last day be accepted.

This indeed is the severe service, and the distasteful part of duty. It is a
matter of much labor and pains, of much strife and contention. For the doing
of our Duty is the top of all, every hinderance must be removed, and every
difficulty overcome before we can attain to it. Our scruples and gainsaying
reasonings must be silenced, our discouraging fears quieted, and all our
repugnant desires cooled or conquered: Every doubt of our minds must be solved,
and every hostile lust subdued e're we can act what we are required. A secret
wish, or a sudden desire of Obedience may start up in our souls unawares, and
there is not much opposition made to it, because our lusts receive no great
hurt from it. For the pleasure of our lusts lies in acting and fulfilling them,
they are secure of their own delights, so long as they are of our practice. And
therefore they will allow us to think of good, to spend a faint wish, a sudden
inclination, or a fruitless desire upon it. But if once we would go on to do
our Duty, and to work Obedience, then begins the conflict. Our Lusts then
bestir themselves with might and main, and set every faculty awork to resist
and defeat it. For our thoughts begin to argue, and to pick quarrels with our
Duty. They suggest all its difficulties and damages. They represent all the
pains of the undertaking to cool our love; the appendant dangers to raise our
fears; and the great hazards to shake our hopes, and make us despair of
success. For the sake of our sins we arm all discouraging passions, and quite
stifle all the obedient suggestions of our consciences. For either we soften
our sin by excuses, or justify it by arguments, or overlook it by ignorance,
heedless inconsideration and forgetfulness. Either we will act it rashly
through the power of a strong lust, and not consider it at all, or else think
of it only to lessen or defend it. And when by the opposition of our Lusts to
the perfecting and performing of our Duty, our spiritual strengths are thus
weakened, and our lusts advanced, when our passions rise, and our minds plead
against it; then is the strife, and there is the toil and difficulty of
obedience.

And because in this obedience of our works and actions there is so much
difficulty, therefore are most people so desirous to shift it off, and so
forward to take up with any thing which will save them the labor of it. They
persuade themselves that God will admit of easier terms, and build their hopes
upon cheaper services; in particular upon these Four:

First, A true belief, or orthodox opinions.

Secondly, An obedience of idle desires, and ineffective wishes.

And if for all these they continue still to do what God forbids, and to work
disobedience; then their hope is to be saved notwithstanding it, because

Thirdly, Their falling is through the power of a great and overpowering
temptation, which they see and resist, but cannot prevail over. So that

Fourthly, Their transgression is with reluctance and unwillingness, their
service of Sin is an unwilling and a slavish service.

1. The first false ground whereby men elude all the necessity of serving God
with their strength or executive powers in outward works and operations, is
their confidence of being saved for a true belief, or a right knowledge in
religious matters, and orthodox opinions. They turn all Religion into a matter
of study and speculation, as if it required only a good head, and a discerning
judgment. They make it a matter of skill, but not of practice; an exercise of
wit and parts, but not a rule of action. For the faith which they expect should
save them, with some men goes no further than the mind, and consists barely in
right notions and apprehensions. They take it to be nothing more but an
understanding what Christ has said, a being able to reason upon it, and to
argue for it, and in their own minds approving and consenting to it. And that
not to all that Christ has revealed neither. For the Precepts or Commands it
overlooks, and does not meddle with; the threatenings it either considers not at
all, or if it do, it takes them not to be due to that whereunto God has fixed
them, (viz.) disobedience of practice, but only to ignorance and unbelief. But
all that which their faith eyes, and which their minds solely, or at least
principally approve of, is the historical passages of Christ's life and death,
the doctrinal points which he has told us concerning God or himself, and the
comfortable promises of the Gospel. They believe what Christ is, what he has
done and suffered for us, and what he has promised to us: they think right in
all the Religious Controversies that are on foot in the world, joining
themselves with the Orthodox men, and siding, as they presume, with the true
Opinion; they profess Christ's Religion, and are Members of his Church, and
adhere to the right party of Christians, and to the purest Congregation, and
that they conclude is enough to bring them to Heaven.

But if any think, as God be praised, many do, that God requires more than the
bare service of our minds and right apprehensions; yet even a great part of
them fancy, that all which he requires besides is only the obedience of their
tongues and discourses. If they believe with the mind, and confess with the
mouth, although they are rebellious and reprobate in their practice, they are
satisfied of their Godly estate, and presume that God is so too. Their Religion
is made up of lip-service, for they think to content God by heavenly talk, and
pious conference, by larding all their discourses with the Name of God, and
shreds of Scripture; all their conversation is holy phrase, and sanctified form
of speaking; and this they hope will atone for all the lewdness and
disobedience of their lives and actions.

And if they proceed yet further to a Faith that reaches beyond the mind and
the tongue, and think it necessary that it sink down from the head into the
heart; yet there they will allow God to expect no great matters. They hope he
will be well pleased, although it summon not up all our Affections for his
service, if it produce in us these two easy passions, which are raised without
much ado, and may well be spared, (viz.) a strong confidence, and a warm zeal.
If to make it saving it must imply a joint concurrence of our Affections, it
shall be only of these two. It shall add hope to knowledge, and be a belief
that God will save sinners, with a special hope, and fancifull confidence that
he will in particular save them. It shall add Zeal to Orthodoxy, a warm heart
to a sound head, and be no more but a maintaining of and stickling for right
opinions, and against erroneous and false ones, with heat and fierceness.

Thus do men delude themselves into great confidences, and vain expectations
from a faith that is without fruit, from an orthodox, but empty knowledge,
which is void of all obedient practice.

But a knowledge and belief which is not more comprehensive in its nature, nor
has other effects than these; they will find to their cost in the event of
things, is miserably delusive and vain. It will serve to no other end but the
heightning of their crimes, and the increasing of their condemnation. For do
but consider:

If we will believe and understand Christ's Doctrines and his Promises, but
overlook or deny his Laws and Precepts; what is this, but instead of honor and
service, to affront and renounce him? By picking and choosing at this rate* we
cast off his power of molding for us a Religion, and fixing the terms of his
own mercy, and make to our selves a condition of our own salvation. We follow
him so far only as we please our selves, but no further. The compass of our
belief it self is not bounded by his authority, or measured according to his
mind, but our own. For we understand and assent, not to every thing that he has
said, but only to what we our selves like. We refuse to take every thing upon
his word, and credit him in what he speaks no longer than it agrees with us. If
we believe him, it is only where we matter not whether what he says be true or
no; but we either give no heed to him, or flatly disbelieve him where we have
any temptation. His veracity and truth it self has no power over our very
minds, beyond what our own lusts and beloved sins will suffer it: but the Devil
and the World must be served in the first place by our Opinions, and God must
be forced to take up with their leavings.

Nay what is yet more, by such a partial and squeamish belief as this, we do
not only give or take at our own liking from that attribute of his, which in
believing we would be thought to honor, viz. his Truth: but even where we seem
to submit to it, we wrong and pervert it. For we wrest his sense, and spoil his
meaning, and undermine all that he intends: So that even that which we do
believe is not his mind, but our own. For the true meaning of his Promises,
which run all upon condition of our Obedience, we pervert; the force of all his
threatenings, which denounce woes to every sin and transgression, we cancel. We
do as much as in us lies, to corrupt his Word, and to belie his very Gospel. We
make his whole Religion signify another thing than what he intended. For we
make it allow what he forbids, and encourage such as he threatens; and save
those whom at the day of Judgment he will condemn. And since this perverse
faith and knowledge, which believes what it likes, and is infidel to all the
rest; which sets up one part of his Word against another, by making his
Promises to undermine his Precepts, and the Truth of his Doctrines to render
all his threatenings false and useless: I say, since such an untowardly partial,
and gainsaying knowledge and belief as this, is in very deed so plain a Libel
to his Person, so hateful a violence to his Truth, and such a contradicting
piece of Infidelity to his Gospel, it can never be thought to be that Obedience
which he commands and encourages, but such a piece of contumelious flattery,
and fawning disobedience, as he will most severely punish and condemn.

But if we believe his whole Gospel, and besides the faith of his Doctrines and
Promises, take moreover all his Precepts to be such as he injoyns, and all his
threatenings, in their true meaning, to be such as he will execute; and yet, for
all that, in our works and practice despise, and sin against them; then is such
our faith and knowledge so far from rendering our condition safe and
comfortable, that in very deed it makes it quite desperate, and utterly bereft
of all color and excuse. For it takes from us all plea for disobedience, and
leaves us not so much as the common refuge of all misdoing, the pretense that
we did offend but did not know it. It makes every sin which we commit to be
acted with a high hand, and all our offenses to become contempt, our
disobedience, rebellion, and our transgressions, presumptuous. For we sin then
with open eyes, we know Gods Commands, but refuse to practice them; we discern
our duty, but despise it. It makes us not only to renounce his Authority, but
also to defy his Power. For we know his Almighty Strength, but we will not
fear it; we see his dreadful threatenings, but yet dare to commit the things
which he has threatened in despite of them. We see and believe that our Death is
entailed upon our disobedience, but for all that we choose and run upon it. We
contemn all his Commands, and set light by all his Promises, and despise all
his Threatenings: We see and believe them all, but prefer the pleasure of our
sins before them, and transgress in open affront to them. And such a state as
this, every man must needs see is so far from gaining his favor, and
ascertaining his acceptance; that in reality it is a continued heightning of
every provocation, an habitual hostility, and state of crying sin.

But if ever our Orthodox Faith and Professions avail us unto Life and Pardon,
they must end in our Obedient Works and Actions. We must do that which we know
God requires, and practice that Pure Religion which we profess; If ye know
these things, says our Savior, happy are ye if ye do them, Joh. 13.17. It is
not every verbal Professor, every one that says unto me, or calls me Lord,
Lord, that shall enter into the kingdom of heaven; but he only that does the
will of my Father which is in Heaven, Mat. 7.21. We are condemned out of our
own mouths if we commend Christ's Religion, whilst we contemn and disobey it:
Every word which we speak in its behalf, is a charge against our own selves,
and every Plea which we make for it, is to us an accusation. For if it be a
Religion so pure, so good* so worthy of God, and so beneficial to men as we
profess it is, the more unpardonable wretches we that transgress and act
against it. All the praises which we heap upon our Duty, are a most bitter
invective upon our own practice; and the more we commend Christ's Religion and
Laws, the more we condemn our own transgressions; so that now God in exacting
the punishment, be it as severe as it well can, only executes our own sentence.
We are made the worse for our knowledge if our Actions are not ruled by it; for
it shows plainly, that our Lusts are most obstinate, and our wills most wicked;
when for all we are clearly showed the Laws, the Promises, and the threats of
God, we can yet despise them all, and for the short pleasure of a silly sin
transgress, and act against them. And since it does thus enhanse our Sin, we
may be sure that it will proportionably increase our punishment. For he that
knows his masters will, and does it not, shall be beaten with many stripes,
Luke 12.47.

And thus we see, that this thinking to be saved by the labor of our minds,
without any works of our lives and practice; and coming to Heaven barely by a
True Belief, and Orthodox Opinions, and Right Professions, without ever obeying
in our works and actions; is one of those false and delusive grounds, whereupon
men shift off the necessity of this service with all their strength, the
service of their Actions.

And another false ground of shifting off the same service is,

2. The delusive confidence which wicked men have of being saved at the last
Day for an obedience of idle desires, and ineffective wishes.

It is a strange conceit which some people have been taught, viz. that the
desire of Grace is Grace, and that God will at the last Day judge men to have
obeyed, although they have not wrought, but only desired it. There is a
complaisant sort of Casuistry, and a much easier than ever God made, that has
been brought into the World, which bids men to hope well, though they do
nothing, so long as they find in themselves a desire that they could do it.
They wish they were what God expects, and that they performed what he commands;
but they do no more but wish it. They sit still, and work no more now they have
wished it, than they did before. Theirs is a weakly infant-desire, it just
lives, but that is all, it can effect nothing. For the smallest lust is too
strong for it, and the least temptation over-bears it; the desire of the Virtue
is hushed when the opportunity of the Sin returns, for notwithstanding all the
contrary desire, this is acted at the next offer. Obedience is not desired so
much as their ease; for they love it not so well, as to be at the necessary
pains for it. It is a squeamish delicate desire; it would obey if that could be
without trouble, but it will undergo nothing for obedience.

But this is a conceit as strange as it is destructive, and such wherewith the
simplest of men suffer themselves to be imposed upon in no other matters, but
only this which most of all requires their care and caution, viz. the eternal
welfare of their souls, and the truth of their obedience. For who ever took his
desire of gain to be gain, his desire of ease to be ease, his desire of meat to
be food, his desire of clothes to be raiment, or his desire of knowledge to be
knowledge? And why then must that be true in Religion, which is always false in
common life? and the desire of Grace be said to be Grace, and the desire of
obedience, obedience? Our desires are one thing, but the thing desired is
another. Our desires are within, but the object desired is without us. Our
desires are our own, but the thing desired is wanting. For so far is our desire
of any thing from being the very thing it self which is desired, that it is not
always joined with it, but we possess one, whilst we are without the other. For
alas! we find that those things which we need, and have a mind to, do not come
at the beck of a desire, nor are procured by a wish; but we must do more than
desire them, endeavor after them, and work or act for them, or else we shall
sit without them. A man does not presently possess meat because he is hungry,
or is Owner of a great Estate because he is covetous; no, he must labor and
seek, as well as desire, both for the one and the other, or else let him desire
what he will, he shall get neither.

It Is true a desire of money is a great preparative to get money, and a desire
of knowledge a good disposition to attain knowledge; because our appetites and
desires are, of all the passions, the great and most immediate Spring of our
outward works and operations. For delight begets love, and love ends in desire,
and desire carries us on to work and labor for the thing desired. We seek
after a thing, because we long for it; and take pains about it, because we
desire it. And thus our desires of Grace and Obedience are Grace and Obedience.
That is, Our desire of Grace is not Grace it self; nor our desire of Obedience,
Obedience; but a good step and degree toward them. It is so metonymically, it
is the Principle and the Cause of it. For therefore we acquire Grace, and
perform Obedience; because we desire them. We should take no pains about them,
were it not for our desires of them; but because we have a mind to them,
therefore we labor after them.

But till our desires come on to this effect, they have no title to the rewards
of it. Because although they are a gift of Gods Grace, it is true, as well as
Obedience it self is; yet are they not that Grace which in the Judgment shall
entitle us to pardon and happiness. For the promise to the Desire of Obedience
is one; but the promise to Obedience it self is another. If we sincerely desire
to do Gods will, i. e. if we desire it so, as according to the best of our
power to endeavor after it; the promise to that is, That we shall be enabled
to do it. For one promise of the New Covenant is, That God will grant unto us
to serve him in holiness and righteousness, Luke 1.74, 75; which he will then
do, when we desire it of him, by giving his holy Spirit to them that ask him,
Luke 11.13. But if we do indeed obey it, the promise to that is, That we shall
be saved by it. For Christ is become the Author of eternal salvation to them
that obey him, Heb. 5.9. And it is said expressly of them that obey, That they
shall have right to the tree of life, Rev. 22.14. So that to the honest desire
of obedience, all that God promises is the power to perform and work obedience;
but that whereunto mercy and life is promised, is nothing less than obedience
it self. For to the working out our salvation it is required, as St Paul says,
that we be wrought upon, not only to will what God commands, but also to do it,
Phil. 2.12, 13.

The great pretense whereby men of idle, unworking desires would plead for
their unfruitfulness, and support their hopes of a happy Sentence under a life
of disobedience; is a mistaken sense of these words of St Paul in his Epistle
to the Galatians: The Flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against
the Flesh; so that ye cannot do the things that ye would, Gal. 5.17. Which
words they interpret thus: The Spirit in all good men lusts against the
Flesh, but not so far as to prevail over it: for although they may will and
desire with the Spirit, yet they cannot do those things which they would. And
if this be so, it is plain that we have warrant enough to hope for mercy
notwithstanding we only desire, but are not able to perform.

But this is a plain perverting of the Apostles words from the Apostles own
meaning. For although he says that the lusting is on both sides, both of the
Flesh against the Spirit, and of the Spirit against the Flesh; yet as for the
ineffectiveness, or not doing what is willed and desired, that he charges only
upon one. He leaves it purely and solely to the Fleshes share, which can indeed
lust and desire evil things even in regenerate men, but is not able to prevail
so far as to work and effect them, because the overruling will of the Spirit
checks and restrains it. Through the victorious lusting of the Spirit against
the Flesh, says he, it comes to pass that you cannot do or (...).
do not those things which from the instigation of your Flesh you desire and
would do. And to show this to be his sense, I need do no more than set down his
words in that order wherein they stand; which is as follows: This I say then,
Walk in the Spirit, and you shall not work and fulfill the lusts of the Flesh.
Not work and fulfill them, I say, notwithstanding you will still feel an
ineffective and unconquering stirring of them. For the Flesh lusts against
the Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh, and these two are contrary one to
the other. So that in walking or working, as I said, after the lustings and
desires of the Spirit, you fulfill not the lusts of the Flesh which are contrary
to it; ye cannot do, or you do not the things that your Flesh lusts after,
which yet, through its lusting, ye would, ver. 16, 17. Whereas if this last
Clause were expounded thus, Ye do not the things that your Spirit lusts after,
which yet, through its lusting, ye would do; it would destroy that which the
Apostle brings it to confirm, viz. their not willing and desiring only, but
doing or walking also after the Spirit, so as not to fulfill the works of the
Flesh, ver. 16. Which in plain English is to make the Apostle in the same
breath to say and unsay, to tell them of walking in the Spirit, and not
fulfilling the lusts of the Flesh; because they do not after the Spirit, but do
fulfill the lusts of the Flesh. Which is flatly to make the Apostles proof to
contradict the Apostles affirmation.

If therefore we would approve our selves regenerate, and have a just hope of
life and pardon at the last Day; we must not only wish and desire, but live and
walk after the Spirit, The service of the Flesh indeed must go no further than
desire; and although we shall all of us more or less have lustings from it, yet
must we not Romans 13.14.
fulfill them. But as for the service of God, it must have our hands as well as
our hearts; for it is not enough to will and desire what he commands, but we
must moreover practice and perform it.

As for the affirmative Commands of God; it is not required that we perform
every one of them at every time; for so our whole life would be taken up in the
keeping of one Command, and we could never observe all, since we cannot do any
two things, and much less such a multitude at the same time. But all that
obedience which God requires of us to them, is that we act them as his
Providence, and ordering of times and occasions gives us opportunity. Now
although for the main Body and greatest Number of them, every man has
opportunities returning almost every day; yet for a perfect and complete
performance of some of them, some men have not opportunity at some times, nor
others in all their lives. I instance in the affirmative Command of
Almsgiving. A man that has but little, can give but little at any time; and a
rich man, if he be in a strange place, and have no great stock about him,
although he have a great Object of Charity, can yet make but small relief. So
that in both these the work of Alms and outward performance, must needs be very
strait; although both of them in their hearts and desires are never so liberal.
They have not power and opportunity to act as they would; they would perform
more if their circumstances would allow it. And now in this Case God does not
measure their obedience by the size of their outward performance; he looks not
so much at what was done, as at what would have been done had they had ability.
So that they shall be accepted according to the greatness of their will, and
not according to the narrowness of their deed; and their reward shall be fitted
to what was in their heart, and not that which appeared in their action.

And this very Case is expressly determined by St Paul in his second Epistle to
the Corinthians. For exhorting them to contribute to the relief of the Saints
in Judea, as the poor Christians in Macedonia had already done most liberally,
he encourages them to give what they could out of their present livelihood, by
telling them, that albeit it were not so much as they could wish, and were
forward in their own hearts to give if they were able; yet in Gods acceptance
it should be estimated as if it were. For if there be first a willing mind,
says he, it is accepted according to what a man has, and not according to
what he has not, chap. 8. verse. 11, 12.

This is the very case for which the Apostle lays down this rule, as any man
may see who will be at the pains to peruse that Chapter. He speaks it upon no
other occasion, but where our wills are really ready to perform farther than
our outward fortune enables us. He gives it as an Axiom only where our inward
resolutions are larger than our possessions. For where our heart is indeed
ready to do more, than in our necessitous circumstances we can do; there God
looks upon the will, and not upon the work; and rewards us according to the
compass of our desires, but not according to the scantiness of our performance.

But if any man shall conclude from hence, that when it is in his Power to do
what is commanded, God will still accept of an idle desire without an active
performance; he may use St Paul's words indeed, but he perverts them wholly to
his own meaning. For the Apostle spoke them in one case, and there they are
true; but he applies them to another, and there they will deceive him. Because
the will is never accepted for the deed, when it is in our power to do as well
as to will; and wheresoever we have opportunity to do what we desire, it is not
the willing, but the doing that must save us; as the Apostle himself intimates
in this very place, when he presses them to complete their readiness to will,
by performing according as they were able, verse. 11.

So that this thinking to be saved by an idle desire, and an ineffective wish
of obedience, without ever obeying in our works and actions, is very whit as
false and delusive as the former deceitful ground was, of being saved at the
last day barely upon the account of an Orthodox Faith and Opinions.

Thirdly, Another false ground whereupon men hope to be saved, though they work
disobedience, is because when they do so, it is through the violence of a great
and overpowering temptation, which they see and resist, but cannot prevail
over. They are drawn in by a great gain, or a great pleasure, the bait laid for
them is very enticing, and there is no withstanding it.

This indeed is a great and an usual pretense. For men would gladly shift off
their sin, and charge it upon any thing but their own selves. They would have
the pleasures of their flesh, and the pride of their hearts both served at
once, enjoy all the pleasures of sin, and yet have the praises of virtue.
(...). Andron. Rhod. Paraph. in Eth. Arist. l. 3. c. 2.
Whenever they do well, as a great Philosopher has observed, they would
arrogate that to themselves; but when they do amiss, they would impute that to
the pleasure that mislead them, and to the strength of temptation.

But this is a very vain shift, and a thin pretense. For what is it that makes
any temptation strong, but the wickedness of men's own hearts? They are
slavishly in love with it, and therefore they cannot resist it, but are
overcome by it. (...). Ibid. and Arist. Eth. ad Nicom. l. 3. c. 1.
It is ridiculous to think, says the same excellent Philosopher, that the
pleasure of the sin which is without us, is the cause of our sinful action;
and not rather that we our selves are, who are so wickedly inclined, as to be
so easily taken by it. It is only the strength of our own sinful lusts, that
gives such an irresistible strength to the outward temptation. A great offer of
gain indeed cannot be withstood by a covetous heart; and an inviting beauty,
and a fair opportunity are irresistible to a slave of lust, and a lascivious
reigning inclination. But if the man is above the world, and his heart is
chaste, they are of no force, nor can they offer any violence at all.

It is the wickedness of our own hearts lusts therefore, which are so deeply in
love with them, and so unbridledly bend after them, that gives all the
prevailing force, and overpowering strength to the outward temptation. But now
this is our Sin, and so can by no means plead our excuse; it is our damnable
disease, and therefore it can never prove our saving remedy. For this is that
reigning power of Sin which the Gospel has indispensably required us to
mortify, but not to submit to. It is only if you through the spirit do
mortify the deeds of the body, says St Paul, that you shall live, Romans 8.13.
Col. 3.5.

But if we are not under this damnable servitude to Sin, there are no
temptations so strong, but that God has given us sufficient defensatives
against them. For the present offer of a Gibbet would fright away the most
endearing temptation; the near expectation of a great Estate, or of a Crown,
would make us prevail over it. And what are these to hell fire, and an eternal
Crown of Glory? Heaven therefore and Hell, when they can be considered of, are
an answer to all temptations in the world; they will engage our hearts more
than all the endearments of a lust, and infinitely out do all the baits and
allurements of sin.

If we commit sin then, it is no sufficient excuse to us that the temptation
was strong, because it was only the strength of our own unmortified lusts that
made it so. For we loved the sinful pleasure too well, and that was the reason
why it overpowered us. And since the strength of temptation is owing only to
the strength of sin, it can never excuse us from undergoing punishment. So that
this must needs be a false hope, to think of being excused for our sin, because
we acted it through the violence of a great temptation.

Fourthly, Another ground of false confidence whereupon men hope to be saved
although they do not obey in their works and actions, but are workers of sin
and disobedience; is, because when they do transgress, it is with reluctance
and unwillingness. Albeit in their actions they do serve sin, yet in their
minds they do not approve of it, their service of it is an unwilling and a
slavish service. They cannot sin freely, and at their own ease, but with
fearfulness and regret. For the Conviction of their duty abides in their
Consciences, the fear of hell torments sticks fast in their souls; they cannot
shake off either their sense of duty, or their fears of punishment. So that
even when they do sin against God, it is with remorse of mind and fearfulness
of apprehension. They cannot embrace their sin with a full choice, because they
know that it is not an unmixed pleasure. They believe and know it to be of a
compound and mixed nature; to have some present pleasure which will delight, but
withal much future punishment which will torment them. And since they know it
to be a composition of good and ill, they do not perfectly either love or hate,
choose or refuse it. Their will is distracted by different motives in the same
choice; for the future pains would draw them to reject, but the present joys
invite them to embrace it. So that in a different degree they both will, and
nill the same thing; they would have it, and yet they would avoid it. For they
would enjoy what they desire, but withal they would keep off from what they
fear: they have a mind to commit the sin, because it will please them for the
present; and yet they are afraid of it, because of that wrath which it
treasures up for them against the time to come.

But notwithstanding all this conflict in their own choice, yet at last their
sin prevails, and they obey it. For they had rather hazard all its torments,
than miss of its delights; they are unwilling to venture upon those dangers
which it brings, but yet they had rather venture on them than go without it.
They sin unwillingly just as a labourer works, or as a soldier fights
unwillingly; that is, they do not will it for it self, they would not do it
unless they were hired to it. For considering all things they will to act, and
not to omit it; their will is against it indeed at the first sight, but upon
better consideration it resolves upon it, and all things laid together they
choose to commit the sin rather than to forbear it.

But now this is such a State as will never bring any man to Heaven: For
whether he transgress willingly or with reluctance, is not the question; but if
he choose at last to disobey, when God comes to judgment he shall be sure to
pronounce upon him that death which he has established for the punishment of
disobedience. Because for all he fears and mistrusts, grumbles and repines; yet
he serves and obeys his lusts all the while notwithstanding. He works at their
will, and does what they command him. He serves not with a full heart, or a
fearless mind; but yet he is their servant still.

It Is true indeed, it is some mitigation of his sin that he does it with
regret, and the transgression is something the less for being acted not without
reluctance and aversion. It shows that his sense of duty is not quite lost; his
Conscience, wholly feared, or his fear of God utterly extinguished. It is some
extenuation that he startles at the offense; for it argues that his soul is not
wholly depraved, or his heart hardened in disobedience. But although his sins
be not of the highest rate, yet he is a lost sinner still. For so long as his
lusts prevail, and he chooses at last to act and commit them, he serves and
obeys them. It is his works and actions that must determine his service and
obedience; so that if he commit sin, he is the servant of sin. Willing or
unwilling may extenuate or heighten his disobedience, but not utterly destroy
or alter the nature of it.

For indeed something of struggling and regret is to be found in the obedience
and disobedience of the greatest part of the world. There being few so good, as
to obey without all reluctance; and few so wicked as to sin without all
remorse. For as long as we are in this life, we are a mixed and compound
substance of Soul and Body, Flesh and Spirit. Our carnal appetite draws us on
to forbidden things, to transgress those restraints which Gods Law has set to
it, and to sin. And our Conscience being enlightened with the knowledge of Gods
Laws, and allured by his Promises, and affrighted with his threatenings; would
persuade us to keep within his bounds, and to act obedience. Now these two
contrary and gainsaying Principles distract our choice, and divide our wills;
so that when we close with one of them, it is not without the grudging and
reluctance of the other. We would, and we would not; one inclines us for a
thing, and the other against it. The flesh, says St Paul, lusts against the
spirit, and the spirit against the flesh; and these are contrary one to the
other, so that you cannot fulfill both their desires, and do each of the things
that you would, Gal. 5.17. If we obey, it is through the repining of our
appetites; and if we transgress, it is with the remorse and lashings of our
Consciences: On both sides there is something that is evil, whereof we are
afraid, and which we would not; our will is imperfect and with reluctance; and
we will and choose in some measure unwillingly, whether it be to work obedience
or sin.

As for the Saints in Heaven indeed after the Resurrection; it is true that they
shall have no gainsaying appetites. For their flesh will be in perfect
subjection to the spirit; their will shall have nothing to seduce it, but shall
stand always firm and entire for God; so that they shall obey without any
thing of reluctance or regret.

And as for some of the profligate and profane sinners here on earth; they
have now already so quite benumbed their Consciences, that they neither allure
nor threaten, admonish nor accuse them. And they sin without all contention;
they transgress, and do not dispute; their lusts hurry them without any
opposition; so that they disobey most willingly, and free from all remorse.

But as for all the good, and the generality of the wicked here on earth, they
are of a middle rate. They both of them act through strife and conquest; their
consent is courted on both sides, and when they comply with one, they must
refuse the other. Both Flesh and Spirit struggle in them, although at last but
one prevails. For in the Regenerate good man, the flesh stirs, but it cannot
conquer; they have bodies, and bodily appetites, but they subdue them, and as
St Paul says, keep them under, 1 Cor. 9.27. So that all the while the Spirit
rules in them, when the flesh does but in vain solicit; this may tempt, but it
cannot govern; for the spirit gives them Laws, its pleasure they perform, and
what it commands, that in their actions they obey: But in the wicked and
disobedient the case is quite opposite. For in them, although their Conscience
smite them, yet can it not prevail with them; it suggests, but they will not
hearken; it shows the way, but they will not follow it; in all things their
Lusts are the governors of their lives and actions; so that although the
lashes of their consciences may sharpen and embitter, yet are they not able to
disappoint the service of their sin.

In all the obedience therefore, and in the greatest part of the transgressions
here on Earth; there is still something of struggling and reluctance. Men act
not by a will that is void of all restraint, or by a desire and choice that is
free from all unwillingness; but there is a mixture of love and hatred, an
unwilling will that carries them on either to act obedience, or to disobey.

But notwithstanding their ineffective wishes and imperfect wouldings to the
contrary; it is their peremptory will and last choice which shall determine
their condition. For if they will and choose to do what God commands, in spite
of all the gainsaying wishes raised by their fleshly Appetites; they shall be
pardoned and acquitted. When the good man overcomes the temptation, and
prevails over his unwillingness, and triumphing over it goes on to practice and
obey; he shall receive the reward of his obedience. But if they will and choose
to do what God forbids, in spite of all the contrary Admonitions and
Threatenings of their Consciences; they shall dye in their disobedience. The
Sinner who is carried on to do what he disallows, to work what he fears, and to
commit what at first sight his will is averse to; he shall undergo the smart
and punishment of his transgression.

And the reason is plain; for he serves his sin, and fulfils his lust; and his
thraldom to it is so absolute that no aids of the Spirit, nor any suggestions
of his Conscience can deliver him from it. He that commits sin, says our
Savior, is the servant of sin, John 8.34. So long as it conquers, it does
indeed inslave him; For of whom a man is overcome, of the same, says St Peter,
he is brought in bondage, 2 Pet. 2.19. If we yield our selves up to serve it,
we do indeed obey it; and must expect that death which is denounced upon such
obedience. Know you not, says another Apostle, that to whom you yield your
selves servants to obey, his servants you are to whom you obey; whether of sin
unto death, or of obedience unto righteousness, Romans 6.16. If we are at the
beck of our Lusts, and go where they send, and do what they command us, and
acknowledge their pleasure in all things to be a Law to us; we are perfect
Slaves to them, and liable to all that misery which is denounced upon them. We
serve and obey them; and that shall surely bring us to suffer for them. For it
is the fulfilling of our lusts, the doing or walking after them, and the
obeying of our sin which Christ's Gospel threatens so severely, whatever mind we
do it with. If you live after the Flesh, says the Apostle, you shall dye; and
it is only if you through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the Body that you
shall live, Romans 8.13. When Christ comes to Judgment, the enquiry will not be,
Whether we sinned with a full delight, or with fear and reluctance; but whether
in very deed without repenting of it afterward, we sinned wilfully, or
transgressed at all. For we have what shall be his Sentence at that Day, from
his own mouth already, Depart from me ye that work iniquity, Matthew. 7.23.

So that it will be no sufficient Plea for any man at the last Day, who has
disobeyed in deed and wrought wickedness, to say, That he did it with
backwardness and remorse. For that which God indispensably requires, is, that
h^ should not do it at all; and he will only deceive himself if he ever expect
to be accepted otherwise. For as the hopes of salvation upon mere orthodox
opinions, or ineffective desires of obedience, or sinning through a strong
temptation are utterly delusive, and sure to fail them that trust to them: so
is this fourth ground likewise, viz. our hopes of being accepted
notwithstanding our sins, because we transgressed with reluctance and
unwillingness*

CHAP. IV. A further pursuit of this last ground of shifting off the Obedience
of our actions, in an Exposition of the seventh Chapter to the Romans.
The CONTENTS.
A further pursuit of this last ground of false confidence. The Plea for it
from Romans 7. represented. This refuted. A Metaschematism usual with Saint Paul
in an odious Topic. The Apostle shown not to speak of himself in that Chapter,
because of several things there spoken which are not truly applicable to him.
This evidenced in sundry instances. Nor to have spoken in the person of any
regenerate man, which is proved by the same reason, and manifested in sundry
Particulars. But to have personated a struggling, but as yet unregenerated Jew,
who had no further assistance against his lusts, but the weak and ineffective
Law of Moses. This shown from the order and design of that Chapter. This whole
matter represented in a Paraphrase upon the seventh Chapter, with part of the
sixth and the eighth. Two Reasons of the inability of Moses's Law to make men
wholly obedient; and the perfection, as to them, of the Law of Christ, viz.
First, The promise of eternal life. Secondly, The promise of the Spirit. Both
these were wanting in the Law; and are most clearly supplied in the Gospel. The
Jews had the assistance of the Spirit, not by virtue of any Article in their
Law; but by the gracious Covenant of the Gospel, which has been confirmed with
the world ever since Adam. The Law mentioned in Scripture as a weak and mean
instrument upon the account of these defects. This weakness of the Law set off
particularly in this seventh to the Romans. No hopes to any man who acts sin
from this Chapter; but plain declarations of the necessity of a working
obedience shown in several expressions of it to that purpose. A proof of the
necessity of this fourth part of integrity, the obedience of our executive
powers in our works and actions; and the insignificancy of all the rest when it
is wanting.

THAT which has been the great occasion of this last pretense whereby men
justify themselves in the practice of disobedience, viz. because when they do
transgress, it is with reluctance and an unwilling mind; is a wrong
understanding of the words of St Paul in the seventh Chapter of his Epistle to
the Romans. For thus says he, Verse 15.
That which I do, I, being sufficiently instructed in the Law which forbids it,
in my mind and conscience allow not. For what, through the Laws commanding, I
would do, that do I not: but what, from the Laws prohibiting, I hate, and would
not do, that do I. 19.
The good that I would do, I do not. For although to will it is present with
me, 18.
yet through the prevailing power of my Flesh how to perform and practice that
which is good I find not. But the evil which I would not do, that do I. And all
this happens to me by reason that the Law of my lusts or members wars against
the Law of God in my mind or Conscience, 23.
and that with so much success as to make me act against my Conscience, and
bring me into a slavish observance or captivity to the Law of sin, which is in
my members. So that I my self, or the (...), Verse 25.
same I who, with the mind and Conscience, in approving and willing serve the
Law of God, do yet, with the Flesh, in my bodily and outward works and
operations, serve the Law of sin.

Now since no less a man than St Paul himself speaks thus of sinning against
his will, of doing what he disallows, and transgressing through the power of a
ruling lust against his Conscience: it may well be thought reasonable for any
other man to conclude himself in a safe condition although he do so likewise.
For who would desire to be more perfect than St Paul? Who would ever scruple to
have the same Lot in the next World with an Apostle? If an unwillingness in
sin, and transgressing with reluctance could bear him out notwithstanding he
did against his Duty, and in works and actions disobeyed his Lord; who can ever
question but that it will be a sufficient Plea for us also?

And indeed if St Paul had spoken all that of himself, and meant it of his own
Person; the Inference is undeniable, and it is not to be doubted but it would.
But for a full Answer to this Allegation, it is plain that St Paul, when he
expresses all those things in the first person, uses that merely out of
modesty, but not out of truth. For he was upon an odious Topic, representing
the unmortified state and sinful condition of those persons, who had no other
help against their Lusts, but the Religion and Law of Moses. And because this
was a Charge which they who were most guilty would not love to hear of, that he
may soften the matter as much as may be, and discover things of so much
reproach with the least offense; he wisely takes all the business, and fathers
all the shameful Narrative upon himself; and expresses it, not in theirs, to
whom it really did belong but in his own person.

And as for this Metaschematism, or speaking things that are odious in his own
name, when indeed they belong not to him, but to other men; it is very usual
with the Apostle. For in this Disguise he recites a most blasphemous perversion
which some men had made of his most pious Doctrine, Romans 3. If the truth of
God, or his faithfulness in performing his Covenant with us, has more ahounded
to his Glory through my lie or unfaithfulness in breaking my Covenant with him
(which makes the most that can be for the honor of Gods faithfulness, since no
perfidiousness of ours can weary or provoke him out of it) why yet am I, not I
Paul, who could never act thus falsely, or argue thus profanely, but I
blasphemous Objector judged as a Sinner? ver. 7. And the same way of speech he
observes again, when he charges the wicked lives of those who have given up
their names to Christ* not upon his Religion, but upon their own selves. If
while we seek to be justified by Christ in the profession of his Religion and
not of Moses's Law, we our selves are still found Sinners and as flagitious in
our lives as ever, is therefore Christ the Minister of sin? God forbid. For if
I build again the things which at my very Baptism into Christianity I
destroyed, as it is plain all Christians do who after Baptism prove customary
Sinners; it is no longer Christ who would rescue and free me from sin, but I my
self, not I Paul, but I flagitious Christian that make my self a Transgressor,
Gal. 2.17, 18. Thus also he speaks in his own person, when he only personates
the strong but uncomplying Christian, 1 Cor. 6. All things are lawful for me,
but all things are not expedient, ver. 12. And when he personates the
uncharitable Christian, 1 Cor. 13. If I have all faith, and have no Charity,
what does it profit me? ver. 2. And the same inoffensive way he uses in noting
faults in 1 Cor. 10. ver. 22, 23. and ^^, 30.
other places.

And such an obliging disguise in reprehending and exposing the faults of
others is most usual among our selves. Nothing being more common in our
ordinary Discourse, than when we would be sharp in reproving, and inveighing
against any thing, by a most courteous Fiction to put it in our own Case, and
to suppose that we our selves should do this or that. Whenas in the mean time
we are no further concerned in it, than to be able under this disguise with
more success and less offense to disparage and chastise it.

And this way of transferring odious things to our selves when we would
describe and reprove them, which is so usual with all the world, and with St
Paul in other Cases, is particularly used by him in his Character of the
ineffective Striver in this seventh Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans. He
speaks not those things above recited, of willing but not performing, etc. in
his own person, or in the person of any regenerated man; as will plainly appear
from this reason.

Because in that Chapter such things are said of the person there spoken of, as
can by no means agree to St Paul, or to any regenerate person; so that the
Apostle must be made to falsify, if he should be understood to speak so of
them.

Such things, I say, are there spoken, as can by no means agree to St Paul
himself. For we read Of the person there spoken of,
That he lived and was alive without the Law of the ten Commandments, once,
ver. 7.9.

That the Law of his members wars against the Law of his mind, and brings him
into captivity to the Law of sin, which is seated and rules in his members,
ver. 23.

That how to do or perform what is good, he finds not, ver. 18.

That sin works in him all manner of lust or concupiscence, ver. 8.

That he is captivated and conquered, and, as a vanquished Slave, sold under
sin, ver. 14.23.

That he sinned against his Conscience. For what I do, says he, in my practice,
that I allow not in my mind or Conscience: but what I hate and disapprove, that
I do, ver. 15.19.

That he is in a state of death: For sin revived, and he died, verse. 9. and by
deceiving him, it had slain him, v. 11. The good law he had found to be unto
him the occasion of death, by his falling into that disobedience whereto it had
threatened it, verse. 10. For the motions of sin, which were not, and could not
be restrained by the law, wrought in his members to bring forth damning sins,
or fruit unto death, verse. 5.

Of Saint Paul himself elsewhere,
That he was both born and bred up under the Law, being circumcised the eighth
Day, of the Stock of Israel, an Hebrew of the Hebrews, or an Hebrew both by his
Fathers and his Mothers side, Phil. 3.5,

That he keeps under his Body, and is not led captive by it, but on the
contrary brings it into subjection and captivity, 1 Cor. 9.27.

That he can do all things which are good through Christ that strengthens him,
Phil. 4.13.

That it works none, but that instead of lusting and coveting worldly things,
the world is crucified to him, and he unto the world, Gal. 6.14.

That he has fought a good fight against it, 2 Timothy 4.7. And that by the (...)
in exem. Claromont. and verse. Lat. Not (...).
Grace of God through Christ he is delivered from it, Romans 7.25.

That he knew or was (...).
conscious of nothing by himself, 1 Cor. 4.4. but that he trusted he had a good
Conscience, and that in all things, being willing to live honestly, Heb. 13.18.
Acts 23.1. For this had all along been his care, he hahaving made it his
business, and exercised himself to have, not now and then, but always a
conscience void of offense, or not wounded and smitten with the sense of any
offenses either toward God or men, Acts 24.16.

That the law of the spirit of life has made him free from the law of sin and
death, Romans 8.2. That he has finished his course to his advantage; so as there
is laid up for him, not a painful death, as the punishment of his
disobedience; but a Crown of Glory, as a reward of his righteousness, which the
righteous judge will give him at the last day, 2 Timothy 4.8.



If therefore we will believe St Paul, and let those accounts which he gives of
himself explain his own meaning; he cannot be that very person who is there
spoken of. For they are persons altogether of a different stamp, and a contrary
character: they are as opposite as a servant of God, and a slave of sin; as a
spiritual, and a carnal man; as one whose conscience approves, and another
whose conscience condemns him; as a child of God, and a child of darkness; as
an heir of Heaven, and a subject of Hell. So that he cannot speak of himself in
that seventh Chapter, and in the other places too; because then he would appear
inconsistent with himself, and be found false in his own story. And therefore
as sure as St Paul is true, he says all that is spoken there in an inoffensive
disguise, not intending to give a character of his own person, but to personate
another man.

Nay, I add further, that the person whom he represents in that Chapter, is not
only another from himself, but also one of a quite opposite and contrary
character. He is not only no Apostle, but even no good Christian or regenerate
man. For such things are there said of him, as, if St Paul and the other
Apostles say true, are inconsistent with a regenerate state, and destructive of
salvation. As will plainly appear by considering those things which are said Of
the person described there,
That with his flesh or fleshly members, he obeys the law of sin, verse. 25. And
this he is forced to do, and cannot help it. For the law of his members wars
against the law of his mind, and brings him into captivity to the law of sin
and death, ver. 23. He is as absolutely enslaved to it, as ever any servant was
to his master who was sold in the market. For, says he, I am carnal, and sold
under sin, verse. 14.

That sin works or accomplishes, and brings on to (...).
outward act and perfection in him all manner of concupiscence, verse. 8. For
taking occasion by the nakedness of the tenth Commandment, whereto no
punishment was expressly threatened, it deceived him into the customary
commission of it by that wile, and thereby slew him, verse. 11.

That the law he found to be unto death, in discerning himself to be fallen
under the curse and condemnation of it, verse. 10. For the motions of sin which
were encouraged and emboldened by means of the fancied impunity of the, law
wrought in his members, which are the seat of their Empire, so far as to bring
forth damning sins, or fruit unto death, verse. 5.

That in his flesh dwells no good thing, verse. 18. For sin dwells and inhabits
in him, verse. 17. and that so as to rule and govern, or have all the force of a
law in his members, verse. 23.

That he sins against his own conscience. For what he does, that he allows not;
but what in his own mind he hates and disapproves, that he does, verse. 15.19.

That to do good, although he might wish, or approve it, he found not, v. 18.

That he stands in need to cry out, O wretched man that I am, who will deliver
me from this body of death, being as yet not rescued from it, but laboring
under it, verse. 25.

Of the regenerate elsewhere,
That as for their members, they yield them not to be instruments unto sin, but
unto righteousness; because now since their regeneration into true Christians;
Sin is not to reign in their mortal bodies, that they should obey it in the
lusts thereof, Romans 6.12, 13. In becoming Christians they are dead, and
crucified with Christ, that the body of sin might, not be maintained to live
and rule in them, but destroyed, that thenceforward they should not serve sin.
For he that is dead is freed from sin, verse. 6, 7. The Gospel of Christ, or the
law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus, has not enslaved, but freed them
from the law of sin and death, Romans 8.2. So that sin now shall not have
dominion over them, because they are not under the law, through the weakness
whereof it tyrannized, but under Grace, Romans 6.14.

That their body is dead because of sin, Romans 8.10. And that they make no
provision for the flesh to fulfill and accomplish the lusts or concupiscence
thereof, Romans 13.14. Because if they should, they would cease to be sons of
God, and heirs of happiness, and be rendered obnoxious to misery and death. For
the plain declaration of Christ's Gospel concerning the heirs of life and death
is this. If you live after the flesh in accomplishing its lusts, you shall die;
and it is only, if you through the spirit, instead of acting and completing, do
kill and mortify the deeds of the body, that you shall live, Romans 8.13.

That against them there is no condemning force of any law, Galat. 5.23. For
the law of the spirit of life has not left them still enslaved, but made them
free from the law of sin and death too, Romans 8.2. And being become the servants
of God, they have their fruit, not to sin and death, but to holiness at
present, and the end thereof at length everlasting life, Romans 6.22.

That their bodies or fleshly members are temples of the Holy Ghost, and sacred
places wherein it inhabits; and that they glorify God in their bodies, as well
as in their spirits, seeing both are Gods, 1 Cor. 6.19, 20.

That they hold faith and a good conscience, without which, of faith in
dangerous times they would soon make shipwreck, 1 Timothy 1.19. And that they are
saved by the answer of a good conscience, which comforts and applauds, but
cannot accuse them, 1 Pet. 3.21.

That he only who does good is of God, 3 John 11. and that there is no
condemnation to them who do and walk after the spirit, Romans 8.1. And that
without these new fruits, it is in vain to lay any claim to a new nature;
because, as our Savior says, if men were the children of Abraham, they would
do the works of Abraham, Joh. 8.39.

That the body of sin is already destroyed in them, that henceforth they should
not serve sin, which the other complains so much of, Romans 6.6. For they are
delivered from the law, upon occasion of the weakness whereof sin brought forth
in them fruits unto death, to serve now in newness of Spirit, Romans 7.5. So that
what the weak, ineffective law could not do for them; that the Grace of God
through Jesus Christ our Lord has done in an effectual deliverance of them, v.
25.



So that if we will take the word of St Paul, and of the rest of the Apostles
in this matter; we must needs believe that regenerate men, and heirs of heaven
are not in any wise such persons as are described in that seventh Chapter to
the Romans, there being no agreement or resemblance at all between them. Their
tempers and behavior are utterly inconsistent, and as far distant as Heaven
and Hell: For one serves and fulfills the lusts of his flesh, the other
crucifies and subdues them; one yields his members servants unto sin, the other
unto righteousness; one is made a perfect captive, and sold under sin; the
other is made free from it: one is forced to act against his conscience, the
other always acts according to it; one complains of being oppressed by the
body of death, the other rejoices in being delivered from it; one can perform
and do no good, the other does all good; one brings forth fruit unto death, the
other to eternal life.

These, with others that might be mentioned, are the lines of difference, and
the contrary characters of the person represented in the seventh Chapter to the
Romans, and the regenerate man described by St Paul himself in all his other
Epistles, and in the following and foregoing Chapters of this. By all which it
appears, that they are descriptions contradictory and incompatible, which
cannot at the same time be affirmed of the same man. And that to give such an
account of a regenerate man, as is there set down, would not in all appearance
be the way to describe, but rather slanderously to libel and revile him.

If any therefore enquire now how I know that St Paul does not speak of himself
in that Chapter, nor of any other regenerate person; but of an unregenerate
man, who is yet in the state of death and sin: he has his Answer full and
undeniable already. I know he does not mean so, because he cannot mean so, the
things which he says not bearing to be so understood. For that meaning would
make his speech to be no Apostolical Truth, but an open falsehood; it would
make St Paul inconsistent with himself, and to unsay at one time, what he had
said most peremptorily at another. It would make him flatly to gainsay all that
he has taught elsewhere, yea, even what he had affirmed almost in the same
breath, in the foregoing and the following Chapters. So that he cannot be
understood of himself, or of any other regenerate person, but must be allowed,
according to his usual custom in such odious topics as this was, to speak all
in a borrowed disguise, and in the person of a sinful and a lost man.

For indeed, to be yet more particular, all that discourse in that seventh
Chapter is not meant either of St Paul, or of any other regenerate Christian;
but of a struggling and contending, although yet unconquering and unregenerate
Jew. For the Apostle is there describing the state, not of a perfect debauch,
nor of a perfect Saint, but of a middle man. He is one whose Conscience is
awakened; for he delights in the Law of God after the inner man of his mind and
reason, verse. 22. and when he does evil, he does not allow, but disapproves of
it, verse. 15. but yet his practice is enslaved; for to perform what is good he
finds not, verse. 18. what in his mind he hates, that he does, verse. 15. the law
in his members bringing him into captivity to the law of sin, so that with his
flesh, or in his bodily actions, he obeys the law of sin still, verse. 23, 25.
He strives something indeed, but not enough; he is not far from the kingdom of
heaven, but as yet he is short of it. He is a sinner of the middle rate, such
as I have described in the last Chapter: For he is not as yet either quite
hardened in sin, or perfect in goodness; he is offering to go off from sin, but
still it lays hold of him, and keeps him under; he is in the rank of unwilling
sinners, but he is a lost sinner still. He is something above the forelorn
condition of mere Nature, and something below the more perfect institution of
Christ; he is in a middle state between both, under the discipline and
assistance of the Jewish Law, or the Religion of Moses.

And that this is the person there characterized will appear, not only from the
things themselves that are said of him, and which I have already noted, (viz.)
his Conscience being awakened, but his practice still enslaved, which is the
very state of midling sinners; but also from the whole order and design of that
seventh Chapter.

For the business which the Apostle drives at in the sixth, seventh and eighth
Chapters, (to go no farther) of that Epistle, as any man that attentively
peruses them may plainly see, is this; (viz.) To show the Jews at Rome a double
change, which they had come under by their becoming Christians. One was in
their subjection, and the other in the consequent of that, their service and
obedience.

One change he tells them is in their subjection; for now they are not subject
to, and under the law of Moses, but under the Grace and Gospel of Christ, chap.
6. verse. 14, 15.

And upon that change in their subjection, there is likewise another change in
their service. For now they serve not sin as they did formerly, but they serve
and obey God, chap. 6. verse. 15, 16, 17, 18; and chap. 7. verse. 4, 5, 6.

And because this seems to be a great reflection upon the Law of Moses, as if it
encouraged them in their sins, and helped to make them sinners; this latter
part, (viz.) their being wrought into this change of service by changeing their
Master and Religion, he explains more fully.

For to take off all reproach from the Law, under which he had affirmed they
served sin; he shows that the reason why they sinned under it, was not the
sinfulness of the Law it self, for it is holy, and commands holiness, chap. 7.
verse. 12. but the power of their own sinful lusts, which were too strong to be
corrected and restrained by those aids which it offered toward it, verse. 11,
13, -- 23.

In the management, and evident proof whereof he shows two things:

One is the goodness and innocence of the Law, because, so far as they were
influenced by it, they were for that which is good. For their mind and
Conscience, wherein the Law was seated, did approve of it, and their heart
desired it, chap. 7. ver. 15, 16, 18, 22.

The other is the weakness and inability of that Grace which was offered in the
Law to work men's reformation, and to make this change in their service and
obedience. For notwithstanding it, they served and obeyed sin still, chap. 7.
ver. 15, 19, 21, 23, 25.

Wherein yet to be more particular, he shows further that those good effects,
which the Law was able to work in them, were only in their mind and conscience,
chap. 7. ver. 15, 18, 22, 23. But that still the Law in the Members proved all
the while too strong for it, and kept possession of their life and practice,
ver. 15, 17, 18, 21, 23, 25.

But then as for that change in their service, which the Law of Moses had not
strength enough to work in them; he shows that the Gospel and Grace of Christ
has wrought it effectually. For now, since they became subject to him, they had
thrown off the service of sin, which the Law could not enable them to get quit
of, and had begun to serve and obey him, chap. 7. ver. 25. and chapter 8. v. 1, 2,
3, 4, etc.

This is the Argument which the Apostle pursues, and the way wherein he manages
it, as every man will perceive who will be at the pains to peruse those three
Chapters as I have pointed them out to him. So that as for all the ineffective
striving and sinning, with regret, which is so often mentioned in the seventh
Chapter; it belongs not to the Apostle himself, nor to any other regenerate
Christian, but only to a midling Sinner among the Jews, who is changed
something by Moses's Law, but not enough; and who is in a way to become a Child
of Grace, although for the present he be a Son of Death and Hell.

This, I say, will appear to be the person, whom St Paul sets forth in that so
much mistaken Chapter, to any man who shall fairly consider those three
Chapters, observing that help for the understanding of them which I have
already offered.

But because this is a matter of highest importance, and I would not seem to
shun any pains which may in probability make for the satisfaction of any,
though but one single man, concerning this necessity of an active obedience; I
will here set down what I verily take to be the sense of those three Chapters
(or so much at least of the sixth and eighth as makes for the understanding of
the seventh) in this ensuing Paraphrase. Which I hope will not be altogether
unuseful for common Readers, because they will thereby see what, as I take it,
is the Apostles meaning, in full and at length here, whenas they read it more
contracted and involved in their Bibles.

And to take our rise from thence, that being sufficient for our present
purpose, at the fourteenth Verse of the sixth Chapter thus the Apostle
discourses:

Chap. 6. Verse 14.
Hereafter now you are not in subjection under the Law of Moses, but under the
Grace and Gospel of Christ.

But what then? Shall we serve sin, Chap. 6. Verse 15.
because we are not under the Law which condemns, though it cannot conquer it;
but under Grace, which pardons it? God forbid that ever any of us, who are come
now under the Gospel which proffers pardon for sins past, should think of
refusing it all service for the time to come; and continue still to serve and
obey sin, as much, or more than we did under the weak aids of the Law before it
came. That we should continue to serve, by continuing to obey it, I say, For

Know you not this, 16.
That to whom you yield your selves servants to obey, his servants you are to
whom you obey? So that there you will be judged to pay your service where you
pay your obedience, whether that be in the performance of sin, unto the
purchase of death; or of obedience, unto the obtaining of righteousness.

But whatever some licentious Renegado Christians may think of obeying, and so
serving sin, 17.
after they have put themselves under subjection to Christ, who proffers to
pardon it for the time past, only that he may thereby encourage them to leave
it for the future: yet God be thanked that you for your parts have quite other
apprehensions. For although indeed you were formerly in your time of Judaism,
and subjection to the Law of Moses, the servants of sin: yet now, since your
coming into subjection under Christ, ye have, together with your subjection,
changed your service also, and have obeyed from the heart that New Gospel- Form
of Doctrine, (...).
whereunto, or into the hands whereof, ye were delivered, when you were
exempted from all subjection to the Law.

Being then, 18.
by this change of subjection from the Law, under which sin had power, to
Christ's Gospel, which enables you to destroy it; made free from the service of
sin; ye became, as the Subjects of Christ, so likewise the servants of
righteousness. Chap. 6.
And for this change of your service, together with the change of your
subjection, there is all the reason in the World.

Whereof I will speak after the most moderate expectations, Verse 19.
and equitable manner of men, because of the infirmities of your Flesh, whereby
I know you are disabled from making such high returns as the reason of the
thing calls for. For this is the least that the mildest man would require in
this Case, and yet it is all that God exacts of you; as ye have formerly, when
you were subject to the Law, under which sin took so great advantage, yielded
your members servants to uncleanness, and to iniquity, unto the bringing forth
still of more iniquity; even so in the same manner now, since you are become
subject unto Christ, give the same fruits there of your subjection, and yield
your members servants to righteousness, unto the increase of greater holiness.

20.
This, as I say, is no more than you did upon your subjection to the other. For
when ye were the servants of sin, and under subjection to his Law, ye were free
from all that service of righteousness, which God expects of you now upon your
subjection to a better Law.

21.
And as this change of your service, together with the change of your
subjection, is most highly reasonable; so let me tell you withal it is most
beneficial. For when ye were subject to the Law, and thereby servants unto sin;
what fruit had you then, either in enjoyment or expectation, besides death and
disgrace, in those things and services whereof you are most justly now ashamed?
And not only so, for besides that one effect of shame, there is moreover
another end of those things, and that is death too.

But now on the other side, being, by means of your subjection unto Christ, 22.
made free from the Law and Authority of sin, and become, as it is meet for
Subjects, servants unto God; Chap. 6.
you have your fruit at present unto holiness, and the end thereof at last
everlasting life.

This difference there is, I say again, between the fruits of your former
subjection and service, Verse 23.
and those at present. For the wages of sin to its Subjects and Servants is
death; but the gift of God to his is eternal life.

And this service of God, which gets you right to eternal life, I must still
tell you is owing to your being freed from subjection to the Law, under which
you served sin; and to your becoming subject unto Christ.

For in the first place, Chap. 7. Verse 1.
as for your being freed from subjection to the Law, and being now no longer
under it; that is very plain. For know you not, my Brethren, (for I speak to
them that know the Law, or the nature and quality of those Laws which give one
person interest and power over another) how that the Law, when considered as a
person that has such power, has dominion over a man who is under it as long
as he lives indeed, or as it lives in force to bind him, but no longer.

A man's subjection to a Law, 2.
is just like that of a Woman to her Husband; where, as we all know, the
subjection cease, and all the Laws pertaining to it, when her Husband dies
whom she was subject to. For the woman which has an Husband, is bound indeed
by the Law of that subjection to her Husband as long as he lives; but if the
Husband be dead, she is then no longer subject, but loosed from the Law of
wedlock made in favor of her Husband, as she is from that subjection wherein
it was founded.

So then if while her Husband lives, 3.
during whose life all the Laws of Wedlock belonging to that subjection are in
force, she be married to another man; she shall be truly called an Adulteress;
but on the other side, if her Husband be dead, that subjection, and all the
Laws which could oblige her in it, are dead with him; and she is free from the
obligation of that Law which forbid her to marry another upon pain of being
accounted an Adulteress; Chap. 7.
so that she is no Adulteress now, that Law being dead which made her so,
though she be married to another man.

Verse 4.
And this is just your Case, the Law of Moses, which held you in subjection
formerly, being dead and abolished now by the Death and Doctrine of Christ; or
you being dead to it, which comes to the same thing. Wherefore, my Brethren, ye
also, as the woman is to the dead man (the Duties of this relation living or
expiring at the same time on both sides equally) are become dead to the Law,
which was your former Husband, (unto which therefore now you are no longer
subject) by the body and sufferings of Christ crucified, who has abrogated and
Ephesians. 2.15. Col. 2.14, 16, 17.
abolished Moses's Law under which sin reigned; which abolition of the Law he
wrought for this end, that ye, by this death of it, being freed from all
subjection to it, might now be married, and thereby become subject to another,
even to himself, who is raised from the dead to a state of Matthew. 28.18.
absolute Authority and Dominion over us; to whom, I must tell you, we are
espoused for this purpose, ^^at upon becoming his Subjects we should be freed
^^om our former sinful service; and, agreeable to our p^^sent subjection,
perform service, or bring forth fruit unto God.

5.
And this alteration of our subjection from the Law to himself, was necessary,
as I said, for this altering of our service from sin to righteousness. Which is
manifest from comparing what we were formerly, with what we are at present. For
when formerly we were in subjection to the Flesh, or Law of Moses under which
the Flesh had so great advantage, we generally felt, as they do now who are
still under it, that the motions of sin, which were occasioned and strengthened
by the weakness and inability of the Law, which could not restrain them, Chap.
7.
did work such service and obedience to them in our members or bodily powers,
as to bring forth fruit unto death.

But now, upon our becoming subject unto Christ, we are delivered from the
subjection of the Law, Verse 6.
whose weakness gave sin so great advantage over us, that Law, I say, being now
dead and abolished, wherein, whilst we so served sin, we were held in
subjection; which deliverance is vouchsafed us, as I said, for this end, that
being made, not the Laws, but Christ's Subjects now, we should answerably to
that serve in newness of Spirit, or in such sort as the new Spirit and Grace of
his Religion enables us, and not as we served formerly, under our subjection to
the Law, in the oldness of the letter, or in those weak and ineffective degrees
whereto the helpless letter of the old Law could assist us.

But upon what I say of this change of service from sin to God (which we have
all felt upon our becoming Christians) being an effect of this change of
subjection from the Law to Christ; 7.
some of you it is like may think, that the Law, which I affirm we sinned under,
is aspersed and reproached by me, and thus object: What (...);
say we then? Is the Law, under which you say we sinned so much, and from which
being now delivered, we have ceased to serve sin, the cause of sin to them who
live under it? Now to this I must answer, God forbid that any man should either
say or think so. No, we served sin under the Law, but yet the Law was no cause
of sin. And both these all they who live under it feel in themselves, and must
acknowledge. To avoid offense, suppose that I my self were this Subject of the
Law now, as I was formerly; it is very true, as I have said, that I do serve sin
under it; but is the Law the cause of it? By no means. Nay, so far is the Law
from causing or encouraging sin in me, Chap. 7.
that, on the contrary, it points it out to me, and forbids it. I had not known
what things are sin, but by the help of the Law which shows it; for I had not
known lust or concupiscence for instance, which is only in the heart, and not
in the outward action, to be a sin, except the Law of the tenth Commandment had
said expressly, thou shall not covet.

Verse 8.
But for all the Law both shows and prohibits sin, and so can contribute
nothing to produce, but rather to destroy it: yet I must truly tell you still,
that whereas Sin has other causes more than enough that are sufficient to produce
it; the Law is so weak and imperfect, as not to be able to hinder it. For in
this instance of Concupiscence especially, whereto in the Law there is no
express punishment threatened, the sinful inclinations of our flesh, which are
cause enough of all sin, grow bold, and, hearing of no express threatening from
it, will not be restrained by it. And by this means the Sin of Concupiscence
taking occasion from the impunity of the Commandment, instead of being
restrained by it, took liberty and presumed upon it; and so without all fear
wrought and accomplished, or brought on to (...).
complete action and practice, in me all manner of concupiscence. And seeing
the Law only forbid, but could not restrain it, it helped on in the end rather
to make, and let me see my self to be a sinner, than to deliver me from sin;
for without the promulgated Law, Sin was almost dead, being both little in it
self, and less upon the Conscience. For the less knowledge there is of the Law,
the less is there of sin in transgressing it, and also the less sense of it.
And therefore, as I say, as for this instance of Concupiscence, which I had not
known to be a Sin unless the Law had told me so; without the Law I had neither
offended so highly in it, nor had so great a sense of my offense. Chap. 7.
Verse 9*


And this was found by experience in the men of our Nation. For any one of
them, who was alive at the promulgation of the Law upon Mount Sinai, might say:
I was alive to my thinking, and as to great degrees of that guilt which I
contracted afterward, without the Law once, or before such time as it was
there proclaimed to us: for till then I knew not lust to be a sin, and so, by
reason of my ignorance, neither sinned so much in it, nor was so sensible of it
as now I am; but when the Commandment came, and was plainly made known to me by
Moses; then Sin, I say, which was only shown and forbid, but could not be
restrained by it, revived and begun to have the fullness of guilt and terror in
it, and I, thenceforward, being warned against it, and not being able to keep
back from it, became liable to that death which is the wages of it, and died by
it.

And thus the Law or Commandment, 10.
which was not only holy, and innocent in it self, but moreover intended by God
for my good, and ordained to life which it promised could I have obeyed it; I
notwithstanding found to be unto death to me, because that became my due when I
sinned against it.

Not as if the Law can be said to be the Author of death to me, more than it is
of sin in me: 11.
For it was aimed to destroy sin, which it shows and forbids; and to procure
life, which it offers and promises. But the true cause of this effect so
contrary to its intention, (viz.) its producing Sin and Death, whenas it was
ordained to Holiness and Life, is its being, as I said before, weak, and unable
by all its aids to conquer fully, and restrain that Sin which brings Death upon
us; for it cannot subdue, but only show and forbid it. And therefore our
habitual Lusts finding themselves too strong for it, burst through it, and, in
spite of all its restraint, make us commit the one, and so become liable to the
other. Chap. 7.
For in very deed it is not the Law, which is the cause of Death to me, but Sin
it self, which, taking occasion or advantage by the literal and fancied
impunity of the tenth Commandment, deceived me through a false hope into the
commission of it; and by it made me in reality liable to that Death which is
truly the wages of it, or in a word, slew me.

Verse 12.
Wherefore notwithstanding we sinned, yea, and died also during our subjection
under the Law; yet for all that neither can our Sin, nor our Death be charged
upon the Law it self; because, instead of contributing to them, it tends to
destroy them, by expressly forbidding the one, and offering to deliver us from
the other. And therefore as for this difficulty that was made at the seventh
verse against my saying, that we served Sin under the Law; (viz.) its following
thence that the Law was the cause of our Sin and Death; this we see is quite
taken off, and does not follow at all. For although we sinned, yea, and died
too under the Law; yet was not the Law the cause of these, but the strength of
our own Lusts. But the Law is holy still, and so no cause of sin; and the
Commandment forbidding sin, and promising Life to the obedient, is not only
holy, and just, but over and above that good too, and so no cause of death and
suffering.

13.
But upon this you will say how was it then, that that which is so good in it
self, as you say the Law is, should be made the cause of the greatest evil,
even of Death unto me? Could it prove so to me if it were not so in it self?
And to this I answer with abhorrence, God forbid that I should say the Law is
Death. No, this Death as I have told you, is not the effect of the Law, for it
was ordained to procure Life for me. But it was Sin, I say again, that was too
strong for the Law, which could only forbid, Chap. 7.
but was not able by all its aids to restrain it; this Sin it was, that it
might appear Sin indeed, that went on working transgression unto Death in me,
by advantage taken over that Law which is good, although not strong enough to
overpower the settled habits of evil. And by this conquest of Sin over the good
Law, which was set up as a bar against it, and should have destroyed it, it
appears to be most mischievous. For this comes of it, that Sin, by proving too
hard for the Commandment, might by such prevailing over all that is set against
it, be extremely heightened and aggravated, and become exceeding sinful.

And that the Law should thus be worsted by Sin is no wonder. For we know, that
although the Law, Verse 14.
which commands, is spiritual, to show and suggest better things; yet I, who am
to obey, in that state of sensuality and sin, wherein the Law finds me, and out
of which it is too weak to rescue me, am carnal so as to serve sin
notwithstanding it. Which I am to such a degree, as if I were sold under sin,
and my actions were as much at its command, as the actions of a slave bought
with money are at the command of his master. So that although the Law shows me
that which is good, and commands me to perform it; yet cannot I obey it, in
regard I am under another power, under the beck of sin.

And in very deed, to speak yet more particularly to this business, the good
Law can, 15.
and does produce good effects in the mind and conscience, which is the throne
wherein it is seated; but still the law of sin, which is seated in the members
or executive powers, prevails over it, and engrosseth all our actions: So that
the utmost that it can ordinarily do with us, is to make us in our mind to
disapprove sin; but when it has done that, it cannot hinder us in our lives
from practicing it. Chap. 7.
And of this the complaints of those, who are subject to it, are a sufficient
proof. For who is there among them for the most part, that is not ready to
confess and cry out thus, that which through the prevailing power of my lusts I
do in my practice; that, through the power of the Law, I allow not in my mind
and conscience: for what, being excited by the Law, I would do; that, being
hindered by sin, do I not; but what, from the Laws prohibiting, in my mind I
hate and disapprove; that, from my own lusts forcing and overpowering me, in my
actions still do I.

Verse 16.
And this by the way, as it is an evident argument of the weakness and inability
of the Law to restrain sin; is also a clear testimony to the holiness and
goodness of the Law it self, which shows plainly that it is no favourer, or
author of Sin* as was objected, verse. 7. Because if even then when I do sin, I
do not approve of it, but in doing so, I do what I would not; I thereby consent
in my own conscience unto the Law, and acknowledge, by my approving what it
commands* that it is good. Yea, I show moreover that all that, which it
produces and effects in me, is good also. For even when I do sin, sinning thus
against my conscience, the sin cannot in any wise be charged upon my conscience
where the Law reigns, so as that the Law in my mind may be styled the cause of
sin, as it is verse. 7. but only upon the power of my habitual sin and fleshly
lusts that reign in my members, which are so strong as that the law of my mind
cannot restrain them.

And now then, (in this state of sinning thus with regret, 1^.
and against my conscience) even when I do sin, it is no more I, (or my mind
and conscience that is governed by the Law, and which may be called my self)
that do it, seeing it disapproves it; but it is sin that dwells in me, and
reigns in my members.

It must not be charged upon the Law in my mind, Chap. 7. Verse 18.
I say, but upon this inhabiting Sin which rules in my members. For I know, and
confess freely that in that other part of me, that is to say in my flesh and
members, (which for all the Law rules in my mind, does yet keep possession of
my practice) dwells no good thing. Nay, on the contrary, there dwells so much
evil as proves too strong for the good Law, restraining all its effect to the
approbation of my mind, but not suffering it to influence my practice. Which
we, as I said, who are subject to the Law find by sad experience. For almost
every one of us feels, and must confess this, that to will upon the account of
the Law, is present with me; but then how to perform that which is good after I
have willed it, that I find not.

For after the Law has done all that it can upon me, 19.
this is still true, that the good that, being instructed by the Law, I would
do; that, being hindered by the prevalence of my lusts, I do not: but as for the
evil, which, because of the prohibition of the Law, I would not do; that, being
over-master'd by my lusts, I do.

But now all this while, as I said, 20.
if what my lusts make me practice, through the Law in my mind I do not
approve; but in doing it, I do that which I would not; then it is clear, that my
sinning cannot be charged upon the Law, as it is verse. 7. because it hinders it
as far as it can. It cannot, I say, be attributed to that, for it is no longer
I, or my mind and conscience, that do it; but to the power of habitual Sin
which the good Law cannot conquer, to that sin which dwells and rules in me, i.
e. in my bodily members.

And therefore to sum up all, 21.
I find another Law in my members opposite to the Law of God in my mind which
strives against it, and prevails over it; and makes me practice contrary to
what my mind approves. So that when, being inclined by Gods Law, I would do
good; Chap. 7.
then, being overruled by the law of sin, I cannot, but evil is laid before me
and present with me.

Gods Law, I say, I serve with the mind. For I delight in the Law of God after
the inner man of my mind and conscience. Verse 22.


23.
But all this while I only approve of it, but no more. For all the effect which
it has upon me, is only to create a liking of it in my mind. But as for my
practice and Outward performance, it is under another power. For I see another
opposite Law, (viz.) that of Lust and Sin, which is seated in my bodily
members, not only warring against the Law of God in my mind, but conquering
also and prevailing over it, bringing me into captivity, that absolute sort of
subjection and slavery, to practice the Law of Sin which is seated in my
members.

And since I am so far enslaved to the Law of Lust and Sin when the Law of God
undertakes me, 24.
that even that Law it self, which God has appointed for my remedy, is not able
to rescue and deliver me: I have too great reason to cry out, O! wretched man
that I am, who shall deliver me, since this Law given me by Moses is not able
to do it, from the slavery and misery of this body of death.

25.
This indeed was our condition under the Law, which shows at once the Laws
holiness and goodness, and withal its inability and weakness; because
notwithstanding it offered some Grace, yet was not that enough, but that during
our subjection under it we commonly served sin still. But now as for that
slavish service of sin, which a bare Jew, who has no other help against it but
Moses's Law, complains of, and longs to be delivered from: that, as I told you
at first, we Christians, through the surpassing Grace of Christ's Gospel, are
delivered from already. So that to such a complaining Jew as I have here
personated, Chap. 7.
I Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ can readily make answer. Alter your
subjection, and you shall alter your service too; for in becoming subject unto
Christ instead of the Law, you shall become servants of God instead of serving
sin. I thank God there is a way now in Christ for such deliverance, or, as it
is read by some copies, In exemp. Clarom. it is not (...), but (...), which
reading is also followed by the old Latin Verse.
the Grace of God which comes through Jesus Christ our Lord shall deliver you,
although the Law could not which came by Moses. But without this Grace I must
still tell you that the Law it self will not generally have any such effect
upon you; seeing, as I said, it will only awaken your conscience, but not
reform your practice. So then, to shut up this discourse, this you must still
conclude upon, that whilst you continue subject to the Law, you will serve sin
in your practice, however you may disapprove it in your minds. For I my self,
or the (...).
same I under the Law, who with the mind, as has been often observed, serve, in
approving, the Law of God; do yet with the flesh, so long as it has nothing
else but the Law to restrain it, serve, in practicing, the Law of Sin.

But to return to what I said, verse. 5, 6. of the last Chapter, Chap. 8. Verse
1.
from whence we have hitherto diverted to answer this objection. I say having
by this passage from subjection to the Law, to subjection unto Christ upon the
Laws being abolished, changed our service together with our subjection, and
become servants now, not unto Sin, but unto Christ: All we Christians are safe
from that Death which the Law of the members brought forth fruit to ( Chap. 7.
verse. 5.) and have right to that Eternal Life, which as I said, is the gift of
God to all his servants ( Chap. 6. verse. 22, 23.) So that what reason soever a
poor Jew under the Law, who serves and obeys Sin, may have to cry out of the
body of Death: yet we Christians, who began to serve God upon our becoming
subject unto Christ, Chap. 8.
may comfort our selves to see that we are delivered from it. And therefore
whatever there be to a striving, but yet unconquering Jew, there is now no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus's Religion, because they are such
who have changed their service together with their subjection, and walk not now
after the Flesh, as they did formerly whilst the Law held them in subjection,
but after the Spirit.

Verse 2.
This change of service, I say, is wrought in all true Christians by the Law of
Christ, although it could not generally be wrought in the Jews by the bare Law
of Moses. For the Law and power of the Spirit of life which is given to us in
Christ Jesus, and is expressly promised in his Luke 11.13.
Religion though it were not in the Law of Moses; that enabling Spirit, I say,
has made me Christian free from the so often mentioned Law of sin, and from
the punishment of it, Death.

For what the Law of Moses could not do toward our deliverance from the
service of sin, 3.
in that it was too weak through the overpowering wickedness of the Law of lust
in the Flesh; even that has God done in sending his own Son Jesus Christ in
the likeness of sinful Flesh, and in making him a (...).
Sacrifice for sin, that in his death he might found his own Religion, whereby
he has condemned and destroyed, what the Law of Moses was overcome by, viz.
the Law of sin seated in the Flesh.

So that by the help of Christ's Law perfecting what the Law of Moses wanted, 4.
the righteousness which was shown to us and required of us in the Book of the
Law of Moses, might be performed and fulfilled in us Christians, although it
was not ordinarily in the bare Jews, because we are such, who being Christ's
Subjects, must be his Servants likewise, and in our works and practice walk not
after the lusts of the Flesh, but after the motions of the Spirit.

Thus have I given a Paraphrase upon this involved, and so much mistaken
Chapter. Wherein I have largely, and, as I hope, truly represented the Apostles
meaning, his design and manner of arguing in this place. In all which we see he
intends not at all to give a Character of himself, or of any other regenerate
man, but only of a midling Sinner, who sins against his Conscience, and
transgresses with reluctance. Which Transgressor of a middle rank he
particularly represents under the person of an awaked, but as yet unregenerate
Jew; who was one on whom the Law of Moses had wrought some change, but could
not work enough; being able only to awaken his Conscience, but not to reform
his practice.

So that all that is there said in that seventh Chapter of willing but not
performing, etc. only sets off the weakness and imperfection of the Law of
Moses as to the making men completely obedient; and the perfection as to this
particular of the Law of Christ.

The Law of Moses was unable to work a general reformation by reason of several
defects, two whereof I shall particularly mention, which in the Religion of
Christ are fully supplied; and they are the great motive to all obedience,
eternal life; and the great encouragement of all endeavor, the promise of the
Spirit.

Eternal life are words that are never heard of in all Moses's Law. Indeed the
good people under it had all some rude thoughts and confused expectations of
it; but the Law it self did no where clearly and expressly propose it. Whereof
this may serve for a probable proof, because a whole Sect among them, the
Sadducees I mean, did flatly deny it; and this for an undeniable Argument,
because those very Such as Deuteronomy. 14.1, 2. Ye are the Children of the Lord your
God, ye shall not cut your selves for the dead. Which, say they, were rather to
be done for that reason of their being Gods Children and a Kings Son, were it
not for the blessed immortality of the departed Soul which this reason suggests
to them. Such also are Deuteronomy. 32.39.47. Deuteronomy. 4.4, etc. All which must be
brought about to speak it by Rabbinical Art, and unwonted fetch of consequence.
See witness to Christ. pt. 2. chap. 13.
places of the Law, which are brought to confirm it by those Jewish Doctors
that are most for it, are in all appearance so remote from it. Nay even our
Savior himself, when he goes to prove it against the Sadducees out of the
Books of Moses, can find no other Testimonies for it, than such as are fetched
about to speak it by art, and brought to it by consequence, Luke 20.37, 38. So
that well might St Paul say in triumph over all other Religions in the World,
That life and immortality were brought to light by the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1.10. And
in the comparison of that Covenant which came by Moses, with that other which
came by Christ; to affirm that the Covenant which came by Christ was the
bringing in of a better hope, Heb. 7.19; and a better Covenant, for this
reason, because it was established upon better promises, Heb. 8.6.

And then as for the promise of the Spirit to enable men to do what was
required of them; of that Moses made no mention. By this Law, as St Paul says,
was the knowledge of sin, Romans 3.20. It showed men what they should do, and
denounced a Gal. 3.10.
Curse upon them if they failed to do it; but it stopped there, and went not on
to promise any inward Grace and help that might enable them to be as good as it
required them. No, the promise of that was reserved to another dispensation,
and to be the hope of a better Covenant; it was not to come by Moses, but by
Christ; nor to be an express Article of the Law, but of the Gospel. Christ has
redeemed us from the curse of the Law, says the Apostle, that now, being under
the Gospel, we might receive the promise of the Spirit, which comes not by the
Law of Moses, but through the Faith of Christ, Gal. 3.13, 14. The Law, by its
prohibition, made several actions to be sinful, it showed us what was sin, and
it threatened the curse to it; but that was all that it did toward the
extirpation of it; for, as for any inward strength and ability to overcome it,
it offered none, but left us there to our own selves. And because sin was too
strong for us, and had got possession of our Bodies and executive Powers,
insomuch that we were quite enslaved to it, and as it were sold under it:
therefore the Law, by making more things sinful through its prohibition, and
not strengthening us against sin through spiritual assistance, instead of
lessening the Empire of sin, proved in the end to increase it. For our lusts
not being restrained by it, and more of them becoming sinful by being
prohibited; when the Law entered, as St Paul says, the offense did more abound,
Romans 5.20; and the Law became, not the bane and overthrow of sin; but, by
making its services more numerous, it was rather, as the same Apostle says, the
strength of it, 1 Cor. 15.56. And forasmuch as the Law did only thus outwardly
show and reveal sin to our eyes, but brought along with it nothing of inward
Grace and assistance to help us against it; therefore is it called a Letter
without us; opposite to the Grace of the Gospel, which is an enlivening Spirit
within. And since it did nothing more but outwardly show and threaten sin, but
did not inwardly assist and rescue us from it; it served only to condemn us for
what we did, from the doing whereof it brought no inward Grace to hinder us;
and so proved the ministration of death and condemnation, not of life and
pardon. All which is plainly affirmed of it in the third Chapter of the second
Epistle to the Corinthians. God, says St Paul, has made us Apostles ministers
of the New Testament, or (...).
Covenant, not of the external Letter only, as Moses and the Ministers of the
Law were; but of the internal Spirit also. For the Letter or old Law shows sin,
and curses men upon the breach of that which they cannot keep, and thereby
kills them; but the Spirit or new Law enables them to do what it commands, and
thereby gives right to life, which is the mercy that it promises. That was the
ministration of condemnation; for it showed men the curse which it did not
enable them to shun: this is the ministration of justification and
righteousness, which it both promises and enables them to attain to, ver. 6, 7,
8, 9.

It Is very true indeed, that several of the Jews themselves under the Law of
Moses, had really such assistances of Gods Spirit, as enabled them to do, as
well as to know what was required of them. For David in all his life and
behavior was a man after Gods own heart, 1 Samuel 13.14. Zacharias and
Elizabeth, as to their walking in all the Commandments of the Lord, were
blameless, Luke 1.6. And the Case was the same with a number of other honest
and godly Jews.

But then this assistance which they enjoyed was no Article of their Law;
although God afforded it, yet had their Law no where promised it, nor was he
bound to it by the Mosaical Covenant. For in very truth all this inward Spirit
which was vouchsafed to them, was reached out, not by virtue of the Covenant of
the Law, but of the Covenant of Grace. For the Covenant of Grace was not first
made with the World when Christ came into it; but was established long before
with Adam, Genesis 3.15; and after that confirmed again with Abraham, and all his
Seed after him, Genesis 12.3. Gal. 3.8, 17. So that under it, as well as under
Moses, all the Jews lived; and by the gracious terms and assisting Spirit of
it, all the righteous people, that have been since the beginning of the World,
were justified. It being, as St Paul says, by faith, which is the righteousness
of the second Covenant, that the Elders who lived before the Law, obtained a
good report, Heb. 11.2; and that the Jews, who lived under it, were delivered
and justified from all things, from which they could Gal. 3 9, 10, 11, 12.
not be justified by any virtue of the Law of Moses, Acts 13.39. And therefore
that which the Apostle affirms of the defectiveness of the Mosaic Law, viz.
its having no promise of the Spirit to enable men to do what it commanded, is
true still. For the Law did not promise it, although several both before and
under the Law enjoyed it: but they who had the benefit of it, received it, not
from the Covenant of the Law, but from the Covenant of Grace and the Gospel,
which has been more or less on foot through all times ever since the World
began.

And in this Covenant, since Christ has given us the last Edition and
perfection of it, both these great defects of the Mosaic Law, which rendered
it so unable to work this entire reformation and obedience, are fully supplied.
For in every Page of Christ's Gospel, what is so legible as the promise of
eternal life? The joys of Heaven are as much insisted on by Christ, as the
delights of Canaan were by Moses. And then as for the other promise, viz. that
of the Spirit; it is now as plainly revealed as words can make it. For we need
not to guess at it by signs, or to presume it from probabilities, or to believe
it upon Syllogism and consequence: but Christ has spoke out so as to be
understood by every capacity, -- God will give the holy Spirit to them that ask
him, Luke 11.13.

Now because the Law of Moses labored under these two great defects, which are
happily supplied by the Gospel of Christ, by reason whereof it was very unable
to effect that reformation of the World which was necessary; therefore does the
Apostle in several places speak very meanly of it, as of a weak and ineffective
Instrument. He affirms plainly, and proves also, That it neither could nor did
make men thoroughly good; and that therefore God was forced in the fullness of
time to make known, and, in Christ's death, to establish a better. If there had
been a Law given by Moses which could have given life, then, says he, verily
righteousness should not have needed to be sought by another Covenant; but have
been by the Law. But this we see it could not, for the Scripture has concluded
all those who lived under it to be still under the dominion of sin, that so,
since the Law of Moses could not do it, the promise of eternal life, of the
Spirit, and of other things which we have by the faith of Jesus Christ, might
be given to work and effect it to those that believe, Gal. 3.21, 22. Something
indeed the Law did toward it, for it armed their consciences against sin, so
that they could not take their full swing, and transgress without all fear and
remorse. And this was some restraint, and kept them from being so ill by far as
otherwise they would have been, although it was not able to make them so good
as they should. And to lay this hank upon sin, and to check it in some measure,
till such time as the Gospel should be more clearly revealed to subdue it
perfectly, was that very end for which the Law was at first given, and whereto,
so long as it was in force, it served. Wherefore, says he, serves the Law of
Moses? It was added to the rude draught of the Gospel Covenant made with
Abraham, because of the transgressions of men which grew very high, that it
might in some degree restrain them, till Jesus Christ the seed of Abraham
should come, to whom, as to the head and in behalf of his Church, the promise
of such Grace as would restrain it fully was made. And to fit it the more for
imprinting an awe upon peoples Consciences, whereby it might lay this restraint
upon sin, it was ordained at the first giving of it by terrible fire and
thundrings made by the Angels, which were so dreadful, that the people desired
of God that those formidable Angels might be no more employed in delivering it
to them, but that it might be put into the hands of another Mediator, (viz.)
Moses, who was a man like unto themselves, Gal. 3.19. But although this
restraint upon Sin were something, yet was it far from sufficient; so that
still it is true of the Law of Moses, that notwithstanding it could begin, yet
it could finish and make nothing Galat. 4.9.
perfect; but that it was the bringing in of a better hope than was warranted
by the Law, which should do that, Heb. 7.19. And as for this imperfection and
faultiness, which the Apostle imputes to the first Covenant or Law of Moses in
these and other places; it is nothing more, as he observes, than God himself
has charged upon it, when he speaks of establishing a better instead of it. For
if the first Covenant by Moses had been faultless, and void of imperfection;
then should no place have been sought for the introduction of the second, which
it is plain there was. For finding fault with them for their breach of the
first Covenant, he says (in Jer. 31.31.) the days come when I will make a New
Covenant with the house of Israel, such as shall make me to be for ever unto
them a God; and enable them to be unto me an obedient People, Heb. 8.7, 8, 9,
10.

Now this Inability of the Law of Moses to work a complete conquest over sin,
and a through reformation, which the Apostle affirms so clearly in these other
places, he sets out more largely and particularly in that seventh Chapter to
the Romans. For from the beginning of this Discourse, which I have taken at the
14th Verse of the 6th Chapter, to the end of it at the 5th verse. of the 8th;
this weakness and inability of the Law is that still which is every where
endeavored to be made out, and which returns upon us as the conclusion and
inference from every argument. Sin must not have dominion over you, says he,
because you are not under the Law, where is the place of its reigning, but
under the Grace of Christ, at the 14. verse of the 6th Chapter. And in the 7th
it is taken notice of at every turn. When you were in the flesh (or under the
Law, which, from its consisting so much of Carnal Ordinances, and giving the
flesh so much advantage, is called flesh, Galat. 3.3.) the motions of sin,
which were encouraged by the weakness of the Law, brought forth fruit unto
death: but now being delivered from the weak Law, you serve in newness of
spirit, not as you did then, in the oldness of the letter, verse. 5, 6. Sin
taking occasion or advantage over the weak Commandment, wrought in me all
manner of concupiscence, verse. 8. When the weak Commandment came, sin revived,
and I died, verse. 9. Sin taking occasion or advantage by the Commandment, slew
me, verse. 11. by which prevailing over the Commandment it appears to be
exceeding sinful, verse. 13. And at the end of the discourse at the 8th
Chapter, we are told again of the Law of Moses being weak through the
conquering power of the flesh, which made it necessary for God to send his own
Son with a better Law, which was strong enough to rescue us not of the dominion
of it, verse. 3, 4.

So that upon the whole matter it plainly appears, that all that is said in
that seventh Chapter of willing but not doing, of sinning against conscience,
and transgressing with regret; does not at all set forth the savable state of a
true Christian under the Gospel of Christ; but only the state of a midling
sinner, of a lost Jew who only struggles but cannot conquer, being yet under
the weakness and imperfections of the Mosaic Law.

Nay, I add further, So far is any man who continues to work and act his sin,
from having any real grounds of hope and encouragement from this place in so
doing: that in very deed, if he rightly consider it, it will possess him with
the quite contrary. It holds out to him a sentence of death, and shows him
plainly the absolute necessity, not only of a willing, but also of a working
obedience. For the man who disobeys thus unwillingly, and sins with regret, is
so far from being in a state of Life and Salvation notwithstanding his sins,
that he is here expressly said to be undone and slain by them. The motions of
sin under the law bring forth fruit unto death, verse. 5. when sin revived by
the coming of the Commandment, I died, verse. 9. The Commandment which was
ordained unto life, I on the contrary found to be unto death, verse. 10. Sin
taking occasion and advantage by the Commandment, slew me, verse. 11. Sin
wrought death in me by that Law which is good, verse. 13. O! wretched man that I
am by reason of this subjection unto sin, who shall deliver me from this body
of Sin and Death, verse. 24.

But on the other side, if we would belong to Christ, and appear such Servants
as he will own and reward at last; we are taught in this very place that we
must not be worsted by sin, but overcome it; that we must not work evil, but
righteousness; that we must not walk after those sinful lusts which are seated
in the flesh, but after the Law of God which is enthroned in the Spirit. Sin
shall not have dominion over you if you are under Grace, Chapter 6.14. Now
yield your members servants unto righteousness, verse. 19. you are become
subject, and as it were married to Christ, that you should bring forth fruit to
God, Chap. 7. verse. 4. Now being delivered from the Law, we must serve, not
sin, as we did under it, but God in newness of spirit, verse. 6. The Grace of
God through Jesus Christ has delivered me from this body of death, verse. 24,
25. The Law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus, when I became truly and
acceptably Christian, has made me free from the law of Sin and Death, Chap. 8.
verse. 2. So that the righteousness of the Law, which it was not able to work in
me, is now, by means of the Gospel, wrought and fulfilled in me; for since I
came under it, I am one who walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit,
verse. 4.

So that all the while we see, this is a Truth most sure and steadfast, which St
Paul is so far from opposing in this seventh Chapter to the Romans, that in
reality he avers and confirms it, (viz.) that if we do commit sin and work
iniquity, it will not excuse us to say that we did it unwillingly. The regret
in sinning may be allowed, as was shown in the last Chapter, to lessen our
crime, and thereby to abate our punishment; but that is all which it can do,
for it cannot quite exempt us from it.

And thus at last we see, that this fourth ground of shifting off the necessity
of this service with our actions, (viz.) our hope of being saved at the last
day, although we have not obeyed in our works, but have wrought disobedience,
because when we did so, it was with reluctance and unwillingness; is no less
delusive than are all the former. It will certainly fail any man who trusts to
it, and, if he will not see it before, make him know the falseness of it, when
it is too late to rectify and amend it.

As for all those foundations therefore whereupon men build their hopes of a
happy sentence, without ever obeying with their strength or bodily powers,
(viz.) the conceit of being saved for Orthodox Opinions, for ineffective
desires, for never transgressing but through a strong temptation, or with an
unwilling mind: they are all false grounds, snares of death, and inlets to
damnation.

But as ever we expect that our obedience should avail us unto Pardon and Life,
we must obey with our strength or bodily powers, as well as with our wills, our
passions, and our understandings. If we would have God at the last day to
approve our service, and to reward and justify our obedience, this, and
nothing less than this must be done toward it. We must not only desire, but
do; it is not enough to will and approve, but we must work and practice what is
commanded us. We must not barely think right in our minds, or desire with our
affections, or choose with our wills; but, as the Perfection and Crown of all,
we must put to our strength and executive powers, and work the will of God in
our lives and actions. Without this, if we have life and opportunity, all other
things will signify nothing. For it is he who does good, says St John, who
will be looked upon to be of God, 3 John 11. Little children, says the same
Apostle, let no man deceive you, for it is only he who 1 John 2.17.29.
does righteousness, who in Gods judgment is righteous, 1 John 3.7. It is this
service of our strength or bodily powers, in our outward works and operations,
which makes up our duty, and secures our reward: Blessed are they that do his
Commandments, for they only have right to the great reward, the Tree of Life,
Revel. 22.14.

But on the other side, if we do evil, and work iniquity; no service of our
other faculties can stand us in any stead, but in Gods account we shall be
esteemed wicked wretches, children of wrath, and heirs of destruction. For the
words of our Savior Christ himself, who is to judge of it, are vehement and
plain. Verily, verily I say unto you, whosoever commits sin is the servant
of sin, Joh. 8.34. He who commits sin is of the devil, for whosoever does not
righteousness is not of God, but a child of the devil, 1 John 3.8, 10. And as
this working wickedness, howsoever we are against it in our thoughts and
desires, makes us, in Gods account, sons of sin and disobedience; so will it be
sure to render us withal children of wrath and destruction. If you live after
the flesh, says St Paul, you shall die, Romans 8.13. And whatever men think in
their minds, or desire in their hearts, or profess in their words to the
contrary; if for all that they have sinned impenitently in their actions,
Christ has told them plainly that he will pronounce, when he comes to sit as
their Judge, -- Depart from me all ye that work iniquity, Mat. 7.23.

As for this fourth faculty therefore, our strength or bodily powers in outward
works and operations; it is one necessary ingredient of an entire obedience.
The service of our works is indispensably required to our pardon and happiness,
as well as the service of our minds, our wills, and our affections; so that as
ever we hope to live, our obedient thoughts and desires must end in an obedient
practice.

And thus at last we see what those powers or faculties are, whose concurrence
in Gods Service is necessary to make up an entire obedience. We must obey all
the particular Laws that are recounted in the former Book with our whole man,
both with our minds, and souls, and hearts, and strength: all these several
powers must unite in Gods Service, before it will be upright and complete, such
as at present his Law requires, and such as at the last day he will accept of.

CHAP. V. Of the second sort of integrity, an integrity of times and seasons.
The CONTENTS.
Of the second sort of Integrity, viz. that of Times and Seasons. Of the
unconstancy of many men's obedience. Perseverance necessary unto bliss. The
desperate case of Apostates, both as to the difficulty of their recovery from
sin, and the greatness of their punishment.

BUt besides the Integrity of our powers and faculties, or the Integrity of the
Subject, whereof I have discoursed hitherto; there is a second sort of
Integrity which is plainly necessary to make our obedience available to our
salvation at the last day; and that is an Integrity of seasons and
opportunities, or our obeying the forementioned Laws, not now, and then, but at
all times.

We must not think to please God by an obedience that comes and goes by fits;
or by serving him only at such times as we are in humor, or have no temptation
to the contrary. But our service of him must be constant and uniform, we must
obey him at all times, and wilfully transgress in none. For although all other
things have their proper season, yet sin has not; it is always forbidden, and
always threatened; so that whenever we commit it, it puts us under the curse,
and makes us liable to death and hell.

Some indeed there are who parcel out their time, and divide it betwixt God and
their sins. They observe a constant course of transgressing and repenting, of
sin and sorrow. For they are always won when they are tempted, and they are
always sorrowful when they have done. They are all holy purpose and good
resolution before they are tried; but when the temptation comes they can make
but a poor resistance, for all their good thoughts quickly vanish, and they are
taken. They are never constant either in pious purposing, or in well-doing.
Their actions are not all of a piece, but a medly of good and bad; for they
still keep on in an uninterrupted vicissitude and succession of works of
obedience and sin.

Others again there are who act more agreeably to themselves, and, whilst they
are for God, are more constant in their obedience; who yet fall off at last,
and sin against him for altogether. For either they grow faint and weary by the
tediousness and length of their journey; or they are turned out of the way by
some great difficulties; or drawn aside by the importunate allurements of some
temptation: and when once by any of these ways they are put beside their duty,
they turn their backs thenceforward upon God, and never more obey him. They are
seduced by ill company, or drawn away by interest, or frighted by persecution;
and from that time their care slackens, and their lusts increase, and grow too
hard for Grace and the Gospel. And thus, what from inducements from within, and
what from occasions from without, they are quite cut off from the service of
God and Religion, and give themselves up to serve their lusts for altogether,
and to an uninterrupted obedience of sin.

But now as for such a broken service and obedience as this; God will by no
means accept of it, nor shall any man be ever the better by it. For when Christ
comes to Judgment, he will pass Sentence upon men according to what they are
then, and not according to what they have been formerly. If the righteous man
turn away from his righteousness, says Ezekiel, and commit iniquity, and do
according to all that the wicked man does; shall he live? No, by no means. For
all his righteousness that he has done formerly shall not be mentioned, but in
his trespass that he has since trespassed, and in his sin that he has sinned;
in them shall he dye, Ezekiel. 18.24. It is only if you continue in my Word, says
our Savior, that you are my Disciples indeed, John 8.31. You must persevere in
obedience if you expect to have the reward of it. For he only who endures to
the end shall be saved, Matthew. 10.22; and none but they, who by PATIENT
CONTINVANCE in well doing seek for Glory and Immortality, shall inherit eternal
life, Romans 2.6, 7. Perseverance is the indispensable condition of bliss, we
cannot have it cheaper; Be thou faithful unto death, and then, says Christ, I
will give thee a Crown of life, Rev. 2.10.

But as for all those who fall off from a good course, and turn Apostates from
obedience; their case is desperate, and their condition extremely damnable. For
they grow wicked to the highest degree, and their state is almost
irrecoverable. They have, by their continued rebellion and provocations in
spite of all the suggestions of Gods Grace, and the checks of their own
Conscience, not only grieved, but even quenched the Spirit of God. So that God,
for the most part, leaves them to themselves, and seeks no further to reduce
them. For if men are idle, and will not use it; and much more if they
scornfully cast it from them, and reject it; Christ has told us plainly that
the Grace which any man has shall be taken from him, Matthew. 25. 29. And when
once God and his good Spirit have deserted them, they are under nothing but an
unbridled lust, and run on, without all restraint, into an exorbitant pitch of
wickedness.

And this any man may easily observe in the world. For who is usually so evil
as the backsliding Sinner? Who is ordinarily so irrecoverable as the Apostate
Saint? They are quite lost to all goodness, and sin beyond all bounds and past
all retrieve. No Creatures in the World were ever so much out of all capacity
to be restored to Heaven, as those Angels that fell from it; and no men on
Earth are so hardly reclaimed from a wicked to a holy life, as they who once
knew what it was, and yet utterly renounced it. For God for the most part lets
them alone to enjoy their own choice, and to go on in their own way; and the
good Spirit, which has been almost quenched by them, contends no more with
them, nor acts any more upon them. They have trampled already upon all
spiritual aids, and benumbed and silenced their own Consciences, and quite
hardened themselves in their wickedness; so that now they have nothing to
hinder them, but advance to work all manner of sin with greediness and
wantonness, and thereby fall under the severest curse that can be met with in
Hell and damnation.

And as for this progress of all Renegado Saints and revolting Sinners, both in
sin, and also in suffering; the Scripture is express and plain. When the
unclean Spirit, which is once gone out of a man, returns into him again, says
our Savior, he takes unto himself seven other Spirits, which are more wicked
than he himself is, and they enter in and dwell there: and the last state of
that man is made worse in all respects by this means, than the first, Matthew.
12.43, 44, 45. The man becomes a greater Sinner, and a greater Sufferer than
otherwise he ever would have been. For if after men have once escaped the
pollution of the world, through the knowledge of Christ's Gospel, they are again
entangled therein, and overcome by it; then is the latter end worse with them
than the beginning. For it had really been by much the better for them not to
have known the way of righteousness at all; than after they have known and
walked in it, to put such a slur upon it, and to revolt and turn from the holy
Commandment, which was delivered unto them, and for some time embraced by them,
2 Pet. 2.20, 21.

As for an obedience then which goes but half way, and breaks off before it has
got to the end: so far is it from availing us unto pardon and life, that in
very deed it renders our present case more desperate, and our future punishment
more insupportable.

But that obedience which God will accept, and in which alone we may safely
place our confidence; must be, as of our whole man, so of our whole time
likewise. We must persevere in it through all Seasons, and take care both to
live and dye in it. For our reward will be dispensed out to us according to the
nature of our service at the time of payment, and he only, as our Savior says,
that endures to the end shall be saved, Matthew. 10.22.

CHAP. VI. Of the third sort of integrity, viz. that of the Object; or of
obedience to all the particular Laws and parts of Duty.
The CONTENTS.
Of the partiality of men's obedience from their love of some particular sins.
Three pretenses whereby they justify the allowed practice of some sins, whilst
they are obedient in some other instances. The first pretense is the
preservation of their Religion and themselves in times of persecution. A
particular account of men's disobedience under this pretense. The vanity of it
shown from the following considerations. Religion needs not to be rescued from
persecution. The freedom of outward means of Religion is restrained by it, but
the substance of Religion it self is not. It is extended in some parts, and
ennobled in all by sufferings. Where it needs to be defended, disobedience is
no fit means to preserve it, because God cannot be honored, nor Religion
served by it. Religion and the love of God is only the color; but the true and
real cause of such disobedience is a want of Religion, and too great a love of
men's own selves. Men are liable to be deceived by this pretense from a wrong
Notion of Religion for religious opinions and professions. A true Notion of
Religion for religious practice upon a religious belief, as it implies both
faith and obedience. The danger of disobedience upon this pretense. The
practice of all religious men in this case. Of Religion in the narrow
acceptance, for religious professions and opinions. The commendable way of
men's preserving it. First, By acting within their own sphere. Secondly, By the
use only of lawful means. Thirdly, By a zeal in the first place for the
practice of religious Laws, and next to that for the free profession of
religious opinions.

BUT to render our service perfectly entire and completely upright, it is not
enough that there be an integrity of the Subject, by our obeying with all our
powers; or an integrity of time, by our obeying in all Seasons; of which two I
have discoursed hitherto: but it is further necessary that there be an
integrity of the Object also; or that what we do thus obey with our whole man,
and our whole time, be nothing less than all the particular Laws of Duty and
instances of Obedience; nothing under the whole will of God.

We must not Neque est justa causatio cur praeferantur aliqua, ubi facienda
sunt omnia. Sal. de Prove. l. 3. p. 80. Ed. Oxon.
pick and choose in the doing of our Duty, for if we do not obey all, we obey
not Si pro arbitrio suo Servi Dominis obtemperant, ne in iis quidem, in quibus
obtemperaverint, obsequuntur. Quando enim Servus ex Domini jussis ea facit
tantummodo quae vult facere; jam non Dominicam implet voluntatem, sed suam. Id.
p. 79.
right in any. Because all the Laws of God are bound upon us by the same power,
and enjoined by the same Authority; so that if we fulfill any one upon this
account of his having required it, the same reason holds for our fulfilling all
the rest.

This indeed is very hardly believed, because it is so hard to practice. For
almost every man has some sin or other, which he can as well dye as part with:
It has got his heart, and is become the Master of his affections; and since he
loves it so dearly, he hopes that God will bear with it too. He will part with
any thing else for Gods sake, he will not stick at any other service, nor
repine at any other imposition; all that he craves is only to be tolerated in
his Darling Lust, and to be allowed to serve him without cutting off what is as
useful as his right hand, or pulling out what is as dear to him as his own
right eye, to please him.

And when men are thus desirous of reconciling the service of God with the
service of their lusts; when they are resolved to hope, and yet resolved to
sin: they have no other way but to persuade themselves that the keeping of some
Precepts shall atone for the transgression of others, and to bear up
themselves with the delusive hopes and false confidences of a partial and a
half obedience. They presently forge new terms of life and pardon which God
never made, and which he will never stand to: for finding that they do not
perform all his Laws, and yet resolving that what they do perform shall be
sufficient for them; they straightway fancy that if they do keep some, for the
rest they shall have a Dispensation. It shall be enough for them to part with
such lusts for Gods sake as they can best spare; but some they will keep, and
them he must allow; and so instead of a perfect and entire, they put him off
with a partial and a maimed service.

Now this partiality of obedience is in so many kinds, as men have sins that
are endeared to them, which they will not leave for God's sake, but join with
him. For every beloved sin can make an interest and Party, and if it reign in
us so far as to make us fulfill it, and to disobey in it, our obedience in other
things is all that we have to show besides, and therefore it must be our excuse
for it.

And this being an error of such eternal moment, and a Rock whereupon all the
souls, which miscarry under any appearances of piety, are split; I will be
particular in recounting and evacuating those colors and pretenses wherewith
men deceive their own souls, and think that they justify and defend it.

Now as for those false grounds and pretensions, whereby men seek to shelter
themselves under the practice of such bosome-sins as they overlook, because
they have no mind to leave them, hoping to be secured, whilst they continue in
them, because of their obedience in other parts of Duty, which is a partial
obedience: Those pretensions, I say, which are most pleadable in this matter,
are these that follow, viz. because their indulgence of themselves in those
instances wherein they disobey is either upon one or more of these accounts.

1. For the preservation of their Religion and of themselves in times of danger
and persecution.

2. For the supply of their necessities, by sinful arts, compliances and
services, in times of want and indigence.

3. For the satisfaction of their Flesh in sins of temper and complexion, age,
or way of life.

1. The first pretense whereby men justify to their own thoughts the indulged
transgression of several Laws, whilst they obey in others; is because those
transgressions, wherein they allow themselves, are necessary for the
preservation of their Religion and of themselves in those times of danger and
persecution, wherein Gods Providence has placed them.

Religion is in danger, and like to be undermined by the close and subtle arts,
or overborn by the more open and powerful violence of strong and witty Enemies.
And this is Gods Cause, and Christ our Lord and Saviors interest; so that
whatever is done here, we think is in service of our Maker. If we fight, it is
his battles; if we spitefully persecute and devour, it is his enemies; if we
rob and spoil, it is to weaken his adversaries; if we lie and dissemble, it is
to defeat the designs of such as he will call Rebels; if we transgress in all
the instances, and use all the lawless liberties of war, it is because we are
engaged in his quarrel. The Cause which we contend for, and have to manage, is
sacred; and that we believe will justify all means, and hallow any services
whatsoever. So that our heat and fierceness, wrath and bitterness, envy and
malice, revenge and cruelty, endless strife and ungovernable variance, spoils
and robberies, seditions and murders, wars and tumults: in a word, all the
transports of passion and peevishness, anger and ill nature, rigor and
revenge, are all sacred under this Cover; and pass for holy zeal and pious
vehemence, and religious concern for God; whenas, in reality, they are a most
impious throwing off, and bursting through all the Ties of Religion, and Bonds
of Duty toward men.

All these enormous effects and horrible instances of an indulged disobedience,
are at this Day the consequents of this pretension.

For some on one hand, who call us Heretics, and enemies to Christ and holy
Church, think no means sinful whereby they can weaken and divide, seduce,
surprise, or any way destroy us. For they esteem it lawful to dissemble under
all shapes to gain a Proselyte, or to disaffect a Party to our Communion and
Government. They act a part and play the Hypocrite in all Disguises, and under
cover of all Trades, the better to insinuate themselves among all sorts of men;
they will affirm falsehood, even of their own Church, when it serves their turn;
and deny any Doctrines, Precepts, or Parts of it, when they are a scandal to
the persons whom they would practice upon, and make against them. They make no
conscience of lies and perjuries in conversation, when thereby they can promote
the Churches interest. For they have found out ways to deceive without lying,
and to lie without sin, and to forswear without perjury, and to perjure
themselves without danger; by their pious frauds, and religious arts of
equivocations, mental reservations, dispensations, pardons and indulgences.
They can be treacherous and faithless without breach of faith, if it were made
to Heretics; they assassinate and murder Magistrates, embitter and embroil
Subjects against their Governors, and against one another; they conspire the
death of Kings, the confusion and fall of Kingdoms, the ruin of all that dare
oppose them, yea even of all that differ from them. And all this they do for
Christ's sake, in a zealous concern for God and Religion, and for the utter
extirpation of all heresy and schism. It is this pretense which bears them out
through all, and makes them believe that they are serving God, whilst after
this extravagant rate they are overturning his whole Gospel.

And others again even of our own selves, who justly abhor these damnable
instances of disobedience upon the pretense of preserving or propagating
Religion in some furious and fiery spirited sort of Papists, (for God forbid
that we should think them all to be of this temper) do yet run into the same
extravagance, which upon so great reason they condemn in them.

For if we look into our zeal for the common Religion of Protestants, we shall
find that we transgress many, and those most material and weighty Laws of it,
whilst we express our affection and concern to defend and preserve it.

For does not this pretense of preserving our Religion carry us beyond all the
bounds of peaceableness, and good subjection? Our great fears about its defense
make us daily to distrust our Governors, to think and speak irreverently and
reproachfully of their persons, to undervalue all their counsels, to
misconstrue all their actions and proceedings, and with much undutifull
credulity and unchristian rashness to believe and spread abroad concerning them
most odious suspicions and invidious reports; they make us pragmatical and
busybodies, to go out of our own sphere, and to usurp upon the Magistrates,
in projecting means and expediencies, prejudging Criminals, and irreverent
censuring, reproaching, yea, and oft-times slandering of our Governors, if
they, either in Court or Council, at the Board or on the Bench, determine
contrary to our anticipations. They make us to disturb the quiet, and to
unsettle the peace of our fellow subjects, in filling their minds with endless
jealousies about their Princes care, and their own safety, and in possessing
them with discontents, and undutifull suspicions, words and actions, to the
great weakening of Government, and disturbance of the public peace.

Yea, I add further, these same fears for our endangered Religion transport us
into the transgression of sundry weighty Laws, which oblige us toward our very
enemies who have contrived to destroy us. For they have made us most partially
backward to believe any thing that is good, and forward to catch at every thing
that is spoken ill against them. They have made many of us fierce and
implacable, malicious and revengefull; they have caused us to thirst after
their blood, and to be in pain when they escape; to measure our Religion, and
the soundness of our piety, by a reproachful, spiteful, and implacable usage
and behavior toward them. All which are tempers and practices most contrary
to those Laws of forgiving injuries, of loving enemies, of praying for our
persecutors, of returning good to all that have evilly entreated us, of
meekness and patience, mercy and placableness toward the worst of men, yea,
even the worst of enemies, which are so much the soul and spirit of that
Religion, which we pretend to be so zealously concerned for.

And if we look into our Zeal for our several parties, how many other Laws
shall we find to be daily transgressed, I will not say for the preservation,
but even, where that is sufficiently secured, for the higher advancement and
increase of them? For what rude and unmannerly, envious and ill-natured
reflections are daily cast upon those persons, especially Ministers, and men of
Note and Eminence, who differ from us? How forward are many among us to
undervalue and disparage, to contemn and affront them; to heap reproach and
infamy upon them, thereby to render their persons ridiculous, and their pains
useless? For are not several of us perpetually censuring and speaking evil of
them, undervaluing all their real virtues, putting hard and uncandid
interpretations upon all their actions, prying diligently and maliciously into
all their defects, and aggravating all their faults or follies, raising
continually, and spreading to their disparagement uncharitable and envious,
yea, oft-times false and slanderous reports? We envy and hate, reproach and
censure, revile and slander, bite and devour one another; and all this
fierceness and uncharitableness we use for that meek, that charitable, gentle,
quiet thing, Religion. For in its service we take our selves to be engaged, and
so long we fancy that we have a liberty of saying, or doing any thing.

Thus full of Sin and Disobedience is this sanctified pretense. It is the cover
for every offense, and the common shelter for all transgressions; for we boggle
not at any Sin so long as it tends to preserve us in the prosperous profession
of our endangered or oppressed Religion.

But if men would consider calmly, and have patience to look beyond the surface
and bare outsides of things, they would soon discern the vanity of this
pretense, and how far it will be from excusing any such sinful and disobedient
practices as they seek to justify and warrant by it.

For as for true and substantial Religion, for protection on whereof they would
be thought to venture upon all these transgressions, it stands in no need of
their help to preserve it in persecuting times, although they should use
innocent and just means, not such as are sinful and disobedient. It would live
then without their care, and whether they went about by any politic means to
preserve it yea, or no. For Religion is not lost when Religious men are
persecuted; it does not suffer, when they do that profess it, seeing it is not
one jot impaired when men are buffetted and imprisoned, nay, bleed and dye for
it.

Indeed as for the freedom of the outward means of Religion, (viz.) the
publickness of preaching, the community of prayers, the unrestrained use of
Sacraments, and the like; they are much straightened by persecutions, and we must
expect to feel either a great want, or at least a great difficulty in them when
Times are troublesome. A persecuting Government can in great measure deprive us
of them, when after our utmost use of all such means, as are no ways
undutifull or against any Law of Christ, we are not able longer to preserve
them.

But as for the substantial part and main body of Religion it self, which
consists in sound faith, and upright obedience, and which those outward means
are appointed to beget in us; no state of Times need make them wanting. For
they are within our selves, and depend altogether upon Gods Grace, and our own
Free Wills; so that all the Powers of Earth and Hell are never able to rob us
of them. Could the violence of persecution have oppressed our Religion, it had
been stifled in the birth. For it entered in a persecuting age, and yet it was
not overborn by the pressure of its sufferings, but bravely overcame them. It
begun, grew up, and conquered all the world in the very heat of affliction and
opposition; the more it was burdened, the more still it spread; and the more
men sought to straiten it, the further was it enlarged; the common observation
then being this, that the (...) exqai^tior quaeque crudelitas ^es^ra, ill^cebra
est magis Secle.^ Plures essi (...) quoti^s metimu^ ^ v^bis, semen est sanguis
Christianorum. Tertul. Apol. c. 50.
unparalled sufferings of its professors, were the true prolifick, cause of
the vast increase of the Church.

And indeed what should hinder Religion from thriving in evil times? For the
same Religious Duties, which are practiced with more ease in a prosperous, are
exercised also, but with greater honor, in an afflicted state of things. To
believe, and do well; to be pious and pure, chaste and sober, just and
charitable, meek and gentle, quiet and peaceable, with all other instances of a
substantial and acceptable Religion, are indifferent and undetermined to any
turns of Providence. They may be shown under fines and imprisonments, axes and
halters; as well, and much more honorably, than in times of ease and softness.

Nay, some of its most eminent parts and noble instances are not capable of
being exercised at other times. For the duties of patience, and taking up the
cross, of forgiving injuries, and doing good to enemies, of praying for them
that persecute us, and despitefully use us, which are the most exalted strains,
and glorious heights of our Religion, are such, for which a peaceable and
prosperous, a favorable and flourishing age affords no famous opportunities.
For we must be in a state of suffering evil, and laboring under a load of
persecution, before we can sufficiently evidence how readily, how
magnanimously, how meekly, how charitably and Christian-like we can undergo it.

So that as for Religion and Sufferings, they are at no such distance but that
they may very easily be made to meet; they bear no such mutual opposition, but
that they may very well consist together; nay, I add farther, but that they may
honor and ennoble, and in many instances, enlarge and improve each other. And
therefore Religion needs not to be preserved from sufferings, since it can not
only live in them, but is also much extended, heightened, and advanced by them.

But where Religion wants our help, and calls for our assistance; yet is it not
possible for us to please God, or to secure it by sinful means, but only by
such as are either virtuous, or at least innocent.

It is not possible for us, I say, to please God by sinful means, although we
intend them for his own service. For what is there in God that should be served
by our sins? Is his Love for any thing greater than his hatred is for sin, so
as the gratefulness of that should make this, otherwise most offensive, an
acceptable service? Is any thing that we can offer to him so pleasing as our
obedience? Is he more delighted when we follow our own counsel, than when we
follow his; when we do our own, than when we do his pleasure? For all those
Laws of the Gospel, and instances of obedience, which under this pretension we
transgress, are ways of Gods own appointment; they are a service of his own
choosing, a Religion that is most agreeable to his mind, and fitted in all
things according to his liking; a rule that he has thought most absolute to
direct our actions, and most fit for us to walk by. If then we would exp^^ss
our concern for God, our venerable esteem of his wi^dom, our acquiescence in
his choice, our submission to his ordering, our acknowledgement of his
authority, and our cheerful compliance with his pleasure; let us do it by a
religious observance of these Rules which are of his own prescribing. Let us
honor him in his own way, by doing our duty, and practicing such things as he
has made expressions of honor, by making them instances of obedience. For
disobedience can serve no interest of God, nothing that we can do being so
effectual a reproach to all his Attributes, as to disobey him.

Nor is the use of evil and unlawful means in any wise a fitter expression of
our care for Religion. For what is there in Religion, that can be honored and
advanced by disobedience? Is there any thing in it so sacred as the Divine
Laws; and dare any man call that his care of them, when he lays wast, and
plainly rejects them? It is gross impudence for any man to pretend Piety in the
breach of Duty; and to cry up Religion whilst he is acting irreligiously; he
prides himself in the empty name, when it is clear to all that he has lost the
thing; for as for Piety it self, and true Religion, by transgressing and
trampling upon the Divine Laws, he does not further and defend, but impiously
and irreligiously destroys it.

It is not Religion then, whatever men may vainly pretend, that makes them run
into the breach of Laws, and contempt of Duty lest they should suffer in the
profession of it. For God and Religion owe them no thanks for such a course,
because he is not honored, nor it strengthened and preserved, but ruined and
destroyed by it.

But the true and real cause of such disobedience, whereof God and Religion are
only the color and false pretense, is plainly a great want of Religion, and of
the love of God, and too great a love of the world, and of men's own selves. Men
are hurried away by an unmortified love of pleasures, honors, and temporal
interests; and they have not Religion enough to restrain and overrule them. For
these it is, and not Religion, which sufferings and persecuting times take from
them: and an ungovernable desire to preserve these, which makes them so
violent, as that, at such times, no Laws of Religion can hold them. When men
set at naught and disparage Governors, disobey Laws, disturb the Public
Peace, injure their Fellow Subjects, and commit several other sinful acts and
irreligious violations of the Laws of Christ, that they may keep off
Persecution for the profession of the Christian Faith: they show plainly that
they will follow Christ only in a thriving, but not in a suffering Religion.
They will serve him no longer than he sets them uppermost, and above their
Brethren. For rather than suffer any loss, and fall into any dangers for their
adherence to him; they will leave him and his Laws to fend for themselves, and
flatly disobey him. But when they do so, it is shameless hypocrisy to pretend,
that all their transgressions and disobedience is still upon the Principle, and
from the Power of Religion; since it is not Religion, but a resolution to be
uppermost; not duty, but ambition, covetousness, sensuality, revenge, or a nest
of some other unmortified and reigning vices of like nature, which makes them
under pretense of a conscientious care for religious profession, to destroy all
religious practice.

This, one would think, is plain and evident to any man who can have the
patience to consider it; that True Religion can never be the cause of sin, or
make men irreligious and disobedient. That must not for shame be called men's
Religion, but their Lust which makes them wicked, and carries them on to
transgress Gods Laws, that are the chief and sovereign part of his Religion,
which, who so keeps, is a religious, as whosoever breaks them, is an ungodly
and irreligious man.

This indeed is clear Doctrine, and obvious to any common, if it be withal a
free and considerate understanding. And it were scarce possible that any men
should think otherwise, had they not either by accicident, have, or ill design,
taken up an odd notion of Religion altogether different from that which the
Scriptures give, and which all considerately religious men have of it.

For by Religion they mean only their adherence to the Doctrines and Opinions,
but not to the Laws and Precepts of the Gospel. And when they talk of defending
and maintaining of Religion; they intend not a defense of Laws, but of Notions;
not a maintenance of the practice of Christian Precepts, but only of the
profession of Christian Doctrines. They are of the Religion which Christ
reveals, but not of that which he commands; they will know and believe what he
pleases, but do what they please themselves. They are only for a Religion of
Orthodox Tenets, but not of Upright Practice; and if thereby they can preserve
men safe in thinking and professing well; they fancy that God will not be
offended with their use of any means, though never so wicked and disobedient.

But this is a most gross mistake, and a most dangerous Notion of Religion,
which is quite another thing than what this conceit does represent it to be.
For,

First, The prime part and matter of Religion is the practick part, (viz.) the
Laws and Precepts, the Promises and Threatenings of the Gospel. And agreeably
thereto the prime business of all Religious men is an obedient practice, and
performance of them, or a virtuous discharge of duty and a holy life. This is
that Religion whereby all of us must stand or fall, and that great condition,
which, as I have shown, we must for ever live or dye by. When Christ comes to
judgment, says Saint Paul, he will render to every man according to his
deeds, Romans 2.6. And in that prospect of the last judgment, which St John tells
us God vouchsafed him, men were judged every one according to their works, Rev.
20.13. This Religion of Obedience and a good Life, is that which the Gospel is
full of, wherein every Chapter, nay almost every verse of it instructs us, and
some way or other directs, exhorts, encourages and excites to. And therefore,
as ever we would pass for Religious men in the Scripture Notion, we must be
careful to live in all Piety toward God, by complying readily with all his
Laws, depending upon his Providence, and resigning our selves up to his
pleasure; in all purity and soberness, being free from all lust and
intemperance, all sinful pleasures, and covetous practices; in all justice and
charitableness, doing right, and keeping peace, and showing mercy toward all
men. This, says St James, will pass for pure and undefiled Religion before God
and the Father at the last day, if in such instances as these we have
expressed, not our Opinions, but our Obedience; by visiting the fatherless and
widows in their affliction, and by keeping our selves unspotted from all
filthiness and disobedience of the world. But if any man pretends to be
religious, who is destitute of this obedience, that man's religion is vain, Jam.
1.26, 27.

Secondly, Another great part and object of Religion, is the Doctrines of the
Gospel. And agreeably another act or instance of Religious Service, is Faith,
or Orthodox Belief. And this is intended by God himself as a means to produce
the former; Faith being the great instrument in working out our obedience. For
this is that victory, says St John, which makes us conquerors, and overcomes
the world, even our Faith, 1 John 5.4. An obedient practice is all that a
righteous faith aims at; it is its end and perfection, that which consummates
and compleats it. It being, as St James assures us, by works which faith (...).
co-operates and concurs to, that faith is made perfect, Jam. 2.22. And this
all the points of our Christian Faith are most admirably fitted to effect in
us. For in that epitome and compendious account of them, whereinto they were
contracted by the Apostles, and which is usually called the Apostles Creed,
there is not any one purely speculative Article, or point of idle notion, and
mere belief. But every one is influential upon our practice, and helps on our
obedience; as any man, of competent skill and abilities, may discern by running
over the particulars.

These two then, (viz.) Knowledge and Practice, or Faith and Obedience, take in
the compass, and integrate the nature of our Religion. Obedience is the chief
thing, and first in Gods design; and Faith or Knowledge is the great means
which God has prescribed us, whereby to compass and effect it. So that Religion
in that sense wherein the Scriptures use, and God at the last day will reward
it; is the same, as obedience to the Gospel proceeding from a belief of it, or,
in Saint Paul's phrase, an Obedient Faith, or a Faith which works by Love,
Gal. 5.6.

And now let any man, who considers this, bethink himself, and tell me whether
the transgression of Gods Laws can ever be called Religion in the
Scripture-sense; or whether it be possible for men to evidence themselves to be
Religious by their disobedience. For the making us obedient to Gods Laws is the
great design, and ruling part of all true and acceptable Religion; and the
belief and profession of Gods Truth is an exercise and instance of it that
avails us only so far, as it concurs to, and effects this Religion of
Obedience. So that Religion is not preserved, but lost by breach of Duty; it is
never strengthened by disobedient and sinful means, but is always wasted and
destroyed by them.

Let no man therefore ever dare to make Religion a cover for unlawful Lusts;
or dream of protecting it from sufferings and persecutions this way. For God
will by no means endure such gross mockery and hypocritical pretensions, as for
men to feign piety in the breach of Duty; but if they wickedly transgress his
Laws, and continue impenitently to disobey him, let their Forms and Professions
of Religion be what they will, he will take severe and endless vengeance on
them for their impious and irreligious disobedience. If they are scandalized at
the Cross, that is, if they fall off from religious and obedient walking into
irreligious transgressions, to prevent those crosses that in persecuting times
are annexed to a religious practice and profession; they are scandalized, or
Mat. 11.6.
offended in him. The Cross is to them a 1 Pet. 2.8. Galat. 5.11.
stumbling block, and a rock of offense, it makes them trip, and turn out of
their duty; because they will disown their Lord, and break all his Laws rather
than undergo it. And this is a most provoking sin, and subjects men to a most
dreadful punishment. For as God will abundantly recompense any losses which
befall us through the exercise of an obedient Religion, and a pious conscience;
so will he also inflict such torments, as infinitely surpass all those light
and present advantages, which we may at any time promise our selves from our
politic disobedience. For whosoever, by sinful means, will seek in perilous
and persecuting times, such as those were, to save his life in this world; he
shall certainly lose it for ever in the next world: but whosoever shall lay
down his life for Christ's sake (in taking up that cross which is laid upon a
Christian profession, and a Christian practice) that same man shall save and
increase it eternally, Luke 9.23, 24. So that no dangers in obedience, can ever
render it secure for any man to disobey. But that which God indispensably
exacts of us in perilous cases is this. Fear not them which kill the body,
but, after that is done, have nothing more to fright you with, being utterly
unable to kill, or so much as touch the soul; but fear him who exacts obedience
of you even at such times as your bodies are like to perish for it, for he,
after he has killed the body, which is all that they can do, is able eternally
to destroy both body and soul in hell, Mat. 10.28.

No dangers then can make obedience cease to be our Duty, nor any sufferings
make it cease to be our Interest: So that neither Religion, nor Prudence will
ever allow of sinful means; but every Religious, yea, every wise man must take
up the Cross, and patiently bear any sufferings that come upon him for
Religion, rather than use any breach of duty, or unlawful ways, either to
prevent, or remove it.

And this the Saints of God and Religious men always did. For no dangers or
hazards, no pains or sufferings in obedience could ever draw them to seek for
shelter by disobeying. David was tried with hazards and persecutions of all
sorts, but neither sense of present, nor fears of future evils could ever chase
him from his duty, or make him seek relief from iniquity and sin. He could not
be forced upon it by the most apparent dangers even of the most affecting loss,
the loss of life it self. The wicked, says he, have laid a snare for me, yet I
erred not from thy Precepts. My soul is continually in my hand ready to be
snatched out of it, yet do I not forget thy Law, Psalm. 119.109, 110. He was not
grieved, or frighted into it, either by the pressure of his pains, or by the
number of his persecutors: They had almost consumed me upon earth, but I
forsook not thy Commandments, verse. 87. and many now still are my persecutors
and enemies, yet do I not decline from thy testimonies, verse. 157.

The Holy Apostles of our Savior conflicted with more difficulties and
distress, persecutions, and sufferings for the Religion and Obedience of their
Lord, than any men, I think, ever did, or it may be ever will do. I think,
says St Paul, that God has set forth us Apostles last, as it were men
appointed to the bloodiest, which is usually the last, scene of all, even to
death it self. For we are exposed to slaughter, as men were, in the tragical
sports of that time, upon a public theater, being made a spectacle unto the
world, and to angels, and to men. From the first entrance on our office even to
this present hour, we both hunger, and thirst, and are naked, and are
buffetted, and have no certain dwelling place, being made as the very filth of
the world, and the offscouring of all things from the first to this day, 1
Cor. 4.9, 11, 13. If any straits could authorize an evil action, or if any
pressures could justify a disobedient escape, sure these would. But they knew
too well the nature of their Religion ever to dream of a liberty to sin that
they might avoid persecution; and they were too resolutely addicted to it ever
to attempt it. For neither the extremity of their sufferings, nor the
desperateness of their danger, could ever make them transgress their duty, or
go beyond the Laws of their Religion to lessen or prevent them. But they obeyed
bravely and entirely, even in the highest strains, even in the most ungrateful
instances, even in those matters, wherein, if any where, the malice and
violence of their enemies would provoke, or rather force them to disobey. For
in the midst of all these pressures, says St Paul, being reviled, we bless,
being persecuted, we suffer it; being defamed, we do nothing worse than entreat
and pray for our defamers, 1 Cor. 4.12, 13. In patience, in afflictions, in
necessities, in distresses, in stripes, in imprisonments, in popular tumults,
in manual labors, in all these things, and in the throng and distraction of
all our sorrows, we approve our selves as the true obedient Servants, and
faithful Ministers of God; showing that, not by any selfish, disobedient,
politic shifts, but by pureness of conversation, by long-suffering, by
kindness, even to our very enemies; in a word, by the most excellent of all
gifts, and the Epitome of all Duty, Charity or love unfeigned, 2 Cor. 6.3, 4, 5.

Religion then can never give protection to any disobedience, nor our concern
and zeal for God be pleaded with any show of modesty or reason in vindication
of our transgressions of any of his Laws or Precepts. For Religion needs no
defense from times of suffering, it can live in them, it is improved by them,
nay some of its most glorious parts and eminent instances are never shown in
any luster, but when we fall under them; and where it ought to be defended, the
breach of Laws is in no wise a fit instrument for its advancement and
protection. For God cannot be honored, nor Religion advanced by disobedience.
Obedience is so essential and super-eminent a part of its Nature, and so
preferable to any idle profession or ineffective belief; that to transgress
Christian Laws, for the maintenance of an undisturbed liberty, in professing
Christian opinions, were not to strengthen and preserve, but dangerously to
wound, if not wholly to destroy it. This disobedience to Christian Laws that we
may avoid suffering for the profession of Christian Doctrines, is such as the
very temper of the Gospel, which is made up in great part of passive Precepts
and a suffering Religion, plainly contradicts; such as its Laws and Precepts
strictly forbid; such as Christ our Lord and Judge will certainly and most
severely punish; and such as the most persecuted religious men could never be
provoked or forced into, either by the greatness of their fears, or by the
violence of their pains, although the most exquisite that could be invented by
the most searching wits and keenest malice in the world.

So that whenever men sin to avoid suffering, and disobey the Laws of
Religion to preserve the profession of it from persecution; it is not Religion,
but their Lusts, not their love of God, but their love of their own selves
which makes them disobedient. Religion will upon no accounts justify their
transgressions, but utterly condemns them; and unless their repentance prevents
it, God at the last Day will endlesly punish and avenge for them.

But as for Religion in that narrow sense wherein some understand it, i. e. the
use of religious Ordinances, and the profession and belief of religious
Opinions; if men would show their care and concern to preserve the free liberty
and unpersecuted use of that, so as both God and all good men should honor and
commend them; let them show it in a pious and discreet management. Which they
will justly be thought to do, if they keep within their own sphere, and use
even there no sinful and disobedient means, and are zealous in the first place
for the practice and preservation of religious Laws, and next to that for
religious Ordinances and Opinions.

1. In showing their care to preserve the free liberty and unpersecuted use of
religious Ordinances and Professions, they must act within their own sphere. We
private Christians must not prescribe methods of preserving it to public
Magistrates, or censure their proceedings, and speak irreverently of their
persons and administrations, when they determine otherwise than we had thought
fitting. We must not, without consent and approbation of Authority, combine in
Bodies, and associate in solemn Leagues, Bonds, and Covenants, to be aiding and
assisting to each other with our Persons, Arms, and Purses, to protect it
against all Opposers. For these are such things as are no part of our business;
but God has hedged them in, and entrusted them in other hands. He has delegated
that power to Kings and Governors to take care of the common good, and to
judge of public expedience. He has put the sword into the Magistrates hands,
and has authorized him, and him only, to have power of life and death, and to
decree and establish peace and war. And if any man, without his order, shall
take the Sword, and use it against his Brother; he may read his Sentence which
is writ in plain words already, They that take the sword, as every man does
when Authority does not allow or reach it out to him, shall perish by the
sword, Matthew. 26.52.

These means then, and any others which God has appropriated to the care, and
entrusted in the hands of other men, can be no lawful expressions of our care,
but an unlawful intruding into another Office; a sinful use of what is put out
of ours, and committed to an others management. Our exercise and use of them is
a proud usurpation, an unpeaceable encroachment, a busy meddling in other men's
Offices and Affairs, against the plain Precept of studying to be quiet, and to
do our own business, 1 Thessalonians. 4.11.

But the endeavors which we are to use, and the means whereby we must try to
secure to our selves an unpersecuted freedom in religious Ordinances and
Professions; must be such as are within the sphere of private men. We must be
upright and exemplary in the practice of it our selves, and press a like
exemplariness in the practice of it upon others. By our humble, modest, quiet,
peaceable and submissive carriage, we must convince such as are in Power that
it deserves protection; and by our affectionate, fervent and importunate (...),
says Nazianzen of the putting by Julian's designs against the Christians. Orat.
3. adv. Julian.
prayers to Gods we must endeavor to have it put into their hearts to protect
and preserve it. We must plead its Cause, and represent that truth and goodness
which may recommend it; and try to wipe off the aspersions, and rectify the
mistakes of such as plead against it, or think hardly of it. These, and such
like means, are the laudable service in this Case, and the proper business of
private Christians. And whilst their care is contained within this compass, and
they act thus within their own sphere, it is excellent and praiseworthy: they
seek to preserve Religion, and their seeking to do it in this way, is it self
very pious and religious.

2. In showing their care to preserve the free and unpersecuted profession of
Religion, they must exercise such only of those actions within their own
sphere, as are lawful and innocent, but by no means endeavor to maintain it by
such as are sinful and disobedient. They must not defend it by lies and
forgeries, by wrath and bitterness, by fierceness and revenge, by slandering
and reviling of their Opposers. They must so defend Religion, as not to disobey
it; because that is not defending, but betraying it. A free profession is no
further desirable than it tends to an upright practice. So that to disobey for
it, is to lose all that wherefore we endeavor after it. Truth must never be
bought with the loss of innocence; nor must we ever commit any one sinful
action to promote a freedom of orthodox and true professions.

3. In evidencing their care in preserving the free and unpersecuted profession
of Religion, they must be zealous in the first place for the practice and
preservation of religious Laws, and next to that for religious Ordinances and
Opinions. St Paul directs us to the great Object of all religious zeal, when he
tells us that Christ came into the world to purchase to himself a peculiar
people, zealous of good WORKS, Tit. 2.14. Nothing in the world is so
warrantable a matter of a man's zeal, as Gods Laws, and men's obedience. For the
Laws of Christ's Gospel are that part which he esteems most; he has made them
the measure of life or death, the Rule of our eternal absolution or
condemnation. And as he accounts of them, so should we too. Our zeal for them
must be more warm, and our care more watchful than for any other thing; because
God himself is most especially concerned for them, and all men are most highly
concerned in them; they being that whereby all men must live or dye eternally.
This I will, says St Paul to Titus, that thou affirm constantly, That they
which have believed in God may be CAREFVL to maintain GOOD WORKS; these things
are good and profitable unto men, Tit. 3.8. So that the practice of religious
Laws must be the great point, wherein we are to be zealous and careful in the
first place.

Next to which we must take care of those opinions which have a great influence
upon, and are the great productive instruments of all obedient practice; such
as are all opinions which are either motives or inducements, helps or
encouragements to obedience. In which sort of opinions our Religion abounds,
there being, as I said, no idle Article in the Christian Creed, but such
Doctrins and Declarations concerning God, and Christ, and our selves, and the
other world, as are either absolutely necessary, or very helpful to a holy
life. All which, according to their several proportions in promoting piety and
obedience to Gods Laws, we are to be zealously concerned for in the next place,
as we are for that pious obedience which is wrought by them in the first.

But when we have shown our good affection to substantial piety and Religion by
a just zeal for obedience, and plainly practical opinions; then may it be very
fit for us to show our zeal for other true Doctrines and Professions likewise.
For it is a great honor to God, and an ornament to Religion, that we have it
pure and sincere, free from all things that are liable to just exception, and
from all mixture of error and falsehood. And it is also a great happiness to
men to have orthodox apprehensions in Religion, and to embrace nothing for
Gospel truths, but what God has thereby declared to them. But it is a further
happiness still, and such whereof men are the most sensible, to be free from
the imperious imposition and tyranny of error; so as neither to be forced upon
the impossible belief of that, which in our own minds we see is false, and
therefore cannot believe; nor upon the feigned and hypocritical profession of
believing a thing, when really we do not believe it; one of which two is men's
unhappiness, when their professed Religion falls under persecution. Now both
these are severe and rigorous impositions. For the first is utterly impossible
to any, so long as it continues a free and impartial, head; as the latter is to
any, whilst it remains an honest and obedient, heart. So that all men have very
great reason, so far as they can by all innocent and honest ways, to be zealous
against them, and to use all the lawful care and caution that possibly they
can, to avoid so powerful a motive, as a sharp persecution is, to tempt them to
a thing so unreasonable as is the first, and so wicked and sinful, as is the
latter.

So long then as men will moderate their zeal for the unpersecuted use of
religious Ordinances, and profession of religious Opinions, with this
discretion; let them be zealous and concerned for it in God's Name. For it is
their Duty so to be; and God will reward, and all good men commend them for it.
If they take care that their zeal transport them not beyond their own sphere,
that it carry them not against their Duty, and that it be concerned in the
first place for Laws and practical opinions; they may allow it after that to
spend it self upon other Points which have more of speculative truth, but less
of practice. This zeal now is excellent, it is truly pious, it is religious.

But if they have a zeal without obedience; if for preventing of persecution in
the profession of true opinions, they run upon sinful means and undutiful
transgressions; their zeal is ungodly, and all their pretended care of Religion
is plainly irreligious. For Religion is not beholding to them, but their own
lusts; it condemns their disobedient actions, and unless their timely
repentance prevent it, God will most severely punish them. So that as for this
first pretense for a partial obedience, viz. our allowing our selves in the
transgression of some Laws, whilst we obey in others, because those wherein we
indulge our selves are necessary to keep off persecution for the sake of
Religion; it is a vain, deceitful ground, and will certainly fail any man who
relies upon it.

CHAP. VII. Of the two remaining pretenses for a partial Obedience.
The CONTENTS.
The second pretense for the allowed practice of some sins whilst men obey in
others, is the serving of their necessities by sinful arts in times of
indigence. An account of men's disobedience upon this pretense. The vanity of
it, and the danger of disobeying through it. A third pretense is bodily temper
and complexion, age, and way of life. A representation of men's disobedience
upon this pretense. The vanity of it, and the danger of sinning through it. No
justifying Plea for disobedience from our age. Nor from our way of life. Nor
from our natural temper and complexion. So that this integrity of the object is
excusable upon no pretense. It was always required to men's acceptance.

ANother pretense whereby men justify to their own thoughts the allowed
transgression of several Laws whilst they obey in others, is the serving of
their necessities; because those instances of disobedience, wherein they
indulge themselves, are only such sinful arts, compliances and services, as are
necessary to relieve their want and indigence.

They are in great streights, and deep poverty; and since God has not provided
conveniences, nor it may be necessaries for them; they think that they may be
allowed to be their own Guardians, and to use any means within their own
compass whereby they can make provision for their own selves. For they are born
with the same appetites and indigencies as other men, and some way or other
they must satisfy and supply them. And this they cannot do if in all things
they must religiously obey, and keep themselves entirely innocent. They must
lie and overreach, cheat and cozen, if not pilfer and steal, to get
maintenance. And they must also use wicked arts and sinful compliances to get
favor. For not having of their own wherewith to relieve the wants, to comfort
the weaknesses, and to appease the cravings of their natures; they must be
beholden, and cannot help it, to the good will and kind charity of others. And
other men are proud and humorous, acted by self-will and vicious interests; and
will therefore reach out no help to them unless they please them, and do any,
or all such things as they would have them do. They must lie and dissemble,
fawn and flatter, drink and swear, bear them company in their sins, and serve
their vicious interests, and boggle at no sort of sinful arts and disobedient
compliances; or else they are not for their turn, nor must expect to feel any
effects of their kindness.

This is the hard fate, and the great temptation of a poor and indigent
condition. They who labor under it, are brought thus into a seeming necessity
of many sins, because they cannot otherwise provide for their own maintenance
and appetites. For God has made their nature subject to several wants; and he
has made their condition low, so that they are unable to relieve themselves in
any comfortable degree, but must depend, as for that, either upon the fraud and
overreaching cunning of their own wits, or upon the good will of others: and
his Providence has placed them among such Neighbors, whose kindness and good
will they cannot purchase, but at the cost of their Virtue and Obedience. And
therefore if in this hard Case they disobey, they hope that he will excuse it.
Their necessity they think will bear them out, so long as all their
transgressions are only to provide for themselves, and for the competent
satisfaction of their own appetites where his Providence has left them
unprovided.

This is the wicked arguing and disobedient practice of men of a soft and
delicate Religion. They will obey God in any thing, where they must not
disoblige their appetites; but no further than they will suffer them. They are
Servants of their own Bellies in the first place, and God shall have just so
much, but no more, than they can spare him. For they will live easily, and want
for nothing in this world, as well as be for ever happy in the next: and if God
will allow them both these, then they are for him; but otherwise they have
nothing to say either to him or his Religion. For they will not endure to serve
a man of sorrows, to follow Christ in wants, to be subjects to that Sovereign
who has no temporal rewards wherewith, even in this life, to recompense their
service. They will serve God just so long as he will suffer them to serve
themselves and their own appetites; but if his service does not provide them
all supplies, or crosses the satisfaction of these, they beg of him that he
would excuse them. In other things they will serve him, if that will content
him; but here charity must begin at home, and if they disobey, he must give
them a dispensation.

But God will not endure to be thus undervalued, and served in the second
place. He can in no wise bear to have the world and our fleshly appetites set
above him; to see them served, and himself slighted: because by this means we
do not honor, but debase; not serve, but renounce him. For he can be no
faithful servant of God, who loves any thing better than his master; nor is he
truly united unto Christ, who can be drawn to disobey him by any temptation. If
we love any thing in the world then, though never so dear to us, better than
him, we are utterly unworthy of him, and must never hope to be the better by
him. For he that loves father or mother, son, or daughter, more than me, says
he, is not worthy of me, Mat. 10.37. Nay, he that hates not these, and all
things else when they stand in competition with my service; that hates not, I
say not barely his worldly goods, and rich neighbors, but even his father, and
mother, and wife, and children, and brethren, and sisters, yea, and his own
life also, he cannot be my disciple, Luke 14.26.

If any cravings of our own flesh then cannot be satisfied without
disobedience, we must not seek to pleasure, but subdue; nor endeavor to
fulfill, but to deny them. And if any wants or losses are brought so close to
us, that we cannot avoid them without breach of duty; they are the burden of
the Cross imposed upon us, and, unless we would cast off all relation to
Christ, we must not shun them. For whosoever does not bear his Cross, says our
Savior, when Gods Providence lays it upon his shoulders, and come after me
even then when he must suffer under it; he cannot be my disciple, Luke 14.27.

This God peremptorily and indispensably exacts of us; and there is all the
reason in the world why he should. For he will infinitely recompense in the
next world, either the want, or loss of all those things which for his sake, we
are content to be without in this. Heaven and eternal life will be an abundant,
and incomparably surpassing compensation; all the wants and sufferings of this
present time being, as St Paul says, utterly unworthy to be compared with that
Glory, which shall then be revealed in us, Romans 8.18.

Let no man therefore disobey Gods Laws for the love of the world, for the
supplying of his wants, and the satisfaction of his appetites; and yet for all
that persuade himself that God will own him, and connive at his disobedience.
For in doing so, he plainly renounces God, and sets the World above him; he
makes his Duty truckle to his Interest; he slights obedience, and submits to a
temptation. He does the work of sin for the interest which tempts to it; and
that will certainly bring upon him that death, which God has established for
the wages of it.

Thirdly, A third pretense whereby men justify to their own souls the indulged
transgression of several Laws whilst they obey in others; is, because those
transgressions wherein they allow themselves, are only such as are sins of
temper and complexion, age, or way of life.

Sometimes men's place and way of life is a continual temptation to some
particular sin; and if they may but have leave to indulge that, they will
abandon every other. The Courtier takes himself obliged by the fashion of his
place to lies and dissimulation, ostentation and vanity, to sinful
compliances, and faithless engagements, to promise all, but to perform nothing.
The Merchant in pursuit of his gain, serves the end of his trade by fraud and
dishonesty. He accounts it a piece of his Art to overreach, to defraud
customs, to vend false wares, and set exacting prices. The Lawyer thinks it a
part of his profession to encourage strife, and foment difference; the malice
and revenge, the wrath and bitterness, the slanders and evil-speakings, the
strife and contentions which are other men's sins, are his livelihood. These
sins, being ever before them, are always a snare to them; for they are
continually importuned by them* and it must be a toilsome pains, and an
uninterrupted watchfulness which can preserve them from being either won, or
wearied into the commission of them. And since obedience in these instances is
a thing which they can so very hardly spare; they hope that God in mercy will
not exact it; but will graciously accept them upon their service in other
particulars, although here they continue to disobey him.

Other sins men are invited and importunately tempted to by their age and
condition, their particular temper, and complexion. Lust and rashness are the
vices of youth, as craft and covetousness are of the gray hairs. Some sins are
rooted in men's very natures; for some are naturally inclined to be passionate
and hasty, some to be peevish, and others to be malicious and revengefull. The
temper of their bodies hurries on some to lust and intemperance, some to
turbulency and fierceness, and others to slavish fears, and sinful
compliances. Nay, a sharp and long affliction will sometimes embitter even a
good nature, and make it habitually sour and fretfull, peevish and morose. So
that men's very natural temper, their age, and condition prove many times an
uninterrupted solicitation to some sin or other, and they always fall, by
being always under the power of their temptation.

Now when men find that some sins have got thus near to them, and have taken
such deep root in their way of life, nay, in their very natures; since they
will not be at the pains to reform and amend, they expect that God should be so
gracious as to dispense with them. As for all the instances of this kind, he
must abate them, seeing they will not perform them; his pardoning goodness must
supply all the defects of their sloth. For God and they must still be agreed,
and therefore because they cannot well abandon some of their darling lusts, and
bosom sins for his sake; the compliance must fall on his side, and he must
desert and cancel all those severe and grating Laws to serve and pleasure them.
They will obey him most willingly in all other things; only in these they beg
that he would excuse them: they will do any thing else for his sake, which does
not contradict their beloved sin, and never displease him, but when they cannot
otherwise fulfill and pleasure it.

Thus, for instance, the Covetous man will obey in keeping back from
drunkenness and whoredom, from ambition, and profuseness, and all other sins
which are expensive: But as for those other duties of suffering loss our selves
rather than defrauding and overreaching others, of a contented mind, and
contempt of the world, of alms and beneficence, and all the chargeable
expressions of an active love, and an operative charity: here he stands upon
his points, and chooses to dispute rather than to perform; to article rather
than to obey.

The peevish and angry man will readily keep the commands of Justice and
Temperance; he will neither spoil his neighbors Goods, nor wrong his Bed, nor
pamper and defile his own body; he will do any thing, which either ministers to
his reigning lust, or which does not contradict and make against it. But then
as for the commands of meekness and patience, of long-suffering and
forgiveness, of speaking well, and doing good to enemies, of passing over
provocations and peaceableness, and all other instances of pardoning, and
forgetting injuries; in these God must excuse him, for his dear lust opposes
them, and he can not, he will not serve him in the practice of them.

Some who are of a tractable and submissive, of a soft and governable temper,
will observe readily all those duties which their constitution has made easy,
and which their natural genius enclines them to. They will be constant
performers of all the cheap, because agreeable duties of submission to
Governors, and obedience to public Constitutions, of uniformity in worship,
of honor and observance of the Laws and establishments, and of all things
belonging to the Churches Unity and outward peace. But as for the severities of
an inward and hearty Religion, in mortification and self-denial, in paring off
all sinful lusts, and exorbitant desires, in patience, and taking up the
Cross, and in all other hard instances of duty and a holy life: here they
withdraw their service, because they must contradict their natures, and go
against their ease; and set themselves, not to obey these Laws, but to evacuate
or evade them.

Whereas others, who are of a temper more severe, but withal of a querulous
and restless, a busy, and ungovernable spirit, will keep off from atheism and
profaneness, from idolatry and witchcraft, and other heinous impieties; from
drunkenness and revellings, from fornication and adultery, from oppression, and
fraud, and other alike gross and notorious instances of injustice and
immorality. For all these their strict temper can easily avoid; they have no
great temptation to them, and are therefore able without much pains to abstain
from them. But then as for those other sins, which agree with the bent and
inclination of their busy and ungovernable humor; they will still indulge
themselves in the practice of them, for all they are of an equal guilt,
although indeed of a more spiritual and refined nature. For they will strive to
weary laws, to vilify and contemn, to undervalue and disparage Governors;
they will permit themselves to be overswayed by spite and malice, by wrath and
bitterness, by envy and emulation, by strife and sidings; to be drawn aside
into censoriousness, and evil-speakings, into the raising and spreading of
uncharitable, and envious, yea, false, and slanderous reports: they will be
forward to magnify themselves, to publish their own praise, and to boast of
their own actions and seize; but withal to detract and lessen, to shame
and disparage others.

Thus will even these men, who make the fairest appearance of abominating all
impious and ungodly, all immoral and debauched actions, halt still in their
obedience, and think to please God, not by a perfect and entire, but a partial
and a maimed service. For their Conversion goes but half way, not from sin to
righteousness, but from some sorts of sin to some others. All the alteration
that their Religion has wrought in them, is not a forsaking of sin, but an
exchange of it; a turn from what is more easily left, to a more liberal
practice of that which they find it hard to part with; a remove from grosser,
and more scandalously fleshly sins, to other more spiritual and refined, but
still as deadly and damnable transgressions.

And thus by all these instances it appears, that when men have got some sins
that are close and pleasing, such as their temper and complexion, their age, or
condition, or way of life, has endeared to them so far, as that even for Gods
sake they will not part with them; their recourse is presently to some more
cheap and easy instances of obedience, that they may atone for them. And the
same might be shown in all other instances of a partial and a maimed service.
In all things they will obey God no further than their beloved sins will suffer
them, but as they yield to the Law in other things, so must the Law yield to
them in these; for neither God nor their Sin shall rule alone, but the service
shall be shared between them, and both shall enjoy a divided empire.

But this is a most damnably delusive, and a desperately false pretense. For
whatsoever fond conceits men who Love, and are resolved not to let go their
sins, may please themselves withal: yet God, when he comes to judge us, will
accept of nothing less than an entire obedience. All his Laws are established
under the pains of death, and he will exact all that he has required, whatever,
at that day, be our concern in it. For he comes not then, as a corrupted party,
to judge for us, to make his own Laws bend and bow to serve our Interests, and
to cancel and disanull all such among them as make against us. No, he comes, as
an upright and even Judge, to execute all his Laws, but not to destroy any; he
comes to inflict what his Gospel threatens, and his sentence will then be what
it says, not what we can bear. So that if we have wilfully disobeyed, and have
not repented, whether in one instance or in many; we must undergo the
punishment of our disobedience. For God is a friend to no Vice, neither one nor
other, but he always forbids, and he will most severely punish every one. And
as for all these pretenses, whether that of our age, or our way of life* or of
our very natural temper and inclination it self; there will be no shelter or
excuse in any of them to bear us out in any.

There is no protection to any sin from our Age; for no young man may pursue
lusts because they are youthful, but is bound to fly and avoid them, as those
things which war against, and would destroy his soul, 2 Timothy 2.22. Gods Laws
make no distinction of young or old, but the same Duties are the Rule for both
their practices; and the same rewards or punishments will be returned
indifferently to them both upon their obedience or transgressions.

There is no justifiable Plea for any sin from our way of life; for a constant
(...).
practice or trade of sin, as St John says, can be no man's employment, but his
who is born of the Devil, and must inherit under him, 1 John 3.8. But the way
of life whereunto God calls us, is a way of piety and obedience. He has given
us his own Laws for the way which we are to walk in, and in that alone it is
that we can escape death, and obtain salvation.

Nay so far is any thing in the world from sheltring us under the service of
any one sin, that even that, which may have the highest pretense to it of all
things else whatsoever, viz. our very natural temper and inclination, is no
excuse to us if it makes us continue in any disobedience. If any thing in the
world could be a just defense for the practice of any sin, surely this must.
For our Nature is not of our own choosing; and therefore its effects ought least
of all to be charged on us, seeing they least of all proceed from us, but are
in great degrees determined to our hands before we have any power either to
will, or to refuse them. But such is the purity and strictness of Christ's
Gospel, that it indispensably requires us to conquer sin, not only where it
makes no opposition, but even where it has the greatest strength, and the
highest force of all. For if our very Nature draw us on to disobey, it enjoins
us under all our hopes of Heaven not to submit to it, but to Psalm. 18.22, 23.
strive against it so long till we vanquish and subdue it. For if we would be
judged to be Christ's Disciples at the last Day, we must deny our selves,
Matthew. 16.24. As we hope to live, we must not perform and fulfill, but kill and
Col. 3.5.
mortify those deeds whereto we are hurried on by the temper of our Bodies,
Romans 8.13. We must renounce and forsake all sin, although never so dear and
useful to us, before Christ's Gospel will acquit, or he will save us. If a lust
so dear to thee as thy right eye offend thee, or (...).
cause thee to offend; pluck it out, says our Savior, and cast it from thee:
or if one so useful to thee as thy right hand; cut it off likewise, and cast it
from thee: and that for no less reason than this, Because it is more profitable
for thee that one of thy members should in this manner perish, than that thy
whole body should be cast for ever into Hell fire, Matthew. 5.29, 30.

Thus vain and helpless are all these excuses and pretensions, under which men
endeavor to shelter themselves in the indulged transgression of some Laws,
whilst they obey in others. For whether their pretense be the saving of their
Religion from times of persecution, or the serving of their necessities in
times of want, or the satisfying of their own natural temper and inclination;
we see that none of them can justify their indulged allowance of any one sin,
nor serve any other turn than to delude them to their own destruction.

But whosoever would obey to his own salvation, must obey in every instance,
and continue wilfully to transgress in none. He must never hope to please God
by performing nothing but what he lists himself. No, every particular Law of
God, as we saw above, is bound upon us by all our hopes of Heaven, and under
the pains of Hell; so that we cannot transgress in any, and yet be safe: but
that obedience which can secure us, is nothing less than performing in every
instance.

For this third sort of integrity, viz. that of the Object, or performing all
and every of those Laws which God has given us, both is, and always was,
indispensably required to life and pardon since the world began.

Thee have I seen righteous before me, said God to Noah, because Noah did
according to ALL that the Lord commanded him, Genesis 7.1, 5. And in the
repetition of the ten Commandments, Deuteronomy. 5. O that they would fear me, says
God to the Jews, and keep Exodus 23.21, 22.
all my Commandments always, that it might be well with them for ever, ver. 29.
It is nothing less than our obeying in all, which God declares that he will
accept; and upon nothing less than their performing all, that good men have
hoped to be accepted. Then shall I not be ashamed, says the Psalmist, when I
have respect unto Psalm. 119.2, 3.
all thy Commandments, Psalm. 119.6, 7. Those persons to whom the Lord does good
and shows kindness, are only the upright in heart. But as for them, who
although they are right as to the main, do yet turn aside in some things to
their crooked ways, he will lead them forth with the workers of iniquity, Psalm.
125.4, 5.

And as this integrity in doing the whole will of God, was required of Noah
before the Law, and of the Jews under it; so is it likewise exacted every whit
as strictly of us Christians under the Gospel. For the obedience of that
Covenant, whereinto Christ commissions his Apostles to baptize Converts, is
nothing below an entire obedience. Go, says he, and baptize all Nations,
teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you Matthew.
28.19, 20. And this is no more than what he himself had preached before, in his
own Sermon upon the Mount. For of the Moral Law and the Prophets, (which he
came to confirm and establish) and also of his own Law, (which he came then to
publish and proclaim) he affirms plainly, That the observance of it in every
particular is necessary to the attainment of God's favor and eternal life. He
that breaks the very least of these Commandments, shall be called least (or
shall be least, or none at all, which is the sense of the Hebrew Phrase) in the
Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew. 5.17, 18, 19. And agreeably to this Pattern, and this
Commission, the Apostles themselves, when they came afterward to discharge
their Office, did most strictly require it, and most severely threaten all
those in whom it was wanting. Let us cleanse our selves, says St Paul, from all
filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of the Lord, as
we hope to attain those good things which he has promised, 2 Cor. 7.1. There is
no remedy, but we must either do this or dye. For the wrath of God is revealed
from Heaven against, not only some, but all ungodliness and unrighteousness of
men, Romans 1.18. The Curse takes place upon the transgression in any instance.
For the threatening is not barely to some one, or to some few Laws; but to the
whole Code which comprehends them all: so that if we transgress any one, the
Covenant is broken, and the penalty takes place. For whosoever shall keep the
whole Law besides, says St James, and yet offend in one Point, that subjects
him to all the evil, and he is guilty of, or obnoxious to that punishment which
is appointed for the wages of all, James 2.10.

As for this integrity of the object therefore, or men's obedience to the whole
will of God; we see that in all times and ages it was necessary unto life, and
indispensably required to salvation. For neither the Sons of the Patriarchs,
nor the Subjects of Moses, nor the Servants of Christ; no Professors of any
true Religion in the World were ever accepted upon any service less than
entire, upon any obedience that was maimed and defective. But so much as he
thought fit to enjoin, God always exacted of men that they should perform; so
that if they did not obey in all, they should certainly be condemned as if they
had done nothing.

So that as for this third sort of integrity, viz. our obedience to the whole
will of God, or to all the particular Laws forementioned, which is the
integrity of the Object; it, as well as both the former, is plainly necessary
to our acceptance, and to render our obedience available to our salvation.

And thus at last it appears what that integrity is, which will render our
obedience to all the particular Laws of God above recounted acceptable in God's
sight. For it is nothing less than an obedience of the whole man, to the whole
Law, and that not for some short, but for our whole time, and to the end of our
lives. He who thus entirely obeys, cannot, as was before observed, be other
than sincere; and he who obeys sincerely and uprightly has all that God
requires of him, enough to support his hopes, and to secure his happiness.
Sincerity and uprightness is neither more nor less than is exacted of us;
without them we shall surely dye, but through them we cannot miss of being
happy eternally.

CHAP. VIII. Of obeying with all the heart, and all the soul, etc.
The CONTENTS.
Of obeying God with all the heart, and with all the strength, etc. It includes
not all desire and endeavor after other things, but it implies, First,
Sincerity. Secondly, Fervency. Thirdly, Integrity, or obeying, not some but,
all the Laws of God. These three include all that is contained in it; which is
shown from their obedience, who are said in Scripture to have fulfilled it.
Integrity implies sincerity and fervency, and Love with all the heart is
explained in the places where it is mentioned, by loving him entirely.
Sincerity and uprightness the Conditions of an acceptable Obedience. This a
hard Condition in the degeneracy of our manners; but that is our own fault. It
was easy and universally performed by the primitive Christians. This shown
from the Characters of the Apostles, and of the Primitive Writers. Hence it was
that they could despise Death, and even provoke Martyrdom. Some Pleas from our
impotence against the strictness of this obedience, which are considered in the
next Book.

NOW as for this entire obedience of the whole man, at all times, to the whole
will of God, whereof I have hitherto discoursed in the foregoing Chapters; it
is that very obedience with all the heart, and with all the soul, and with all
the mind, and with all the strength, which is so expressly called for in the
words of the Commandment, Luke 10.27. Deuteronomy. 11.13.

It is not to be expected that all our heart, and all our mind, and all our
soul, and all our strength should be so wholly devoted to God, as that we
should never either will, or think, or desire, or do any other thing than what
he has commanded us. No, that is a Dream of utter absurdities and
impossibilities. For God has not only allowed us, but he has made it plainly
necessary for us to employ our thoughts, and desires, and endeavors, upon
several other things besides himself and his Commandments. Because we cannot
live without meat and other necessaries, and these we cannot get without
seeking, nor seek without desiring, nor desire without thinking on them. All
the innocent enjoyments of Nature, and all the necessaries of life, all the
laudable advantages of converse, and all the lawful benefits of trade and
employment, require our minds, and hearts, and souls, and strength, as well as
God and our Duty; all our Powers not only may be exercised about them, but they
needs must. For God himself has so ordained it, it being a necessity of his own
making; so that we must employ our endeavors about them, and we cannot do
otherwise. And therefore when the Commandment calls for all our hearts and all
our strength, etc. it is utterly absurd and unreasonable to understand it of
such an all, as excludes the exercise of these faculties upon any thing
besides. It does not ingross all our power to God's use alone, and shut out all
other things from any place in them; but may and must be understood so as to
leave room for them likewise.

But all that is included in the latitude of that expression, with all thy
heart, etc. is set out, agreeably to the use of the Phrase at other times, in
these three Particulars.

1. It notes the sincerity and undissembledness of our faculties; so as the
Phrase, with all the heart, signifies the same as in simplicity and honesty,
without guile or a double heart. For a dissembling hypocritical man has one
heart in show, and another in reality. His heart is not one entire thing, but
double and divided. He appears to will what indeed he does not will, and to
desire what in truth he does not desire; so that his whole heart does not go
together, that which he outwardly professes being one, but that which he
inwardly intends another. And this simplicity and sincere honesty of intention,
is expressed in the course of our common speech by this Phrase, all the heart;
nothing being more usual in our daily converse than to give assurances of our
sincerity in any thing which we do, by saying it is with all our heart. And as
sincerity is expressed by all the heart, so is dissimulation and hypocrisy on
the contrary set out by a double heart. And thus the men of war who were
faithful to David, and undissembled in their service of him, are said not to
have been of a double heart, Psalm. 12.2. Which sense the word double has, not
only when it is applied to this particular faculty, viz. our wills and hearts,
but also when it is attributed to any other. And thus we read of a double, that
is, of a dissembling tongue, 1 Timothy 3.8*

2. This Phrase, all the heart, etc. implies the fervency and concernedness of
our faculties. And thus the Latins use the word whole, when they express their
being very busy, or industriously intent upon a thing, by saying they are
Totus in hoc sum.
whole upon it.

And as this Phrase, all the heart, etc. in respect of our faculties
themselves, denotes these two things, viz. sincerity, and fervency; so likewise
in respect of their object, or that will of God which they are to be employed
about, does it imply

3. Integrity, so as that this fervency and sincerity be shown in obeying, not
some, but all the Commandments; not part, but the whole will of God. For our
heart, and soul, and strength must be all or whole for God; that is, they must
be constant and uniform, not various and divided, being sometimes for him, and
at other times against him. They must be for all things which he commands, and
for nothing that he forbids; for we must neither think, nor desire, nor do any
thing against him. And in this sense the word all or whole is opposed to
divided; and expresses thus much, that our faculties do not stand for some
commands* and against others; that they do not divide and parcel, pick and
choose with Gods Laws; but that they obey wholly and universally, observing all
and every one.

Now these three, (viz.) the sincerity and fervency of our faculties, and the
integrity of our obedience, which are conveniently expressed by the word all or
whole, are all indispensably required of us; as appears plainly from what has
been above discoursed upon this subject. So that they are all implied in the
latitude of this Commandment: Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, and with all thy mind, etc.

But besides them nothing else is. For if we should extend that precept
further, and make it include all that the largest compass of those words would
comprehend; we should give it a sense which is, as I said, absurd, and utterly
impossible.

And to clear this a little more, wherewith so many good souls are oft-times
perplexed, we may further observe, that those very men who willed, and thought,
and desired, and acted other things, as well as Gods Laws; are yet in the
Scriptures expressly recorded to have performed all that is meant in this
Commandment, because they served God in the particulars which I have mentioned,
(viz.) sincerely, fervently and entirely. For Numb. 14.24. Deuteronomy. 1.36.
Caleb and Joshua are said to have followed the Lord wholly, Numb. 32.12. David
kept my Commandments, says God, and followed me with all his heart, 1 King.
14.8. Josiah did what was right in the sight of the Lord, 2 Kings 22.2. Now
these persons were men, not only of as great necessities as others, but also of
far higher place, and greater business in the world. For their station required
them to be much employed about it, and to spend frequent thoughts, and many
desires, and great pains upon it. So that their whole heart, and mind, and
soul, and strength, could not be employed in Gods service any otherwise, than
as they loved and served him entirely and above all things; and neither willed,
nor acted any thing besides, when it stood in competition with him. The
sincerity, fervency and integrity of their service was all which they had to
show in answer to this Commandment; and upon the account of them God did accept
them, and has left it on record to all the world that they have fulfilled it.

As for the last of these, (viz.) Integrity, it indeed includes in it all the
rest. For it is the greatest warranty and effect of fervency, and the best
evidence of the sincerity of our service. Because this, as I said before, is
the great measure of acceptance in our thoughts and affections, (viz.) that
they carry us on to acceptable works and actions. And this is the great Rule
whereby to judge of a sincere service, (viz.) that men be universal and entire
in their obedience. So that if once we perform all that God requires of us;
there is no further question to be made but that we perform it honestly, and
with that fervency and concernedness which is sufficient to our acceptance.

And this integrity of obedience including both the other, is that very thing
which is meant by the service with all the heart, and with all the soul, which
is exacted of us in the Commandment. Whereof we have still a further argument,
because in almost all the places where any man is said to fulfill this, we find
that annexed as its explication: Which is a plain interpretation of the
Scripture to it self, that to obey with all our powers in its sense is nothing
else, but to be uniform, undivided, and entire in our obedience.

David, says God, followed me with all his heart; which appears in this,
because he followed me so as to fulfill all my will, and to act nothing against
it, but to do that only which is right in mine eyes, 1 Kings 14.8. Caleb and
Joshua followed the Lord wholly; which was seen in that their obedience was
entire to him, and they did not transgress in those particular Laws of Duty, by
the breach whereof others provoked him, Numb. 32.10, 11, 12. And of Zacharias
and Elizabeth, St Luke says that they were blameless, because they walked, not
in some, but in all the Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord, Luke 1.6. But
on the other side, as for all such as were partial in their obedience to God,
and kept some instances of duty, but transgressed others according as they
themselves listed; they are said not to be whole in their hearts and other
faculties toward him. Jehu, says the text, took no heed to walk in the Law of
the God of Israel with all his heart, for of this there is a clear proof, in
that his heart run after some sins as well as some duties, because he departed
not from the sins of Jeroboam, although he did from others, 2 King. 10.31. If
you return unto the Lord with all your heart, says Samuel, then put away that
particular sin which you still adhere to, your strange Gods, and serve him
only, 1 Samuel 7.3. And that this is true in every man's case, as well as it was
in theirs, the Psalmist plainly assures us, when he lays it down for an
universal maxim, that they seek the Lord with their whole heart, who do no
iniquity, Psalm. 119.2, 3.

And thus upon all these accounts it appears, that to serve the Lord with all
our heart, and with all our soul, and with all our mind, and with all our
strength, according to the tenor of the Commandment; is neither more nor less
than to serve him universally and entirely. For it can bear no other sense,
because upon no greater or better service than this, God himself has declared
that men have served him with all their heart according to the Commandment; and
more cannot be required when this fulfills it. It can mean no more, because
that all which it should mean further is impossible in the present condition of
humane nature, and therefore is no fit matter of a Law, nor subject to a
Commandment. And lastly, it does mean no more, because the Scriptures
themselves, where they set it down, are wont to annex this interpretation, and
thus explain it.

And thus at last we have seen what degrees and manner of obedience to all the
Laws recounted in the former Book, is necessary to our acceptance. For we must
obey sincerely and entirely, if ever we expect to reap the rewards of
obedience. We must keep every particular Law of God, and that through our whole
lives: we must think on them in our minds, and pursue them with our affections,
and choose them with our wills so far, till we perform them with our strength,
in outward and bodily operation. This uprightness of obedience, which is a
certain evidence of its sincerity, is all that Gods Law requires of us; and it
will infallibly save us at the last day, although less than it nothing in the
world will.

As for that condition of life and pardon then which the Gospel indispensably
exacts of us, we now see plainly what it is. For it is nothing else but our
obedience to all the forementioned Laws of God in sincerity and uprightness. It
is by this that all the world must stand or fall at the last day; according to
their performance or neglect whereof they shall then be judged either to live
or die eternally.

This indeed, though it be a very great, will seem a very uncouth and severe
truth in the degeneracy of manners, and loose lives of our times. But if it do,
that is wholly our own fault, and can be no prejudice at all to the
declarations of Christ's Gospel. For our Lord has proclaimed it to us plainly
enough, and if our own wicked hearts make us shut our eyes, and willing to
overlook it; for that we must blame our selves, but can never hope thereby to
evacuate his sentence. This in very deed is the Gospel that he has published,
and these are the terms of mercy which he has procured for us: So that if we
live up to them, we shall be saved by him; but if we fail to perform these
gracious demands, we have no benefit at all by his death, nor any ground of
hope from his Gospel. All that can be said is, that he offered us Grace and
Pardon upon most fair and easy terms, but that we would not accept them. But
we preferred the pleasure of our sins before all the glory of his rewards, and
chose to hazard all those evils which he threatened, rather than to be at the
pains to perform that condition which he peremptorily enjoined.

But although by our wicked lives we in these days cast off the light yoke of
Christ as over-burdensome, and make the Covenant of Grace it self to become a
rigorous condition: yet once the case was otherwise, and the world was more
Christian. For they who professed Christ's Religion then, performed all that he
commanded, and practiced all that, which, as we have seen, his Gospel does
enjoin. And to go no further for an evidence of this, we will take those
accounts of the obedience of Christians in the first times, which the Apostles
themselves give us.

You, says the Apostle to the Colossians, that were sometimes, in your Gentile
State, alienated from God, and enemies in your minds by means of your wicked
works; yet now, since you become Christians, has he reconciled in his death,
to present you holy, and unblameable, and unreproveable, according to the terms
of the Gospel, in his sight, Col. 1.21, 22. And to the same purpose he speaks
of the Ephesians yet more fully. You, says he, has God quickened by the
preaching of the Gospel, who, before you heard of that, were dead in trespasses
and sins, wherein, in times past of Gentilism, ye walked, as well as others,
according to the wicked course of this world, according to the instigation of
the Prince of the powers in the air, who is the spirit that both aforetime, and
even now works in the children of disobedience. Among whom also we all, as I
say, had our conversation in times past, living, just as they did, in the lusts
of our flesh, fulfilling and performing the desires of our flesh, and were
thereby the children of wrath as well as others. But God, even when we were
thus dead in sins, has, upon our embracing of Christ's Religion, quickened us
together with Christ, by that same spirit whereby he raised up him, Ephesians. 2.1,
2, 3, 4, 5. But the character which he gives of the Corinthians is more
particular and complete still. No unrighteous, says he, of one sort or other
shall enter into the kingdom of heaven. For neither fornicators, nor idolaters,
nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind, nor
thieves, nor covetous, nor revilers, nor drunkards, nor extortioners, shall
inherit the kingdom of God. And such indeed as these were some of you once, (
viz. in your Gentilism;) but since you were Christened I bear you record, that
you are washed from those impurities, that you are sanctified from those
wickednesses, and that you are justified from the condemning force of all these
Commandments in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the help of the enlivening
and converting spirit of our God, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10, 11. These places are very
full and particular for the power of Christianity, and the perfect and entire
obedience of Christians in those days. And yet there is one testimony more of
this Apostle, which I must not omit, because it is so very comprehensive; and
that is the account which he gives us of the Reformation which the Gospel
wrought among the Romans. For before it was preached among them, they were
strangely debauched, and unaccountably wicked; as we may be fully informed,
were there no other register of their vices, from that prodigious Catalogue of
their sins, which St Paul himself has given us, Romans 1. Verse. 25.26.
For they worshipped and served the Creature more than the Creator. Their very
women were so unnatural in their lusts, as to change their natural use, into
that which is against nature. 27.
And the men leaving the natural use of the women, burned in their lusts
toward one another, men with men working that which is unseemly. They were
filled with all unrighteousness, fornication, 29.
wickedness, covetousness, maliciousness; being full of envy, murder, debate,
deceit, malignity; whisperers, back-biters, 30.
haters of God, despitefull, proud, boasters, inventers of evil things,
disobedient to parents, without understanding, covenant-breakers, without
natural affection, 31.
implacable, unmercifull. Thus had they degenerated from all sense of common
honesty and honor; and fallen into the vilest sink of vices. But when once
Christianity took place among them, it quickly turned them from a most impious
and monstrously unclean, into a most religious and holy people. For so St Paul
himself bears witness to them. You were, says he, in your time of Heathenism,
the servants, nay, the rankest slaves of sin, but God be thanked that ye have
now, since you became Christians, obeyed from the heart that form of doctrine,
which was by us Apostles delivered to you. For being made free from that
strange inventory of sins, ye became the servants of righteousness, Romans 6.17,
18. And what St Paul tells us of these particular Churches under his care; St
Peter will also inform us was true of all the Churches in Pontus and Asia with
whom he was concerned, and to whom he directed his first Epistle. The time past
of our life may suffice us, says he, to have wrought the will of the Gentiles;
when we walked with them in lasciviousness, lusts, excess of wine, revellings,
banquettings, and abominable idolatries. Yea, indeed this does suffice us. For
since we became Christians we have left off to accompany them in these vices,
for which they are estranged to us, and revile us. For they think it strange
that we run not with them to the same excess of riot as we used formerly,
speaking evil of us for abstaining from them, 1 Pet. 4.3, 4.

Thus honest was the service, and thus entire was the obedience of Christians
in the Apostles days. And when they had finished their course, and were called
out of the world, Christ's Gospel had still the same effects, and his subjects
continued to pay him the same service. Dei autem praecepta, quantum valiant in
animis hominum, quotidiana experimenta demonstrant. Da mihi virum qui sit
iracundus, maledicus, effraenatus; paucissimis Dei verbis tam placidum quam
ovem reddam. Da cupidum, avarum, tenacem; jam tibi eum liberalem dabo, and
pecuniam suam plenis manibus largientem. Da timidum doloris ac mortis; jam
cruces, and ignes, and Phalaridis taurum contemnet. Da libidinosum, adulterum,
ganeonem; jam sobrium, castum, continentem videbis. Da crudelem, and sanguinis
appetentem; jam in veram clementiam furor ille mutabitur. Da injustum,
insipientem, peccatorem; continuo and aequus, and prudens, and innocens erit.
Vno enim lavacro malitia omnis abolebitur; pauca Dei praecepta sic totum
hominem immutant, and exposito vetere, no^um reddunt, ut non cognoscas eundem
esse. Lactant. de Falls. Sap. l. 3. c. 26.
As for the Religion and Laws of Christ, says Lactantius, what excellent
effects they have upon the minds and lives of men, is plain from every days
experience. For give me a man that is fierce, hasty, and ungovernable; and with
this Law I will make him as tractable and gentle as a lamb. Give me one who is
covetous, greedy and tenacious; this Religion shall quickly make him liberal
and generous. It will make the cowardly and timorous, to become bold and
venturous; the lustful and intemperate, to turn chaste and sober; the cruel and
revengeful, to grow merciful and placable. In one word, it works a perfect
change and alteration, making the wicked and injurious, to become forthwith
most innocent and holy men. For all manner of sin is renounced at their
entrance, all filthy habits are washed off at the Font, and never again resumed.
They are so wholly altered in their life and temper by embracing of our Faith,
that you will scarce know them to be the same men. Thus were the Christians in
those Days the holiest sort of men, and the most noble patterns of Virtue and
Goodness: being Non aliunde noscibiles quam de emendatione vitiorum
pristinorum. Tertul. ad Scap. c. 2.
distinguishable from other men, as Tertullian says, in nothing so much as
this, That they had left off all their former vices. For they lived what they
taught, and performed what others only could discourse of; their common Motto
being this, Non magna loquimur, sed vivimus. Cypr. de bono patientiae Ed. Rig.
p. 222.
Although we have not the skill to talk, yet we have the Grace to live as well
as any. Nay, their very enemies themselves, who would be sure to spare no pains
nor skill in fastening some immoralities upon them, were yet forced at last to
confess that they had no fault but one; and that was, that they were called
Christians. For it is a known Story and usage which Tertullian complains of,
that the very Heathens themselves could not but cry out, Bonus vir Caius Sejus,
sed malus tantum quod Christianus. Tertul. Apol. c. 3.
Such or such a one is a very good man, bating only this, That he is a
Christian.

And when the World of Christians were thus entirely obedient, and completely
virtuous; it was no wonder that they could so bravely despise Death; and not
only suffer, but even seek and Quid facies de tantis millibus hominum, tot
viris ac foeminis, omnis Sexus, omnis Aetatis, omnis Dignitatis, offerentibus
se tibi? Tertul. ad Scap. c. 4.
provoke martyrdom. They durst dye for the Gospel, because they were sure to
(...). Ignat. Epist. and Smyrn.
live by it. For they performed all that it required, and were thereby secure
of all the happiness which it promised: and when by this means Death was become
to them only a passage to a most glorious and eternal life; it had nothing in
it that could fright them. All Sorts, Sexes, and Ages, had lived their Religion
so well, that they feared not to dye for it; but with the most undaunted
courage, and (...), is St Clement's Character of good men, 1 Ep. ad Cor. c. 26.
assured hope, they every where in great numbers sealed their profession with
their blood, and gave testimony to the truth of their Faith with their own
lives.

And now if we fall short of that obedience that God requires, and which was
performed by former Ages; whose fault is that, or who must in reason suffer for
it? For Christ's Gospel is the very same that it was sixteen hundred years ago,
the Precepts are still unchanged, and the penalty altogether unaltered. It
always was, and always will be the same Rule of Faith, and the same measure of
mercy or damnation. And therefore if we lose what it promises, we may thank our
selves for neglecting what it enjoins. For the same terms of life have stood
fixed hitherto, and shall stand through all Ages; the primitive Christians kept,
and were saved by them, and if we break them, we shall certainly be condemned
for them.

How small soever therefore that be which in these loose times men perform; yet
an entire obedience is that which God indispensably enjoins. It is the
peremptory Demand of his Gospel, and will at the last Day be the inviolable
Rule of his Judgment. It saved the ancient Christians, and less than it nothing
in the World will save us.

But this, some will be ready to say, instead of a gracious and merciful, is a
very rigorous and severe Condition. It binds us to more than is in our power,
and threatens us for what we cannot help, and is a task too heavy for any mere
man, and proportioned only to the strength of an Angel. For to obey all God's
Laws, and that at all times, who is sufficient? God's Laws themselves are not
Rules so general as to admit of no exception. For we are commanded, for
instance, to live in peace; but yet sometimes we may, and must be engaged in
striving and contention. And as it is in this, so it is in other parts of Duty;
the Commandment holds not in every Case, but some are excepted. And who now is
of an understanding so discerning and sagacious, as to see in all things where
he is fast and where he is loose, and never to mistake that for his liberty,
which is indeed his Duty? To be infallible in judgment, and to think right in
all things, is the property of a God, not of a man; And if through this
weakness of understanding, whereto all mankind are subject, we are ignorant at
any time and do not see, or erroneous and mistake our Duty; how is it possible
that we should in all instances, and at all times perform and fulfill it.

But even where we do know God's Law, yet neither there can we always observe
it. For since we have many other thing to do besides our Duty, and
opportunities for action call frequently upon the sudden; we are oft-times
drawn to act before we have time to think, and so although we know what we
should do in the general, yet in this particular Case we have not leisure to
attend to it. We are surprised into action e're we are aware, and perform
before we can consider; and therefore, as the chance happens, many times do
ill, because we have not time to look about us, and to see what is well doing.

But if an opportunity for some sin happen when we are at leisure to consider
of it, and to avoid it; yet many times, although for the present it does not,
afterward it shall win upon us. For all temptations do not come upon us
suddenly, and pass away as suddenly again; but some stay long with us, and
persist to obtrude themselves upon us. And although we can consider for a
while, and watch well, and resist long: yet such is the imperfection of our
very faculties, that they cannot be held long at stretch, but they will at last
grow weary. They will be tired out by continuing so strict a Guard, and begin
at last to remit of their care, and to slacken their diligence: and when they
unbend, the temptation increases, and our lusts take advantage; so that albeit
we were not surprised at first, yet we shall at last, and be tired and wearied
into a transgression.

And since all these, with others, are infirmities not only incident to, but
inseparable from our Natures, and such as we cannot throw off till we shake off
our Bodies, and all converse with the tempting world: how can it be thus
exacted of us, who cannot always stand upright, that we should never fall, but
obey God entirely, in all things, and at all times?

But to give a clear Answer to these difficulties, which are here with great
truth objected; having shown that Obedience is the Condition which is
indispensably required of us, and what those particular Laws are which we are
to obey, and what degrees and measures of obedience is required to them: I
shall now proceed to enquire into that which I promised in the next place, viz.
What are the mitigations and allowances of this Condition of happiness, and
what those defects are which it bears and dispenses with; of which in the next
Book.

BOOK IV. Showing what defects are consistent with a regenerate state, and
dispensed with in the Gospel.
CHAP. I. Showing in general that some sins are consistent with a state of
Grace.
The CONTENTS.
Some failings consistent with a state of Grace. This shown in the general;
First, From the necessity of humane Nature, which cannot live without them.
Secondly, From sundry examples of pious men, who had right to life whilst they
lived in them.

THAT measure of life or death which Christ has indispensably fixed for all his
Servants, is not a perfectly entire, and absolutely unerring obedience. No, it
makes allowances for the unconquerable frailties, and unavoidable infirmities
of our Natures. It considers that we are but men, and exacts no more of us than
a humane service. That integrity which, as we have seen, it requires of us, is
an entire obedience only of our free works, and deliberate, chosen actions. For
then we are perfect and entire in God's account, when we have done all that was
in our power, and have no wilful stain upon us; when we have no other blemish,
than what the unwill'd weakness of our Nature, and the very frame and
circumstances of our Constitution have made necessary. And therefore every
transgression whatsoever, whether with our wills, or without and beside them,
does not presently blot us out of the Book of life, and put us out of a state
of Grace and Salvation. No, some defects there are which do not overthrow, but
consist with it.

To give a clear account of this, I will show these two things.

1. In the general, that some slips and transgressions are consistent with a
state of salvation, and dispensed with by the Gospel Covenant; so that although
a man dye before he has amended them, and is reformed from them, yet he shall
not at the Day of Judgment be condemned for them.

2. More particularly, what, and of what nature those consistent slips and
transgressions are.

1. I say in the general, that some slips and transgressions are consistent
with a state of salvation, and are not eternally threatened, but graciously
tolerated and dispensed with by the Covenant of the Gospel. And therefore if a
man dye in them before he has perfectly amended them, he shall not be condemned
for them.

Now as for this, the absolute necessity of humane nature makes it evident. For
such a state of unerring obedience and impeccability cannot here be performed
by any man, whether Heathen, Jew, or Christian; and therefore it cannot be
required of him. No man of any Religion whatsoever can do it; and so God
cannot, he will not exact it.

For of this all men may be fully satisfied from that assurance of God's
goodness, which is common to all Religions in the World, that he never commands
impossibilities, or enjoins men to do that which is not to be done. He does not
require a Beast to be as perfect as a man; or lay that load upon a man which is
fit only for the strength of an Angel. For to do thus were to act the part of a
severe Taskmaster, and a cruel imposer; but by no means to use the Authority of
a loving and a gracious Lord. It were indeed to reap where he has not sown, and
to call for that which he has never given; and to command and order, reward or
punish; not to promote obedience, but only to show power; not according to men's
deserts, but only according to his own will. For if he should bind
impossibilities upon us by a Law, and establish it with penalties; he could not
be thought to prescribe a Rule of action, since no man can act after it; nor to
fix a measure of Judgment, since it being in no man's choice to break or to
perform, no man can justly be judged by it; but only to seek a palpable
pretense of unjust force and arbitrary cruelty. Because it is all one to
torment and punish a man without any Law, as to punish him for the breach of
that which it was never possible for him to perform. For there can be no fault
where there is no ability; and a Tree is as much in fault for not walking when
it is bidden, or a Stone for not discoursing; as a man is for not doing that
which it is above his power to do. So that whatsoever a man in such case is
punished for, will fall at length upon God himself; because whatsoever he
suffers, it is not for that he would not, but for that he could not help it;
which in very deed is to suffer punishment for being no better or abler than
God was pleased to make him.

Whatsoever therefore no man can Quis peccat in ^o, quod nullo modo careri
potest? Aug. de lib. Arbit. l. c. 18.
avoid, no man shall ever be punished for. Because God cannot be offended with
infirmities of his own making, nor angry at his own workmanship, since that
were in reality and reason to be angry at himself.

And thus much, I say, all the world may be convinced of in this matter, from
that common assurance which all men either have, or may have of Gods Justice
and Natural Goodness.

But then as for us Christians, we are assured that God cannot enjoin
impossibilities, or make that an indispensable condition of his Covenant which
the best of us all is not able to come up to; because such dealing would not
only contradict the Goodness and Justice of his nature, which is enough to make
any honest Jew or Heathen, to abhor the thoughts of it, but would moreover
thwart and destroy all the ends of the Gospel, and the declarations of Grace.
For if the Covenant of the Gospel, or of Grace it self, should exact that which
no Christian can perform, and damn them for what they cannot help; it were no
Covenant of Grace and Mercy, nor any favor at all to men, seeing it would
leave them just where it found them, and not put them into one jot the better
case than they were in before it came. Christ could never have called himself
the way, if no man could walk in it; or the ^ohn 14.6.
life, if none were ever able to live by him. The Angels had never sung Luke
2.10.
joy to all people at his birth, if that joy had been set so far above us, that
the tallest of us all could not reach up to it; nor have proclaimed upon his
coming into the world, Verse 14.
on earth peace, and good will toward men; if yet, after all that he has done
and suffered for us, we are still left in such a case, that what none of us all
can help shall put God and Us into a state of ill will and enmity. How could he
have been called a Jesus or a Mat. 1.21.
Savior; if he proffered salvation upon such strict terms as no man could ever
hope to be saved by? or Joh. 1.17.
Grace and Truth have been truly affirmed to come by him; and the preaching of
his Religion be called a Gospel or (...).
glad-tidings; if the conditions of it were so very hard, as that no man could
perform them? To make such offers of Grace, as none were able to accept of, had
not been to relieve our necessities, but to deride them; and that which in the
Apostles judgment is a most gross absurdity, would have been in reality a most
certain truth; (viz.) that all their preaching was vain, and our faith is vain
also, 1 Cor. 15.14, 17.

As for us Christians therefore who are under the gracious Covenant and Gospel
of Christ, we are assured that nothing is under the pains of hell and misery
required of us, which cannot be performed by us, not only from that common
natural knowledge which we, as well as others, have of Gods Goodness and
Justice; but also from all those particular Revelations which we enjoy, above
other men, in the Gospel of Grace. Impossibilities can be no condition of our
happiness, because as Gods nature cannot bear, so neither can Christ's Gospel
consist with it.

Nay, I add further, so far are all the Laws of Christ from being an impossible
task, that to us Christians, who are strengthened by those assistances which
Christ affords, and his Gospel Promises, they are neither grievous nor extreme
difficult, but a burden fair and easy to be born. His Commandments, says St
John, are not grievous, 1 John 5.3. And our Lord himself, who best knew the
measures, both of our Natures, and of his own Grace, declares expressly that his
Yoke of Precepts is easy or (...).
gracious and favorable, and his burden light: Upon which inducement he
exhorts all men with the greater willingness to take it upon them, and submit
to it, Mat. 11.30.

This then all Religions in the world, and we Christians above any, either are,
or may be undoubtedly assured of, that no man is indispensably bound to do,
what no man can do; and that those things cannot be enjoined, which can never
be performed.

But now to live wholly without sin, in an impeccable and unerring obedience;
to go on exactly straight in Gods way without the least wandering, and to tread
always firm in the paths of righteousness without ever slipping: to walk so
uprightly as never to fall, neither by security or rashness, inadvertency or
weakness, surprise or weariness, is more than humane nature can do, and is a
task, not for a Man, but an Angel.

And that some slips and transgressions of this nature are such as no man of
what Religion soever, whether Gentile, Jew, or Christian, can avoid; is plain,
because no mere man ever yet did avoid them.

It was an undeniable Argument of Atticus in St Jerome, Da exemplum qui absque
peccato fuerit in perpetuum, aut confitere imbecillitatem tuam. Jerome. lib. 1.
Dial. adv. Pel. paulo ab initio.
Give an instance of some man that did it; or else confess that no mere man yet
ever could do it. For since there is both an utter necessity, and a severe
Commandment requiring it; it cannot be but that some of all mankind, when they
had so much reason, and so infinite inducement, should have endeavored to the
utmost, and have done it, if the doing of it had been within the power of
humane nature. So that if it be a failing inseparable from the practice of
every man, we must conclude it to be unconquerable by the humane nature also.

But now as for this inability of performing in every instance, and
transgressing at no time; it has been the complaint of all persons, in all
Religions, throughout all ages of the world.

For as for the bravest men among the Heathens, we have Seneca their great
Moralist confessing freely. Peccavimus omnes, alii gravia, alii leviora, alii
ex destinato, alii forte impulsi, alii aut aliena nequitia ablati: alii in
bonis consiliis parum fortiter s^^timus, and innocentiam inviti, ac renitentes
perdidimus. Nec delinquimus tantum, sed usque ad extremum aevi delinquimus.
Etiam siquis tam been purgavit animum, ut nihil eum obturbare amplius possit,
ac fallere; ad innocentiam tamen peccando pervenit. Sen. de clem. lib. 1. cap.
6.
We have all sinned more or less, says he even of his Country Laws. For some
have sinned in great matters, some in little, some out of choice and design,
some through constraint, or through the ill example and seduction of others.
Some have been too easily driven from good purposes, and sinned, though it were
against their wills. Nay, we have not only transgressed thus far, but, what
augments our misery, we shall continue still to transgress so long as we have
breath in our bodies. Yea, if there be any man who has so well cleansed his
soul, as that no temptation can win upon him; yet has he run through a long
train of sins before he attained to that pitch of innocence. Hoc primum nobis
suademus, neminem nostram esse sine culpa. Quis iste est qui se profitetur
omnibus legibus innocentem? Et ut hoc ita sit, quam angusta innocentia est ad
legem bonum esse? quam multa pietas, humanitas, liberalitas, sides, justitia
exigunt? quae omnia extra publicas tabulas sunt. Id. de Ira, lib. 2. cap. 27.
Let us persuade our selves of this in the first place, says he again, that we
are all sinners. For what man is he that dare say he has broken none even of
his Country Laws? But granting that he had kept all them, yet how scanty and
defective an innocence is that, to have done only all that Good which they
oblige to? For how many things are required, and not performed, by the Divine
Law of Piety, of Humanity, of Liberality, of Justice, of Fidelity? of all
which, whether we keep or break them, the Laws of our Nation take no notice.

And as for the Jews, we find David the man after Gods own heart crying out,
Who can understand his errors? Cleanse thou me from my secret faults, Psalm. 19
12. And Solomon, who was the wisest and most knowing man that ever was upon the
earth, lays it down for an Aphorism of universal observation, that there is
not a just man upon earth so perfect as always to do good and never sin,
Eccles. 7.20.

Nay, even the Disciples of Christ themselves, who have the noblest
encouragements, and the greatest assistances for a most complete and entire
obedience of any men whatsoever; could never yet attain to such a state as to
obey universally without ever slipping. The Holy Fathers in the African
Councils felt this by themselves, and were so deeply sensible of it from their
own experience, and from what they heard and presumed of others; that they
condemned it as a proud error for any man to think or speak otherwise. Et
Quoniam tales nascantur nunc quoque qualis Ille suit nostri Generis pater ante
reatum: Posse hominem sine peccato decurrere vitam Si velit, ut potuit nullo
delinquere primus Liberate sua: nempe haec damnata fateris Conciliis --
Prosper lib. de Ingrat. contra Pelag. cap. 9.
To say that our Nature is as perfect as ever Adams was, and that any man now
may live, if he will, all his life long without sin, and has the same free
liberty that Adam had in Paradise never to do amiss; is an error that stands
condemned by the Holy Councils. And what these good men thus ingenuously
confessed, all others have constantly complained of; there being none among
them who was ever able to live up so exactly to the Precepts of the Gospel, as
not to do against them in any instance. No, that was the sole Prerogative of
the man Christ Jesus, who in that respect had no other man to whom he could be
likened. For he was made like unto us in all other things indeed, save only in
sin, which we all had more or less, but he wanted, Heb. 2.17. and chap. 7.26.

And since this state of unerring Obedience is such as in this life no man can,
because no mere man ever yet did attain unto; we may be sure that God does not
indispensably require it. But some infirmities the Gospel must of necessity
dispense with, because according to the present circumstances of Humane Nature
we cannot help all; some must be pardoned, since all cannot be escaped.

But besides all that has been already said to show the consistence of some
failings with a state of salvation, because of the unavoidable weakness of
Humane Nature which cannot perfectly get quit of them: we may add this further,
which will evidence it beyond all exception, that the best Saints of God, and
the unquestionable heirs of happiness have always lived subject to them. Those
very men, who are most certainly gone to Heaven, went thither with some of
these slips and infirmities about them. They could not plead an unerring
obedience; but yet notwithstanding all their errors they had right to all the
Promises of the Gospel. They died happily, although they could not live wholly
without offense. So that some sins do not in any wise destroy a Saint, or
subvert the hopes and happiness of a good man, but can and do consist with them.

And in the proof of this the Scriptures are many, and plain. Holy Job, who
maintained his own Integrity to be such as God would accept and approve of more
stoutly, it may be, than any man ever did; confesses notwithstanding a number
of sins, for which, although God of his abundant Grace and Mercy would not, yet
if he would he might contend with him. How shall man, says he, be just with
God? If he will contend with him, he cannot answer him so much as one of a
thousand. If I justify my self in the unerringness of my obedience, my own
mouth shall condemn me; if I say before him that I am perfect and have sinned
in nothing, it should also, by such confessions as he would extort from me,
prove me perverse, Job 9.2, 3, 20. And David, a man after Gods own heart,
acknowledges freely that he is guilty, not only of several sins which he
remembers, but also of many more which he does not know of: Who can understand
his errors? cleanse thou me from my secret faults, Psalm. 19.12. Nay, even Paul
the Apostle, who at that time was a most undoubted heir of Heaven, does yet own
freely that as yet he had not attained to perfection, but only endeavored
after it, Phil. 3.12, 13. But although he were not so perfect as to obey
without all error, and to offend in no instance; yet had he as much perfection
as the Gospel exacts, and such as the best men on earth attain to. For at the
15th verse, he calls upon as many as be perfect in such measure as the Gospel
accepts of, to be thus minded as he was, and forgetting those things whereto
they had already attained, which were now behind; to press on toward that
higher perfection which was yet wanting in them and before them, as he told
them he himself did, verse. 13.

And since men of this full growth and high pitch in goodness, could never yet
get free of these unavoidable infirmities; it cannot be expected that others,
who are endowed with a more imperfect Grace and a lower Virtue, should ever
live entirely above them. No, alas! God himself declares plainly by the mouth
of his inspired Servants, that no man yet ever did attain so far. There is no
man, says Solomon, that sins not, 1 Kings 8.46. He challenges any person, how
good and holy soever, to say that he is wholly blameless, and has no stain at
all upon him. Who can say I have made my heart clean, I am wholly pure from my
sin? Prove. 20.9. No man certainly, not the most nobly good and eminently
virtuous themselves. For there is not a just man upon earth that does good, and
sins not, Eccles. 7.20. The blessed Saints who are now in heaven, could
never get perfectly free from sin till they got thither. For it is only in
heaven, the New Jerusalem, where the spirits of just men are made perfect, Heb.
12.23. But so long as we continue here on earth, let us aspire after that pitch
of Righteousness never so much, yet, such is the inseparable infirmity of our
nature, we shall still fall short of it. Be favorable in censuring one
another faults, says St James, because every man will need that favor from
others toward his own faults more or less; for in many things we offend all,
Jam. 3.1, 2. whatever some may falsely pretend, yet in reality no man lives
entirely innocent. For if we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves,
and the truth is not in us, 1 John 1.8. we are never able to show this height
of obedience, nor does Christ's Gospel exact it of us. For even there we are
taught in our daily prayers to confess our daily trespasses; and yet
notwithstanding that, we are allowed, nay, commanded in the same breath to call
God our Father still, Mat. 6.9, 12.

As for some slips and transgressions therefore, we see plainly that they are
consistent with a state of salvation, and are not eternally threatened, but
dispensed with by the Covenant of the Gospel. For the infirmity of our Nature
is such, that we never can; and Gods goodness is so great, that he never will
require us to be entirely free from them. The very best men, and those very
Saints who are now in bliss, have lived subject to them, and fallen under them;
but yet they made no blot in their character, nor robbed them of Gods favor,
and that life and pardon which is promised in the Gospel. And that we may be
certain is consistent, which, as we plainly see, not only needs must, but
indeed always has consisted with a state of Mercy and Regeneration. For the
terms of the Gospel are the same to all times, and what they bear with in one,
they do likewise in another. God is no respecter of persons, nor can ever
render different judgment to them who have done the same things. So that as
for some sins, we are fully assured from the foregoing considerations that they
are not eternally threatened, but dispensed with by the Covenant of the Gospel;
and that so long as we are free from others, if we die in them without amending
them, we shall not at the last day be condemned for them.

Thus then in the General it appears, that some slips are consistent with a
state of Grace, God under the Gospel Covenant does not punish them, but bear
with them; so that although we die unreformed from them, we shall yet be saved
notwithstanding them.

But to clear up this business more fully, I shall proceed now to what I
undertook in the second place; namely, to show more particularly what, and of
what Nature those allowed slips and transgressions are; whereof I shall
discourse in the ensuing Chapters.

CHAP. II. Of the Nature of these consistent slips more particularly.
The CONTENTS.
Our unchosen sins are consistent with a state of Grace, but our wilful and
chosen ones destroy it. All things are made Good or Evil, a matter of reward or
punishment, by a Law. Laws are given for the guidance and reward only of our
voluntary and chosen actions. This proved, first from the clear reason of the
thing. Where it is inferred from the Nature of Laws, which is to oblige; from
that way that all Laws have of obliging, which is not by forcing, but
persuading men; from the dueness of rewards and punishments, commendations and
reproofs; from the applause or accusations of men's own consciences upon their
obedience or transgressions. Secondly, From the express declarations of
Scripture.

IF any man should ask which of all Christ's Laws those are which he may keep or
break at his own pleasure, and yet go unpunished; I must tell him, none at all.
For there are no failings and transgressions in a man's life allowed of for this
reason, because disobedience is warranted to some Laws, although it be not to
others. No, in our whole Religion there is no one Law that is left so naked.
For God has not given any Commandments with that indifference to them, as if he
cared not what became of them, or were unconcerned whether men kept or broke
them; but he has established them all under the same penalty, so that he who
breaks any one, is guilty, as St James says, and obnoxious to the punishment
of all, Jam. 2.10. It is not therefore the transgression of some Laws which
shall be born with, but not of others; for that which gets an allowance for the
breach of one, would procure a favorable sentence for the like violation of
all the rest.

That then which makes the difference of punishable and unpunishable in men's
failings, is not to be sought for in Christ's Laws, seeing the punishment of
every one of them is the same; but in their own actions. For some sins shall be
born with, not for that they are against a Law whereto no penalty is annexed,
there being none such in all Christ's Gospel; but for that they are such
imperfect actions as the punishing Law, which they are against, will not take
hold of. Every Law of Christ threatens death, but these allowed offenses are
not of the number of those actions which are threatened by it.

For we must take notice that those works of ours whereon Christ's Laws lay
restraint, and whereto they, as all other just Laws in the World, threaten
punishment, are our voluntary and chosen actions. They bind us up in all those
performances which are placed in our own free power, and come from the choice
of our own will; and they denounce woes to us if in them we go beyond those
bounds which they have set us. So that in all our free and chosen actions we
must take care to do what the Law requires, and to keep back from what it
forbids; and we are sure to suffer if we neglect it. For it is among these
actions of choice where the Law reigns, on which it lays Commands, and whereto
it threatens punishment. If we choose and do what is commanded, then have we a
right to the promised reward; and if we choose to do what is forbidden, then are
we guilty, and obnoxious to the punishment denounced. But as for other actions
which flow not from our own choice, of which sort are all our pardonable and
allowed infirmities* they fall not under the strict force of the Law, either in
the guidance of its Command, or in the sting of its punishment; so that at the
last Day it will not be judged to have been either broken or kept by them.

That I may fully clear up this, whereupon so much of that which I shall say
under this Head depends, I will show concerning it these two things:

1. That all things whatsoever, which are either good or evil, and a fit matter
of reward or punishment, are made such by a Law.

2. That all our actions are not governed by God's Laws, so as to be strictly
and directly either enjoined or prohibited, punished or rewarded by them; but
only those among them which are voluntary and chosen.

1. I say, All things whatsoever, which are either good or evil, rewardable or
punishable, are made so by some Law. For good and evil, virtue and vice,
obedience and sin, which are only so many different Names for the same thing,
have all relation to a Commandment. Virtue and obedience is the performance, as
vice and sin is the transgression of it. Where there is no Law, says the
Apostle, there is no transgression, Romans 4.15. And no man sins, as says
another Apostle, but he that transgresses the Law; for sin is the
transgression of the Law, 1 John 3.4. And as Law is the measure of sin and
Duty, so is it likewise of reward and punishment. For God never afflicts and
torments the Children of men out of the inclination of his Nature, but only out
of the necessity of Government. He is the Ruler of the World, and the Lord of
men; and therefore he must maintain his own Laws, and punish the evil Doers.
But no man is ever punished without an offense, and he must do evil before he
suffer it. He undergoes nothing but that which is his own choice; for he chose
rather to incurr the penalty, than to perform the Commandment. He feels no more
than the Law denounced, for God the Judge executes nothing but what the Law
threatens; he punishes according to it, but not without it. The Law does always
make a penalty due to an Offender, before he either can, or does exact it.

Thus are all things, which are either good or evil, rewardable or punishable,
made such by a Law. But then

2. As for our actions, all of them are not governed by God's Law, so as to be
strictly either enjoined or prohibited, punished or rewarded by them, but only
those among them which are voluntary and chosen. And this being a a Point
whereof I shall make so much use in all that follows, I will spend the more
time in clearing of it up, as I hope, beyond all question, by showing the truth
of it, 1. From the clear reason of the thing it self. 2. From the plain
declarations of the Scripture concerning it.


1. I say, That only our voluntary and chosen actions are under the restraint
of Laws, and either enjoined or prohibited, punished or rewarded by them; is
plain from the great and convincing reason of the thing it self. For let us
consider,

First, The very nature of a Law, and we shall find that in all those actions
whereon it is imposed, it supposes them who exert them to have a power of
choice, and a free liberty of making them either a piece of service to it, or a
transgression of it. For all Law is a Bond or a Tie, which lays restraint upon
us, and induces Obligation. So that in all those actions whereupon the
restraint is laid, we are necessarily supposed to be free before it comes. For
it is an utter absurdity to bind any thing by a Law, which is before
necessitated by its very Nature. Who would ever be so vain and foolish as to
give a Law to a Stone, that it should not speak? or to a Tree, that it should
not walk? or to the Fire, that it should not chill and freeze him? There can be
no place for, nor need of an Obligation, where there is no choice and liberty.
For it is only where things have a power to act on both sides, that there is
room for a Law to oblige and tie them up to one. And for this reason it is,
that among all that variety of Creatures which inhabit in this lower World, men
alone are capable of Laws, because no Creature besides is endowed with freedom
of will and liberty of choice, which is to be bound up and restrained by them.

Nay, even in men themselves, those actions and tempers which are not subject
to their own choice, nor under the power of their own wills, are no fit matter
of a Law, nor fall under the force of a Commandment. For who can ever be so
unreasonable and void of all sense, as to command a man that he should not be
born rich or poor, base or noble; that he should not be sick and weak, hungry
and thirsty, sleepy or weary? No, since none of these instances is in his own
choice, or under the free disposal of his own will, in none of them is he
capable of an Obligation.

Seeing then that it is of the nature of every Law, to be given as a Bond and
Obligation to us in such Actions, to which otherwise our will is free, and able
either to choose or refuse them; it is plain that Laws are intended for a
restraint upon us only in our voluntary and chosen actions. For there are none
else wherein we are free, and therefore none besides wherein they should intend
to bind us.

Secondly, That only our voluntary and chosen actions are under the restraint
and punishment of Laws, is plain from that way which all Laws have of obliging
men. The Law is no Law further than it obliges; and all its obligation is only
upon our chosen actions. For all the force which it can possibly have upon us
to bind us to the performance of any thing, is only so far as it can make us
will and choose it. And therefore as for all unchosen actions, they are not
within the reach of Law, because they are not subject to the force of
Obligation.

Now that this is the only way which all Laws have of obliging us to a thing,
viz. their engaging us to will and choose it, so that the force of obligation
can fall upon no action which is unchosen, is evident. For that whereto they
would oblige us, is such actions as they enjoin or forbid; and that power or
faculty in us which they would oblige to it, is our wills. For our wills are
the Disposers of our actions, seeing we work at our own choice, and do what we
will and like our selves. But now as for all the obligation which any thing can
possibly lay upon our wills, it is not by way of necessitating, compulsive
force, but only of moving and exciting Arguments. Because from the very
constitution of our nature, our will cannot be forced by any Bond, but only
moved of it self to choose that which it is intended to be bound to; so that in
its nature it is capable of being obliged to nothing which is unchosen. For the
will of man is not a Subject capable of natural force or bodily violence; a man
may as soon hope to grasp a shadow* or to lay violent hands upon an Angel, as
to engage it that way. No, it is no Body, nor bodily faculty; so that it is not
subject to any physical force, to be bound hand and foot by a Law as a Thief is
by a Chain: but the only possible way whereby to work upon it, is to win it by
Arguments. It must determine its own choice, since other things cannot
determine it; and therefore such things must be suggested and proposed to it as
can persuade, but nothing that can force and compel it.

For this indeed is all the hold that any Law can have upon the will of man; i^
naturally wills and chooses what is good, and hates and refuses what is evil.
And this gives a Law some power over it, in binding it to choose what the
Lawgiver has a mind it should, if he first make it desirable. He may win it in
its own way, viz. If he make obedience to become its interest, and show it
plainly that it can be no gainer by disobedience, but that it is by far the
better for it to choose what he enjoins, than to refuse it. For the wills own
proper motion, and natural way of working carries it on to desire and choose
that which appears to be good, and to fly and refuse that which is known to be
evil. And therefore when the things proposed in the Law have a most desirable
good annexed to the performance, and a most hateful evil joined with the
transgression of them; this is an engagement and tie upon it indeed to choose
the Duty for the goodness sake, and to avoid the sin for the evil that
accompanies it. It binds it so far as its own desires and inclinations can bind
it: it ties it up as much as can be by its own hopes and fears: it lays
obedience in the way to that which it loves and longs after; so that if it
would come at that, there is no other means, but this must be the way to it.

And this is the way whereby all Laws oblige us. For they are backed with such
rewards and punishments as make it every man's advantage to do what they enjoin
him. The evil of disobedience is always infinitely greater than the evil of
obeying; so that if the wills of men choose in their own way, and will be
wrought upon by their own motive, they must determine themselves to that
whereto the Laws would bind them. And this securing of that which is commanded,
by making it far worse for any man to break than to fulfill it, is absolutely
necessary and naturally inseparable from all Laws. For a frightful penalty is
either expressly mentioned, or, if not, it is always employed. If the punishment
is set down, then they who transgress must suffer what the Law threatens; but
if it be not, they must undergo what the Legislator pleases. So that punishment
can never be pulled away from Law, but if there be a Command given which makes
no penalty due, nor creates a right of inflicting any; it has only the name of
a Law or Commandment, but that is all, for it contradicts its nature. A request
or entreaty it may be, a counsel or advice; but a Law or Command it never is.

And seeing all obligation to action, is only such a motive and convincing
reason to our wills, as makes them choose to act, rather than to omit what the
Law intends to oblige them to; it is plain that where there is no room for
choice, there is none likewise for Law and Obligation. For we cannot be moved
to choose those actions which are unchosen, and therefore we cannot be obliged
to them. But all obligation being only a convincing motive to our choice, we
cannot be capable of being obliged by Laws in any other than our voluntary and
chosen actions.

And thus it appears both from the nature of Law, and from the force of
obligation, both which are antecedently necessary to make up the nature of sin
or obedience, that all the restraint which is laid, and all the punishments
which are inflicted by Laws, are only upon our voluntary and chosen actions.

And this will yet further appear if we consider some other things which are
consequent to sin or obedience, and ensue upon the working or commission of
them; as are,

Thirdly, Rewards and punishments, commendation and reproof. Every Lawgiver
commends and rewards those who keep his Laws, and punishes and reproves all
such as break and transgress them. But now all this can have place only upon
their voluntary actions, which were at their own choice, and in their own
liberty, either to have exerted, or omitted. For no actions can be imputed to a
man, either for him or against him, further than they depended on him. Because
there is no thanks at all due to him for doing that which he could not avoid;
nor any charge at all capable to be brought against him for failing to do what
he could not do. Who would ever be so absurd as to reprove and punish a man for
being low of Stature, or weak of Body, for being born of mean persons, or to a
small Fortune? These, and all other things of like nature, which a man could
never help, may be his misfortune, but not his fault; and whatsoever he suffers
upon the account of them, may be, and often is, his calamity, but by no means
his punishment. No man can justly be charged with that which was never subject
to his own choice; but if any imputation is laid upon him for its sake, it
rests not there, but falls all upon that Cause, whose free pleasure it was so
to order him. Agreeably whereunto the Wise man tells us, That whosoever mocketh
the poor, reproacheth not him, who cannot help his poverty, but his Maker,
whose pleasure it was to dispose of him in that condition, Prove. 17.5. And as a
man can bear no just blame for that which it never was in his power to hinder;
so neither can he undergo any just punishment. Barbarous cruelty indeed he may
fall under, which would have taken place without a Law as well as with it; but
legal and just penalties he never can.

And seeing no action is punishable but what is chosen, it is plain that the
Laws of God impose restraint, and threaten punishment, only to our voluntary
actions.

Which will still further appear from another effect of every sinful and
punishable action; namely this,

Fourthly, That it is such for which our own Consciences will blame and condemn
us, and which we shall lament in repentance and remorse. One great part even of
Hell torments is this remorse and worm of Conscience. For there is no action
for which we shall there be punished, but when it is too late, we shall
endlesly repent of it. Their worm there, as our Savior says, dies not, Mark
9.44. But now it is an utter absurdity and downright madness for any man to be
angry at himself for that which he could never help, and to repent that ever he
committed that which it was not in his power to hinder. For does it ever repent
any man that he is not tall of Stature, that he was not born as strong as
Samson, or made immortal as an Angel? Was any man ever touched with remorse,
because he breathes, and sleeps, and thirsts, and hungers? No man ever is, or
ever can be angry at himself, but when he sees that he has been wanting to
himself; when he has done that which it was in his own choice to have done
otherwise. For all remorse is for a willing offense: a man chooses it when he
commits it, and therefore, when afterward he sees his error, he condemns
himself for it.

And since a man's own Conscience condemns him for all those things for which
God's Law will punish him, and no man can condemn himself for doing any thing
but what he chose to do: neither his own Conscience can condemn, nor the Law
punish him for any, but his voluntary and chosen actions.

And thus upon all these reasons we see, That it is only our voluntary and
chosen actions whereupon God's Laws lay restraint, and wherefore, at the last
Day, he will inflict punishment; so that no sin is damning which is not chosen.
This is a very clear and well-grounded truth. For the nature of Law which makes
good and evil, of obligation which enforces it, of rewards and punishments
from God, of acquiescence and remorse from our own Conscience, which ensue upon
it; all these evidently evince and prove it. For not any one of them is
concerned about any actions, but those which proceed from choice, nor have to
do with any works but what are wilful. So that every action whereto there is
Law and obligation, exhortation and admonition, reward or punishment,
commendation or reproof, acquiescence or remorse, as there are for all those
which the Laws of God will sentence; every such action, I say, is an effect of
our own will, or a voluntary chosen action.

Thus is it clear from the reason of the thing it self, that all our actions
are not governed by God's Laws, so as to be strictly either enjoined or
prohibited, punished or rewarded by them; but only those among them which are
voluntary and chosen.

And this will appear yet further,

2. From the plain declarations of the Scripture concerning it.

That whereby God 1 Samuel 16.7.
looks upon his Laws to be either broken or kept, is the Non est cui recte
imputetur peccatum, nisi colenti. Aug. de lib. Arbit. l. 3. c. 17.
choice and consent of the heart. My Son, give me thy heart, says Wisdom,
Prove. 23.26. So long as that is pure, we can have no damning stain upon us, for
out of the heart, as our Savior assures us, all those things must proceed
which God will judge to defile a man, Matthew. 15.18, 19, 20. The lusts of our
Flesh must gain the consent of our wills before they become deadly sins, and
consummate transgressions. Lust, says St James, when (having won over the
liking and approbation of our wills, and a half consent to its impure embraces)
it has conceived, brings forth the Embryo or rude Draught (answerable to
conception, which is but a half production) of sin: and this Embryo of sin,
when (by being brought on to a full choice and consent, or, what is more, to
action and practice) it is finished, brings forth its genuine Offspring
Death, Jam. 1.15. The consent of our hearts then must complete our sin, and our
own (...). Justin Martyr, Apol. 1.
wills must of necessity concur to work our ruin. For we must wilfully reject
or cast off the Law which would keep us in, and go beyond it when we behold it,
before our transgression will have got up to the pitch of a damnable pollution,
or a mortal crime. Nay, I add further, till we are come thus far as wilfully to
reject the Law, and knowingly to transgress it; we shall not be interpreted to
commit that which the Gospel calls sin, and which it strictly forbids and
severely threatens under that name. For if we will take St John's word, this is
his explication of it. Sin, says he, is the transgression, as we render it, but
more fully, and more agreeably to the Original it should be, the He calls it
not (...), which is the proper word to denote a going beside the Law, or a
transgression of it; but (...), which imports a being without Law, or a
renouncing of it. As (...) are the lawless and disobedient.
renouncing or casting off the Law, 1 John 3.4.

And thus we see that from plain Scripture, as well as from clear reason, it
manifestly appears, that all our actions are not governed, nor will hereafter
be judged by Gods Laws; but such only among them as are voluntary and chosen.

And therefore although there be no Law of Christ which gives men leave to sin
without fear of punishment; yet some actions there may be against many, or most
of Christ's Laws, which shall not be judged to be punishable transgressions of
them; as are all our involuntary and unchosen actions. And of this sort are all
those consistent slips which, as I showed before, not only are, but needs must
be born with, and allowed by the Covenant of the Gospel. For it is our
involuntary failings which are our unavoidable ones, because we have no power
to avoid where we have no liberty to will and choose; and since they are such as
we cannot help, they are such likewise as God pities, and such as the Gospel
does not punish, but graciously pardon and dispense with.

CHAP. III. Of the nature and danger of voluntary sins.
The CONTENTS.
The nature of a wilfill and a deliberate sin. Why it is called a despising of
Gods Law, a sinning presumptuously, and with a high hand. Wilful sins of two
sorts, (viz.) some chosen directly and expressly, others only indirectly and by
interpretation. Of direct and interpretative volition. Things chosen in the
latter way justly imputable. Of the voluntary causes of inconsideration in sins
of commission, which are drunkenness, an indulged passion, or a habit of sin.
Of the power of these to make men inconsiderate. The cause of inconsideration
in sins of omission, (viz.) Neglect of the means of acquiring virtue. Of the
voluntariness of all these causes. Of the voluntariness of drunkenness; when it
may be looked upon as involuntary. Of the voluntariness of an indulged passion;
men's great error lies in indulging the beginnings of sin. Of the voluntariness
and crying guilt of a habit of sin. Of the voluntariness of men's neglect of the
means of virtue. No wilful sin is consistent with a state of Grace, but all
are damning. A distinct account of the effect of wilful sins, (viz.) when they
only destroy our acceptance for the present, and when moreover they greatly
wound and endanger that habitual virtue which is the foundation of it, and
which should again restore us to it for the time to come. These last are
particularly taken notice of in the accounts of God.

HAving thus clearly shown in the General that all the dispensation, and
allowance for our consistent slips under the Gospel, comes not from the
nakedness and want of penalty in any of Christ's Laws, but only from the
imperfection and involuntariness of our own actions: I will descend now to
consider particularly what those consistent slips and transgressions are.

In the management whereof, I shall show these two things:

First, That our voluntary and chosen sins and transgressions of any of Christ's
Laws, are not consistent with a state of Grace and Salvation, but are deadly
and damnable.

Secondly, That our involuntary and unchosen slips are consistent, and such as
Christ's Gospel does not eternally threaten, but graciously bear and dispense
with.

First, I say, No voluntary sin, or chosen transgression of any of Christ's Laws
is consistent with a state of Grace and Salvation, but is deadly and damning.

To make this out, it will be very requisite to show,

1. What sinful actions are voluntary and chosen: And,

2. That none of them is consistent with a state of Grace, but deadly and
damning.

1. What sins and transgressions are voluntary and chosen.

Then we commit a wilful chosen sin, when we see and consider of the
sinfulness of any action which we are tempted to, and after that choose to act
and perform it. Every chosen sin is a sin against Knowledge, for the will is a
blind faculty, and can choose nothing till our mind proposes it. All choice is
an act of (...) Andron. Rhod. Paraph. in Eth. Arist. lib. 3. cap. 4.
Reason and Understanding, a (...). Ibid.
preferring one thing before another; and we must view and consider both before
we can prefer either.

That which suggests the sinfulness of any action to us, and sets the evil of
it before us when we are about to choose it, is our Conscience. For God has
placed this Monitor of every man's Duty in every man's breast, to tell him upon
every occasion what he requires from him. And till such time as men have
debauched their understandings into a gross mistake of their Duty, so as to
call Evil Good, and Good Evil; and God in his just anger has given them up to a
reprobate mind, or a mind (...), Romans 1.28.
void of judgment; their own consciences will keep them in mind of Gods Laws,
and not suffer them to transgress without reproof. So that every wilful sin,
is a sin against a man's own mind or conscience.

Nay further, so long as men's hearts are soft, and their consciences are
tender, and before such time as they are wholly enslaved to their appetites,
and quite hardened in sin; their consciences, especially in some great and
frightfull instances, will not only suggest and represent their Duty, but argue
also and debate against their lusts for the practice and performance of it. And
then men are not won at the first offer, nor consent to fulfill the sin upon
the first assault of the temptation; but are drawn in after a long deliberation
and debate, and dispute the matter with themselves before they submit to it.
For when men's consciences do not nakedly suggest, but moreover plead the cause,
and urge the observance of their Duty; there are arguments on both sides to
render the choice at first somewhat doubtful. The Law of God promises an
infinite reward to the action of obedience, and threatens an endless punishment
if we disobey; both which are future, and to be expected in the next world. And
the temptation inducing us to sin presents us with a fair show of sensitiv
pleasure, profit or honor if we practice, and threatens us with all the
contrary evils if we neglect it: both which it sets before us as things
present, to be felt and enjoyed by us even now whilst we are here in this
world. Now these are great motives on both sides, each of them bidding fair for
our consent. Our minds or consciences suggest the first, and our fleshly
appetites and carnal reason represent the latter; and for a good while these
two advocates solicit the cause on both sides, and distract and divide our
wills between them. So that when at last the temptation does overcome, and the
Law of Lust in the members prevails over the Law of God in the mind; yet is
that after a strife and a war, after a tedious toil and much contention. And
these wilful sins, because we underwent a great conflict in our own minds
about them, and past through a long deliberation, in an alternate succession of
desires and aversations, hopes and fears, imperfect choices and refusals, e're
the consent of our wills was gained over to the commission of them, are called
deliberate sins.

Every wilful chosen sin then is a sin against knowledge and against
conscience, when our own heart rebukes and checks us at the time of sinning,
telling us that God has forbidden that which we are about to do,
notwithstanding which we presume to do it. And if it happen to be in an
instance that is greatly criminal, and frightfull unto Conscience, which
therefore puts us upon demurs, and creates dispute and arguing; then is it not
only a known, but a deliberate sin also.

Nay, where we have time, and there is a sufficient space to consider in
between the opportunity and the action; if we know that the action is sinful,
and are not in ignorance about it, by having either never heard of it, or quite
forgot it; we sin wilfully whether our conscience check us for it, and we
consider of it or no. For wheresoever we can consider we can choose, there
being motives on both sides sufficient to determine our choice on either. And
as for all those sins which we know, whenever we have time, we can think and
consider of them. For all thought is free, and if we have leisure we may employ
it according to our own liking. We cannot think, it is true, of many things at
once, but we can consider of any one, and employ our minds upon it when, and
how long we please. So that in all such leisurely transgressions, if we acted
inconsiderately, our inconsideration was our own fault, and entered only because
we suffered it, and had a mind to it.

In all such actions therefore as we know are sinful, every transgression with
time and leisure is voluntary and chosen. For either we saw and considered it
before we ventured on it, or we might have seen it if we would. Our thoughts
indeed are our own, so that even at such times as we have leisure to consider,
we may still, if we please, transgress without all consideration. But if we do,
that is not our mishap but our fault, and we must answer for it. For where God
has given us both Power and Time wherein to see and consider; he most justly
expects, and will certainly exact at our hands an account of what is done as of
a known and considerate action. So that not only our considerate and deliberate
transgressions; but such others likewise as are unconsidered shall be judged
wilful sins, if they are acted leisurely, and are in such instances as we know
are sinful.

These sins of time and leisure, of knowledge, and of deliberation, are our
voluntary wilful sins. And as for them, they are all of a heinous guilt, and a
crying nature, every commission of them is a despising of Gods Law. For when we
sin wilfully, both our duty and our sin being set before us, and both being
compared and thought of by us, we despise and reject obedience to the Law, and
willingly and advisedly, whilst we consider both, prefer the obedience of our
sin before it. Upon which account our sinning wilfully is called a despising of
the Law, Hebr. 10.28. And forasmuch as such despising of the Law, (which is
nothing less than the will of Almighty God, who is most extremely offended by
it, and can most severely punish it) is an act of the greatest boldness and
presumption: therefore are our wilful and chosen sins styled, in another word,
Deuteronomy. 17.12. Will do presumptuously, is explained by will not hearken.
presumptuous sins, Psalm. 19.13. And since such presuming with open eyes to
despise Gods Law is a professed rejecting of his Law and Authority, an open
casting off his yoke, and rebelling against his Sovereignty; doing willingly
and advisedly what he forbids, and setting up our own will in opposition to
his, which is the highest instance of pride and insolence, and opposing God;
therefore are our wilful sins said to be acted through rebellious pride, and
with a (...).
high hand, Numb. 15.30, 31.

But now as for these sins, which, being thus considered and deliberate, are
voluntary and chosen; they are not all either considered or deliberated of,
willed or chosen in the same way. For even among our wilful sins we must
observe this difference.

First, Some of them are chosen expressly and directly.

Secondly, Others are chosen only indirectly and by interpretation.

1. Some sins are chosen expressly and directly. And such are all those sinful
actions whereto the consideration and thoughts of our minds are particularly
directed, and which we eye and view before we choose and act them. They are
such sins whereat we deliberate and pause, doubt and demur; when we have a
conflict and dispute in our own minds whether we should commit or keep off from
them. And such direct choice and express volition happens when men sin with
some tenderness, and sense of conscience. They cannot choose the sin as soon as
it is offered, but they undergo a succession of fears and desires. For the
temptation solicites them to work the sin, and their conscience being awakened
by Gods Law would deter them from it; so that they have a particular and
express consideration of both sides, before they act either. As for this way of
sinning therefore by express choice and direct volition, it is incident
ordinarily, not to all sinners whatsoever, but only to those of a middle rate,
whose consciences being not quite hardened as yet, make them transgress with
reluctance and remorse.

But besides these there are,

2. Other sinful actions which are not chosen directly and expressly, but only
indirectly and by interpretation.

By an indirect and interpretative choice, I mean an express choice of such a
state of things, as makes some sinful actions after that to be no longer a
matter of free choice, but almost necessary and unavoidable. For some things
are in our power at first either to do, or omit them; but by some free actions
of our own we can, if we will, put that power out of our own hands, so as
afterward we cannot, if we would, keep off from them. Thus a servant, for
instance, who is strong and healthy, can, if he please, perform his masters
will, and do what he requires of him. But if he choose either to maim his body,
or to impair his health; he has parted with his own ability, and his omission
of the things enjoined him after that is no longer a matter of choice, but of
necessity. A wealthy man can easily, if he will, give every man his own, and
honestly discharge those debts wherein he may stand engaged to other men: But
if he choose to waste his estate, and to throw away his riches; he is no longer
able to do what he should, but detains the goods of other men thenceforward,
not because he will not, but for that he cannot help it. Now these omissions of
the lame sick servant, and this dishonesty of the impoverished man, in this
necessitous state of things, whereinto they have thrown themselves, are no
matter of particular and express choice, because, as the case stands, it is not
in their power to refuse them. But yet they were chosen by them indirectly and
in the general, when they chose to put themselves into this necessitous state,
wherein being once placed, they should not have the power thenceforward to
avoid them. So that indirectly and implicitly they have chosen to do that,
which particularly and directly it is not at their choice to avoid. And because
that which they do now under this necessity of their own making, is interpreted
to them, and charged upon them by virtue of their former choice, as if now in
every particular, they did expressly choose it: therefore do I say it is chosen
by Interpretation; (i. e.) it is imputed to them, and may be exacted of them,
as if they had chosen it expressly.

This then is an indirect and interpretative choice, even in actions which in
the particulars are necessary, (viz.) when that was deliberated of and chosen
which made them so. All our actions in a necessitous state are indirectly and
interpretatively voluntary and chosen, when the necessity it self is of our own
choosing. In the particulars, it is true, we are not free to refuse them, but
the reason why we are not, is, because we our selves choose to be so. For
although our present actions are necessary, yet once it was in our power to
have kept them free: and that which causes us now to act indeliberately and
without consideration, was it self once freely deliberated of and chosen. So
that all those actions, which are now necessary in the particulars, were, as
the Schools speak, voluntary in the cause; which is an indirect choice, and
interpretative volition.

And as for those actions which are chosen only indirectly and implicitly,
(viz.) in the free choice of that cause which made them afterward to be all
necessary; they may very fairly be imputed to us, and interpreted to be our
own. For in all reason the natural and immediate effects of a man's own free and
deliberate choice may be charged upon him, and if he chooses his necessity, it
is fit that he should answer for it, and bear the punishment of those sins
which he commits under it. What is a matter of any man's choice, may be an
article of his accusation, and a matter of his punishment also. But now as for
this necessity of sinning, it is a necessity of men's own choosing. For they
wilfully threw themselves into it in choosing the cause of it; and so may very
justly be made to answer for all that which they commit under it. All the
effects of their present necessity, if they are traced up, will terminate upon
their own will; for they hang upon that file of actions, which had beginning
from their own choice; and being thus chosen by them, they may justly be
charged upon them.

As for such effects indeed as are so remote, that a man's understanding, in the
honest and sincere use of it, cannot see them; although he do choose the cause,
yet neither God nor men will look upon him to have chosen them. For there can
be no choice where there is no knowledge, because a man must see a thing before
he will and choose it. But when effects lie near, and obvious to any ordinary
capacity if it do but use an honest diligence, as most men's necessity of
sinning does to those free actions which produce it; there it is only men's
sloth and negligence if they do not discern it; and if they choose blindfold,
when, if they would open their eyes, they might see, it is all one in God's
account as if they did see it. For it is against all reason in the world that
the sinful neglects of men should take away (...) rights of God. He has given
them faculties wherewith to see things before they choose them, and he requires
that they should. And if they will not use them, that is their own fault; but
what he requires of them he will still exact, and punish them for what is done
as for a chosen action.

So that as for those sins which men have chosen in their next and discernable
Cause, although they are not free to choose or refuse them in the Particulars
themselves, they are a part of their account at the last Judgment. What is
chosen indirectly and by interpretation is looked on as their own, and, if it
be evil, will be imputed to them for their condemnation.

But now several of men's sins are of this last sort. For as we saw of some
particular actions, that they are chosen in the Particulars directly and
expressly: so are there likewise several others, which in the Particulars cannot
be refused, but were chosen in the general, in the free choice of that Cause
which has made them all afterward necessary, so that they are voluntary only
indirectly, and chosen by interpretation. For there is nothing so common in the
World as for men by their free choice of some sins to bring themselves into a
necessity of others: they freely will and choose some, which necessarily cause
and effect more.

Now those things which may bring men into this necessity, are such, and so
many, as make them inconsiderate and hasty. For therefore it is that in the
Particulars we cannot expressly choose or refuse several sins, because we cannot
stay particularly and expressly to consider of them. We have brought our selves
to such a pass, that they slip from us without reasoning and enquiring about
them. For either our understanding is diverted that it cannot, or so well
acquainted with them that it need not look upon them to observe and consider
them. And since we do not particularly consider of them when they come, we
cannot expressly will and choose them: but forasmuch as we chose the cause of
this inconsideration, we are said to choose them indirectly and by
interpretation.

And as for the wilful and chosen Causes of such inconsideration, I shall
discourse of them under these two sorts, viz. as causing such inconsideration
in sins, either, 1. Of commission, or doing what is forbidden. 2. Of omission,
or neglecting to do what is commanded.


1. For those causes of inconsideration in our sins of commission, which make
us venture on them without all doubt or disquisition, they are these: First,
Drunkenness. Secondly, Some indulged passion. Thirdly, Habit or custom of
sinning.


For all these, when once we have consented to them, take away either wholly or
in great, measure all further freedom, and make us will and choose what is evil
indeliberately, and without consideration.

First, As for Drunkenness; we find daily in those persons who are subject to
it, that it so disorders and unsettles all the intellectual powers, that they
have scarce any use of them at all. For their memory fails, and their judgment
forsakes them. They have no thoughts for that present time of good or evil, of
expedient or inexpedient. Their reason is overwhelmed and quite asleep, and
there is nothing that is awake and active in them, but their bodily lusts and
sensual passions, which then hurry them on to any thing that falls in their way
without the least opposition. So that they are wholly governed by their
appetites, and, for that time, unbridled passions of lust, or cruelty, or envy,
or revenge. They blab out that which in their right wits they would conceal,
and do what in a sober mode they would condemn. And so little is there of that
reason and understanding in all their speeches and behavior, which appears in
them when the drunken fit is over, that any man may plainly see how, for that
present, it is removed from them. So that they act rashly and irrationally,
more like brute Beasts than men, committing rapes, or robberies, or bloodshed,
or any other mad frolicks and sinful extravagancies without any deliberation or
consideration at all. And,

Secondly, As for an indulged passion, we daily find that when it is permitted
to grow high, it has the same effect in making a man act inconsiderately as
Wine it self has. For a man may be drunk and infatuated with a violent anger,
an impetuous lust, an overpowering fear, as well as with wine. It shall make
him quite forget all Rules of decency and Virtue, and attend no more to them at
that time, than if he had never known them. Of anger it is affirmed to a
Proverb, that it is a Ira furor brev^s ^st.
short fit of madness. And the Case is the same in other passions when they are
suffered to go on to amazing and stupifying degrees. How many things are acted
in the heat of lust, of fear, of anger, etc. which the men in their sober wits
condemn so perfectly, that they would account themselves to be very much
injured, if any man should say that they might be ensnared into them, and fall
under them? Of so great power are men's passions in clouding, nay for a time
quite overwhelming their reason and understanding. For such is the condition of
the reasonable soul, that during its being here united to the body, it is
subject to all its alterations, and liable, even in its most proper and
spiritual operations of reason and knowledge, to be either improved, or hindered,
or quite taken away by those changes which befall it. In a sound body, it is
free and active; but if the bodily Spirits, which are those great instruments
that it makes use of, are ruffled and disordered; if they are either confused
and overcharged by strong drink or a strong passion; blended and displaced by a
frenzy; blasted by an apoplexy; or otherwise mixed and disordered, quenched
or oppressed by any other violent Disease: all use of reason and consideration
is strangely hindered, if not for a while perfectly eclipsed. And this all men
are so sensible of, that every one is apt to plead this in his own behalf for
those faults which he commits in the height of passion; and others are as ready
to admit of it. For their great excuse is, That their passion made them almost
mad, and spurred them on to act they knew not what, without all sober thought
and consideration.

Thirdly, As for the habit or custom of choosing sinful actions; it brings our
wills to such an acquaintance with them, and to such an unstudied forwardness
in embracing of them, that when an opportunity is offered for them we cannot
refrain from them if we would, or stand to deliberate whether we should choose
them or no. For custom, as we daily see, in all sorts of actions begets such a
promptness and easiness in performing those things which we are accustomed to,
that we readily act them upon the next occasion without staying to think and
consider of them. Use, as was observed above, is a second Nature; and what we
have been wont to do by long practice, we do as easily, as quickly, and as
indeliberately, as we do those things which flow from the necessity of our very
Nature it self. And as it is in all our other actions, so it is likewise in our
works of sin and disobedience. By a long acquaintance with them, and practice
of them, we learn at last to choose them whenever we meet with them, without
all thought and examination. For all the little doubts and exceptions of our
minds against them, all tormenting fears and checks of Conscience have been so
often silenced, that now they are heard no more to make any delay in our
embracing of them. And our wills have been so accustomed to strike in with
them, and to choose the sinful action upon every return of the temptation, that
now they do not need to pause, but act of hand, and sin without enquiry. And
our bodily powers are so naturally disposed to spring out into the commission
of them upon occasion, that they hardly stay for a Command, but are as quick
and hasty in the dispatch, as our wills were in their indeliberate choosing of
them. So that our willing of them after a long use is not a matter of arguing
and discourse, of weighing and considering; but a sudden, inconsiderate motion.
It is rather turned into an act of nature than of choice, and has more in it of
indeliberate necessity, than of considerate liberty. And as such the Scripture
is wont to represent it. For when sin is once grown into a confirmed habit, we
are told that it is not so truly an inviting temptation, as a binding Law, Romans
7.25. It does not then so truly persuade, as rule and command us. For we are
led Captives by it, ver. 23; and sold under it, ver. 14. We submit to it out of
necessity, and not out of choice; because we do not choose where we cannot
refuse, and here we must be under it, and cannot help it. For it is now become
our very nature, and it is almost as much out of our power to alter it, as it
is for a thing to cast off what is most natural to it. Can the Ethiopian
Blackamore change his skin, or the Leopard his spots? When they can do that,
then, says Jeremy, may you also do good who are accustomed to do evil, Jer.
1^.23. If men are so pleased, they may choose to sin themselves out of their
liberty, till they can no longer choose whether they shall sin any more or no. A
complete habit, and a perfect custom shall make them sin beyond all liberty,
because they will sin without all deliberation; and then they are got up to
that pitch whereof St Peter speaks, Of them who cannot cease from sin, 2 Pet.
2* 14.

In sins of commission then, or doing those things which are forbidden, the
causes of indeliberateness and inconsideration are most usually these three,
viz. A drunken fit, a high passion, or a confirmed habit.

And then,

2. As for the other Branch of sins, viz. those of omission, or neglecting to
do what we are commanded; Besides these three already mentioned, which have
their evil influence upon sins of that kind also, there is one great and
particular Cause which takes away our liberty of choice in them, and that is a
neglect of those means which are necessary to the performance of the omitted
Duty. For as it is in all our other actions, so is it also in those of
obedience, they hang in a chain of dependence, and are helped on or hindered by
several others, which, further than they influence them, are not religious
themselves, nor make up any part of obedience. There is a Religion of the
means, as well as of the end; and some actions are helps and preparatives to a
religious Duty, but otherwise they are no Duty in themselves. Thus the not
staying to look upon a woman, or to gaze upon her beauty, is one means whereto
our Savior directs a man, that he may be preserved from coveting and lusting
after her, Matthew. 5.28. So fasting is a furtherance to prayer and repentance,
and several other instances of obedience. And the Case is the same in several
other things. For meekness, and patience, and contentedness, and forgiveness,
and every other Virtue, has some particular helps and furtherances, some things
that promote it and dispose us for it, and others that obstruct and hinder it.

Now as there is this order in the things themselves so must there be likewise
in our endeavors after them. We must take them as they lie, and use the means
that we may attain the Virtue. For meekness, humility, contentedness, and the
like, are not so perfectly under the power of our wills, as that they can be
exerted through their bare Decree and peremptory Commandment. But if we would
attain them, besides this imperiousness of Command, we must further use all
those means and helps which fit and prepare for them. In habits of the mind men
are sufficiently convinced of this. For it is not every one that wills
prudence, who is a wise; or that wills learning, who is presently a learned
man. But he who would be so, besides his willing and desiring it, must read,
and study, and observe, and seek instruction: he must use all those means which
lie in the way to knowledge, and those instruments which prepare for it, and
are necessary to introduce it, before he can attain to it. And the Case is the
same in all virtuous and moral habits, which are seated in the will likewise.
For we must use those instruments which facilitate and dispose us for the
Virtue, before the Virtue will become our own; and we must put in practice all
the means and preservatives against any Vice, before we can in reason hope to
conquer and avoid it. If we would not be proud or peevish, we must abstain from
all the inlets to pride and peevishness. And if we would be meek and humble, we
must not neglect the helps and instruments promoting meekness and humility. For
the helps and the virtue must both go together; so that if we neglect the one,
we shall certainly miss of the other also. When once we have neglected the
means of any Virtue therefore, we have parted with our power of obtaining it.
We have thrown away our liberty in losing of our opportunity; so that now our
missing of it is not so much a matter of choice, as of necessity. We omit it
and cannot help it, because we neglected to use those means whereby we should
have attained it. And in sins of omission this is the great and special Cause
which puts them without our power; for we neglect the means of doing what we
should, and after that it is not so truly our free choice, as our necessity
that we omit it.

These then are the causes of our want of choice in the particular instances of
sins, whether of commission, or of omission. We do not choose that evil which we
commit for want of considerateness and deliberation, the freedom whereof is
taken away from us by drunkenness, passionateness, and a habit or custom of
committing it. And we do not choose the omission of some Duty which we neglect,
for want of power, whereof we have deprived our selves through the neglect of
those means which are necessary to the performance of it. So that both in doing
what is forbidden, and in neglecting what is commanded upon these Causes, we do
what for that present we cannot help. For we do not choose because we cannot
refuse it; and therefore it is not so much through choice, as through necessity
that we are involved in the transgression.

But although these sins are thus undeliberated in themselves, and thus
unchosen in their own Particulars; yet shall we be punished for them as surely,
as if we had expressly chosen them, because they were all chosen in their
Causes. For we freely and deliberately chose that which made them necessary,
and that is enough to make us answer for all those things which we acted under
that necessity.

For as for drunkenness, which is one of those Causes that deprives us of all
liberty by taking away all considerateness and deliberation; it is plain that it
either is, or may be deliberately considered of and chosen. For drunkenness is
a sin which requires time in the very acting of it. It is not entered on in a
moment, or dispatched before a man can have time to bethink himself; for he may
pause and deliberate at every Glass, and is free all along to choose the sin
before the Wine inflames him. It has nothing in it of suddenness or surprise,
and therefore nothing of indeliberation. Because where a man has time, he may
deliberate if he will; and if he will not, that is his own fault, and he must
answer for it, and is punishable in all reason as if he did.

It Is true indeed, to a man who has never tried, and is ignorant of the force
of Wine, or of any other intoxicating Liquor, and of its sudden way of
discomposing his Spirits and dethroning his Reason: Drunkenness at the first
time may be a sin of surprise, and an indeliberate action. Because he suspects
not that a free Draught which he takes down now, should a while hence work so
great an alteration: he is unacquainted yet with the strength of it, and knows
not that it will have such effects upon him. And so long as he does not see
that intoxication is at the end of his present draught, he cannot be said to
deliberate of, or considerately to choose it. It happens to him besides his
expectation, and is not an effect of choice, but of surprise. And thus it was
with righteous Noah, Genesis 9.20, 21. And this being unforeseen and indeliberate,
what a man commits under it is the more excusable, as was the incest of Lot,
Genesis 19.33. But after a man has felt by himself, or learned from others what
the power of Wine, or other intoxicating Drink is, it is generally after his
own fault, and his own choice if he be overcome by it. For either he does, or
may see the ill effects of it; and if for all that he choose to go on in it, it
is at his own peril: because if he chooses drunkenness, he shall be interpreted
to choose all those sinful effects whereto he may see, if he will, that
Drunkenness exposes men. So that as for this Cause of indeliberate sins, viz.
drunkenness; it we see is in it self deliberated of, and freely chosen.

And as for the second cause of indeliberate sins, viz. some indulged passions,
which grow to such a height as to drive us on furiously into the fulfilling of
them without suffering us to deliberate about them; they also are a Cause of
our own free choice and deliberation. For it is in our power at first either to
give way to a beginning passion, or to repress it. We can check it as we please
whilst it is low, because then its strength is very weak, and our own
consideration and command is the greatest. But if we slacken the Reins, and
give it liberty; then it knows no bounds, but proves too strong for us, and
hurries us on whether we will or no. For in every step which the passion makes,
it does still the more disturb our Spirits, and thereby disable all the power
of our reason and consideration. So that proportionably as it increases, our
consideration, and, together with that, our choice and liberty is lessened and
impaired. But at the first, whilst it is young and of small strength, it is in
the power of our own wills either to indulge it, or to stop and repress it. And
therefore if it get ground upon us, it is by our own liking, because either we
expressly choose to stay upon it, and thereby to feed and foment it, or wilfully
neglect to use that power which we have over it, in curbing and straining it.
And when once we have of our own choice permitted it to go too far, then is it
got without our reach, and goes on further without asking our leave, whether we
will or no.

And herein lies the great error of men, viz. in that they freely and
deliberately consent to the first beginnings of sin, and by their own voluntary
yielding too far, they make all that follows to be plainly necessary. For the
lustful man deliberately and wilfully permits his wanton fancy to sport it self
with impure thoughts, and lascivious imaginations; till by degrees his passion
gathers strength, and his lusts grow so high, that all his powers of reason and
Religion are scattered and clouded, and rendered wholly unable to subdue it. The
angry man freely and deliberately hearkens to exasperating suggestions, and
cherishes discontents so long, till at last his passion is got beyond his
reach, and flies out into all the unconsidered instances of rage and fury. And
the Case is the same in fear, in envy, in love, and hatred, and other passions.
Men first consent to the first steps and beginnings of a sinful lust, and when
they have deliberately yielded to it a little way, they begin by degrees to be
forced and driven by it. For all progress in a vicious lust is like a motion
down hill; men may begin it where they please, but if once they are entered,
they cannot stop where they please. All vice stands upon a Omne in praecipiti
vitium. Stat. Juv. Sat. 1.
Precipice, and therefore although we may stay our selves at the first setting
out, yet we cannot in the middle. But although when once we have gone too far,
it be not at our own choice whether or no we shall go further; yet was it in
the free power of our own wills not to have gone so far as we did. The entering
so far into the passion was an effect of our own will and free deliberation;
and if this make that necessary which is done afterward, that is a necessity
of our own choosing. So that whatsoever our after actions are, this cause of
them is a matter of our own will, and freely chosen.

And then as for the third cause of indeliberate sins, (viz.) a custom and
habit of sinning; that is plainly a matter of our own free choosing. For it is
frequent acts that make a habit; and they are all free and at our own disposal.
Because the necessity arises from the habit, and does not go before it; so that
all those actions which preceded and were the causes of it, were free and
undetermined. Wherefore as for that indeliberateness in sinning which arises
from an habit and custom of sin; it does not in any wise lessen or excuse a
sinful action. Nay, instead of that, it aggravates and augments it. For this
is sin improved up to the height, and become, not so much a matter of choice,
as of nature. And to sin thus, is to sin as the Devils themselves do, from a
natural Spring and Principle, without the help of thinking and disputing. Upon
which accounts, as it is the most advanced state of sin, so must it be of
suffering likewise; this state of reigning, and prevailing habits of sin being,
as St Paul calls it, a body of death, Romans 7.23, 24. All which aggravation both
of sin and suffering it has, because it is an aggregate and collected body of
many wilful and presumptuous sins. For before men come so far, they have
deliberately chosen, and wilfully neglected to refrain from all those
precedent actions which have advanced the strength of sin to that pitch, and
have made it to be not so much a temptation or a refusable motive, as a binding
Romans 7.23.
Law, and necessitating nature. So that although those sinful actions which
flow from us after that we are come to a habit of sin, are indeliberate and
unchosen: Yet as for our evil habit it self, which is the cause of them, it was
produced by a combination of wilful sins, and was in all the antecedent
degrees a matter of choice and deliberation.

And lastly, as for the cause of our involuntary omissions, (viz.) our neglect
of those means which are necessary to our performance of those things which are
commanded; this is clearly our own fault, and comes to pass only because we
choose it and have a mind to it. For the reason why we neglect the means, is,
because we will not use them. We have time enough wherein to deliberate and
consider of them, and thereby to choose and practice them; but we will not use
it to that purpose. The means and helps to chastity, to meekness, to
contentedness, and other virtues, are all before us, and we have power to put
them in practice if we think fitting. For it is just the same for that matter
with the endowments of our wills, as with those of our minds and bodies. We can
see and consider of the means of begetting knowledge and learning in our minds;
and of those receipts and rules which are to promote the health of our bodies;
and upon such consideration we not only can, but ordinarily do make choice of
them, and put them in practice. And although it happen much otherwise with
those wise directions, and helpful rules that are given for the attainment of
virtue, which are read ordinarily only to be known but not to be practiced; yet
is it in the choice of our own wills to make use of them if we please, as well
as of the other. The neglect of them is a wilful neglect, for therefore we do
not use them because we choose to omit them. So that although when once we
neglect the means, it be not at our choice after that to attain the virtue; yet
that neglect it self was. The omissions in themselves it may be are not chosen,
because they cannot be refused: but that negligence, which is the cause of
their being so, is plainly an effect of our own choice and deliberation.

Thus then it plainly appears, that our sinful commissions upon drunkenness,
passionateness, and custom of sinning; and our sinful omissions upon our
neglect of the means and instruments of virtue, all which are indeliberate and
unchosen in themselves, were yet deliberately chosen in their causes. So that
all our necessity in them is a necessity of our own making, seeing it was at
our own choice whether ever we should have come under it; although, when once
we are subject to it, it be no longer at our liberty whether or no we shall be
acted by it.

And since all these sins which are thus indeliberate in themselves, were yet
so freely chosen and deliberated in their causes, they are all imputable to us,
and fit to be charged upon us. They were chosen indirectly and interpretatively
in the choice of that cause which made them all afterward to be almost, if not
wholly necessary. For either we did deliberate, or, which is all one, we had
time enough to have deliberated as we ought, before we chose our own necessity.
So that these sinful actions which are unchosen and unconsidered in
themselves, are yet imputable to us, and fit to be charged upon us as our own,
because we chose them by an indirect and interpretative volition.

As therefore there are some sins, which are expressly willed in the particulars
by an express choice and deliberation; so likewise are there several others,
which are expressly and deliberately willed only in their cause, but in their
own particulars are not chosen otherwise than indirectly and by interpretation.

And both these together take up the compass of our wilful and chosen sins.
For either we expressly think, and deliberately consider of the sinful action
when we commit it; or we expressly and deliberately thought upon that cause,
when we chose it, which makes us now to sin without thinking and deliberation.

And by all this it appears now at length how considerateness and deliberation
is employed in every wilful sin. For the sinful action is seen and considered,
(or it is our faults if it be not, since we had both time and powers for such
consideration) either in it self, or in its cause; and being it is thus a
matter of our consideration, it is likewise a matter of our choice, and a
wilful action.

And thus having shown what sinful actions are voluntary and chosen; I proceed
now to show,

2. That none of them is consistent with a state of grace, but deadly and
damning.

As for our wilful sins, they are all, as we have seen, of a most heinous
nature; being indeed nothing less than a contempt of Gods Authority, a sinning
presumptuously, and with a high hand. They are a plain disavowing of Gods will,
and renouncing of his Sovereignty; they are acted in a way of defiance, and are
not the unavoidable slips of an honest and well-meaning servant, but the high
affronts of an open Elatio contemnentis in minimis mandatis culpam facit non
minimam, and convertit in crimen gravis rebellionis naevum satis levem
simplicis transgressionis. Bernard. de Praecept. and Dispens. c. 14. p. op. 931.
rebel. So that no favorite or child of God can ever be guilty of them, or he
must cease to continue such if he be. Because they interrupt all favor and
friendship, and put God and him into a state of hostility and defiance; seeing
they are nothing less than a renouncing of his Authority, at least in that
instance, and a casting off his Law. And this lawlesness, or rejecting of the
Law, is that very word whereby St John describes sin. For sin, says he, is the
transgression, as we render it, but more fully it should be the (...) not (...).
renouncing of the Law, 1 John 3.4. In which sense of sin, for a wilful and
rebellious one, he tells us, that whosoever abides in God sins not, verse. 6;
being indeed no longer a child of God if he do, but of the Devil, verse. 8.

They deprive us of all the benefits of Christ's sacrifice so long as we
continue in them, and of all the blessings purchased for us by his death. This
was their effect under the Law of Moses, and it is so much rather under the
Gospel of Christ. For the sentence which that Law pronounced upon all
presumptuous and wilful offenders was death without mercy. The soul that does
ought presumptuously, the same, by his contemptuous sin, reproacheth the Lord,
and that soul shall be cut off from among his people, Numb. 15.30. If ever it
could be proved against him, by that dispensation there was no hope for him.
For he that despised, or contemptuously In the Syriack version, according to
Tremeli^s's translation^ it is transgressus est, s^^l aspernanter.
transgressed Moses's Law, died without mercy, says the Apostle, being
convicted under the testimony of two or three witnesses, Hebr. 10.28. For even
those very sins for which under the Law God had appointed an atonement, were
no longer to be attoned for than they were committed involuntarily and through
ignorance. In the fourth Chapter of Leviticus we are Verse. 2.
told, that as for those sins which are committed against any of those
Commandments which concerned things not to be done; if they were acted (...) in
verse. 70.
involuntarily and unwillingly, they should be allowed the benefit of an
expiation, and the sacrifices for that purpose are there prescribed. But if
they were acted wilfully and advisedly, then had they no right to the expiation
there promised, nor would any sacrifices be accepted for them, but that
punishment must unavoidably be undergone, which in the Law was threatened to
them. For, to name no more, this we are plainly told of two instances; (viz.)
the contemptuous making of perfume, and eating of blood, after both had been
forbidden. Whosoever shall contemptuously make any perfume like to that (which
was commanded to be made, verse. 35.) to smell thereto; that soul shall not be
expiated by sacrifice, but cut off from his people, Exodus 30.38. And whatsoever
man there be that eats any manner of blood, (viz. willingly and wilfully, the
ignorant and involuntary transgressions of this and the like prohibitions being
attoneable, Lev. 4.) I will even set my face against that soul, and will cut
him off from among his people, Levit. 17.10.

Thus severe was the sentence, and thus unavoidable was the penalty of all
wilful sins under the Law of Moses. And by how much the ministration of Christ
is nobler than the ministration of Moses was, by so much shall the punishment
of all wilful and contemptuous sins against the Law of Christ be more severe,
than it was for those against the Law of Moses. And this is the Apostles own
argument. For if that word of the Law threatening death, which was spoken unto
Moses on Mount Sinai by the mediation only of Angels, was steadfast, and every
transgression of it received the just recompense of that death which it
threatened, such persons dying without mercy: How shall we Christians hope to
escape it, if we wilfully neglect and contemn those Laws which are published to
us by so great a means of salvation as the Gospel is; which was at first spoken
to us, not by Angels, but by the Lord Jesus Christ himself, who is far above
all Angels, being indeed the Son of God himself, Hebr. 2.2, 3. Surely, as the
Apostle argues in another place, if he who despised even Moses's Law died
without mercy for that contempt; we ought to think with our selves, not of how
much less, but of how much sorer punishment he shall be judged worthy, who, by
wilful sinning and despising of his Laws, does in a manner tread under foot,
not Moses, but the Son of God himself, Hebr. 10.28, 29. His punishment indeed
shall be most dreadful, being nothing less than all those woes which are
denounced in the Gospel. For the Law, with all its threats and penalties, is
particularly made and designed, as St Paul says, for the lawless (which is
that very (...).
word whereby St John describes sin) and the wilfully disobedient, who when
they see the Law will not be (...).
subject to it, 1 Timothy 1.9.

As for our voluntary and chosen sins then, whether they are chosen directly,
or only by interpretation, we see plainly that they are not consistent with a
state of Grace and Salvation. For they subject us to all that death which the
Law threatens, and deprive us of all that life and happiness which it proposes
to us, which, beside all the evidence which the Scripture gives us of it, is
plainly demonstrable from the very reason of the thing it self. For certainly
if Christ's Laws will condemn us for any actions whatsoever, it must be for
those, which, being voluntary, may justly be charged upon us, and looked upon
to be our own. It must be our willing what sin enjoins, which can make us
Servants of it, and subject us to that death, which God has appointed for its
wages: So that both from Reason and Scripture it evidently appears, that every
wilful sin is certainly a deadly one, and puts the sinner out of a state of
Gods favor and salvation.

It Is true indeed that every wilful sin does not rob us of Gods favor in such
measure, as to incapacitate us for regaining of it ever after. But its effect
is this, before such time as we have repented of it and amended it, we are
under all the threatenings of the Law, and subject, if we die in that instant,
to that death which is ordained for the wages of it. We are out of Gods favor
for the present, and the state of friendship betwixt him and us is interruped;
and till we repent, we shall not be again restored to it. As for the state of
acceptance and salvation it is broken, and destroyed for the present; for we
are put under the punishing part of Gods Government, and are made subject to
his vengeance by being sinners against his Law. But as for the foundation of
that acceptance, (viz.) that habit of virtue and obedience, which, in the
wilful action, we sinned against; it is not quite destroyed, but only wounded
and impaired in us. For habits are neither won nor lost by one action, but by
many. It is frequency and repetition that must either produce, or destroy them.
If therefore a good man is careless in some instance, and loses his innocence,
and is vanquished into a wilful sin; yet is not the habitual inclination of
his soul toward that instance of obedience, against which he offended, quite
extinguished in him, but only somewhat weakened and abated. Thus, for instance,
a sober man, if he consent once to be drunk, does not thereby wholly lose his
sober inclination. But when the temptation is past, his habitual temper, which
was foiled and overborn, revives again, and he abhors his sin, and confirms
his resolution, and so is ready at the next return of the temptation to wash
off the stain of his former offense by an opposite instance of new obedience.
And the case is the same in the wilful commissions of any other sin. For
although any one wilful act be a damnable transgression, and put the sinner
into a damnable condition for the present; yet does it not destroy, but only
wound and weaken that habitual temper of virtue, which, if God spare him life,
may enable him with ease to act otherwise for the time to come.

Although indeed some wilful sins have such a complication of evil in them,
and are carried on against so many suggestions of the spirit, and checks of
conscience, and are brought to effect through so many thoughts, and so long
contrivance; that they destroy, not only that innocence which is the condition
of our state of Grace; but also that habitual temper and inclination, which is
the principle and foundation of it too. They unravel all, and set us to begin
again the work of reformation anew. Of which sort are Idolatry, Witchcraft,
Perjury, Sacrilege, Murder, Adultery, Robbery, Oppression, entering into the
fields of the fatherless and widow, and such like. For these sins do not only
destroy a man's acceptance with God for the present; but moreover they lay waste
his conscience, and spoil all his virtuous temper and inclination, whereby he
should recover himself afterward; whence they are called Peccata sanciantia,
and vastantia.
wounding, and wasting sins. And this effect they have, because in the very
acting of them there is usually so much time and deliberation, and a succession
of so many desires and aversations, hopes and fears, chusings and refusals;
that the sin has had a great many imperfect consents before it come to have
that which is last and prevailing. Our wills, by a number of imperfect
wouldings, are in great part accustomed, and have almost wholly learned to
unwill all that good, which they willed before; so that there is an imperfect
habit contained in the very action. Besides, what is most of all considerable,
these being such sins as are made up of several combined together, before we
can bring our selves to act them, our conscience of their guiltiness must be in
great part extinguished, and the good spirit of God exceedingly grieved, if not
wholly quenched. For Adultery implies fornication and injustice; Sacrilege
contains theft and impiety; Perjury includes lying and profaneness; and so for
all the rest. Now these being complicated sins, and crimes of an accumulated
wickedness; men's Consciences are more than ordinarily afraid of them, and the
good spirit of God extraordinarily concerned to keep them from them. They
suggest and represent the greatness of the sin, and the greatness of the
danger. Which they do with such constancy and importunity, that before men have
silenced the one, and extremely grieved, if not wholly quenched the other, they
cannot overcome their own fears, and venture upon the commission of them. And
here now is the danger lest their own Conscience be laid asleep, and Gods holy
spirit leave them. For he will not always strive with man, Genesis 6.3^ and from
him that has not; that is, has not used that talent of Grace which was
granted to him, as the wicked Servant had not done who had hid it, verse. 25,
shall be taken even that, says our Savior, which he has, Mat. 25.29. And
when men resist the motions of the Holy Ghost to such a degree as this, and
after all the repeated suggestions, and obedient inclinations which he threw
into their souls during all that time wherein the sin was under deliberation,
resolve still to venture on it: no wonder if, being thus grieved and rejected,
he withdraw himself, for some time at least, if not for altogether.

And of all this we have a clear instance in holy David, upon that wasting sin
of his in murdering Vriah, and adulterating his wife. For upon that he felt
both these losses which I have mentioned, (viz.) the laying waste of the
virtuous temper of his own spirit, and the deprivation of the good spirit of
God. For this sin being so long in acting (as it must needs be, since it
required such a train of wicked plots and contrivances to the consummation of
it) he must needs feel all the opposition that could be made from the checks of
his own Conscience, and from the restraints of the Spirit of God. And when he
had born down both for the satisfaction of his lust, and trampled them under
foot for the consummation of his sin; then does he begin to feel the want, and
to be all in fear of losing the habitual rectitude of his own spirit, (which,
by so many contrary actions employed in that one great one, he had almost quite
destroyed) and of suffering the desertion of Gods spirit, which by his
continued provocations contained in it likewise, he had well nigh abandoned.
For to this purpose we find him complaining and crying out in his Psalm of
repentance for that great transgression, whereof, at the 14th verse, he makes
express mention. Create, or new make in me a clean heart, O God, says he, and
renew a right spirit within me. And besides that, cast me not away neither from
thy presence, nor take thy holy spirit from me, Psalm. 51.10, 11.

So that as for the effect of wilful sins, it is plainly this. All wilful
sins whatsoever destroy our state of acceptance with God, and put us into a
state of enmity and death for the present. But as for those among them which
lay waste the Conscience, they effect not that only, but moreover they destroy
that virtuous habit, and grieve, nay, sometimes drive away that good spirit,
whereby we should restore our selves to it for the time to come.

And because this latter sort have the mischievous effect, in making our return
thus dubious and difficult; they are particularly taken notice of in the
accounts of God. Thus, for instance, David had committed several deadly sins,
for some whereof he had undergone severe punishment; as particularly for that
proud presumptuous offense of his in numbering of the people, 2 Samuel 24.1, 10,
13, etc. But these made no notable decay or devastation in the virtuous temper
of his soul; for his own heart admonished him of the evil which he had done,
and he repented quickly, and rose again without delay, and so was presently
restored to what he was before. But as for his sin in the matter of Vriah, it
was a 2 Samuel 11.4, 5, 27.
lasting work, and took up a long verse. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 13, 14, 15.
deliberation and contrivance. It made his Conscience hard and insensible; for
his own heart did not smite him into a change, nor enable him to repent without
a Chap. 12. verse. 1, 5.
monitor. So that his stay in this crying sin was long, and his return both
difficult and dangerous. And therefore in that character which is given of him
by the Holy Ghost, when all the rest are buried in silence, this sin
particularly is expressly specified. David did that which was right in the eyes
of the Lord, and turned not from any thing that he commanded him all the days
of his life, save only in the matter of Vriah the Hittite, 1 Kings 15.5.

Thus then, as for this first part of our enquiry, we see plainly of all our
wilful sins that they are not consistent with a state of Grace and salvation,
but that they are all deadly and damning for the present, if we dye under them
without repenting of them; and as for the future, that they do all of them
wound and weaken, but some almost quite destroy that habitual, inherent Grace,
whereby we should recover our selves to the state of pardon for the time to
come.

CHAP. IV. Of the nature of involuntary sins, and of their consistence with a
state of salvation.
The CONTENTS.
Of involuntary actions. Of what account the forced actions of the Body are in
morals. Two causes of involuntariness. First, The violence of men's passions. It
does not excuse. Secondly, The ignorance of their understandings. This is the
cause of all our consistent failings, and the sins that are involuntary upon
this account are consistent with a state of salvation. This proved, 1. From
their unavoidableness; The Causes of it; in what sense any particular sin among
them is said to be avoidable. 2. From the nature of God. A representation of
God's nature from his own Word, and men's experience. The Argument drawn from it
for the consistence of such failings. 3. From the nature and declarations of
the Gospel. It is fitted to beget a cheerful and filial confidence, and
therefore is called the Spirit of Adoption. The Argument from this. The
Scripture-Declarations and Examples in this matter. These Arguments summed up.

THE second sort of sins are such as are involuntary and unchosen; and these
are consistent with a state of salvation, and such as Christ's Gospel does not
eternally threaten, but graciously bears, and in great mercy dispenses with.

As for the involuntariness of men's actions, that which produces and effects
it, is not any force from without upon our will it self. All the things in the
material world can never bind and compel the will of man, seeing it is no
physical, bodily thing, so as that any bodily force might act upon it. Nothing
in the world can make us will and like that which we do not like; the will of
man is liable to no Voluntas non potest cogi. Axioma Scholast.
compulsion, it has this privilege above all other things on the Earth, that
nothing about it can force or constrain it, but that still it wills and chooses
as it self pleases.

As for the actions of men indeed, they are mixed things. Because they flow from
the whole man, both Body and Soul; and beginning in the mind or will within,
are consummate in our outward and bodily operation. And as for the last of
these, viz. our bodily operation, it may be forced, forasmuch as one Body is
liable to the force and compulsion of another. Thus, for instance, a chaste
Matrons Body may be violently ravished. A peaceable man's hand may, by the
overpowering strength of another man, be made the forced instrument of another
murder. The bodily work and operation can be forced, seeing other Bodies more
powerful than it self can compel it. And in this sense the Schools understand
the word action, viz. only for the action of the Body, when they make one kind
of involuntary actions to be involuntary by Invitae per vim.
violence or compulsion; that being a thing whereto not the will it self, but
the body only can be liable.

But now these forced actions of the Body, although in Nature they be looked
upon as actions, yet in morality they are esteemed as none at all. That is,
Laws, which are the Rules of good and evil, and the measure of men's manners,
take no notice of them, nor look upon themselves to be either broken or kept by
them; because it is not the Body and Carcass, but the whole man, consisting of
Soul as well as Body, which Laws are given as a Guide to. So that a ravished
Matron, if only her Body suffered, and there was no concurrence of her own
consent to it, is as chaste and unpolluted in God's account and in the censure
of the Law, as is the purest Virgin. And therefore it was a great truth whereby
Collatinus and Brutus went about to comfort the poor destowred Lucretia in
Me^tem peccare, non corpus, and ^nde consilium abju^rit, ^ulpam abiss^. Live.
Dec. ^. verse. sin.
Livy; It is the mind, say they, which sins, and not the Body; so that in those
actions wherein there is nothing of will and deliberation, there is likewise no
fault or transgression. And this Case is expressly thus determined, Deuteronomy. 22.
For in the Case of the ravished Damsel, whose will was no way consenting to it,
but who did all that she could against it, it is expressly ordered that to her
there is nothing to be done by way of punishment, because in her there is no
sin worthy of death; for like as when one man is slain by another, even so is
this case; she is not acting, but suffering in it, ver. 26.

As for him indeed who chose thus to force us, it is true that the Law will
interpret what is done by our Bodies as his action, because he freely chose so
to compel us. Our bodily Members, which were forced by him, were his
instruments, and not our own; for he it was, and not we ourselves, who ordered
and directed them. We were the same in his hands, as a Sword is in the hand of
a man, viz. the Instrument only, but not the Agent. So that what was done by us
is not our own, but his who was pleased so to make use of us. In him therefore
the unlawful action, being willed and chosen, is really a sin and
transgression. But in us, since it was not our own, it is looked upon as none.
There is nothing charged upon our account for it, more than if it had never
been done; because we did not act, but suffer; it had nothing of our own will,
and therefore it can be no Article of our condemnation.

So much of any action therefore as is forced, viz. the outward, bodily
operation, in the estimate of good and evil, of vice and virtue, is of no
account to us whatever it be to others; because it is not our own. For to make
any action ours, it must proceed, not from our Bodies, but from our selves, who
have Souls as well as Bodies: it must come from the will within, as well as
from the body without; and as for our will it self, it is plain that it can
never be made to choose involuntarily by force, since it is not subject to any
forcible violence and compulsion.

But although those actions which we exert our selves, and wherein we are not
merely passive instruments in the hands of others, cannot be made involuntary
by any force from without upon the will it self: yet may they become so from
something else within us. For our wills are not the only internal Principle of
humane actions, but several others concur with them, whereby their choice it
self is influenced. Our wills indeed choose and command our actions; but then
our passions move, and our understandings direct and carry away our very wills
themselves. So that they are set in a middle Station, being subject to be acted
upon and hurried away by some; as well as they are empowered to command, and
govern others.

1. Men's wills are subject to be violently acted by their passions, which hurry
them on to consent to those things which are both without and against their
habitual liking and inclination. When any passion is grown too strong for them,
although they are afraid to act that sin which it hales them to, yet can they
not withstand it. For the Law of sin in the Members is of more force with them,
and prevails more over them, than the Law of God in the mind. So that although
they have several exceptions against it, they are not for all that able to
refuse it; but they are overcome by it, and yield at last to act it, though
unwillingly, and to fulfill it though with trouble and regret.

Now here is an unwillingness, it is true, and things are done, which otherwise
would not be done, because the power of men's lusts and passions is so strong
that their wills cannot restrain them. For all the interest, which the contrary
motives of Reason and Religion can make against them, is not able to contend
with them. They can and do effect something indeed, so as that the will, when
it does consent to them, does it not fully and freely, with perfect ease and
pleasure; but unwillingly, with fear and reluctance. But yet that which they do
is not enough, for the other side prevails, and the will is not able to hold
out, but yields at last to fulfill the lust, and to act the sin still.

But now although this be some sort of involuntariness, yet is it not that
which will excuse our transgressions, and make all those sins which we commit
under it, to be esteemed consistent slips and pardonable infirmities. For this
state of unwilling Sinners, as we heard Book 3. Chapter 4.
above, is no state of mercy, but a state of death. It is the state which St
Paul describes in the seventh Chapter of his Epistle to the Romans, viz. a
state of captivity and slavery under sin, ver. 14, 23; and thereupon a state of
misery and death, ver. 24. All the Grace which Christ's Gospel allows to it, is
a Grace of deliverance; a Grace that shall help us out of it, and rescue us
from it. In this state of weakness and infirmity Christ found us. For whilst we
were yet without strength to help our selves, says St Paul, Christ dyed for
us, Romans 5.6. But now since he has dyed for us, he will not leave us in it, but
rescue and deliver us out of it. For now he having dyed for us, we are likewise
to reckon our selves to be dead indeed unto sin for him; that it should no
longer master and prevail over us to reign in our mortal bodies so far, as that
we should fulfill the lusts thereof, Romans 6.11, 12. And as for our bodily
members, which are the Stage whereon our lusts and passions reign, we are to
yield them up now, not any longer instruments of unrighteousness unto the
service of sin, but instruments of righteousness unto the service of God, ver.
13.

If therefore we are truly Christians, and such as Christ came to make us, upon
our becoming which he has procured Grace and pardon for us, we are not enslaved
and led Captives by our passions, but have conquered and subdued them. This St
Paul affirms expressly. For they that are Christ's, says he, have crucified the
flesh, with the (...).
passions or affections and lusts, Gal. 5.24.

But then besides our lusts and passions, which although they do make some,
cannot yet effect a pardonable unwillingness; there still remains one cause
more which may produce it. For

2. Men are subject to be carried on to work what is both without and against
their habitual liking and inclination, through ignorance. And this is the great
source and entire cause of all our consistent slips and pardonable infirmities.

As for the will of man, it is a blind faculty, it can choose nothing till the
understanding shows it. That is, we cannot desire or will a thing before we see
it, nothing can be chosen which is not apprehended. So that if at any time we
offend through ignorance or inconsideration, and do amiss either because we did
not understand our Duty, or because we did not think of it; unless our
ignorance and inconsideration be themselves damnable, and charged upon us to
our condemnation, nothing else will. For God will -- Ergo non est cui relle
impatetur peccatum nisi vol^nti. Aug. de lib. ^rbit. l. 3. c. 17.
impute nothing to us at the last Day, either to save, or to destroy us, but
what proceeded from our own will and choice; and therefore if any sinful action
be innocently involuntary, it is likewise uncondemning.

And this now is the Case of all our slips and transgressions of the Law of
God, which are consistent with a state of Grace and salvation. We act them
without understanding or considering of them, and so they are involuntary and
unchosen. For in some of them we do not think or consider of what we do at all;
and in others, although we know the action, yet are we ignorant of the
sinfulness of it; so that even in the choice of that this still remains
unchosen.

For sin and obedience is not all acting of a thing, but an acting of it with
certain ends and designs. If we would be thought to obey Gods Law, we must do
it because he requires it; and if we be judged to have sinned against it, it
will be for doing something when we saw that he had forbidden it. For that
service which God requires is not a heartless service, but a service of the
will and choice. So that we must do what he enjoins for his sake, and because
his Law requires it, if we expect that he should take himself to be obeyed in
it: and we must choose to do wh^t we Non sacit aliquid contra Legem Legis
ignarus -- Nullus potest ejus rei praevaricator esse quam nescit. Salvian de
Gub. Dei l. 4. p. 134, 138. Ed. Oxon.
know is against his Law, for the sake of sin before we need to fear that he
will punish us as men that have sinned against him. Obedience then and
disobedience, besides the action, require likewise the eye and intention; viz.
the choosing of what we do because his Law commands it, or the choosing it when
we know that his Law has forbidden it. But if this knowledge of his Law be
wanting, although we choose the evil action, yet do we not choose the sin,
because we do not see that it is sinful. For we would not choose it if we knew
that he had forbid it, so that in our hearts there is no contempt of him, or
disobedience at all.

When therefore at any time we knowingly and deliberately choose an action which
we do not know to be sinful, except that ignorance be our own fault, whatever
the action be as to it self, yet as to its relation to the Law, viz. its
sinfulness and disobedience, it is not willed and chosen. For since we did not
see its sinfulness, we could not choose and consent to it. So that there is no
rebellion in our wills, whatsoever there may seem to be in our action; but they
may notwithstanding it be still entirely subject unto God, and ready to obey
him in every thing wherein they see he has laid his Commands upon them.

As some of our consistent slips and transgressions therefore are not thought
of, or considered at all; so others, although they are known and considered in
themselves, are yet unknown under that relation of sinful actions; so that the
sin is all the while unseen, and therefore involuntary and unchosen.

Now as for these slips and transgressions which are thus unknown, and thereby
involuntary; they are consistent with a state of Grace, and such as Christ's
Gospel does not eternally threaten, but in great mercy bear, and graciously
dispense with.

To convince us of the truth whereof, besides all that has been above
discoursed upon this Argument, it is first considerable that all these
involuntary failings upon ignorance or want of knowledge, are unavoidable, and
God, we know, will never damn any man for doing that which could not be
avoided. For no man can choose to shun that which he does not see, but his
understanding must first discern and apprehend a thing, before his will is in
any capacity to refuse it. And forasmuch as these slips are no matter of our
sight and knowledge, they can be none of our refusal and avoidance.

Indeed if a man should pause and deliberate, watch and examine at all times;
albeit he might still be subject to one sort of involuntary actions, viz. that
which arises from his ignorance of his Duty; yet would he not be liable to the
other which results from this inconsideration of it. For where a man has time,
and his Powers are awake, so that he is fit to look about him; his thoughts are
his own, and he may fix them upon the consideration of what he pleases. And
where he has the power to consider of any action, he has the power likewise to
avoid it. And this is that which is pleaded in behalf of men's ability to keep
all Gods Commands entirely, and to live wholly without sin, by Atticus in St
Hierome: Hoc and nos dicimus, poss^ hominem non peccare si velit, pro tempore,
pro loco, pro imbecillitate corporea, quamdiu intentus est animus, quamdiu
chorda nullo vitio laxatur in cithara. Hieron. Dial. adv. Pel. l. 3. p. 302.
Ed. Erasm.
Thus much we say, That a man may live without all sin if he will, for such
time and place as his mind is intent, and his care is at stretch, and his
bodily infirmities will suffer him to continue so.

But as for this power of avoiding all involuntary sins which arise from
inconsideration, it is no power at all. For herein we must know lies every man's
unavoidable weakness and infirmity, that whereas our obedience is required at
all times, this fitness is only in some certain time and place. For no man is
always in that good condition, to be wise and well-disposed, watchful and
standing upon his Guard. But he forgets when he should remember, and his
faculties are asleep when they should be awake, and he is diverted by other
business, and hindered by intervening accidents. So that sometimes either he has
not leisure to consider in, or his faculties are not well disposed, and his
thoughts free and at his own command, so as, when he has time, duly to consider
in it.

And this evil state, which thus unfits a man for consideration, is not always
in his own power, and at his own choice whether he shall fall under it or no.
For as for the want of time, a man in this world is placed in a crowd of
business, and whilst his thoughts are hot in the pursuit of one, another many
times waits for him.

And because opportunities do not stay till we are at leisure, we must take
them when we find them; so that we act oftentimes without considering, since,
if we should stay to think, we should stay beyond that time which we are to act
in, if we do act at all. Besides, our powers of action, especially where there
is any strong temptation of pleasure or profit to act for, are forward of
themselves, and ready to spring out upon the first occasion. As soon as the
temptation is offered to our thoughts, our wills indeliberately approve, and
all our bodily and active powers, by an unconsidered emanation, start up to
pursue and endeavor after it; whence thinking and considering is necessary,
not to raise, but to stop and restrain them. And then if either our thoughts
have been otherwise engaged, and so cannot readily withdraw themselves to
consider of a new object; or if our thinking powers themselves are dull and
heavy, and thereby unfit to consider of it: we presently and indeliberately go
on to act the thing without all pausing and due consideration.

For this other reason of inconsideration also, viz. the want of power, or
indisposition of our thinking faculty it self, is not a thing wholly subject to
our own will, to choose whether, or when we shall fall under it. Because in this
state of our souls, during their being here united to our Bodies, they make use
of our bodily powers in their use of reason, and in the very exercise of
thought and consideration; and therefore even in them they are liable to be
changed and altered, just as our Bodies are. For in a brisk and healthy Body,
our thoughts are free, and quick, and easy; but if our Bodies are dull and
indisposed, our minds are so too. A heaviness in our heads, will make us heavy
in our apprehensions; and a discomposure in our Spirits, whether through the
strength of Wine, or of a violent passion; will make us discomposed and
incoherent in our thoughts also. And if there be an utter perverting, or
blasting of our bodily powers, as is often seen in the bodily Diseases of
Epilepsies, Phrensies, Apoplexies, and the like; there will be the same
perversion, or utter extinction of our conceptions likewise. But now these
indispositions of our Bodies, which thus unfit our very souls for thought and
due consideration, are not in our power to order when and where they shall
seize upon us. For our Bodies are liable to be thus acted upon by any other
Bodies of the world, whether we will or no. A heavy air, or an indisposing
accident will work a change in our bodily temper without our leave; and when
once that is indisposed, we cannot hinder our thoughts themselves from being
indisposed too.

And since it is not in our power at all times to choose whether or no we will
pause and consider; although we can avoid offending in those Cases wherein we
can consider of it, yet is it manifest that we cannot avoid offense in all.

Indeed if we take any particular action, and in our own thoughts separate it
from any particular time, and from the Chain of other particular actions
amongst which it lies; we shall be apt to affirm that it is such whereof we can
think and consider. For take any action by it self, and being aware of it, we
can let other things alone, and watch for it particularly; and when we do so,
we are sure to find one time or other when our understandings are disposed for
a due deliberation, and fit and able to consider of it. But then we must take
notice that this supposed state of an action, as separate from the Crowd of
other actions, and determined to no time, is only imaginary and in speculation.
For when we come to practice them, though in some we have time and power
enough, yet in others we find that we have not. Because either they come in the
throng of other business, and then our thoughts, being hotly employed upon
other things, cannot so easily be drawn from them upon the sudden to consider
of them: or if they call upon us when we have time to consider in, yet it
happens that our faculties are heavy and indisposed, and so we exert them still
without due consideration. When we think of any particular action by it self
therefore, we take it out of the throng of business wherein it is involved, and
out of that time wherein we are indisposed; and then we are bold to conclude
that we can consider of it. But when we come to practice it, we find that our
former speculation supposed false, and that it comes mixed with a crowd of other
things, or in a time when we have troubled and discomposed thoughts: So that
how subject soever it was to our consideration in that separate state wherein
we imagined it, yet have we no power to consider of it in that throng of
business or indisposition of faculties wherein we find it.

And this is verily the Case of several of our slips and transgressions. For
look upon any of the particulars by it self, and take it asunder from the rest;
and then we shall be confident that we may bethink our selves and consider of
it. But take it, as indeed it lies, among the mixed Crowd of other actions, or
as offered to our indisposed understandings; and then we shall find that it
slips from us without all consideration.

And this, as I take it, is intended by a great man, when he tells us of sins
of pardonable infirmity, that the Libertatem eam, quam in specie habere
videntur, in sua generalitate considerata non habeant. Grot. de Jure Belli, l.
2. c. 20.. 19.
liberty which they seem to have when we consider them in special and asunder,
they indeed have not when we consider them in the general; viz. as involved in
the crowd of other actions amongst whom they lie, and altogether. Upon which
account of their having in them no choice and consideration, he questions
whether they contain that which can in strictness and propriety of speech be
called sin. And indeed if we understand the same by sin which St John does,
when he gives the explication of it, 1 John 3.4; ( viz. a (...).
rejecting or contemning of the Law, in which sense only a state of Grace is
destroyed by it, and he who is born of God cannot commit it;) they have not.
For men cannot be said to reject and Nil contemptu agunt c^^lestium
praeceptorum, praecepta Domini nes^ientes, etc. -- Nemo ignota contemnit, etc,
Salv. de Gub. Dei, l. 4. p. 134. and 148. Ed. Oxon.
despise a Law, when they do not see and consider of it.

The liberty then which we have about those slips and transgressions which we
do not know and consider of, is in effect no liberty at all. For we neither
choose the disobedient action it self, nor the cause of it. We do not choose the
sinful action it self, because we do not know or consider of it: Nor do we
choose the inconsideration, because it is not left to our liberty whether in
some of our actions we should be inconsiderate or no.

And since our slips and failings which are thus involuntary by ignorance,
cannot be chosen or refused, it is plain that they cannot be avoided. And as for
all those things which we cannot avoid, it is clear from what has been said
above, that the Gospel does not eternally threaten us, nor will God ever
condemn us for them.

But that these slips and transgressions, which being thus unknown are likewise
unchosen, and so unavoidable, are not eternally punishable by the Gospel, but
consistent with a state of Grace and Salvation, will further appear if we
consider, First, The Nature of God. Secondly, The nature and plain declarations
of the Gospel.


1. I say their consistency with a state of Grace, or Gods favor, will plainly
appear if we consider the Nature of God.

God is the most Gracious, Loving, and good natured Being in the whole world.
For all the love and kindness that appears among us men proceeds from him, and
makes us to resemble him, and to be like unto him. Nay, he is not only Loving,
but even Love it self. For God, says St John, is Love, and he who dwells in
love dwells in God, and God in him, 1 John 4.16. And if we will take that
character which he gives of himself, it is wholly made up of the various
instances of Mercy and Goodness. The Lord, says he to Moses, the Lord God
merciful and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth;
keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgression and sin, Exodus
34.6, 7. All his delight is in exercising Love, and showing kindness. For he
swears to us as he lives, that he has no delight at all in the death of a
sinner, but had rather that every wicked man should turn from his wickedness,
and live, Ezech. 33.11. He is by no means forward to epsy faults, or malicious
to misconstrue actions, or prone to admit of provocation, or implacably angry
when he is once provoked, or cruelly vindictive when once he is angered. The
Lord, says the Psalmist, is merciful, and gracious, slow to anger, and
plenteous in mercy. He will not always chide when he has just reason for it,
nor keeps he his anger for ever, Psalm. 103.8, 9. He is not at all of the
humor of severe masters, who are prone to take offense; but like a most tender
father he is all benignity and goodness. For if any thing be pitiable, he
pities it; if any thing is done amiss, he is slow to wrath, and easy to
forgive it. Like as a father pitieth his own children, even so the Lord pitieth
them that fear him, Psalm. 103.13. Nay, take this Love and Pity of a Parent
where it is at the highest pitch of all, (viz.) in mothers toward their most
helpless, and so most pitiable infants; and yet this tenderness of God does
infinitely exceed it. Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not
have compassion on the son of her womb? Yea, they may forget, says God by his
Prophet Isaiah, but I will not forget thee, Isa. 49.15.

Thus Loving, Pitiful, and Benign a Nature do the Scriptures represent God to
be. And what they declare of him, all the world have experienced, and found by
him. For every impenitent sinner is a lasting monument of his long-suffering
and forbearance; and every prosperous event, and deliverance in the world, is
an effect of his boundless love and kindness. He is infinitely good beyond all
desert, nay, in spite of all provocation. For he is loving even unto the
unthankful and the evil, making his sun to shine, and his rain to fall, and
all the other m^r^ies of life to descend upon the unjust as well as upon the
just, upon them who contemn, as well as on them who obey him; as our Savior
observed, Mat. 5.45. Luke 6.35. And this he is to such an astonishing degree,
as to bestow upon them, not only the blessings of his substance, of his
protection, and of his kind providence: but also, what is a wonder to conceive,
for their sakes to part with his own well-beloved, and so much the more
beloved, because his only begotten Son. For God, as says the Apostle, has
recommended his love to us, in that whilst we were sinners and enemies, Christ
his Son came from him, and died for us, Romans 5.8.

Thus wondrously pitiful, obliging, and good natured then is God, according to
that account which both the Scripture, and the Experience of the whole world
give of him.

And now let any man think with himself how so surpassing kind, and infinitely
gracious a nature as this, is like to be affected with the ignorant, or
inconsiderate slips and errors of his Servants? Will he be utterly offended
with them, so as quite to cast them off, and for ever to condemn them? No
certainly, but in great mercy he will pity and bear with them. For these slips,
where we do not consider, or where we err and do not understand our duty, are
such instances of disobedience as imply nothing of contempt or of a rebellious
heart, nor have any thing of our will in them. They are clearly involuntary, so
that whatsoever the action may appear to be, the will it self is innocent. For
the disobedience cannot be chosen, since it is not understood; which indeed, in
the notion and interpretation of Gods Law, makes it not to be that sin and
disobedience which is threatened, but something else: for that sin, as St John
tells us, is a rejecting or a renouncing of the Law, whereas in these slips
where we do not see it, it is plain that we cannot renounce it.

And since they have nothing in them of a disobedient will, or of a rebellous
heart; can any man think that so gracious and pitiful a nature should be so
highly provoked with them, as for ever to condemn his own honest servants, and
otherwise obedient children upon the account of them? Whosoever thou art, who
art inclined to think thus, let me advise thee to consider a little what Love
is, and whether it can possibly be guilty of such hard usage. If thou have any
competent degrees of that Love and Pity in thine own heart, which are so
infinite in God, bethink thy self whether thou could do it, for that is the
way, and thence take thy measures in judging whether or no God can. Does any
gracious master use that severity toward the oversights and indiscretions of
his honest servant? or, to rise yet higher, can any tender Parent show that
rigor upon every error and inconsideration of his heartily obedient child? Is
not every good man prone to pass by such offenses as are committed unwillingly
against him; and the more he has of goodness, is he not still more forward to
pardon and bear with them? There is no Nature upon Earth that is kind and
pitiful, but will make allowances for those things which proceed from want of
understanding, and will pass over those miscarriages which imply nothing of ill
will or ill intention. Every good man will overlook and connive at them when
they are committed by a perfect stranger; but then most of all when they are
incurred by his own intimate and dear acquaintance or relations, by his own
servant, or his own child. This, I say, every good and loving man does, and the
more he has of love and goodness, the proner still he is to do it. For it is a
natural and inseparable effect of charity, so that in what proportion it
increases, in the same must this increase likewise. Charity, says St Paul,
suffers long, and is kind, charity is not easily provoked, charity thinks
no evil, charity bears all things, and endures all things, 1 Cor. 13.4, 5,
7. The more therefore that any man has of charity, the more will he be sure to
show of sufferance, of pity, of endurance of such slips and oversights as are
consistent with an honest, and otherwise obedient heart.

And now since those imperfect measures and degrees of Love which are found in
the hearts of all good men, are of force more than sufficient to make them pity
and bear with these slips of honest ignorance and inconsideration: that
infinite height of Love which dwells in God Almighty, must needs make him bear
with them much rather. For the most loving man upon earth has not the
thousandth part of his affection; the more loving any men are indeed the more
still they are like him, but when they are arrived to the highest pitch of what
humanity can bear, it is not possible, that they should in any measure equal
him. And since Gods Love is infinitely more, his pity and forbearance toward
such pitiable oversights, which is a most natural and necessary effect of it,
cannot possibly be less than ours is. No, if no kind-hearted loving man would,
it must needs be the greatest injury to an infinitely loving God to suspect
that ever he should be severe in punishing us for them.

If we ask Gods Pardon then for all our ignorant and inconsiderate slips and
failings; he is as ready to give as we are to desire it. And this we are
assured of, because it is no more than we daily experience at the hands of
every loving and good natured man. For since God cannot be equalled, and much
less outdone by the very best of us in kindness; what the weak Love of a man
does every day effect, that certainly the infinite Love of God will effect more
abundantly. And as for this way of arguing, it is no more than our Savior
himself uses in another case, when he shows that God will give good gifts unto
his children at their request, because all earthly Parents do it unto theirs
daily; whenas yet their Love, which makes them grant the good things asked so
readily, is infinitely exceeded by the Love of God, Luke 11.13.

Thus from the consideration of Gods Nature it plainly appears, that those
slips and transgressions which are committed involuntarily and unavoidably,
because ignorantly and inconsiderately, do not put us out of a state of Grace,
but consist with it.

Which will appear yet further, if we consider,

Secondly, The Nature, and plain declarations of the Gospel.

As for the Nature of the Gospel, St Paul affirms plainly that it is of such a
temper and genius as tends to ingenerate in the professors of it, not a spirit
of fear and slavery, which they are possessed with who serve a rigorous and
austere Lord; but a spirit of cheerfulness and free confidence, such as they
enjoy who serve a gracious and a loving Father. For he tells the Jews at Rome,
that in embracing of Christ's Gospel they had not received again the spirit of
bondage, unto the possessing of their hearts with fears and scruples; but the
spirit of adoption, whereby they were emboldened with the cheerfulness and
confidence of sons to cry unto God, Abba, Father, Romans 8.15. But now if the
condition of the Gospel it self were so severe, as that, according to the
tenor of it, these unavoidable slips of inconsideration and ignorance should
set God and us at enmity; no Christian man could ever look upon God as upon his
tender Father, with this spirit of filial freedom; but must needs fear and
dread him as his angry and avenging Lord. And the Gospel requiring more of us
under the forfeiture of Gods favor, than any man among us is able to perform;
it could not minister to ingenerate in us a spirit of cheerful confidence
toward him, but quite contrary to that, to fill us with inextricable doubts
and fears of him. As for these slips of ignorance then which cannot be avoided,
we may be assured that according to the Gospel they never can be punished; for
the New Covenant must bear with them, because it cannot engender in us this
spirit of adoption, and filial confidence without such forbearance.

And then as for the Declarations of the Gospel, in this matter they are very
clear also. For besides those places that are mentioned above, which show
clearly that no involuntary sins are damning, and then certainly that our slips
of ignorance are not, seeing they have the greatest plea to involuntariness of
any: I say, besides those, this consistence of our unknown and unconsidered
slips will be evident from other places also.

And for this, to seek no further, St James's Rule is full and plain. To him
that knows, or, which comes to the same thing, if he will may know how to do
good, and does it not, to him it is sin, Jam. 4.17. If then we have no other
sins to answer for, but only these of inconsideration and ignorance, we are
guilty of none wherefore we shall be condemned, these unknown sins not being of
that number.

And indeed St James's Rule is verified by Scripture instances. For holy David
fell through inconsideration and unadvisedness in sundry things; as
particularly in an inconsiderate despairing of Gods mercy, Psalm. 31.22. and in
an excessive sorrow for his Son Absalom, 2 Samuel 18.33. and chapter 19.4. But
notwithstanding these, and all other his unadvised slips, he was all the while,
a man after Gods own heart, a person upright and acceptably obedient still.

Zacharias and Elizabeth were surprised no question, as well as other people
are, into several slips and inconsiderate follies. For one we have mentioned,
even in that short account which the Scriptures have given us of them, and that
is this; viz. that at the first hearing of the joyful message of the Angel, he
is incredulous, and is punished with dumbness for his unbelief, Luke 1.18, 20.
But yet this, and his other involuntary failings of like nature, come not into
the account of his sins and disobedience when God speaks of him; for
notwithstanding these their infirmities, of both of them we are told, that they
were righteous, and that before God, walking in all the Commandments of the
Lord blameless, Luke 1.6.

As for this sort of slips and transgressions therefore, (viz.) our sins of
ignorance and inconsideration; we see plainly that they never will be charged
upon us to our condemnation. They do not destroy a Saint, or put us out of a
state of Grace and Salvation, but consist with it. This must needs be true, for
they must be pardoned, because they cannot be avoided. Besides, the love and
pitifulness of Gods Nature infers, and the very temper and genius of his Gospel
supposes it; the Apostle plainly and fully declares it; and from Gods own mouth
we are told of several of his dearest Saints who have experienced the truth of
it. By all which it appears, that so long as we are guilty of no other slips
but such as these, we are safe in Gods favor, and secure of his promises; we
shall be accepted by him, although we live and dye in them.

And thus at length it appears what sins are truly and innocently involuntary;
(viz.) those which are acted ignorantly and unwittingly: and that they do not
unsaint a man, or destroy his state of Grace and Salvation, but consist with it*

CHAP. V. Of these involuntary and consistent sins particularly; and of the
first cause of innocent involuntariness, (viz.) Ignorance.
The CONTENTS.
A twofold knowledge necessary to choice, (viz.) a general understanding, and
particular consideration. Consistent sins are either sins of ignorance, or of
inconsideration. Of sins involuntary through ignorance of the general Law which
makes a duty. How there is still room for it in the world. Of crying sins,
which are against Natural Conscience, no man can be innocently ignorant. Of
what others he may. This ignorance is necessary to all men for some time, and
to some for all their lives. Men's sins upon it are not damning. Of sins
involuntary through our ignorance of the present actions being included in the
known Law, and meant by it. The causes of this ignorance. First, The difference
between Good and Evil in some actions being not in kind, but only in degree.
Secondly, The limitedness of most Laws, which admit of exceptions. Thirdly, The
indirect obligations which pass upon several indifferent actions. Fourthly, The
clashing of several Laws, whence one is transgressed in pursuit of another; the
great error upon this score is in the case of zeal. Fifthly, The clashing of
Laws with opinions or prejudices.

BUt in regard this consistence of our ignorant and unconsidered slips, is a
matter of so great account in the quieting and comforting of troubled and
fearful Consciences; I will yet proceed to enquire of it more distinctly, and
to show what particular ignorances those are which will cause that innocent
involuntariness, which Christ's Gospel does not punish, as has been already
shown, but graciously dispense with.

To him that knows to do good, says St James, and does it not; to him it is
sin, Jam. 4.17. And the reason why it is so is this, because that sin which a
man knows and sees, he wills and chooses; but if he commit sin, when he sees it
not, it is not imputed to him for a sin, because it is not chosen by him.

That we may clearly understand then what ignorance renders any sin
involuntary, and therefore unpunishable, it is very proper to enquire what
knowledge is necessary unto choice, and fit to make any sin to be esteemed
voluntary and chosen.

Now to our choice of any sin, there is a twofold knowledge necessary.

First, An habitual and general knowledge that the action is sinful.

Secondly, An actual use and exercise of that knowledge in a particular
animadvertence, and express thinking upon what we know; which is consideration.

Both these are necessary to a chosen sin; for we must both know an action to
be a sin, and also actually bethink our selves, and consider of its sinfulness,
before we can be said to choose the sin, and wilfully to disobey in it.

1. Before we can be said to choose the sinfulness of any action, it is
necessary that we know habitually and in the general, that the action,
whenever it is committed, is sinful.

I call that an habitual and general knowledge, when we are not to learn of any
sinful action that there is a Law that forbids it, nor are in any doubts or
darkness in our own thoughts whether it be a sin, or no. But if it is proposed
to our minds, they are already resolved about it, and need not further to
enquire of it; they know and judge it to be a sin when they are asked the
question, and that is their standing opinion and fixed persuasion. And this
knowledge, because it is no more of one particular action than of another, I
call general; and because it is fixed and permanent, having grown into a lasting
impression and habitual judgment of the mind, I call an habitual knowledge.

Now that we may be said to choose to sin and disobey in any particular action,
it is necessary that we have this general and habitual knowledge of its
sinfulness. For if we do not understand that, although we do choose the action,
yet we cannot be esteemed to choose the sin, since our will may be all the while
innocent and obedient, and ready to refuse the action if it were made to see
that it is sinful. We can have no choice of that whereof we have no
apprehension; for the will, as it is truly said, is a blind faculty, and can
choose nothing till it be represented and proposed to it by the understanding.
So that if our minds are in darkness about any action, and have no knowledge of
its being forbidden; our wills can have no share in choosing of the sin; but
since it was unknown, it must be also involuntary and unchosen.

But besides this general and habitual knowledge of the sinfulness of any
action; there is moreover necessarily required to our choice of it,

2. An actual use and exercise of that knowledge in a particular
animadvertence, and express thinking upon what we know, which is consideration.
For there is no knowledge that directs and influences our choice, further than
we actually attend to it, and consider of it; but if at any time we did not
think of it, it is all one as if we did not know it. Nothing is a motive to our
will, further than it is heeded and attended to at the time of willing; and
unless we see and consider of it then, when we are to choose upon it. For in
this Case the Civilians Maxim is very true, Non apparentis, and non existentis,
eadem est ratio.
That which does not appear to be, is of no more account than if really it were
not at all.

That any sin then may be said to be willed and chosen by us, it is necessary
that it occur to our thoughts, and be present to our minds at the time of
choosing of it. For if we transgress when we do not think of it, our heart may
be innocent all the while, and our will incur no disobedience at all, since if
we did but consider of the sin, we would by no means embrace, but utterly
refuse it. So that all that can be charged upon us in such Cases is only the
have and error of our understandings, but not any rebellion in our wills; for
our heart is good, although the outward action appear to be evil.

Now since both a general knowledge, and a particular consideration are
necessary in every wilful and chosen sin; the involuntariness of any
transgressions may arise from the want of either of them. So that those sins
are justly reputed to be involuntary and unchosen which proceed,

1. From the want of the general knowledge, as in all sins of ignorance.

2. From the want of particular animadvertence, as in all sins of
inconsideration.

1. The first Cause of an innocent and pardonable involuntariness, is ignorance
of our Duty; when we venture to do what God forbids, because we do not know
that he has forbidden it.

And this ignorance may enter upon two accounts, either,

First, From our ignorance, or mistake of the Law it self, when we know not
that God has made any such Law as our present action is a transgression of. Or,

Secondly, From our ignorance, or mistake of the thing it self, which the Law
enjoins or forbids, when we know not that our present action comes under that
which in the known Law is enjoined or forbidden.

Thus, for instance, a man may sin by backbiting, censoriousness, etc. either
because he knows not that backbiting and censoriousness are things prohibited,
or because he knows not that what he does is censuring and backbiting. And
either way the error may be confined to his understanding, and the
transgression be no where else but in his mind, but may not reach his heart or
will at all. For he would neither utter the backbiting nor censorious word, if
he knew that it were against God's will; but for this very reason he ventures
on them, because he knows not that actions of that kind are forbidden, or that
his is of that forbidden kind of actions.

First, The first sort of ignorance, which can effect an innocent
involuntariness, is our ignorance of the general Law which makes a Duty, when
we know not that God has given any such Commandment as our present action is a
transgression of.

All the Laws of Christ are not known by every man, but some are ignorant of
one or other of them. Nay there is no man, how perfect soever his knowledge of
them be at present, but at some time he did not know them. He had a time of
learning before he attained to a complete understanding of them. For our
knowledge of them, as of all things else, is gradual; it goes on by steps, and
from the notice of one proceeds to the notice of another. So that even the wise
and learned themselves do not at all times see all those things which Christ
has required of them, but pass through a long time of ignorance before they
arrive at that pitch of complete knowledge.

But then there are others who have neither abilities nor opportunities to know
every particular Law of Christ in a longer time, nor some, it may be, in their
whole lives. For how many men are there in the world whose understanding is
slow, and who come to apprehend things with great difficulty? And as their
faculties are narrow, so are their opportunies very small. For although they
are most heartily willing and desirous to see all that God has required of
them, that they may keep and practice it; yet their education has been so poor,
that they cannot read it; the place which Gods Providence has allotted for them
is so destitute, that they are far from them who should instruct them in it;
their condition in the world is so subject and dependant, that they have little
time and leisure of their own wherein to seek instruction; and their
apprehensions are so slow, and their memories so frail, that it is not much of
it at a time which they can retain when they have got the freedom of it. They
are servants, or poor men, and must be working for their bodily maintenance,
when they should be in search of spiritual Doctrine.

Indeed through the infinite goodness and gracious Providence of God, it
seldom happens, if at all, that they who have honest hearts, which stand ready
and prepared to obey his Laws, in Christian Countries live long without the
means of understanding them. For although they themselves cannot read; yet, if
they desire it, and seek after it, they cannot miss of Christian people, and of
Christian Guides who will be most ready and willing to instruct them. So that
no man amongst them, whose heart is first desirous of it, can ever be supposed
to want all opportunities of coming to the knowledge of his Duty.

But then we must consider, that knowledge of our Duty is a word of a great
latitude, and has many parts and degrees in it. For our Duty takes up a great
compass, no less than all the particular Laws, which are contained under the
general Precepts of Piety, Sobriety, Justice, Charity, Peaceableness. And
although every man's opportunities will serve him to know some, and to
understand the most general and comprehensive; yet will they not enable him to
understand all. Our whole Duty, it is true, both toward God and men, is
comprehended in that one Law of Love, which, as St Paul says, is the fulfilling
of the Law, Romans 13.10. So that if every man had but the wit and parts, the
time and leisure to make deductions, and to run this general Law into as many
particular instances and expressions as it would reach to, in the knowledge of
that one Law, which is soon learned, he might have it within his own power when
he would to understand all the rest, which are contained within the compass of
those two great Branches, and general Heads of Duty. But alas! it is not every
common head, no nor very many even of the wise and learned, who are so quick
and ready, so full and comprehensive, in making inferences. But they have need
to be showed the particulars, and are not able of themselves to collect them by
a tedious* and comprehensive train of consequences. So that even when they have
learned their obligation to the most material and general Precepts of the
Gospel; yet may there be several Particular ones still remaining, which not
only the poor and ignorant, but they also who think themselves to be more wise
and learned, do not see, and take themselves to be obliged by.

As for the crying sins of Perjury, Adultery, Murder, Theft, Oppression,
Lying, Slander, and the like, which even natural Conscience, without the
assistance and instruction of Christ's Gospel, would be afraid of; these, it is
true, no man, who is grown up to years of common reason and discretion, can be
ignorant of, and yet be innocent. But then besides these, there are many other
sins which are not of so black a Die, or of so mischievous a Nature, which many
of them who profess the Gospel, through the littleness of their abilities,
their leisure, or opportunities, do not understand to be sinful. Their
Consciences are not afraid of them, nor check them either before, or after they
have committed them. For how many are there of the Professors of Christ's
Religion, who never think of being called to an account for lasciviousness and
uncleanness, for passionateness and uncourteousness, for backbiting and
censoriousness, for disturbing the public peace, and speaking evil of
Dignities, for not speaking well of an enemy, or not praying for him, or for
the like Breaches of several other particular Laws of Christ's Gospel, whereby
at the last Day we must all be judged? Alas! they know not of any such Laws,
nor ever think of being tried by them. In the Gospel, it is very true, they are
all recorded, and by Christ's Ministers at one time or other they are all
proclaimed, and by some exemplary good men, although God knows they are very
few, in one place or other they are duly practiced; but yet for all this a
great many Christian men are ignorant of some or other of them. For either they
cannot read the Scriptures where they are mentioned, or they have not
opportunity to hear the Preacher when every one of them particularly is taught,
or they are not in sight and observation of those patterns of piety by whom
they are practiced; so that still they do not understand them. Or if at last
they do come to know them, yet is it some time first, and they acted several
times against them, before they saw that they were bound by them.

So that still we see there is room in the World for sins of ignorance, from
men's not knowing of the Law which they sin against. Several particular Laws,
which lie more remote, and are not so plainly of natural obligation, nor
startled at by natural Conscience, are oftentimes, and by many persons
transgressed, because they do not perceive themselves to be bound by them.

And as for this ignorance of one Branch or other of their Duty, it is some
men's unhappiness rather than their fault; they do not so truly choose it, as
through an unchosen necessity fall under it. For it is necessary to all people
whether they will or no for some time; and to some for all their lives.

It is necessary, I say, to all people whether they will or no for some time.
For by the very constitution of our Nature, which is before any thing of our
own choosing, we are born ignorant: the mind of man being, as Aristotle compares
it, like a blank paper, wherein is nothing written. No man ever since Adam came
into the World in the free exercise of his understanding, and with his perfect
wits about him. And when after some time we do begin to know, yet even then is
all our knowledge gradual, and by little and little. For we first learn one
thing, and then another, and so by several steps attain at last to a competent
pitch of knowledge. When therefore any man does begin to know Gods will, and to
discern his Laws; yet is it not possible that he should understand them all at
once: but some of them every man must needs be ignorant of, till he has had
time to learn and know them all.

To some people, I say, it is necessary for their whole lives, to their dying
Day they do not arrive to the understanding of some things which God has
required of them. And that because they wanted either abilities, or
opportunities, neither of which is of their own choosing. They are of a slow
understanding, and have not those means of instruction, or that time and
leisure to attend upon it, which others have. And that by reason of their place
and low condition in the world, wherein it was Gods pleasure, and not their
own, to dispose of them.

But now this ignorance of some or other of Christ's Laws, being thus
involuntary, it must likewise be innocent. For there is no damning sin and
disobedience but in our own choice; so that as long as the heart is true to
God, he will not be at enmity for any thing else which may seem to be against
him.

And since our ignorance it self is innocent, the sinning upon it will never be
rebellious and damning. For the disobedience is not any way chosen, neither in
it self, nor in its Cause; we do not choose the sin, because we do not see that
the action is sinful, nor do we choose not to see it, because we cannot help it.
But where there is no choice, there will be there no condemnation. So that the
action which is done against the Law, shall not be punished by the Law, if we
were thus innocently ignorant of the Law whereof it was a transgression.

And that it will not, is plain. For God never did, nor ever will condemn any
man for the transgression of a particular Law, before he has had all due means
and necessary opportunities, such as may be sufficient to any honest and
willing heart, to understand it. The Jewish Law obliged none but those whom it
was proclaimed to, who had the advantages of being instructed out of it. It is
they only, says St Paul, who have sinned in or under the Law, who shall be
judged by the Law, Romans 2.12. The Law of Christ did not bind men until they had
sufficient means and opportunities of knowing it, Romans 5.13.
and being convinced by it. If ye were blind, or wanted abilities, says our
Savior to the Pharisees, you should have no sin, John 9.41. And again, if I
had not given them sufficient opportunities of knowing, come, and spoken unto
them, they had not had sin; but now since I have, they have no cloak, or no
(...).
pretense or excuse for their sin. Nay, if I had not given them all due means
of conviction, and done among them the works which no other man has done, they
had not had sin still, John 15.22, 24.

These slips of honest ignorance of our Duty are no more punished under the
Gospel of Christ, than they were under the Law of Moses. For Christ our High
Priest does atone for them by virtue of his Sacrifice of himself, as well as
the Aaronical Priest in behalf of the ignorantly offending Jews, made an
atonement for them by his sin-offering, Levit. 4.2, 3, etc. This St Paul tells
us in his comparison of Christ's Priesthood with that of the line of Aaron. In
his interceding to God, and offering Sacrifice for sins, he can have compassion
on the ignorant, Heb. 5.2.

Ignorance therefore of the general Law which makes any thing a Duty, so long
as it is not wilful and affected by us, through the merits of Christ's
Sacrifice, and the Grace of his Gospel, renders those offenses, which we commit
under it, pardonable transgressions; such as do not destroy a state of Grace,
but consist with it.

And this is the very determination which St Cyprian gives in the Case of
transgressing our Lords institution, in the participation of the Lords Supper.
For some Churches in those Days were wont to make use of Water instead of Wine,
in which way of communicating several of them had been educated and brought up,
having received it ignorantly and in the simplicity of their hearts, as they
had done other things of their Religion, from the practice and tradition of
their Forefathers. Now as for the usage it self, St Cyprian declares plainly
that it is a breach of Duty, and a custom very dangerous and sinful. Invenimus
non a nobis observari quod mandatum est, nisi eadem quae Dominus secit, nos
quoque faciamus, and calicem pari ratione miscentes a Divino magisterio non
recedamus.
It is, says he, against our Lords Command, who plainly bid us do what he did;
i. e. make use of bread and wine, which were those things that he used. Apparet
sanguinem Christi non offerri, si deest vinum calici, nec Sacrificiam Domini
cum legitima Sanctificatione celebrari, nisi Oblatio and Sacrificium nostrum
responderit Passioni. Quomodo ^lim de Creatura vitis novum vinum cum Christo in
Regno Patris bibemus, si in Sacrificio Dei Patris and Christi vinum non
offerimus, nec calicem Domini Dominica traditione miscemus?
The blood of Christ is not offered if there be no wine in the cup to represent
it; and how can we ever hope to drink wine with him in his Fathers Kingdom, if
we drink it not at his Table here on Earth? So that in the good Fathers
judgment the Duty was express, the Law binding, and the transgression
dangerous. But yet as for those innocent and well-meaning souls, who had no
opportunity to be told of it, but were bred up in a contrary way, under the
authority of a tradition that opposed it, and therefore in the simplicity of
their hearts were ignorant of it: Siquis de antecessoribus nostris vel
ignoranter, vel simpliciter non hoc observavit ac tenuit, quod nos Dominus
^acere exemplo and magisterio suo docuit: potest simplicitati ejas de
indulgentia Domini venia concedi; nobis vero non poterit ignosci, qui nunc a
Domino admoniti and instructi sumus ut calicem Dominicum vino mixtum, secundum
quod Dominus obtulit, osseramus. -- agentes graetias quod dum instruit de
futuro quid facere debeamus; de praeterito ignoscit quod simpliciter erravimus.
Cypr. Ep. ad Caecil. quae est Ed. Rigalt. 63.
They, says he, even whilst they do transgress shall go unpunished. Their
simplicity and ignorance shall excuse them, whilst our knowledge will certainly
condemn us; they shall be pardoned, because they could not know it, but we
shall be punished because, when we might have known and kept it, if we would,
we neglected and despised it. In the mean time herein is Gods great mercy shown
to us, and for this should we return most hearty thanks to him, that even now,
when he plainly instructs us in that which under pain of his displeasure we are
to do hereafter; he, at the same time, pardons us for all that, which through
simplicity and honest ignorance we have already done.

And as this innocent unwill'd ignorance of the Law it self excuses all those
transgressions which we incur by reason of it; so does

2. The second sort of ignorance, (viz.) the ignorance of the thing it self
which the Law injoyns or forbids, when we know not that our present action is
included in it, or meant by it.

Gods Laws, as all others, run in general terms, and never go to reckon up all
particular actions which are with them or against them, but leave the judging
and discerning of that to our own selves. He tells us that theft and revenge
are sinful, but leaves us to inform our selves what actions are thievish and
revengefull. He teaches us that Covetousness is forbidden, but he puts us to
see of the action before us that it be covetous; and the same he does in every
other Law. For that which he expressly mentions, is the general name of the
action which he forbids; but as for the particular application, he leaves that
to our own selves.

Now here is the wide place for the ignorance and errors of all sorts of men.
For what Arrian says of happiness and misery, is equally true of sin and duty:
(...). Arrian. Comment. in Epict. lib. 3. cap. 26.
in the application of the acknowledged notion or law to particular things or
actions is the cause of all our evils; here the great scene of ignorance in
morals, the field of doubting and dispute lies. The great controversies which
men have either in their own thoughts, or with Gods ministers, is not so much
whether evil-speaking, backbiting, censoriousness, unpeaceableness,
drunkenness, sensuality, or any such prohibited vice be a sin. For as to that
the Law is express, the very word is mentioned in it, and he that reads or
hears the Law, if he attend to what he reads or hears, cannot but observe and
understand it. But the great doubt is, whether this or that particular action,
which they are about to commit, be indeed a censorious, an unpeaceable, a
sensual, or a drunken action.

And the Reasons of this are several. For,

1. In some actions, although we know the general Law, yet we know not whether
the particular action be comprehended under it; because what is forbidden in
the Law differs from what is innocent, not in kind, but only in degree. For a
great part of our appetites and actions are neither determined to good nor ill
in their whole nature, but only as they are in certain measures. The use of
meats and drinks within due bounds is harmless, but beyond that it is
intemperance; the desire and search of money in a moderate degree is lawful,
but above that it is Covetousness; the modest pursuit of honor and promotion is
innocent, but when it exceeds it is ambition; to have just thoughts of a man's
self is allowable, but to be puffed up with over-high conceits is pride; and so
it is in several other instances. A great many passions and actions are not
always sinful, but so far only as they are deficient or exceed. Which holding
true of several virtues and vices, made Aristotle lay it down as a part of the
nature of virtue in general, that it is something consisting in (...), etc.
Arist. Eth. ad Nicom. l. 2. c. 6.
mediocrity; and agreeably that vice is something consisting in defectiveness
or excess.

Now the actions which are prohibited by several Laws, not coming under the
compass of the Laws in their whole natures, but only when they are arrived to
certain measures and degrees; herein, after we have known the general Law, lies
the difficulty and unresolvedness, whether or no the present action falls under
it. For it is a very hard thing, and, it may be, impossible to any humane
understanding, to fix the exact bounds and utmost limits of virtue and vice, to
draw a line precisely between them, and tell to a tittle how many degrees are
innocent, and the just place where the excess begins. Here the Wise and Learned
themselves are at a loss, and much more the rude and ignorant; so that in Laws
of this nature they may many times mistake their sin for their liberty and
allowance, and go beyond the innocent degree, when they do not know it.

2. In other actions, although we do know the general Law, yet many times we
are ignorant of the present actions being comprehended under it, because the
Law is not absolute and unlimited, but admits of several exceptions, whereof we
may mistake the present action to be one.

The great and general Laws of Christ, as of any other Legislator, have several
cases which are not included in the general name of the duty enjoined or of the
sin prohibited in the Law, but are exempt from it. What Duty is enjoined in
more universal words, than that of Peace? but yet in several cases we not only
may, but out of Duty must nourish contention: For we are bid to contend
earnestly for the Faith which was once delivered to the Saints, Jud. verse. 3.
We must be concerned for God and Religion, when others concern themselves
against them. We are not tamely and unaffectedly to see Gods Laws cancelled, or
our countries peace disturbed; but must strive and contend with as much wise
zeal and active courage, and with infinitely more honor and peace of mind, to
maintain and defend, than ill men do to oppose and destroy them. Again, what
Law is delivered in fuller and plainer terms, than that of forgiving injuries?
but yet there are several cases wherein we may justly seek amends for them. For
we may bring a malefactor to condign punishment, or an injurious man to
restitution; and the like is observable of other Laws.

Now those actions which come under the general name of the sin prohibited, not
being forbidden universally, but some being excepted; here again is room for
ignorance and mistake about the particular action after we have known the
general Duty. For we may take that to be a case excepted, which is indeed a
case prohibited; and venture upon an action as an exempted liberty, which in
truth and reality is a forbidden sin.

3. In other actions, although we know the general Law, yet many times we are
in ignorance about the particular action, because there are several actions
which are not directly forbidden by any Law, but are always innocent and
indifferent, unless when some Law takes hold of them indirectly. The action is
usually allowed, except when it is committed in such a manner as that the
transgression of some Law accompanies it. There is no Law against it self, but
only against some thing that is annexed to it. For God has not given a
particular Law for every sort of actions, but has left us in several to govern
our selves by other motives and inducements of pleasure, honor, or interest,
and not by virtue of a Commandment. But although these unrestrained actions are
no matter of a particular Law, which expressly names them, and directly binds us
up to one side, either in choosing, or refusing the whole kind of them: yet in
our use and exercise of them, they may at one time or other fall under the
power of several. For, to illustrate this by an instance, there is no Law which
directly and expressly, either enjoins or forbids us to play at cards, or other
pastime; but yet several Laws commanding or forbidding other things may be
transgressed in our use of them. For even in a game at cards we may incur the
sin of Covetousness, by our desire of money; the sin of Injustice, by our
endeavors to cheat and cozen; and the sins of passionateness, impatience, and
unpeaceableness, by our repining at our ill luck, our quarrelling, and
contending; and the like might be shown in other cases.

Now seeing several actions which in themselves are thus innocent, and under no
Law; may yet, at one time or other, by reason of some thing concomitant, and
annexed to them, be indirectly a transgression of a Law: here is still a
further reason, why, when we know the general Law, we yet are ignorant of our
present actions being forbid by it. For the Law does not look upon it directly,
but takes a compass before it comprehends it. They lie not in the same line,
and so one may be particularly seen and considered of, and much more known and
understood in the general, without seeing of the other.

4. In other actions, although we know the General Law which we sin against,
yet we do not believe that our present action is included in it, or forbid by
it, because another Law happens to clash with it in some instance, and seems to
enjoin and justify what we do, although that be transgressed by it. For it
often happens in a Christians Life that two Laws interfere, and command
differently in the same instance. Our Duty is at variance with it self, so that
when we pursue obedience in one particular, another is disobeyed by us. How
obvious and usual is it for him who would avoid the passion and impatience of
discourse, to fall into a fault of the opposite extreme, by fullenness and
unsociable moroseness? What is more common than for men to be over- censorious
and troublesomly rigid in conversation, who aim at nothing but to be severely
virtuous, and piously austere? It is an obvious error for any, whilst they
intend a charitable feasting, to run into some small intemperance; for
inoffensiveness and kind compliance, to justle out the due severities of
reproof; for severity to exceed into ungentleness, for affection to degenerate
into fondness; and, which is the great instance of error upon this score, for
our zeal for God to disturb the peace, and transgress the bounds of charity
toward men.

I do not mean such zeal as transgresses notorious and weighty Laws, for
disputable, nay, even for clear and evident Doctrines and Opinions. A zeal that
will stick at nothing, but bursts through all Gods Commands to propagate an
Article, and ventures upon murders, tumults, lying, slander, wars, bloodshed,
and other instances of a most notorious and damning disobedience in practice,
to promote an Orthodox belief. For these are such instances of offense as no
honest heart can overlook; but if a man has not debauched his Conscience, they
must needs appear to be of a frightful guilt, and of a damning nature. Any
virtuous temper must abhor, and every good conscience utterly condemn them. So
that no man of an hon^st and obedient heart can ever hope to serve God by them,
or think any pretense whatsoever of force enough to justify the practice of
them.

But then there are other sins, which are of a smaller guilt, or of a more
alterable nature, such as either are not greatly, or not always evil; but only
when they happen to have ill effects, or are in an exorbitant degree: and these
an eager zeal does many times drive men to, and they think all is obedience,
even when they proceed so far in them as to disobey. Men's (...) for those
Opinions which they account Religious, (...) them daily into estrangedness of
mind, and (...) of behavior, into passione disputes, and (...) reflections,
into animosities, and disquietness, and a great breach of mutual charity and
love. And all these, though really they are breaches of their Duty, are looked
upon as innocent, nay, praiseworthy; they judge them to come from an honest
Principle, and therefore doubt not but that they will end in an happy reward.
The duty of pious zeal is the spring, although it contract much of humane
passion in the passage; and that they hope will be acceptable to God, which
goes under cover of a Commandment, and comes to serve him.

And this was the case in that hot and sinful contest, which happened betwixt
those two great lights of Virtue and Learning, Epiphanius and Chrysostom. For
it was a zeal for public good, and against such things as were likely, in
their opinion, to corrupt the Faith, or disturb the Peace, or pervert the
practice of the Church, which transported them into that warm contention that
ended in an uncharitable breach and passionate imprecation; when (...). Sozom.
Hist. Eccl. lib. 8. c. 15. Another instance of this we have in Tertullian, who
through a Zeal for a severe virtue, which he thought was more strictly enjoined
among the Montanists than the Catholics, was erroneously ensnared into the
Montanists Separation, and into a sinful neglect of the Catholic Communion.
Concerning whose Opinions, which led him into that criminal breach, Rigaltius
says thus, -- Haereses Tertulliani quae dicuntur, eae vix aliud praecipiebant
quam martyria fortiora, jejunia sicciora, castimoniam sanctiorem, nuptias
scilicet unas aut nullas. In quibus quicquid peccavit, id omne virtutis amore
vehementiore peccasse videatur. Rigalt. Observe. in lib. Tertull. ad Praxeam.
Epiphanius wrote to Chrysostom, That he hoped he would lose his See, and
never dye a Bishop; and Chrysostom replied to him, that he hoped he would come
to an untimely end, and never return safe into his own city.

And a real transgression of one Law being thus, through the clashing and
enterfering of two Laws of Christ, in fair appearance an act of laudable and
necessary obedience to another: Here again is a further reason, why, when we
know the Law which we sin against, we yet think that our action is not sinful,
because we take it to be justified, nay, what is more, commanded by another.

5. In other actions, although we know the General Law which is transgressed,
yet we take our present action not to be comprised under it, because of some
prejudices which exempt it. There is oft-times a clashing and enterfering of
Laws and Opinions, as well as of one Law with another. For men entertain
several persuasions which are inconsistent with some instances of Duty, and
that make them look upon themselves in those cases not to be obliged by them.
Their Opinion justifies one thing, when the Law commands another; it contracts
its force, and evacuates its obligation; and makes them venture confidently
upon several actions, whereby the Law is transgressed, by making them first to
believe that in those actions they are not obliged by it.

And because this is so universal a cause of Ignorance and Error, and so
powerful in making men both overlook Gods plain Laws, and, even whilst they
consider of them, evacuate and undermine them; I think it very needful to be
more full in its explication, and shall therefore state it more largely in the
next Chapter.

CHAP. VI. Of Prejudice.
The CONTENTS.
The nature of Prejudice. It a cause of Ignorance of our Duty. The difference
betwixt things being proposed to a free and empty, and to a prejudiced or
prepossessed mind. An evident proposal sufficient to make a free mind
understand its duty; but besides it, a confutation of its repugnant prejudice
is necessary to a mind that is prepossessed. An account of several Opinions
which make men ignorant of several instances of Duty. One prejudice, that
nothing is lawful in Gods worship, but what is authorized by an express
command, or example of Scripture; the acts of sin that are justified by this
prejudice. Another, that all private men are public protectors of Religion,
and the Christian Faith; the acts of sin justified by this Opinion. Other
Opinions cause a sinful neglect of the Sacraments. These are incident to some
honest and obedient hearts. An account of other prejudices, as that Christ is a
Temporal King; the acts of disobedience authorized by this Opinion. That a good
end will justify an evil action; the acts of sin upon this persuasion. That
Dominion is founded in Grace; the disobedient acts avowed by this Principle.
These are more disobedient and damning. The case stated, what prejudices are
consistent with, and what destroy salvation. Some prejudices get into men's
minds, not through a disobedient heart, but through weakness of understanding,
and fallibility of the means of knowledge. These are consistent with a state of
salvation. An instance of this in the prejudice of the Apostles about preaching
of the Gospel to all Nations. Other prejudices get into men's minds through
damning lusts or sins. A brief account of the influence of men's lusts and vices
upon their Opinions. This is illustrated in the Gnostics. They were famous for
covetousness, and worldly compliances; and for impure lusts, and excess in
bodily pleasures. The effect of these in producing agreeable Opinions. Another
of their vices was a turbulent and seditious humor. Their Opinion was
answerable. A further illustration of it from the Pharisees. An account of
their vices, and the influence which they had in begetting vile persuasions.
This influence of men's lusts upon their judgments proved from the Scriptures.
The damnableness of such prejudices as enter this way. Certain marks whereby to
judge when prejudices proceed from unmortified lusts. As first, If the sin
whereto the prejudice serves, is unmortified in them. Secondly, If it lie so
near to the prejudice, that we could not but see that it ministered to it, when
we embraced it. Thirdly, Though it lie more remote, if we still adhere to it
when we plainly see that some unquestionable and notorious Laws are evacuated,
or infringed by it. A Rule to prevent disobedient prejudices; viz. Let Laws be
the Rule whereby to judge of truth in opinions, not opinions the Rule whereby
to measure the Obligation of Laws. Some Reasons of this, viz. Because Laws are
more plain and certain, but opinions are more difficult and dubious: Obedience
to Laws is the end of revealed truth, and so fit to measure it, not to be
measured by it.

A Prejudice is a false Principle, or such a former false Judgment, whereby we
afterward examine and judge amiss in others. For all our rational judgment of
things is by Principles, when we determine of the truth or falsehood of such as
are suspicious and doubtful, by their agreeableness or repugnance to such
others as we think are true and certain. So that those opinions, which first
take possession of our minds, are the Rules and Standards which all others,
that seek to enter after, must be tried by.

And if these anticipations of Judgment are true and solid, if they are taken
up upon good reason, and mature deliberation; they are right Maxims of
knowledge, and Principles of understanding. But if they are false and faulty,
and entertained upon weak grounds, through haste and rashness; they are false
Rules and Principles of error. And because they hinder us in our
after-judgments, making us judge amiss of things, as they needs must who judge
according to a false measure, they are called prejudices.

And these are a most general Cause of the errors and ignorances of men. For
we are ignorant many times of our Duty, and mistake a sinful action for a
lawful liberty, when no want of plainness in God's revelations, or in the
nature of Virtues and Vices, nor any want of opportunity to be told of them;
but some of these hindrances of our own minds are the causes of our ignorance.
Those very Duties which are brought clear and open to our understandings, are
sometimes either not at all, or very maimedly and imperfectly understood,
because our minds are blocked up by a contrary belief, which makes us not to
attend to them, but either wholly to overlook, or in great measure to evacuate
and undermine them. Our prejudice has got possession of our souls, and suffers
not even a plain and clear Duty to be entertained if it makes against it, but
either throws it out all, or pares off so much of it as is inconsistent with
it. For one error begets another in practice, as well as in speculation; so
that if we have an erroneous belief which contradicts our Duty; it is but
rational that we should erroneously evacuate or impair our Duty likewise. So
long therefore as the prejudice is entertained, if the Duty be never so plainly
expressed, or loudly proposed to our minds, it must needs be excluded, or only
so much of it gain our notice and belief, as does not thwart the prejudice, but
agrees with it.

To understand this we are to take notice, that any Truths or Duties, which are
proposed to our understandings, have a very different success when they are
offered to a free and empty, from what they have when they are proposed to a
prejudiced and prepossessed mind. For with the former any Duty is sufficiently
qualified to beget a right understanding and belief, if it be plainly and in
clear words proposed to them; but with the latter a plain proposal is not
enough, but besides that, there is need withal of a confutation of the
erroneous prejudices which make against it.

1. To a mind that is open and free, not incensed by any repugnant lust, nor
misled by any contrary opinion; nothing more is needful to make it understand
and believe its Duty, than to have a revelation of it from God in plain words,
and a clear and evident proposal. For such men are ready and willing, not only
to hear and believe what God says, but also to take his meaning from the
obvious and simple sense of his own words, and not from any agreement with
their own bye-inclinations and prepossessions. They are not biassed by any
lust, or made a party by any opinions which should make them lean to one sense,
but are unconcerned on one side or another: and therefore they have no
temptation to pervert Gods Words and misinterpret them, and to make them speak,
not what according to their usual and open sense they should, but what to
gratify their private lusts or opinions they wish they might do. Their minds
in themselves are free to any impression, and wait for the plain and simple
meaning of such expressions as God shall use to determine them. So that he need
do nothing more to give them a right apprehension of his will, than to utter it
in such plain, and intelligible words, as in their usual and obvious sense are
expressive of it. A plain and clear proposal then of any Duty, is sufficient to
make these ingenuously honest, and free minds to understand it; and nothing is
a greater Argument that the expressions wherein our Duty is revealed are
ambiguous or obscure, and that the proposal is incompetent; than that these
teachable minds, which have nothing but the inevidence of the revelation to
misguide them, do not rightly conceive and apprehend it.

But,

2. To a mind that is prejudiced and prepossessed, and, through a love to some
former opinions and anticipations of Judgment which are inconsistent with it,
unwilling to understand and assent to it; a plain and evident proposal of any
Duty is not enough: but besides it, there is need moreover of silencing those
doubts, and confuting those opinions which make against it.

To such minds, I say, a plain expression, and evident proposal of Gods will is
not sufficient to make them believe, and rightly apprehend it. For their
prejudice is a Bar against it, and makes them not to admit, but overlook the
most natural and open sense even of plain and clear expressions; which they do,
not because the words do not obviously express, but because their prejudicate
opinion cannot consist with it. For their own opinion they believe is true, and
that in their own sense, which, what it is, they know most certainly. And
whilst they do think this a truth, they cannot believe that to be a true,
although never so plain and obvious a sense of any other words, which convinces
it of falsehood. So that in this Case of clashing and contradiction between a
prejudicate opinion, and a new proposal, so long as the prejudice is adhered to
one, of these two things must of necessity be chosen; either for the sake of
such contradiction to throw away the new proposal; or to mitigate it by some
sense that is reconcilable to the prejudicate belief. And if the Proposer were
any way of a suspected credit, and a person liable to error and mistake; such
interfering proposals would be rejected without more ado, and not admit of any
long debate. But if the person who brings them be of unquestionable credit,
both for the untaintedness of his integrity which cannot deceive us, and also
for the perfection of his knowledge, whereby he is not subject to be deceived
himself; (as God is in all those truths which his Word declares, and in all
those Duties which his Law enjoins us) then is there no way left, if we stick
still to our opinion, but to seek out for some amicable and consistent
interpretation of his words, whereby they may be made to comport with it. And
here the natural defect of words, and the universal imperfection of all speech
befriends us. For scarce any Sentence is so plain and full for one sense, but
that through the witty arts of some, and the irregular and improper use of
others, it may be shown capable to speak another. And that other sense we shall
be sure to put upon it, although it be never so remote and foreign from that
true and obvious interpretation wherein God meant it. Nay, if we cannot readily
fix upon it any other than the plain sense, which clashes with our own opinion;
and yet dare not suspect its truth in that sense, be it what it will, wherein
God intended it: yet so long as we are true to our prejudicate Principle, we
must suspect that it has another, which although we cannot hit upon at
present, yet others, or, at another time, it may be we our selves may. This, I
say, we must do; because so long as we think our own opinion true, we cannot
judge another to be true too so far as it contradicts it; so that if for his
sake who proposes it, we must esteem it to be true likewise; that cannot
otherwise be than by softening it into such a sense as our own opinion, whereby
we judge of it, can consist with. As for such interfering Truths or Laws then,
we shall not interpret them by the plain and obvious sense of those words which
express them; but by the consistence of our own prejudicate belief, whereby we
measure the sense and meaning of them.

A plain expression then of any Law of God is not sufficient to make us rightly
apprehend, nor a clear proposal able of it self to make us understand it
against a prejudice, which opposes the plain and true sense of it. Because our
prejudice, so long as we adhere to it, will make us reject and overlook the
plain and true meaning of the Law which opposes it, and take up with any other
false or maimed sense, although it be never so remote, improper, or imperfect,
which agrees with it.

But that our Duty may be owned and understood in its true and full meaning,
it is necessary not only that it be clearly proposed; but also that our own
doubts be silenced, and our prejudicate principle confuted, which impairs and
undermines it. The true and full meaning of the Duty will not enter into our
minds, till the gainsaying prejudice is thrown out of them. For in all our
judgments of things, this is the natural and necessary course which God himself
has set us; viz. to put a sense, or to pass a sentence upon any thing that is
proposed to us, according as we find it to clash or agree with such received
opinions and standard-perswasions of our own minds whereby we judge of it. If
they infer it, we approve; but if they overthrow it, we disbelieve it. For it
is against the Laws of all reasoning, and the Rules of Argument and Discourse,
to reject the plain and necessary consequence of an allowed Principle. So that
till we renounce the prejudice which manifestly destroys a Law, we must needs
evacuate, or in great part impair the Law which is opposed by it. But to make
the Law be understood in its plain meaning, and believed in its full extent;
it is necessary that the Principle be rejected which thwarts or excludes it. All
our Arguments for it must be answered or overborn; and all our exceptions
either against the truth, or fullness of our plain Duty, must be taken off; and
our belief must be won to it by new light, and increase of Argument. And to
conquer all our backwardness, and silence all our doubts, we must be showed
that God does indeed intend his Law in that plain and full sense, which his own
words obviously express, but our prejudice opposes, by the importunity and
confirmed use of a repeated proof and revelation.

Our prejudices then, or anticipated opinions, which are looked upon as great
Truths and Rules of Judgment, will in all likelihood make us ignorant of
several Duties, or at least of several parts of Duty, which are plainly enough
revealed. They will make us to overlook either some whole Laws, or a great part
of the compass and extent of them, and to think several actions to be exempt
from them, which are really bound up by them. Which, I say, we shall do,
because we shall not judge of our Duty from those plain words that express it,
which is certainly the safest course whereby to have a full sense of it; but
from our own foreconceived Notions and Opinions, which oftentimes, and in
several instances and degrees, if not altogether, evacuate and impair it.

To help our apprehensions in this abstract Discourse, we will look a little
into the practice of men; and that will show us plainly how bad an influence
prejudices have upon their minds, in making them ignorant, either of several
Duties, or of the sinfulness of several actions which are restrained by them.
For we shall find great numbers of men of all sorts to have taken up several
false opinions, which are inconsistent with some Virtues, and which make those
Laws that they are against to have no force at all, or very little, upon their
Conscience, nor any effect upon their practice. So that they misinterpret that
to be no Duty which God has made one, and transgress boldly and securely,
without fear or remorse.

For some, out of a certain timerousness of mind, have entertained a wrong
belief, That nothing is lawful in God's Worship, but what either some
authentic Example recorded in Scripture has approved, or some Command has made
necessary. So that when any Law of their Governors comes to enjoin any
Circumstance or Ceremony in Gods service, which God and the Scriptures had left
indifferent, although when once such Law has past, the plain and known Precepts
of obedience to Laws, and submission to Governors, of peace and unity among
Fellow Christians enjoin it; they account the fulfilling of it to be no longer
a matter of obedience and Duty, but unlawful and a sin. For their mistaken
Notion of things being made lawful only by some Example or Law that warrants
them, and not on the contrary being lawful and at liberty antecedent to all
Laws and Precedents, because no Law forbids them, is the Rule whereby they
measure the obligation of all these Duties, and it plainly overthrows them. So
that in a confident belief thereof they securely transgress these Laws, and
break the unity and disturb the peace of men, thinking that they obey God in so
doing.

Others have given way to a false opinion, that Religion is so much every man's
care, as that not only Kings and Governors, whose Office and Title it is to be
Defenders of the Faith, but also every private Christian should contrive and
act for the public maintenance and protection of it. They are not content in
securing it to keep within their own sphere, and to do what they are bound in
Duty toward it as private Christians. That is, to pray to God earnestly and
importunately, that he would preserve it; and to endeavor industriously in
their own place after it, by their own lively and exemplary practice of it, by
a careful instruction of other men in the reasons of it, by exhorting them to a
close adherence to it, and by pressing upon them all the motives of Heaven and
another World to persuade them to a conscientious taking up the Cross, when it
shall please God to lay it in their way, and a patient and courageous suffering
for it. When God by his Providence brings a National Religion into danger,
these are the Duties whereto he calls every private man, and it is his present
honor, and shall be his immortal happiness conscientiously to discharge it.
And would they content themselves with this, all were well and laudable. But
when once they have imbibed this opinion, that they are not only private
Promoters, but also public Contrivers and Protectors of the Faith; they run
beyond all these private means into a censuring of the administration of
affairs, and the prudence of Governors, into endless fears and jealousies,
murmurings and complaints, and other instances of pragmaticalness, irreverence,
and contempt of higher Powers, and disturbance of the public Peace. All these
their Principle justifies, and therefore in assurance of it they boldly venture
on them. So that although the Commands of studying to be quiet, and to do their
own business, against a pragmatical meddling in the affairs, and disturbing the
quiet of other men, are expressed in words most plain and easily intelligible;
yet do they overlook them, and in all those instances wherein their prejudice
leads them to transgress, quite evacuate all their plain force and obvious
Obligation.

Some for a long time neglect the dutiful use of one Sacrament, because they
think that they have a pious reason against it; and many other humble and
well-meaning minds omit a dutiful participation of the other, as scarce ever
thinking themselves to be sufficiently prepared for it. Their false opinion
carries them into their sinful neglect, and makes them disobey those Laws which
require the use of them, by making them first to think that they would offend
God if they should observe them.

These breaches of Duty, and indulged acts of sin, well-meaning and honestly
obedient minds are oft-times drawn into through erroneous conceits and
prejudicate Opinions. For some men of honest hearts, and of humble modest
tempers, who are ready to comply in every thing wherein their consciences allow
them, are ensnared into them, and disobey only because they judge obedience to
be unlawful. And that which makes them judge so, is not any lust or sin which
is harbored and unmortified in their hearts, which should be ministered to by
such erroneous judgment. But the Opinion took possession of their souls by the
education of their Parents, or by the authority and instruction of spiritual
guides; they imbibed it at first in the simplicity of their souls, and since
that have continually been used to it, and bred up in it. So that although they
never serve that sin whereto it ministers in other instances, but always fear
and conscientiously avoid it; yet where this prejudicate Opinion warrants it,
they do.

These Prejudices, I say, are not altogether inconsistent with an honest and
obedient heart, but are sometimes entertained by innocent and religious men,
although many others damnably disobey in them. But then there are many others
which are of a more heinous, and damning nature; which although some
well-meaning men may pardonably admit at first, before they have seen the
damnable consequences, and effects of them: yet very few can adhere to when
they are set before them, without being in danger, if repentance intervene not,
to be damned for them. Of which sort, among several others, I take these to be
that follow.

Some are possessed with an odd belief, that Christ is a Temporal and Secular
King in Sion, (i. e.) the Church on Earth, and that his subjects are to fight
for his Interests, and for the protection of his Religion, with the same
worldly force and armed violence that the subjects of other secular Princes
use. And as for Earthly Kings, since they are but Deputies and Delegates of
Christ the Supreme King of all, that they are no further to be submitted to,
than they act serviceably and subordinately under him; but that they may, yea,
ought to be persecuted as Enemies and Apostates from King Jesus, if in any
thing they oppose and act against him.

Now when men have once imbibed this Principle, they run on furiously, as every
man must who understands it, into all the mischiefs of Rebellion and Bloodshed.
For in all Instances where this prejudice leads them to it, they utterly
overlook, as things not belonging to them, all the plain Laws of Honor and
Reverence, Submission and Obedience to Governors; of Justice and
Charitableness, Mercy and Peaceableness toward their Fellow Subjects: and
burst out violently into contempt of Governors, and reproachful usage, and
speaking evil of Dignities, into revenge and fierceness, strife and bitterness,
sedition and tumults, spoils and robberies, murders and bloodshed; and into all
other licentious and extravagant effects of a most unjust war, and horrible
rebellion. In all which they think that they only fight Gods battles, and spoil
and slay his enemies, and, like good Subjects and Soldiers of the Lord of
Hosts, with all their might maintain his Rights, and serve his Interest. For
all this rebellion against earthly Kings, they esteem to be nothing else but a
proof of their Loyalty and just Allegiance to King Jesus the Sovereign Lord of
all, who by these worldly means must Rule on Earth, although he dwells in
Heaven.

Others to exalt the Temporal Monarchy and Grandeur of Christ's pretended Vicar
here on Earth, have imbibed this Principle, that a good end will justify any
action, and that all is lawful which is necessary and profitable for the
advancement of the Churches Interest. And having once sucked in this venomous
Opinion, in all those actions wherein it is any ways concerned, there is no
Precept so plain which they cannot overlook, nor any obligation so sacred which
they do not cancel. They stick not at the breach of all the most exalted and
sublime Laws of Christ. For instead of being meek and gentle, they are fierce
and furious; instead of being slow to wrath, they are enemies without
provocation; instead of forgiving injuries, they are violent to revenge them;
instead of doing good to enemies, they are eager to destroy them; instead of
taking up the Cross, and bearing it with patience themselves, they are utterly
impatient till by any means they can force it upon others. Nay, they burst
through the most notorious and weighty Laws of Humanity and Nature, in
dissimulation and equivocations, in lies and perjuries, in sowing strife, and
all manner of unpeaceableness, in spoils and robberies, murders and
assassinations, treasons and rebellions, which even natural conscience, where
it has any force at all, must needs tremble and be amazed at. But yet all this
time they think that they are doing Gods work, whilst indeed they are
subverting his whole Religion; for their poisonous Principle bears them out
through all, and they are confident that what they do will be accepted for his
service, because it is intended for the advancement of his Church.

Some again of the more extravagant Anabaptists entertained a wild Opinion,
that all Dominion is founded in Grace, and that nothing but virtue and holiness
can give any man a title to his possessions. And when once they had believed
this, they acted but agreeably to their own Principle in overlooking all the
plain Laws of Justice and Honesty in all those instances where this Doctrine
would warrant the contrary, and in exercising all sorts of fraud, couzenage,
spoils and robberies, where they had power and opportunity to commit them. For
their spoiling of their neighbors they esteemed to be like Isreal's spoiling of
the Egyptians, (viz.) a taking away that which belonged not to them, seeing God
had given it away from them.

It were endless to recount all the enormously wicked and disobedient Opinions,
which ill men take up in favor of their beloved sins. For some overlook the
plain duties of temperance, mortification, and self-denial, because they are
sensual and fleshly: and others give no heed to the manifest duty of paying
tithes, because they are loath to part with their money. When Christ preached up
a charitable use of the unrighteous Mammon, the Pharisees, who were covetous,
would not believe and understand, but derided him, Luke 16.14. And the same way
it fares with other duties, when men's unmortified lusts, which are struck at by
them, are opposed against them.

By these instances, and many more which might be mentioned, it clearly appears
how destructive many men's consciences or prejudicate Opinions are of several
parts of Religion, and the Divine Laws. They do in great measure cancel the
force of Duty, and make men transgress in several instances against known Laws,
by making them first to believe that in those cases they do not oblige them.

But now to determine which of these prejudices is pardonable and consistent
with a justified state, and which destroys and interrupts it; we must observe
in them this difference.

First, That some of them get into men's minds or consciences, not through any
thing of an evil and disobedient heart, but only through weakness of
understanding, or fallibility of the means of knowledge; and these are
consistent with a state of Grace and Salvation.

2. That others get into men's consciences through some damnable lusts and
vices, and they are deadly and damning.

First, Some prejudices, which lead men into sin and disobedience, get into
their consciences, not through any thing of an evil and disobedient heart, but
only through weakness of understanding, and fallibility of the means of
knowledge; and these do not destroy, but consist with a state of Grace and
Salvation.

They get not into men's understandings by means of an evil and disobedient
heart. For it is not any love which they have for the damning sins of pride,
ambition, sensuality, covetousness, unpeaceableness, faction, or the like,
which makes them willing to believe those Opinions true that are in favor of
them. When they take up their prejudice, they do not see so far as these ill
effects, nor discern how any of these sins is served by it; and therefore they
cannot be thought to admit it with this design to serve them in it. Nay
further, what is the best sign of all, that lust or disobedience, which the
prejudice happens to minister to in some instance, is mortified and subdued in
them; and so cannot have any such influence upon them. For sometimes those very
men, who, in such instances as their prejudice avows it, are irreverent and
disrespectful, pragmatical and disobedient to their Governors, or the like; in
all other cases, wherein their Opinion is unconcerned, are most respectfull,
quiet, and obedient. Humility and modesty, peaceableness and quietness,
submission and obedience, are both their temper and their practice. For they
love and approve, and in the ordinary course and constant tenor of their lives
conscientiously observe them; and nothing under such prejudicate Opinion as
makes them believe them to be unlawful in some cases, could overrule that love
and obedience which they have for them, and prevail upon them so far as to act
against them. So that with these men it is not the disobedient temper of their
hearts which makes their conscience err; but the error and prejudice of their
conscience which makes their practice disobedient.

In such men therefore as are thus qualified, who do not see those sins which
their prejudice ministers to when they admit it, and in all the other actions
of their lives, except where by this prejudice they are overruled, show plainly
that they have mortified and overcome it: it is clear, that the prejudice did
not get into their consciences by any influence of an evil, and disobedient
heart.

But that which made way for it was only their natural weakness of
understanding, or the fallibility of the means of knowledge. They are not of an
understanding sufficient to examine things exactly when they embrace their
prejudice; for their Reason then is dim and shortsighted, weak and
unexperienced, unable thoroughly to search into the natures of things, and to
judge of the various weight, and just force of reasons, to sift and ransack,
separate and distinguish between solidity and show, truth and falsehood. But
those arguments whereupon they believe, and upon the credit whereof they take
up Opinions, are education and converse, the instruction of spiritual guides,
the short reasonings of their neighbors and acquaintance, or the authority of
such books or persons as they are ordered to read, and directed to submit to.
These are the motives to their belief, and the arguments whereupon they are
induced to think one Opinion right, and another wrong, and the only means which
they have of discerning between truth and falsehood.

But now all these means are in no wise certain; they are an argument of belief
indeed, and the best that such men have; but yet they are far from being
infallibly conclusive. Sometimes they lead men right, but at other times they
lead them wrong; for they are not at all determined one way; but in several
men, and at several times, according as it happens, they minister both to truth
and falsehood.

In matters that are primarily of belief and speculation in Religion, they lead
a hundred men to error where they lead one to Truth. For there are an hundred
Religions in the world whereof one alone is true; and every one has this to
plead in its own behalf, that it is the Religion of the Place and Party where
it is believed. The Professors of it are drawn to assent to it upon these
Arguments, (viz.) because they have been Bred up to it by the care of their
Parents and Teachers, and confirmed in it by long Use and Converse: It was
Education and Custom, the Authority of their Spiritual Guides, and the common
Persuasion of their Country which made them both at first to believe, and
still to adhere to it. And every one in these points having these Arguments to
plead for his own belief, against the belief of every other man who differs
from him: since of all these different Beliefs one alone is true, these
Arguments must be allowed indeed to minister to Truth in that, but in all the
rest to serve the Interest of Falsehood.

In matters of Duty and Practice, it is true, there is infinitely more accord
and good agreement. For almost all the laws of nature, which make up by far the
greatest part of every Christians Duty, are the Catholic Religion of all sober
Sects and Parties in the world. So that these Arguments of Custom and
Education are tolerably good, and right guides to men's Consciences, how ill
soever they are to their speculative Opinions; because although they carry them
into a wrong belief, yet will they lead them into a righteous practice.

But although in these practical Notions and Opinions they are commonly a
right; yet sometimes, and to several persons they prove a wrong instrument. For
even in matters of Duty and Practice, men are no more secure from error than
they are from disobedience; nor more certain that they shall have no mistakes
about them, than that they shall not go beyond them. They have, and, till they
come to Heaven, ever will have erroneous Opinions as well as practices; so that
these motives, Education, and Custom, and Authority, will never be wanting in
the world to instill into weak and undiscerning minds such Opinions, as will,
in some instances and degrees, evacuate, and undermine some duties.

And since there will never be wanting in the world such fallible Arguments and
means of knowing, nor such weak and unexperienced understandings as must of
necessity make use of them: it is plain, that several disobedient prejudices
will in all times get into men's minds, not through any wickedness or
disobedience of their hearts, but only through the natural weakness of their
minds, and the fallibility of the means of knowledge.

And when any prejudices which lead to disobedience enter this way, they do not
put us out of Gods favor, or destroy a state of Grace and Salvation; but
consist with it. For in our whole action of disobedience upon them there is
nothing that should provoke Gods wrath, and punitive displeasure against us. He
will not be at enmity with us, either for acting according to our erroneous
Conscience; or, if the error was thus innocent, for having an erroneous
conscience for our rule of action.

He will not be offended at us, I say, for acting according to our erroneous
conscience: for whether our conscience be true or false, it is the only rule
that we can act by. We cannot perform duty without we understand it, nor obey
Laws before we have some knowledge of them: we must judge what is commanded
before we can observe it, and whether we judge right or wrong, we have no way
to obey, but by acting according to such judgment. Yea, if our Conscience does
err, and innocently mistake our Duty, yet whilst we follow it in the
simplicity of our hearts, we perform the life and soul of Obedience, even when
we erroneously transgress it. For we do the mistaken action out of an obedient
intention, we exert it for Gods sake, in an acknowledgement of his Authority,
and a resignation to his pleasure; and this is so truly the life and spirit of
an acceptable obedience, that, in case of such erroneous belief, we should
sinfully and damnably disobey should we neglect it. So that if the error of
our conscience it self be inoffensive, God will not take offense at our well
meant, and obediently designed performance of that, which our conscience
erroneously tells us we are bound in duty to perform.

Nor will God be offended at us for having such a scandal or rock of offense,
as this prejudice and error of our conscience is, if the error it self is
thus innocent. He will not take it ill that we did not judge that to be our
Duty, which the Principle we had to judge by told us was no Duty, or it may be
a breach of Duty and a sin. For this was truly to judge by Principles, and to
have recourse in judgment to the best and likeliest notions, which we could
find in our own minds; which way of passing judgment is all that we have, and
the very method which he himself has prescribed us. Neither will he be angry at
us for admitting such false Opinions into our minds as should afterward
misguide us, if it were not our sins and passions, but the ordinary way, and
usual means of knowledge which got them entrance. For when the very same means
of information and discourse, which carry us on to truth in other opinions,
mislead us into error and mistake in these; we err in the honesty of our
hearts, and in the use of means and ordinary endeavors; so that nothing
remains for our error to be charged upon, but either a weakness of
understanding, or an ill fortune: either that using fallible means, we were not
so wise as to avoid being deceived by them; or that we had the ill hap to be
guided by them in such an instance, when error lay at the end of them. And
since these Causes of error are only our weakness and unhappiness, but not our
fault and disobedience; God will graciously bear with us, and will not be
extreme to punish us for them. Or if we happen to err in an instance wherein
he will exact obedience, he will at least bear with us so long, till besides
the plain declarations of our Duty, and the common means of knowing it, we have
had moreover such accumulation of proof and clearing of the Case, as will, if
we are not wanting to our selves, answer all our exceptions, and bear down all
our prejudices against it.

And of this we have a clear instance in the error of the Apostles, about the
discharge of that great Duty of preaching the Gospel to all Nations immediately
after Christ's ascension. He had enjoined this in a Command as plain, one would
think, as words can make it. All power is given unto me in Heaven and in Earth;
Go ye therefore, and teach, not the Jews only, to whom I sent you at first, but
all Nations, Matthew. 28.18, 19; preaching remission of sins upon repentance to
all Nations beginning at Jerusalem, Luke 24.47. But for all this Precept was so
express, and this Declaration of their Duty was so plain and evident; yet was
it not of it self sufficient to give them an understanding of it. For those
prepossessions which they lay under drew such a Veil before their eyes, and
linked their minds so fast to a contrary belief, that they took no notice of
it, nor ever thought their contrary practice to be forbid by it. They thought
still that Israel was Gods peculiar people, that the Jews were the only seed of
Abraham, and that the great Prophet Messiah, whom Moses told them God would one
Day raise up among them, for eminence and extraordinariness of Divine
Commission, like unto him, was to be theirs peculiarly to whom God had promised
him. These prejudices, and anticipations of Judgment, had been instilled into
their young and tender minds by the early care of their Parents, and fomented
by the instruction of their Teachers, and daily more and more confirmed in them
by conversation, and an uninterrupted custom of persuasion. And being thus
forcibly impressed upon them, they had so blocked up their obedient and
well-meaning minds, that when a plain Command required them to practice
contrary to this belief, they did not understand, but overlook it. Insomuch
that Peter himself was not convinced of it by the manifest injunction of a
clear Law; but stood in need to have his doubts solved, and his exceptions
answered, and his former prejudices confuted and overborn, by such accumulation
of proof and evidence, as God was pleased to give him, in a most condescensive
Dispute upon that Subject, by an after and repeated Revelation, Acts 10. and
11. Chap^ers.

But now this ignorance of their Duty, which was so plainly delivered in the
words of a clear Law, did not put them out of Gods favor, because it was
occasioned only by such hindrances as were consistent with an honest heart, or
such whereto not their sins and passions, but their natural weakness of
understanding, and their education and custom, those fallible means of
knowledge, had betrayed them. For God still lovingly embraced them; he bore
with their weaknesses, and helped their infirmities; he pitied their ignorance
whilst they labored under it, and because he saw it was fit and necessary that
they should get quit of it, he graciously afforded them a further, and more
powerful evidence whereby to overcome it. And all this pardon and forbearance,
I say, they found, because their prejudices were consistent with an honest
heart, since they were begot in them, not by any lusts or vices, but only by
their weakness of understanding, and the fallibility of the means of knowledge.

But as some prejudices which lead to sin and disobedience, get into men's
Consciences only through weakness of understanding, and fallibility of means,
which are therefore consistent with a state of favor and salvation; so are
there,

2. Several others which are got into their Conscences, through the assistance
of their lusts and vices; and these are deadly and damning.

Men's lusts and vices have a great influence upon their minds, and the chief
hand many times in molding of their judgments and opinions. And therefore we
may know men's manners by their persuasions about their Duty, before ever we see
their practices. For they who will live wickedly, will quickly bring their
minds to think wickedly. Their lusts and vices will soon insinuate themselves
into their judgments and apprehensions: they will dispose their souls for such
persuasions, as are most serviceable to them; and win them with ease into a
belief of evil things, by making them willing first, and eagerly desirous to
believe them.

For our belief of any opinion is produced in us by our diligent search and
consideration of all such Arguments as can get credit to it; by overlooking or
clearing such difficulties, or industriously considering and improving all the
answers to such exceptions as are made against it. As on the contrary, our
disbelief of any opinion is effected, by overlooking or weakening all those
reasons which are brought to prove it, by darkening it with difficulties,
perplexing it with doubts, and raising such exceptions as may shake or
overthrow it. But now as for the employing of our wit and industry in either of
these, it is plainly in our own choice, and we deal indifferently and
impartially between both, or espouse either part as we stand affected. If then
we are earnestly desirous, and strongly inclined for one way; we can overlook
or answer all that makes against it, and throw by difficulties, clear up
doubts, invent reasons to justify and prove it. So that the will and pleasure
of our hearts will quickly draw after it the judgment of our understandings,
and if once we are resolved upon a way, we shall soon find reasons to avow it.

When therefore our lusts and vices have got our hearts, and give Laws to our
wills and appetites; they will quickly bear Rule in our understandings also. We
shall quickly believe that any of their gratifications are lawful, when once we
are greatly desirous to have them so. Nothing being a more probable, and
ordinary effect in the nature of things, as well as in the just judgment of
God, of a disobedient and rebellious heart, than a reprobate mind, or a mind
(...).
void of Judgment, Romans 1.18, 21, 28.

So long then as men have wicked hearts, it cannot be expected but that they
will have debauched consciences: for whilst they retain unmortified lusts and
vices, they will justify them in their own thoughts by damnably sinful, and
disobedient opinions. They will take up prejudices and a wrong belief, not to
direct and guide, but to defend their wicked practice. The factious and
unpeaceable man will easily persuade himself into that belief which disturbs
Peace, and opposes Government. The covetous soul will favor any Tenet which
promotes gain, and advances interest. The licentious Libertine will snatch at
any opinion that gratifies the flesh, and pleads the Cause of sensuality and
softness. Men's pride and ambition, their fierceness and cruelty, their malice
and revenge, their contentiousness and faction, their sensuality and
covetousness, will make them overlook the humble and lowly, the meek and
gentle, the patient and merciful, the quiet and peaceable, the generous and
self-denying Laws of Christ, and greedily imbibe such wicked prejudices, and
erroneous conceits, as evacuate and overthrow them.

To illustrate this business, let us consider it in some instances.

That execrable Sect of men the Gnostics, who were so famous for their impure
and lawless consciences, were not more notorious for their vile opinions, than
for their evil lives. I will consider both, that it may from thence more
clearly appear how influential their lusts were upon their minds, in begetting
suitable persuasions.

As for their lives, they were infamous for covetousness, cowardice, and
softness, in heaping up wealth, and avoiding all loss of Goods and bodily
pains, though by means never so wicked and dishonorable: and for the greatest
luxury and unnaturalness in their lusts and unclean pleasures.

They were notoriously infamous for their covetousness, and abominably soft and
irreligious compliances. For they are described as men that have their hearts
exercised with covetous practices, 2 Pet. 2.14; that do any thing because of
advantage, Jude 16; that forsake the right way of Worship and Religion, and go
astray from it into the bypath of Idolothyta indisserenter manducant, nihil
inquinari abiis putantes; and in omnem Diem Festum Ethnicorum, pro voluntate in
honor Idolorum factum, primi convenient, etc. Iren. adv. Haereses, l. 1. c. 1.
idolatry and profaneness, when they are like to suffer by it; being thus far
fitly compared to Balaam the Son of Bozor, that they, professing true
Christianity, join in idol-worship with the idolatrous Gentiles; as he, being a
true Prophet, did in the idolatrous worship of the King of Moab, Numb. 22.40,
41: and also in that they sort and combine with the Jewish and Gentile
Persecutors of the Christians; as he did in cursing first, and afterward in
fighting against the Israelites in the Army of Midian, Numb. 31.8; upon which
accounts, his way or error they are said to follow, 2 Pet. 2.15. Jud. 11.
Their Character is to desert the public Assemblies by reason of the heat of
persecution against all that dare frequent them, Heb. 10.25; to deny the only
Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ when they are in danger to suffer for the
owning of them, Jud. 4.

They were also equally notorious for abominable luxury, and unnaturalness in
their lusts and unclean pleasures. For they are set out to us as men that are
sensual, Jud. 19; that account it a pleasure to riot in the day time, 2 Pet.
2.13; that defile the flesh, Jud. 8; that walk after the flesh in lusts of
uncleanness, 2 Pet. 2.10; in pernicious, or, as it is rendered from other Copies
in the Margin of our Bibles, (...), MS. Alexand. and plur. al.
lascivious ways, verse. 2; that have eyes full of adultery, ver. 14; and that
are not content to riot in these abominable filthinesses themselves, but use
them as baits to decoy and draw in others; alluring through the lusts of the
flesh, and through much wantonness, those who (...).
really, or for a The Kings MS. (...).
little while had escaped from such an abominable life of error, ver. 18.

Thus was their life and temper overrun with covetousness, basely cowardous
and sinful compliances; and with most filthy lusts, and unnatural
uncleanness. Both which St* Peter setting himself against, requires all men,
who would be thought to have that true and saving knowledge, which is opposite
to that false and spurious one which they (...).
pretended to, to give all diligence in adding to it these two Duties, which
are directly contrary to their vile lusts; viz. virtue, or courage and
constancy, which is opposite to their base arts of tergiversation and sinful
compliances; and continence or chastity, which is contrary to their unclean
practices. Give all diligence to add to virtue, or valorous courage,
knowledge, and to knowledge temperance or (...).
continence, 2 Pet. 1.5, 6.

Now these men having such a Scene of debauchery in their lives, they quickly
became as lewd and debauched in their consciences. When once, for all their
professions of knowing God, they began, as St Paul says, in works to deny him;
they quickly made their Consciences to be as filthy and polluted, as were their
practices. To these defiled Wretches, says he, is nothing pure, their very
mind and conscience is defiled; for they have lost all sense of purity and
Duty, being unto Quemadmodum aurum in coeno depositum non amittit decorem suum,
sed suam naturam custodit cum coenum nil nocere auro possit: sic and semet
ipsos dicunt, licet in quibuscunque materialibus operibus sint, nil noceri,
neque amittere spirit^alem substantiam. Quapropter and intimorate omnia quae
vetantur, hi, qui sunt ipsorum pe^^ecti, operantur; de quibus Scripturae
confirmant quoniam qui faciunt ea, Regnum Dei non haereditabunt* Iren. l. 1. c.
1.
every good work reprobate or void of judgment, Tit. 1.15, 16. They overlooked
and disbelieved all the Christian Laws of passive valor, and patient courage,
of generosity and contentedness, of mortification and self-denial, chastity and
temperance; and fell into those lewd opinions, for which they were so infamous
in the Apostolic Age, and will be still among all men that are but competently
sober to the Worlds end. For they introduced into the World the scandalously
vile and profligate opinions, that all Concerning lascivious pleasures being
allowed to them who are perfect and spiritual; and denied to others who, as
they were wont to speak, are animal, they taught thus: Quicunque in saeculo est
and Vxorem non amat ut ei conjugatur, non est de veritate, and non transiet in
veritatem. Qui autem de saeculo est mixtus muli^ri, non transit in veritatem,
quoniam in concupiscentia est mixtus mulieri. Quapropter nobis quidem, quos
Psychicos vo^ant, and de sa^culo esse dicunt necessariam continentiam and bonam
operationem, uti per eam veniamus in medietatis locum: sibi autem, spiritalibus
and perfectis vocatis, nullo modo. Iren. ib.
filthy and unnatural uncleanness; that Agrippa Cas^or says that Basilides,
one of their chief Heads, taught thus: (...): As he is cited by Eusebius, Eccl.
Hist. l. 4. c. 7. See also Epiphan. Haeres. 24.
denying Christ to be come in the flesh in times of persecution, and that our
Jesus was he; are parts of Christian liberty, and things lawful and allowable
in a knowing, in a spiritual, in a perfect man. Turning by this means, as St
Jude says, the Grace of God and his Gospel, which under the highest pains
forbids and punishes them; into a liberty and allowance of these their
Characteristick Vices, viz. lasciviousness, with all manner of filthiness, and
denying, when they are in danger to suffer for him, the only Lord God, and our
Lord Jesus Christ, Jude 4.

Another instance of their behavior we have set down in relation to the
Public; and that is this, They were of a proud and ungovernable, of a haughty
and turbulent, a querulous and seditious humor. Their temper is to be
presumptuous and self-willed, 2 Pet. 2.10; which they evidence every where by
despising Dominion, and speaking evil of Dignities, Jud. 8; and by murmuring
and complaining, as men that are always discontented, and never pleased with
any administration of affairs, ver. 16.

And agreeable to this ungovernableness of their lives and tempers, were the
licentious principles and opinions of their minds. For they were the men who
promised their Followers liberty from all subjection, 2 Pet. 2.19; and who
despised all Masters and Governors, as being by the new Character of
Christianity become their Brethren, and therefore, as they argued from that
Title, now only equal to them, not superior, as they must be who would pretend
to rule and govern them, 1 Timothy 6.1, 2. The Abettors of which Doctrine St Paul
assures Timothy do in reality know nothing, notwithstanding all the false show
of that swollen Title, (...).
knowing men, which they so vainly arrogate to themselves, ver. 4.

The wicked Sect of the Pharisees, who were the reproach of the Jewish, as
these filthy Gnostics were of the Christian Name, were of a life and temper
proud and ambitious, covetous and rapacious; whose heart and inside, as well as
their life and practice, was all rottenness and disobedience. For if we would
have a character of them, our Savior himself has given us one in the 23d of St
Matthew's Gospel, which is most complete and particular; wherein a combination
of these several vices are set to make up their description.

First, Vainglory. All their works they did to be seen of men, verse. 5.

Secondly, Pride and Ambition. They loved the uppermost rooms at feasts, and
the chief seats in the Synagogues, and greetings in the public markets, and to
be called of men Rabbi, Rabbi, that is to say Master, or Doctor, verse. 6, 7.

Thirdly, Covetousness, Fraud and Rapaciousness. For besides that St Luke
informs us of their being covetous, Luke 16.14; we are told here, that they
would most profanely abuse the most sacred things for their covetous ends, and
make long prayers only for a pretense, that thereby they might be enabled more
easily, and without suspicion to devour even Orphans, and Widows houses, verse.
14: being indeed, whatsoever they might outwardly appear to be, all extortion
and excess within, verse. 25.

Fourthly, Hypocrisy. For they would dissemble even in their most solemn
performances, and use Religion only as a stalking-horse to worldly designs.
They made long prayers only for a pretense, verse. 14; what they made clean was
only the outside, verse. 25; for that indeed they beautified, but still they
were all stench and rottenness within, verse. 27.

In sum, they said, but did not; they bound heavy burdens on other men's
shoulders, but would not touch them themselves with one of their fingers, verse.
3, 4. Yea, take them, even at the best, where they were Religious; and that
they will be found to have been only in trifles, but not in substantial Duties;
for they strained at gnats, at the same time that they swallowed Camels; they
paid tithe of cheap and inconsiderable things, such as mint, and annise, and
cummin; but they omitted all the weightier matters of the Law, as Judgment,
Mercy, and Faith, verse. 23, 24.

And since they were men of this character, thus unmortified in their lusts,
and thus vicious and irreligious in their practice; what can in reason be
expected, but that they should be full of debauchery and disobedience in their
consciences and persuasions also? And so accordingly we find they were. For
when Christ preached to them the Doctrine of Charity and Liberality, in
opposition to their miserable worldly way; they, being covetous, instead of
believing, fell a mocking and deriding him, Luke 16.14. And as they treated
Christ in this particular, so did they likewise in all the rest of his
Religion. For finding that it required such humility, sincerity, honesty,
contentedness, and heavenly-mindedness, as were inconsistent with these
unmortified lusts of theirs which I have mentioned; they would not own and
embrace, but for that reason especially reject and disbelieve it. Nay further,
even in their own acknowledged way they took up several disobedient prejudices
to serve their lusts; and either wholly evacuated, or in great part impaired
several Laws, by admitting such erroneous persuasions as undermined them. For
to gratify their haughty and stubborn, their petted and revengeful humor,
they entertained a conceit, that if they did but say it is Corban, or a gift by
whatsoever thou might be profited by me; (i. e.) I bind my self by the vow
or oath called Corban never more to do any good to thee, which was a form of
oath in use among the Jews; they should be freed from all obligation of the
fifth Commandment requiring honor, service, or relief to their Father or
Mother, Mat. 15.4, 5, 6. And many other things like to this our Savior tells
us they did, Mark 7.13. But not to enquire further about particulars, we are
plainly assured of them in the general, that they transgressed, rejected, and
evacuated the Laws of God, through the erroneous persuasions and prejudicate
belief of their traditions, Mat. 15.3, 6. Mark 7.9.

Thus natural and obvious it is for a wicked life to work a disobedient belief;
and for men's unmortified lusts and passions, which set themselves against Gods
Laws, to convey such prejudices into their consciences as will evacuate and
overthrow them. Their unbelief enters through the corruption of their heart,
and is therefore called an evil heart of unbelief, Heb. 3.12. they are hardened
into a want of all sense and conscience of their offenses, through the
deceitfulness of sin, verse. 13. And this effect is obvious and ordinary; for
not only the nature of things, but even the just judgment of God concur to it:
Nothing being more common, than for those men, who hold the truth, as St Paul
says, in unrighteousness of living, and even whilst they know God, do not
glorify him by their service and obedience, which are due to him, and are our
way of glorifying him as God, nor are thankful in their hearts and actions; to
lose that knowledge, and to become vain in their imaginations, their foolish
heart being darkened, by Gods giving them over to a reprobate mind, or a mind
void of all true judgment, to do those things which are not convenient not
knowing they are so, Romans 1.18, 21, 28.

But now as for these prejudices which get into our consciences and
persuasions, not through any force of reason which compells, but through the
witchcraft of lusts and vices which enveagle, and make us willing and desirous
to believe them; they will not excuse us, because they are themselves sinful,
and deserve damnation. For they enter at an ill door, and win upon us through a
reigning lust, or a damning sin; and therefore they are so far from excusing
those transgressions which flow from them, that in themselves they are
instances and effects of a deadly offense, and if repentance intervene not,
will certainly prove desperate and damning.

St Paul in breathing out threatenings against all believers, and in persecuting
of the Church, acted only according to the best of his own Judgment and
Opinion. For he verily thought with himself, that he not only might, but ought
to do several things contrary to the Name of Jesus of Nazareth, Acts 26.9. But
as this Opinion was his sin, so would his transgressions upon it have proved
his condemnation, had not God shown pity on him in calling him to repentance
and conversion, whereby alone it was that he obtained mercy and pardon. I was,
says he, a persecutor, and injurious; but I obtained mercy by that Grace of
God conferred upon me at my conversion, which was exceeding abundant with these
two fundamental Graces, which are a most prolifick spring of all the rest,
(viz.) Faith, and Love, which is in Jesus Christ, 1 Timothy 1.13, 14.

The Jews who blasphemed and crucified our Savior, did nothing against their
own conscience: for their Opinion bore them out in all that practice, in regard
they judged it to be no sinful murder, but a most necessary act of Justice
upon a great impostor, and a most laudable and legal execution. I wot Brethren,
says St Peter, that through ignorance ye did it, as did not you only, but also
your rulers, Acts 3.14, 15, 17. But forasmuch as this Ignorance was their own
fault, and their prejudices were owing to their own vices, in regard that for
this reason alone their minds would not receive a true belief of Christ and his
Laws, because they plainly contradicted their sinful lusts and practices:
therefore should it by no means excuse them, but, if their repentance did not
prevent it, it would most certainly in the end prove deadly and damning. For
their crucifixion of him, he tells them, was by wicked hands, Acts 2.23. and it
was only upon their repentance, and conversion, that their sins of blasphemy
and murder should be blotted out, Acts 3.19.

Again, the transgressions of the Pharisees were justified by their own
Opinions; for they looked upon themselves, notwithstanding them, to be holy
men, and favorites of Heaven: But proceeding, as we have seen they did, from
unmortified lusts and a wicked life, they rendered them obnoxious to damnation;
How can you escape the damnation of hell? Mat. 23.33. The sins of the
Gnostics, notwithstanding they were warranted by their disobedient Principles,
were of a damnable nature; for their heresies and disobedient Principles
themselves, being the effects of disobedient and wicked hearts, deserved
damnation, and are called by St Peter, in that Chapter where he recounts them,
and with great zeal inveighs against them, damnable heresies, 2 Pet. 2.1. They
are works of the flesh, or the products of unmortified lusts and carnal
practices; and must therefore share in the same judgment with other flesh^^
works amongst whom they are reckoned. The works of the flesh, says St Paul,
are manifest, seditions, heresies, envyings, murders, drunkenness; of the which
I tell you, that they which do such things shall not inherit the Kingdom of
God, Gal. 5.19, 20, 21. If we will transgress our Duty by disbelieving it
first, and giving credit to such Opinions as destroy the obligation of it; our
disbelief of our Duty will by no means excuse our sin, or rescue us from
condemnation. For to disbelieve the Laws and threatenings of Christ is the very
worst part of unbelief, and the most hateful and deadly instance of
infidelity. And as for unbelievers, says St John, or those men who will not
believe Religion, or the best part of it, Laws and Duties, but seek to evade
its force after that God has plainly told them of it; they shall have their
part in the Lake which burns with fire and brimstone, Rev. 21.8. Men without
understanding, who will not see their Duty, because they are Romans 1.21, 28.
blinded by such lusts as fight against it, in the judgment of God are Mat.
15.14.
worthy of death, Romans 1.31, 32. The reason why their consciences adhere to
such Opinions as utterly destroy their Duty, is only because their lusts and
vices have made them hate, and turn away from it: And as for every such
prejudice against a Duty, as proceeds from our aversation to it, it is of a
great guilt, and liable to a very severe punishment. For in this St Paul is
peremptory; All they shall be damned who believe a lie, and believe not the
truth, through the pleasure which they take in unrighteousness: They shall
perish, because they receive not the LOVE of the Truth, that they may be saved
by it, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11, 12.

When our disobedient prejudices therefore enter upon this score, and are begot
in us through a wicked heart, and through some reigning lusts and vices which
are served by them; but not by any weakness of understanding, or such
fallibility of means as may betray even an honest heart into them: they are
subject to a sad doom, and a severe censure; they will by no means plead our
excuse, but are an Article of our condemnation.

And as for some marks whereby to judge whether our disobedient prejudices
proceed from this deadly Principle, our unmortified lusts and vices, and
thereupon are of this dangerous and damning nature, or no; we may observe these
Characters, and judge according to these measures.

First, If that Lust or Sin whereto our prejudice is subservient be strong and
powerful, if it reign in us, and in the ordinary course and custom of our
lives gives laws to us: the corruption and disobedience of our heart is plainly
the cause of our disobedient conscience and corrupt persuasion. It is not only
the error of our conscience which makes us serve the sin, for we serve it
equally in other instances where that is wholly unconcerned. The Sin is
unmortified and imperious, it carries us on to transgress where it is furthered
by the error of our consciences, and where it wants it. But it is the
wickedness of our hearts which makes us to be wicked in our judgments, and to
espouse such Opinions as encourage and defend it. For when any lust is so
strong in us as to rule our practice, it will be sure to lay a corrupt bias
upon our wills, so that we shall be apt still to judge in favor of it, and be
very partial in all those Opinions wherein it has any interest. And therefore
several disobedient prejudices will be taken up to serve a turn, and we shall
work our selves up into a belief of them for the sins sake, which is justified
and protected by them.

Is any man therefore of a temper and conversation that is fierce and
contentious, busy and restless, forward to give Laws, and impatient to submit
to them: It Is no wonder if he takes up Opinions that justify contempt of
Governors, that avow Alteration and Disturbance, and countenance Faction,
Sedition, and a Civil War. For the ungovernableness of his Conscience is but
agreeable to the ungovernableness of his Practice; the Sin reigned first in his
heart and life, and was from thence with ease instilled into his Opinion and
Persuasion.

Is any man habitually inclined to Pride and Ambition, Wrath and Malice,
Revenge and Cruelty; is he greedy of Gain, and a slave to sensual Delights and
bodily Pleasures: He is prepared for any of those Vile Opinions which overturn
all Laws to promote Christ's Temporal Power on Earth, or to advance the secular
greatness of his pretended Vicar and Holy Church; and for any others of like
nature. For the unmortified lusts are a Law to him in his life before they come
to govern in his conscience; he is first wicked and rebellious in his heart,
and that makes him to admit of such wicked Opinions into his understanding.

In these men then the case is plain; it is clearly seen how they came by their
disobedient prejudices, for their lives and conversations show that abundantly.
Disobedience reigned first in their hearts, and thence got into their
consciences and persuasions.

Secondly, If the disobedience and the prejudice lay so near, and were so close
conjoined, that a man could not but see one when he saw the other; it is still
imputable to his wicked lusts and vices. For he discerned how obedience was
impaired, and how the Sin was served by it when he first gave credit to it; and
therefore he was plainly acted by a want of virtue and an evil heart. For if he
had been touched with any love of virtue, he could not have allowed of that
which he knew would evacuate and undermine it; but he would have shown much
more forwardness to reject the Opinion for the sake of the sin, than to embrace
it upon any appearances of argument and reason. So that his prejudice entered
through an aversation to that instance of obedience which it undermined; and it
was his love to the wicked lust which was advanced by it, that made way for it.
He willingly and designedly served the sin, and he saw how much the Opinion
contributed to it, and therefore he readily embraced it.

Nay further,

Thirdly, If the sinful consequences were not discerned when a man at first
embraced it; yet if they are such as are of a plain unquestionable guilt, and
greatly sinful, and when he is showed afterward how they follow from it, he
still stands by it and adheres to it; however the prejudicate Opinion might
enter at the first, yet it holds possession by a heart that is wicked and
disobedient.

Some sins there are whose guilt is not altogether so clear and indisputable,
but that an innocent and honest, although a weak and erring mind, may sometimes
question and overlook it. And thus many truly religious souls do not think that
their refusing to observe the commands of men about the ceremonies of divine
worship, is disobedience; or that their over-acting in the cause of God and
Religion, is pragmaticalness. For these sins, among several others, although
they are plain and obvious to an unprejudiced and piercing understanding, which
is able to discern the grounds and reasons of things, and fairly to consider of
them: Yet to such minds as have fallen unhappily under some mistaken notions
and false prepossessions, they are not evident; whence many men that have
honest and obedient hearts, do yet err, and judge amiss concerning them. But
then several other sins are so open and notorious, that no sober mind, and
virtuous inclination can ever have any doubts about them. Thus, for instance,
no honest man who is willing fairly and seriously to consider things, can ever
question, I think, that killing without Commission from Authority, and due
process of Law, is Murder; that spoils without judicial course, are robbery;
that appearing in Arms against the supreme Sovereign Power, or men commissioned
by him, is Rebellion; that intoxicating use of Wine, is Drunkenness; and a
promiscuous use of Women, Adultery or Fornication. These sins, and many others,
are of so open and notorious a nature, that no man of an ordinary wit, if he
has any competent degrees of honesty, can ever apprehend them to be other than
damnably sinful. And if any man has any opinions which in any cases justify
some of these, if he continues to hold them still after he sees how these sins
follow from them, which he must needs do when he practices and incurrs them,
because the opinions lead him on to them; it is plain that his opinion holds
possession of his mind, because his heart is wicked: simplicity and ignorance
it may be gave it entrance; but sin and disobedience enable it to persevere.

If the man indeed was only simple and short-sighted, rash and forward at the
first, and either had not understanding or patience enough to look on so far as
the sinful consequences when he gave it entrance; his lusts and vices at that
time could have no share in it, because he did not see how they could be served
by it; and so far the simplicity of a well-m^aning mind, and the obedient
temper of an honest heart and a good intention, may plead his excuse for his
otherwise wicked and disobedient persuasion. But if afterward he persists in
it, when he sees all the iniquity and disobedience that flows from it, and goes
on to cancel and transgress notorious and weighty Laws upon the assurance of
it: it is manifest then that his heart is wicked, and that he is influenced more
by a reigning sin, than by a cogent reason. For if his heart were acted by a
full resolution of obedience and a love of Virtue, he would quickly renounce
such opinions when once he saw such notorious and unquestionable Laws to be
overturned by them. But since he will stick to his wicked Principle, even when
it destroys obedience, and prefer a disputable opinion before a weighty and
plain Duty; it is plain to all, that he is not willing to obey, but industrious
to seek a shift, and to evade all obligation to obedience.

As for this enquiry then, viz. When our disobedient prejudices get into our
consciences by the help of our own unmortified lusts and damning vices: from
these measures we may make our own souls this Answer: If we are usually, and in
the common course of our lives, guided by that lust or vice which our prejudice
advances; if we saw the disobedient effects of it when we first gave credit to
it; or if we still adhere to it after that we have been plainly showed the
unquestionable and notorious sins which are avouched by it: Our prejudice took
place by virtue of our disobedience, and without our timely repentance it will
certainly condemn us. If it entered innocently and honestly through the weakness
of our understandings, or the fallibility of the means of knowledge, it would
be pardoned and not imputed to us: but since it gains admittance by our love to
damning lusts and disobedience, it is of a deadly guilt, and, unless repentance
intervene, will certainly destroy us.

And thus at last we have seen what ignorance is effected by our prejudices;
and what is to be judged of those transgressions which are incurred under it.
And the sum of all is this, That our prejudices make us either quite overlook
several Laws, or even whilst we know and consider of them, to venture upon
several disobedient actions which really come under them, not knowing that they
do. And if such prejudices entered through the fallibility of means, and
weakness of an honest understanding, they are pardonable and uncondemning: but
if they took place by means of strong lusts, and a wicked heart, they are
deadly sins, and fit to be charged upon us, as all others are, without
repentance, to our condemnation.

But seeing it is much safer, and infinitely more eligible to have no
disobedient prejudice at all, than to be put into all this danger about the
pardon and forgiveness of it; before I dismiss this Point, I will set down one
plain Rule and easy Method, in matters of Duty and moment, to prevent it. For
by this means we may all of us attain, in good measure, to that which St Paul
assures us was his utmost care and industrious exercise; viz. a conscience void
of offense, or rather an (...).
inoffensive conscience, which is no scandal or cause of sin to us, and which
does not stumble and cast us down into any breach of Duty either toward God,
or toward men, Acts 24.16.

And the Rule which I would press upon all simple and honest minds for that
purpose is this, Begin with Duty and plain Laws, to make them the measure
whereby to judge of Notions and Opinions; not with Notions and Opinions, to
make them the measure whereby to interpret plain Laws.

For our Duty is made plain and open, and expressed so clearly as that every
man may understand it. It is no matter of skill and parts to know Christ's
Commandments; but an honest and a teachable heart is a better preparation to
that, than refinedness of wit and philosophic learning. For God who gave us
Laws, knew the measure of all capacities, and the compass of every
understanding; and what he intended that all should practice, he wanted not
skill to express so plainly that every one might apprehend it. Laws are the
Rule of the last Judgment, and our obedience or disobedience to them is a
matter of life or death; and that in all reason and equity ought to be revealed
clearly and sufficiently to every understanding, which every man must for ever
live or dye by. As for Laws and Duty then, they are plain and easy; they are
expressed in such clear and intelligible words as carry what God means by them
in their usual and obvious acceptance. So that in judging of them, if we begin
there, there is no great difficulty; seeing they are easily and obviously
understood by any man, who brings along with him an obedient and teachable mind
to the obvious understanding of them.

But as for abstract Notions and general opinions, they admit of much doubting
and dispute, and of great appearance of reason, and variety of argument on one
side, as well as on the other. And besides, all capacities are no fit Judges of
them; but those only which have much quickness, and much experience; that can
dispel the darkness, by clear evidence; and help the confusion, by a distinct
representation of things; that can judge of reasons, and of exceptions, and of
the various degrees in evidence, and the just weight of arguments. So that they
are a matter, not for the determination of common heads, but for the learned
and witty, for refined Parts and Philosophers. Yea and even among them, by
reason of their difficulty and doubtfulness, they admit of great disputes, and
beget generally much variety of judgment and opinion; wherein if some think
true, as it is very possible, nay often happens that neither do, the rest must
of necessity be mistaken.

Opinions therefore and Notions are more dark and difficult, less easy to be
understood than plain Laws, and much more liable to be mistaken. So that Laws
and Duty are fit to be made a Principle, because we may easily understand them,
and be well assured of them: but general Notions and Opinions being more dark
and liable to error and mistake, they are not so proper to be themselves a
Rule, as to be measured and judged of by them.

And that they should so is further reasonable, because in the very designs of
God, obedience is primarily and chiefly intended to be ministered to by Divine
Truths; not truths to be served and furthered by obedience. For the revelation
of religious truth is given by the Author of our Religion himself in order to
religious practice. The very end and perfection of our Faith being to produce
Jam. 2.22.
Good Works, to make us ^ Joh. 5.4.
overcome the World, to 1 Pet. 1.9.
save our souls, or to deliver us from our sins, which are those evils that
Mat. 1.21.
Christ came to save us from. And since obedience unto Laws is the end, and
general truths are only means whereby to compass it; it is certain that no truth
can ever oppose a Duty, or evacuate obedience, because God would defeat his own
end in revealing it, should he at any time become the Author of it. So that
this cannot be a proper, at least it is not a safe way of arguing; this plain
Law in such and such parts, and sorts of instances, contradicts a truth, and
therefore it is no Duty: whereas we should proceed quite contrary after this
manner; this or that opinion interferes and undermines this or that plain Law,
so that it can never be a true opinion. For this arguing is fair and likely,
and withal it is most secure. It is sure to preserve obedience, because it
admits of nothing that interferes with it: and it is also very likely to
preserve truth; for it is most certain that no Doctrine can ever come from God
which encourages or justifies any wickedness; so that not only an obedient
heart, but even a free and impartial reason must quit the Principle, if it
appear to draw after it an evil consequence.

To settle Principles and Rules of Judgment then, especially for simple and
unlearned minds, the first enquiry ought to be, not what is true or false, but
what is good or evil. For since the knowledge of this is more plain and
obvious, easy and accessible to all, but to them most especially; it is
evident, that as all others, so particularly they, if they would secure even
Truth as well as Duty, must begin with Laws as their Principle, and from thence
make their inference to Doctrines and Opinions. To avoid sinful errors and
disobedient prejudices, they must use Laws and Duties as the measure whereby to
judge of notions; not notions and opinions as the standard whereby to measure
and interpret plain Laws.

CHAP. VII. A sixth cause of ignorance of the present actions being
comprehended under a known Law. And of the excusableness of our transgressions
upon both these sorts of ignorance.
The CONTENTS.
All the forementioned causes of ignorance of our present actions being
included in the known Law, are such to knowing and learned men. Besides them,
the difficult and obscure nature of several sins is a general cause of it to
the rude and unlearned. Sins upon this ignorance, as well as upon ignorance of
the Law it self, unchosen, and so consistent with a state of Grace and
Salvation. Where there is something of choice in it they extenuate the sin, and
abate the punishment, though they do not wholly excuse it. The excuse for these
actions is only whilst we are plainly ignorant: they are damning when we are
enlightened so far as to doubt of them, but pardonable whilst we are in
darkness or error. This excuse is for both the modes of ignorance, 1.
Forgetfulness; 2. Error. All this pardon hitherto discoursed of upon the
account of ignorance of either sort, is no further than the ignorance it self
is involuntary. The willfulness of some men's ignorance. The several steps in
voluntary ignorance. The causes of it. Two things required to render ignorance
involuntary, 1. An honest heart, 2. An honest industry. What measures necessary
to the acceptance of this industry. Gods candor in judging of its sufficiency.
This discourse upon this first cause of an innocent involuntariness, (viz.)
ignorance, summed up.

THus upon all these accounts, which are mentioned in the two former Chapters,
we see it will often happen, that although in the general we do know the Law
which forbids any sin; yet shall we still be ignorant of our present actions
being comprehended under it. For the small, and barely gradual difference
between Good and Evil, the limitedness of most Laws, the indirect obligations
which pass upon some indifferent actions, the clashing and enterfering of some
of Christ's Laws, sometimes with other commands, and sometimes with our own
prejudices and prepossessed Opinions; are also many reasons why after we know
the General Laws that forbid them, we shall still venture upon several
particular actions through ignorance of their being forbidden.

And yet besides all these, which are causes of such ignorance to the most
knowing men, and to those who have great parts and learning: there will be
moreover one great and general cause of it to the more rude and ignorant, and
that is the difficult, and, to them, obscure nature of the sin it self, which
in the Law is expressly, and by name forbidden. For how many of them who hear,
it may be, of the Law against censoriousness, lasciviousness, uncleanness,
carnality, sensuality, refusing of the Cross, and other things; do not well
understand what those words mean? Alas! the greater number of men in the world,
have but very rude, and imperfect notices of things; they see them only in a
huddle, and by halves. And as it is in their knowledge of other things; so is
it in their understanding of Sin and Duty likewise. For their sight and sense
of them is dark and defective, and albeit they have some general and confused
apprehensions of them; yet is not their knowledge so clear and distinct, as
that they are thereby enabled to judge of every particular action, whether it
falls under any of them, or no. And since they have but such half and imperfect
notions of several sins, it is no wonder, although they know the General Law,
if they venture upon several actions which really come under it, not knowing
that they do.

And thus we see, that besides the ignorance of the Law it self, there is also
another sort of ignorance which will be a cause of sin to several men of all
sorts, and that is their ignorance of their present actions being comprehended
under the letter of the Law, and meant by it.

But now as for those transgressions, which men of an honest heart are guilty
of, through this ignorance of their own actions being included in the Law, when
they do know the Law that includes it: They do not put them out of a state of
Grace, but consist with it.

For this Ignorance is men's unhappiness rather than their fault; it is not an
Ignorance of their own choosing, seeing their will and choice is against it.
For they desire to be free from it, and strive to prevent it, and endeavor,
according to those abilities and opportunities which God has afforded them, to
get right and true apprehensions of all Gods will that they may perform; and of
every evil action that they may avoid it. But it is the difficulty and
intricateness of things which renders them ignorant, and that is not of their
making. For the sins forbidden are not easily distinguished from the Liberty
allowed, or from the Duty commanded in some cases; and therefore it is that
they mistake them, and are ignorant of the sinfulness of their present action,
when their knowledge of it should enable them if they would to avoid it.

And since it has so little of their own will, and the men, even when by reason
of their ignorance they transgress, are industriously desirous to know their
Duty, and prepared to practice it so far as they understand it: it shall have
nothing of Gods anger. It is altogether a pardonable slip, and a pitiable
instance, and that is enough to recommend it to Gods mercy. For he is never
rigorous and severe in a case that is prepared for pity and pardon, so that he
will not punish, but graciously forgive it.

And if it were otherwise, who could possibly be saved? For this ignorance of
their present actions being comprehended in the words of the known Law, is such
as the wisest men have been subject to; and they, among the rest, who were most
eminently skilled in all the Laws of God. St Paul is not certain but that some
such ignorance adhered to himself. I know or am (...).
conscious of nothing by my self, says he, but yet I am not hereby justified,
because some such sins may have nihil mihi conscius, etc. quia legerat, delicta
quis intelligat, etc. temperabat sententiam n^ ^orte per ignorantiam
deliquisset* Hieron. Dial. adv. Pelag. lib. 2. p. 284. Ed. Erasm.
escaped my knowledge, 1 Cor. 4.4. Why, says St (...). Chrysostom. Hom. 11. in 1
Epist. ad Chor. c. 4. verse. 4. Tom. 3. p. 307. Ed. Savil.
Chrysostom, should the Apostle say that he is not thereby justified, although
he is conscious of nothing by himself wherefore he should be condemned? because
it might so happen, that he had committed several acts of sin, which, at the
time of action, for all his knowledge of the Laws themselves, he did not know
were sinful. And this is no more than holy David, the man after Gods own
heart, thought he had reason to suspect himself for before him; who, says he,
can understand his errors? cleanse thou me from my secret faults, Psalm. 19.12.
The best men in all times, whether Jews or Christians, have been subject to
miscarriages through this sort of ignorance; and God, who is never wanting to
the necessities of his servants, has always provided a sufficient atonement
and propitiation for them. For under the Law, if any honest Israelite happened
to do any thing which was forbidden to be done by the Commandment of the Lord,
and wist not that it was forbidden; Moses appointed the Priests to make an
expiation for him, and several atonements for that purpose are set down, Levit.
4. And under the Gospel our Savior Christ, by Joh. 1.17.
whom Grace and Favor is said to be given much more largely than it was by the
Law of Moses, has provided us of a much more powerful and valuable
propitiation. He himself, by virtue of his own sacrifice, atones for all such
unknown offenses; as well as the Jewish Priests did by their Sacrifices, which
were prescribed in the Law of Moses. For in comparison of the two Priesthoods,
as to that part of their Office which lay in making these atonements, St Paul
assures us, that like as the Jewish Priests had, so Christ can have compassion
upon the ignorant, Heb. 5.2.

As for those transgressions then which are therefore involuntary and unchosen,
because we do not know that the Law which they are against does comprehend
them; they shall not finally damn any man. So long as we have an honest heart,
that is ready to perform what it knows, and unfeignedly desirous and
industrious to know more, that it may perform it likewise; if in some things
still we happen ignorantly to offend, such ignorant offenses shall not prove
our ruin. For our ignorance will excuse our sin, and make it consistent with
Gods Favor, and with all the hopes and happiness of heaven.

Nay, even where our heart is not so honest as it should be, and we are
ignorant of the present actions being comprised under that sin which the Law
forbids through our own fault; yet even there our ignorance, although it cannot
wholly excuse, does still extenuate our sin, and proportionably abate our
punishment. Perhaps it is our rashness, or inconsiderateness, or violent
pursuit of some opinions and prejudice against others which makes us judge
wrong of some particular actions, and not to see that they are included in the
prohibition of some known Law, when really they are. Nay, so far may our
mistake go, as not only to judge them to be no sinful breaches of these Laws;
but moreover to be virtuous performances of others. For our Savior tells his
Disciples, that the time was coming, when even they who killed them should
think that thereby they did God good service, Joh. 16.2. And St Paul says
plainly, that he verily thought with himself, that he ought to do many things
contrary to the name of Jesus of Nazareth, Acts 26.9. All which murders and
persecutions they were ignorantly guilty of; not as if they did not know the
Laws against murder and persecution, but because they thought their present
actions to be unconcerned in them, and not forbid by them; nay, on the
contrary, to be warranted and enjoined by other Laws requiring zeal for God,
and judgment against false Prophets.

Now this Ignorance was such as they might very well have prevented had they
been calm, and considerate, humble, and teachable, and would have hearkened
honestly, and with an even mind to that evidence which Christ gave of his being
the Messiah, which was sufficient to convince any honest mind. And this
patience, humility, and teachableness were in their own Power to have exercised
if they would; so that they were ignorant in good measure through their own
choice, and by a wilful neglect of those means which would have brought them to
a true belief, and a right understanding. And since their Ignorance was thus a
matter of their own choice, it is their sin, and they must answer for it.

But although, being, as I say, their own fault, it could not wholly excuse;
yet was it fit to lessen and mitigate their crime, and to abate their
punishment. Their account should be less by reason of their Ignorance, and the
sinful actions, being committed with an honest heart through a misguided
understanding, were much more prepared for pardon than otherwise they would
have been. And this Christ himself has plainly taught us, when he uses it as an
argument with his Father for the forgiveness of that sinful murder of the
Jews, whereof they were guilty in his Crucifixion. Father, says he, forgive
them* for they know not what they do; their killing of me they take to be no
sinful murder of an innocent and anointed person, but a virtuous execution of
a lying Prophet, Luke 23.34. And this likewise St Paul experienced: I obtained
Mercy, says he, for persecuting the Church of God, because I did it
ignorantly, not thinking it to be a sinful persecution, but a pious service, 1 Timothy 1.13.

Yea, if the culpa^le ignorance be either of the Law it self, or of our present
actions being contained under it; ^^though God should not call us to repentance
for what we ignorantly committed, and so to pardon; yet even unpardoned we
shall undergo a much lighter punishment by reason of our ignorance, than we
should have suffered had we sinned in knowledge. For in this Point the words of
our Lord and Judge are express, He who knew not his Masters will, and did
things worthy of stripes; shall be beaten with few stripes, Luke 12.48.

This allowance the Gospel makes for our sinful actions, so long as we are
ignorant that the Laws which they are against do include and comprehend them.
Whilst our Consciences are in darkness about them, and we do not see that we
transgress in them; though that ignorance were in good measure culpably wilful,
we should obtain a milder punishment; but if it were involuntary and innocent,
we shall be fully acquitted and excused.

This allowance, I say, there is whilst our sin is ignorant, and our
Consciences do not see that the known Law is transgressed by our sinful action.

But if our Consciences should come to know so much of the sinfulness of that
action which we commit, as to scruple its lawfulness; and to be enlightened so
far as really to doubt of it: then is the case quite altered, and we cannot
plead that we did it ignorantly, because we knew so much by it at least as
should have made us forbear it. For if indeed we doubted of it, we knew it was
as likely to be a Sin, as to be an innocent Action; because that is properly
Doubting, when we suspend our Assent, and cannot tell which way to determine,
when we judge one to be as likely as the other, and do not positively and
determinately believe the truth of either. And when this is our case concerning
any Action, if we venture on it whilst the doubt remains, we are guilty of sin,
and must expect to suffer punishment. For by so doing we show plainly, that we
will do more for sin than we will for God, and that it has a greater interest
with us than he; because even whilst we apprehend it as likely to be our sin as
our liberty, yet for the sins sake we choose to venture on it, rather than for
Gods sake to abstain from it.

This Contempt of God there is in it, in the Nature of the very thing it self,
although God had no ways expressed himself concerning it. But we must know
further, that whenever we are in this estate of doubt and unresolvedness, God
has given us a peremptory Command that we should not act what we fear is
sinful, but omit it. Abstain, says he, from all appearance of evil, 1 Thessalonians.
5.22. So that if after all our Disputes and Demurs we venture at last to commit
the Action which we doubted of, we do not only slight God by running the hazard
of Disobedience to one Law, whereof we are uncertain; but we wilfully disobey
him in transgressing of this other Law, whereof we all either are, or may be
certain if we will. And if in this estate we presume thus to disobey, we shall
be sure to suffer for our Disobedience.

And in this case St. Paul is plain. For if there be any thing, whose
lawfulness our Consciences are unresolved and unperswaded of; whilst that
unresolvedness remains, he tells us plainly, that our commission of it is
utterly unlawful. Whatsoever, says he, is not of Faith, or proceeding from a
belief and persuasion of its lawfulness, is sin. So that if it be about the
eating of meats, for Instance, he that doubts is damned, both of God and of
himself, if he eat, because he eats not of Faith, Romans 14.23.

If our minds therefore are so far enlightened concerning any sinful Action, as
that we are come to doubt of it, we are no longer innocently and excusably
ignorant. For we see enough by it to make us choose to abstain from it; and if
for all this we presume still to venture on it, sin lies at the door, and we
must answer for it. We are no longer within the excuse of Ignorance, but we are
guilty of a wilful sin, and are got within the bounds of Death and Damnation.

But if in any Action we know nothing at all of the Law which forbids it; or
after we have known that, if we are still ignorant of its being contained under
it; if we are not come to doubt, but are either in Ignorance, or Error
concerning it; our Ignorance shall excuse our Fault, and deliver us from
Condemnation. We do not choose the sin which we do thus ignorantly commit, and
therefore we shall not suffer that Punishment which is threatened to it; but our
unknown offense is a pardonable slip, such as, according to the gracious Terms
of Christ's Gospel, shall surely go uncondemned.

And this is true, not only of simple Ignorance, but likewise of the two
particular Modes of Ignorance, viz. First, Forgetfulness. Secondly, Error.


1. Our sins of Ignorance will be born with, if we venture upon the sinful
Action through Ignorance of its sinfulness, which we knew formerly, but at the
time of acting have forgotten. For a slip of Forgetfulness is no more than
befell an Apostle, who was for all that a blessed Saint, and an Heir of Life
still. St. Paul himself reviles the High Priest, forgetting both his Duty, and
that that man was he whom he spoke to. I wist not, Brethren, says he, that he
was the High Priest, for had I bethought my self I should not have spoke so
disrespectfully to him, it being thus written, Thou shall not speak evil of the
Ruler of thy People, Act. 23.5.

2. Our sins of Ignorance shall be dispensed with, if we are led to commit them
through a mistake of their innocence, when indeed they are sinful, which is an
acting of them through error. For no less a man than Peter was drawn into a
sinful dissimulation, through an erroneous conceit that his giving no offense,
but keeping in with the Jews (which was the thing that he aimed at by it) would
justify and bear him out in it. For which St Paul tells us when he came to
Antioch, he withstood him to the face, because he was to be blamed, Gal. 2.11,
12, 13. But yet for all this St Peter was at that time a true good Saint, and
if it had pleased God then to call for him, he had been undoubtedly an Heir of
salvation.

And to mention no more upon this Point, as there were constant atonements for
the errors of the people under the Law, so is there provision made for them
under the Gospel. For Christ who is our High Priest, as St Paul assures us, can
have compassion on the ignorant and (...).
erroneous, or them who are out of the way, Heb. 5.2.

So long therefore we see as our ignorance of any kind, whether of the Law it
self, or of our present actions being comprehended by it, is involuntary and
innocent; so long shall we be born with for all such slips as we incur under
it. For God will never be severe upon us for weakness of understanding, or for
want of parts, whilst there is nothing in us of a wicked heart: and therefore
if our ignorance it self is innocent, our offenses under it shall go unpunished.

But here we must observe that all this allowance for our ignorance, is so far
only as it is involuntary and faultless: but if we choose to be ignorant, our
ignorance is in it self our sin, and will make all our following offenses
damnable. For we must answer for any thing of our own choice; and therefore if
we choose the ignorance, we shall be interpreted to choose, and so put to answer
for, all those ill effects which it produces. Those sins which are voluntary in
their cause, are interpreted to us, as we have seen, and put upon our score; so
that if we choose the ignorance which brings them, we shall be adjudged to
suffer for them.

Now as for the ignorance and error of many men, which is the cause of their
sins and transgressions, it is plainly of their own choosing. They have a mind
to be ignorant of their Duty, and that is the reason why they do not understand
it. For either they shut their eyes, and will not see it; or they are idle and
careless, and will not enquire after it; or they bend their wits, at the
instigation of their lusts, to dispute against it, that after they have
darkened and confounded it in their own thoughts, they may mince or evacuate,
mistake or disbelieve it. So that if at last they do not know it, it is because
they do not desire the knowledge of it, or will be at no pains for it, or take
pains against it, to supplant and disguise it. And these are they, who are not
ignorant against their wills, but, as St Peter says, willingly ignorant, 2 Pet.
3.5.

And as for such ignorance as this, it will by no means excuse us before God;
but if we will be ignorant, God's will and pleasure is, that we shall suffer
for our sinful ignorance, and for all those sins that we commit under it, which
we might and should have seen and avoided. For all those Laws, which are
ignorantly transgressed by us, threaten death, and the ignorance being of our
own choosing takes nothing off; so that death and damnation rest upon us.

But that ignorance which can be pleaded to excuse us before God, must be an
ignorance that is involuntary; an ignorance, which in the constitution of our
nature is imposed upon us, and is not chosen by us.

And a right understanding of this difference in ignorance being of so great
moment, I shall, before I dismiss this Point, observe when our ignorance is
voluntary, and when it is involuntary.

First, I will show when our ignorance is ^^voluntary.

As for the knowledge of our Duty, like as of all other things, it does not
spring up in our souls as an Herb does out of the ground, nor drop into us as
the rain does from a Cloud; but it must be sought for, and endeavored after,
and unless we use the means of acquiring it we must be content to live without
it.

The means of obtaining the knowledge of God's Laws, and of the innocence and
sinfulness of our own actions, are the reading of his Word, the attendance upon
his Ministers, the thinking or considering upon what we read or hear in our own
minds, and praying to God to make all these means effectual for our
information: and if ever we expect to know God's will, we must put these in
practice.

But now whether we will make use of these, or no, is plainly in our own
choice, and at our own pleasure. For if we will, we may Nulii homini ablatum
est scire utiliter quar^re, quod inutiliter ignorant, and humiliter consitendam
esse imbecillitatem, ut quaerenti and consitenti ille subveniat, qui nec errat
dum subvenit, nec laborat. Aug de lib arbit. l. 3. c. 19.
exercise; and if we will, we may as well neglect them. And when both these are
before us, if we refuse to make use of the means of understanding, and wilfully
Non tibi deputatur ad culpam quod invitus ignoras, sed quod negligis quaerere
quod ignoras. August. ib.
neglect the methods of attaining to the knowledge of sin and Duty, good and
evil; if we sit down without the knowledge of Gods Law, it is because we would
our selves, and our ignorance is a voluntary and a wilful ignorance.

And this is the first way of our ignorance's becoming voluntary, viz. when it
is so upon a voluntary neglect of those means which are necessary to attain
knowledge. And this in the Schools is called a Ignorantia supina.
supine, slothful, careless ignorance. And if it be of such things as lay near
in our way, and might have been known without much pains or much seeking; it is
called Ignorantia crassa and assectata.
gross or affected ignorance.

But besides this sort of wilful ignorance of our Duty, through a wilful
neglect of those means which are necessary to the knowledge of it; there is
another which is higher and more enormous, and that is,

Secondly, When we do not only slight the means of knowing God's Law, but
moreover use those of confounding or mistaking it.

For our knowledge of things is then made perfect and useful, when it is clear
and distinct; and our assent and belief of things is then gained, when their
evidence is represented and duly considered of. But now as for the employing of
men's thoughts in clearing or confounding, believing or disbelieving of the Laws
of God; it is perfectly in their own power, whether to use it on one side, or
on the other. And commonly it is their pleasure to use it on the worse. For
they will consider only of the difficulties and intricacies of Gods Laws, which
may darken and disturb, confound and perplex their thoughts about them; and
attend only to such exceptions as they can make against them, which may
unsettle their minds, either about the meaning, or the truth of them: so that
after all their reading and considering of them, they shall not understand, but
err and mistake them. As it happens to all those who had disputed themselves
out of the knowledge of their Duty, until, as Isaiah says, they call evil good,
and good evil, put darkness for light, and light for darkness, Isai. 5.20.

And when men are ignorant of their Duty, because they chose thus to endeavor
it, and take pains for it; this ignorance is voluntary and wilful with a
witness.

These two reasons of men's being ignorant of their Duty, viz. their neglect of
such means as are necessary to the knowledge of it, or their use of the
contrary means of confounding or discrediting it, are the causes of their
wilful ignorance.

And that which makes them guilty of both these, is either the gross idleness,
or the profligate wickedness of their hearts, which are wholly inslaved to some
beloved lust or sin. They are wretchedly idle, and therefore they will not
learn their Duty because that is painful; they are greatly wicked, and so care
not for the knowledge of the Law because that would disquiet them. Men love
darkness, says our Savior, better than light, because their works are evil;
they hate the light and will not come to it, lest their deeds should be
reproved by it, John 3.19, 20. Because they hate and fear the Law, they neglect
the means of knowing it; nay, they pick quarrels with it, and endeavor all
they can to perplex or darken, to evacuate or disparage it.

So that our ignorance is then wilful, when we are therefore ignorant because
we neglect the means of knowledge, or industriously endeavor to be mistaken.
And that because we are either too idle to learn, or too wicked to care for the
knowledge of our Duty. The idleness and wickedness of our hearts is the first
spring, and the neglect of means, and industrious perverting of the truth are
the great productive instruments of our wilful ignorance. Which is therefore
called voluntary and wilful, because the Principle and the Instruments, the
motive and the means to it, are both under the power and choice of our own
wills.

And these things making our ignorance wilful, viz. a wilful neglect of the
means of knowledge, or a wilful perverting of those Laws which we are to know:
we shall easily discern,

Secondly, What ignorance is unwilled and involuntary; namely, that which
implies a freedom from, and an absence of both these; so that unto it there is
required, First, An honest heart. Secondly, An honest industry.


First, In all involuntary ignorance, it is necessary that we have an honest
heart. We have St Paul's word for it, that our receiving of the love of the
truth is necessary to a saving belief, and understanding of it. They who
believed not the truth, but believed lies, fell into that miscarriage by this
means, says he, because they received not the love of the truth, that they
might be saved, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11, 12. And our Savior has taught us, that an
obedient heart is the surest step to a right understanding. If any man will, or
is willing to do God's will, he shall know of the Doctrine which I preach,
whether it be of God, John 7.17. The heart or will must in the first place be
obedient, and unfeignedly desirous to know Gods will; not that it may question
and dispute, but practice and obey it. For a failure here spoils all besides,
because the Heart and Will is the Principle of all our actions, and if it be
against obeying any Law, it will be also against understanding it, and so will
be sure to make us neglect, and omit, more or less, the means of coming to the
knowledge of it. To prevent therefore all wilful defects afterward, care must
be taken in the first place that our hearts be honest, and truly desirous to be
shown our Duty, be it what it will. They must entertain no Lusts which will
prejudice them against Gods Laws, and make them willing, either to overlook, or
to pervert them. But they must come with an entire obedience and resignation,
being ready and desirous to hearken to whatsoever God shall say, and resolved
to practice it whenever they shall understand it. Of their sincerity in which
last, besides their own sense and feeling, they cannot have a greater Argument,
than their being careful to be found in the practice of so much as they know
already, without which it is not to be expected that they should be perfecter
in their practice by knowing more.

This Honesty and obedience of the Heart then is necessary in the first place
to make our ignorance involuntary, because we should wilfully omit the means of
knowledge, and become thereby wilfully ignorant if we wanted it.

But then as an effect of this Honesty of the heart, to make our ignorance
involuntary and innocent, there is yet further required

Secondly, An honest Industry. For the knowledge of our Duty, as was observed,
is not to be got without our own search, but we must inquire after it, and make
use of the means of obtaining it, before we shall be possessed of it. We must
read good Books, which will teach us Gods Will, but especially the Bible; we
must be constant and careful to hear Sermons; attend diligently to the
instructions of our spiritual Guides, whom God has set over us for that very
purpose. We must submit our selves to be catechized by our Governors, taught
by our Superiors, and admonished by our Equals; begging always a Blessing from
God to set home upon our Souls all their instructions. And after all we must be
careful without prejudice or partiality to think and meditate upon those things
which we read or hear, that we may the better understand them, and that they
may not suddenly slip from us, but we may remember and retain them.

All these are such means as God has appointed for the attainment of spiritual
knowledge, and laid in our way to a right understanding of his Will. And they
are such as he has placed in every man's power, for any of us to use who are so
minded. So that if we are ignorant of our Duty through the want of them, we are
ignorant, because we our selves would have it so. But if ever we expect that
our ignorance should be judged involuntary, we must industriously use all those
means of knowledge, which are under the power of our own wills, whereby we may
prevent it.

And as for the measures of this industry, (viz.) what time is to be laid out
upon it, and what pains are to be taken in it, that is so much as in every one,
according to their several abilities and opportunities, would be interpreted an
effect of an honestly obedient heart, and of an unfeigned desire to know our
duty, by any honest man. For God has not given all men either the same
abilities or opportunities for knowledge; and since he has not, he does not
expect the same measures from them. He does not reap where he has not sown, but
that which he exacts, is, that every man according to his opportunities, should
use and improve that talent, be it more or less, which was entrusted with him,
as we are taught in the Parable of the Talents, Mat. 25. And to name that once
for all, we have this laid down by our Savior as an universal maxim of Gods
Government; unto whomsoever much is given, of them shall much be required.
Which is the very same equitable proceeding that is daily in use among our
selves. For to whom men have committed much, of him they will exact the more,
Luke 12.48.

If any man therefore is industrious after the knowledge of Gods will,
according to the measure of those abilities and opportunities which God has
given him; he is industrious according to that measure which God requires of
him. All men have not the same leisure, for some are necessarily taken up by
their place and way of life in much business, some in less; some have their
time at their own disposal, some are subject to the ordering of others. And all
have not the same abilities and opportunities, for some are able by study and
reading to inform themselves, some have constant need of the help and
instruction of others; some have most wise and understanding teachers, and may
have their assistance when they will; others have men of meaner parts and
seize, and opportunity of hearing them more seldom. But now of all these,
whose leisure and opportunities are thus different, God does not in any wise
exact the same measure: No, one shall be excused for what another shall be
punished; but if every man endeavors according to his opportunities, he has
done his Duty, and God has accepted him.

And in the proportioning of this, where there is first an honest heart, God is
not hard to please. For he knows that, besides their Duty, men have much other
business to mind, which his own constitution of Humane Nature has made
necessary; and he allows of it. The endeavors which he exacts of us, are not
the endeavors of Angels, but of men, who are soon wearied, and much
distracted, having so many other things to employ us. But he accepts of such a
measure of industry in the use of all the means of knowledge, as would be
interpreted for an effect of an hearty desire to know his Laws, by any honest
man. For where there is first an obedient heart, God will not be equalled, and
much less outdone by the best of men in pity and kindness. Which is the
argument from which our Savior himself concludes that God will give the holy
spirit at our prayers, because that men themselves, who are infinitely below
him in goodness, will give good gifts to them that ask them, Luke 11.13.

Let us therefore take care in the first place to secure our selves of an
obedient heart, and to give such evidence of an honest industry, as any kind
hearted honest man would accept of; and then we may have just reason to be
confident, that although our endeavor is weak and imperfect, being much
hindered, and often interrupted, yet shall it still be esteemed sufficient. For
Christ himself, who is to judge of its sufficiency, is no stranger to our
weaknesses, but, having felt them in himself, he is prone to pity and pardon
them in us. He experimented the backwardness of our flesh, and the number of
our distractions, and the tiredness of our powers, and the insinuations and
strength of temptations. So that having such an High Priest to intercede for us
at present, and to judge us at the last day, who is touched with a feeling of
our infirmities, having been tempted himself in all points, even as we are: let
us come boldly unto the throne of Grace, as the Apostle exhorts us, that we may
obtain mercy for what we cannot master, as well as find grace in a seasonable
time of need to conquer what he expects we should overcome, Hebr. 4.15, 16. And
this merciful connivance at our imperfections, and gracious acceptance of our
weak endeavors, we may with the greater reason and assurance hope for; because
Christ our Judge will be most candid and benign, in putting the best sense, and
in interpreting most to our advantage all those our actions and endeavors,
which shall then be brought before him. Whereof he has given us a clear
instance, in that most favorable construction which he made of that Charity,
that was shown unto his Brethren by those on his right hand, Mat. 25. For
although it was not expressed to him, but only to their fellow Christians for
his sake; yet because their kindness reached him in the intention of their
minds, and what they did to his servants for his sake, they would have done to
himself much rather could they have met with an opportunity; he resented it as
if it had been really shown to his own person. For when they say unto him,
Lord, when saw we thee an hungered, and fed thee; or naked, and clothed thee,
etc. he answers, inasmuch as ye have done it to one of the least of these my
brethren, I take the affection for the performance, and interpret it as if you
had done it unto me, verse. 40.

When therefore the sufficiency of our endeavors fater the knowledge of our
Duty, is come to be enquired into by our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; we may
be assured that it will have a favorable trial. It it to be censured by a
candid, equitable, and benign judge, who will interpret it to our advantage as
much, nay, more than any good natured honest man would. So that if our industry
after the knowledge of Gods will be in such a measure, as a candid and benign
man would judge to be a sufficient effect of an obedient heart, and of an
honest purpose; Christ will judge it to be so too.

And where our Ignorance of any of Christ's Laws is joined with an honest heart,
and remains after such an industry; we may take comfort to our selves, and be
confident that it is involuntary and innocent. If we are desirous to know Gods
Laws, and read good Books, frequent Sermons, hearken to any good instructions
which we meet with, and that according to our opportunities, and in such
measure as any good man would interpret to be an honest endeavor after the
knowledge of our Duty if it were to himself: if after all this, I say, in some
points we are still Ignorant, our Ignorance is involuntary, and shall not harm
us; it is not chosen by us, and therefore it never will condemn us.

And thus we have seen what ignorances excuse our slips and transgressions
which are committed under them; and when those Ignorances are themselves
involuntary and innocent, so as that we may comfortably expect to be excused
upon the account of them. And the sum of all that has been hitherto discoursed
upon this subject is this. That as for the Laws themselves, all men must needs
be ignorant of some of them for some time, and some men for all their lives,
because they want either ability or opportunity to understand them. And as for
their present actions being comprehended under them, that many men of all sorts
and capacities, after that they have known the General Laws, will still be
ignorant of it likewise. For as for the wise and learned, the small and mere
gradual difference between good and evil in some instances, the allowed
exceptions from the generality of others, the indirect force and obligation of
a third sort, and the frequent clashing and enterfering, whether of Laws with
Laws, or of Laws with their repugnant prejudices and opinions; will be sure to
make them very often overlook it. And as for the rude and ignorant, that,
besides all these causes of such ignorance which are common to them with
learned men, the difficult and obscure nature of several Vices and Virtues
themselves, which are plainly and expressly forbidden or enjoined, will be of
force sufficient to make the generality of them in many instances not to
understand it. And as for the pardon and excuse of our ignorance and unknown
transgressions from all, or any of these causes; that it is involuntary and
innocent so long as it is joined with an honest heart, and remains after an
honest industry; and begins then only to be our wilful sin, and an Article of
our condemnation, when our Lusts or Vices introduce it, and we have a mind to
it, and take no pains against it, or, what is the consummation and height of
all, industriously labor and endeavor after it.

And this may suffice to have spoken of the first sort of want of Knowledge,
which, as I said above, produces an uncondemning involuntariness, (viz.)
Ignorance, when we commit sin, because we do not know the sinfulness of our
present action, or the Law which we sin against.

CHAP. VIII. Of Sins consistent through the second Cause of an innocent
Involuntariness, viz. Inconsideration.
The CONTENTS.
Consideration is necessary to choice. Some sins are inconsiderate. Three
innocent causes of inconsideration. 1. Suddenness and surprise of opportunity.
An account of this. The involuntariness of it. Slips upon it are consistent. 2.
Weariness of our thinking powers or understandings. An account of this; and of
its involuntariness. The consistence of our Transgressions by reason of it. 3.
Discomposure or disturbance of them. An account of this. The causes of it are
Drunkenness, or a strong Passion. Drunkenness is always our own fault. Our
Passions grow strong in us sometimes by our own indulgence, and then they are
our damning sin, and we must suffer for the evil that we commit under them:
sometimes through the suddenness, and greatness of outward objects; and then
they are pardonable, and our inconsiderate slips upon them are excusable. The
Passions which have Good for their object, as Love, Desire, etc. cannot by any
force of outward objects be so suddenly forced upon us. But the Passions which
have Evil, as Grief, Anger, and Fear especially, often are. The reason of this
difference. Inconsideration upon the latter excusable, but not upon the former.
This difference made by our Savior in a case where both were criminal.
Excusable slips upon discomposure of our thinking powers, are such as proceed
from an unwill'd sudden Grief or Anger, but especially from a sudden Fear. No
fear is involuntary but what is sudden; and sins upon deliberate fear are
damning; but upon unwill'd sudden Fear, Grief, or Anger, consistent with
Salvation. Cautions about inconsiderate sins to prevent false confidence. No
sin is innocently inconsiderate: 1. Where we have time and an undisturbed
understanding. 2. Where the sin is mischievous, or greatly criminal. 3. When we
do not strive against it. We must endeavor against all involuntary Failings,
though we cannot resolve against them. 4. When we are not sorry after we have
committed it, nor beg pardon for it. 5. When it is committed with observation.
A summary Repetition of this fourth Book.

HAving in the foregoing Chapters discoursed largely of the first cause of an
innocent Involuntariness, viz. Ignorance of our Duty or want of a general
Knowledge, I proceed now to the second, viz. want of particular Animadvertence
and Consideration of what we know, which is Inconsiderateness. And this is the
second way of rendering our Transgressions pardonably involuntary, which I
proposed above; namely, when in any sinful action we do not bethink our selves,
and consider of its sinfulness.

It is not all knowledge of our Duty that renders every particular sin against
it chosen and voluntary. For a knowledge that is only general, and at such time
as the thing occurs to our thoughts, and we are asked the Question, will not
do: but as all our choice is of particular actions, so must our knowledge be
likewise. Before we can be said to choose a particular action, we must see and
know it particularly; and if we act it without thinking, we act it also without
choosing, seeing all choice is upon sight and knowledge of what is chosen.

But now this is the case in several of our Transgressions, they slide from us
without this actual application of our minds to them. For we do not think and
consider of the evil of them when we commit them; and so their sinfulness being
unseen, it is withal unchosen. They are of the number of our involuntary sins,
and such as, implying nothing of our own will, shall have nothing of Gods
anger, who will not punish, but graciously bear with them.

And these slips stealing from us without our considering and thinking on them,
or adverting in the application of our minds to them; are called by these
several names, which are all of the same signification, viz. sins of
inadvertency, incogitancy, and inconsideration. Which because they are such as,
through the weakness of our Natures, we are continually subject to, and liable
daily to incur, are styled in another word sins of daily incursion.

Now as for this second sort of sins, our inconsiderate Transgressions, they
may steal from us involuntarily and innocently upon as many grounds, as there
may be innocent causes of inconsiderate actions. And as for the unwill'd, and
therefore innocent causes of inconsideration, they are reducible to these three.

1. Suddenness and surprise of Opportunity. 2. Weariness, and 3. Discomposure
and disturbance of our thinking powers wherewith we should consider.
1. The first cause of inconsideration in our Actions, whereupon we venture
upon some sin without thinking or considering of it, is the suddenness of the
Opportunity, and the surprise of Temptation. It falls out unexpectedly, and
stays for us at such time as our minds are otherwise employed; and so we act it
without considering, because it lies ready and prepared for us just then, when
we have no leisure for thinking and consideration. And the first beginnings of
a sinful Passion, whether of Anger, of Envy, etc. and the unadvised slips of
the Tongue in rash censuring, in uncharitable speaking, in indeliberate
backbiting, and the like generally enter this way. For they come upon us in the
throng of Conversation, and opportunities are offered for them before we
foresee them; and so we spring out indeliberately to act and exert them.

And this inconsideration is such as we cannot avoid. For we have no freedom of
acting where we want a freedom of thinking, seeing we cannot choose without
consideration. But as for these inconsiderate slips, they steal from us before
we can bethink our selves, and stay not for our consideration, but run before
it. For our operative Powers, when they are spurred on by any thing of an
inward desire, or of a remaining corrupt inclination, (and who, as long as he
lives here, can be wholly free from it?) are ready of themselves to spring out
into Action and Practice upon the first offer of Temptation, and stand in need
of reason and consideration, not to raise and excite, but to restrain and
repress them. So that upon the offer of a fit occasion we act many times amiss
before we are aware; and we cannot help it, because we cannot deliberate and
consider of it.

But as these slips of surprise are such as we cannot avoid, so are they such
withal wherefore God will not exact a severe account of us. He will not punish
but pity us for them, and in great mercy dispense with them.

For they are necessarily incident to all men; they have been incurred by his
best servants, but were never looked upon to be of that provoking nature as to
put them out of his favor, or to interrupt their state of salvation and
acceptance. Just Noah through his ignorance of the strength of Wine was
surprised into one sin; for he was drunken before he was aware, or could
discern what effects the fruits of his new Vineyard would have upon him. Noah
drank wine, says Moses, and was drunken, Genesis 9.21. But this was perfectly a
mixture of surprise and ignorance, for his wits had left him before he was
aware, and before he ever knew that the Wine which he drunk would drive them
from him. For it was at his first planting of a Vineyard, before he understood
what measure of it would cause intoxication. He began, says the Text, to be a
Husbandman, and he planted a Vineyard, and he drank of the wine of his new
Vineyard, and was drunken, v. 20 21. The great Apostle Paul himself was guilty
of one sudden slip toward Ananias the High Priest, who, whilst his mind was
intent upon his Speech which he was making in his own defense, commanded him to
be smitten on the face. Upon which unexpected occasion he was surprised into a
sudden anger, and into an unadvised irreverence. God shall smite thee, thou
whited wall, says he presently to him again, for sit thou to judge me
according to the Law, and yet command me to be smitten contrary to the Law?
Act. 23.1, 2, 3. But as soon as ever he dad done, he retracts his words, and
confesses that his Speech was evil; but yet he pleads that it was pardonable,
as being altogether unconsidered through the suddenness of the occasion. I wist
not, Brethren, says he, that he was the High Priest, I did not think of that;
for if I had I should not have spoke so disrespectfully to him, it being thus
written, Thou shall not speak evil of the Ruler of thy people, v. 4, 5.

2. Another innocent cause of inconsideration, whereby we venture upon several
actions without thinking of their sinfulness, is the natural weariness of our
faculties or understandings. It is the very frame of our Natures, and we cannot
help it, for our minds to be tired out by being held long and constantly to one
thing. We find it is so with us in all Studies whatsoever; for let our thoughts
be employed upon what we will, they cannot be kept at stretch upon it for a
long time together, but either we must draw them off and relieve them, or else
they will flag and fail of themselves.

But now as for some sins, they are a continued temptation. They do not soon
come upon us, and go off as soon again; but they lie before us and stick to us,
and for a long time are still alluring and soliciting us. And here although
our minds can consider of them, and watch against them for some time; yet by
reason of their long abode with us they wax faint at last, and grow weary and
forgetful: and then the temptation gets ground, and enters when we are not
aware, and in some thing we prove unadvised, and yield to it because we cannot
hold out longer to consider of such things as should guard and preserve us from
it. Thus in afflictions and sickness, for instance, by the uneasiness of his
flesh, and the hardness of his condition, a man is tempted to fret and murmr,
and to be peevish and repining. But for some considerable time he stands upon
his guard, and his thoughts are in readiness; and so long he represses his
passion and keeps it under: so that although the sin be importunately offered,
it is not embraced. And if the temptation would pass off whilst he stands thus
prepared to watch against it, all were well, and his Virtue would remain in
safety. But on the contrary it is lasting and permanent, it sticks to him, and
incessantly importunes him, and so proves a continual snare to him. And now if
his mind would endure to be held always upon the stretch, and in a continued
watchfulness against it, all were well, and he would keep back from it still.
But alas! his Faculties, after a long toil, grow weary; and his Powers of
thinking, being constantly employed, are spent and disabled; and then his
watchfulness begins to impair, and his thoughts by degrees to unbend; and
whilst he becomes less attent, and less careful to oppose the Temptation, it
wins ground, and prevails upon him when he is not aware: so that although he
could not at first, yet he is surprised at last into some impatient thought, or
peevish behavior. And the case is the same in a continued provocation to
Anger, Lust, or other sins.

Now this weariness, which renders us thus inconsiderate, is no matter of our
own choosing; it is the very frame of our Nature, and not the effect of our
will; so that we must submit to it, and we cannot help it. For the Soul in
thinking and understanding uses bodily powers, and they by exercise are spent
and wasted, weakened and enfeebled: and therefore when by a fixed watchfulness
and consideration of one thing, they have been kept long attent, they naturally
grow weak and weary, and there is no avoiding it.

And since we cannot help it, God will never exact of us that we should; but
when he comes to judge us for those slips, which were inconsiderate upon this
account, he will not punish, but in great mercy pardon and bear with us.

And this we find that he has always done. For his best Servants have been
wearied into slips of this nature, and yet they have not put them out of a
state of Grace, nor made a breach in God's acceptance; but he has owned and
rewarded them as his faithful Servants still.

Job was a man patient to a Proverb, and one to whom, by the testimony of God
himself there was none equal in the whole earth; a perfect and an upright man,
one who feared God, and eschewed evil, Job 1.8. But yet this man of admirable
Constancy and Patience, was wearied out of his watchfulness by a tedious Trial
of Afflictions, and in that time of his unadvisedness uttered many things
impatiently with his lips. For after he had watched sore by himself, and kept
silence, continuing still his noble Patience when his Friends came to pity him,
and stood amazed at his condition for seven days and seven nights together: at
last being overcharged with grief, and wearied off from his guard against it,
he bursts out into a rash and foolish cursing of the day of his birth, and into
many repining Questions and fretful Answers, Job 2.12, 13 and Chap. 3. But yet
notwithstanding all these, and several other fretful expressions of a tired
mind, God owns him for his dear Servant still, and honors him in the end with
a most noble mark of a particular affection, by accepting of his Sacrifice for
his Friends, when he would not accept of it from themselves, Job 42.8.

David, the man after Gods own heart, when in great fear he flies from Saul,
and after several escapes made from one place to another, could not either
weary or avoid him; being tired out of all patience and composure at last,
begins sinfully to call in question the truth of Gods promise. For although
Samuel had 1 Samuel 16.13.
come from God to anoint him King, and had thereby in Gods Name assured him of
the Crown: yet, after a long confidence in Gods Faithfulness, he begins at last
in the tiredness of his spirit to doubt within himself whether God would be as
good as his word, and to say in his heart, I shall now perish one day by the
hand of Saul, 1 Samuel 27.1. which he did, as he himself gives the account of it,
only because the weariness of his mind, through his continued and repeated
dangers, had made him hasty and inconsiderate. I said in my haste, says he, I
am cut off from before thine eyes; referring in all likelihood to this very
case, Psalm. 31.22.

Good Asaph, by the continuance of his troubles, is wearied into a like
offense. For although he guarded his spirit well at the beginning, and for some
time; yet after he had labored long under his affliction, he breaks out at
last in the discomposure of his soul into these repining thoughts and
distrustful expostulations: Will the Lord cast off for ever, and will he be
favorable no more? Is his mercy clean gone for ever, and does his promise fail
for evermore? Has God forgotten to be gracious, and has he in anger shut up
his tender mercies? Psalm. 77.7, 8, 9. But when once he had got liberty to
recollect his thoughts, and to recover again his former guard; he does not any
longer give way to these distrustful surmises, but immediately suppresses and
corrects them. Then I said, as he goes on, this is mine own infirmity, v. 10

3. A third innocent Cause of inconsideration in our Actions, is the
discomposure and disturbance of our thinking powers, which should consider of
them.

Our souls, as I said, are united to our bodies, and make use of their powers
in their most spiritual actions of Knowledge and Apprehension. And therefore
upon any ruffling discomposure in our bodily spirits, our thoughts are ruffled
and discomposed likewise. They see nothing clearly at such times, nor have any
distinct notices of things; but are blunder'd and confused even as our bodily
powers themselves are.

Now that which thus discomposes our bodily spirits, so as that our souls can
see and consider of nothing through their disorder, is either strong Drink, or
a strong Passion. For so much is all exercise of reason and consideration
disturbed and hindered by these, that of men in drink or in a high passion, it
is usually said, that they are not themselves, and that they have not their
wits about them.

But although either Wine or any violent passion are sufficient causes of
disturbance in our spirits, and of discomposure in our thinking powers, which
unfit us to consider of what we do during such time as we are disturbed by
them; yet are not both of them innocent, and able to excuse those inconsiderate
slips which we commit by reason of them. For drunkenness is always our own
fault, and if we sin unadvisedly through its discomposure, we shall certainly
suffer punishment, because that is a discomposure of our own seeking.

As for our passions indeed, they are causes of ambiguous quality. For
sometimes they grow strong in us by our own fault. Either we feed them, or we
indulge them; we suggest such things to them as will foment them, or we permit
them to grow unruly of themselves, without checking and repressing of them, as
we might and should, were we so minded. And when our passions are thus
indulged, and the violence of them is of our own choosing; they are themselves
our sin, and so cannot plead our excuse and vindication.

But then at other times they are forced upon us by the power and suddenness of
outward objects, whether we will or no. For we hate them, and are afraid of
them; and if we were aware we would stand upon our guard, and call in against
them all the Aids of Reason and Religion to preserve us from being too much
disturbed by them. But God's Providence casts them upon us on the sudden, so
that we do not see them before they come, nor can consider aforehand to prevent
and avoid them. And when once they are come, by their very natural force in
disturbing of our Spirits, they take away from us all power of consideration.
So that they are unconsidered in themselves, and unconsidered in their effects,
and therefore they are involuntary all the way. And when our passions are made
violent this way, viz. by being raised in us, not by any thing of our own
search or indulgence, but by the timing of God's Providence, and by the
suddenness and greatness of outward objects, they are pardonable in themselves,
and will excuse our inconsiderate transgressions. Those slips which we incur
under them are prepared for pardon, because we did not seek, nor could avoid
them.

Thus then our innocent Discomposures which unfit us for consideration, are
those only which are caused in us by strong passions not of our own indulging.
The passion which begets them must enter against our wills, through the
greatness and suddenness of outward objects; it must be forced upon us suddenly
and by surprise, and then we cannot refuse it, or the discomposure which ensues
upon it, because we have no time beforehand wherein to consider how to prevent
it.

Now it is not every passion which the power of outward objects can force upon
us on such a sudden. For love, desire, and all those passions which have good
for their object, are more under our own Command, and spring up in us more
gradually. They arrive not to such a discomposing pitch in a moment, but they
require more time, and go on more leisurely; and in all the intermedial steps
they are subject to our own power, so that we may arrest them, if we please,
before they have got so far. And therefore all the inconsideration which they
effect in us is more or less wilful, and a matter of our own choice, because it
proceeds from our own permission and indulgence.

But then as for other passions of grief, anger, and fear especially, which
have evil for their object; if the opportunity be sudden, and the object great
enough, they may be raised in us to such a degree, as to amaze and confound us
in a moment. A man may be in such a fright upon the sudden, as not to know what
he does, as we see by daily experience; and the case is the same in the others
likewise. And the reason of this difference between these passions and the
former is this, because the suffering of evil is far more repugnant to
self-preservation and self-love, which are the fundamental principle of all our
passions, than the absence of good. For if we sit without that good which would
move our love and desire, we are still where we were: but if we fall under that
evil, which excites our fear, we are made miserable, and much the worse: that
is only a denial of a farther delight; but this is a real deprivation, and a
step toward destruction. And since our self-love and self-preservation are so
much more nearly concerned in the suffering of evil, than in the absence of
good; our passions, which are only their several aspects and expressions, must
needs be more quick and violent in that than they are in this, and the
discomposure upon them will be so likewise.

This difference there is betwixt our inconsiderateness upon the violent fears
of evil, and upon our violent desires and pursuit of good. Which is observed by
our Savior in an instance where both were criminal; in which notwithstanding
the discomposure upon the fears of evil, being fit to plead the more excuse,
made the transgression that ensued upon it to be a lesser sin. For both the
Jews and Pilate concurred in the grievous sin of shedding innocent blood when
they crucified and murdered him. In which wicked action, that which moved them
was Mat. 27.18.
envy and malice, but that which prevailed with him, was his fear of their
calumnies, and of the anger of the Roman Emperor. For in his own heart he was
minded to John. 18 38, 39.
release him, being convinced of his innocence, and John 19 8.
afraid to have any hand in the Blood of one who called himself the Son of God.
But because he called himself a King, which his own John ^8 33.
mind could not but suggest to him, as the John 19.12, 13.
Rabble did afterward, was a Title whereof the Emperor would be extremely
jealous: therefore he gives him up to their will, fearing lest, if he did not,
he should be traduced as no Friend to that most jealous Prince Tiberius Caesar.
And when Christ himself comes to pass Judgment in comparison of his offense and
theirs, He who delivered me unto thee, says he, has the greater sin, Joh.
19.11.

Those discomposures then of our knowing Faculties, which are innocent, and fit
to excuse our inconsiderate slips which proceed from them; are such as spring
from an unwill'd sudden grief, or anger, but especially from an unwill'd sudden
fear.

To make it unwill'd, I say, it must be sudden; for if our fear it self, which
is a passion that amazes more than all the rest, does not presently effect any
thing, but stays some considerable time, and reigns long before it produces any
sinful action: then it is a matter of our own choice, being it is a fear of our
own indulging. We give it room and entertainment, we feed it, or give way to
it; and that makes our fear to become our sin, which can never serve for our
vindication.

For a true Christian must be as bold as a Lion, and fear nothing so much as
the disobedience of his God, and the breach of his Duty. But as for other
things, which men use to be afraid of, whether they be loss of Fame, of Estate,
of Friends, of Liberty, or even of Life it self; though he may justly fear and
avoid them, when he can innocently; yet if they are the burden of the Cross
imposed upon the doing of his Duty, he must cheerfully Mat. 16.24 25. and Chap.
10. ver. 37.
take it up, and not fear and fly from, but overlook and contemn them. For God
will make us an abundant Recompense in the next World, for any thing which we
part with for his sake in this. And therefore he indispensably requires us, as
in all reason he very well may, not to fear and shrink from the loss of any
thing, even of life it self, when he calls for it; but in Faith of his
Promises, and in hope of his Rewards, most courageously to undergo it.
Persecutions and Dangers, which are the great objects of our fears, are the
chiefest trials of our obedience, for which reason they are so often in
Scripture called 2 Pet. 2.11. 1 Cor. 10.13. Jam. 1.2, 3.
Temptations; and therefore their business is to evidence how much we will part
with for obedience, but by no means to excuse us when we disobey. But in
relation to them Christ's command is this: Fear not them which kill the body,
but are not able to kill the soul; but fear him who can cast both body and soul
into Hell, Mat. 10.28. And if we suffer our fears of them to chase us away from
the owning of his Religion, or to drive us from the performance of his Will;
his Sentence against us is plain and peremptory: Whosoever is ashamed of me and
my words, and dare not own them, although it be in a Generation that is sinful
and adulterous, wherein he will be sure to suffer for the profession of them;
of him shall the Son of man be ashamed when he comes in the Glory of his
Father with his holy Angels, Mark 8.38.

As for all Fear then which drives us from our Duty, it is our fault; and if we
stand and pause upon it, and have time to deliberate and arm our selves against
it; if we fear still, our fear is our wilful and deadly sin, and does not
excuse, but deserve our condemnation. And such was the fear of Peter that made
him deny his Lord, which cost him so many penitential tears to wash off the
stain of it, Mat. 26.75. And in an instance of a smaller crime, such was the
indulged fear of Abraham, when, to save his own life, he exposed his wife
Sarah, and Pharaoh King of Egypt to the danger of an adulterous mixture, Genesis
12.11, 12, 13, 15, etc. Concerning which action St Chrysostom thus discourses:
(...). And that because (...). Chrysostom. Homil. (...). in Genesis c. 12. v. 12,
13. p. 259, 260. Tom. 1. Ed. Savil.
He participates in the Adultery of his wife, and does in a manner minister to
the Adulterer unto his wife's reproach, only that he himself may avoid a
present death. And this he did, because his mind was still subject to the
Tyranny of death, the sting of it was not yet taken out, nor his fears of it
subdued; but the face of it was ghastly and terrible above his courage. And a
like sinful practice upon a deliberate fear we meet with in Isaac in the same
case, who was a true Child of Abraham in his infirmities, as well as in his
piety, Genesis 26.7.

But that Fear, or Grief, or Anger which makes excusable and innocent
discomposure, must be sudden and surprising. It must seize on us suddenly, and
disturb our thinking powers unawares, and carry us on to transgress before we
can recover our selves from the discomposure. And when it does so, it is forced
upon us, and is not chosen by us; we are hurried into it without our own
consent, and cast upon it whether we will or no: and since the inconsideration
it self is thus involuntary, the slips upon it are excusable, and such as God
will not severely punish, but has been always prone to pardon and dispense with.

David, the man after Gods own heart, when he received the sad (...) of
Absoloms being slain, was suddenly transported into a most impatient and
indecent height of sorrow, 2 Samuel 18.33. and Chap. 19. v. 2, 4.

Samuel who was a person so dear to God, that if he could be Jer. 15.1.
entreated by any man, he tells us it would be by him or Moses standing to
intercede before him: did yet in an instance that would have drawn him into the
hazard of his life, dispute Gods command when he should have performed it, and
question where in duty it became him to obey. For when God bid him go and
anoint David King, which service was sure to draw upon him the cruel and
implacable hatred of Saul, through the sudden force of that frightful thought,
instead of obeying, he answers again, saying, How can I go? for if Saul hear of
it, he will kill me, 1 Samuel 16.1 2. And a like instance we have of Moses's
infirmity, when God was for sending him upon an Errand as hazardous, and much
more difficult, viz. his deliverance of the poor oppressed Israelites from the
cruel Bondage of the powerful Egyptians, Exodus Chap. 3, and 4.

And Paul and Barnabas, two great Apostles, and most eminently pious Servants
of Jesus Christ, in the bitterness of dispute and (...).
heat of quarrel are so hasty and unadvised, as, through the sudden resentment
of that contest, to separate companies and part asunder, Act. 15.37, 38, 39.

And since these slips of inconsideration, through a sudden Grief, Fear, or
Anger, were incident to the most perfect Saints, and the most assured
Favorites and Heirs of Heaven; it is plain, that they are a fit matter of Gods
mercy, and will be graciously born with and forgiven, but not severely punished
by him.

As for our slips of inadvertence then, and inconsiderate transgressions,
whether we are inconsiderate through surprise, or weariness, or discomposure of
our thinking Faculties, they are such innocently involuntary sins as shall not
at the last Day be charged upon us; they do not unsaint a man, or destroy a
state of Salvation; but consist with it.

But to prevent men's false confidences of pardon, and groundless hopes of being
excused upon this head; I think fit to subjoyn these Cautions about
inconsiderate sins.

1. No sin is innocently inconsiderate where we have time, and our
understandings being undisturbed, are able to make use of it.

If we have Time to think, but our minds are troubled and distempered, which
makes them unfit to think and consider in it, as it happens in the cases of a
great weariness, and a violent sudden passion mentioned above; there, it is
true, we have no choice, because we have not all that is necessary to
consideration. But if we have ability and power as well as time and leisure,
our thoughts are at our own choice, and if we transgress inconsiderately, the
fault is our own; for we might have helped it if we would, and if we will not,
we must answer for it.

2. No sin is innocently inconsiderate which is of a mischievous nature, and
greatly criminal. For if a man has not brought himself into a habit of sin, and
under a great hardness of heart (which is always his own fault, and subjects
him to a most dreadful punishment) his own Soul must needs give back, and his
Conscience boggle at every great offense; and where he doubts and demurs, he
cannot say he is rash and inconsiderate. No man therefore can be guilty of an
act of Idolatry, Blasphemy, Perjury, Sacrilege, Adultery, Murder, Sedition,
Rebellion, Theft, Slander, or any other of those sins which are so great a
Terror even to Natural Conscience; and yet say he wist it not, and ventured on
them when he did not think of it. For if his Conscience had any thing of that
tenderness, which it should and would have, unless he has sinned it into
numbness and stupefaction, he could not commit any of these without checks of
mind, nor ever come to be guilty of them without fears and doubtings, disputes
and conflicts in his own soul. He must consider them over and over, and view
them on one side and on the other, before he can be able to master his own
fears, and work himself into courage sufficient to venture on them.

As for lesser sins indeed, a man's Conscience has not so quick a sense, nor so
great a dread of them; and therefore he may be surprised sometimes into the
commission of them before he considers of them. A good man may speak a rash
word, and be carelessly angry, or triflingly peevish, through surprise and
suddenness; but he cannot contrive the death of his neighbor, or stab a man to
the heart, without fear and consideration. He may be ensnared unawares into a
wanton eye, or a lascivous thought; but he cannot fall into an act of
fornication and adultery, till he might look about him, and should bethink
himself. He may rashly and unadvisedly be guilty of an uncharitable censure, of
a surly behavior, of a discourteous, uncondescensive, uncandid action: but he
cannot slander his neighbor, or entertain malice, wrath, and implacable enmity
against him, without deliberation, unless it be his own fault that he will not
deliberate, and consider of them. He may run before he bethinks himself into a
covetous wish, but not into fraud and circumvention, into theft and robbery,
into perfidiousness and oppression: and the like is observable in other
instances. These lesser sins, which are acted in more haste, and need less
deliberation, because men's consciences are less sensible and afraid of them,
men may, and very often do commit inconsiderately and unadvisedly; they are
surprised into them before they bethinks themselves, and consider of them.

But then as for greater sins, which either imply thought and contrivance, or
require time and leisure, or, for the heinousness of their guilt, are frightful
unto conscience; we can have no excuse of inconsideration when we fall under
them. Some, I say, imply thought and contrivance, as fraud and circumvention;
others require time, and a long stay upon the very commission of them, as rapes
and adulteries, thefts and robberies, drunkenness and revellings, wrath, anger,
and malice; and all of them are frightful and terrifying to any honest, and
truly tender Conscience. And when we think and contrive for them, or dwell long
upon them, or are frighted with them, and put into doubts and disputes, fears
and demurs about them; it is gross nonsense and absurd contradiction to say
that we did we wist not what, and committed them when we could not consider of
them. So that as for any sin which is of a mischievous nature, or greatly
criminal, unless it be our own fault, and we have made our Consciences hard and
callous, we cannot venture on it without considering it, because we cannot act
it without checks and fears of Conscience about it.

3. No sin is innocently and involuntarily inconsiderate, which we do not
endeavor and strive against. To endeavor against all sin is in our own power,
and at our own choice, although it be not perfectly to overcome it and get free
from it. For our endeavors are our own, and are either put forth, or omitted
at our own pleasure; so that it is only because we would have it so if they are
wanting. And therefore if we are inconsiderate because we refused, and wilfully
neglected to prevent it; our inconsideration enters upon our own choice, and is
so far owing to our own will. For we were willing to come under it, and would
not strive against it; and so far as it was willed by us, it may be charged
upon us, and imputed to condemn us.

Let no man therefore indulge himself in an inconsiderateness of sinning, and
take no pains against it, but quietly submit to it, out of a fond conceit of
being excused upon his inconsideration. For if he make no opposition to his
inconsiderateness, but carelessly lays himself open to it, and idly waits for
it; he makes it cease to be wholly his infirmity, and in some measure to become
his fault. Because it is so far an effect of his own will, as it is of his
wilful negligence; and as he wills it, he shall not be excused, but put to
answer and account for it.

But if any man expect to have his inconsiderate slips excused as involuntary
and innocent, he must not indulge to them, or quietly wait for them, but
seriously endeavor and strive against them. It Is true indeed, he cannot
resolve against all, because he cannot live free from all; and what a man
cannot perform, it is downright folly and gross absurdity to resolve upon the
performance of. No man in his wits resolves to be as wise as Solomon, to
support a Millstone by his own strength, or to destroy a vast Army by his
single valor. For since these things cannot be done by him, if he understands
what he does, he cannot resolve to do them. And therefore as for the being
wholly freed from all infirmity, and never falling by inconsideration; it is
utterly absurd for any man to resolve upon it, because no man can ever attain
unto it. But although we cannot resolve against all inconsiderate slips, yet
can we endeavor to get quit of them, and strive against them. For we may
endeavor to do what is not to be done; and do as much of it as we can,
although we are not able to do it all. Saint Paul himself endeavored, and
exhorts all others who were perfect to such acceptable degrees as he was, to
endeavor with him after a state of absolute perfection, although none of them
all would ever be able in this life to arrive to it, Phil. 3.14, 15. They could
not resolve upon it indeed, because they could not compass it; but they could
and ought to endeavor after it, and to attain so far as they had power, when
they could not so far as they desired. And after that rate must we strive
against all inconsiderate transgressions also. For although we shall never get
wholly free from them, yet still must we take pains against them; but if they
seize upon us through a neglect of our own endeavors, they seize upon us
through our own will; and then they are unfit to be judged involuntary.

4. No sin is innocently and involuntarily inconsiderate, except we are sorry
after we have committed it, and beg Gods pardon for it. When thou art reproved
for thy rash and unadvised miscarriages, says the wise Son of Sirach, show
repentance; and so shall thou escape the guilt of wilful sin, Ec^lus. 20.3.
Aristotle has long since observed, That ignorance it self does not render an
action involuntary, unless we are troubled at it afterward when we come to
understand it. For (...). Arist Ethic. ad Nicom. l. 3. c. 1.
that act of ignorance only is involuntary, says he, which we afterward with
grief repent of. When we come to know that evil which we ignorantly committed,
we must have an indignation at it, and beg Gods forgiveness of it; and then
both our inconsideration, and ignorance may be judged involuntary and innocent;
but without that in reason they cannot. For if our wills are not displeased
with our offense, when once we come to discern our selves guilty of it, nor
seek, by begging Gods pardon, as far as may be to undo it; it is manifest that
really they were not against it. They did not choose it, it is true, when it was
acted, because then they were not made to see it; but afterward they make it
their own as much as may be, by showing how readily they are bent and inclined
for it. They are not at all sorry for it, nor repent of it, but take a pleasure
and delight in it; and what can any Body judge from thence, but that they avow
it.

If therefore we would have it thought that our ignorance and inconsideration
was at any time against our wills, we must evidence that by showing how much we
are troubled, and displeased with it. Our wills must express their dislike of
it, and utterly disclaim and renounce it; or else it will readily be inferred
that they either had, or would have had a hand in it.

After all these marks whereby to judge of an innocently, and involuntarily
inconsiderate sin; I presume I have no need to add that it must be such as is
unobserved when we venture on it. For if we see and observe it, it is not
possible that it should be any longer inconsiderate. And therefore no man may
look upon his sin, and say, Is it not a little one, and yet after that venture
to commit it with a confidence of being excused for it. For no known and wilful
sin is little in Gods account, whatsoever it be in ours, but every offense with
open eyes, and with a convinced Conscience, is deadly and damning. The man that
presumed wilfully and willingly to carry a burden of Sticks upon the Sabbath
Day, under the Law of Moses, was Numb. 15.36.
struck dead as surely as he would have been for going to plough, or trading at
the market. Although this seem to be a little instance, yet was it no small
offense; for be the matter that a man disobeys in what it will, yet a contempt
of God, and a wilful rejecting of his Law, can in no case be little. And
therefore if at any time we see and observe a sin, we must by all means avoid
it; or else our willing offense will certainly subject us to the curse, and
prove of a size sufficient to condemn us.

And these are such Conditions as are necessary to make our inconsiderate slips
involuntary and innocent. And therefore as ever we expect that the
forementioned inadvertencies should excuse us, we must take care that they have
all these requisites. We must never be guilty of them where we have time and
understanding, nor in any great and mischievous sin, nor without a serious
endeavor against them before, and a sorrowful repentance and desire of pardon
after we have committed them. All these must concur in us before our
inconsiderateness excuse our sin, and rescue us from danger of Damnation.

And now I have gone through both the Particulars of our involuntary, because
unknown sins, whether their involuntariness proceeds from ignorance, or
inconsideration; neither of which shall be rigorously dealt with, or imputed to
us for our Condemnation.

And thus at last we see, what in the beginning of this Book I proposed to
inquire of; viz. what are the mitigations of that integrity of obedience which
is the Gospel-condition of happiness, and what are those defects; which it
bears and dispenses with. And the result of all is this: That the integrity of
obedience, which the Gospel indispensably exacts of us, is an integrity of our
chosen actions. And therefore if wittingly and wilfully we transgress any one
Commandment, we are under the Curse which the Gospel threatens; but if we
transgress several unwittingly and against our wills, we are out of the reach
of it, and entire in Gods account still. We do not lose our integrity, or break
the condition by every slip of ignorance, whether that whereof we are ignorant
be some Law that forbids any sin, or our present actions being forbid by it:
nor by every slip of inconsideration, whether our inconsiderateness proceed
from suddenness or surprise, from weariness, or from the discomposure and
disturbance of our thinking Faculties. For not any of these Failings will
deprive us of that, which Christ's Gospel will construe to be a perfect and
entire obedience; they do not destroy a state of Grace and Salvation, but
consist with it.

And all these allowances the Gospel makes to our sinful actions; besides some
others to our thoughts and See Book 5. Chap. 4.
desires, which are sin only in an imperfect birth, and not yet arrived to the
guilt of a complete transgression; as I shall have a fit occasion to show in
answering of those groundless doubts and scruples, that perplex good and
honest, but weak minds, which shall hereafter follow.

But the great Condition of the Gospel being nothing less than an entire
Obedience; and the generality of men being so maimed and defective in obeying:
what shall become of them? For who is there but at one time, or other, has
willingly transgressed some of those Laws which I have described; and therefore
if the Curse take place upon every wilful offense, then woe be to all Mankind.

And so indeed it would, if Christ had not taken pity on us, and come into the
World for this very purpose, that he might succor and relieve us. But the very
end of his coming amongst us, was to find out a remedy for all these evils. He
came to rescue us from the Curse of the Law, and to procure for us new Terms,
and put us into a capacity of Pardon. So that whatsoever his Laws threaten, or
whatsoever we have committed; yet are we still secure from suffering, if we
make use of his remedy, i. e. if we repent of it; as shall appear in the next
Book.

BOOK V. Of those Remedies which restore men to a state of Salvation when they
are fallen from it; and of some needless Scruples concerning it.
CHAP. I. Of Repentance which restores us to Gods Favor after Sins of all
sorts.
The CONTENTS.
The Rigor of the Mosaic Law is taken away by Christ, who came to preach
Pardon upon Repentance where that denounced an unavoidable punishment.
Repentance is the great Remedy. God heartily desires men's Repentance, and
promises Forgiveness to it. This has been preached in all times. The Remedy for
our unknown sins. They are incapable of a particular Prayer and Repentance, but
are forgiven upon a general one. The Remedy of wilful sins is a particular
Repentance. That is available for their pardon; for wilful sins after Baptism,
as well as before it. Two places, which seem to deny all pardon to wilful sins
after Baptism, cleared; the wilful sin, Heb 10.26, is not any wilful
transgression of any particular Law of Christ, which have all been pardone^;
but a wilful Apostasy from his whole Religion, which is proved from sundry
things there spoken of it. The falling away mentioned Heb. 6, is likewise
Apostasy from Christianity, which is shown from those things which they are
said to fall from, and those others which are said to be implied in their
falling. An account of the desperate state of these men. The state of some
habitual Sinners desperate and irreclaimable, by reason their period of Grace
is over, but this is no discouragement to any man's Repentance.

HAving hitherto insisted largely upon that Integrity of Obedience which the
Gospel indispensably requires of every man to his Salvation; and upon those
Defects which either destroy, or consist with it: I proceed now to inquire what
Remedies it directs us to for recovering a state of Grace and Favor, when at
any time we happen to fall from it.

Among the Jews, according to the strictness of the Law of Moses, the
punishment took place upon the first wilful breach; and therefore in those Laws
which were established under pain of death, when it appeared by sufficient
evidence, that any man was guilty of the wilful transgression of them, the
Sentence was unavoidable, and the man dyed without mercy. He that despised
Moses's Law, says the Apostle, if it were in an instance whereto the Law
threatened death, dyed without mercy, being convicted under the hands of two or
three witnesses, Heb. 10.28. A man that had committed Murder, or Adultery, or
any other crime, whereof Death was the established Penalty, was to dye without
all remedy; for no Sacrifice would be accepted for him, nor would the Law admit
of any favor or dispensation. And therefore David, when he made his
Penitential Psalm for murdering Vriah, and adulterating his Wife, expresses the
Legal unpardonableness of his offense in these words -- thou desire not
sacrifice, else would I give it; but thou delightest not in burnt-offerings for
such sins as I stand guilty of. No, my crimes are of that nature, for which any
man less than a King should dye, and such wherefore no Sacrifice will be
accepted, Psalm. 51.16.

This was the rigor of that Political Law, which God imposed upon the Jews by
Moses; those punishments that were threatened by it, which were temporal and of
this World, were irreversible, when once they were incurred.

But when Christ came into the World, his business was to give Laws of a much
more gracious nature, which would admit of a Salvo for every sin, and offer men
a remedy, which if they did but use, although they had transgressed, they
should not suffer punishment.

This gracious Covenant, whose Promises and Rewards are future, and to be
enjoyed in the next World, was published more or less ever since Adam. For by
the Grace of this, all the holy Patriarchs hoped for pardon; and by it likewise
all the Good men among the Jews, when they should be brought to Gods Tribunal
in the next World, hoped to be forgiven. But the Promulgation of it under Moses
was dark and obscure, and lay hid in great measure, and almost buried under the
crowd of the rigid and inexorable Laws of the Mosaic Covenant.

But when Christ came into the World, his Errand was to abrogate all the rigor
of Moses's Law, and to preach an universal Pardon upon Repentance. And of this
he gave them a clear instance in the case of the Woman, who was taken in the
very act of Adultery. Moses, say they, and that very truly, Lev. 20.10.
commanded us in his Law that such should be stoned; but what say thou? Joh.
8.5. But his Sentence was, Go and sin no more, and then will not I condemn
thee, v. 11; which was a fit sentence for that Religion, whereby they should be
justified from all those things, from which they could not be justified by the
Law of Moses, Act. 13.39.

Whatsoever it was therefore under the rigor of the mere Law of Moses, under
the Religion and Law of Christ our case is not become quite desperate, and
irrecoverable upon the first offense. It is not every wilful sin, and much less
our slips of ignorance and inconsideration, which can for ever exclude us from
the Favor of God, and incapacitate us for his Mercy. No, the Religion of
Christ is not a Religion that seeks advantages of us, and shuts us up close
Prisoners of Damnation, as soon as we are guilty of any thing which may deserve
it: For Christ need never have come into the World for that end, since the Law
had rendered us accursed and miserable enough already. But he came on a quite
contrary Errand, to be the Minister of Life and Pardon, and not to seal us up
to eternal Death upon the first wilful transgression, but to procure for us
remission of all our deadly and damning sins, and to restore us out of a state
of Enmity and Death, to a state of Mercy and Reconciliation. He came to find
out a remedy for all our evils, and to prescribe us a way of recovering our
selves when we had fallen by any sin; so that although none of us all have
lived free from it, yet in the event sin shall not be our ruin.

And that remedy which God has provided us for this purpose, is Repentance. He
does not abandon us upon the commission of every sin; but he is heartily
desirous that we should repent of it, and when we do so, he has obliged himself
by his Truth and Faithfulness to forgive it.

He is heartily desirous, I say, that whenever we commit any sin we should
repent of it. If we dare take his own word, he tells us, as he lives, that he
does not delight in the death of any sinner, but that the wicked turn from his
way, and live: turn you, turn you, as he goes on, from your evil ways; for why
will you dye, O house of Israel? Ezekiel. 33.11. And this all the World experience
by him, in his long-suffering and forbearance with them. For he does not exact
the punishment so soon as we have incurred it; but expects long to see if we
will return and repent, that then he may with honor pardon and remit it; this
being, as St Paul assures us, the end of his forbearance and long-suffering, to
lead us to repentance, Romans 2.4. And what St Paul says, that we all experience.
For during all that time wherein he bears with us, how restless and unwearied,
earnest and affectionate are his endeavors for this purpose? He admonishes us
of our faults by his Word, and by his Ministers; he invites us to return by his
Love, and by his Promises; he moves us to bethink our selves by his Spirit, and
by his Providence; and if we are stubborn, and not to be thus gently won by
these methods of mildness, he seeks to reclaim us by a blessed, and a most
affectionate force and violence. For he corrects us with his Rod, and visits us
in chastisement, and never ceases to try all means of reducing us to a sense of
our sin and repentance, till we are become plainly incorrigible, and utterly
rebellious, and so fit for nothing but to be swallowed up of ruin. And yet
even then his desire of reclaiming us is so strong, and his love so
affectionate; that he scarce knows how to give us over. How shall I give thee
up, says he, O Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee, O Israel? Hos. 11.8.

And when we do repent, I say, he has obliged himself by his Truth and
Faithfulness most graciously to forgive us.

This was the Doctrine of the Prophets. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the
unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, says Isaiah,
for he will have mercy upon him, and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon,
Isa. 55.7. If the wicked man, says God by Ezekiel, will turn from all his sins
that he has committed, and keep all my statutes, and do that which is lawful
and right, he shall surely live, he shall not dye. All his transgressions,
which he has formerly committed, shall not be mentioned unto him, but in his
righteousness, that he has done since, he shall live. For have I any pleasure
at all that the wicked should dye, says the Lord God? and not that he should
turn from his ways and live? Ezekiel. 18 21, 22, 23.

This i^ the great Doctrine of the Gospel, which is a Covenant of remission of
sins, upon Repentance. Repentance is its great Article and fundamental Truth,
and is therefore called by St Paul the Foundation of Repentance, Heb. 6.1. For
that which was taught to all the World, in all the degrees of Publication of
the Gospel, was that now God called all men to repent, and that he would
forgive them all their sins upon their true repentance.

St John the Baptist, who was Christ's Herald and Forerunner, at his entrance
upon that work, begins with it. John, says St Luke, in all the Country about
Jordan, came preaching the Baptism of repentance for the remission of sins,
Luke 3.3.

Our Lord and Savior Christ himself, when he comes after to proclaim his own
Gospel, goes on with it. Jesus began to preach, says St Matthew, and to say,
Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand, Mat. 4.17.

And when he left the World, the Commission which he gives to his Apostles is
to proceed on still in the Promulgation of it to all the World, as he had done
to the people of the Jews. For at the last time of his being with them, just
before his Ascension into Heaven, when, as St Matthew Matthew. 28.19.
tells us, he commissioned them to preach to all mankind; those instructions
which he gave to them, St Luke informs us were, that repentance and remission
of sins should be preached to all Nations in his Name, beginning at Jerusalem,
Luke 24.47. This was the chief thing which they had in Commission, and the sum
and substance of their Embassy. For that Ministry which was committed to them,
was a Ministry of reconciling God and men by this means, as St. Paul says, or a
Ministry of Reconciliation; so that they were Ambassadors for Christ, as
though God did beseech men by them, and they as Christ's Deputies, who is the
prime Mediator, did pray them in his stead to be reconciled to God, 2 Cor.
5.19.20.

And when the Apostles came to execute their Orders, the publishing of this was
all their care and practice. For they all of them went about preaching in all
places, and to all persons, repentance for the remission of sins.

St. Peter in his first Sermon thus exhorts the people; Repent and be baptized
every one of you for the remission of sins, Act. 2.38: and so again Act. 3.
Repent and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, v. 19. And the same
he proclaims more generally in his second Epistle, assuring all Christians,
that the Lord is not willing that any man should perish, but that all should
come to repentance, which is sure to prevent it, 2 Pet. 3.9.

St. Paul preaches to the Athenians, that now God had commanded all men every
where to repent, Act. 17.30.

And St. John assures us, that by virtue of that Gospel Covenant which was
confirmed with us in Christ's Blood, if with repenting hearts we confess our
sins, he is faithful to his word, and just to his promise to forgive us our
sins, and to cleanse us from the guilt and stain of all unrighteousness of one
sort or other, 1 John 1.9.

I should recite almost the whole New Testament, if I were to repeat all that
the Scriptures affirm in this point. But by what I have already offered, I take
it to be clear beyond all doubt and scruple, that the Gospel Covenant is a This
is that Grace which Christ's blood procured for us -- (...). Clem. Romans 1. Ep.
ad Cor. c. 7. And that which ensued upon his exaltation -- exalted to give
repentance and remission of sins, Acts 5.31.
Covenant of remission of sins upon repentance. God most earnestly desires that
we should repent, and he is most truly and faithfully willing to forgive us all
our former sins upon our true repentance. Nay I might add, he is not only
willing, but extremely joyful and glad of the occasion. For it is his highest
pleasure to go out and meet a returning Soul; and the joy of his heart to
embrace a reclaimed Penitent, as our Savior has most clearly intimated to us
in the most welcome reception of the returning Prodigal, Luke 15.11, 12, etc.
There is a general joy in the Heavenly Court, says our Savior again, and in
the presence of all the Angels of God, even over any one sinner that repents,
Luke 15.10: nay there is more joy over one penitent, than there is over ninety
and nine just persons which need no repentance, v. 7.

Thus had God provided us of a means which will most certainly restore us to
his favor. He has not left us in our forlorn state, but has prescribed us this
method of repentance to recover us out of it, and to be the great Instrument of
our Pardon and Reconciliation.

And this remedy is adequate to all our needs, and able to regain all that
which our sins at any time have made us lose. For it will repair the breach
upon all sorts of offenses, whether they be our known or unknown, our voluntary
or involuntary sins. Of all which I shall now proceed to speak particularly.

This remedy of repentance, I say, God has fitted for all sorts of
transgressions; whether they be, 1. Our known, or 2. Our unknown and secret
sins.


1. Our unknown and secret sins have the benefit of this remedy, and that
whereupon God will pardon them is a general repentance, and a general prayer
for forgiveness.

As for several both of our voluntary and involuntary sins, they are secret and
concealed from us, and quite without our knowledge and remembrance. We are
wholly ignorant and in the dark about them, and our Consciences have no more
sense of them, than they have of those which we were never guilty of. For as
for our involuntary sins, in some of them we are wholly ignorant, and never
think them sinful; and in others we are inconsiderate, and do not many times
observe that we sin in them. And as for our voluntary and wilful sins, though
we know full well, and observe when we at first commit them; yet does our
knowledge of them, as of other things, slip out of our minds by degrees, and
through length of time, and throng of other thoughts, at last we quite forget
them.

And these sins being thus quite out of our thoughts, and wholly secret and
unknown to us; we cannot particularly either beg pardon for them, or repent of
them.

We cannot, I say, particularly beg pardon for them. For no man can become a
suitor in behalf of he knows not whom, nor recommend any thing to Gods mercy
before he has discovered it himself. And since these particular sins are secret
and unknown, they cannot be the matter of a particular prayer and
recommendation.

Nor can we particularly repent of them. As for our wilful sins indeed, whether
we remember them or have forgot them, the case is the same as to one prime part
of a particular repentance, viz. our forsaking of them, and beginning to obey
that particular known Law which we had wilfully sinned against. We must retract
every voluntary sin by a voluntary obedience, and without this we can have no
just hopes of pardon. For there is no hopes of salvation to any man but upon a
particular obedience to all known Laws; so that when once he sees and
understands a Duty, he must obey it particularly before he can expect to live
by it. But now as for those Laws which are transgressed by our wilful sins,
they are all known, since we could not will and choose to disobey them, unless
we saw and knew our selves to be bound by them. So that whether we had sinned
against them formerly, or no; whether we remember it, or have forgot it;
obedience to them is our present Duty, and a Duty too so necessary, that
without it we cannot be saved. If therefore we have sinned against any such
known Law we must amend it, and leave off wilfully to repeat it; for our
obedience to all them is necessary to our pardon, and whether we remember or
have forgot that we transgressed formerly, as to the present it is all one, for
we must choose to obey now.

As for our wilful sins then, which being long since acted, are now quite
forgotten and unknown, one great act of a particular repentance is necessary to
their pardon, viz. conversion or new obedience and reformation. For all wilful
sins are transgressions of known Laws, and whether a man has broken or kept it
formerly, a present obedience in all chosen actions to every such particular
Law is necessary to put him into a state of mercy and salvation.

But as for other acts of a particular repentance, viz. confession, sorrow,
detestation, and the like; there is no place for them about any of our Secret,
whether they be voluntary, or involuntary sins. For no man can confess he knows
not what, nor grieve he understands not why, nor hate and detest he knows not
whom; so that he must particularly know his sins before he can be thus
particular in his repentance of them.

A particular prayer and repentance then have no place about our unknown sins;
they are not capable to be exercised about them, and therefore they cannot be
exacted for the pardon of them.

But that prayer and repentance whereof they are capable, and whereupon God
will graciously forgive them, is indefinite and general. These may very well be
used about them. For we may all understand thus much by our selves that we are
all Sinners, and are guilty of much more than we know and can remember. Several
sins slipped from us at first without our knowledge and observation; and several
others, which were at first observed, were afterward forgotten. And when we
know this general number, although we are not able to recover any particular
instance, we may very well be sorry for it, and beg God to forgive it; and so
expiate them as much as may be by a general prayer and repentance.

And this remedy God has assigned for our unknown sins, and when we make use of
it he will forgive them. Holy David was very sensible that he labored under
many such secret faults, and by this means of a general penitential prayer, he
endeavors to procure their pardon. Who, says he, can understand his errors?
Cleanse thou me from my secret faults, Psalm. 19.12. And because such sins are
daily slipping from us, that our remedy might be as near as our disease, our
Lord has put into our daily prayers this general petition for our expiation,
Forgive us our trespasses, Matthew. 6.12.

As for this first sort then, our unknown and secret sins, a general prayer and
repentance is their remedy. If we obey all known Laws, and particularly repent
of all our known transgressions; our secret and unknown sins need not lie heavy
on us. For if we are honestly igrant of them, and use due pains and ingenuity
about them; if we neither overlook them through sloth and negligence, nor
mistake them through partiality and wilfulness; a general and penitential
prayer shall serve their turn, and restore us unto mercy and reconciliation.

And then,

2. As for all our known sins, God has not been wanting to us in them neither,
but has most graciously provided us of a remedy, and means of reconciliation
for them, of what nature or degree soever they be. Whether, 1. Our voluntary
and wilful; or, 2. Our involuntary sins.


1. In the Gospel God has provided us of a remedy to restore us again to his
favor, when once we have lost it through our voluntary, and wilful sins; and
that remedy is a particular repentance of them.

To the pardon of these it is altogether necessary that we particularly amend
and forsake them. For they interrupt a state of love and good agreement, and
set God and us at enmity and defiance. So long as they are continued in, they
keep God and men at a distance, they interpose betwixt us and his mercy, and
hinder all the signs of his approbation, and all the expressions of his
pardoning Grace from issuing out upon us. To restore us therefore to Gods Grace
and acceptance, these voluntary sins must be taken out of the way; and by a
voluntary amendment and reformation, we must undo all that was done amiss in
our wilful transgression. And of these sins all those places are meant, that
make repentance, which, as we saw above, includes in it amendment, the
indispensable condition of life and pardon. As when repentance and remission of
sins is commanded to be preached to all Nations, Luke 24.47: and men are bid to
repent, that their sins may be blotted out, Acts 3.19; or, as it is in the
peremptory and severe words of our Savior, to repent, or else they shall all
perish, Luke 13.3.

And as this particular repentance and reformation is altogether necessary to
the pardon of our wilful sins; so is it most certainly available and sufficient
for them. Although they are of a most heinous guilt, and provoking Nature; yet
is not their offense unpardonable, or their case desperate. For after a man has
put himself out of a state of Grace and God's favor by them, he is not quite
cast off, nor need to despair of getting in again. He is not presently upon
every such offense banished this Kings Court and Presence for ever; but upon
his particular repentance and reformation he will be allowed to recover his
former station. For the preaching of the Prophets, of the Baptist, of Christ,
and of his Apostles, was to call the wilful and all lost Sinners, both of the
Jewish and Gentile World to this reconciliation; Christ, as himself informs us,
coming to Matthew. 18.11.
save that which was lost, and to Matthew. 9.13.
call all Sinners of one sort or another to repentance. Men's very Baptism or
entrance into Christianity, is a cleansing of them from the guilt of all former
sins without exception. Repent, and be baptized every one, says St Peter, for
the remission of sins, Acts 2.38; and be baptized, says Ananias unto Saul, and
wash away all thy sins, Acts 22.16.

Nay after men are once baptized, and have all their former wilful sins washed
off in that water of regeneration; yet is not every wilful sin, which they are
guilty of, thenceforward irrecoverably damnable, but they are still called to
accept of mercy and forgiveness upon repentance, as before. When men come under
the Covenant of Grace, and list themselves under the Discipline of Christ; they
do not subject themselves to a Covenant of Terror and Desperation, which takes
hold of the first offense, and denounces an irrevocable enmity ever after. No,
a baptized offender is under the Grace of repentance as well as others. For
that repentance whereto we are called by Christ's Gospel, is not so much an act
as a state: which St Paul intimates when he talks of renewing men unto
repentance, that is, unto the condition and standing terms of it, Heb. 6.4, 6.
It is of Gods Grace that there is any forgiveness, and, in order thereunto, any
place for repentance at all; and of the same Grace we have received a promise
of forgiveness upon repentance for all sins, and at all times whatsoever. If
any man among us baptized Christians sin, says St John, his case is in no wise
desperate, for we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous,
and he is the propitiation for our sins, as well as for the sins of the whole
unchristned world, 1 John 2.1, 2. The Gospel does not bid every wilfully
offending Christian to despair, and conclude himself to be irrevocably lost,
and fallen beyond remedy into a damned condition. But its design is quite
another thing, to recover them again from that state of death, and to call them
by repentance to mercy and forgiveness. For the Spirit of God himself writes to
the Rev. 2.16, 21.
backsliding Church of Ephesus, to remember from whence they were fallen, and
to repent and do their first works, Rev. 2.5. And St Paul finds fault with the
Christians at Corinth for not repenting of their uncleanness, and fornication,
and lasciviousness which they had wilfully committed; threatening to bewail
them, or to excommunicate them in sorrow and lamentation, according to the
custom of those times, if they did it not, 2 Cor. 12.21. Nay in the case of the
incestuous Criminal, who had committed such a fault as was not so much as
named, and much less done among the unbaptized Heathens themselves; he does not
consign him up to eternal Torments, but endeavors, by the rod of Discipline
and Church Censures, to reduce him to repentance, that his spirit might be
saved in the judgment day of the Lord Jesus, 1 Cor. 5.1, 5. And as for the
other Members of the Church of Corinth, who were unconcerned and puffed up at
such an enormous accident; he reproves them smartly, that by bringing them to a
sense of their sin, he may work them into a reformation, v. 1, 2. Which good
effect when he understood that his reproof had wrought upon them, he rejoices
mightily, and glories in it in his next Letter. I rejoice, says he, that by my
former letter you were made sorry, seeing it was after a godly manner, and you
sorrowed to repentance: For such godly sorrow works repentance unto
salvation, which is not to be repented of, 2 Cor. 7.8, 9, 10. And as he
practiced thus with baptized wilful offenders himself, so does he instruct
Timothy that he should do likewise. For he tells him, that the way whereby the
man of God ought to deal with sinners, even those of the worst sort, who are
not only subject, but enslaved to it, is not peremptorily to damn, and seal
them up fast unto destruction: but in great meekness to endeavor to reclaim
them, that by recovering them to repentance, he may restore them again to life
and pardon. The man of God, says he, must in meekness instruct even the
refractory and contumacious, or those that oppose themselves against him, if
God peradventure will give them repentance, to the acknowledgment of the truth,
and that they may recover themselves out of the snare of the Devil, who are
taken captive by him at his will, 2 Timothy 2.25, 26. And to name no more
instances of this nature, but to sum up all in one, even those great and
enormous wilful sinners, whose offenses are so heinous, as to make them fit to
be expelled the society of Christians; are not yet in their very
Excommunication shut up irrecoverably under the pains of Hell, but quite
contrary are endeavored by this very means to be reduced to repentance, and
thereby to pardon and acceptance; Excommunication it self being, as St. Paul
says, for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day
of the Lord Jesus, 1 Cor. 5.5. And the Power of the Keys in remitting or
retaining sins, that is, in the excommunicating or absolving of offenders, is
entrusted with the Ministers of Christ's Church for the edification of the
excommunicated sinners themselves, and not for their destruction, 2 Cor. 10.8.
and chap. 13.10.

And by all this we see that the Grace of Christ's Gospel is a grace of
repentance and remission of sins all the way, both before Baptism, and also
after it. In all periods, from the beginning to the end, it is an instrument of
pardon and a means of peace; or a word and ministry, as St. Paul says, of
reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5.19. If we break our Baptismal vows, which are the
condition of the Covenant, once, and thereby forfeit all our Right to
Happiness; it gives us liberty to repeat them. For we have the freedom both in
our private and our public prayers to renew all our good resolutions, and to
make God new promises, and to undertake for the performance of that wherein we
have wilfully failed by new engagements. Nay it does not only allow that we may
thus renew the Covenant; but it requires that we should: it has appointed an
Ordinance, the Eucharist or Lords Supper I mean, for this very purpose. For the
Bread and Wine which we eat and drink there, our Savior tells us is a Federal
form, the New Covenant, or, according to the manner of the Eastern Nations, who
ratified their Covenants by eating and drinking together, the re-entring or
confirming of that Covenant, which was at first sealed and confirmed in his
Blood. This, says he, is the New Testament or (...).
Covenant in my blood, drink ye all of it, and so, according to the known Rite,
confirm this Covenant with God by it, Luke 22.20. Mat. 22.27. And this he has
not only allowed, but enjoined to all his Disciples -- Do this, says he, in
remembrance of me. And that not only at one time, as it is with Baptism, but at
all times during your whole lives; for in this manner of a Federal eating and
drinking of this Bread and Wine, you must show forth the Lords death always,
even till he come again the second time, i. e. unto the worlds end, 1 Cor.
11.24, 25, 26.

Forgiveness of sins then upon repentance is a Grace which is begun in Baptism,
and ever after continued, being repeated in every Prayer, and sealed in every
Sacrament to the end of our lives. So that no wilful sin can damn us, if we
repent of it; but the damned accursed sinner is only he who lives and dies
impenitent. Insomuch as that very sin, for which St. Paul says there is no
benefit from Christ's Death, nor any help of Sacrifice under the Gospel; is
therefore excluded from all Grace of pardon, because it is from all possibility
of repentance. For therein it is that the irrecoverableness of those lost
sinners consists -- It is impossible, says he, to renew them to repentance,
Heb. 6.6.

Thus then, we see, that Christ's Gospel has afforded us a remedy even for our
wilful sins, whether they be committed before Baptism, or after it, at one time
or at another, at all without exception; so that although sometimes we do fall
under them, yet we shall not be eternally condemned for them. Let us but repent
particularly therefore and amend it, and whatever sin we have wilfully been
guilty of, our work is done. For our repentance shall set us straight, and our
reformation will make us innocent; and if we are careful to do so no more, our
offense will be looked upon as if it never had been done at all.

But against this pardonableness of our wilful sins after our belief of the
Gospel, and Baptism into the Christian Faith; some perhaps may be ready to
object two places from St. Paul's Epistle to the Hebrews, wherein he may seem to
teach us a more rigorous and severe Lesson.

In the 10th Chapter, he lays down this as a great Truth: If we sin wilfully
after that we have received the knowledge, or open belief and (...).
acknowledgment of the truth of Christ's Gospel, there remains no more benefit
to us from Christ's sacrifice for sins; but a certain fearful looking for of
judgment, and fiery indignation which shall consume the adversaries, v. 26, 27.

And in the 6th Chapter, to the eternal Terror of all willing and wilful
Back-sliders, he speaks thus to the same purpose: It is impossible for those
who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made
partakers of the holy Ghost, and have tasted the good word of God; if after all
this they shall fall away, to be again recovered, or for any of us to renew
them to repentance; seeing they crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh,
and put him to an open shame, v. 4, 5, 6.

But now if our wilful sins after Baptism and belief of the Gospel be thus
desperate, and utterly excluded from all hopes of cure and benefit of Expiation
by Christ's Sacrifice, as the Apostle in these places seems to intimate: how can
the Gospel be truly called a Ministration of Reconciliation, Grace, and Pardon,
toward all sorts of wilful sins?

To take off all this difficulty I will answer to the places severally, that
all those good minds, which are wont to be perplexed by them, may be more
perfectly relieved by a particular and distinct understanding of them.

First then, to begin with that, the words of St. Paul in the 10th Chapter of
his Epistle to the Hebrews are these. Verse 23.
Let us hold fast the profession of our faith without wavering; 25.
Not forsaking the assembling of our selves together, as the manner of some is,
but exhorting one another to the open owning and frequenting of them; and this
we ought to do so much the more, forasmuch as ye see the day of Gods righteous
Judgment approaching. 26.
For if we sin wilfully in this backsliding from the public Assemblies, and
from the profession of the Christian Faith, after that we have once received
the knowledge, or professed belief and (...).
acknowledgment of the truth of it; there remains no more benefit to us from
Christ's sacrifice for sins; 27.
but a certain fearful looking for of that judgment, I say, which shall devour
the adversaries. And this all you Hebrews have reason to expect from Christ,
from what you very well know of the manner of proceeding in such cases under
Moses. For he that despised or rejected the whole, 28.
yea or even any one particular instance of Moses's Law, whereto death was
threatened, dyed without mercy, if the thing was proved against him under the
testimony of two or three witnesses. 29.
And then of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall this wilful sinner be
thought worthy, who has, by such wilful rejecting of all Christ's Laws and
Religion, trodden under foot the Son of God, as if he were not raised up again
from the dead, but were yet in his grave; and has accounted that blood of his,
which confirmed the New Covenant, and wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy
thing, making it to have been justly shed, as the blood of a Malefactor; and
has done despite unto the Spirit of Grace and all its evidence, by rejecting
it as insufficient? I have set down the place at large, that the very Text it
self may afford us an accumulated proof of the ensuing Explication.

But now as for this sin, which, being wilfully committed after the belief and
acknowledgment of Christ's Gospel, is here said to have no help from Christ's
Sacrifice, nor any benefit of his Propitiation: it is not the sinful
transgression of every Law of Christ, no nor of any one; but a total Apostasy
and abrenunciation of them all.

The sin, I say, which being wilfully committed after the belief of Christ's
Gospel is here said to exclude us from all benefit of Christ's Sacrifice, is not
the transgression of any of Christ's Laws whatsoever, nay nor of any one. For
the Corinthians were guilty of the wilful transgression of several Laws, and
that too after they had embraced the Faith of Christ. They were guilty of an
indulged Lasciviousness, Uncleanness, and Fornication, 2 Cor. 12.21. Nay one of
them was guilty of it in such an instance, as was not so much as named, and
much less practiced among the Gentiles themselves; viz. in a most incestuous
marrying of his Stepmother, or his Fathers wife, 1 Cor. 5.1. And St. Peter, a
great Apostle, after three years converse with his Lord and Master, denies him
three times, and that not suddenly e're he could bethink himself, but after a
due space of time between one denial and another, Luke 22.57, 58, 59. All which
he did in the most aggravated manner, by accumulating perjuries and
profaneness upon the sin of disowning his Master; for when his bare word would
not be believed, he began to curse and to swear that he knew him not, Mar.
14.71. All these were sins wilful in their commission, and some of them most
highly criminal in their nature; but yet none of them was excluded from the
benefit of Christ's Sacrifice, for they all enjoyed it. So that it is not any
one transgression of a particular Law after men have embraced the Faith of
Christ, which is the un-atoned sin here mentioned.

But it is an utter rejecting of all the Laws of Christ, and a total Apostasy
from his whole Religion. It is the renouncing of Christ's Authority, the
disowning of his Gospel, and falling quite off from him to Judaism, or
Paganism, or something directly Antichristian, which is the sin here intended.
And whosoever does this wilfully, after he has once acknowledged it, and been
convinced by it, (as most men, if not every man, must do who is guilty of it at
all) for him there remains no more sacrifice for sin, but a fearful looking for
of judgment and fiery indignation, which shall devour him, and all other
Antichristian adversaries.

That the word which is here translated (...).
sin, signifies sometimes not all sin in general, but particularly this
superlative height and aggregation of all sin, an utter revolt from Gods
service, and Apostasy from his whole Religion, appears plainly from 2 Pet. 2;
where the Apostate Angels are called the Angels that (...).
sinned, v. 4.

And that this particular way of sinning, by an universal Apostasy, and
falling quite off from the profession of the Christian Faith, is that very sin
which is here intended, will appear from all those things which are spoken of
it in this place.

It Is plain from the Apostles exhortation against it -- Let us hold fast, says
he, the profession of our faith, and not revolt from it, v. 23.

From his further disswasion from it in the verse next but one, -- not
forsaking the Christian Assemblies, which is a great step toward the disowning
of Christ himself, as the manner of some is, v. 25.

From his Character of it in the verses that follow, it being a sin that
includes in it all these instances of aggravation.

By it we become utterly Antichristian, and Adversaries to Christ and his
Religion; -- the fiery indignation that is kindled by this sin, shall devour
all them, who by reason of it are become Adversaries, ver. 27.

By it we deny Christ to be risen, and look upon the Son of God as yet in the
Grave and under our feet; we count his blood, which was spilt for the
confirmation of the New Covenant, to have been the impure and unholy blood of a
Malefactor justly executed; we despise all the clear proof and convictive
evidence of the Spirit of Grace, which we once thought a sufficient Argument
for his Religion, and whereby we were moved to the acknowledgment of that truth
of his, which now we contumeliously reject. Whosoever has committed this sin,
says the Apostle, I will show him what he has done; he has trodden under
foot the Son of God, and has counted the blood of the Covenant wherewith he
was sanctified an holy thing, and has done despite unto the Spirit of Grace,
ver. 29.

As for the sin then which is here spoken of, it is plainly this; viz. a sin
that is contrary to the holding fast of our Christian profession, that implies
a forsaking of the Christian Assemblies, that makes us open enemies and
adversaries to Christ and his cause, seeing thereby we deny Christ to be risen,
and affirm him to have been an Impostor, and his blood to have been, like that
of the Thieves which were crucified with him, unholy and impure as the blood of
a Malefactor, and set at naught all the miraculous proofs, and despise all the
convictive evidence of the Holy Ghost that Spirit of Grace, which has proved
to us abundantly that that Religion of his, which we now renounce, is a most
certain truth of God. All these marks are evidently attributed to that sin
which the Apostle here speaks of; and then what can any man think it to be
less, than an absolute Apostasy from the whole Religion, and an utter
abrenunciation of all the Laws of Christ?

Now whosoever wilfully falls under this, I confess he is in a very deplorable
and most desperate case. Because for him, as says the Apostle, there remains
no more benefit from Christ's Propitiation or Sacrifice for sin: He has
affronted that so enormously, that God will never suffer him to be the better
by it. And this to a Jew ought to be no uncouth or surprising Doctrine, seeing
he who thus renounced Moses could have no Sacrifice to atone for him. For no
propitiation was allowed for him who wilfully rejected any one particular
Command of Moses, but least of all if he had apostatized from the whole Law. He
that despised even any one particular threatening death in Moses's Law, died
without mercy under two or three Witnesses. But now this Covenant and Law of
Moses was sealed only in the blood of Bulls and Goats; whereas this Covenant
and Law of Christ, which these men renounce that I am speaking of, was
confirmed in his own blood: Moses, the Author of that Law, was but a Servant;
whereas Christ, the Author of this, was a Son. If then the revolting from
Moses was so unpardonable, that it inevitably incurred death, and put a man out
of all hopes of propitiation and benefit of Sacrifice; of how much sorer
punishment, as he most rationally argues, must all Apostates from Christ be
accounted worthy, who by their falling away from his Religion, tread under foot
the Son of God himself, a Person infinitely above Moses; and count the blood,
not of Bulls and Goats, but of the Christ of God, wherewith this Covenant was
sealed, to be an unholy thing? They are indeed irrevocably plunged in death,
and their apostatizing or drawing back from that Religion, which upon so good
evidence they had before acknowledged, is to their own ruin and destruction,
ver. 38.

But although this total apostasy and abrenunciation of Christianity it self,
when it is wilfully committed, be thus remediless and desperate a sin; yet is
that nothing to the breach of any particular Law, or to the wilful
transgressions of any baptized man, so long as he still continues Christian.
For all his sins of one sort or other have the salvo of repentance provided for
them: and if he does but once reform and amend them, he shall not be condemned
for them.

And thus having showed that this place in the tenth Chapter to the Hebrews
makes nothing against the pardonableness of any Christian man's sin upon
repentance, but only against the forgiveness of those who have apostatized from
Christ, and become unchristian; I proceed now,

2. To consider that other place in the sixth Chapter of the same Epistle,
where the Apostles words are these: Therefore leaving the Principles of the
Doctrine of Christ, Verse. 1.
wherein we are wont to catechize even Children and Novices; let us go on unto
perfection, and to treat of such things as are fit for grown men: not laying
again, for such as are apostatized from it, the first Foundations of the
Christian Doctrine, as are the Doctrine of repentance from dead works, and of
faith toward God; of the Doctrine of Baptisms, and of laying on of hands, 2.
and of resurrection of the dead, and of eternal Judgment. And this will we do
if God permit, without returning, 3.
as I say, to prove again the foundations of the Faith to them who are fallen
from it; which indeed were a very vain and fruitless undertaking. 4.
For it is impossible for those who were once enlightened or (...).
baptized, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made Partakers of the
Holy Ghost; 5.
and have tasted of the good word of God, and of the powers of Christ's Kingdom,
or the World to come; 6.
if after all this they shall wilfully fall away from this Faith, it is
impossible for them, I say, to be recovered, or for us by any endeavors of
ours to renew them again unto the Grace and Covenant of repentance; because God
is irreconcileably provoked by this revolt, seeing thereby they crucify to
themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him once again to an open shame.

Here indeed the Case is as desperate as it was before; and it is no wonder why
it should, because the sin is the very same. For it is nothing less than an
universal backsliding, an apostasy both in faith and manners, a renouncing of
all the Religion and Laws of Christ whereof all these severe things are spoken.

As for the word (...).
which is here put to note this falling away, it signifies for the most part a
fall which admits of a rise again, and is recoverable; but sometimes it denotes
a fall that is desperate, and beyond all hopes of remedy. Thus the Apostle,
speaking of the incredulous Jews, to whom the Religion of Christ was a
stumbling block and a rock of offense, distinguishes betwixt these two, (...)
and (...).
stumbling, and falling; making the latter to be much more dangerous than the
former, and denying it, when he affirms the other. Have they stumbled, says he,
that they should (...).
fall mortally and irrecoverably? God forbid, Romans 11.11.

And thus it signifies in this place. For the falling away here spoken of is
nothing less than a revolting from all Christ's Laws and Doctrines, and an
apostatizing from his whole Religion. Which appears from several things that
are here said of it, some whereof they are said to fall from, and others are
said to be implied in their falling.

It appears, I say, from some things, which they are said to apostatize or fall
from.

They fall away from their Baptism which is expressed by the word (...). See
Heb. 14.32.
enlightened, the common name in the ancient Church to signify the baptized;
from the remission of sins, the preaching of the Word, and the administration
of the Sacraments, which are such privileges and gifts of God, as are afforded
to persons baptized; from the hopes of Heaven, and all the promises and good
word of God; from the gift of tongues, and other effects of the Holy Ghost,
whereof, upon the imposition of the Apostles hands, they had been made
Partakers; and from the power of working miracles, that were so conspicuous
under the appearance of Christ, those times of Messiah, which the Jews were
wont to call the Age or world to come. If those, says the Apostle, who were
once baptized or enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were
made partakers of the holy Ghost, and have tasted of the good word or promise
of God, and the powers of the world to come; if they shall fall away or
apostatize from all these, it is impossible to renew them, v. 4, 5, 6. This, as
is evident, is the Apostasy which is here specified, which is nothing less
than a renouncing of the Baptismal Covenant, of the preaching of the Word, of
the administration of the Sacraments, of all the Gospel-promises, nay of all
those miraculous gifts and powers of the Holy Ghost, whereof in the first times
they were ordinarily made partakers; and what can any man take this to be, but
an utter renouncing of the whole Gospel and Religion of Christ?

And that it is so, is still further manifest from those things which are said
to be implied in their falling.

For hereby they are said to condemn Christ as an Impostor; to justify his
murderers; to say he was crucified justly, and that were he now alive, they
should be ready to crucify him over again, which is a publishing again to all
the world his reproach, and a putting him anew to an open shame. By this
falling away, says the Apostle, they crucify to themselves the Son of God
afresh, and put him to an open shame, v. 6.

But now thus to renounce our Baptism, and all our Christian Privileges, to
condemn Christ as a cheat and Impostor, to justify his Murderers, and to
defame his Religion; what is it less than a renouncing of his Gospel, and a
falling off to persecute the Christian Faith and Profession?

And as for this indeed, the Apostle says expressly that it is desperate, and
that it is impossible for him, by any endeavors or arguings which he can use,
to renew-again those who are guilty of it, to that Gospel Covenant which they
thus abjure, and which is the only gracious means of repentance and
reconciliation. And since it is to no purpose, says he, I will not attempt it,
but go on in speaking to those who still retain the Faith, without concerning
my self to prove again the foundation to those who have apostatized from it, v.
1, 3.

These wilful Apostates therefore are in a most deplorable case, for they have
sinned themselves out of all capacity of mercy, and transgressed beyond all
recovery. For there is no pardon to any wilful sinner whatsoever without he
repent; but as for Apostates, it is impossible for any man to renew them again
unto repentance.

Their renewal I say is impossible. For as for all humane means which any men,
even the Apostles of our Lord themselves, could use for their recovery; they
have defeated them already. They know all the evidence of Miracles, and the
demonstrations of the Spirit; nay they have not only seen them, but they
themselves have been partakers of them, and empowered to work them: but yet
after all they have renounced that belief which all these persuade to, they are
Armor of proof against all these demonstrations of the Holy Ghost, and
Infidels to Christ notwithstanding them. So that let an Apostle himself urge
any thing to them in behalf of Christ's Religion, his Argument has been overcome
before he offers it. He tells them nothing new, nor shows them any thing but
what they have seen, nay what they themselves were formerly empowered to show
to others; but all that was not strong enough to keep them in the Faith, for
when they saw it all, they turned Infidels and Apostates still.

As for any humane means then, they are of no force with them, they cannot
reclaim them, or bring them anew to the acknowledgment of the Gospel, which is
the only gracious Ministry of Repentance and Reconciliation. So that if ever
they be restored again, it must be by a Divine Power; for nothing now can
possibly prevail with them but a special Providence and a special Grace.

But now here is the desperateness of their state, these will never be afforded
them. For when men have wilfully sinned up to this height, and fallen off
against so great means, and so clear conviction; God in the ordinary methods of
his Grace is resolved to concern himself no further with them, nor to trouble
himself any more for their recovery. They have had all the care and cultivation
of his Grace which they are like to have, and now, like barren ground, (which
after all that has been laid out upon it, brings forth nothing but thorns and
briars, that are not only useless, but prickling and offensive) they are nigh
unto cursing. And this is the very instance which the Apostle himself uses, and
the reason which he gives of that impossibility which he had affirmed to be in
that undertaking. It is impossible, says he, for any man to renew them, because
God will no longer help on his endeavors with his Grace, nor look any further
after them. For with those men who are Infidels after all his care, he will
deal just as he does with ground whose fruit is evil and offensive after all
his labor; and as for his dealing with that, it is plainly this. That earth
indeed which drinks up the rain that comes often upon it, and brings forth
herbs meet for them by whom it was dressed; receives more blessing still from
God. But that which, after it has been thus watered, bears thorns and briars,
is rejected, and nigh unto cursing, whose end is, not to be watered any more,
but burnt up, v. 7, 8.

As for these two places of the Apostle therefore in his Epistle to the
Hebrews, we see indeed that they speak of wilful sins beyond pardon, and of
transgressions which are irremissible; but these sins are not the wilful
transgressions of any Christian man, but a wilful Apostasy from Christianity
it self. So that after all it is true still, that every man, who owns the
Religion, and professes the Faith of Christ, is provided of a remedy for all
his wilful sins, whenever they are committed; for let him but particularly
repent of them and amend them, and he never shall be condemned for them.

Nay so fast is the tie, and so inseparable is the connection under the Gospel
of Christ betwixt Repentance and Remission; that, as I observed, this
irremissible sin of wilful Apostasy it self, is therefore alone declared
impossible to be forgiven, because it is impossible to bring men to repent of
it, Heb. 6.6.

If a man does but repent then, let his sin be wilfully committed, whether
before or after Baptism, it matters not; for his repentance shall set him
straight in both, and his offense shall be quite forgotten, as if it had never
been.

Indeed if a man goes on in a constant trade of sin, silencing continually his
own conscience, and grieving Gods holy Spirit, and despising all the means and
offers of his Grace; he may sin himself beyond his time of mercy, and so his
sins will prove irremissible, because he is gone too far ever to repent of
them, which is their only remedy and means of pardon. For there is a set period
of Grace, and a certain season and space of time wherein God will still make
the offers of his help, and of the guidance of his Spirit to reclaim and reform
men. But if after all, they slight all his offers, and reject his aid, and
prove utterly incorrigible; he grows weary at last, and will trouble himself no
more about them, but leave them wholly to themselves. And this God plainly
intimates concerning incorrigible Ephraim, who was just then about to be
abandoned, and to be given up to the unmasterable wickedness of his own heart
-- How shall I give thee up, says he, O Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee, O
Israel? Hos. 11.8. And our Savior says the same over intractable Jerusalem. O!
if thou had but known, at least in this thy day, the things that belong unto
thy peace with God; but now it is too late, for they are hid from thine eyes,
Luke 19.42.

This, I confess, is a state of sin which is desperate and irrecoverable; not
for that repentance is no sure means of remission; but because when once men
are come thus far, God deserts them, so that they never can repent of them.

But as for the time when any man is come up to this unpardonable pitch, that
only God in Heaven knows. No man can say, I am beyond my time of repentance,
because without a special Revelation no man can understand it. And therefore
let a man have sinned never so long, yet cannot that discourage him from
repenting, because if he set himself seriously about it, for ought he knows,
God will pity him, and afford him his Grace and Spirit, which is never wanting
to such as heartily desire it, to aid and strengthen him in his repentance. Nay
indeed, if a man be come so far as to bethink himself, and to be apprehensive
of his danger, and to be convinced of the destructiveness of his sinful
courses; there is no question to be made but that he will. For the tide is
turned, and the change is begun already; and that is a thing which needed God's
Grace as much as any thing that is yet remaining. For a cariere in wickedness
is like running down hill; the great difficulty is to make the first stop, but
when once that is done, to return again is much more easy. And therefore if a
man has received so much Grace, as makes him break off his evil courses for the
present, and stand and deliberate with himself, whether or no he shall proceed
in it; he need not doubt, if he will go on to endeavor as he has begun, but
that he shall have more, till at last he is fully enabled to perfect and
complete it. He has an experimental evidence that his time of Grace is not
past, he may be sure it is still with him, because it helps and works in him.
For it is Grace that brings him on to what he is, and if he be but as willing
to be aided by it, as it is ready to assist him, it will not fail to carry him
on further. Gods Grace will still grow upon him, as his own endeavors do; so
that if he make good use of this, he shall have more. For this is laid down by
our Lord as a certain Rule of Divine dispensations; To him that has, that is,
makes a right use of that Grace which he has, shall more be given even in
abundance, Mat. 25.29.

Whatsoever irreconcileableness therefore there may be, and truly is in some
states of sin, when men have gone on beyond their time of Grace; yet he who has
so much Grace as to doubt and question, to fear and scruple, has great reason
to think that, as for his part, he is not past Grace, but under it. For an
irrecoverable sinner is commonly one that is hardened; he transgresses without
sense, and goes on without fear; he is infatuated with his lusts, and lulled
asleep in his sin, and scarce ever comes to himself till he awakes in
Damnation. But if once he begins, especially in the time of health, either
through a severe reproof, or a severe providence, to interrupt his sin for the
present, and to apprehend the evil of it; and if from thence he goes on to good
desires, and holy purposes of well-doing: then he feels that Grace which he is
afraid he wants, and that good Spirit works in him, which he suspects to have
deserted him. He is not in this irrecoverable state, but is going on toward a
good recovery.

Indeed if his Conscience is awakned in the height of horror, and extremity of
despair, so that he is obstinate against all good advice, and dead to all
endeavor, and continues to be so; this is not an effect of Grace, and a step
toward repentance; but a terror of Judgment and a fore-taste of Hell. If it
deads all industry by excluding all hope; if he complain of his estate without
seeking to get out of it, and despair without all amendment; this fear of heart
and terror of soul, it is true, does not bring him nearer unto life and pardon,
but by secuing him faster in his sin, it shuts him up a closer Prisoner of
Condemnation.

But if he be so apprehensive of his danger as to run from it; if he has so
much hope as will put him upon trying all means, and using his best endeavors;
if upon his apprehensions of his present evil state, he fears, and desires, and
resolves, and strives to get quit of it; he is not deprived of a good
Providence or of a gracious Spirit, but enjoys the benefit of them, and is
conducted by them. He is in the way to Life, and under the recovering methods
of Grace; Gods holy Spirit has not for ever abandoned him, but has begun again
to work in him.

And thus at last it appears, that as for all the wilful sins of any Christian
man, they are in no wise desperate and helpless; but the Gospel has reached out
a remedy for them to all who are willing to make use of it. For let them but
particularly repent of them, and amend them, and then they are safe from them.
So long as they continue in the profession of the Christian Faith, and do not
apostatize from it, there is no sin whatsoever which they wilfully commit, but
is pardonable upon their repentance. If once they honestly undo the fault, and
conscientiously forsake it, their work is done; for their penitent reformation
shall make them innocent, and whatever punishment the Law may threaten to any
sins, when God comes to Judgment, he will not exact it of any man who has been
thus reclaimed from them.

Do we find our selves guilty then of any unretracted wilful sins, and thereby
subject to a dreadful sentence according to those measures that have in great
largeness been hitherto discoursed of? Let us particularly repent of them, and
begin to amend them, and then we are safe from it, and shall most certainly
prevent it. Have any voluntary faults put us out of a state of favor, and made
us obnoxious to the severities of Judgment? let us reform them, and do so no
more, and repair the breach which ensued upon them, and we are surely pardoned.
For the Gospel of Christ does not in any wise intend to amaze and astonish us,
or to affright us from amendment, by putting us into a despair of mercy. No, we
must lay this down as a most unerring Rule, That that can never come from God
which tends to detain us in our sins, and to discourage our reformation. For
the sum of all his designs and endeavors, both in the sending of his Son, and
in the preaching of his Gospel, is to free and cleanse us from all sin, and to
carry us on to reformation and repentance by the sure and steadfast hopes of
pardon and acceptance.

Whenever we have wittingly done evil therefore, let us take care to do so no
more; and if it were offensive or injurious to our brethren, to repair the hurt
our sin has done, and all is well. And if any Law of the Gospel threaten us,
let us begin thus to fulfill it, and then we are safe from it. Let us fulfill it,
I say, for that only is a saving repentance, which, as we saw above, implies
obedience, and ends in reformation. And if we repent in that manner of any sin,
whatsoever it be, or whenever it be committed, whether before Baptism, or
after it, it matters not, we shall surely go unpunished, and shall not be
eternally damned for it.

CHAP. II. Of Reconciliation, and Restitution upon those Sins, whereby we have
offended, or injured our Brethren.
The CONTENTS.
Of the Necessity of Reconciliation upon Sins whereby we have offended, and of
Restitution upon others whereby we have injured our Brethren. In sin three
things considerable, the offense against God, and the offense and injury
against men. Sins whereby God alone is offended, are sufficiently repented of,
and pardonable upon reformation and amendment. Those whereby we have also
offended, or injured our brethren, are not sufficiently repented of, or
pardonable upon that alone, unless moreover we seek to be reconciled, and make
restitution. These two means of pardon, for affronts, and injuries against men,
are necessary fruits of a sincere and sufficient repentance. Of sins whereby we
have justly offended our Brethren. Their ill effects represented, which are to
be redressed by penitential acknowledgments, and seeking to be reconciled.
These penitential acknowledgements necessary only to appease those, whom by our
sin we have offended; and so unnecessary, when they know nothing of our
offense. Where they do, Reconciliation is necessary so far only as it can be
had, and where we have an opportunity of seeking it. This discourse upon
Reconciliation sum'd up. Of sins of injustice, whereby we have injured men.
Reparation ordinarily necessary to a sincere, and always to a sufficient
Repentance of them. It Is necessary moreover in it self, as an instance of
strict justice. An account of particular injuries, how to be repaired where the
injured persons can, and how where they cannot receive it. Restitution
necessary whether our Brethren know themselves to be injured by us, or no. It
is due only upon sins of injustice. Of the perfect right which we have to
things of strict Justice, and of the imperfect right which we have to things of
Charity, whence the performance of them is sometimes called righteousness. In
sins of injustice, reparation due so far only as we can, and according as we
have opportunity to make it. In judging of a just opportunity, caution given
that we be neither too strict, so as more than needs to prejudice our selves;
nor too loose, so as to overcharge our Neighbors. This Discourse of reparation
upon injuries summed up.

FROM what has been discoursed concerning the remedy of wilful sins in the
foregoing Chapter, it plainly appears that they are not hopeless, but that at
what time soever any of them have been committed by a Christian man, whether
before Baptism, or after it, they are still pardonable upon his particular
repentance of them.

This repentance, as has been shown, implies amendment, so that we never shall
be judged to have repented of them, till we have forsaken them, and are
reformed from them. Amendment then is necessary to our repentance, and to the
pardon of all voluntary offenses whatsoever; and to the pardon of some, viz.
those wherein God alone is concerned, it is not only necessary, but sufficient:
but then to a right repentance, and to the pardon of others, which do not
barely offend God, but are offensive also and injurious to our Brethren, there
is more required. For although God will forgive his own share of any sin, viz.
so far as it is an act of disobedience to him, and account us duly penitent
upon our amendment and reformation; yet will he not judge so favorably, or so
easily pass over the hurt which is thereby done to other men. And since in
several sins, there is not only an offense to God, but withal an affront or
injury to our Brethren; what ever God may do in some, it is plain that he will
not pardon others, or look upon us to have sufficiently repented of them, upon
a bare forsaking of the fault, without our seeking also to be reconciled to the
offended persons, and making of due reparation.

And this being a thing which occasions much doubt and scruple in many honest
minds, I will here endeavor to give a plain state of the Duty of
reconciliation upon offenses, and of restitution upon injuries against our
neighbor, that so we may have no needless fears upon this account, or know how
to put an end to them when we have just occasion for them.

In sin there are three things considerable, according as it may concern either
God or men, or both; viz. the offense against God, and the offense and injury
which it may include against men.

First, As for the offense against God, as it is a breach of his Law, and a
going cross to his pleasure; it is atoned by reformation and amendment. Till we
are reclaimed indeed from our former sins, and are become Gods dutiful Sons,
and faithful Servants, for the present, and for the future; it is not
consistent with the honor of his goodness and holiness, with the authority of
his Laws, and with the ends of his Government, to bear any complacential love,
or show any marks of favor and friendly affection toward us. But as soon as
ever we are conscientiously reformed from them, he will be reconciled to us. He
will never punish us for any disobedience against his Divine Majesty, after we
have forsaken it; but whenever we turn off from any evil way, so far as he
himself was concerned in the dishonor of the offense, he will graciously pass
it by, and as may plainly appear from what has hitherto been discoursed, return
to have mercy upon us.

But then as for the offense, and also as for the injury which our sins may at
any time imply toward men; he will not judge us savingly to have repented of
them, nor pardon them upon amendment alone, unless, together with that, we
expiate the first by seeking to be reconciled to the Party whom we have
offended, and the latter by making amends for the damage done, and offering a
due reparation.

These two means of pardon for our sins of affront or injury against men, viz.
our seeking to be reconciled, and making all due restitution, are no less
natural fruits and necessary effects of repentance for them, than reformation
and amendment is for them, and for all others.

For the most natural effect of a sincere and sufficient repentance, is to undo
the fault, and set things in the same place where they were before, It implies
a change of mind from sin, that now our hearts and thoughts are set against it;
which change is helped on and produced in us by our hatred of it, our grief and
sorrow for it, and our being ashamed of it: And the natural effect of a change
of mind, of hatred, shame, and grief, where they are in any just degrees and
perfect measure, is to wish that the action which causes them had never been
done, and, as much as it is possible, to undo it again. So that if our
repentance for any sin is both true and perfect, if it implies an undissembled
hatred, a deep shame, and a great and hearty grief and sorrow for it; it will
make us cancel and undo it, and take away, as far as can be, all the footsteps
which it had left behind it.

And because there are more effects remaining after some sins, than after
others; the fruits of repentance are more for some, than they are for others.
For in some only God is concerned, as it happens in the sins of impiety, and in
several instances of unsoberness, when there is no scandal to our Brethren
joined with them: and the breach in these being only in God's Authority and
Honor, it is repaired by our beginning to own his Laws, and the stain is
wiped off by amendment and new obedience. But in others, our Brethren are
concerned too, as it falls out in all those sins whereby we injure, or affront
men: and since there remains after these sins, not only a dishonor of God, but
also a lasting hurt and offense to our Neighbor. The breach made by these is
not repaired barely by our beginning to obey God, unless we also seek to
appease and satisfy men, by our penitential acknowledgments and restitution.
And therefore if we are so far penitent, as to retract and undo our sins,
without which we are not duly ashamed, or sorry, nor sufficiently changed, and
reclaimed from them; we shall be ready, not only to repair the dishonor which
they cast upon God, but the injury and offense which they gave to men too.

But in the account of these two instances of repentance, and means of pardon
to be more particular.

2. In sin we are to consider the offense and just displeasure which it gives
to our brethren, as it manifests our contempt of them, and our hostile
inclination to insult over them, or to vex and disquiet them: and this is to be
put away by our seeking to be reconciled with penitential confessions.

In all sins against Justice or Righteousness toward all men in general, or
toward any in those particular relations wherein we may be concerned; there is
not only an act of disobedience toward God, but also of affront or injury
against our Brethren: And this, if they understand it, will beget an alienation
of mind, and create hard thoughts and hostile inclinations. For when they have
observed our contempt of them, or our ill will to them, from our mockery and
contumelious usage, our whisperings and backbitings, our slanderings, false
witness, fraud, cozenage, or any other trespass against them, whether to their
damage, or only to their disparagement, or both; they will have great reason to
be afraid of us, and offended with us. They will think our society unsafe, and
either fly our company; or be jealous of us, and stand upon their guard when at
any time they are so unhappy as to be engaged in it. So that upon these sins
against the Honor, Persons, and Estates of our Brethren, when once they come
to understand how they are damnified by them, there is not only an act of
disobedience toward God, but also a plain breach of that friendship, good
will, and mutual confidence which ought to be among men.

And now to undo all these evils which ensue upon these sins, and to set things
in the same state which they held before; there must not only be an act of
reformation and amendment to appease God, but also some outward indications of
a change to the parties offended, and such penitential acknowledgments as may
repair the breach which they have made among men. We must let the persons
grieved know that now we are ashamed, and sorry for our fault, that our temper
is changed, and our mind is altered; so that they may safely venture to return
again into favor with us, and never fear suffering the like indignities from
us any more. And this now will reconcile men's minds, and reunite their hearts,
and make them to become again kindly affectionate, secure, and confident, in
the society and conversation of each other. And when this is done, and they
have both by reformation and amendment made their peace with God, so far as his
honor was concerned in it, and also by such penitential acknowledgments made
their peace with men; they have undone, as much as is possible, all that was
done amiss, and such repentance shall suffice, and prepare them for Gods
pardon. And this is that which our Savior expressly requires of us, Mat. 5. If
thou bring thy gift to the Altar, says he, and there, before thou offerest it,
remembrest that thy brother has taken just offense, and has ought against
thee, (whether upon account of thy causless anger in calling him Fool, and
Racha, or using any other opprobrious language; or of any other affront or
injury whatsoever;) presume not to think of appeasing God before thou have
appeased him, but leave there thy gift before the Altar, and go thy way, first
be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift for thy
reconciliation unto God, v. 22, 23, 24.

As for those sins then, whereby we have not only dishonored God by
disobedience, but also provoked and offended men by affront or injury; to
procure the pardon of them, we must not only seek unto God by reformation and
amendment, but to them too by such penitential acknowledgments as may repair
the breach, and reconcile the difference, which our sins had made betwixt them
and us.

But here we must observe, that as the necessity of superadding these
penitential confessions to our amendment, arises only from the necessity of
appeasing men, whom our sins had offended: So whenever our trespasses against
them have given them no offense, there is no need of these acknowledgments for
a reconciliation. And therefore in all our sins against them, whereby we have
either injured or disparaged them, which they know not of, there is no need of
it at all. For if they understand not that we have wronged or abused them, they
cannot be angry at us for so doing; and so there being no breach made by our
offense, there is no place for a reconciliation.

Yea I add further, if they are come to understand our offense, and have
accordingly resented it; there is not always still a necessity of having them
actually reconciled, but then only when it can be had, and we have an
opportunity of doing it.

There is then only a necessity of having them reconciled, when it can be had.
For some men are unalterable in their resentments, and never lay them down;
they are eternal in their hatred, and will not forgive an injury to their lives
end. And with these, God does not require that we should actually be
reconciled, neither will he be angry at us, when at last we miss of it. He has
not made impossibilities the means of pardon, nor will he make the
unconquerable obstinacy of one man's sin, to be an article of another
punishment and condemnation. And therefore when we have to do with such men, we
shall be accepted, if we earnestly seek reconciliation, although we cannot find
it. So that if in this case we seriously express our sorrow, and beg pardon for
our fault, and promise never after to repeat it, and, by our obliging carriage
and after-kindness, endeavor to atone for our past offense, and to show them
how safely they may confide in our present engagements: if all this does not
melt them into a compliance, the sinful continuation of the breach is now their
own; but as for us, we have done enough to mend what was amiss, and shall
deliver our own souls.

And even with those men from whom it might be had, there is then only a
necessity of an actual reconcilement when we have an opportunity of doing it.
For in the infinite mixture of conversation, and variety of company which we
meet with in this world, how universally are men, especially of an abusive
sportful wit, and a proud petulant humor, guilty of these offenses toward
those persons whom they shall never see again, and whom they know not where to
find, or when. Now here, by reason of absence of the persons whom they should
make it to, an actual acknowledgment and reconciliation, is impossible, and all
that can be done toward it, is only sincerely and firmly to resolve to seek
it, whenever an opportunity shall be offered. And this honest purpose of
reconciliation, till such time as we have an opportunity to perform it, shall
be every whit as available to our pardon, as if we were indeed reconciled. The
will, as I have Book 1. c. 3.
shown, shall be taken for the deed, where it is in our power to will only, but
not to do, and where the deed would certainly follow, if there were but an
opportunity to show it in. For in this case the Apostles rule is sure; Where
there is first a willing mind, it is accepted according to what a man has, and
not according to what he has not, 2 Cor. 8.12.

As for the Duty of seeking Reconciliation then, where our sin has given
offense to men, it is plainly this: If they know nothing of our fault, they are
not angered, and so have need of no atonement. But if they do understand it, and
are offended at it; we must seek a reconciliation, if it can be had, and where
we have an opportunity to endeavor it. But if there be no opportunity of
making our acknowledgments at present, we must firmly purpose it in our own
minds, and resolve to make it when a fitting season shall be offered: and upon
this honest purpose, which would prove effectual, were the persons present, we
shall be pardoned, as if we had performed it.

3. In sin we are to consider the damage and injury which it implies toward
our Neighbor, as it causes his unjust loss or hindrance, whether as to his
Life, Liberty, Good Name, or Estate; and this is to be expiated by making
amends for the wrong, and restoring what our injury took away, by a just and
full reparation.

How often does men's Envy and Revenge, their Covetousness and Ambition, render
them not only offensive by indignities and affronts, but really hurtful and
injurious to their brethren. They blast their Reputation by slanders and false
reports; they spoil them of their Goods by theft or oppression, by fraud and
cozenage; they rob them of their lives or liberties by murder and false
witness; they inflame their enemies, estrange their friends, and stop or
destroy their preferment, by their malicious suggestions, unjust suspicions,
and spiteful representations of them. And when at any time we do thus by our
Neighbor, he is really a loser by reason of our sin, and has just reason to
complain of us, and to stand at a distance from us as dangerous and hurtful
persons, till we do not only confess our fault, and seek a reconcilement, but
moreover make him a just amends, and set him in the same state, if possibly we
can, which he enjoyed before.

This we shall surely do, if we are truly and completely penitent; and till we
have thus restored a spoil, and repaired a wrong, we cannot be thought truly,
or at least perfectly to have repented of it.

We cannot ordinarily be thought, I say, to have repented of it truly, but only
under a Si res aliea, propter quam peccatum est, cum reddi possit non redditur,
non agitur poenitentia, sed fingitur. Aug. ad Macedon. quae est Ep. 54.
false disguise and vain hypocrisy. For that is ordinarily no true sorrow
which does not undo the fault, and set things, as much as may be, in the same
state which they held before. We shall not be thought to be really angry at the
crime, if still we hold fast the bait, and are pleased with the temptation. We
shall not be esteemed to hate it, so long as we are in love with that which
comes by it; for we did not love it for it self at first, but only for the
unjust gains sake which led us on to it; and if we yet hold that fast, and will
not restore it and let it go, it is plain we love it, and adhere to it for its
sake still. So long then as men are pleased in the fruits of their injustice,
and continue the damage which their brother suffered, or hold fast the unlawful
gain which they themselves acquired by it; they cannot in reason be thought to
renounce or to redress it, but to justify and confirm it. They are resolved to
have their end in it, and to enjoy that by it which led them on to it; and this
is not to be punished and afflicted for a fault, but to be enriched by it; it
is not repenting of it, but owning and avowing it.

But if the sense of Gods wrath, which they have incurred by their unjust
dealings, should put these men, who will not repair them, into some real
trouble of mind and grief of heart, as sometimes it does; yet so long as they
make no just amends, but suffer all the ill effects upon their brethren to
remain, their repentance, such as it is, although it be real and sincere, is
not yet perfect and entire, and able to work that reformation which it is
designed for. Their mind is changed in part, but it is but half way; their
sorrow for their sin is something, but not enough; it would not have strength
sufficient to prevent the sin, because it cannot wean them from the temptation.
For the unjust gain still keeps possession of their heart, and all their grief
and change of mind is not able to remove it: their brothers loss is still their
love and delight, and all their repentance cannot bring them to repair it. They
still adhere to, and love the fruits of their offense, more than they do the
rewards of amendment and obedience: so that if they should be tempted by these
inducements again, they would have the same effect upon them which they had at
first, and make them as unjust as they were before.

Thus necessary is restitution and reparation of a wrong, to evidence that men
truly and perfectly repent of it.

But besides this way of its being necessary, viz. as a necessary effect of a
complete repentance; it is also necessary in i^self, as a piece of common
justice and natural equity, without which no man, who has done wrong, can be an
equal or a just man. For the great Rule of Justice is, That every man should
have his own, and that no other man's force or fraud should spoil him of it, or
any ways detain it from him. So that if any man has destroyed or wasted any
thing belonging to another, he must make it up; if he has taken it to himself,
he must restore it. For whatsoever Goods he has wrested wrongfully from his
Neighbor, are not his Goods, but his Neighbors still. For that which
transfers Propriety from one private person to another, is his own consent;
this being the very nature of Dominion, that a man may dispose of a thing at
his own will, and no other man may meddle with it, without he agree to it: so
that it must be his own voluntary act, and not another force or fraud that can
justly mak^ an alienation. If then one man wrongfully possesse^ another Goods,
he is no Owner, but an Usurper; he enjoys what belongs not to him, and cannot
be a just man, till he has cleared his hands of the others Goods, and made
restitution.

Thus necessary is restitution of unjust Possessions, and reparation of unjust
damages, not only to evidence a sincere and sufficient repentance, but also as
an instance of common Equity and natural Justice, and to maintain a mutual
peace, security, and confidence in the World. And therefore God, that he might
take away all temptation to sportful, or malicious injuries, and unjust
gettings in some; and all enmity and strife, unsociable fears and jealousies,
murmurings, and complaints by reason of them in others; has laid a great stress
upon it, and made it plainly necessary to the obtaining of his Non remittitur
peccatum, nisi restituatur ablatum. Aug. ad Maced.
pardon. Render to every man his due, says the Apostle, and owe no man any
thing, but to love one another, Romans 13.7, 8. This is plainly necessary, and a
duty that will not be dispensed with. For as Ezekiel says, it is not only, if
the wicked man turn from his sin, and do that which is lawful and right: but
if, together with that, he give again what he has robbed, that he shall surely
live, and not dye, Ezekiel. 33.14, 15.

If then we are guilty of any injury, and have at any time wrongfully damnified
our Neighbor; we must not only seek to be reconciled, and remove the offense,
but withal we must repair the loss, and make him in as good a state, if by any
means we can, as he was in before. And therefore if we have spoiled him of his
Goods by fraud, oppression, or robbery; we must in the fittest way, which our
own prudence, or the wisdom of our friends, and spiritual Guides shall direct,
restore them unto him again. If we have injured him in his Good name, and by
slanders, false stories, and malicious representations put a blot upon his
honor, advantaged his enemies, disingaged his friends, and stopped his
promotion; we must confess our fault, and declare our miscarriage, we must
endeavor to wipe off all the dirt which we have thrown upon him, and to set
him right again in the apprehensions of all men, but of those most especially,
who by our means were brought to think ill and hardly of him. If we have
wrongfully deprived him of his liberty, or of any thing else, by false witness,
or corrupt judgment, or any other way; we must take shame to our selves, and
clear up his innocence, and take off all the undeserved reproach, and all the
criminal disguise, wherein we had involved him.

As for some injuries, it is true, they never can be repaired, nor is it
possible to make the persons whole again who suffered by them. Of which sort
are Murder, Adultery, a customary constant fraud in traffic, and the like. But
although the damage in these can never be entirely repaired, yet in part it
may; and when we cannot do as much as we should, it is but just and necessary
that we do as much as we can. And therefore in those injuries whereby many are
made to suffer, as it ordinarily happens in murder and adultery, which damnifie
not the persons injured alone, but their Families also and Dependants; we must
make restitution to those that can, that we may be pardoned for neglecting
those who cannot receive it. And if few of the injured persons are to be met
with, as it happens through the infinity of Sufferers by a constant fraud in
commerce; there cannot be a better commutation, than to put the poor into their
place, and make the needy their Receivers. Which exchange was most commendably
resolved on by a great offender in this kind, viz. Zaccheus, the Chief among
the Publicans. For when he comes to repent of his Publican sins, at Christ's
calling of him, Luke 19: he makes his penitential profession thus; If I have
taken away any thing by (...) accusation, or unjust force, says he, from any
(...), whom I know and can repay again; according as the Exodus 22.1
Law prescribes in that Point, I restore him it again fourfold. And as for all
other exactions which can never be particularly repaid, whereof I, and
generally (...). Dict. Zenon. Comoed.
all in my employment are guilty without number; I endeavor to atone them,
according to the Vid. Dr Light. Hor. Heb. in loc.
Jewish custom, by giving as much, or more to the indigent and needy in their
stead: for behold the half of my Goods I give unto the poor, ver. 8.

Thus is restitution to repair the damage, as necessary as confession is to
atone the offense which our sins have given to our Brethren. And this it is,
whether our Brethren know of the unjust loss or hindrance which we have caused
to them, or no. As for the confession of our fault, to have the offended party
reconciled; that, it is true, is necessary only to make peace where they have
taken offense, and therefore it is of no necessity where they do not know our
sin, because there they cannot be offended by it. But as for the reparation of
unjust damages, that is necessary out of natural equity and strict Justice, so
that we are bound to it wheresoever Justice is infringed, and any one is
injured, whether he understands it, and be offended at it, or no. If then our
Neighbor knows he has been injured by us, and is offended at it; we must not
only make restitution to repair his loss, but also beg his pardon to atone the
offense, and to procure a reconciliation. But if he is wronged and knows it
not, we need make no acknowledgments, it is true, since he has no need to be
reconciled; but still we must make a just amends, and repair the damage, be the
way of doing it never so private, and managed with as much discretion as can be
used about it.

But to prevent needless fears, as well as to press a necessary practice in
this Point; I think it not amiss to add these limitations to the obligation of
this Duty, viz. that we are bound to it only in (...), not of Charity and
Courtesy; and (...) far as we can, and as we have an opportunity to perform it.

First, We are bound to make amends and restitution only upon sins against
strict Justice, not upon sins against Charity. All restitution must be of
something, whereto another man has a full and complete right, otherwise it is
not restoring, but giving it. It is returning of a thing to its right Owner,
and putting him into possession who has the just title and propriety. Now such
right as this no man has to things of Charity, but only to things of strict
Justice.

It Is true indeed, there is a certain dueness in them, as well as there is in
these; we ought to give Alms, as well as to perform Contracts; to be grateful,
compassionate, courteous, and condescensive, as well as to restore a pledge, or
fulfill a bargain. These Points of Charity, as well as those of Justice, are due
from us, and ought to be performed by us: and since there is a Duty on our
parts to bestow, there must be answerably some kind of right in others to
rec^ive them. So that even the instances of kindness and Charity, are in some
sense a matter of right and duty; and because those who receive them are not
altogether void of title, but have some right to them, they are oft-times in
Scripture called works of righteousness, and the persons who perform them, are
called upon that account just, or righteous men. Thus where we read, Take heed
that you do not your (...).
Alms before men; it is read by several Copies, Take heed that you do not your
(...).
righteousness before them, Matthew. 6.1. The merciful men, Matthew. 25, who are
described by their Compassionateness, Alms, and Hospitality, ver. 35, 36: are
called the righteous men in the next Verse, Then shall the righteous say, Lord,
when saw we thee an hungered? etc. ver. 37. Thus the charitable Lender is called
a righteous person, Psalm. 37; the righteous is merciful, and lends, ver. 25,
26; and Joseph's being a pitiful, kind Husband, and unwilling publicly to
expose his Wife Mary, whom he found with child before they came together, but
resolving to put her away privily, is called his being a (...).
just man, Matthew. 1.19.

Some right then our Brethren have to our works of mercy, liberality,
gratitude, candor, affability, courtesy, and other instances of common charity:
So much dueness there is in them, and so much right and title they have to
them, as can denominate them works of righteousness, and us who perform them
just and righteous men.

But this right is much less than that which they have to all expressions of
strict Justice; and is rather an imperfect draught and a beginning of right,
than right it self. For all full and perfect right bestows a title, it invests
a man in propriety; so that what he has a complete right to, he may justly call
his own. And such a right as this all men have to the safety of their persons,
goods, and reputations, and all other things which are a matter of strict
Justice. They have a full claim to them, and cannot, without their own consent,
be deprived of them: and therefore if any private person like themselves
damnifies them in these, they may justly complain he wrongs them, and demand
satisfaction; and when they receive it, they do not thank him as for a free and
charitable gift, but look on it as their own, and accept it as a debt and
necessary restitution. Thus full and perfect is that right which men have to
things of strict Justice, it invests them with propriety, and makes the things
which they have a right to, to become their own; so that it is no gift, nor
thank-worthy, when other men either perform at first, or after injury restore
it to them.

But as for that right, which men have to all expressions of kindness and
charity; it founds no full claim, nor invests a man with Lordship and
Propriety; so that he must own another kindness when he receives them, and
cannot say he is deprived of his own, when they are withheld from him. This
Right does not confer Propriety, but does only something toward it; it makes
it another duty to give, and his gift must complete our Title, and bestow a
perfect Claim to it. Thus, for instance, if any person has an opportunity put
into his hands, to be helpful to a man in want or misery; when the needful
persons ask an alms, they do not demand a debt, but entreat his charity; they
do not exact what is their own, but beg what is his; so that he has an
opportunity, not of doing justice, but of showing kindness and charity when he
gives; and they are under a duty of acknowledging his kindness, and being
thankful when they receive it. And the case is the same in gratitude, candor,
courtesy, and other instances of Love and Charity. The right which any man has
to them is not so full, that he can say they are his own; there is a duty
indeed on other men to give, and that gift may make them his in time; but till
that is done, he cannot say he is injuriously deprived of any thing which of
complete right belongs to him, or require that they, who have taken nothing
that is his from him, should repair the loss, and make a restitution.

Restitution then in transgressions against strict Justice is a duty, because
there men are deprived of that which is really their own; and it is but
justice, and not thank-worthy, that he who deprives them of that, should give
it back again, and restore it to them. But in sins against mere Charity it is
no duty; for there, since men have lost nothing that is their own, they can
demand nothing to be restored to them. By these sins of uncharitableness indeed
God is dishonored, and by our amendment that must be repaired; our Brethren
are sometimes justly offended, and when they are so, by our penitential
acknowledgment they must be reconciled; but by a bare uncharitableness none of
them is injured, so that there is no unjust loss which should be repaired, nor
any thing taken from them which ought again to be restored to them.

2. We are bound to make amends for injuries, and to restore that which was
taken away by them, so far only as we can, and as we have an opportunity of
doing it.

We are bound, I say, to make restitution so far only as we Non remittetur
peccatum, nisi restituatur ablatum; sed cum restitui potest. Aug. Ep. ad Maced.
quae est Ep. 54.
can. Some injuries in the nature of the thing can never wholly be repaired, as
Murder and Adultery, for which satisfaction cannot be made to the persons
principally concerned, but only to their families and dependants. Others cannot
be completely recompensed, because of the number of persons that suffered by
them, many whereof will never be seen again, or are forgotten; as it happens in
a customary constant fraud in commerce, which cannot otherwise be perfectly
requited than by putting the poor into their stead, or by some other pious and
religious commutation. And others, lastly, cannot have a complete amends, by
reason of our inability completely to amend them. Some cross accidents of
Providence, or some former vices or carelessness of our own, (which, though now
we repent of, yet we cannot help,) have made us poor, and so unable to preserve
all from being losers by us, and to restore to every man again what at any time
we had injuriously spoiled, or taken from him. And now when by any of these
ways restitution is impossible, and a thing which the truest penitent cannot
perform, God will not exact it of him. If he does what he is able, when he
cannot do all; if he restores the damage to the injured persons dependants and
relations, when he can make no restitution to himself; or if he restores it to
charitable and religious uses, when he can do neither; or if, lastly, he
confess his fault, and beg pardon, and be forward to return service and good
offices, when he can make no other restitution at all; he has done what a tr^e
penitent ought to do, and God will graciously accept him. His will shall be
taken for the deed, since it is in his power to will only, but not to do; and
through his honest readiness and endeavors to perform it, if he could, he
shall be interpreted to have performed it.

We are bound, I say again, to make an actual restitution only when we have an
opportunity of doing it. An honest purpose, as was said above, shall be
accepted for all affirmative precepts, till there be a season offered for an
actual performance. When there is an opportunity for it, we must not only will,
but do and practice them: but till that happens, all that God expects, or that
we can do, is to resolve to practice them, as we shall find occasion. And
therefore if honestly we seek an opportunity to repair a wrong, but cannot find
it: let us not disturb our souls with fears and scruples, but rest in peace; in
confidence that our honest purpose shall bear us out, till Gods Providence
affords us an opportune season wherein we may perform.

And in judging of this, when a fit season is come, and when such an
opportunity is offered as we are bound to make our restitution in; we must
neither be too strict and rigorous, nor too gentle and remiss.

We must not be too strict, and tie our selves up to so much quickness in
restoring, as to run upon great inconveniences that are of far more weight
than the thing is worth, to prejudice considerably our own affairs, and
neglect, it may be, some other as weighty duties, rather than delay a little
longer; especially when it may be done at another time as well as then, and the
damage, which the injured person sustains by such delay, is nothing in respect
of that which we incur by a precipitate dispatch of it. Under such incommodious
circumstances we may be allowed to put it off a while, and we need not fear
lest our brother should be offended, or farther injured by such delay, since we
have just reason to presume he willingly agrees to it. For thus far we may
reasonably presume upon the free consent of all the conversable part of
mankind, that, out of common humanity and compassion, they will be content to
deny themselves in small things, to advantage us in great ones; and to want
some slight conveniences themselves, rather than put us, for the supplying of
them, to deprive ourselves of such as are considerably weightier. And where we
have so good a reason to presume of their consent to it, we shall not be
trespassers against them, or any ways offensive to them, by our delaying of it.

But then, on the other hand, we must not be too remiss and partial to our
selves, in judging of a fitting season for such a reparation, nor prone to
press upon our brethrens wants and inconveniences, but to spare our own. We
must not refuse an offer, because it is joined with some pains, and clogged with
some difficulties, and may occasion some loss and hindrance to us, or
additional expense. Our slowness in returning a just amends at any time, but
chiefly where the opportunities for it are more uncertain, must not be such as
argues that we seek to excuse it, or are very indifferent to it, and easily put
by it: it must not seem to intimate that we are in suspense about it, or have
not perfectly resolved upon it, or, at least, that the performance of it is a
forced, ungrateful thing, so that we would not come to it so long as we can
find any pretense to turn it off, or are able to overlook it. For this shows
evidently that our repentance is without zeal, that our sorrow is without life,
and that, at best, we are acted only by an imperfect and insufficient, if not
also by an unsincere purpose. And therefore to vindicate the honor, and
perfect the degrees of our repentance and obedient purposes, which are
absolutely necessary to our pardon and acceptance, we must show such an
overplus of affectionate haste to repair our injured brothers loss, as
manifests that we are more concerned for him, than we are for our selves, and
that we regard the pains and burden of our own part much less, than in all
rational presumption, were he to judge of it, he himself would. This we shall
do where the sorrow of our sin is great, where we have a high zeal against it,
and have fully and completely repented of it: and when we are actuated and
carried on by these, they will prevent all doubts, and never suffer any hard
and uncertain question about the fitness of the opportunity, to come into a
debate of Conscience. But if men have not so much love for the duty of
Restitution, and so much zeal in their repentance as will make them overlook
little things; if their repentance has no more warmth than is just necessary to
make them do what is indispensably to be done, so that they come to weigh
scruples, and nicely to debate whether some doubtful hindrances are sufficient
to delay their restitution, or no: the best way that I can advise them, is to
refer their brothers loss in wanting for some time, and theirs in making a
present reparation, to the judgment of their spiritual Guides, or any other
wise Advisers; and then peaceably to acquiesce in that course whereto those
wise and good men shall direct them.

As for the duty of making reparation then where our sins have injured men, it
is plainly this. In sins which are not only against Charity, but also against
Justice, whereby we have wronged any man either in his Person, Goods, or
Reputation; whether he knows that we have injured him or no, we must make a
just amends and restitution. This must be made, where it can, to the injured
man himself; and where that is not to be done, to his family and dependants;
and, where that is impracticable too, to the poor, or to God himself, by some
charitable or pious commutation. And this we are bound to do so far as it is in
our power, and according as we can find an opportunity; being desirous of it,
and fully resolved upon it when we want one; and doing as much as we can
toward it, and asking pardon for that wherein we fail, when we are disabled
from doing all. It is not enough after these sins to do so no more, unless,
according to these rules, we make amendment for what we have done already.
Reformation and forsaking of the fault will atone for any other wilful sin,
whereby we have offended none but God: and that, and, penitential
acknowledgments, will expiate those whereby we have offended both God and men;
but if we have not only offended, but wronged also and injured them, we must
not only amend our fault to please God, and penitently acknowledge it to
appease them; but, as ever we would secure the pardon of it, we must restore
the spoil, and repair the wrong, and set them, as far as may be, in as good a
state as our sin took from them.

CHAP. III. Of the Remedy for our involuntary Sins.
The CONTENTS.
Involuntary sins imply something of our own fault, and so it is fit we should
be sorry for them, and beg pardon. They had a remedy under Moses's Lay, and
have now likewise under Christ's Gospel. We are qualified for their pardon, not
by a particular repentance and reformation: but in the general, by our
obedience in all our wilful and chosen actions; in particular, by our prayers
for Gods pardon, and our Charity and forgiveness of the sins of other men. This
Discourse of Repentance summed up. An Application to particular offenders,
whether voluntary or involuntary. A Summary of all that has been hitherto
discoursed.

HAving showed in the former Chapters what remedy Christ's Gospel has afforded
us for the most dangerous sort of offenses, viz. our chosen and wilful ones; I
shall proceed now in this to inquire what remedy he has likewise provided for
our involuntary and unchosen sins.

As for our involuntary slips themselves, they also come under the Letter of
the Law, and within the compass of the Penalty. They are a doing what the Law
forbids, and so an incurring of that evil which it threatens. For the words of
the Law it self are unlimited and universal, they make no exception of
voluntary or involuntary, considered or unconsidered; but they require that
something should be performed or omitted, and threaten us if we do it not. So
that if they were to be tried by the strictness and rigor of the Laws; even
our involuntary slips themselves would prove a matter of our condemnation.

But if God should proceed to judge us, I will not say according to what the
compass of the literal Law would comprehend, but even according to the utmost
of what the justice of the thing would bear, the greatest part of our
involuntary sins would be charged upon us. For how few are there who live up to
the utmost of their possibilities; but they fall sometimes where they might
stand, and are rash in some instances when, if they had used due care, they
might have deliberated. We do not come up to that, which, according to the
highest ability of our natures, and the utmost stretch of our faculties, might
be done: and therefore setting aside the rigor of the Letter, which requiring
more than can be performed, must threaten where the punishment that is
threatened cannot in justice be exacted: yet should God proceed with us for most
of our involuntary slips according to the utmost severity which Justice it self
would bear, we should be in an evil state, and give in a sad account for them.
So that we have need to be sorrowful even for the greatest part of our
involuntary sins, and to beg Gods pardon for them, that all the defects of our
care may be made up by the riches of his mercy and goodness.

And as for the rest of them, which steal from us not so much through any thing
of our culpable neglect as our unhappiness, and are purely involuntary and
unavoidable; an after-grief is necessary in them also, although it be only to
evidence our involuntariness in doing them, and that our wills were perfectly
against them. Because, as was observed above, our ignorant offenses themselves
cannot in reason be esteemed involuntary, further than we show our wills to be
set against them, by our trouble at them, and our prayers for pardon, when
afterward we come to discover and understand them. So that some repentance is
still due, even for our involuntary and unchosen sins, and they must have our
sorrow and our prayers before they are fit to be forgiven.

And here we all experience the abundance of Gods Love; for he allows for these
pitiable infirmities, and has provided us of a remedy, which if we make use of,
we shall never be condemned for them.

Under Moses's Law these involuntary slips of ignorance and inconsideration,
being they were continually incurred, were allowed the benefit of a continual
atonement. For God himself appointed several Sacrifices for them which should
expiate their guilt, so that every man, who was subject to them, was furnished
with a sufficient remedy against them.

And as they had their remedy and relief under the Law of Moses; so ought they
to have much more under the Gospel of Christ. And in this our Lord has not been
wanting, but has afforded us a Salvo for them; so that although we are all of
us guilty of them, yet none of us need to suffer for them.

But now as for this remedy which Christ has prescribed for the Expiation of
our involuntary sins; it is not the same which he requires to the Expiation of
our voluntary and wilful ones. For that, as we have seen, is nothing less than
a particular repentance and amendment, in the forsaking of that very sin which
we committed wilfully. But as for our involuntary sins, this can be no cure for
them, because it is impracticable, and not possible to be effectually used
about them. For we shall always live subject to them more or less; and although
we may labor and strive against them, yet shall we never be able, as long as
we are in this world, to get entirely free from them. We have no power and
choice to avoid what we cannot see and consider of, and all these sins come in
upon the account of our unwill'd ignorance or inconsideration; and since we
cannot see and consider of them, we cannot particularly prevent them, which is
effectually to repent of them.

A particular Repentance and Reformation then is not the Gospel-remedy for our
involuntary sins. It cannot be the cure assigned for them, because it is
impossible to them; their pardon must not depend upon it, because then they
were wholly impardonable and desperate, since in them no man on earth can use
it.

But that remedy which Christ has appointed for them, and that repentance
whereupon he will graciously pardon and forgive them, is in the general, an
hearty (...), etc. -- (...). Clem. To. 1. Ep. ad Cor. c. 35, 36.
repentance and reformation of all wilful sins, and an entire obedience in all
such actions as are voluntary and chosen. If we serve God faithfully and truly
in all our other actions, where we do see our duty, and can choose to practice
it; he will connive at these slips, which, after an honest care and industry,
are involuntary and unchosen. For any kind master would do so to his honest
servant; and more especially every tender father would to his obedient child.
And God, who is Love it self, being the first Fountain and the compleatest
Pattern of all kindness in the world, will never be outdone in any love that
is excellent and praiseworthy by his own creatures. But if their kindness
would bear with such infirmities and oversights of an honest mind, his will
dispense with them much rather.

The faithful servants therefore and obedient children of God, who repent
particularly of all their other sins that are known and wilful, and effectually
amend them; shall be sure to find this favor at the hands of their heavenly
Lord and Father for all these failings which are involuntary and unchosen.
Their obedience in other things shall plead their excuse, and make their
unwill'd slips in these to be uncondemning.

But to be yet more particular, these involuntary transgressions of men that
are obedient in all their voluntary actions, shall certainly be pardoned
through the means of these particular duties.

1. Their Prayers.

2. Their Charity, and forgiveness toward the offenses of others.

1. Their involuntary failings of ignorance and inconsideration shall be
forgiven them upon their prayers; if they beg Gods pardon for them, he is as
ready to grant, as they are to desire it. And this we are sure of, because that
no earthly Parent, who is wise and good, would refuse to bestow it in such
Cases at the request of his Children; whereas they have nothing near that pity
and tenderness for their Children, which God has for his. And this is an
Argument which Christ himself has taught us to rely upon in this matter: If
you, says he, being evil, will yet, for all that, at their request give good
gifts to your Children; how much more shall your heavenly Father, who has not
the least taint of your illness, give the best of gifts, even the Holy Spirit
to them that ask him? Luke 11.13.

And indeed that we may never want this remedy, Christ has put a Prayer for
this purpose daily into our mouths; that since our involuntary sins are of
daily incursion, we may as daily beg pardon for them. For he has made it a part
of our daily prayers to ask pardon, among others, for our daily trespasses,
this being one of those Petitions which he has taught us to put up as often as
we do that for our daily bread, that he would forgive us our trespasses, Matthew.
6.11, 12. And this St Austin observes of it; Tenete vitam bonam in Praeceptis
Dei, ut Baptismum custodiatis in finem. Non dico vobis quia sine peccato hic
vivetis: sed sunt venialia sine quibus vita is^a non est. Propter omnia peccata
Baptismus inventus est: propter levia, sine quibus esse non possumus, Oration
inventa. Quid habet Oration? Dimetre nobis debita nostra, si^ut nos dimittim^s
D^bitoribus nostris. S^m^l abluim^r Baptismate, quotidie Oratione. August. de
Symb. ad Catechum. in Art. de Remis. Peccat, l. 1. c. 6.
for those small sins, says he, which no man can avoid, was this Petition in
the Lord Prayer inserted.

Nay, long before him, St Clement teaches the same Doctrine of our prayers
being a most sure expiation for all our involuntary sins. For in his first
Epistle to the Corinthians, relating that truly Christian state wherein their
great Apostle Paul had very lately left them; among several other parts of
their Character he gives this for one: (...). Clem. Romans Ep. 1. ad Cor. c. 2.
Being filled with holy desires, and a virtuous will, with a good and
commendable forwardness of mind, and with a pious assurance of being heard, you
lifted up your hands to Almighty God, beseeching him to be merciful and
propitious to you, if in any thing you had sinned INVOLVNTARILY. Having first,
as says the good Father, a virtuous heart, and a holily disposed will, so that
in nothing their heart was disobedient by sinning wilfully; they were forward
to ask God forgiveness for all those sins which they had committed
involuntarily. And this forwardness, says he, was (...).
good and commendable, and their confidence of obtaining pardon upon their
prayer, was pious; it was a (...).
godly and a pious confidence.

This is a plain and full testimony, and withal it is authentic, and such as
we may rely upon as much in a manner, as if an Apostle himself had told us so.
For this Clement, as we may observe, was one who was sent out by the Apostles
themselves to preach Christ's will, and entrusted by them to declare unto the
World what are the terms of remission of sins and the condition of pardon; so
that what we hear from his mouth we may look upon as Gospel. St Paul himself
makes honorable mention of him, calling him his Fellow Laborer: Help Clement
my Fellow Laborer, whose name is in the Book of Life, Phil. 4.3. And the thing
it self which he testifies, is not so much a matter of says and (...), wherein
an honest man may sometimes err and be mistaken; as an historical relation of
a matter of fact. For he is recounting what a brave and gallant Church they
were in that state, wherein the great Apostle left them: and as one of the
Particulars of that relation this comes in, That as for their involuntary sins
they begged Gods pardon, and that too with a pious assurance of obtaining it.
So that as for this practice, of a confident hope of pardon for their
involuntary sins upon their prayers, it was not only such as St Clement the
Companion and Fellow Laborer of St Paul approved; but such moreover as the
Apostle Paul himself, who had planted Christianity amongst them, had left with
them.

This therefore is one great remedy for our involuntary slips, They shall he
forgiven us upon our prayers for pardon and forgiveness.

And so shall they,

2. Upon our Charity, and forgiveness of the offenses of others.

As God himself delights in mercy, so does he require that we should; and to
oblige us to it the more, he has made our kind dealing toward our Brethren the
Luke 6.36, 37, 38.
Condition of his kindness toward us. Above all things, says St Peter, have
fervent Charity among your selves; for Charity shall cover, or procure pardon
for, the multitude of those many, because unavoidable and involuntary, sins, 1
Pet. 4.8. And hereto Charity is then especially available, when it is shown in
the highest instance of all, viz. in procuring our Brethrens repentance and
conversion. For thus says St James, Brethren, if any of you do err from the
truth, and one convert him; for his encouragement let him know this from me,
That he who converts the Sinner from the error of his way shall not only save
the others soul from death, but shall also hide a multitude of his own sins,
James 5.19, 20.

Thus is Charity in all acts of kindness and beneficence most available to
procure the pardon of our many, because unavoidable and involuntary sins. But
among all the instances of Charity, one is particularly singled out by our
Savior as a necessary Condition to our forgiveness at Gods hands, and that is
our forgiving others that offend against us. For the man who would have no pity
upon his Fellow Servants as his Lord had showed upon him, was unpardoned all
again, and delivered over to the tormentors till he should pay the uttermost
Farthing, Matthew. 18.32, 33, 34; and the same measure our heavenly Father will
mete out to us, if we forgive not every one his Brother their trespasses, v.
35. And that a Condition so necessary to our forgiveness might never be
forgotten our Lord has put it expressly into that Prayer which he has taught us
to put up daily for the pardon of our own sins. For he bids us pray that God
would forgive us our trespasses against him, even as we forgive those that
trespass against us, Matthew. 6.12. And that we may take the more notice of a
Point so indispensable, he tells us as soon as ever the Prayer is done, that if
we forgive men their trespasses, our heavenly Father will also forgive us; but
if we forgive not men their trespasses; neither will our heavenly Father
forgive us our trespasses, verse. 14, 15.

If we are rigorous and severe therefore with our Brethren, God will be so with
us also; and when he comes to judge us we shall find as little allowance at his
hands as they have done at ours. For he shall have judgment from God without
mercy, who to men has shown no mercy; but if any man has been merciful to his
Brethren, God will be much more so to him; for mercy rejoices even against
judgment, James 2.13. This will be the greatest motive to procure Grace, and
the best Plea that can be urged to obtain mercy at Gods hands; Blessed are the
merciful, says our Savior, for they shall obtain mercy. Mat. 5.7.

And thus as for our involuntary slips, we see now what is their remedy; they
shall be forgiven us upon our prayers, and upon the prayers of our friends and
other good Christians for us; and upon our Charity and forgiveness of other
men. With the same measure that we mete, God will mete out to us again, Mat.
7.2. So that if we show mercy to the unwill'd sins, yea and the voluntary
offenses of other men; if in other things we are obedient, we shall be sure to
find it for our own.

And thus at last we see what remedy the Gospel has provided us for all sorts
of offenses, whether they be our voluntary or involuntary sins. And upon the
whole matter we find that our case is not desperate under any sort of sins, but
that if we will use it, we have a sufficient cure for them. For if we are in a
state of death by reason of any wilful sin; let us but particularly repent of
it and amend it, and, if it either injured or offended our Brethren, seek to be
reconciled and repair the wrong, and we are restored to pardon. And if in any
thing we have fallen involuntarily; let us but pray and be merciful, and we are
forgiven. And either way when God comes to judge us, whether we have in all
points fulfilled his Laws, or are pardoned our transgressions of them, we shall
be acquitted by him. We shall be safe at that day, if we have either kept the
condition, or used the remedy; for a pardon will justify us to as much
purpo^^* as we should have been justified by an unerring obedience.

To apply this then to every man's particular case. Has any man, whether learned
or unlearned, committed wilfully and advisedly an act of any known and
notorious sin, whether of Blasphemy, Perjury, common Swearing, Witchcraft,
Idolatry, Drunkenness, Fornication, Adultery, Lying, Slander, Fraud,
Oppression, Theft, Murder, Rebellion, Tumult, or the like? has he been guilty
of these, or of any other sins of like nature whereat all men's consciences are
wont to boggle, and their hearts to check them, till they have sinned
themselves into numbness and stupefaction? let him particularly amend that evil
way, and retract that very sin, and, if his crime implied any, as far as he
can, repair the wrong it did his brethren; and then he is in a safe condition.
For his particular repentance and amendment shall make up the breach which such
wilful offense had made betwixt God and him, and shall most certainly procure
his pardon.

Has any man of opportunities and understanding committed any action of
Lasciviousness, Uncleanness, Passionateness, Fierceness, evil Speaking,
Backbiting, Censoriousness, Vncandidness, Unmercifulness, Vnpeaceableness, or
the like? has any such man, or any other whatsoever, been guilty of these or
the like offenses when his own Soul reproved him, and either did, or would have
set the sinfulness of his present action before him, unless he has sinned in it
so long, as to lose all sense of it, and to stifle all suggestions against it?
let him also particularly amend and reform such voluntary sin, and make his
peace with his offended brethren, that he may be saved. His particular
repentance shall likewise make his peace, and procure for him Gods favor and
acceptance.

Has any man, lastly, been surprised into rash words and censures, into sudden
anger, and trifling discontents, and peevish, or uncourteous, or uncandid, or
uncondescensive behavior? has he been wearied by long importunity into some
loose thoughts and wanton fancies, into some small fretfulness, or impatience,
or the like? has he spoke or acted unadvisedly through deep grief, or violent
fears, or other astonishing unwill'd passion? let him bewail his failings, and
strive against them, although he be not able perfectly to overcome them; let
him seek peace, and use charity, and show mercy upon the like errors and
escapes, and upon the more wilful offenses of his brethren, and then with
comfort beg Gods pardon. For his prayers thus attended shall set him straight,
and procure his reconciliation.

If a man is conscious to himself of any of these sorts of sins, these remedies
will certainly restore him. And as for those unknown and secret sins, whereof
his conscience cannot inform him; he has an obvious and an easy expedient, for
a general penitential prayer will undoubtedly be accepted for his pardon.

Whatsoever therefore his sins be, if he please to make use of it, he is
provided of his remedy. Repentance shall surely save his Soul, and make
atonement for all his offenses. So that of whatsoever nature, number, or degree
his faults have been, after once he has thus repented of them, they shall never
be imputed to him; but through the Merits of Christ's Death, and the Grace of
his Gospel, they shall be looked upon as if they had never been.

And thus at last we have seen what that condition is which the Gospel
indispensably exacts of us toward our acceptance in the last Judgment, what
those defects are whereof it allows, and what those Salvo's for all sorts of
disobedience which it offers. For it requires an entire obedience of all our
voluntary actions, it bears with all our innocently involuntary failings, and
it admits us to recover our former state when once we have lost it, or to
persevere in it when we enjoy it, by a particular repentance and amendment of
all our wilful sins, and by our prayers and charity for our involuntary ones.

This then is the true Test whereby at the last Day we must all be tried. If we
have obeyed entirely, and have been guilty of no wilful sin; or if, when we
have, we did not rest in it, but repented and amended it, and, where there was
any, repaired the wrong, and sought to be reconciled; and if we have begged
pardon for all our involuntary slips, and have been diligent in showing
charity, and mercy, and forgiveness, to atone for them: then are we innocent in
the accounts of the Gospel, and when Christ comes to judge us, we shall hear
the joyful Sentence of Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom
prepared for you, Mat. 25.34. This repentance and obedience will bear us out,
and secure our happiness; but less than it nothing in the world will. For God
will take vengeance, says St Paul, on all that obey not the Gospel of Christ,
2 Thessalonians. 1.8: and, Except you repent, says our Savior, you shall all perish,
Luke 13.5.

And thus having shown what condition that is which the Gospel indispensably
exacts to our acceptance in the last Judgment, what defects are consistent with
it, and what remedies, when once it is lost, shall again restore to it: I shall
now proceed to that which I proposed in the fourth and last place; namely, to
remove those groundless scruples, which perplex the minds of good and safe, but
yet erring and misguided people, concerning it; whereof I shall discourse in
the remaining Chapters.

CHAP. IV. Of such groundless Scruples as make safe, but weak Minds doubt of
their Title to Salvation.
The CONTENTS.
Pious minds scrupulous. Their condition is safe even then, but uncomfortable.
Several needless grounds of their fears. 1. Ineffective desires of evil. This
represented. No man otherwise good shall be condemned for ineffective lusts and
thoughts of evil. These are considerable either as to their first birth, or
indulged continuance. The first stirrings of lusts after evil things are
unavoidable. The after-entertainment is by our own indulgence. Even these are
uncondemning so long as they neither are consented to, nor fulfilled, being in
themselves not deadly under the Gospel, but a temptation to deadly and damning
sins. The way whereby sin wins upon men, and the nature and force of
temptation. To be tempted is no sin, which is proved from the nature of
temptation, from Adams being tempted before he sinned, and from Christ's being
tempted who knew no sin. Degrees in temptation or in lusts of evil. Some are
checked quickly, and are not permitted long to parley. This happens only in
grown men and perfect Christians, and that too not in all instances. These
certainly are not damning. Others stay longer, and strive and contend with our
mind or conscience, although at last they are vanquished by it. This happens
ordinarily to younger Converts, and in extraordinary temptations to grown
Christians. These still are uncondemning, which is shown from Gal. 5.16, 17;
and from the instance of our Savior Christ. What lusts and desires of evil are
damning. They are condemning when they make us consent to a damning sin. A
distinct account of the several steps to a sinful action. A proof of this, that
from their gaining of our consent in all the after-steps they are mortal. Our
lusts must be mortified to that degree, as to be disabled from carrying us on
thus far. This is done when men become true Christians. The better men are, the
less difficulty and self-denial do they find in mortification. Watchfulness and
strife still necessary. The danger of indulging to temptations, or to lusts and
desires of evil. This point summed up.

IN matters of Religion and another World, nothing is more ordinarily
observable than that those people are wont to have the greatest fears, who have
the least reason for them. For good Christians, although they think the best of
others, are generally very suspicious of themselves. They have a deep sense of
the danger of sin, and a full conviction of the fatal end of disobedience; and
that makes them think, that in a matter wherein it so highly concerns them not
to be mistaken, they can never be over-jealous of their own hearts, or too
cautious, lest after all, those insupportable punishments of sin should fall to
be their own portion.

And this they do especially, if in any material point, whereupon, as to the
Sentence of Life or Death, the Gospel lays a great stress, they are ignorant
and erroneous. For there are no terrors in the world that are comparable to
those of Religion, nor have any men upon earth so much reason to be afraid, as
they who are in danger to fall under them. And therefore if there is any thing
which will be of great account in the last Judgment, or, what is all one, which
they think will be severely accounted for; and they either find themselves to
be guilty of it, or, which comes to the same thing, fancy that they are: they
must needs be fearfully perplexed, and deprived of all peace and comfort,
though really they are in the greatest safety. It Is true indeed that in the end
they shall be no losers, nor shall their mistaken fears ever be fulfilled upon
them; because at the last Day God will judge them according to his own Rule,
and not according to their errors and misapprehensions of it; so that if they
have really done all that which he requires to Heaven and Happiness, he will
think well of them notwithstanding they think never so hardly of themselves.
Their errors shall in no wise pervert his Truth, for he sees what they are,
howsoever they may mistake it; and if he sees them to be righteous, his
sentence will follow his own knowledge, and he will declare to all the world
that they are so.

This is the security of all good men, as it is the eternal terror and
astonishment of all hypocrites and sinners, that they shall be brought before
an unerring and incorrupt Judge, who can neither be bribed nor deceived, and
who cannot mistake them, or wrongfully condemn them, howsoever they may
mistake, or wrongfully condemn themselves. And since it is so, they are really
safe in their own goodness, when they most of all suspect their own danger; and
secure from evil, even whilst they are afraid of falling under it.

But although every good man is in this safety, let his understanding of
himself be what it will; yet if in any of those things which he takes to be a
matter of life or death, he judges wrong of himself, and thinks erroneously, he
can enjoy no peace and comfort. He will go to Heaven full of fears, and
forbodeing thoughts; and never think himself in the way to Bliss till he is
actually inthroned in it, and possessed of it. He will meet indeed with
happiness in the end, but he will have no sight or expectation of it in the
way; for all his life long he will be tormented with doubts and suspicions,
fears and jealousies; and be still by turns concluding himself lost as to the
next World, though he be lost no where but in his own fancy. And this imagined
future misery will bring him under a real one for the present; it will make him
have sad thoughts and a sorrowful heart, it will bereave him of all joy and
peace, and almost overwhelm him in groundless perplexity and vexation.

But that pious Souls may not fear where no fear is* nor torment themselves
with unreasonable expectations; having before shown what that condition really
is which renders any man's a safe condition, I will go on now to remove their
groundless scruples and mistakes concerning it, by showing what, and of what
force those things are, which are wont, without any sufficient reason, to
disquiet the minds, and to disturb the peace of good and safe, but mistaken
Christians about it.

And as for the causes of good men's fears, so far as I have been able to learn
them, they are chiefly these that follow.

1. Good men are wont to call in question the saveableness of their present,
and the happiness of their future state; because after all their care against
them, they find that some motions of the flesh, some stirrings of their lusts,
some thoughts of evil do still arise up in them. They feel themselves subject
to delightsom fancies and desires of forbidden things. They are liable to a
lustful thought, a covetous wish, an insurrection of anger, of envy, and of
several other damning sins. It Is true indeed that these lusts do not reign in
them, because they do not consent to their instigations, nor do what they would
have them. They can only inhabit and stir in them, but have not strength enough
to give Laws to them; for they repress them before they get so far, and prevail
over them before they go on to fulfill what they inclined to. Not any of these
sinful lusts, whereof they are afraid, has got so much power over them, as to
carry them on either to consent to them, or to fulfill them; for though they may
think on some forbidden things in their minds, or desire them in their hearts;
yet do they not will and choose any of them, and least of all do they work and
practice them. They may perhaps have a thought and fancy, a wish and
inclination after unchaste pleasures; but they correct themselves there, and go
no further, for they never in their hearts consent to an unlawful embrace, nor
ever proceed to an unclean action. In a sudden motion of anger, it may be, they
may have several expressions of wrath and instances of revenge occur to their
thoughts, and obtruding themselves upon their fancy; but they stop there and go
no higher, for they do not consent to utter an injurious word, or to commit a
spiteful action; and the same they experience by themselves in other instances.
In all which several forbidden things will get into their thoughts and desires,
and steal from them a wish or inclination; but when once they have done that
they can do no more, being unable either to gain their consent, or to command
their practice, so as that they should not only desire, but also choose and
fulfill them. But although they do not suffer sin to reign in them so as to
consent to it, or to fulfill it in the lusts thereof; yet they fear lest their
very thoughts and inclinations after it should prove damnable. For God requires
the obedience of our whole man, of the mind and affections, as well as of our
wills and actions; and he is disobeyed by any, as well as by all our faculties.
And seeing every sin is forbidden under pain of death, who knows but that this
admission of sin into our thoughts and desires is a deadly transgression. This
is one great cause of fear, and a rock of offense to truly honest and good men.

But to take off all doubt and scruple upon this account, we must know that our
impotent lusts and ineffective desires of evil things, if they are able to get
no further than a thought or a wish, though at present they are a matter of our
exercise and humiliation; yet at the Day of Judgment they shall be no Article
of death or condemnation. For Christ's Gospel does not sentence us severely upon
these first motions of a lust, or beginnings of a sin; no, if they arrive no
higher than fancy and inclination, through the merits of Christ's Sacrifice
there is Grace enough in store for them, and in the Gospel account they are not
grown up to be a matter of Death, nor come within the Confines of destruction.

That I may speak with the more distinctness to this Point, I will here show
these two things:

1. That for our feeble lusts and desires after evil, which are unconsented to,
and unfulfilled, we shall not at the last day be condemned.

2. For what lusts and desires of them we shall.

1. I say, For our feeble lusts and desires of evil, which are unconsented to
and unfulfilled, at the day of Judgment no man otherwise good shall ever be
condemned. God will never sentence us to Hell for every sudden desire an
inclination after sinful things; but if it rests there, and goes no further
than bare desire, he will pardon and pass it by, but not eternally avenge it.

To speak distinctly to this Point, these lustings and desires are considerable
either as to their first birth, or as to their indulged and allowed
continuance: the first are never damning, and the latter many times are no
Article of condemnation.

As for our bodily lusts and desires of evil, in their first birth, I say, they
are never damning, nor shall any man, who is otherwise virtuous and obedient,
be ever judged to dye for them.

And if it were otherwise, who could possibly be saved? For as long as we live
in this World, we have all of us these first motions of appetites after evil
things more or less; and there is no avoiding of it. For the Laws of God, which
are impositions superinduced upon our Natures, by their prohibitions make
several of our most natural appetites and desires themselves to be sinful; the
lusts of the Flesh making up a good part of the prohibitions of the Gospel. But
although God by his after-prohibition has made them sinful, yet from that
natural necessity which he had laid upon us before, we cannot live entirely
free from them. For our Flesh will lust, and make offers after such things as
are naturally fitted to its liking; and we cannot help it: because our Bodies,
so long as they are conversant among the things of this World, from their
natural frame and constitution will still be delighted with some things, to
crave and desire; and pained by others, to hate and abhor them. This, I say, is
natural, whilst there is any life and sense in our Bodies, the good and evil
things of the world must of necessity thus sensibly affect them; and where they
are affected with pleasure, there it is natural for them to desire; as where
they feel pain, it is natural for them to abhor the thing which occasions and
produces it.

These first lustings then and cravings after forbidden things are natural, and
were made necessary before the prohibition came to make them sinful. And if by
an after-Law men shall be condemned for being sensibly affected with outward
things, or for having a sudden lust and inclination after them upon their being
so sensibly affected with them; then shall they be condemned for what they
could not help, and dye for not performing impossibilities.

But God neither can, nor does make any Laws which exact things so rigorous: He
punishes nothing in us but what proceeded from our own will, nor exacts an
account of us for our natural lusts and inclinations, further than they are
subject to our own choice and free disposal. If a sudden fear, or an unclean
desire arise up in the heart of an holy man, from the presence of outward
objects or inward imaginations, and the natural temper of his Blood and
Spirits; he shall not be put to answer for it, because he could not prevent it.
He could no more hinder it, than he can hinder the beating of his heart, or the
motion of his blood; seeing it was no free work of his will, but a natural
effect of his temper. And to be condemned for that, is to suffer for having
flesh and blood, as well as Reason and Spirit; and to undergo punishment for
being made up of Body as well as Soul, for being a man and not an Angel.

As for several things indeed which follow upon the first suggestion of a
prohibited object, and upon the first lusting after it: they are not the
effects of nature, but of our own choice. For though a fancy of evil, and a
sudden lusting after it from its fansied agreeableness, may obtrude it self
upon us whether we will or no, either by chance, or by occasion of a
temptation: yet a continued entertainment of it, and a stay upon it in our
imaginations, to cherish lust, and inflame desire, cannot come upon us but by
our own liking and connivence. For as soon as ever we can observe them, our
thoughts are our own, to dispose of how, and upon what we please The first
thought, it is true is not always in our power to hinder, because many times it
comes upon us e're we can observe it. For our souls, as I have sometimes said,
are souls in flesh, and make use of our bodily powers in their most spiritual
operations; being linked so fast to them, as that they cannot but communicate,
and be affected with them. But then the stay upon it, and the continued
attention to it in after-entertainment is a thing that cannot be so suddenly
forced upon us, but we give way to it only when, and how long we our selves
please. So that whatsoever the first fancy and desire of evil was, the
after-entertainment is our own; seeing it came not from any necessity of
nature, but from the free determination or connivence of our own will.

But yet even these after-thoughts and inclinations after forbidden things are
not always an Article of our condemnation; but then only when we consent to
them, or practice and fulfill them. For if the forbidden thing is only fansied
in our minds, and craved by our appetites, but has got no consent of our
hearts, nor any endeavors of our lives and actions: according to the gracious
terms of that Gospel whereby we must stand or fall, it is not yet come within
the terrors of Judgment, nor has made us liable to Death and Hell.

For the evil and danger of our bodily desires, we must know, is the evil and
danger of a temptation. When our appetites desire what the prohibition has made
evil, and our Spirits on the other side declare what the Commandment has made
good; then is the time of temptation or trial whether our wills are resolved to
stick to our lusts or to our Duty, and whether they will prefer God or sin. And
herein lies the great danger of our natural appetites; for although in
themselves they are not deadly and damning to any man otherwise good, yet are
they traps and snares to deadly and damning sins.

In themselves, I say, to any Christian man who is otherwise good and virtuous,
our natural appetites are not deadly and damning. The lusting and inclination
of our Flesh after Meats and Drinks, and after ease and pleasures; and the
lusting of the eye after gain and riches, are not absolutely and directly
forbidden, or in themselves, and before they have got any further, an Article
of our condemnation. No, all the desires of the Flesh are naturally necessary,
some to preserve our own persons, and some to the preservation and propagation
of Mankind. This God himself has made, and he allows of it. It is no man's sin
to have a stomach to his meat, or to have desires after ease, and a fleshly
inclination after bodily pleasures: because God has so framed our Bodies that
they should, and therefore he cannot be angry with us if we do desire them.
Indeed he has not left these desires to their own swing, but has put several
restraints upon them: he has bound them up from some objects, and in some
degrees. For we are forbid to desire and lust after meat and drink, ease and
pleasure, riches and plenty, when either we are injurious to other men in
procuring that which we lust after, or when we are excessive and intemperate in
the use of it, or for its sake transgress any other Commandment. Our desires of
meat and drink, for instance, must not carry us on to excessive measures in
gluttony and drunkenness; our carnal lusts must not draw us on to act them with
undue objects in fornication, adultery, rapes, or other prohibited
uncleanness; and our desire of money must not betray us into thefts or
robberies, fraud and circumvention, extortion and oppression, niggardliness,
uncharitableness, or other sins whether against Justice or Charity. As on the
other side our fears and aversations from want, or pain, or other bodily evils,
must not induce us to neglect a Commandment that we may please our Flesh, or to
deny our Religion for the securing of a bodily enjoyment. These restraints God
has laid upon our bodily appetites, having given us these Commands, with
several others mentioned above, which we are oft-times tempted to transgress in
order to the fulfilling of them. For our bodily appetites themselves do not
distinguish, either of objects, or of degrees. A man's palate, or his stomach in
any delicious meat or drink which yields a pleasure to it, does not tell him
when they have enough, or cease desiring before they are gone on to be
intemperate. Our eyes lust after money, but they consider not whose it is; but
so they may have it, they matter not to whom it belongs, or how they come by
it: and so it is in our fleshly appetites of other things. For it is the
natural pleasure of those things which we lust after that moves our bodies; and
therefore they lust after them so long as they are pleased with them. They
never stop at a fixed measure, or turn away from a forbidden object; so that if
we will be ruled by them, they will carry us on to any thing that agrees with
them, whether it be lawful or unlawful, and so are sure to ensnare us into sin.
And here indeed God has set a strict restraint upon them, and will punish them
severely if they go beyond it. For

Then, as I said, our lusts are deadly to us, and articles of our condemnation,
when they have damning effects, and ensnare us into deadly and damning sins. To
any good man the bare lusts and desires of evil are not so truly a damning sin,
as a dangerous temptation; they are not in themselves an Article of Death to
him, but they are apt to carry him on to that which is. For that which puts any
sin into a capacity to tempt us, is our lust or desire of something which is
annexed to it, and which we hope to obtain by it. There is always something
that goes along with it, which is naturally fitted to please our flesh, and to
excite a carnal appetite; and by this we are tempted and allured into the
practice and commission of it. For bare sin could never tempt any man, nor
could any one in his wits ever choose to disobey for disobedience sake without
any thing further: because there is no good in transgression nakedly
considered, which should move any man's will to choose and embrace it; but on the
contrary much evil, that will dissuade and affright him from it. For it
deprives us of Gods favor, and subjects us to his vengeance, and fills us with
sad hearts, and anxious thoughts, and terrible expectations. But that which
wins us over to a liking and approbation of it, is the appearance of some
pleasure, profit, honor, or other annexed allurement which we expect to reap
by it. It is one or other of these that overcomes all our fears, and inveagles
us into the commission of it; for they strike in with our natural appetites,
and raise in us desires after it; and those prove the bait which draws us in,
and the insnaring temptation.

For herein lies all the force of any temptation: The satisfaction of a lust is
joined with the acting of a sin, which is an invitation to us for the sake of
the one to commit the other also. The transgression has something annexed which
is agreeable to our fleshly Natures, and raises in us desires of it, and
cravings after it; and when it has got this hold of us, it draws us as much as
we can be drawn by our love of our own lusts, and the gratification of our
bodily appetites; which is indeed a great step to our choice and commission of
it, and a strong temptation.

For this is the natural order of our actions; either our Consciences or our
Passions move and excite us to them, and then our Wills choose and intend them,
and upon that choice and intention our Understandings contrive and direct, and
last of all our bodily and executive Powers fulfill and perform them. All our
bodily actions are at the choice and under the command of our wills, and all
our choice is upon the appearance of some good or other, which either our
consciences, or our fleshly lusts and appetites propose to us. For our wills,
we must remember, are placed in a middle state, and are canvased and beset on
both sides, our lusts being urgent with us to consent to one thing, and our
consciences to another. And this is that strife betwixt the flesh and spirit,
which is mentioned in the Scriptures; and that contention which St Paul
describes in the 7th Chapter to the Romans, between the Law of lust in the
members and the Law of God in the mind. These two Principles, our Body and
Spirit, or our Lusts and our Consciences, are those great Interests that vie
and struggle in us, and emulously contend which shall obtain the consent and
choice of the will of man. And whenever either of them has got that, our
actions follow in course. For our bodily members move at our own choice; and
therefore if our lusts after the pleasures of sin have once prevailed upon our
wills to consent to it, they have gained their point and their work is done,
and we shall go on without more ado to act and commit it.

In this then lies all the force of a temptation, that the sin which we are
tempted to has something annexed to it wherein our flesh is delighted, and
which it lusts after, and desires for the sake of that pleasure which it finds
in it. And when by this means any sin has got our fleshly love and desire, it
has got a powerful friend in our own bosoms. For our lusts are strong and
violent, and where they set upon a thing, they will not easily be denied, but
are urgent and importunate with our wills to consent to their gratification,
and yield to the fulfilling of them. So that if once any sin has struck in with
them, it is able to try its strength, and contend with the Law of God in the
mind; being furnished now with a powerful bait and a strong temptation.

Thus are our lusts and desires of forbidden things, not the forbidden sin it
self, but the temptation to it; so that in bare lusting or desiring of them, we
do not commit the damning sins themselves, but are tempted only to their
commission. And in this St James is most express; for then, says he, every man
is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own lusts, and enticed to evil by
them, Jam. 1.14.

And as for mere temptation to a damning sin, it is not deadly and damning. For
our being tempted to sin is not a renouncing of our Lord, but an exercise of
our service and obedience to him, and a trial whether or no we will renounce
him. It is the great proof and argument how dearly we love him, and how closely
and faithfully our wills adhere to him. It shows how obedience is uppermost in
our hearts, and that we will rather deny our dearest lusts and importunate
desires, than venture, for their sakes, to offend him. So that to be tempted is
no instance of damning disobedience, but a plain proof how much we will lose
and suffer rather than we will disobey. It is a trial of us how we prefer God
and our Duty before other things, even those that are most dear to us of all
things in the world besides. We do not sin damnably then in being tempted, so
long as we consent not to it, but manfully resist and overcome the temptation.

And this is evident from hence, because those very men who have lived most
free from sin, have not for all that lived free from temptation. Even Adam
himself, before he knew what sin was, and during his state of Innocence, was
liable to be tempted. For the Tree of Knowledge of good and evil, whereof God
had forbidden him to eat, was alluring to his eyes, and an incentive to his
lust, as well as any other Tree of the Garden. And because it was so, the Woman
was won to eat of it through the strength of such desire after it,
notwithstanding God had commanded her to abstain from it. The woman saw that
the Tree was good for food, and pleasant to the eye, and she took of the fruit
thereof, and did eat; and by the same inducement she drew in her Husband, and
gave it unto him, and he did eat also, Genesis 3.6. And the second Adam, who was
most entirely innocent and guilty of no sort of 1 Pet. 2.22. John 14.30.
sin, was yet liable to temptation like as we are, being in all points tempted
like as we are, yet without sin, Heb. 4.15. Nay, says the Apostle, it was
necessary that he should be so; that by what he felt in himself, he might the
better know how to show mercy and have compassion upon us. In all things, says
he, it behoved him to be made like unto his brethren, that he might be a
merciful as well as a faithful High Priest; for in that he himself has
suffered being tempted, he is able to succor them that are tempted, Heb. 2.17,
18.

As for our being tempted then, or invited to any sin by our bare lusts and
inclinations after it; in it self, and before it has got any further, it is no
deadly sin or damnable transgression. It is the scene of good endeavor, the
trial of obedience, a test of our great love and preference of God and his Law
before all the world besides, yea even before our own dearest lusts, and our
own selves. It is nothing more than befell Adam before he had sinned, or than
befell Christ who never knew sin; and therefore in it self bare lust and desire,
or being tempted and invited to sin, cannot be damnably sinful.

As for our Lusts or Temptations, it is true they differ in degrees, according
as our desires of that evil which we are tempted to are indulged, and have
advanced more or less. For sometimes a lust may stir, but as soon as ever it is
observed it is again extinguished. The pleasure of the sin, whether by being
seen or fansied, raises in us a sudden thought or desire after it; but the lust
is expelled as soon as it is discovered, it is not suffered to remain and dwell
in us, but is presently thrown out with indignation. For we turn away our fancy
from the evil thing, and will not endure to think upon it, or to continue
craving and lusting after it. And this is a power over our own desires, and a
way of breaking the strength of temptation, which is incident only to grown men
and to perfect Christians: and that not in all instances of temptation, but
only in such as are not extraordinary in themselves, and which have been often
vanquished and triumphed over. It is in such cases where use has made the
conquest easy, and long custom of ceasing and turning away from the inveigling
desire has taken off all the difficulty; so that now we are able to silence and
subdue the lust as soon as we discern it. And as for these feeble desires and
impotent temptations, there is no question but that a good Christian may be
under them, and yet be in no danger of being condemned for them.

But then at other times our lusts live longer, and advance higher; they grow
up to good degrees, till they are able to contend and strive against our mind
and conscience; so that even when at last they are denied, and our wills choose
to do what God commands in spite of them; yet is it after much struggling and
opposition. The flesh lusts against the spirit, as well as the spirit lusts
against the flesh; and although at last the fleshly lusts are overpowered, and
cannot prevail with our wills to choose on their side; yet do they strive hard
and contend for it. And here a lust is not presently subdued as soon as it is
discerned, but it strives and struggles; it can make head against the Law in
the mind, although it cannot overcome it; it has some interest in the will,
although it have not an interest sufficient; for the will hearkens to it for
some time, and considers of what it offers, notwithstanding at last it reject
its suit, and through the solicitations of a more powerful Favorite, resolves
against it. And this power our lusts have in us whilst we are young Converts,
and of a more imperfect goodness; nay in some very great temptations indeed,
such as are the fear of death and bodily torments especially, they will
struggle thus in those who are the most perfect Christians of all.

But now when our lusts are in this d^gree, so as to stay upon our Souls for
some time, and to strive against our spirits for the consent of our wills
before they are ^inally denied it: yet if they go no further than bare lust,
and our wills do not after all their struggling consent to them, or choose the
evil thing which is craved by them, they are still uncondemning, and incident
to an Heir of Salvation. And this, as I take it, is clear from what St Paul
himself says of the truly regenerate, or of those who, in his words, walk in
the spirit. For in them he says plainly, that the flesh lusts against the
spirit, albeit it is not able to prevail over it; so that even in doing what
the spirit commands them, they do against the contrary will and lusting of the
flesh which gainsays it. The flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit
against the flesh; so that even in fulfilling the will of the spirit, you
contradict another will of your lusts, and cannot do, or (...).
do not the things that you would, Gal. 5.16, 17. Nay even Christ himself who
knew no sin, nor ever committed any thing which could in strict justice be
worthy of death; was yet subject to such a conflict of flesh and spirit as this
now mentioned. His very Death and Passion, which was the very Phil. 2.8.
consummation and highest part of his obedience, was not without great
struggling of his flesh, and a long and earnest conflict of his bodily desires
against it. For he was in a strange fear and discomposure about it; he began,
says St Mark, to be sore amazed, Mark 14.34. And when he had recovered himself
a little from the maze of that sudden fright, he prays against it -- O my
Father, if it he possible, let this cup pass from me, Mat. 26.39. And when his
request was not granted at first, he makes a fresh address wherein he is more
importunate -- being in his Agony, says St Luke, he prayed more earnestly, Luke
22.44; his supplications he offered up with strong crying and tears, Hebr. 5.7.
All this strife and opposition did the desire of life, and the bodily appetite
after ease and safety, together with the sense of God's wrath and high
displeasure, raise in him against this obedience of his sufferings. But because
all this was only lust and desire, which although it lasted some time, and
discomposed him much, was not yet able to gain any thing of his will and Matthew.
26.39, 42.
consent to it; therefore notwithstanding it, was he perfectly innocent. All
that can be said is, That he was tempted by the desires of his Flesh against
this great and last instance of obedience; but he did not yield or consent to
the temptation.

Thus then as for the lusts and desires of our Flesh, whether they be suddenly
rejected and make no resistance, or are longer lived and contend much; if they
have got no consent of our wills to the fulfilling of them, nor any choice of
the evil which is craved by them, they are only a temptation to a damning sin,
but in themselves thus far they are not damning.

As for these motions and lustings after evil things then, that are unconsented
to and unfulfilled, which are the complaint and fear of good men; they shall
not harm them, or be charged upon them to their condemnation. But when God
comes to judgment, he will pardon and pass them by, and not eternally punish
and avenge for them.

And having shown thus for what lusts and desires of evil we shall at the last
day be pardoned; I come now,

2. To show for which of them we shall be condemned.

And as for this, we have in great part our answer to it already. For our lusts
are then damnable and dangerously evil, when they are effectual instruments and
temptations to damning evils, and carry us on either to choose, or practice
them. For they are the great Favorites and Seducers of our wills, and thereby
the Authors of our actions; they first bring us to choose and consent to the
deadly sin whereby they are gratified, and then to act it; and when they are
gone on to either of these, they are an Article of our condemnation. They are
uncondemning till they come so far, but if once they have got us to consent to
the alluring sin, from that consent begins their sting, and both it, and all
that follows it, make us liable to eternal destruction.

To make this Discourse more clear, I will here set down those several steps
whereby we ascend to the completion, and are carried on to the working and
commission of any sin.

1. At the representation of the object which is to tempt us to it, whether it
be an unchaste embrace, an unlawful gain, or the like, either by what we feel of
it now if it be before our senses, or by what we fancy if it is in our
imagination, our flesh is pleased and delighted with it. And from this pleasure
it naturally goes on to love, and from loving to desire it. And desire or lust
is the last step among the passions; for delight begets love, and love ends in
desire; but when once we are come to desire a thing, our passions have done
their part, and all that in them lies toward the action.

2. When in the appetite or animal soul the sin has gone thus far, the next
step is, that to gratify this desire or lust of our Flesh, our wills should
consent to it. For our wills are the Disposers of all that follows, so that
unless they consent to get that which the Flesh so much desires, there can
nothing more be done toward it. But if they do consent to the desire, and
intend to fulfill it; then,

3. Our understanding and contrivance is employed in deliberating and
consulting what time, what place, what means are fittest to accomplish it with
the least difficulty, and the most delight, and to the greatest advantage. And
when our minds have seen which to prefer and fix upon; then,

4. Our wills resolve upon them, and make choice of them. And when this is
done, the last Decree is past, and all the time of doubting and deliberation is
over; so that nothing more remains, but,

5. To apply our bodily powers to perform our resolutions, in the execution and
commission of that which was resolved upon.

This is the natural order of our faculties, and the process that is observed
by our principles of action in their completion and final commission of any
sin. The first beginning is in the lower soul, for that is the inlet of all
sin, and the seat of temptation; and there it is that sin has all its strength
and insnaring power, upon which account it is called by St Paul a Law in the
Members, Romans 7.23. And when these lusts of our Flesh have won the consent of
our wills, they are secure of all our after-contrivances for it, and of our
actual performance and execution of it. For both our thoughts and our bodily
powers are at the Command of our own wills; so that if at the instigation of
our lusts, our wills have once consented to the sin, they will quickly set our
heads awork to contrive for it, and our hands and other bodily powers to
execute and fulfill it.

And in this method our Principles of action move, when we act with full
deliberation, and when they are all employed. Sometimes indeed there is no
contrivance at all, because none is needful; as it happens when the opportunity
of the sin is present with us, and just before us at such time as we consent to
it; so that nothing more is wanting but only to act and fulfill it. But when the
opportunity is absent, and we are put to forecast and contrive for it; then is
the process of our faculties in that very order which I have here described.

For an instance and illustration of this, we will take the sin of drunkenness,
and the process will appear to be in that order which I have mentioned. For in
a man whose inclination that way disposes him to be tempted by it, the fancy of
it in himself, or the having it suggested by another, gives him a thought of
the pleasure which accompanies it; and from that apprehension of its
pleasurableness he begins to love, and from that loved he goes on straightway
to desire it. And now his will being solicited by his lust or bodily desire,
consents to the fulfilling of it. And this consent being once gained, the next
thing in order is to deliberate and contrive what company, what time, and what
place are fittest for it. And when by comparing all things together he comes to
make a judgment of that, he immediately chooses and resolves upon it; and that
being done, there is nothing remaining further but to execute what he has
resolved, and go on to the performance of it.

This then is the method and progress, from our lusting and desiring of any
thing that is evil, to our acting and committing it. It begins in delight, and
love and desire; and thence goes on to our consenting to it, to our contrivance
for it, to our resolutions upon it, and after all these to our practice and
performance of it.

Now so long as the evil is entertained only in a short delightsom thought, or
love, or desires, and rests there, but goes no further: it is not so much our
damning sin, as our dangerous temptation; it will be connived at, and at the
last Day we shall not be condemned for it. For thus far the sin is only
soliciting our choice, but has not got it; and as yet we have not committed a
mortal crime, but are only under a trial whether we will be drawn to the
commission of it, or no. But if once our wills consent to it, then begins the
sting, and there the danger enters; for the lusting after evil so far as to
consent to it, and much more so as to contrive for it, or to fulfill it, makes
us liable to death and eternal condemnation. For our own choice, as we heard
above* makes any sin damning; so that if by means of the tempting lust any sin
has prevailed so far, it is become a deadly offense, and subjects us to
destruction. Lust, says St James, when it has conceived, or is imperfectly
consented to, answering to conception which is an imperfect information,
brings forth sin; and sin when by being perfectly consented to, it is
finished, brings forth death which is the wages of it, Jam. 1.15.

And that our lusts after any sin are then damnably sinful when they are gone
beyond desire, and are come on either to our consent, or contrivance, or actual
performance; appears further from these instances in them all three.

If we lust so long after any evil thing, as to consent to the sinful enjoyment
of it, we are guilty of all that punishment which is threatened to it. He that
looks upon a woman, says our Savior, so long as to lust after her, or to Juxta
Domini nostri Dictum, Qui Mulierem viderit ad concupiscendum, reus est
Adulterii cord concepti: intelligere possumus quod et sires turpes and
damnabiles necessitate non agimus, pro ipsa tamen rerum turpium voluntate
damnamur. Sal. de Prove. l. 6. p. 205. Ed. Oxon.
consent in his heart to the enjoyment of her, he has committed adultery
already with her in his heart, Mat. 5.28.

If we lust so long as to contrive for it, which is a degree further; we are
more guilty of the sin, and more liable to the punishment of it still. The
inclinations and contrivances of murder, as was observed above, are reckoned
among those things which pollute a man, (and thereby unfit him for entering into
Heaven, where nothing can ever have admittance that is unclean) as well as
murder it self is, Mat. 15.19.

But if our lust after any sinful enjoyment carry us on, not only to consent to
it, or to contrive for it, but, what is the perfection of all, to work and
fulfill it: then has it ensnared us into as much mischief as it can, and is
become dangerous and damning with a witness. For then it has prevailed with us
to complete our sin, and give the last hand to it; it has brought us under that
which is most of all threatened; for now we fulfill the lusts of the flesh, Gal.
5.16, 19; we work iniquity, Mat. 7.23.

And if we continue to do this not only for once or twice, but in constant
returns, and in a fixed course and tenure of action; then as our sin is grown
higher, the acts thereof being more numerous, and the guilt more crying; so
will our punishment also be more dreadfully severe. And this is called walking
after the flesh, 2 Pet. 2.10; and living after the flesh, Romans 8.13. And this
being a state of wasted virtue, and habitual reigning sin; it is not only,
through its obnoxiousness to punishment, a state of death; but also, through
its hardness of cure and difficult recovery, a state of great doubt and danger
likewise.

So that as for all these further degrees, from the consent of our wills,
onward; if our lusts after any sin have gone on to them, they are deadly and
damning. For the same Law in the members which wars against the law of the
mind, so as thus to captivate and triumph over it, is as the Law of sin, so, as
the Apostle says, the Law of death too, Romans 7.23.24.

All our lustings after evil therefore, when once they come to be consented to,
although before they were connived at, are thenceforth deadly and damning. So
that whosoever hopes to be saved at the last Day from the punishment of them,
must thus far mortify and kill them. Mortify, says St Paul, those desires
which are seated in your earthly members, Col. 3.5; for it is only if you
through the spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, that you shall live, Romans
8.13. As to these damnable degrees, all fleshly lusts must of necessity be
crucified in all good Christian men; for no man will be reputed to belong to
Christ till this change is wrought in him. They that are Christ's, says the same
Apostle, have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts, Gal. 5.24.

Mortify and crucify them, I say, we must; not so as to have no fleshly
appetites and bodily desires of evil; for then must we have no bodily desires
at all. Because our lusts themselves, as was observed, do not distinguish of
lawful or unlawful, but are naturally moved by an agreeable object, whether it
be with God or against him. But we must mortify them to that degree, as that
they never be able to win us over to consent to any forbidden thing for their
gratification. They must never have so much interest in our hearts, as to make
us prefer them before our duty, and choose to perform what they bid us, rather
than what God does. Some stirrings and ineffective motions of them, which
cannot prevail against God, nor gain over the consent of our wills to any thing
that he has forbidden, are dispensed with; they are the stage of temptation but
not of death; for God bears with them, and the mortified men themselves do
daily feel and labor under them. But it is the prevailing strength of our
lusts after evil things, when they get our consent to them, and carry us on to
transgress Gods Laws to fulfill them: this conquering power of fleshly lusts, I
say, it is which is to be mortified in every good man, because under this
strength and empire of them he cannot go to Heaven.

And that no good man may call in question the safety of his state, from any
needless fears about this mortification; this we must know every man has done
in his conversion to become a good Christian. For before he can be such, he has
killed the reigning power of lust, so as not to be acted any longer by its
instigation. He feels some small stirrings of it afterward indeed; but they do
not win upon him, or prevail over him; for he is always ready to deny the
satisfaction of his lust, before he will displease his God; and makes all the
desires of his flesh to give way to the dictates of his Conscience. Ye that are
Christ's, says St Paul, have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts,
Gal. 5.24.

And when this is once done, there is no great trouble in it afterward; for
the more any man is accustomed to obey, the less difficulty does he find in
mortification and self-denial, and in restraining of all those lusts which
tempt to disobedience. He is not now in every temptation put to the pain and
trouble of cutting off a right hand, or of plucking out a right eye; the
self-denial and mortification went so near him at first, it is true; but since
he has been used to it, and his flesh is accustomed to bear the yoke and to be
under subjection, there are no such pangs and uneasiness attending it. So that
if he is not now still upon the severe task of painful mortification, it is
because he does not need it, since it is done already to his hand. His lusts
are so far mortified as it is absolutely necessary they should; they are
crucified to that degree, as to be disabled from gaining his consent to them,
his contrivance for them, or his fulfilling and performance of them; and that
is as much mortification as God will exact of him.

But yet when this is done, and our lusts are mortified to this degree, there
is still need of a watchful care over them, and of a continual strife against
them, lest they should rebel again and go further. For the objects of sense,
and the allurements of our flesh are still before us; and our bodies naturally
are still as capable to be delighted in them, and thereupon to lust and long
after them, as ever they were before. It is only the overpowering strength of
the Law in the mind or conscience which maintains the resolution of our wills
against them, and by that means keeps them under. And therefore if once we
begin to slacken our care, and to keep no hank upon them; but allow them to go
where, and how far they please; they will quickly grow upon us, and prove too
hard for us, and bring us first to consent to them, and after that to complete
and fulfill them.

Let no man therefore indulge to the thoughts of unlawful pleasures, and by the
delights of his fancy foment and cherish the lusts and desires of his Flesh;
presuming that all is safe whilst he does not consent to them, nor yields to
fulfill them. For admitting that all things else are innocent and uncondemning,
yet however by this means he lays a snare for his own soul. For he throws
himself into temptation, and so cannot expect that God should deliver him out
of it. God has promised to relieve us indeed in all necessities of his own
making; if his Providence throws us upon trial, his Grace shall support us
under it, and make a way for our escape out of it. He will not suffer you to be
tempted above what you are able, says the Apostle, but together with the
temptation he will make a way to escape, that ye may be able to bear so much of
it as befalls you, 1 Cor. 10.13. But what is this to us if we bring our selves
into snares, and prove our own tempters? For there is no reason at all to
presume that God, if he will deliver us from other enemies, should deliver us
also from our own selves; and that he should secure us by his Spirit from those
very snares, which we lay for our own Virtue. No, if we will entertain Serpents
in our bosoms, he has no where engaged, nor is there any reason why he should,
that we shall not be stung by them. But on the contrary, he warns us against
them, and bids us be careful to keep off from them. Yea, so far must we be from
bringing temptations upon our selves, that, if we will observe his orders, we
must pray daily even against those whereto his Providence might expose us. This
being one of those Petitions, which, according to our Lords appointment, we are
to put up to God as often as we do that for our daily bread; viz. That he would
not lead us into temptation, Matthew. 6.13. So that if by indulging to
delightsome fancies, and growing lusts of evil, we throw our selves into a
great temptation, we have just reason to fear that God, for our punishment,
should leave us in it, and suffer us damnably to fall by it. Such indulgence is
apt of it self to inflame our lusts, and to weaken our resolutions; and God is
also prone to withdraw his Grace, and to leave us to our own strength upon it;
and since at the same time it increases our necessities, and withdraws our
aids, it must need^ put us into a dangerous condition. If then we would secure
our souls, and keep off from damning sins; we must resist temptations at the
beginning, and not give way to them; we must not cherish and indulge, but
timely check, and heedfully suppress them.

And thus at last we see what is the just force of this first cause of fear to
honest minds, their ineffective lusts, and impotent desires of evil. The first
beginnings of lust cannot be avoided, and the longer entertainment of it shall
not finally be punished, if it is soon checked by us, nay if it stays longer
and contends much with us, so long as it does not prevail upon us to consent to
and fulfill the sin whereto it is a temptation. But when once it has gained our
consent and choice of that sin whereto it would engage us, then is it of a
damning stain, and all its following effects are mortal. All which St James
insinuates to us in that account which he gives us of the progress and
production of sin, which he sets down from the motive or first temptation, to
the perfect birth or complete production, in this order: Then, says he, every
man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own lusts, and enticed to evil by
them. This lust or desire of evil is only the first step, being as yet not
grown up to the stature of sin, but only to that of temptation. But when it
advances, and draws in our other faculties; then sin begins and ripens; it is
first conceived, and then finished; and after the finishing of it, it is a
matter of condemnation, although before it were uncondemning. For then when
lust has conceived, by being in some imperfected measure willed and consented
to, it brings forth, answerable to its conception, which is but an imperfect
sort of production, an imperfect embryo of sin; and this embryo of sin, when by
a full choice and perfect consent, and much more when by action and practice,
it is finished, brings forth its proper wages* death. Jam. 1.14, 15.

Although these lustings and desires therefore which good men complain of, may
justly be an employment of their watchfulness and care; yet ought they not to
be a cause of their fear or scruple. For it shall not bring upon them those
evils which they are afraid of, nor ever prove their ruin and destruction. The
evil thing is entertained only in a thought, or a wish; they lust after it, and
are tempted by it; but that is all, for they do not consent to the temptation.
And since their lusts go no further than thus, they shall not harm them when
Christ comes to Judgment, nor ever bring them into condemnation.

CHAP. V. Of two other Causes of groundless Scruple to good Souls.
The CONTENTS.
A second cause of scruple is their unaffectedness or distraction sometimes in
their prayers. Attention disturbed often whether we will or no. A particular
cause of it in fervent prayers. Fervency and affection not depending so much
upon the command of our wills, as upon the temper of our bodies. Fervency is
unconstant in them whose temper is fit for it. God measures us not by the
fixedness of our thoughts, or the warmth of our tempers, but by the choice of
our wills and the obedience of our lives. Other qualifications in prayer are
sufficient to have our prayers heard when these are wanting. Yea, those Virtues
which make our prayers acceptable, are more eminently shown in our obedience,
so that it would bring down to us the blessings of prayer, should it prove in
those respects defective. A third cause of scruple is the danger of idle or
impertinent words mentioned Matthew. 12.36. The scruple upon this represented.
The practical error of a morose behavior incurred upon it. This
discountenanced by the light of Nature, and by Christianity. The benefits and
place of serious Discourse. Pleasureable conversation a great Field of Virtue.
The idle words, Matthew. 12, not every vain and useless; but false, slanderous
and reproachful words; this proved from the place.

ANother thing which disquiets the hearts of good and honest men, and makes
them needlessly to call in question the saveableness of their present state, and
their title to salvation; is the coldness and unaffectedness, the unsettledness
and distractions which they find in themselves when they are at prayers. Good
people are wont to cry out of desertions, to think that God has thrown them
off, and that his Spirit has forsaken them, if at any time they find a great
distraction and dullness of Spirit in their devotions, and a great abatement of
that zeal and fervency, that fixedness and attention, which they have happily
enjoyed at other times.

But this is a great mistake from men's ignorance of Gods Laws, and of their own
selves. For God has no where told them that he will judge them at the last day
by the steadiness and fixedness, the tide and fervency of their devotions; but
by the integrity of their hearts, and the uprightness of their obedience. The
last Sentence shall not pass upon men according to the heat of their
affections; but according to the goodness of their lives. So that if they have
been careful to practice all God's Commandments according to their power and
opportunities, and this of prayer among the rest, in such sort as their
unavoidable infirmities would suffer them, they shall be safe in that Judgment
notwithstanding any inequality in their bodily tempers, or unconstancy and
abatement in their bodily affections.

To state this business so, as that we may neither be unnecessarily scrupulous
about these qualifications of our prayers when we cannot, nor, on the other
side, irreligiously careless of them when we might, enjoy them; I shall say
something of their necessity when they can be had, as well as of that allowance
which God will make to them when, through any bodily indispositions, or
unforeseen accidents, they cannot.

If we would put up our prayers to God in such manner, as it is fit for us to
offer them in, or for him to hear them, we must make them with a due fixedness
and attention of mind, and fervency of affection.

We must offer them up with a due fixedness and attention of mind. Our thoughts
must go along with our lips, and our souls must be intent upon the business
which we are about, when we are making our prayers to God. We must not expect
that he should mind those vain words, and mere talk, which we do not; or that
he should hear us, when we do not hear our selves: No, it is the work of the
Soul, and not the bare labor of the lips, which he attends to; so that if only
our Tongues pray, but our minds are straying, this is as good as no prayer at
all.

We must offer them up also with much earnestness of desire, and fervency of
affection. We must show that we put a price upon a mercy, before we are fit to
receive it; for otherwise there is no assurance that we shall be duly thankful
for it. We must not seem cold, and indifferent after it, for that is a sign
that we can almost be as well content without it. But we must be eager in our
desire, and express a fervency of affection after it; such as we are wont to
use in the pursuit of any thing which we greatly value: and this is an
inducement for God to give us that, which he sees we so dearly love; it sets a
price upon his blessings, and shows the measure of our own virtuous
inclinations, and therefore he will encourage and reward it. The effectual,
fervent prayer of a righteous man, says St James, avails much, Jam. 5.16.

Thus are a due attention of mind, and a fervent heat of desire in devotion,
such qualifications as are necessary to render our prayers becoming either us
to offer, or God to hear; so that we must always strive, and, according to our
power and present circumstances, endeavor after them. We must take care, as
much as we can, to compose our thoughts when we pray, to draw them off from
other things for some time before, and still to bring them back again when at
any time we find them wandering. And we must endeavor also by a due sense of
the necessity, the greatness, and undeservedness of Gods mercies, to heighten
our affections, and make them bend vigorously and eagerly after those things
which we pray for; that so God seeing we are serious and in earnest with him,
he may be induced to grant those benefits which we desire of him.

But then, on the other hand, if after all our care and pains in fixing of our
thoughts, and raising of our desires, through some bodily indisposition or
unforeseen accidents, which we cannot help, our minds run sometimes still
astray, and our desires are cold and languid; this unwill'd dullness and
distraction shall not influence our main state; it is a thing which we cannot
help, and no man living is perfectly free from it, and therefore God will not
be severe upon it, but in great mercy he will pity and connive at it.

For as for the attention of our minds, and the fixedness of our thoughts,
either in prayer, or in any other business; it is a thing which is not always
in our own power, but may be hindered and interrupted by many accidents whether
we will or no. For any thing that makes our bodily spirits tumultuary and
restless, renders our attention small and interrupted. Any high motion of our
blood, any former impression upon our spirits either by our precedent studies,
or our crowd of business, will make great variety of thoughts and roving
fancies obtrude themselves upon us; and this is our natural frame and
constitution which we must submit to, and cannot remedy. We can no more prevent
it, than we can prevent our dreams, but our fancies will be struck, and
diverting thoughts will be thrown into us, whether we will or no. For from the
natural union of our souls and bodies, our minds, in their most spiritual
operations of thinking and understanding, go along with our bodily spirits, and
apprehend after their impressions; and we can as well refuse to see when our
eyes are open, or to taste what is put into our mouths, as we can refuse to
have a thought of those things which are impressed upon our bodily fancy or
imagination. The connection betwixt these is necessary and natural; and there is
no breaking or avoiding it. So that let us be either at our prayers, or at any
other exercise, if any temper of our bodies, any accidental motion of our
blood, any former impressions of foregoing studies or other business stir in
our fancies; our thoughts must needs be diverted, and our attention disturbed
by them. Nay in our prayers we are more apt to find it thus, than in any other
thing. For there men ofttimes use violence, and screw up the fixedness of their
minds, and the fervency of their hearts to the highest pitch: and then their
bodily spirits, being overstrained, are liable, not only to be discomposed by
outward accidents, but also to give back and fall of themselves; and when in
this manner they withdraw, there is room made, till they can be again
recollected, for other thoughts to arise instead of them. All this, I say,
happens from the very nature and frame of our bodies, and from that dependence
which our minds and thoughts themselves have upon them; so that we cannot
prevent or overcome it wholly. We may, and ought indeed to strive against these
distractions as much as we can, and to compose our thoughts as much as our
natural temper, or our present circumstances will suffer us: when they wander
in our prayers, as soon as we discern it we may recollect them; and when other
thoughts intrude, as soon as they are observed we may reject them: but then
this is all that we can do, or that God requires we should do; for we cannot
pray perfectly and continuedly without them.

And then as for the zeal and fervency of our affections, whether in our
prayers or in any thing else, they are fickle and very changeable, and do not
depend so much upon the choice of our wills, as upon the temper of our bodies.
Some upon every occasion are more warm and eager in their passions, either of
love or hatred, hopes or fears, joy or sorrow, than other men either are, or
can be. For there is a difference in tempers, as well as in palates; and men's
passions do no more issue out upon the same things, in the same eagerness; than
their stomachs do after the same food with the same degrees of appetite. So
that as for a great fervency and a vehement affection; every man cannot work
himself up to it, because all tempers do not admit of it. For zeal and
affectionateness in Devotion, as in other things, is more a man's temper than
his choice; and therefore it is not to be expected that all people should be
able to raise themselves up to a transporting pitch in it; but only that they
should, who are born to it.

Nay even they whose natural temper fits them for a great fervency and a high
affection, are not able to work themselves up to it at all times. For no man's
temper is constant and unchangeable; seeing our very bodies are subject to a
thousand alterations either from things within, or from others that are without
us. If a man's blood is put into an irregular ferment either by a cold air, or
an inward distemper, or any discomposing accident; it spoils, not only the
fixedness of his thoughts, but the zeal of his affections likewise* Let there
be any damp or disorder, any dullness or indisposition, either upon a man's blood
or spirits; and the discomposure of his body is presently felt in his soul, for
his thoughts flag, and his passions run low, and all his powers are under a
cloud, and suffer an abatement. And this every man finds in himself, when he
labors under a sickly and crazy temper, an aching head, or any other bodily
indisposition. For our passions are bodily powers, and are performed altogether
by bodily instruments; they live and dye with them, and are subject to all
their coolings and abatements, their changes and alterations. And therefore as
long as our bodily tempers and dispositions alter, and, by reason of a number
of accidents, whether from without or from within themselves, are still
changeable and unconstant; the zeal and fervency of our affections must needs
be so too.

Thus is some distraction of mind and chilness of affection, either in our
prayers, or in pursuit of any other thing, most necessarily incident to all
men. We cannot wholly prevent them, or live altogether free from them; but
sometimes they will break in, and seize upon us do what we can.

And since we cannot help them, God will not be always angry, or eternally
torment us for them. No, he knows that we are flesh and blood, and his love and
favor to us does not alter as our unsettled thoughts, or bodily tempers do. He
measures us not by the fixedness of our thoughts, or by the fervency of our
affections, which are not always in our own power; but by our wills and actions
which are. So that if we are careful to will and choose what is pleasing to him,
and from our hearts entirely to obey him; we need not doubt but that whatever
involuntary distractions there may be sometimes in our thoughts, or abatements
in our bodily tempers whilst we are at our prayers; we shall still be accepted
by him.

We shall be accepted, I say, and the blessings which we sue for obtained,
although sometimes our prayers are less attent, and less affectionate, than at
other times they are, and we at all times greatly desire they might be. For our
fixedness and fervency are not the only things which procure acceptance for our
prayers. They are great good things, as I said, and such qualifications as make
our requests fit, both for us to offer, and for God to hear; and therefore we
must take care still when we pray, in such measure as we are able, to be
provided with them. But although they are some, yet are they not the only
qualifications of our prayers which prevail with God, and move him to hear
them. For our trust and dependence, our submission and resignedness, and other
spiritual virtues and instances of obedience, are likewise dispositions which
God respects in them; nay indeed which he prizes above all, and principally
looks at. So that if we pray with these, God is honored by our prayers, and he
will reward them; and our petitions shall not be put up in vain, although, by
reason of some bodily dullness or distraction, the fixed attention of our minds,
and the fervency of our hearts, which we endeavor after always, and enjoy at
other times, should happen to be wanting.

Yea I add further, so long as our hearts are honest, and our lives entirely
obedient, we are always furnished with those qualifications which are
sufficient to bring down Gods Grace and Blessing upon us, and which are the
principal things that make our prayers themselves an acceptable Offering. A
good man is drawing down the blessings of Heaven upon himself all his life
long, and not only whilst he is upon his knees: so that if at any time his
prayers are less perfect, and chance to falter; that defect will be otherwise
supplied, and he will have all that mercy conveyed to him through another
means, which his prayers should have obtained for him; seeing that which makes
his prayers procure Gods love and mercy for him, will make his obedience
procure the very same.

For I suppose no man is so silly as to imagine that it is the lifting up of
his eyes and hands, the composedness of his countenance, the quaintness of his
phrase, the eloquence of his expressions, the volubility of his language, or
any other external thing which makes his prayers so powerful, and brings down
the blessing of God upon them. But it is that dependence upon God, that
confidence in God, that love of God and desire of goodness, that acknowledgment
of his tenderness and power, that submission to his Authority, and resignation
to his pleasure, which are all implied in prayer, and fitly expressed by it,
and which make up the very life and spirit of it: these, I say, it is which God
looks at in our prayers, and for the sake whereof he so graciously accepts and
rewards them. But now as for all these, they are expressed every whit as much
by the obedience of our lives, as by the prayer of our lips; nay indeed much
more* in as much as our actions are a more perfect expression and certain
evidence of all these tempers of a good heart, than our words are. They differ
as much as words and deeds, as profession and performance; for whereas in our
prayers we only speak and profess all this, in the obedience of our lives we
work and perform it. We show our love and resignation to God, when for his sake
we deny our selves, and give up our own will in obedience to his. We
acknowledge his Power and Authority most effectually, when we obey it; and own
his Providence to the best purpose, when we contentedly acquiesce in it, and
patiently submit to it; and confess his love and kindness after the most
acceptable sort, when we throw our selves upon it, and work and endeavor all
our lives long in hopes and expectations of it. In our daily actions of Justice
and Charity, of Temperance and Sobriety, of Meekness, Patience, Mercy and
Forgiveness, and in all other instances of obedience, we give God the honor to
choose for us, to dispose of us, to be sought after and entrusted by us. We
evidence our esteem of him, our love for him, our trust in him, our dependence
on him, our resignation to him; and that most effectually. So that whatsoever
can move God in our prayers, will move him in a higher degree, and after
another fashion in our obedience; the Spirit of goodness which is evidenced in
our prayers, being evidenced much more in the course of good actions. No
Rhetoric therefore of our Prayers is like to that of a good life, every action
of obedience in a good man having the effect of a prayer, and calling down upon
him the same mercy and the same Grace, which would be procured by a
supplication.

Let a man therefore make sure in the first place of a good life, and of an
honest and entire obedience; and then he need not fear to want those things
which all good men have need to pray for, seeing he will show so much daily in
his life as will make his requests be granted, and his prayers be hearkened to.
He cannot perish for want of those mercies which he prays for, although it be
sometimes with coldness and distraction; because not only the other obedient
tempers of his prayers, when through some unchosen hindrances a due fixedness
and fervency are wanting, but also the constant and uninterrupted obedience of
his life is daily ascending up, and brings them down upon him.

Let no good soul therefore be further troubled and disquieted upon this
account, as if, because after all his care his prayers are sometimes dull and
cold, and his thoughts therein are much distracted, he should either be
eternally punished for them, or at least go without those blessings which he
desires in them. For so long as the Spirit of obedience appears both in his
Prayers and in his actions, the unwilled distractions of his mind, and the
dullness and frozenness of his affections at some times, shall be no hindrance
either to his Suit at present, or to his happiness hereafter: his request shall
not be thrown by, nor he condemned for them; but, so far as God sees it fitting
for him, it shall be granted, and he shall eternally be saved notwithstanding
them.

3. A third scruple which is wont causelessly to disquiet and trouble good and
honest minds, is the words of our Savior Matthew. 12. I say unto you, That as
concerning every idle word which men shall speak, they shall give an account
thereof at the Day of Judgment, ver. 36.

This seems to be a strict and a severe Saying. For in all the crowd and
variety of converse, in the infinite numbers of Questions and Answers, and
other occasions of discourse; what man in all the World, but especially of
those who are of a conversation that is free and open, courteous and ingenuous,
cheerful and delightsome, which tempers the Gospel does not only allow, but
approve of; who, I say, of all men, but of men of this temper especially, among
all the occasions of speech can avoid a multitude of words? and where much is
said, how can it be but that much must be idle and impertinent?

This is a great snare, and to avoid it men run into a great error. For they
are led to place a great Religion in holy talk, and religious forms of
expression, which they prize so far as to think their conversation is
unhallowed without it. And if at any time their seriousness was thrown aside,
and their Discourse, though innocent, was vain and useless, they are greatly
troubled and afraid, and think they are fallen within the limits of damnation.

And this has a very ill effect, for it frights men from all the innocent
freedom of converse, and the cheerful entertainments of company. It makes them
to appear staid and reserved, silent and morose; to contribute nothing to the
harmless mirth and cheerfulness of conversation themselves, and to frown upon
it in others. For all converse and society is managed by the tongue, and the
ordinary entertainment of company is talking and discourse; but where men think
every idle and useless word so dangerous a sin, they are afraid to speak. So
that all that comes from them is studied and deliberate, grave and composed;
they neither dare use any freedom themselves, nor can without offense allow it
to be used by others.

But this is so far from being injoined by Christ, that it is discountenanced
by nature; it is so far from being a piece of Religion and a holy Duty, that
it is rather a piece of immorality and ill manners. For Aristotle and other
Philosophers of old, have long ago made urbanity, or an innocent freedom and
fac^tiousness in conversation, a Virtue; and have noted this affected
reservedness and unpleasurable moroseness in Discourse with a harsh censure.
(...). Ethic ad Nicom. l. 4. c. 8.
Those, says he, who will neither contribute to the harmless mirth of company
themselves, nor bear with it in others, are justly to be branded with the
reproachful names of clownish and morose.

And as it was discountenanced by the light of nature, so is it also by the
Laws of Christ. For whatsoever some men may think of it, or how innocently
soever they may be misled into that conceit about it; yet is it a temper which
Christ never intended to plant amongst us. For his coming into the world was
after another way, in a free use of the innocent allowances, and liberties of
mankind. The Son of man, says St Matthew, came eating and drinking, i. e. not
in the singular Austerities of John the Baptist, but in a free way of
conversation, such as others used, Mat. 11.19. And his Religion injoyns the
virtues of candor and benignity, affability and courtesy, an open freedom and
alacrity, and all those other ways whereby our conversation may be rendered
innocently agreeable, and whereby we may in any wise benefit, whether by
profiting or pleasing one another. Whatsoever things, says St Paul, are (...).
lovely or grateful to men, think on these things, Phil. 4.8. Love is the
Epitome of our whole Duty, and all the sweetners and endearments of society
that can be, so long as they are lawful and honest, are not only consistent
with it, but parts and expressions of it.

As for the grave entertainments of discourse and religious conference; they,
without doubt, have a great use, and in their place may deserve a great
commendation. For good Christians may be much bettered and improved, by having
their Graces awakned, their pious affections inflamed, their holy purposes fixed
and settled, their endeavors directed and encouraged, and every thing that is
good in them quickened and confirmed by them. But then it is to be considered
that even good things themselves must be taken in their own season, and must
not be suffered to ingross all our time, a great part whereof is to be spent
upon other things. For we have not only one thing to do, but at several times
sundry things call for us. There is a time, says Solomon, to every thing, and a
season to every purpose under Heaven: there is a time to weep, and a time to
laugh, a time to mourn, and a time to dance, Eccles. 3.1, 4. There is a time
for diversion, as well as a time for business; a time wherein to have a more
liberal and free discourse, as well as a time for godly and religious
conference.

Nay the innocent delights of conversation and pleasurable entertainments of
discourse, are themselves a great field of virtue, and an exercise and occasion
of many instances of obedience. For in them we may every one of us exercise in
our own persons, and be examples unto others, of much courtesy and kindness,
civility and condescension, affability and obligingness Let no man think then
that his hours of common converse are lost hours, and that whatsoever time he
spends upon offices of civility, and freedom of company, is misplaced, and
stolen from God and Religion. For we are fulfilling Gods Laws, and doing his
work, whilst we keep all these Commandments in the pleasurable entertainments
of common life; they are such business as he has set us, and our obedient
performance of them is no less his service, than Devotion, holy Conference, and
Meditation.

It is no prejudice or hindrance to Religion therefore to be free and open in
conversation, and pleasurable and cheerful in common life; but rather an
instance and expression of it. It is no part of any man's duty to be talking
always in Scripture Phrase and sanctified expression, or else to be wholly
silent and severely morose, and not to talk at all. For an innocent
cheerfulness, and freedom of discourse is not so truly the good man's sin, as
the exercise of his virtue and obedience.

But as for that opinion, that every idle and impertinent word shall be
severely accounted for at the Day of Judgment, which is the great sourer of
conversation, and the occasion of this conceit; it is a great mistake. For it
is not every idle and unprofitable, but every false, slanderous, or otherwise
sinful and unlawful word whereof our Savior speaks, when in that 12th of St
Matthew he tells us, that every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give
an account thereof in the day of Judgment.

As for the word which we translate (...).
idle, it may signify false and deceitful; as those words are which belie our
(...).
works, when our actions do not answer them. And this is agreeable to the use
of the word (...).
vain, which sometimes signifies the same that false or lying. In which sense
it is used in the third Commandment, where we are bid not to take the Name of
God in vain, i. e. in perjury or falsehood. For that sense our Savior gives to
it in his repetition of the Commandments, Mat. 5. It has been said to them of
old, says he, in the third Commandment, thou shall not forswear thy self or
swear falsely, v. 33.

But if nothing more than useless and unprofitable were noted by the word it
self which we translate idle; yet is it no unusual thing in the Scriptures by
several words to mean and intend more, than in their literal sense they do
express. Thus are the abominable works of darkness mentioned Ephesians. 5, called
(...).
unfruitful works; where the meaning surely is, not only that they bring in no
profit or advantage, but also that they are most deadly and mischievous, v. 11:
and the wicked servant spoken of Mat. 25, is called the (...).
unprofitable servant, v. 30. And after the same use of speech, our words,
which do not only tend to none, but to very ill fruit, may be called (...).
idle or unprofitable words.

And so they are in this place. For the idle words whereof our Savior speaks
v. 36; are such words as are not only idle and unprofitable, but positively
wicked and evil; being indeed false, slanderous, and reviling words; as will
appear from the consideration of these particulars.

For the words which are threatened in that 36. ver. are such as are a sign, not
of a trifling, but of an evil heart. How can ye, says he, being evil, speak
good things; for out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. So that
as a good man out of the good treasure of his heart brings forth, or speaks
good things; an evil man likewise, out of the evil treasure of his heart,
brings forth evil things, v. 34, 35.

And being the fruits of an evil heart, they are the signs, not of an
impertinent, but of an evil man. The tree is corrupt, says he, if the fruit be
corrupt; for the tree is known by its fruits, v. 33.

And since they are such words as are thus sinful in themselves, and an
argument of so much sin in us; they shall in the last Judgment be charged upon
us to condemn us. For by thy words, says he, as well as actions, thou shall be
justified, and by thy words, if they be such idle words as I mean, thou shall
be condemned, v. 37.

The words then which are spoken of in this place from the 33. to the 38. ver.
are such as are a sign of a wicked heart, as make a wicked man, and render us
in the last Judgment liable to condemnation.

But now words of this black dye and of these mischievous effects, are not
every idle and impertinent; but false, slanderous, railing, or otherwise sinful
and forbidden words. But false and slanderous words are especially struck at in
this place, such as were those lying and contumelious ones that occasioned all
this discourse, when the Jews most reproachfully charged his Miracles upon the
Devil, telling him that he cast out Devils through Beelzebub the Prince of the
Devils, v. 24. Upon occasion of which black calumny, he proceeds in all the
following verses to warn them against such blasphemous speeches; demonstrating
clearly the unreasonableness of them, v. 25, to 31; the sinfulness of them,
ver. 33, 34, 35; and the mischievous effects of them in the two next verses.
Such reproachful words as these let me tell you, says he, you shall be called
to an account for, as well as for your works and actions. I say unto you, and
you may believe me, for you will find it true, that every idle, or slanderous
and reproachful word, such as now you have spoken against me, that men shall
speak, they shall give an account thereof in the day of judgment. For when that
day comes, think you of it as you please now, men's words as well as their
actions shall be called to an account: by thy words thou shall be justified,
and, if they have been such as yours now are, by thy words thou shall be
condemned, ver. 36, 37.

And thus by all this it appears, that the idle word here threatened by our
Lord, is not every word that is vain and useless, but only such as are railing,
false, or slanderous. And in this sense some Manuscripts read the place. For in
the Book of Steph. it is not every idle, but every (...), etc.
wicked word that men shall speak, they shall give an account thereof in the
day of judgment.

So that as for this third scruple, it is as groundless as was the former; no
good man need to be disquieted by it, since they shall never be condemned for
it.

CHAP. VI. Of the Sin against the Holy Ghost, which is a fourth cause of
scruple.
The CONTENTS.
Some good men's fear upon this account. What is mea^^ in Scripture by the Holy
Ghost. Holy Ghost or Spirit is taken for the gifts or effects of it; whether
they be first ordinary, either in our minds and understandings, or in our wills
and tempers; or secondly, extraordinary and miraculous. Extraordinary gifts of
all sorts proceed from one and the same Spirit or Holy Ghost; upon which
account any of them indifferently are sometimes called Spirit, sometimes Holy
Ghost. Holy Ghost and Spirit are frequently distinguished, and then by Holy
Ghost is meant extraordinary gifts respecting the understanding; by Spirit
extraordinary gifts respecting the executive powers. The sum of this
Explication of the Holy Ghost. What sin against it is unpardonable. To sin
against the Holy Ghost is to dishonor him. This is done in every act of sin,
but these are not unpardonable. What the unpardonable sin is. Of sin against
the ordinary endowments of the Holy Ghost, whether of mind or will; the several
degrees in this, all of them are pardonable. Of sin against the Spirit.
Blaspheming of this comes very near it, and was the sin of the Pharisees, Mat.
12; but it was pardonable. Of sinning against the Holy Ghost. The Holy Ghost
the last means of reducing men to believe the Gospel, that Covenant of
Repentance. The sin against it is unpardonable, because such sinners are
irreclamable. All dishonor of this is not unpardonable; for Simon Magus
dishonored it in actions, who was yet capable of pardon; but only a
blaspheming of it in words. No man is guilty of it whilst he continues
Christian.

ANother causless ground of fear, which disquiets the minds, and affrights the
hearts of good Christian people, is the sin against the Holy Ghost. They hear
very dreadful things spoken of it, for our Savior Christ who knew it best, and
who at the last Day is to judge of it, has told us plainly beforehand, that he
who blasphemeth the Holy Ghost shall never be forgiven, neither in this world,
nor in the world to come, Mat. 12.32; or, as St Mark expresses it, he shall
never have forgiveness, but is liable to eternal damnation, Mark 3.29. This is
a fearful Sentence upon a desperate sin; and seeing they are in darkness about
it, and do not well understand it, they know not but that they themselves may
be guilty of it; nay some of a timorous temper and abused minds go further, and
think that they really are.

But to cure their fears, and to quiet their minds in this matter, there needs
nothing more be done than to give them right apprehensions, and a clear
explication of this sin; for if they once knew what it is, they would be at
ease from such tormenting suspicions, and unreasonable fears about it.

To explain this I will consider, 1. What is meant in Scripture by the Holy
Ghost. 2. What is meant here by sinning against it.


1. What is meant in Scripture by the Holy Ghost. By the word Holy Ghost or
holy Spirit, according to an usual Metonymie of the giver for the gift, or of
the cause for the effect, is very often meant the gifts or effects of the holy
Spirit, whether they be such as he ordinarily produces in us, or such as are
extraordinary and miraculous.

Sometimes it signifies such gifts and dispositions, whether of mind or temper,
as the Holy Ghost or Spirit of God, is wont ordinarily to produce in men. It
notes, I say, the good qualifications of our minds or understandings, which, as
all other good gifts, are wrought in us by the Spirit, and derived to us from
God. Thus a man endued with wisdom and discretion, such as Joseph advised
Pharaoh to set over all the Land of Egypt, is called a man in whom the Spirit
of God is, Genesis 41.33, 38; and the Spirit of the Lord mentioned Isai. 11, is in
the very next words explained by the Spirit of wisdom, the Spirit of
understanding, the Spirit of counsel, the Spirit of knowledge, and the Spirit
of quick understanding, verse. 2, 3. It signifies also the virtuous tempers and
good qualifications of our hearts, which, like as the former were, are given us
of God. Thus that good and charitable temper which is so exemplary in God, and
which is wrought in our souls by him, is called the Spirit of God, 1 John 4. If
we love one another, God dwells in us; so that 1 John 3.24.
hereby know we that we dwell in him and he in us, because he has given us
that loving temper of his Spirit, ver. 12, 13. The temper which was so
observable in Christ is called the Spirit of Christ, Romans 8.9; the temper of
Elias is called the spirit of Elias, Luke 1.17; the Spirit of the Lord is
explained by the Spirit of the fear of the Lord, Isai. 11.2; and that spirit
which God has given us, says St Paul, is not the spirit of fear, but the
spirit of power, of love, and of a sound mind, 2 Timothy 1.7.

Thus does the Spirit of God signify many times in Scripture those ordinary
gifts and Graces, which are the good effects of the Spirit.

But besides these effects of it in the good endowments and perfections of our
natural faculties, whether of mind or temper, which are common and ordinary;
sometimes it signifies more especially those gifts which are extraordinary and
miraculous. Of which sort are the gift of tongues, of prophecy, of healing
Diseases without any natural means, and performing other miraculous operations,
so famous in the first times of the Gospel. Thus, for example, that Saying, I
will pour out in those days of my Spirit, is interpreted by this in the next
words, And they shall prophecy, Acts 2.18. And the elder Brothers, which was a
double share of the prophetic power of Elias, is called a double portion of
his Spirit, 2 Kin. 2.9. And the Corinthians zealous pursuit of the miraculous
and extraordinary gifts of prophecy, speaking with tongues, healing diseases,
and working miracles; is called by the Apostle their being (...).
zealous of Spirits, or, as we translate it, of spiritual gifts, 1 Cor. 14.12.

Now as for these extraordinary gifts, they are all wrought in us by the same
cause, and proceed from the same Principle, viz. the holy Spirit of God, or the
holy Ghost. There are in the Church now in our times, says the Apostle,
diversities of gifts, but yet one and the same Spirit is the Donor of them all.
For to one is given by the Spirit the word of wisdom, or of Gospel truths and
revelations; to another the word of knowledge, or discerning of remote things,
and prophetical predictions, by the same Spirit; to another faith of his being
Divinely assisted to produce supernatural effects; to another miraculous gifts
of healing Diseases without use of means, by the same Spirit; to another the
working of miracles, or the (...).
utmost activity and energy of powers in the highest instances and effects of
them, of which sort are raising the Dead, casting out Devils, inflicting bodily
torments on contumacious Sinners, etc. to another prophecy, or exposition of
Scripture and inspired; Hymns to another discerning of Spirits, both in seeing
into men's spiritual thoughts and intentions, and also in discerning who wrought
true Miracles, and who Satanical Delusions, who were divinely inspired, and who
were mere Pretenders; to another the ecstatick gift of speaking diverse kinds of
tongues in such rapturous transports as permitted them not to stay to interpret
what they said, and made them afterward forget it; to another the gift of
interpreting into the vulgar language of any in the Congregation those strange
tongues. But all these diversities of gifts works that one and the self same
Spirit, dividing all these different gifts to every man severally as he will, 1
Cor. 12.4, 8, 9, 10, 11. And seeing it is the same Spirit or Holy Ghost, which
is the Author and Giver of them all; therefore are they all indifferently
called by either name. For sometimes all these extraordinary gifts, both the
power of miracles, and the gift of tongues and prophecy, are called the Spirit.
Thus when the Apostles began to speak with tongues, and to prophecy, as well
as to work miracles and heal diseases, it is said that the Spirit was poured
out upon them, Acts 2.17, 18, 19; and all these varieties of gifts o^ one sort
or other, which are reckoned up by St Paul in this twelfth Chapter to the
Corinthians, are attributed to the Spirit, and said to be wrought by it; and
the Apostles being filled with the Holy Ghost, and speaking with tongues, is
called their speaking by the spirit, -- they were all filled with the Holy
Ghost, says St Luke, and began to speak as the Spirit gave them utterance, Acts
2.4. And in like manner at other times all these same powers, whether of
understanding or action, of tongues or miracles, are called the Holy Ghost.
Thus the gifts of signs and wonders, and diverse miracles, are reckoned among
the gifts of the Holy Ghost, Heb. God, says Saint Paul, bearing the Apostles
witness, with signs, and wonders, and diverse miracles, and other gifts of the
Holy Ghost, ver. 4. And the signs and wonders which were done by the hands of
the Apostles, particularly that of healing the lame man, so much taken notice
of Acts 3; is said to be the witness of the Holy Ghost, Acts 5.12, 32.

Thus, I say, by reason that all these extraordinary gifts, whether relating to
our minds in knowledge and speaking with tongues, or to our executive powers,
in healing diseases, and working miracles, proceed all from the self same Holy
Ghost or Holy Spirit; the gifts of either sort are called indifferently by
either name, being sometimes called the Spirit, and sometimes the Holy Ghost.

But although, as I say for this reason the words Spirit and Holy Ghost are
sometimes used promiscuously to signify all or any of these extraordinary
gifts indifferently; yet, what is very material to our purpose, sometimes, nay
very frequently, they are See the excellent Dr Patrick's Witness to Christ,
part 1. chap. 7.
distinguished. And then by the Holy Ghost is meant not all extraordinary gifts
indifferently, but particularly those which respect our understandings, not
executive powers, consisting rather in illumination, than in power and action;
of which sort are the gift of tongues, of prophecy, of discerning Spirits, of
knowledge, of revelation, and such like. Thus the lying against that part of the
gift of discerning Spirits, which consisted in understanding the thoughts and
purposes of the heart, is called lying to the Holy Ghost. For so St Peter, who
was endowed with this gift, tells Ananias, when he would have imposed upon him;
Why has Satan filled thine heart, says he, to lie to the Holy Ghost? Acts
5.3. And St Stephen's being filled with an extraordinary revelation of Christ's
sitting at God's right hand in Heaven, is called his being filled with the Holy
Ghost, Acts 7.55. But more especially the gift of Tongues and Prophecy is
dignified with that name. Thus in the 10th Chapter of the Acts, when the
Gentiles in Cornelius's house begun to speak with Tongues upon St Peter's
preaching; it is said, that the Holy Ghost fell on all them that heard the
word, and that on the Gentiles was poured out the gift of the Holy Ghost, v.
44, 45, 46. The Disciples at Ephesus, who being baptized with the Baptism of
John, cannot be supposed ignorant of the many miraculous Cures so much talked
of among the Jews, and of the strange effects of the Spirit in Jesus whom John
preached; did yet tell Paul, that they had not so much as heard of the Holy
Ghost, Act. 19.2; which might very well be, because the Holy Ghost, or gift of
Tongues and Prophecy, were not given till after Jesus was glorified, Joh. 7.39.
But upon the preaching of St Paul they were made partakers of it, for when Paul
laid his hands on them, the Holy Ghost came upon them, and they spoke with
tongues, and prophesied, Act. 19.6. And to name no more instances in this
matter, that place which I now hinted in the 7th Chapter of St John, is a full
proof of this restrained acceptance. For there after all the instances of
curing diseases, casting out Devils, and other effects of the Spirit in
miraculous operations, which Christ showed wheresoever he came; it is yet
expressly affirmed, that the Holy Ghost was not yet given, because Jesus was not
yet glorified by his Exaltation to the right hand of God, v. 39. The Holy
Ghost, i. e. these gifts of Tongues, of Prophecy, and the like, which are all
that remained still to be shed abroad, and which came upon the Apostles at the
descent of the Holy Ghost at Pentecost, Act. 2.

Thus is the Holy Ghost set to denote, not all the miraculous and extraordinary
gifts of the Spirit promiscuously, but particularly those which respect the
mind or understanding; such as the gift of Tongues, of Prophecy, of deep
Knowledge, and the like.

And on the other side as for the word Spirit, it is set to express, not all
extraordinary gifts and effects of the Spirit in general, but those by name
which respect our executive, not knowing powers, and which consist, not in
illumination, but in action. Of which sort are the gift of healing diseases, of
casting out Devils, of raising the dead, and other miraculous operations. Thus
the miraculous courage and valor which was given to Othoniel, is called the
Spirit of the Lord, Judge. 3.10; as is that likewise which was given to Gideon,
Judge. 6.34; and the miraculous strength of Samson is called the Spirit of the
Lord upon Samson, Judge. 14.6. And upon Christ's working the miraculous cure upon
the man with the withered hand, St Matthew applies to him that saying of the
Prophet, the Spirit of the Lord came upon him, Mat. 12.18; and his casting out
Devils he himself attributes to the Spirit of God, I, says he, by the spirit of
God cast out devils, v. 28.

As by the Holy Ghost therefore are meant particularly the gifts of
illumination in Tongues and Prophecy; so by the Spirit are signified the gifts
of Power in healing diseases, casting out Devils, and doing mighty and
miraculous works.

And both these together take up the full compass of the extraordinary gifts of
the Spirit, and are both distinctly expressed by St Peter, when he says, that
Jesus was anointed with the holy Ghost, and with Power, Act. 10.38.

These then are the several meanings of the words, Holy Ghost, and holy Spirit.
They denote, as the third Person in the Trinity, the Holy Ghost himself; so
also those gifts and effects which proceed from him. Whether those gifts are
ordinary, either in the endowments of our minds, or the virtuous tempers and
dispositions of our wills and hearts; or extraordinary and miraculous. Wherein
yet we must observe this difference, that the gifts of the executive powers in
healing diseases, casting out Devils, working Miracles, are by a peculiar name
called the Spirit; and the gifts of the knowing or understanding Faculties, in
Prophecies, Revelations, speaking with diverse sorts of Tongues, are by a
contradistinct name called the Holy Ghost.

And thus having shown what is meant by the Holy Ghost, I proceed now to show,

2. What is meant by sinning against it; and which of all those which are
committed against it, is the unpardonable sin.

The only way whereby any men are capable to sin against God, as was observed,
is by affront and dishonor; for God is out of our reach for any other sort of
injury, and we cannot otherwise hurt him, than by showing our contempt and
disrepect of him.

And in regard the Holy Ghost in his own person is very and essential God, this
must needs be the only way whereby we can sin against him likewise. We cannot
injure him in his Nature, but only in his Honor; but then we sin against him,
when we walk cross to him, and oppose him, or any way slight and contemn,
undervalue or reproach him, or any of those excellent and Divine gifts which
proceed from him.

Now this we do more or less in every sin. For this Spirit of God is an
universal instrument of faith and good life; it has taken the utmost care by
miracles, and other its convictive evidences to evince the truth of Christ's
Doctrine; and does now still by his daily suggestions and solicitations excite
men to the observance of it. And seeing the Spirit of God has shown it self so
much concerned for our faith and obedience; every act of unbelief and
disobedience is a direct opposition to it, and reproach of it, and therefore is
a sin against it.

But every such sin is not the unpardonable fault here mentioned. For our very
wilful sins themselves, as has been shown, are not desperate under Christ's
Religion, the Gospel being a Covenant that does not damn men upon all voluntary
sin, but encourages their repentance with the promise of pardon; so that
although all our sins are against God and his Spirit, they are not
irremissible, but will be remitted to every man who repents of them.

It is not every sin against the Spirit of God then, which this place in St
Matthew threatens so severely. But the unpardonable sin is a sin by it self; it
has something peculiar in it from all other sins, which by shutting us out from
all possibility of repentance, excludes it from all hopes of being forgiven.

And indeed it is plainly this. It is a sinning against the Holy Ghost in the
last sense, as it signifies not only the power of miracles, but also the gift
of tongues, and other illuminations of the Holy Ghost, which came down upon the
Apostles at Pentecost; and it is such a sinning against these, as is
particularly by reviling and blaspheming them. This, and none other, I take to
be the sin here mentioned.

For the clearer discerning whereof, we will consider the sins against the Holy
Ghost in all the acceptations before laid down; and in all of them, except the
last, we shall find room for pardon and remission.

First then, to sin against the Holy Ghost, as it signifies the ordinary
endowments, and virtuous tempers of our minds and wills, is not the
unpardonable sin that is here spoken of. For every sin against any particular
virtue is a sin against the Holy Ghost in that sense. Every act of drunkenness,
for instance, is against the gift of sobriety; and every act of uncleanness is
against the gift of continency; and so it is in the several actions of all
other sorts of sin. But now as for all these, the great offer and invitation of
the Gospel is, that men would accept of mercy upon repentance. The Incestuous
Corinthian sinned deeply against the grace of chastity, and he repented, and
was forgiven; St Peter denied his Lord and upon his repentance he was also
pardoned; and the same Grace has been allowed, as we have seen, to all other
wilful sinners.

Nay in this sort of sinning against the Holy Ghost, viz. by sinning against
those Christian gifts and graces which he works in us, there is mercy to very
great degrees. For sometimes we do not hearken to his holy motions, but fall
into lesser sins and offensive indecencies, notwithstanding all his virtuous
suggestions and endeavors to the contrary: and then he is troubled and grieved
at us, Ephesians. 4.30. And at other times we venture upon more heinous crimes, which
quite lay waste the conscience, and undo all the virtuous temper and resolution
of our souls, so that we lie long in our impenitence, as David did in the
matter of Vriah, and are almost hardened in our wicked way before we are able
again to recover out of it: and in these offenses the Spirit has been so much
affronted, and his importunate suggestions so frequently thrown out, that he is
almost ready to forsake us, and to leave us to our selves, so that it may be
called a quenching of him, 1 Thessalonians. 5.19. But although the last of these
especially be very dangerous; yet is neither of them desperate. But after we
have been guilty of them, God continues still to make offers and invitations,
and by his long-sufferance, and his gracious providence, and the repeated
calls of his Word and Ministers; he still endeavors to recover us to pardon,
by recalling us to repentance. Yea the holy Spirit it self makes fresh assaults
upon us, and tries again whether we will hearken to it, and be relieved by it;
as it was with David after he had complained of his being deprived of Gods
presence, and of the holy Spirit's being taken from him, Psalm. 51.11; and as it
is with every other reclaimed back-slider.

The sinning against the Holy Ghost therefore in this sense, as it signifies
the ordinary gifts and graces of the Holy Ghost, is far from being the
unpardonable sin, and is manifestly under the grace of pardon and repentance.

Secondly, Nor is a sin against the extraordinary gifts of casting out Devils,
healing diseases, working miracles, or other things called the Spirit, that
unpardonable sin which is here intended. To blaspheme the Spirit, it is true,
comes very near it, and when men are once gone on to that, God is very nigh
giving of them up, and using no more means about them to bring them either to
Faith or Repentance, which are the only way to pardon and forgiveness. But
although this pitch of sin be extreme dangerous, yet in great likelihood it is
not wholly desperate; for after all the dirt that men had thrown upon this
evidence, viz. the miraculous operation wrought by Christ whilst he continued
upon earth, God was still pleased to use some means further to bring them to
believe; and that was the evidence of the Holy Ghost which came down to
complete all after that Jesus was glorified, Act. 2. This great proof, which
was to be poured out upon the Disciples at Pentecost, and upon other Christians
at the Imposition of their hands for a good while after, might effect that
wherein the other had failed, and be acknowledged by those very men who had
blasphemed the former. So that their case, notwithstanding it were gone extreme
far, was not for all that quite hopeless, because one remedy still remained
which God resolved he would use to reclaim them, though after that he would try
no more. The blaspheming of the Spirit then was very near the unpardonable,
because unamendable, sin, but yet it was not fully grown up to it; it was in
the next degree to unpardonable, but yet, if it went no further, it might be
pardoned still.

And of this I think we have a clear proof, even in those blasphemous
Pharisees, whose reviling of the Spirit was the occasion of all this discourse.
For as for the Spirit, they blasphemed it in this very Chapter, when upon
occasion of the miraculous cure of the man with the withered hand, v. 13; and
of Christ's casting out of Devils, v. 28; both which were so manifestly wrought
before their eyes, that none of them durst question, or deny the working of
them; they go blasphemously to charge these evident effects of the Spirit upon
the power of Magic, and to say that these works of God were performed by the
Devil. For when these mighty effects of the Spirit were urged to them in behalf
of Jesus, they answered and said, says St Matthew, this Fellow does not cast
out Devils, but by Beelzebub the Prince of the Devils, v. 24. Here is a
reproach to these miraculous gifts of the Spirit, as great as can be invented;
for it is nothing less than an attributing them to the most foul and loathsome
Fiends in Nature, even to the very Devils themselves. But yet this Blasphemy,
as dangerous as it was, is not utterly unpardonable and hopeless. For our Lord
himself in this very Chapter encourages their hopes, by giving them a promise
that some further means should still be used to cure their Infidelity, after
that they had blasphemed this; telling these very men, that the sign of his
Death and Resurrection, with the other evidences of the Holy Ghost which were
to ensue upon it, should be a further argument to satisfy them in what they
inquired after, viz. his being the Messiah, or the Son of God. For when certain
of the Pharisees, presently upon his finishing this Discourse of their
Blaspheming of the Holy Spirit, v. 37, made Answer to him saying, Master, we
would see a sign from thee to confirm to us the truth of that pretension: he
answered, as St Matthew goes on, an evil and an Adulterous Generation seeks a
sign, and there shall no further sign be given it, but only the sign of the
Prophet Jonas, and that indeed shall. For as Jonas was three days and three
nights in the Whales Belly, and was afterward delivered out of it to go and
preach to the Ninevites: so shall the son of man be three days and three nights
in the heart of the earth, and after that rise again to preach by his Apostles
to you and all the world, sending to you, for a further evidence still, the
Holy Ghost, v. 38, 39, 40.

So that as for this blasphemy of the spirit, wherewith the Pharisees reviled
it, it was not utterly unpardonable, but was still within the possibility of
pardon. For after they had committed it, Christ promised them a further
Argument in his Resurrection after the Example of Jonas, which should be a new
sign added to all that they had already seen, to gain them over to faith or
belief, and thereby to pardon and forgiveness; every sin being pardonable to
him that believes.

And this pardonableness of blaspheming of the spirit, our Lord further
intimates in that very place, by a wary change of the phrase when he comes to
speak of the unpardonableness of it; calling the unpardonable blasphemy, not a
blasphemy against the spirit, (although it was the spirit which was indeed
blasphemed v. 24; and whereof he had just made mention, v. 28;) but a blasphemy
against the Holy Ghost, which being, as St John says, John 7.39.
not yet given, could not yet be blasphemed, v. 31, 32.

But

Thirdly, The desperate and unpardonable sin here mentioned, which shall never
be forgiven, neither in this world, nor in that which is to come, is a sin
against the last and greatest evidence of all, viz. the gift of tongues, of
prophecy, and of other things called the Holy Ghost. In all the other evidence
that came before to win men to a belief of Christ's Religion, which is the only
means of pardon to the World; God had still a reserve, and resolved upon some
further course if they proved ineffectual. If the testimony of John Baptist to
Christ's being the Lamb of God, if the message of an Angel at his conception,
the Star at his birth, and the Quire of Angels at his entrance into the World;
if the innocence of his life, the wisdom of his words, and the mightiness of
his wonders in commanding the winds and seas, in curing diseases, in casting
out Devils, in restoring the weak to strength, and the dead to life; if all
these prove unsuccessful, and unable to persuade an Infidel, and perverse
Generation: yet still God resolves to try one means more, which before that
time the World never saw nor heard of, and that is the ample and most full
effusion of the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles at Pentecost, and upon others at
the imposition of their hands for a long time after. This further evidence
shall still be given to subdue the stubbornness of men's unbelief, which had
proved too hard for all the former. When I am departed from you, says our
Savior to his Apostles, I will send the Holy Ghost, who is the Comforter or
(...)*
Advocate, unto you. And when he is come, he shall plead my Cause more
convincingly, than the operations of the Spirit have done hitherto. For he
shall reprove and (...).
convince the world, and those who remained Infidels after they had seen all
the evidence of the Spirit, of their own sin in not believing on me, and of my
righteousness and truth in saying I am the Messiah, because he shall show that
I am owned above, and am gone to my Father, whence I have sent him down so
plentifully upon you, John 16.8, 9, 10. But when once God had given this proof,
he had done all that he designed: for this is the last remedy which he had
decreed to make use of to cure the infidelity of an unbelieving Age. So that if
men shall use it, as they have done all that went before; and if instead of
being persuaded by it, they shall proceed not only to slight and despise, but,
what is more, to revile and blaspheme it, as they have already done with the
Spirit; then is the irreversible Decree gone out against them, and God is
unalterably resolved to strive no more with them, but to let them dye in their
unbelief. If they should be won by it indeed, and believe upon it; be their
former offenses what they will, no less than a blaspheming of the Spirit, yet
may they justly expect to be pardoned. For the offer of Grace is universal,
Whosoever believes and is baptized shall be saved, Mark 16.16: and nothing is
impossible to him that believes, Mark 9.23. But when once men have gone so far
as to be guilty of it, their sin is unpardonable, because their Faith is
impossible. For they have rejected all the evidence which any man can urge for
their conviction: seeing they have despised all that which God has offered.
Their infidelity is stronger than can be cured, by any Argument that Christ
either has, or will afford to prevail over it; so that they must dye in their
sin, and there is no hope for them.

Indeed if God so please, there is no question but that after they have once
blasphemed it, he can still so melt and soften, fashion and prepare their
minds, that afterward they shall hearken to the incomparable evidence of the
Spirit and the Holy Ghost, which to any honest mind are irresistible. But this
sin is of so provoking a nature, that when once they are guilty of it he will
not. He has past an irreversible Decree upon them, never more to meddle with
them; so that they never will be pardoned, because, as things stand, they never
will be reclaimed. Which is the very reason which the Apostle himself gives of
the desperate state of Apostate Christians. For by renouncing of that faith,
which, upon the evidence both of the spirit, and the Holy Ghost, they had been
before convinced of; they despite, says he, the Spirit of Grace, as it implies
both the Spirit and the Holy Ghost too, so that as for them, it is impossible
to renew them again unto repentance; that being such a sin as God will never
give repentance to, Heb. 6.6.

The sinning against the Holy Ghost in this sense then, as it denotes the gift
of tongues, of prophecy, etc. which is the last evidence that God is resolved
to make use of for the conversion of an unbelieving World, is that unpardonable
sin which shall never be forgiven.

And yet even here in this limited and contracted sense of the word Holy Ghost,
we must still proceed with some caution. For it is not every affront and
dishonor that is put upon these gifts, which is the sin here styled
irremissible. Simon Magus cast a very high indignity and reproach upon them in
his actions: for he went about to purchase the gift of tongues, and other
sacred illuminations called the Holy Ghost, which fell upon men at the
imposition of the Apostles hands, as if they had been only a trick to get
money, or a fit thing to drive a trade withal, and make a gainful merchandise;
When Simon saw that through the laying on of the hands of the Apostles the Holy
Ghost was given, he offered them money, says St Luke, saying, Give me also this
power, that on whomsoever I lay hands, he may receive the Holy Ghost, Acts
8.18, 19. This was a very great abuse, and a most unworthy comparing of the
heavenly and holy Spirit of God to a mercetable ware, and vendible commodity;
thinking it fit to serve any ends, and to minister to the basest purposes of
filthy lucre and covetousness. But yet this sin against the Holy Ghost in its
strictest acceptance, was not the unpardonable sin; it came very near it
indeed, and would hardly be remitted; but still in all likelihood it was
remissible. And therefore St Peter, although he be very severe upon this sordid
man for the high affront, does not yet pronounce an irreversible doom of
damnation upon him, but on the contrary exhorts him to repent, that the sin of
his heart may be forgiven. Repent, says he, of this thy wickedness, and pray
God, if perhaps the thought of thine heart may be forgiven thee, ver. 22.

But that which is the desperately damning sin against the Holy Ghost, which
shall never be forgiven either in this world, or in that which is to come; is
the sinning against it, not by interpretation only in our actions, but directly
in our words and expressions. It is our speaking reproachfully and slanderously
of it, as the Pharisees did of the spirit when they attributed it to Beelzebub.
And therefore it is expressly called the speaking blasphemously against the Holy
Ghost. Whosoever speaks (...).
blasphemously against the Holy Ghost when he shall come, it shall never be
forgiven him, neither in this world, nor in the world to come, Matthew. 12.21,
32. The great weight lies in that, for this heavy doom he denounced upon them,
says St Mark, because they said he has an unclean spirit, Mark 3 30.

And thus at length we see what that sin against the Holy Ghost is, whose doom
is so dreadful, and whose case is so desperate under the Gospel. It is nothing
less than a slandering and reviling, instead of owning and assenting to that
last evidence, which God has given us of the truth of the Gospel in the gifts
of tongues, prophecy, and other extraordinary illuminations called the Holy
Ghost. So that no man who ownes Christ's Religion, and thinks he was no
Impostor, and believes that these miraculous gifts of the Holy Ghost were no
magical shows or diabolical delusions, can ever be guilty of it. No, before he
arrive to that, he must not only be an Infidel to the faith, but also a
Blasphemer of it; he must not only disbelieve this last and greatest evidence,
but disparage and rail against it. If then there be any man who ownes Christ's
Authority, and obeys his Laws, and believes his Gospel, and hopes in its
promises, and fears its threatenings, and expects that every word of that
Covenant, which was confirmed to us by the infallible evidence of the Spirit
and the Holy Ghost, shall come to pass; he is not more guiltless of any sin,
than of this against the Holy Ghost; for he does not so much as slight and
disparage, but ownes and submits to it.

If good men therefore are afraid by reason of the irremissibleness of the sin
against the Holy Ghost; they fear where they need not, and their scruple is
utterly unreasonable and groundless, For let it be as unpardonable as it will,
that shall not hurt them, for they can never suffer by it, since, whilst they
continue such as now they are, they cannot possibly be guilty of it, or of any
thing that comes near it.

CHAP. VII. The Conclusion.
The CONTENTS.
Some other causless scruples. The point of growth in Grace more largely
stated. A summary repetition of this whole Discourse. They may dye with courage
whose Conscience does not accuse them. This accusation must not be for idle
words, distractions in Prayer, etc. but for a wilful transgression of some Law
of Piety, Sobriety, etc. above mentioned. It must further be particular and
express, not general and roving. If an honest man's heart condemn him not for
some such unrepented sins, God never will.

BEsides these scruples already mentioned, some good minds may be put in fear,
and doubt of the safety of their present state, because St John says, that
whosoever is born of God sins not, being no longer a child of God if he do,
1 John 3.6, 9.

But the sin here spoken of, as was observed Book 4. Chap. 2.
above, is defined by St John himself at the fourth verse of this Chapter, to
be not every deviation or going beside the Law, but a wilful transgression and
(...).
rejecting of the Law it self. And this indeed is inconsistent with a
regenerate state, and puts us out of Gods favor, making us liable to eternal
destruction. But then the case for these sins is not desperate, seeing if once
we forsake them, and repent of them, we are as safe again as ever we were
before we committed them. For our repentance will set us straight; and if we
transgress not wilfully again, we are without the reach of condemnation.

Others doubt whether when once they have wilfully sinned they ever can repent,
or shall afterward be pardoned, because they read of Esau, that after he had
sold his birthright with the blessing that attended it, when he would have
inherited it afterward he was rejected, and found no place of a (...).
change of mind or repentance, though he sought it carefully with tears, Heb.
12.17.

In answer to this it will be sufficient to observe, that this change of mind
or repentance which Esau sought, but could not find, was not in himself, but in
his Father Isaac.

It was not in himself, I say, for there he did find a place for it, being he
was really possessed of it. For he was heartily sorry for his former folly in
parting with his birthright; and for his present unhappiness in being cozened
of his Father Isaacs blessing, and he sought to have them reverst with bitter
cries, and importunate desires, and much unfeigned entreaties; which clearly
show that Esaus own mind was changed abundantly.

But that repentance, or change of mind in reversing of the blessing, for which
he labored hard, but without effect, was in his Father Isaac. The good Old man
had already pronounced the blessing upon Jacob, and when Esau most earnestly
entreated him to reverse it, he told him flatly he would not: I have blessed
him* says he, yea and he shall be blessed, Genesis 27.33. For the story, as it is
there recited, is plainly this. When Isaac bid his Son Esau provide him some
Venison, that he might eat thereof, and bless him before he died: Jacob, by the
counsel and assistance of his Mother Rebecca, counterfeited both the person and
the Venison of Esau, and going in therewith to his Father before Esau returned,
craftily stole away the blessing from him. And when Esau came in afterward to
receive the blessing which Isaac his Father had promised him, he tells him that
Jacob his Brother had come with subtilty before him, and under a crafty
disguise had taken it away from him. Verse 37.
For I have made him thy Lord, says he, and all his brethren have I given to
him for servants. And although Esau entreated his Father to reverse it, ver.
34, 38.
and cried, as it is there said, with a great and exceeding bitter cry; yet
Isaac would not change his mind, or alter what he had pronounced: I have
blessed him, 33.
says he, yea and he shall be blessed. This reversion of the blessing, and
repentance or change of mind in his Father Isaac, was that which Esau
endeavored after, and which, as St. Paul here says, he sought carefully with
tears. But as he observes out of this story all was in vain, for it would not
be granted him. When he sought to inherit the blessing, his suit was not
granted but rejected; for Isaacs Decree was past, and he found no place of
repentance, or way to make him change his mind; although he sought that (...).
change carefully with tears.

In this place then the Apostle says not at all that it was impossible for Esau
to repent of his sins against God, or that God would not forgive him upon his
repentance: but only that Isaac would not repent of his decree, or reverse that
blessing which he had pronounced upon Jacob. Which inflexibleness of Isaac he
does indeed make use of in these verses to illustrate Gods inexorableness
toward some sinners; but then those are not all wilful sinners indifferently,
but only Apostates, who have wilfully renounced their Christianity, which, as
we have seen before, is a sin that God will afford no more grace, or place of
repentance to. And this, as I take it, appears plainly from the foregoing
verses. Take care, says he, lest that which is lame, or the weak Christian, be
turned out of the way of his Christian profession through fears of Persecution,
v. 13; Look diligently lest any man fail, or fall from the Grace or Gospel of
God, v. 15; which I exhort you the more earnestly to do, because if any man
does reject all those Gospel-blessings and privileges, which in that Religion
which you have received are now offered to him, and apostatize from them; God
will never afford him the tender of them again, but will be as unalterable in
his Decree against him, as Isaac was in his against Esau, who, as you know from
the story, after once he had mist of the blessing, found no place of
repentance, though he sought it carefully with tears, v. 17.

Others again are troubled in mind, and are afraid lest their Souls are yet in
danger, because they do not perceive themselves to grow in grace, and to be
increased in goodness. They complain that their spiritual life is at a stand,
and that they are not more devout and piously affected, more virtuous and
better Christians than they were for some considerable time before. And this
makes them jealous lest they should pass for idle servants, who have not used
and improved their Talents and who shall be dealt with at the last Day as if
they had abused them.

To speak clearly to this business, and yet to be as brief as conveniently I
can, it is first observable, that to grow in grace is the same thing as to grow
in virtue and goodness, or to go on to higher measures of life and perfection
in any, or in all the instances of duty and obedience. For an obedient life, as
I have largely shown, is that sole instance and proof of grace, which can
render any of us acceptable in Gods sight, and whereupon the Gospel encourages
us to hope for pardon and a happy Sentence at the last Judgment. So that if any
man's life is more perfect than it was, if he grows in doing good, and keeping
back from evil, and goes on higher still in performing all Gods Commandments;
if he begins to have a greater honor for God, to be more careful to please,
and more afraid to offend him; if he is more forward to depend upon his
Providence, to trust in his Promises, to resign himself up to his Will, and to
submit to his pleasure, to praise him for all his Excellencies and Disposals,
and to perform all his Precepts: if he is more humble and heavenly-minded,
chaste and temperate, just and charitable; if he is more meek and gentle,
courteous and affable, quiet and peaceable, more ready to repair wrongs, and to
forgive injuries than formerly: if he thus advances to higher measures, to
greater ease, or to more constancy and evenness of obedience in any, or in all
instances of Duty toward God and men, and that in all relations; his virtue is
in its spring, and is still going on; he grows in grace, and God will
accordingly reward him.

One particular Virtue there is, which men are wont to look at more especially
in this matter, and that is Prayer. They measure their growth in grace by their
improvement in this, and think their spiritual life is then most perfect, when
their Devotions are most enlarged. Which they conclude they are, not when they
are put up with the greatest trust and dependence, submission and resignedness
to God Almighty, or with any other of those obedient tempers implied in Prayer
which are apt to influence our whole lives: but when they are accompanied with
the most sensible joys, and ravishing transports, and unusual height of
fervency and affection. So that if at any time they can pray more passionately,
and put forth more intense desires, and work themselves up to more heavenly
raptures than ordinarily they have been able to attain to; they fancy that they
do indeed grow in grace, and are become higher in Gods favor and acceptance.
But if ever this service happens to be more irksom to them, and they discharge
it with much backwardness and weariness, dullness and indifference; they think
God frowns upon them, and has deserted them, and that their grace is in a
declining state, and sinking down to nothing.

But this is a very uncertain and dangerous mark for any man in this case to
judge by, and will very often deceive him that builds upon it. For these
fervent heats, and delightsom transports of Devotion, are not so much a duty as
a privilege, which all tempers cannot attain to, but only those that are
naturally disposed for it: so that a growth in them, is not a growth in saving
grace, but rather in sensible joy and happiness, and renders us not so truly
gracious in Gods eyes, as happy in our own. Besides, as an improvement in these
religious and pleasing raptures is not a growth in grace it self, so neither is
it always joined with it, and therefore no sure argument can be deduced from
it. For it is easily observable, that several persons of devotional tempers, who
are usually raised up to a high pitch, and ravished with most delightsom
transports in their Prayers; are yet very dangerously defective in many
instances of necessary Duty and a holy life. They fall oft-times, even whilst
they enjoy their blissful heats and heavenly raptures of Devotion, into damning
acts of fraud and injustice, anger and malice, strife and variance, fierceness
and revenge: they live in them, and are habitually inslaved to them, and yet
for all that they find no want of this delight in prayer, nor any abatement of
their devout intenseness of mind, and earnest fervor of affection still. But
now these men, being so maimed and partial in their service, and having no
entire obedience to confide in; they have not grace enough, as manifestly
appears from what has been Book 3.
said upon that point, to bear them out, nor so much virtue as God has
indispensably required to save them.

As for these qualifications of our Prayers then, those sensible joys and
passionate transports which accompany them; they are no instance of obedience
and saving grace themselves, nor any certain argument that those persons are
endowed with it who are allowed to enjoy them. They are oft-times found in ill
men, who, so long as they rest there and grow no better, cannot go to Heaven.

And then as for the other more acceptable and obedient tempers of our prayers,
such as trust and dependence, submission and resignedness, etc. which the men
of sober devotion most justly prefer before the former, as usually most others
do when once their religious heats are over: though a growth in them is truly a
growth in grace, yet a growth in them alone is not enough to save us. They
indeed in themselves are so many particular instances of obedience, and besides
that, they are also great means and proper instruments to produce others: so
that our growth in them is a growth in some particular Graces, and a very
likely way to grow in others also. But still we must remember that they are but
one part of saving Grace, and by no means the whole; so that till we are grown
in others too, we cannot hope to be saved by them. They are some instances of
virtue, and a growth in them is in part a growth in grace: but a growth in them
alone, or in any other particular virtues whatsoever, except we are grown up to
a saving pitch in all the rest, and are come up to an entire obedience, is not
enough to serve our turn. For this is the indispensable condition of the
Christian Religion, and this the Ephesians. 4.13.
perfect man and just stature in the Christian Faith; that we be grown up to an
habitual obedience in all our voluntary and chosen actions, not only to some
few, but to all the parts of Duty, and the Laws of God.

But if we would single out some one, or some few Virtues, from our growth and
improvement wherein we may justly presume that we have attained to saving
degrees in all the rest: St James directs us to the duties of the tongue, in
abstaining from backbiting, censuring, and evil-speaking, etc. which under all
the invitations of conversation, and the temptations of common life, is usually
the last point which good men gain, and that wherein Ecclus 19.16. and 14.1.
they, who scarce ever sin wilfully at all, or very rarely, are wont most
frequently through indeliberation and inadvisedness to miscarry. If any man,
says he, offends not in word, but has attained to an innocent and obedient
guidance of his tongue; that same man need not be defective in other duties, he
is a perfect man, and able also to bridle the whole body, Jam. 3.2.

Thus is men's growth in saving Grace, not a growth only in some one, or in some
few virtues; but in an universal and entire obedience. And this every Christian
is bound incessantly to endeavor after. The longer he lives, the higher
improvement ought he to make, and to attain every virtue in a larger measure,
and in greater firmness and perfection, than he had before. Grow in grace, says
St Peter, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, 2 Pet.
3.18. Forgetting those things which are behind me, and already attained, says
St Paul, and reaching out after those things which are still before me, I press
on forward toward the mark, that I may acquire a more complete growth than yet
I have. And let as many among you as be perfect, be thus minded, Phil. 3.13, 14.

Thus are all good Christians bound to advance still further in a virtuous
course, and the longer they live, to be still more uniform and constant, firm
and perfect in all instances of obedience and a holy life. But then this
obligation is not always laid upon them under the forfeiture of Heaven, but
when once they have attained so far as is indispensably necessary to their
acceptance, only of some higher rewards and greater degrees of happiness which
are to be enjoyed there. For there are different degrees in happiness,
answerable to the different measures in men's obedience: they that perform most,
shall be rewarded highest; but they who perform no more than is indispensably
required, although they miss of that accession of reward which by the Grace of
the Gospel is due to an eminent height of obedient endeavors, shall yet obtain
the pardon of their sins, and a state of joy and blessedness in Heaven, as well
as they who have endeavored and performed more. An entire obedience in all
chosen actions, and a particular repentance and amendment of all those sins
wherein at any time we have wilfully disobeyed God, is sufficient, as has been
shown, to secure the happiness of the next life. According as we have attained
to greater or lesser perfection in it, so shall the degrees of our reward there
be proportioned; but if we have arrived to it at all, we have as much to show
as is just necessary. And therefore whilst we are yet in the more imperfect
measures of it, and only thirst after a more perfect obedience, that we may
still be more acceptable to God, and have right to a more noble and excellent
reward; we are in a safe state, and have no need to disquiet our Souls with
fears and jealousies, lest they should eternally miscarry.

If any person then has used Gods Grace, and improved his Talents to this
measure, he has not been unprofitable and useless, but has profited so far as
is necessary to his happiness. He is bound indeed still to advance higher, and
in every instance of Virtue to improve further; but this he is, not under the
loss of Heaven, but only under the danger of falling back into such a state of
sin as would destroy the hopes of it again, and the forfeiture of greater glory
and rewards there when an entire obedience in all chosen instances, and a
particular reformation and repentance of all wilful sins is once secured, there
is so much growth in grace as is absolotely necessary; an exalted pitch and
complete measures of this obedience with more ease and pleasure, constancy and
evenness, with less mixture of voluntary sins which need particular repentance,
and with a greater freedom from innocent and unwilled infirmities, is necessary
to more absolute degrees and greater hights of glory: but till that can be had,
this is sufficient to a man's salvation.

Several other scruples there are which are wont to disquiet and perplex the
minds of good and honest people who are safe in Gods account, although their
Case seems never so hazardous in their own. And of this sort are their fears
that their obedience is unsincere, because they have an eye at their own good,
and a respect to their own safety; since they serve God in hopes to be better
by him, and out of a fear, should they disobey, of suffering evil from him.
They are afraid also that it is defective in a main Point, for they cannot love
and serve him in that comprehensive latitude which the Commandment requires,
viz. With all their heart, and with all their soul, and with all their mind.
They doubt they are past Grace and Pardon, because they have sinned after that
they have been enlightened, and that wilfully; and the Apostles affirms that for
such there remains no more Sacrifice for sins, Heb. 10.26. These doubts are
still apt to disturb their peace, and make sad their hearts; and some others of
like nature.

But of these and several others I have given sufficient Accounts above; such
as, I hope, may satisfy any reasonable man, who is capable to read and to
consider of them; and thither I refer the Reader, not thinking fit here to
repeat them.

And thus at last we have seen when an honest and entire obedience is taken
care for in the first place, how plainly groundless those fears are, which are
wont to perplex the thoughts of good and safe, yet ignorant and misguided
people about their state of happiness and salvation.

And now I have done with all those points which I thought necessary to be
enquired into, to the end that I might show every man now beforehand how he
stands prepared for the next world; and which at the beginning of this whole
Discourse I proposed to treat of. I have shown what that condition is of bliss
or misery, which the Gospel indispensably exacts of us, and that, as I take it,
so particularly, that no man, who will be at the pains to read and consider of
it, can overlook or mistake it; what those defects are, which it bears and
dispenses with; what those remedies and means of reconciliation are, which it
has provided for us; and, when all these are taken care for, how groundless all
those other scruples are, which are wont to disquiet honest minds about the
goodness of their present state, and their title to eternal salvation.

And upon the whole matter the sum of all amounts to this, that when Christ
shall come to sit in judgment at the last day, and to pass sentence of life or
death upon every man according to the direction of his Gospel, he will
pronounce upon every man according to his works. If he has honestly and
entirely obeyed the whole will of God in all the particular Laws
beforementioned, never wilfully and deliberately offending in any one
instance, nor indulging himself in the practice of any thing which he knows to
be a sin; he is safe in the Accounts of the last Judgment, and shall never come
into Condemnation. Nay if he has been a damnable offender, and has wilfully
transgressed either in one instance, or in many; in frequent repetitions of his
sin, or in few; yet if he repent of it before death seize him, and amend it ere
he is haled away to Judgment; he is safe still. For he shall be judged
according as his works then are when God comes to enquire of them; so that if
ever he be found in an honest obedience, observing everything which he sees to
be his duty, and wilfully venturing upon nothing which his Conscience tells
him is sinful; he is found in the state of Grace and Pardon, and if he die in
it, he shall be saved. All his unwill'd ignorances and innocent unadvisednesses
upon his Prayers for pardon and his mercifulness and forgiveness of other men,
shall be abated; all his other causes of fear and scruple shall be overlooked;
they shall not be brought against him to his Condemnation, but in the honest
and entire obedience which he has performed, in that shall he live.

If then we have an honest heart, and walk so as our own Conscience has nothing
whereof to accuse us; we may meet Death with a good Courage, and go out of the
World with comfortable Expectations. For if we have an honest and a tender
heart, whenever we sin wilfully and against our Consciences, our own Souls
will be our Remembrancers. They will be a witness against us both whilst we are
in this World, and after we are taken out of it, and brought to Judgment. Men's
Consciences, says the Apostle, shall accuse or excuse them, in the day when God
shall judge the secrets of men according to my Gospel, Romans 2.15.

Indeed if men have hardened their hearts in wickedness, and sinned themselves
out of the belief of their duty, having come to call evil, good; and good,
evil: then their Consciences having no further sense of sin, will have no
accusations upon it. But if they really believe the Gospel, and study to know
their duty, and desire to observe it, and are afraid to offend in any thing
which they see is sinful; whilst thus their heart is soft, and their Conscience
tender, they cannot venture upon any sin with open Eyes, but that their own
hearts will both check them before, and smite them afterward. They will have a
witness against them in their own bosoms, which will scourge and awake them, so
that they cannot approach death without a sense of their sin, nor go out of the
World without discerning themselves to be guilty.

If our own Conscience then cannot accuse us of the wilful and presumptuous
breach of any of Gods Commandments, and we know of none but what we have
repented of; we have just reason to take a good heart to our selves, and to
wait for death in hopeful expectations. If our own ^ Pet. 3.21.
hearts condemn us not, says Saint John, then have we confidence toward God, 1
John 3.21. There is no sin that will damn us but a wilful one, and when we sin
wilfully, if our heart is soft and honest, we sin willingly and against our
Conscience; our own heart sees and observes it before, and will keep us in mind
of it after we have committed it. So that if any man has a virtuous and a
tender heart, a heart that is truly d^sirous to obey obey God, and afraid in
any thing to offend him; when his Conscience is silent he may justly conclude
that his Condition is safe, for if it does not condemn him, God never will.

An honest man's heart, I say, must condemn him before he have sufficient reason
to condemn himself. And that too not for every idle word, or every fruitless
lust, or every dullness of spirit, and distraction in prayer, and coldness in
devotion, or such other mistaken marks whereby too many are wont to judge of
their title to salvation. No, Heaven and Hell are not made to depend upon these
things, but although a man be guilty of them, he may be eternally happy
notwithstanding them. But that accusation of his Conscience which may give an
honest man just reason to condemn himself, must be an accusation for a wilful
breach or deliberate transgression of some particular Law of Sobriety, Piety,
Justice, Charity, Peaceableness; it must accuse him of an unrepented breach of
some of those Laws above mentioned, which God has plainly made the terms of
life, and the condition of salvation.

And the accusation for the breach of these Laws must be particular and
express; not general and roving. For some are of so suspicious and timorous a
temper, that they are still suspecting and condemning of themselves when they
know not for what reason. They will indict themselves as men that have sinned
greatly, but they cannot show wherein; they judge of themselves, not from any
reason or experience, but at a venture, and by chance; they speak not so truly
their opinions as their fears; not what their understandings see and discern,
but what their melancholy suggests to them. For ask them as to any one
Particular of the Laws of God, and run them all over, and their Consciences
cannot charge them with any wilful, which is withal an unrepented transgression
of it. But let them overlook all Particulars, and pass a judgment of themselves
only in general, when they do not judge from particular instances, which are
true evidence, but only from groundless and small presumptions; and then they
pass a hard sentence upon themselves, and conclude that their sins are very
great and their condition dangerous.

But no man shall be sentenced at the last Day for Notions and Generalities:
but it is our particular sins which must then condemn us. For God's Laws bind
us all in single actions; and if our own Consciences cannot condemn us for any
one wilful, which is withal an unrepented action; God will not condemn us for
them altogether.

If our own heart therefore does not accuse us for the particular, wilful, and
unrepented breaches of some or other of those Laws above mentioned, which God
has made the indispensable condition of our acceptance; we are secure as to the
next World, and may comfortably hope to be acquitted in the last Judgment.
Being conscious of no wilful sin but what we have repented of, and by mercy and
forgiveness of other men, and our prayers to God, begging pardon for our
involuntary sins; we shall have nothing that will lie heavy upon us at the last
Day, but may go out of the World with ease, and dye in comfort. Our departure
hence may be in peace, because our appearance at Gods Tribunal shall surely be
in safety. For we shall have no worse charged upon us there, than we are able
here to charge upon our selves; but leaving this World in a good Conscience, we
shall be sentenced in the next to a glorious reward; and bid to enter into our
Masters joy, there to live with our Lord for ever and ever. Amen.

Soli Deo Gloria.
FINIS.

