Augustissimi CAROLI Secundi Dei Gratia ANGLIAE SCOTIAE FRANCIAE ET HIBERNIAE
REGIS Effigies
portrait A: Hertsens Fecit.

HONEY SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE.
royal blazon or coat of arms



A SERMON Preached before His MAJESTY AT White Hall. May 29th. 1668.

BY D. H. KILLIGREW Master of the SAVOY, and Almoner to his Royal Highness the
Duke of YORK.

Published by his Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON. Printed by T. R. for R. Royston, Bookseller to his most Sacred
Majesty. 1668.

A SERMON Preached before His MAJESTY. May 29th. 1668.
WISDOM does not only do her works well, but perceives that she does so,
delights in their Beauty, exults in remembrance of the mastered difficulty, and
triumphs ore the conquered Opposition: Thus God stood-off, as 'twere, from his
great work of the Creation when he had finished it applauded, and bles'd it;
prided himself, as I may say, in his noble performance; in that he had brought
light out of darkness, Order out of Chaos, a World out of nothing. In the like
manner, when he had here composed the Distractions and Confusions both in the
Church and State of Israel, by establishing David literally, and Christ
mystically, on the Throne of the Kingdom, he glorys in having brought about
his great Design; laughs at the fruitless Opposition of his Adversarys at home
and abroad, of the Philistines, the Moabites, the Ammonites, the Damascens, the
Amalekites, of the King of Zoba, and of all the turbulent and ambitious spirits
of the house of Saul: delights to recount their Might, and their Machinations,
the more to signalize their Overthrow, and to make his Victory illustrious. For
after all their rage, their malice, their Counsels, their combinations, their
seeming successes against him, the Issue was this. Yet have I set my King upon
my holy hill of Sion.

We may observe in the words these three things.

1. The Person established, My King, (i.e.) David literally so called, and
Christ Mystically. 2. His Establishment, I have set my King upon my holy hill
of Sion. 3. Gods Glorying in the fact, that he had done it with such a Non
obstante, notwithstanding such Opposition and Contradiction. Yet have I set my
King --
1. The Person established, My King, Gods King. Not only holy Scripture, but the
writings of Heathens declare Kings to be sacred persons, descended more
immediately from the Gods, and more particularly depending on them. Kings are
from Jupiter, says Callimachus, and nothing ever descended more sacred from
him. And Theocritus, Kings are the special Care of the Gods. And this
Epithete's affected by Homer, (...) (...) God-lov'd Kings. Indeed all Kings in
general are Gods, derive their Authority from him, govern by his Permission
and Providence, as himself testifies, By me Kings Reign. But then he delights
in a more especial manner to style Good Kings, his; to appropriate their
Persons, and own their Causes, to interpret all things done to them, as done to
himself, as at Verse 2. Why do-the Rulers take council together against the
Lord, and against his Anointed? Conspiracys against the King, are reckoned
Conspiracys against God; the resisting his Anointed, the resisting himself. And
thus, if it be a Glorious thing to be a King, it is a Blessed to be a Good King:
for as splendour attends Majesty and Greatness; protection, and safety, and
felicity, and the love of Heaven attend Righteousness. But let us see why
David is here more particularly called Gods King then others.

The First Reason we may say was, because he was a King of Gods Making, because
he brought him to the Throne, having no Title by Birth to it, a Cautis ovium
tuli te, I called him from the Sheep-book to the Scepter. And as these Persons
which are of our Election, preferring, or favoring, we call Ours; this is my
Scholar, my Soldier, my Officer, because he was of my nomination, my
choosing, my advancing: so David was called Gods King, because he was of his
choosing and advancing; his Right to the Crown, was his immediate nomination;
he had no other Interest in the Royalty, but the Interest he had in Gods
favor; and if he had not been Gods King, he had not been King of Israel.

2. David was called Gods King more particularly, by reason of his many
Deliverances of him; he preserved him, from the time of his first anointing by
Samuel, from the jealousy of Saul, and the malice of Saul's house; conducted him
through all the potent and perilous Oppositions of the Heathen, as I showed,
and left him not till he had set him on his holy hill of Sion (i.e.)
established him peaceably and Gloriously on the United Throne of Israel and
Judah. And for this reason David is not only called Gods King in my Text, but
in the following Verse, his Son, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten
thee. The day of his Redemption and Promotion, being counted the day of his
Creation. And the same words are applied to Christ in the like manner after his
Resurrection, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee. The day of his
deliverance from death and the Grave, is called the day of his Nativity or
Generation; the day in which God exalted him, and Invested him with Power, the
day in which he begot him.

3. David was called Gods King more particularly, because he was a King of his
likeing, as it is said, After his own heart. And in this sense also men say a
thing is theirs, when they approve it, and are pleased with it above things of
the like kind. Horace is my Poet, Tully is my Orator, Tacitus is my Historian,
because these hit my fancy and Genius. In the Books of the Kings of Israel and
Judah, and the Chronicles of their Acts, there is registed a long Catalogue of
them; but though they were all Kings of Gods people, they were not all Gods
Kings, in this last sense, Kings of his liking: he did not boast of many of
them, or own their proceedings, but of those only which executed Justice and
Judgment, destroyed Idolatry, and restored the true Worship; the others though
they wore the Crown, they wore not the Praise of being Kings of Gods liking;
they were of the royal Unction, but not of this divine Relation. And just after
this manner Christ esteemed his Kindred, not she that bare him, was his Mother;
nor those that descended of the same stock, were of his Alliance; but they that
heard his sayings, and did them, were his Mother, his Sisters, and his
Brethren. It Is not he that bears the Diadem and the Scepter, not he that is of
the Race of Kings, that is anointed by the Prophet, shooted for the people,
praised by the hired Historian, that is Gods King but he that does that which
is Righteous in his sight: the others may boast their Title from God, but they
can boast no title to him, to his Approbation and liking, and consequently not
to his Protection and Blessing. In the Hebrew Dialect, things that excel in
Greatness or Height above others, are entitled to God, tall Ceders are thus
styled Cedars of God, high Mountain, Mountain of God; great river, River of
God, etc. And Kings that excel only in might and magnificence, are but
entitled to God as Trees and Mountains, and we may say unto them, as the
Psalmist does to the high hills, Why leap ye so ye high hills? that is, why do
ye insult, or lift up your proud heads unto the clouds? Sion is Gods hill,
where he delights to dwell, Sion of an humbler and lower pitch, but more
pleasant and fruitful. It Is not the Bulk and large Demensions of any thing
that commends it to God, but the Virtue of it; not the King, mighty in his
Hosts, goodly in the Symmetry and Proportions of his Body, but the King that is
mighty in Goodness, whose Actions hold a just Symmetry and Proportion with
Gods Laws; 'twas not Saul higher than the People but David eminent in Piety,
with whom God made his Covenant of mercy, and set upon his holy Hill. Which
brings me to my second part, The Establishment of David.

I have set my King upon my holy hill of Sion. By four Circumstances observable
in the words, may be seen the extraordinary security in which God placed David
after all his Troubles. He set him on Sion, and Sion was a Fortress taken by
David from the Jebusites, who had made it the chief strength and Seat of their
Kingdom. and so, First, 'Twas a Fortification by Art. Secondly, 'Twas a Hill,
and that is a Fortification by Nature; such as must be ascended, before it can
be assaulted. Thirdly, 'Twas a holy Hill, and Holiness is another
Fortification, a Moral or Spiritual, stronger then either of the former, for
here God is the watchman, and concerned in the Defense. And therefore Fourthly,
It Is said My (i.e.) Gods holy hill of Sion, the place where he dwelt, and had
fixed his Tabernacle; God had other places of Religious worship in the land, but
Sion was the Metropolis to which the rest paid homage, and to which all the
Tribes came up thrice every year to offer their Oblation, and so was Gods by a
more excellent Title. And to storm this place was as vain an Enterprise (if
God did not first forsake it, drove away by the sins of the Inhabitants) as to
attempt to force Heaven it self: for he would sooner neglect the Government of
the World, then forget the Place where his Honor dwelt. So that David being
established on Sion, might defy all danger from the Princes his enemies abroad,
or from his ill-affected Subjects at home: nay he was so far from Fearing
from any of them, that he was Formidable to them, as the last Verse of this
Psalm shows. Be wise now therefore, O ye Kings -- Kiss the son (i.e.) pay
subjection to David himself (for that is the first sense of the words) least he
be angry, and ye perish --

Thus we see David, who for so many years together, fled from place to place
(as he describes his own condition) like a Partridge upon the mountains, fixed
and established like a Mountain, environed with a fourfold Fortification, as if
he had been within the Enclosures of Heaven it self: so that with a Pious
presumption he might well say, as he does, Psalm. 30. 6. I shall never be
removed, thou Lord of thy goodness have made my Hill so strong. And let no man
think much, that there was a time that he was deprest and afflicted, as many
are apt to take scandal when they read or hear such things as this, Insignem
pietate virum tot adire labores. Piety, should excel also in Sufferings; for
God by these ways conducts his servants to the Noblest ends, hardens and
prepares the Instruments of his Glory by afflictions, as men do those Tools
which they design for the toughest Employments, by several drenchings of them
in astringent Water. Prospera in plebem, ac vilia ingenia deveniunt, a constant
even Prosperity is the lot of mean Persons and Spirits, the Noble and
Magnanimous are opposed to the Storms and Outrages of Fortune; nor are they
otherwise to be distinguished from the Vulgar, then by these Encounters. That
Great Person, says Seneca, that never proved Adversity, is like a Champion
that enters the lists without an Antagonist; Coronam habet Victoriam non habet.
He may gain a Crown, but he never got a Victory. In a still calm of affairs God
also gets no Glory, he has no Field to show his Power, his Wisdom, and his
Goodness in, he cannot frustrate the Counsels of the wicked, and bring the
preparations of the Mighty to naught. It Is true, He governs all things at all
times, but every Act of his Providence, is not a Victory over his Enemies; and
though he disposes Crowns and Scepters as he pleases; it is when the wicked
resists that he says, Yet have I set my King -- And so I pass to my Third
Part, Gods glorying in his establishment of David.

The Holy Ghost in this Second Psalm, sets down the Method which the Enemies of
David used, to prevent his succeeding in the Throne, which is also the Scheme
ordinarily of all Sedition and Rebellion. First, The Heathen did rage, ( i.e.)
The Neighbor Princes were jealous and angry, out of apprehension of their own
Estates; and this is commonly the ground of Troubles: For a Kings own Subjects,
though they be malcontent, and bear him ill will in their hearts; yet they
often want Courage or Opportunity to execute it, till they are backed by a
Foraign Power. But then Secondly, The People, ( i.e.) Princes own People, begin
to imagine vain things; which may either mean false things which shall not take
effect; or Wicked which shall; for in both senses Vain is taken in the Hebrew.
In the Third place, The Kings of the Earth, and the Rulers take counsel
together, ( i.e.) The Neighbor Kings, and the Magistrates, and Great ones of
the Realm fall into Combinations, and Associations. And then Fourthly, Nothing
remains but open defection, the breach of all Covenants and Contracts, and
Sedition is heard in every man's mouth, as Verse the 3. Let us break their bonds
asunder, and cast away their Cords from us: Their bonds, and their cords, (
i.e.) both of the Lord, and of his Anointed, all Obligations both Humane and
Divine are Cancelled. By bonds, may be understood the softer and gentler Ties
of Natural Love and Loyalty, which every Subject owes unto his Sovereign: by
Cords, the stronger Obligations of Oaths, those Sacramental Chains that bind
men like Iron Shackles and Fetters. But both these are broken, and for fear
they should be again united, cast quite from them. And why was all this? as the
question is deservedly asked at v. the 1. with wonder and indignation: Why did
the Heathen rage? Why did the People imagine a vain thing? Why did they take
Counsel together? David was just to his Allies abroad, and gracious to his
Subjects at home, God prosper'd him, and made him Victorious in all his
Enterprises. Why Lord? To answer in the words of another in a like case,
Odiorum causae acriores, quia iniquiores, their hatred was the sharper and more
implacable, because it was the unjuster; Innocence is abhorred by the wicked,
more than Injury and Violence; The Religion and Piety of David was more
insupportable to his Enemies, than the Yoke of Tyranny and Oppression; and they
chose rather to bear the Iron Scepter of the Nations, or of a base Usurper,
than his holy and righteous Scepter. And this it was which made the
Establishment of David so difficult, because there was no Why, no Just cause
for the Aversion of his Enemies; had there been a Reason, it might have been
removed; had there been a Wrong, there might have been a Reparation: but
Perverseness and Impiety only governed, and God utters himself, as if he had
broke through some great Obstruction in setting David on the Throne. Like one
that for a long time rolled a stone against a Hill, which often returned upon
him; or Rowed against a strong Tide, which forced his Boat back, and when at
last by many a weary stretch and Strain of his Arms has got the better, fits
down, and reflects on what has past, congratulates his labor, and tells
himself what himself has done: Yet I have planted my Stone upon the top of the
Hill; or, yet I have stemmed this Churlish stream, and got my Boat a head of
it. So God is pleased to speak in the Restoring of David, as if he had been
hard put to it, and groaned under the performance, and Gloried in having at
last carried it through, Yet have I set my King --

But perhaps some will say, Is there any thing difficult to the Almighty? Could
not he have crushed the Cockatrice in the Shell? Dashed the yet infant-Plot
against the stones? Scattered his Enemies in their first Imaginations? Why did
he suffer them to Combine, before he confounded them? Confederate and grow to
strength, before he cast them down, and had them in derision? as it is said, v.
4. Even for this very reason, That he might not spoil such his Scene of
Laughter, prevent the Glory of his Triumph, obscure the wise Dispensations of
his Providence, that David might see the whole Wonder of his Deliverance, and
his wicked Adversaries the whole Folly of their Enterprise. A wise General will
not presently give on the Charge upon an Enemy passing a Foord, till a
considerable Party have gained the Bank; that he may not only show his Courage
but his Conduct; and cut off the adverse Power as well as repulse it. Thus,
though God had it in his hands to dissipate and discourage the first Attempts
of his own and David's Opposers, he chose rather to let them proceed and prosper
to a degree, that he might not only obstruct their wickedness but defeat it;
disturb the Conspiracy, but confound the Conspirators. And our Blessed Lord
practiced this piece of Policy, when he suffered the Devil by his wicked
Instruments, the Jews, to take away his Innocent Life, and lay him in the
Grave: For after Satan flattered himself that he had surpised his strong Foe,
he let him see he was surpised by him; that instead of receiving a Captive, he
had received a Conqueror within his Gates: one that sacked and despoyl'd his
Kingdom, dismantl'd his Forts, and razed his Strongholds. And this was a
performance worthy of that Triumphant Speech, O Death where is thy Sting! O
Grave where is thy Victory! A downright defeat is not so renowned to the
Conqueror, or so grievous to the Conquered, as to turn his Stratagems upon
himself, and to overthrow him by his own subtlety and Treachery. Again, to Mock
and Vex an Enemy, is a further degree of Revenge, than to destroy him. When the
Pirates of Cilicia began to treat some Passengers of Italy with the cruelty
they used unto their Prisoners, they cried out, They were Citizens of Rome, at
which Venerable name the Pirates pretended to fear, and commanded presently
Gowns to be brought, and put upon their Backs, and shoes on their feet; and
then with a seeming lowly observance besought them, To walk over the sides of
the Ship, and be free; telling them by way of excuse for their Violation of
them, When they met them next in that Attire they should not be ignorant of
their Quality; and with this derision threw them into the Sea, when the
unfortunate men refused to cast themselves. And the Enemies of David were such,
as God thought fit not only to destroy, but also to mock and vex, as it is said
verse. the 4, and 5. The Lord had them in derision -- And vexed them in his sore
displeasure. But How, and after What manner did he mock and vex them? By
letting them a long time plot and strengthen themselves, make a profuse expense
of Labor, money, and blood, by letting them persuade themselves they had
prevailed, that David was utterly excluded; and then after all, to show them
the despised and Rejected Son of Jesse set Gloriously on the Throne; their
Machin of Usurped Government, made a Pageant for his Triumph; all their
endeavors, all their glorying, serve but for this Occasion of Gods glorying
over them, Yet have I set my King upon my holy Hill of Sion.

I have done with the Words, which have been twice already eminently fulfilled;
Once as I have showed, in the Person of David. And a Second time, in the
Exaltation of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ into the Kingdom of Heaven,
after his Resurrection, as likewise in the setting up his Spiritual Throne in
the hearts of men. So that I may seem to assay an Impious thing, to make a
Third Application to any Mortal King whatsoever. But while I shall not parallel
the Divine and Mystical King, but at a distance adore the footsteps of his
Sufferings and Exaltation, and not compare them; their will be no danger to
show the Tracts and Lineaments that are between the Deliverance and
Establishment of David, and of our Gracious Sovereign, for the awaking our
Gratitude, and magnifying Gods mercies to this Nation.

The Application.
To observe the Method I began with. For the same Reasons and Respects that
David is called Gods King in my Text, our King may pretend to the Title, before
all the present Kings of the Earth.

First, He was a King of Gods particular and singular Advancing, and placing in
the Throne: though not called like David from being a poor Shepheard-boy to
Rule a Kingdom, but descended of a long and glorious Race of Kings; yet
recalled from a Forlorn exiled State, and a deposed Condition, to hold the
Scepter of his Royal Ancestors by a no less Divine Favor. So that whatever his
Title to the Crown was, we may truly say, Had he not been Gods King, he had not
been King of this Land.

Secondly, David was not only called Gods King, as we have showed, for his
Eminent Deliverance of him, but His Son. And whoever considers the many Risques
of our Sovereigns Life, the Prodigies both of his Dangers and Escapes, how God
snatched him out of the Battle, led him safe through the midst of his Enemies,
concealed him many days by a Divine Providence, after the manner the Ancients
feigned their Heroes were wrapped in a Cloud; and then, without the assistance of
Armies, by the same Invisible and Unresistable Hand, fixed him in his Throne:
must confess, we have not only reason to celebrate this Day, for his coming
into the World, or his coming to the Crown; for the Birth, I say, of his
Person, or the Birth of his Royal Dignity, but for his being Born Gods King,
and Gods Son, (i.e.) The King of his preservation, and the Son of his Promotion.

Thirdly, As David was called Gods King, because he was more pleased with him,
than with others; was the King of his liking, as well as of his Preserving and
Advancing: So the Wonderful Testimonies of Gods Love to our Sovereign,
warrants, nay obliges us to believe and revere him as Gods King also in this
sense, as the King of his liking, and after his own heart. And whom God has
approved let no man judge; whom he has Sealed, let no man dare to Censure; no
not in his thoughts. Princes then for the most part want Goodness, when their
People want Candor; and their defect of Virtue, is their Subjects defect of
Love and Loyalty. But if those were Gods Kings, Kings of his liking, Kings
after his own heart, that set up the True Worship, and discountenanced the
False, that executed Justice and Judgment in the Land, then Malice it self must
confess our King, is Gods King. David was renowned for that one Merciful Speech
upon his Return to his Kingdom, Shall there any man be put to death this day in
Israel? As it had been a thing to be abominated, to show Severity, when God had
showed him such singular Grace. But how many Shimei's, how many Railers, how
many Cursers? ('it is but a small thing which I have said) how many Capital
Enemies, how many Betrayers, how many Covenanters against him, and liars in
Wait for his Blood, did our David pardon upon his Return? 'Twas an Observation
of Old, -- regnabit sanguine multo Ad regnum quisquis venit ab exilio; regnabat
Sanguine parco, Reigns at this day, as one Elected to a Kingdom, that had a
Crown bestowed on him, and not as one that had recovered his own. So that as
the Virgins gave David the pre-eminence to Saul in the Songs of Victory and
Triumph, saying, Saul has slain his thousands, and David his Ten thousands: We
in the Songs of Mercy and Clemency, may give our King the pre-eminence to
David, and say, As David pardoned one single detractor, our Gracious Sovereign
gave life, and opportunity of Repentance to thousands of Traitors and
Murderers; and was truly in this, Gods King, and not only a King of his
liking, but a King that is like him, resembling him in one of his Noblest
Attributes, that of his Mercy. Those to whom Princes entrust the care of their
Souls, ought to be faithful to them; and not only speak pleasing things, but
true; to imitate good Surgions, who not always use Oils and Lenitives, but if
need be Lancets and Corrosives. But then let no man at a distance furmise Evil
of his Prince, least while he denies him to be Gods King, he sets to his hand
to make him no King at all; and while he strips him of his Righteousness,
strips him also of his Royal Dignity. I speak not to the Kings Enemies, but to
his severer Friends, if he have any: The Sinister Thoughts and Censures of the
Subject are often Ominous and Fatal to a Prince, whereas their good Opinions
are prophetic, and presage the Virtue, they ascribe; and make him the Person,
they proclaim him. St. Paul says, Charity believes all things, hops all
things, endures all things, (i. e.) those who have this Grace, are easily
induced to believe the good of another, which they do not know; to hope that,
which they do not believe; and to suffer, even when they can neither believe,
nor hope. And if any man be not able to walk upon this profound Sea of Charity,
why does he, like Peter, rashly and un-bidden cast himself into it? Why does he
presumptuously Intrude into his Masters company? Who supported by a Divine
Power, shall stride Majestically ore the Waves, and march through the storm to
safety, while he disordered by every Gust, and amazed at every Billow, poorly
sinks in the danger his Fancy only framed. Will not such an one another day,
like him in the Parable that wanted a Wedding Garment, be speechless? (i.e.)
have nothing to say for himself, when he sees his Prince as far above him in
Glory, as he was in his Station in this life? And when it is objected to him, as
'twas to Peter, O thou of little faith, wherefore did thou doubt? I proceed,
God set David on his holy hill of Sion.

Not to say, that instead of one Fort of Sion, God has guarded our King with
many strongholds and Castles, or yet to boast the Advantages of an Island
above a Hill, which is not only to be ascended before it can be assaulted, but
to be Sailed to before it can be approached, and fought for before it can be
Sailed to; being defended by moveable Bulwarks, stout Ships, which must be
subdued before the Inhabitants can be grappl'd with upon equal terms: But to
come to the Point in which the chiefest strength of Sion consisted, in that it
was a Moral and Spiritual Fortification, a holy hill, and Gods hill. If the
Church of Christ be not inferior to the Old Tabernacle, the Gospel to the Law,
the substance to the shadow; when God not only set our King upon his Throne,
but restored the True Religion, and placed him within the Protection of it, he
set him upon as Holy, and consequently upon as strong a Hill as he set David;
and we may rest assured, he delights as much to dwell here, and that it is as
desperate an Enterprise to assault this his Habitation, as 'twas to assault
Sion. But alas some will say with a deep sigh! Would we found these things to
be so! But what for a long time has been more infirm and unstable than the
Condition of this Nation? Not only ready to be broken in pieces by any
Impression of an Enemy, but even to dissolve and fall asunder of it self; and
the supports of Religion have been as weak, as those of the Arm of Flesh.

To which I answer, This has not happened from the Weakness of the Divine
Assistances which God has given us, but from our neglect and contempt of them.
Religion does not guard men like a Palladium or Charm, preserve those who have
the luck only to wear it, and be possessed of it, but those who practice it,
and live according to its Precepts; they are not Sextons and Sacrists that are
chiefly protected by Heaven, those that keep divine things under Lock and Key,
but that treasure them up in a faithful heart. When David by sin dishonored
God, and defamed Religion, his fourfold Fortification little profited him, but
that security which the power of the Heathen, united with the disaffection of
his Subjects, could not shake, his rebellious Son alone drove him from; and he
fled ingloriously, and left his impregnable Sion, and all the Pledges of Gods
favor and residence with him, behind him; confessing, that when he had
violated their Sanctity, he had invalidated also their Power of Protecting; and
though he possessed still the Curtains of the Tabernacle, the Deity was fled
from him. And little will it profit us, to have the Gospel among us, nay to
have it more purely Preached than to any other People under the Sun, if we are
the worst Auditors of it of any other People under the Sun; to have the
Sacraments more rightly administered, if we are the wickedst Receivers of them.
It Is the holy Use of holy Ordinances that make them a guard and defense.
Righteousness, as it is the Honor of the Soul, so it is the best Armor of the
Body; and does not only, as the Psalmist says, Bring peace at the last, but as
the Apostle teaches, safety at present, For who is he that shall harm you, says
he, if you follow that which is good? 'Twas the Custom of the Ancient Heathen
when they Besieged a City, in the first place to endeavor to entice out the
Guardian Deity, by alleging the Injustice of the Inhabitants, and inviting it
to reside with a more holy People, -- ut habeat te Vrbs melior acceptior que.
Holding it impossible to prevail against the Outworks, when this Divine In
ward strength stood firm. The Sanctity of a Christian is this little retired
Deity in the Chapel, which if it cannot be charmed or enticed out by
Temptation, the Malice of Earth and Hell cannot prejudice the Person in whom it
dwells. The Prophet Eliah was called, The Chariots and Horsemen of Israel, but
much more deservedly may Justice, Piety, and Sanctity, be styled, The Chariots
and Horsemen of a Kingdom. And when God, by the Restoration of his Majesty,
and true Religion gave us the Opportunity of exercising all Virtues Civil and
Divine, he put it also into our hands to be as safe and well fortified as we
cared or desired to be, he made our Condition as secure as a Mortal condition
could be made: and if our Mountain be turned into a Wheel, our Rock into a
Rolling-stone, it is our sins that have unfixt and loosened its Roots; and while
we are led by vanity, what wonder is it that the Kingdom fluctuates after the
manner of Vain and Unstable things?

If we consider Lastly, how great and difficult the work was, to set the
Kingdom again upon its Basis, after it was so utterly subverted; to raise up
the Truth and Splendour of the Church so long deformed and Oppressed by Schism and
Sacrilege, we may allow God also as high, nay a higher cause of Glorying in
our behalf, than for establishing the Church and State of Israel. But the time
suffers me not to insist on this particular, neither is it very necessary to do
it, we having all here been Witnesses and Partakers of what has passed, and
this will be the properer Task of another Age. Instead therefore of dressing up
a Triumph for God into which also our own Vanity or Spleen may be apt to
insinuate it self, I shall employ the few words yet allowed me to speak, to
excite our Thanks for these things.

And if the Benefits we have received are such as are worthy of Gods Glorying,
undoubtedly they are Worthy of our highest acknowledgments, I say, of Ours, in
the most General and Universal comprehension both of Prince and People; not of
the Prince alone, as some are willing to reckon the Benefits his Majesty has
received, not to revere him the more for being so much in Gods Favor, but to
make him more indebted to God than themselves: as if because this is called the
Kings day, all the Mercies of it, and all the Thanks for them were to be put
upon his account. Undoubtedly the Kings Obligations to Heaven are infinite; but
was he only restored this day to his Crown and Country? Or were not all we
likewise re-call'd from the same Banishment, or from Prisons and
Sequestrations, Dungeons, and Gibbets at home, to enjoy our Lives and
Liberties, our Religion and Estates? Has all the delicious Fare of the Land
been served to the Kings Table? All the Gold lace been worn upon his back? Nay,
but I behold many at this instant standing like Kings in the presence of the
King: and it is to be complained of, that the Enjoyments of many Outvie his in
their proportion. Is there then no Thanks of our Own due to God? We have this
Obligation even more than the King has, that we have him, that yet and yet we
enjoy this Principle of Union, this Bond of Peace, this Foundation of Security
and Prosperity. O let us not forget in the loud joys, and Gaiety, and
Festivity of this day, the days of sadness and silence, of scarcity and
Doubtfulness of Soul, when we had no King; when a Villain sat in the Throne,
when our hatred and Aversion ruled over us; the Scourge of Loyalty, and the
Oppressor of Religion and Justice. Let us not forget the Time, when to be
Noble, was to be Guilty; and to be Orthodox, an Enemy to the State: Again, when
to be a Mechanic, made room for the Person in the Courts of Judicature; and a
Fanatic quallify'd him for the highest Charges and Honors, and our Great Ones
bowed down to these, or bowed under a sad necessity.

The remembrance of these things will make us readily acknowledge the Mercies
of this Day to have infinite, and General to us all; and not only heighten, but
ennoble and sanctify our Joy; make the Feast resound with Thanksgiving and
Praises of God, and not only with loose and confused Mirth, Riot, and Excess;
it will preserve us from falling into that fatal Ingratitude which accompanies
Prosperity, and which God, in the People of Israel, warns all Nations of, and
yet which all more or less fall into, The forgetfulness of the Arm that
delivered them, and the Goodness that made them Great. And in the midst of our
Felicity, we shall remember our Duty; and our Ease shall not corrupt our
Manners; nor our Power and Affluence, be snairs either to our selves or others:
And then God will also delight more and more to show us Mercy, and we shall not
fear the Potency and Ambition of our Neighbors abroad, nor our worse Enemies,
Poverty and Distraction at home; Schism shall not spread ore the Kingdom like a
Gangren, nor Discontent be catching and communicative like a Plague; open
Rebellion shall be dashed, and the secret Treason that lurks in a Counsel shall
be seen through; and God will repeat and iterate his glorying, we have heard
this day, in the Person of our King, and of his Posterity to all Ages, even
till all Kingdoms are swallowed up in the Kingdom of Heaven, Yet have I set my
King upon my holy hill of Sion. Which God of the riches of his Mercy grant, and
to which Almighty, Eternal, and most Gracious God, the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, be ascribed all Honor, Glory, and Thanksgiving this day forth, and for
evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

