A SERMON Preached before the KING The first Sunday of ADVENT. 1666.

By HENRY KILLIGREW D. D. Master of the SAVOY, And Almoner to his ROYAL
HIGHNESS.

Printed by his Majesty's special Command.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Roycroft, for Thomas Hacker. 1666.

A SERMON Preached before the KING The first Sunday of Advent. 1666.
Mat. 21. Ver. 9. Hosanna to the Son of David, blessed is he that comes in the
Name of the Lord, hosanna in the highest.
THese words are the Acclamation of the people, at our Saviors entering in
Triumph into Jerusalem, and part of the Gospel appointed for this Day, the
first Day of the Churches Year, as appears by the Cicle or Round of Collects
begun this Day. Christians, with good reason; observing yearly, double sort of
year, an Ecclesiastical from the Advent of our Savior, as well as a Civil from
the Return of the Sun. For the Times and Seasons of the Church are measured,
her spiritual Growths fostered, not by the Sun in the Firmament, but by the Sun
of Righteousness, not by Planetary Motions or Influences, but by the Star of
Jacob, whose Dawn, or Rising upon the World we at this time solemnize.

Advent does not imply that Christ is come, but coming; not his Presence, but
his Approach; Christmas is the high Celebrity of his actual Arrival, this day
only reports and noyses abroad his drawing near. Advent is to Christmas, as
John was to the Gospel, vox clamantis, the Herald or Harbinger that made way
for it; so Advent is the Harbinger to make way for the Queen-feast to succeed
with more Majesty, Royal Personages not only having Followers, but Forerunners
for greater State.

But how comes the Church to make choice of one of the last Passages of Christ's
Life, to proclaim his first coming into the World? the Season of his Passion,
to introduce the Time of his Nativity? Because this coming of Christ in Triumph
into Jerusalem, shows him who he was, to be a King, which (...) was but named
and styled at his Birth: at his Nativity he was but designed to the Crown of
Israel, but here he is seen in the Throne; his Star shone then, but his Majesty
now; the Sages and Astrologers could only at that time discover the King, but
the People here could pronounce him to be the Son of David, and rejoice in
their Sovereign. Again, this last coming of Christ was more immediately to do
the will of God, and perfect the Work of man's salvation; and accordingly Saint
Paul ascribes to it, by way of excellence and eminence, Heb. 7. the fulfilling
of that prophecy, Then said I, Lo I come to do thy will, O God. Christ did the
Will of God in the whole Course of his Life, but at the Time of his Death he
accomplished it. And the Church could not select a more proper portion of
Scripture to usher in his Birth, or to take off the Prejudices of the Poverty
and Infirmity seen in it; to convert, I say, the Stable into a Palace; to
disclose a helpless Infant, to be the Omnipotent Son of God, than this that
makes both ends of Christ's Life meet; that joins the Scepter to the Cradle; the
Triumph to the Nativity: the words of the Angel, Luke 2. 11. Unto you is born
this day* in the City of David; a Savior, which is Christ the Lord, with the
words of the People here in my Text, Hosanna to the Son of David, blessed is he
that comes in the Name of the Lord, hosanna in the Highest.

We may observe in the words these two General Parts. Christ's Entrance. And the
Peoples Reception of him.

In Christ's Entrance these four Particulars.

First, Who it is that comes, the Person here spoken of, the Son of David.

Secondly, For what he comes, his Purpose, which is more clearly set down at
v. 5. To declare himself to be the King of Israel.

Thirdly, How he comes, or the Manner and Equipage of his coming, it was in
Pomp and State, as is seen verses 7, 8.

Fourthly, From whom he comes, or his Commission, He comes in the Name of the
Lord.

The Peoples Reception of him is with joyful Acclamations. Hosanna to the Son
of David, blessed is he that comes in the Name of the Lord, hosanna in the
highest.

First, Who it is that comes* the Person here spoken of, the Son of David.
This was the whole Cities Question at verse 10th. And when he came into
Jerusalem all the City was moved, saying, Who is this? But God had showed it
before out of the mouths of Babes and Sucklings, very Children, properly so
called, and of the poor ignorant People, who were as Children. Their
Understandings were first enlightened, their Tongues entrusted to declare and
welcome Christ, as the Son of David, the Messiah and Savior of the World. And
this is most commonly the Method of God Almighty in making himself known unto
men, that which he hides from the Wise and Learned, he reveals unto the Simple
and Lowly. The Holy Spirit for the most part taking up his Inn, as wise
Travelers do theirs, not the fairest and most frequented, but the more private
retired; where though there is less Magnificence, there is also less Pride, and
more Accommodation and Regard. So here he passes by the Potent Priest and
Pharisee, filled with Ambition, and the conceit of their own Sanctity and
Knowledge, possessed with the love of Riches, and the like, and turns in to the
humble, vacant, disinteressed Multitude, whose Hearts were rasae tabulae, so
many fair Tables, without blur, without scrowl, and fit for any Inscription.

This Question, Quis est hic? Who is this? was not a question of Ignorance, but
Malice; of Persons Uninform'd, but full of Envy. 'Twas like that of his
Countrymen of Nazareth, Non hic est fabri filius? Is not this the Carpenters
son? They saw his words full of Grace, and his works of Wonder, that all his
Performances were truly Divine; but because Joseph was his reputed Father, and
Mary his Mother, because his Breeding and Parentage were not equal to the
Glories manifested in him, they would not honor him as a Prophet; but chose
rather not to know him, than to believe in him; and to be offended at him, than
to confess him. After the like manner the Priests and Pharisees here, because
our Lord came not such a Person, and after such a Fashion, as they had
foolishly fancied, their Messiah would come, a mighty Prince, environed with
Armies, powerful to promote them to Honor and Riches; but a poor Prophet
calling them to the like Poverty and Humility with his own; to Righteousness,
not to Greatness; to take up the Cross, and not the Ensigns of Magistracy, they
would not acknowledge him; but denied the Original, because it resembled not a
false Copy; rejected the Eternal Son of God, because he was not like the
Bastard Child of their Carnal Brains. And, Who is this? signifies not, who is
this that we have never heard of, or seen? Or, who is this that usurps such
honors which the Scriptures allow to no man, no not to the Messiah? But, who
is this that we abhor? who is this our Aversion? who is this that defrauds our
Expectations? that grows daily greater, and makes out his Pretenses in spite
of our Opposition?

That Christ was to be the Son of David, to descend of the Seed and Lineage of
the ancient Kings of Judah, that God out of the old Stock or Root of Jesse
which now through length of time seemed decayed, and doted, sear, and dead,
would cause to grow up a branch of Righteousness to execute Judgment and
Justice in the Land, was a truth asserted from all antiquity; And not only
Esaias and Jeremy, who in express terms speak it, but as Saint Peter says, all
the Prophets bare witness to it. And the later Doctors in our Saviors days
universally allowed the Tradition, as is seen by the answer of the Pharisees to
the question our Lord asked them concerning himself: What say you of Christ?
whose Son is he? And they said, the Son of David. But then that Christ was this
Son of David, this Branch so long foretold and expected, though his Extraction
and Genealogy, his words and works, his life and death, did quadrat and close
with all the Accounts, Predictions and Tipical Representations of the Messiah
in the Law, and the several Lines drawn from the mouths of so many Prophets of
different ages exactly concentered in his Person; yet none but the
dispassionate and disinterressed would confess and acknowledge; the Multitude
here, and the People again elsewhere, or some more particularly inspired, as
the two blind Men mention^d Matt. 9. 27. poor Bartimeus, and the like; who
comparing the Miracles wrought by Christ, with the Prophecies that went of him,
confidently made out this truth, Jesus thou Son of David have mercy on us.

And here we cannot enough admire the bounty of God to his faithful Servants
that do his will, and seek him with their whole heart; whom he does not only
bless and prosper while they are alive, but makes their Names and Memories
illustrious by a renowned Posterity long after they are dead. As he did not
suffer David's Soul to see corruption, even in the grave where all things
perish, so neither did he suffer his Glory to see corruption after so many
ages, when commonly all things are lost in oblivion, but revived it by causing
Christ to Spring from his Loins. Christ, indeed, had an other higher and
nobler Generation, an Eternal, such as no man can declare; as the Prophet Esaias
says, Who can declare his Generation? This his Prime Generation was not from
the Will of Man; but from the Power of the Spirit; he took Flesh of the Virgin,
but not by Propagation, but by Adumbration, and the Will of God: And therefore
in respect of any humane Parentage on the Fathers side, he was liken'd to
Melchisedec, who is introduced in Scripture without Parent, without descent,
without Genealogy: for so it became him that was to be the Preacher of Purity
to the World, that his very Generation should be also Pure. Yet I say so much
was God pleased with the Heroical Virtue of David, so much was he a Man after
his own heart, that he ordained, that that great Person, the Second Person in
the Trinity, should be reckoned to him as his Issue; that he that was indeed
his Lord, as our Savior also alleges as a strange Event, should
notwithstanding become his Son! he willed that the Son of his own Spirit,
should be esteemed the Son of his servant! So true is that which God spoke to
Eli of old, and so exemplary a doctrine to all posterity, Honorantes me
honorabo, those that honor me I will honor: Ye see what is done to him whom
God honors, the very Savior of the World counts it a piece of Nobility and
Gentry, as I may so speak, to derive his Pedigree from David. The second
Particular I observed was,

The purpose of Christ's coming, to show himself the King of Israel.
Thrice a year for three years together, as the custom was for all Israel,
Christ had gone up to Jerusalem the chief City of the Jews, and yet did never
make any Overture, never showed any Semblance, as if he had been King of the
Jews, before this last time of his entry. Nay hitherto he used all means to
conceal his Title and Pretense, rather than to declare it. When they would have
made him a King, he conveyed himself invisibly out of the press, and did a
Miracle, to avoid an Advancement. How comes he therefore now voluntarily to
assume, what before he so sollicitously refused? How comes he to do a Miracle,
that he might appear a King, when he formerly did a Miracle not to appear one?
Affects to have a Mounture whereon to ride; charms the owners Spirit that
should surrender it, hearing the Lord had need of it; inspires the Multitude to
proclaim, what he forbad his Disciples to whisper; takes the whole state of it
upon him, affirms it to Pilate, when he asks him concerning it. Affirms it I
say, though in a Ceremonious way of affirmation usual among the Jews, Art thou
the King of the Jews? Thou say it, says he. Which was as much as if he had
answered, I am indeed that which thou say. Only he makes here the Question it
self go for the Answer, and the Demander asking the truth, in honor to him, he
makes the affirming of it, as it were also, to proceed from his mouth. As in
the case of a negative Answer, the more Civil among us, choose rather to
return an Excuse for their dissenting, than a flat No, or Denial to the thing
that was inquired.

I say it was very strange, that Christ should thus voluntarily assume that
Dignity, which he had so obstinately refused: but it was much stranger yet,
that he should assume it at the season he did, at the Eve to his Passion, when
he began to see (...), the Cross standing at the door in expectance of him! Is
this a time, says the Prophet to his servant Gehazi, to take money, and to buy
Vineyards? when the Lords anger was upon the land, and the enemy daily
expected. So was this a time to lay claim to a Kingdom, when a man's Hour of
Death approacht? To put on the Royal Ensigns, when he was to suffer as a
Criminal? as if he would present himself to the Executioner, after the manner
the Sacrifices of old were brought to the Priests, with Garlands and gilded
Horns. as Salvian says, Ornatur ad poenam, coronatur ad supplicium, he was
invested in royal Robes to be Crucified, he was made a King to suffer Death.
This Hour, in the Worlds judgment, so Incongruous to accept a Crown, was yet
the Season that he made choice of; and he refused all Advancement, till he was
upon the point to be lifted-up on the Cross. But as God says in the Prophet,
My thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways. So we may
say of Christ's Times and Seasons, that they suited and accorded not with those
of men, but he had an Hour and Opportunity peculiar and particular for his
Actions which differed from the Vulgar apprehension. When his Mother prompted
him to turn the Water into Wine, My hour, says he, is not yet come. Again when
his brethren moved him formerly to go up to Jerusalem, says he, Your time is
always, but my time is not always. And the like thing may be said of his
Non-acceptance of the Kingdom when the people offered it, His Hour for that
purpose was not yet come, He had not fully yet Preached the Gospel through the
Cities of Judea, he had not cleared his Title to the Kingdom by Signs and
Wonders, fulfilled the Prophecies that were of him, and the other intermediate
Works enjoined him by the Father: and he would not abruptly seize the
Sovereignty, till all was prepared for it; usurp it, till he had made out his
Pretense: rule over a people, that knew him not to be their Prince; and exact
their obedience, before they understood his Authority. But when he had proved
himself the Son of God, then he first declared he was the Heir and Successor of
David; and well he might be allowed to be the King of Israel, when he had
showed himself to be the Lord of Heaven and Earth, and all the Kingdoms of the
World.

And this is Gods Method in ruling the World, he does not require from men,
before he has given to them; he exacts not their Faith, till he has first
enlightened them; demands not their Obedience, till he has taught them his
Laws, and given them his Grace: But after these things if they pay him not
humble and ready submission, if his Subjects refuse yet to acknowledge his
Dominion, he will cause the Rebels, as it is Luke 19. 27. To be brought forth to
Judgment, and those that would not that he should reign over them, shall be
slain before him; who could not brook his Scepter, shall feel his Sword, and
undergo his Vengeance.

But here in the next place we are to demand, what Kingdom it is that Christ
assumeth? that the Prophets foretold, and the People congratulate? for we shall
find, that the Multitude here speak one thing, and the Spirit in them means
another. The People hoped that Christ would presently show himself such a King,
as I lately said the Pharisees fancied, one that should visibly ascend the
Throne of David, restore the temporal Kingdom only with greater Glory than in
the Patriarchs days, as their words also plainly declare in the parallel place
of Saint Mark, where they cry, Blessed is the Kingdom of our father David! But
Christ's coming at this time was with far other Designs, to claim a Spiritual
Kingdom in the Souls and Hearts of men; -Illa ut Dominetur in aula, that he
might bare sway in these Palaces. Says the Psalmist, A Scepter of
Righteousness is the Scepter of thy Kingdom, thou have loved Righteousness
and hated Iniquity. Such a Scepter as a Prophet might wield. The People
congratulate him as an Anti-Cesar, a King that should deliver from the
subjection of the Romans. But what says he of his Coming? For this purpose came
I into the World, to destroy the Works of the Devil, to be an Anti-Lucifer, and
to lead this his Captivity captive.

And we are to look here upon the Peoples Joy from their imagination of an
Earthly Kingdom, as on the Infirmity and Feebleness of Natural Men's Affections,
who count no Blessings worthy the congratulating, but Temporal; Secular
Prosperity, Worldly Greatness, Outward Splendour, the Complacency of the
Senses, and the like, are the things only which transport and ravish; Christ's
Spiritual Scepter, his Dominion in the Soul, a Crown of Immortality and Glory,
are look^d upon as so many Melancholy Metaphors without reality, without
relish: that Felicity is only desirable, which the World admires; and that
held truly a Kingdom, where Voluptuousness reigns.

But yet we are not so to take this Doctrine of Christ's Spiritual Kingdom as if
he had no Temporal Kingdom at all: for that Prophecy cited by Saint Peter Act.
2. 30. God has sworn with an oath to David, that of the fruit of his Loins,
according to the flesh, he would raise up Christ to sit on his Throne. And
again, that the Kingdom of Christ should be of much greater extent than that of
his father David, Even over all the Nations of the Earth; are to be interpreted
literally, if due regard be had to the time of their fulfilling. Neither did
Christ, when his Disciples asked him of his Temporal Kingdom, wholly disclaim
it, but checked their curious Inquiry after it. It Is not for you, says he, to
know the Times and Seasons, which the Father has kept in his own Power.
Therefore, distingue tempora, distinguish but the Times, and the same thing
which at one time is false, at another may be true. Christ at this Time, when
he entered into Jerusalem, had no Temporal Kingdom: but after he ascended into
Heaven, he had one Visible and Glorious, even unto the eyes of men. And though
he professes in the Days of his Humiliation, that he came not to be minister'd
unto, but to minister; yet after his Exaltation, he claims the Ministration of
all men, even of the greatest Princes: and that is fulfilled which the Prophet
says, All Nations shall do him service. Says our Lord after his Resurrection,
All power is given to me both in Heaven and Earth. He had this power originally
before, but then he first executed it in the Capacity of God and Man, in the
Capacity of the Son of David, and the prophesied King of Israel.

And if we shall regard the Events in the World since the preaching of the
Gospel, we shall find, that no one of the four, which are usually called the
four Universal Monarchies, was ever so vastly, so universally extended, as the
Monarchy of Christ's Kingdom; but as Moses Rod devoured the Rods of the
Magicians, so I may say, has Christ's Scepter swallowed up all the Scepters of
the Kings of the Earth: and as heretofore the Nations flowed so generally into
the Roman Empire, that it was not undeservedly said, Orbem jam totum victor
Romanus habebat, the Victorious Romans have made themselves Masters of the
whole World, there being no Nation that was not subdued by them, which they
thought worthy to march against with an Army, and if any were exempt, 'twas
because they were also despised: so much more may it be said of Christ's Empire,
That it comprises the whole World, seeing that very Globe or Orb of the Romans
it self, is contained within the Globe or Orb of Christ's; neither is there that
Climate to be found, in which there are not those that do bow the knee in
adoration to the King Christ, and erect the Cross in token of his Dominion. It
is enough when we can say, that there is no Sun, where there is no Church; and
if there be a People that know not Christ, it is because themselves are unknown.

They therefore, who have so much doted on the Fifth Monarchy, and out of
Scripture misinterpreted will bring down Christ again from Heaven, to Reign a
thousand years on a Temporal Throne upon Earth, they seek for that in Future
Ages, which is already eminently performed in their sight, and fulfilled in
Story; and it may be said to them of the Temporal Kingdom of Christ, what he
said once of his Spiritual, That it comes not with Observation. No, not with
the Observation of any thing that is Future: but rather is discerned to be now
Current and Instant upon us, both by the Observation of what is past, and what
we daily see. And however the Prophecies may seem to intimate some Secular Way
of Christ's executing his Temporal Kingdom, and that the Jews and others think
they degrade the Messiah, if they make him not an Earthly Prince, yet no
Grandeur of an Earthly Prince can reach to the Majesty of the Messiah, as it is
spoken of in Scripture, or fulfill those very Predictions they stand so much
upon, after so Glorious a Manner as Christ has fulfilled them. Who undoubtedly
did a more Wonderful and Illustrious thing, in that he Reigned ore the World
after his Decease, than if he had done it in the Days of his Flesh; I say, he
did a more Wonderful and Illustrious thing, in first Dying, and after that,
Rising again, and subduing, and ruling the Nations of the Earth, and being
adored ever after as God, than if for a few years only he had Domineered like a
Caesar, or a Xerxes, and then Ingloriously have confessd his Mortality,
expired, and given place to another. And this is the High Prerogative of
Christ, which Saint Peter, Act. 5. 30. so powerfully urges to convert his
Unbelieving Crucifiers: The God of our fathers, says he, raised up Jesus, whom
ye slew, and hanged on a tree, Him has God exalted with his right hand to be a
Prince and a Savior. And Christ being such a Prince or King as we have
described, Let us see in the next place the State and Majesty with which he
came to claim his Kingdom. Which is in the third Particular I observed,

The Manner, Pomp, or Equipage of his Coming.
If we read the Triumphs of the Ancient Romans, nothing can be imagined more
Magnificent, more Stupendous. They being the Works of a racked Invention, and
an immense Charge, the Labor of many months, and the Business of several
days, the Sun sometimes making his Course thrice about the World, before the
several parts of the well digested Pomp could be passed through the City. The
People were to behold Models of the Towns and Fortresses they had conquered,
the Habits, Weapons, and other Warlike Harness and Engines of the Enemy; the
vast heaps of their Treasure, rich Vessels, Pieces of curious Art, wild Beasts
(if any such were found among them) their Princes, with their Wives and
Children led in chains: in a word, whatever could heighten the Popular Joy by
Wonder, Pity, or Contempt, was presented a Spectacle to them. After these
followed their own Victorious Army, Crowned with Laurel, jovial, singing, and
licentious; the Consecrated Herd for Sacrifice, with all the Trappings of a
Pompous and Superstitious Religion. In the last place, the Happy Conqueror
himself, mounted high on an Ivory Chariot imboss'd with gold, and drawn with
Horses of a Matchless beauty, sought out in remote Provinces, and as Authors
speak, led at their bridles by White and Silken Querries; -- Niveos ad fraena
Quirites.

Now if to this Majestic Pomp we shall oppose that of our Saviors entering
into Jerusalem, as it is described in the Mornings Gospel, it will show like a
Mock-Triumph, or Triumph in Burlesque. Which was a thing resolved on, and
performed the same hour, countenanced and conducted only by a Company of poor
Fishermen his Disciples, and a tumultuary Rabble of the Meaner Sort; for rich
Tapestry and Pieces of Needle Work to adorn the Passage of the Triumph, the
Coats of these poor people, and some Extempory Branches snatched from Palm Trees
there at hand, served to strew the Way; instead of a Gorgeous Charret, the
humble Conqueror came riding on a Ass, (...), as St. Chrysostom terms it, the
most abject and despicable of all the Beasts of Burden.

But yet notwithstanding the Poverty and Meanness of those Circumstances, if we
shall look into this Triumph of our Lord, as well as look upon it; consider it
with the sharper Eyes of the Spirit, as well as glance on it with the mistie
Eyes of the Body, we shall find, that with great reason, it was ushered in
verse 5. with an Admonition of Special Observation and Regard to be had to it;
Tell the daughter of Sion, Behold thy King comes unto thee meek and sitting
upon an ass, and a colt the fool of an ass; and that it excelled in Glory the
Triumphs of all the Princes of the World. For though there was seen in it no
Humane Invention or Cost, yet it was Ordered and Contrived by the Wisdom of the
Eternal God; though 'twas resolved on and performed in an Hour, 'twas
prophesied of many Hundred Years before; though no heaps of Gold or
Antick-plate were carried in it for ostentation, yet the Virtues and Miracles
of the Conqueror, his holy Life and Doctrine were born, in a manner, before
him, to the greater Admiration of the Beholders; though no Models of demolisht
Cities, or Kings led in fetters, afforded a Spectacle of admiration and
compassion, yet the Kingdoms of Hell and the Grave were there showed,
dispoil'd and ransackt, and Lucifer the Prince of Darkness himself led in
Everlasting Chains. And then the Joy of this Triumph, was not the Mourning of
many Nations and People beside, but a Cause of Universal Jubilee to the whole
World; or yet to last only for a few days, but to continue even when the Sun
and the Moon shall no longer be.

The Triumphs of Princes and Great Captains, are to boast their Glory and
Magnificence, but Christ's Entrance into Jerusalem, was not to show a Triumph of
the Vain things of this World, but a Triumph over them; not to Magnify the
Opinion of Riches, but to bring them into Contempt.

And this, and the like Passages of his Life, are not so much to be looked upon
in the Story and Fact, as in the Design and Purpose; as Saint Chrysostom says
of them, they are (...), a Rule of Christian Philosophy. At his Birth, when he
was Worshiped by some Kings, and feared by others, he was content to be found
in a Manger; and in the days that he fed thousands with his Miracles, he chose
often times himself to suffer Hunger. And this to teach the Great Ones of the
World, to practice Self-denial, in their highest Affluence and Abundance; to
teach the Honorable to be Humble; and the Mighty to be Meek; to use their
Power, not for Pride and Ostentation, but for the Benefit of their Inferiors;
to teach them to despise their Greatness, when others admired it; When the
People envy or murmur at their Felicity, flatter or adore it, cry, as Saint
Augustine makes them speak, Soli isti sunt, soli isti vivunt, these are the Men
that Live, these are the only Happy, then to reflect on their Infirmities, and
the Unstableness of their Condition, fear, and cast down their Souls. Outward
Pomp and Magnificence was annexed to Kings, to preserve Reverence and Awe in the
Vulgar, but not to puff up their own Spirits: That Great Person that is Proud
and Arrogant from the Contemplation of his Power and many Attendants, shows a
Plebian Spirit, in a Royal Fortune; that is too High, to be Courteous, too much
Exalted, to do Good, dazles no man's Eyes with his Eminence, but shows himself
blinded by his Advancement. Christ therefore easily condescended to take our
Nature, because he was the Son of God; to suffer the Indignities of a Mean
Condition, and to be Rejected of the Jews, because he was conscious to himself
that he was above Contempt; and digested here the Humble Circumstances of his
Triumph, because he came in the Name of the Lord. Which brings me to my fourth
Particular. From Whom Christ Comes, or his Commission.

He comes in the Name of the Lord.
To come in the Name of the Lord] is by the Appointment, or with the Authority
of the Lord. He was Vnctus Dei, the immediately Anointed by God himself to the
Kingdom he came to claim. These Words, Blessed is he that comes in the Name of
the Lord, were first spoken by David of himself, and his own Election and
Anointing by God unto the Kingdom of Israel, Psalm. 118. 26. and so expounded by
him before at verse 22. The stone, says he, which the Builders refused, is
become the head stone of the corner; It is the Lords Doing, and it is
mavelous in our Eyes. And after the like manner Christ's coming in the Lords
Name, is by his Ordering or Doing; his Kingdom, was Gods Assignation; and the
Peoples saluting him the Messiah, was but the divulging of the Divine Counsel;
nay, as David's particular anointing by God to the Kingdom, was but a Type of
Christ's, the Acclamations of the People here, are but the very Echo of the
Prophets words there.

To come therefore in the Name of the Lord, is not to come in the bare Pretense
and Verbal Usurpation of his Name, as false Prophets of old did, and many
thousands of false Teachers now adays do. Who apishly imitating the Phrases of
Gods True Messengers, or but their Boldness and Rusticity, their Astonished
Countenance, and the Dire Accent of their Voice groaning out these or the like
words, The Burden, or Message of the Lord, deceive Simple People, and think
they have great injury that all Learning, and Authority submit not to their
Counterfeit Mission. And it is little less than a Prodigy to consider, how (in
this not Ignorant Age) Multitudes are carried away with these gross Follies.
But that temper of men which our Lord complained of John, 5. 43. is seen every
where in this Nation. I come in my Fathers Name, says he, and ye receive me
not, if another come in his Own Name, him ye will receive. Christ showed the
Broad-Seal of Heaven for what he pretended, the Divine Power bearing him
witness by Miracles: But these Imposters bring nothing but Impudence and
Ignorance to countenance their Proceedings; neither are they seen to advance
any thing but Schism and Sedition, Profanation and Blasphemy. And as Saint
John in his time forbad the Faithful to show the acts of common Humanity to any
one that brought another Doctrine, than that which was taught by Christ, says
he, Receive not such an one into your houses, nor bid him God-speed: So by his
Example I may worthily advise, that no man in these days receive those, that
by their False Interpretations, and pretended New-Lights, Pervert and Corrupt
the Doctrine delivered by Christ, no not so much as to admit such persons into
their Houses, or bid them God-speed, least they seem to be their Disciples, and
to partake of their Evil Deeds. Such as these deserve only the Entertainment
of the Whipping-Post, and the welcome of a Hot Iron to bore their Tounges, the
Bough that Absalom met with in his Rebellion, not the Boughs of Palms which
were strewn in our Saviors Way; the Execrations and Maledictions of the
People, and not their Acclamations and Hosanna's. which brings me to my last
Part, the Peoples Reception of Christ. It was with Joyful Acclamations Hosanna
to the Son of David, etc.

The Peoples Reception of Christ.
Hosanna] is as much as Salva quaeso, O Lord save, or give Salvation, add
Success or Prosperity to the Honor of thy King: for this is not a Prayer of
the People to Christ, but their Prayer for him. As we cry, Vivat Rex, Long live
the King Praying for the Preservation of our Prince, who is the Preservation of
us all. And so the Multitude here beseech God to save Christ, who was their
Savior, and indeed the Savior of the World, and not improperly. For though
Christ in his Divine Nature was above all Dangers and Necessities, yet in his
Humane he was Obnoxious to them; and though he had the Power of a God, yet
'twas in the Weakness of a Man; and even Humane Comforts, and Good wishes, in
the days of his Flesh, were well bestowed on him, and well accepted by him.
And now in the Days that he is ascended to the Right hand of God, and needs no
more the Ministration of Men; though we present him not with the same
Contributions, and Expressions of our Affection, yet we do not desist from
offering All Oblations to him, though our Oblations be changed; our Faith, our
Charity, our Praises, our Zeal for his Glory, etc. are still due, and still
pleasing; for though he lacks nothing, yet for ever he loves Virtue, and
delights in Righteousness.

And this is the Foundation of all Religious Worship, and the Encouragement of
Devotion: this makes the Church observe Holy Feasts, the Commemorations of
Christ's Benefits to her; so sollicitously to warn her Children long before of
their Approach, that they may not be o'retaken with Covetousness, Malice,
Ambition, Sensuality, Worldly Cares, etc. when their Lord comes, as the Jews
were; and so his Presence prove Uneasy and Importunate, and they be tempted to
cry with them, Quis est hic? Who is this? It Is Sin only, that makes men
Ignorant of Christ; and Guilt that makes his coming Unwelcome. But certainly he
that has deserved so well of us, ought not to be held a Burden; nor he that has
bestowed on us so many Benefits, to be forgotten. Or if this move us not, yet
he that is so Mighty, cannot safely be Despised; and so Dreadful in his
Judgments, be cast out of our Thoughts. St. Augustine has this plain
Observation, not remote to our present Concern, We should be troubled, says
he, if but a Friend or other Person that we reverence came to our Houses, when
they were in disorder* and we have nothing Worthy to Entertain him: And his
Application of it is this, Quicquid nonvis inveniri in domo tua, quantum potes
labora ut non inveniat Deus in anima tua, What ye would not that Men should
surprise in your Houses, be much more careful that God when he comes surprise
not in your Souls. Let him not find a Sordedness there, no nor yet an
Emptiness; let not his Reception be more Beggarly than that which he found in
the Inn, or more Unhandsome and Uncleanly than that in the Stable. A Soul
immersed in Lust and Sensuality, is fouler than the Stalls of Brute Beasts; and
a Heart void of Virtue and the Graces of the Spirit, is yet poorer than his
Cradle of a Manger. The Religious Monks of old were wont, when they heard these
words read, And Christ was born in Bethlehem Juda, to fall flat on their Faces
on the ground, in adoration and astonishment at the great Mystery of the
Incarnation, and Gods Wonderful Condescension therein to Mankind. But in these
days we hear this Gospel read like an Unconcerning Story, without
astonishment, without adoration, without thanks, without the least Reflection:
and the Feast of the Nativity comes, and goes, like the Day of a Lord Majors
entering on his Office; it serves to compute our Years, and to digest the
Events of our Annals, but few consider the Benefits of the Holy Season, or the
Duties belonging to it; few put away their Sins, and adorn their Minds with the
Graces of the Gospel; few are Regenerate, or Newborn at the Birth of Christ.
Men prepare for a time of Excess, and Debauch, forecast to have Richer Apparel,
and Choicer Provisions, Money to play, etc. and some will borrow, or rob, but
they will have to supply these things. And thus while the Flesh keeps Holy Day,
the Soul still drudges in the Work of sin; while our Houses are trimmed, and
our Posts bound with Laurel in token of Triumph and Deliverance, we continue
Our Selves in the Slavery of Vice, and the Thraldom of the Devil. And the Sun
of Righteousness rises and sets upon us, as the Sun in the Firmament on Rocks
and Buildings, to parch and harden us, not as on Herbs and Trees, to make us
productive of Fruit.

It Is the saddest Prognostic of a Nation to be miserable, when neither the
Benefits, nor Judgments of God work upon the hearts of the People; but whether
it be a Victory, or a Loss; a Plague, or a Deliverance; a Season of Temporal
Blessings, or a Season of Spiritual; they receive all these Various Changes of
Gods Favor and Displeasure with one Fixed and Unmoved Affection to their Sins.
And though like the Deriders of Gods Judgments, which Saint Peter speaks of in
his second Epist. and third Chapt. they blasphemously cry not aloud, Where is
the Promise of the Lords Coming? etc. yet silently and secretly, in their very
holding fast of their Iniquities, they try what will be the Issue of his
Threats and Denunciations against sin, and they Experiment, as I may say, their
Destruction, though they Invoke it not.

That this day may be the Advent to us not only of Spiritual Blessings, but
also of Temporal; the drawing near of Peace or Victory, as well as of
Redemption; of the saving of our Nation, as well as of the Salvation of our
Souls; let us make a fit Reception in our Hearts for the Lord of
Righteousness who now approaches. And God who at this Season bestowed on us
his Son, How shall he not, as the Apostle says, with him also freely give us
all things?

We have heard Christ's Kingdom is Spiritual, and his Throne Planted in the
Hearts of Men; and I may say, his Nativity is now also Spiritual, and his
Cradle ought likewise to be planted in the Hearts of men; that he is then only
truly Born into the world, when we become Regenerate; and seen again in the
Flesh, when we show forth the Works of Righteousness. How little he regards
the mere Outward Magnificence of his Feasts, we may Collect from the Pomp which
he affected, when he was really born in Bethlehem Judah, and when he made his
present Triumphant Entrance into Jerusalem; a Stable served him for the one,
and a Despicable Ass for the other. He that had an Angel to foretell his
Conception, and a whole Host of them to congratulate his Nativity, had he so
pleased, he could have fixed his Cradle in Herod's Bedchamber, and have forced
the Proud Tyrant to have fled into Egypt in his stead. Again, he could have
Excelled Paulus Aemylius, and all the Cesars in the Splendour of his Triumph:
But his Birth, was the Birth of Meekness, of Innocence, and of Mercy; and when
he entered in Triumph, Humility rode in State.

The Offices of the Church for this day best instruct us, how to welcome our
Lords Coming. What in the Collect we pray, let us set our selves to practice.
To cast away the Works of Darkness now in this Mortal Life, in which Christ
came to visit us in great Humility. What the People here do in my Text, let us
transcribe and imitate; use their Acclamations, and also their Ingeminations,
Hosanna to the Son of David, and again, Hosanna. Reiterating and repeating
these Ave's and Good Wishes to Christ in our Souls, a second, third, and
fourth time. Tautology is the Language of Joy, a Hearty Affection is not
satisfied with uttering Kind Words of Welcome, unless it may utter the same
often. And as Princes accept of Acclamations from their Subjects, as well as
Panegyrihs; continued and redoubled Shouts of Joy, as well as Set-Orations;
nay, esteem these Simple Expressions of a Loyal Heart, before more Studied and
Artificial Complements: So God prefers many times the Eruptions and
Ejaculations of a Faithful Soul, before a longer Prayer; the liftingup only of
the Spirit, before a Formal Psalm. Holiness and Righteousness make the
Esclat or Splendour in Christ's Feasts; when Men's Hearts are full of Grace, then
his Houses are hanged, and his Tables pressed with rich Provisions: 'twas not the
Curious and Busy Hous-wifry of Martha, but the Pensive and Abstracted Faith of
Mary that made the Entertainment at Bethany; and if we will Treat our Lord
acceptably it must not be from the Shambles, or the Mercers; with the Cooks or
the Tailors skill; but with the Sacrifices of Obedience, and the Adornings of
the Holy Spirit. Our Feasts upon Earth must resemble these they typifie in
Heaven, where Righteousness is the Robe, and the Contemplating and Glorifying
of God, the Cheer and the Rejoicing.

Glory be to God on high, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, from all Angels, and
all Men, and all Creatures, now and to all Eternity, Amen.

FINIS.
^^
PAge 1. line ult add a. P. 5. l. 15. for private retired, read private and
retired. P. 10. l. 22. for that should Surrender, read that he should
Surrender. P. 19. l. 19. dele. in. P. 21. l. 18. for those, read these* P. 34.
l. 18. for these, read those.


