THE KINGS Evidence VINDICATED, AS TO THE IMPUTATION OF PERJURY.
In a LETTER to a Friend.
Honored Sir,
IT is not so much a regard unto your Commands, which is great, as Loyalty unto
my King, and Zeal for the Protestant Religion, that compels me, in short, to
give you my thoughts concerning the Validity of Mr. Dangerfield's Evidence,
according to the account I have received of it. You mention his Felonies and
Perjuries, as reason sufficient to engage the Wise and Judicious to neglect all
that Evidence he has given in concerning the Popish Plot; for, say you, if
such a Villain may be credited in matter of Life and Death, what honest man can
be secured either of his Estate or Life?

Sir, there is much seeming strength of Argument in what you suggest; and had
there not been more real strength of Reason to overbalance it, I would
submit. But since it may be made with the greatest clearness to appear, That
notwithstanding all this, Mr. Dangerfield's Evidence may be as good as that of
any Papist, whether a continued Bigot to that Superstition, or one who has
abandoned the abominations of that sort of people; I cannot but presume to be
free in the Communications of my thoughts: which I the rather do, because His
Majesty's Life and the Protestant Religion are so much concerned herein.

I say, that notwithstanding the Felonies and Perjuries you suggest that Mr. D.
may have been guilty of; I assert, that his Evidence is as good as that of any
other Papist whatsoever, that has shown himself a thorough Papist, that is, a
vile Traitor to a Protestant (which they term Heretical) King.

1. That his Felonies cannot make his Evidence less evident than that of the
Papists, is demonstratable to such as shall but consider, that if a greater and
more heinous Crime than that of Felony cannot Invalidate the Evidence of such
an one, then surely, Felony, the lesser Crime cannot. But a greater Crime than
Felony, namely, High Treason against His Majesty's Sacred Life (of which
Hellish Diabolical Treasons, most English Papists, but in special all the
Discoverers of the Plot have been guilty), cannot spoil the Testimony of such;
for should High Treason, that is a Crime that deserves the backest title,
Invalidate the Evidence of a Reforming, Repenting-Traytor', the worst of Rogues
may escape the just severity of our Laws, and the best of Princes be exposed to
the merciless Rage of the vilest of Traitors; And if this great Transgression,
that is inconsistent with all the Rules of Christian Religion, cannot after a
Pardon spoil the Evidence, How is it that Felony, the less (though an odious)
evil should? I hate Felony with my very Soul, but I hate a Traitor much more so.

But the great thing that sticks, is Perjury. To which I offer, that though I
know not whether Mr. D. has been Convicted as a Perjurer; yet be it so, this
cannot Invalidate his Evidence, any more than the Evils of a like nature, in
the which the Plotting- Papists have fully involved themselves. For let it be
but duly considered, and you will find that the true Reason why Perjury should
weaken his Evidence, is because a Perjured person is supposed to be one who
has so far debauched his Conscience, and razed out of his Soul the Characters
of Truth, that it is become impossible he should be ever a true man for the
future. To which I answer.

1. Sincere Repentance is not in this case impossible; Perjury, for certain, is
not the Sin against the Holy Ghost, neither is it embowell'd with Final
Unbelief and Impenitence; whence if you can but find the Characters of a
sincere Penitent on Mr. D. our Church, though it had Excommunicated him, would
have given him his Absolution, whereby he would have been fit for our
Communion; and for which reason, all his old Sins, even his Perjury must be
blotted out of our Remembrance. And can all this be, and his Testimony for the
King an idle thing? But,

2. Supposing Mr. D. a Perjured person, yet nothing more certain than that he
has not prostituted himself more to lies than the Papists, nor debauched his
Conscience more than the other Plotters have done. For,

1. Do we not know that the Popish Religion is but a heap of Lies? What is it
composed of, if not of Equivocations, Mental Reservations, Lies, Falsehoods,
Perjuries, etc? I must be plain, and assure you, that I scruple more the
Evidence of a Real Papist, that I do of a Perjured Protestant: And my Reasons
are these. A Perjured Protestant does never Swear falsely, but it is contrary to
his principle, and may be the product of but a present temptation, of which he
may soon repent; and because of the gripes of his awakened Conscience, like the
burned child dread the fire of such a sin; but the Papists principles, are to
Lie, Equivocate, and Swear falsely, taking the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy,
even when they are resolved for Treason against His Majesty, which they do
without any rebukes of Conscience; or if any are so squeamish, as to boggle at
it, it is but to scowr their Kettle, confess and receive Absolution, and all is
well; yea they may have Dispensations, and what not.

2. It must be also remembered, that if Perjury will Invalidate Mr. D's.
Evidence, what Plotting Papists Evidence, after the greatest remorse can be
good? Are not all that are engaged in this devilish Plot Sworn to the greatest
secrecy? yea with greater and more awful Solemnities, than the kissing the
Bible; and if they discover, are they not all apparently perjured, if not
according to the formality of our Law, yet as really and truly? Which being so,
you may see how dangerous it is to neglect Mr. Dangerfield's Evidence, for the
same thing being pleadable against the rest, we are all an undone people; for
if the past Perjury of honest penitents will Invalidate their future
Testimonies, what encouragement is this to the remaining plotters to make any
further Discoveries? of what use is His Majesty's Proclamation? and how are the
past Plotters animated to go on, being confident that none without Perjury can
discover them? whereby there is no possible guarding against the Papists
plottings, nor no bringing them to condign punishment: All which tends to the
ruin of His Majesty, the loss of our Religion, the destruction of our
Liberties and Lives.

But since it is as sure as that the Sun shines at Noonday, that there is a
Popish Plot, which has been detected by admirable Providence; it is also as
certain, that such as have been Perjured, have spoken true; that is, they have
been by an overruling Power engaged to repent of their devilish Treasons,
their vile Perjuries, etc. and are become honest and true men, good Protestants
and Loyal Subjects, expiating their past Treasons by enduring, and a patient
bearing great Discouragements in their steadfast adhering to the Truth. We have
seen, that if these German Dogs would have been drawn aside by such Crusts as
Popish Preferments, Thousands of pounds, etc. or driven from an Owning the
Truth by such Menaces and Threats as have attended them, as the being
Godfrediz'd or Arnoldiz'd, and the like, we might not have one man to give in
Evidence against the Lords in the Tower, etc.

I had almost forgot to desire you to make a free Intimation of your mind,
concerning what are the Qualifications you expect should be found in a Popish
Plotter, who designs nothing less than the burning Cities, depopulating
Countries, destroying Protestant Kings; What manner of persons must such be?
what! must they fear an Oath, or a Lie? what! is there no Evil in Murder, and
Treason, and the Torturings of thousands of Innocents? What! are all these
things little things in comparison of Perjury? or can you in your Conscience
imagine, that such as are men of principles bloody enough to engage in all
these Cruelties, are yet afraid of a Lie, or of a false Oath? Sir, I do verily
believe there are none fit for these detestable Treasons, unless they can
Perjure themselves over and over; yea, and that there are many who can exercise
their Tongues in Cursing and Damning themselves and others, yea perjure
themselves again and again, who yet could not embrue their hands in the Blood
of Kings, and Thousands of Innocents. Let not past perjury then be so
formidable a thing to stagger your Faith concerning a Plot, whose Being has
been discovered with so much Evidence and Conviction to all that hear on it.

I beseech you therefore, that you will consider how you neglect the Evidence of
such men, who once were perjured Popish, and false Traitors, but are now
honest, good and loyal Protestants, whose Evidences has been most miraculously
brought to light, and confirmed, to the astonishment of all considering and
thinking men, both at home and abroad. I need not beg your pardon, since if you
are a Protestant, as I know you are, you cannot but approve of the Zeal of him,
who is,

Yours,

London, Printed for R. Janeway in Queens-head-Alley in Paternoster-Row, 1680


