^readful News from Wapping: Being a further RELATION OF THE Sad and Miserable
Condition Sarah Bower, A Young Girl of about Fourteen ^^^^s of Age, who is
unhap^^^ ^^ pre^^^t, ^osse^^^d with an ^vil Spirit, ^y ^apping N^^-Staires,
near the Chapel.

(...) Re^^^ed by Richard Kirby, Student in P^ysic^ and Astrology, who has
Visited her.

November. 19. 93. at Noon, I. R. KIRBY, saw this Unhappy Maiden, who is at
present Possessed.

^ a. ad ad.

a, ad and

8. 8.
20. 13. 10. 7. 24 15 7
2^. 8. 20. 13^ ^^. 7. 1^ 17.
^ 5. ^3. 21. 2^.




Licensed according to Order.

The Explanation of the Scheme
Signs of Fascination or witchcraft are these, First, A^ Infortun^^ lord of the
Ascendant and 12th. viz.. Secondly, The Lady of the 6th in the 12th. Thirdly,
The defluxing from the Body of. Fourthly, Lady of the 8th. in the 12th with
Caput Draconis. Fifthly, in to the Ascendant, in of the, and he in mundane ^^
the first. Sixthly, The in parallel of, in the Zodiac and applying to a
parallel of Lord of the 4th. All these are sufficient Testimonies to prove
Fascination, Witchcraft, or Possession by the Devil.

THE Time when I visited this Poor Afflicted Maiden, was the last Lord's Day at
high Noon, being the 19th. of this Instant, to which Moment of Time I have
erected the aforesaid Scheme of Heaven, desiring those Juditious Men which have
entered Vrania's Court, and are well acquainted with the Starry Train, to give
their Opinions of this Afflicted Creatures Condition, that the World may see
how the Face of Heaven agrees with what things are done and acted here below,
either by Men or Devils.

Sarah Bower, the present Subject of this Narration, is near 14 Years of Age,
she was usually of a Temper pretty Brisk and Lively, somewhat given to Pride:
Some Weeks ago this Maid as she was going into a Yard near her Aunt^ Dwelling
received a Sroke on her Back by an invisible Hand, which struck her ^^at on the
Ground; she was taken up as for Dead, but after some time, a Chyrurgeon being
sent for who blooded her, she came in some measure to her self again, ^ut the
greater part of one side of her Body was all benumbed, or in a manner Dead;
which occasioned a crooked bending in at the Wast, and a Lameness, though before
she was very straight and went very well, and the next Day she was taken with
most strange and unaccountable Fits, occasioned (as we then thought) by the
Fright she might receive by the Stroke on the Back. These Fits she had by
Intervals several Weeks, in which space of Time many Doctors (as well as my
self) came to see her, and g^ve her Comfortable things to take; but at the same
time declared they never were with any Patient that had such Fits before. After
this, viz. at the end of the 6 Weeks, and about 9 Weeks since, this Maiden, as
she was rising in the Morning, and out of her wonted Fits, she was taken
Speechless, only she could make an odd sort of a Noise, and her Tongue, which
always in her Fits used to hang out of her Mouth, like a Calf below her Chin,
was now contracted and drawn almost into her Throat: I persuaded her Aunt to
let me put my Hand into her Mouth, which she permitted, and ^ndeavoured to move
her Tongue, but it was so fixed, that I could not: A pretty while before this,
she being at a Neighbors House, rocking a Child in the Cradle, while the good
Woman was gone a little way, (as she after declared when she came to her
Speech) a Gentleman all in Black opened the Door and came in, and after
speaking many kind Words to her, threw down a Bag of Gold and Silver, as she
thought, and poured the Money about the Room, and told her she should have that,
and fine Suits of Head-Cloths, and very high Top-knots if she would be his, and
let him take some Blood out of her Arm; after which, she standing all in Amaze,
the black Gentleman took down a Knife from the Mantle-tree in order, as she
thought, to cut her Arm, upon which she made all the Cry and Noise that
possible she could, upon which the Mistress of the House and some other of the
Neighbors came in, but upon their appearance the black Gentleman or Devil
immediately Vanished, and she made to them all the Signs and Tokens she could
at that time of the occasion of her Cry, which they then thought was, that some
Rogue had attempted to Rob the House; she continued thus Speechless until the
Thursday after the Last-Fast, on which day about Ten in the Morning her Speech
came to her again and she then seemed to be extraordinary sensible of her
former and present Condition, relating as before about the Gentleman in black,
and moreover she related how that he had sort of broad Feet like a Cow, and
further, that something appeared to her in the shape of an Angel with Wings in
a flaming Light, which she calls the Man of God, charging her to fear and put
her trust in God, and not yield to that Man, who was Satan, the Devil that thus
Tempted her, for he sought her Soul; after which she further declared many
strange Things, (and yet seemed very well in her Senses,) as it appeared to the
Men, Women, and Neighbors then present, who were near a Room full, also her
Aunt, who declares, That since her Speech had been taken from her, she had seen
many strange Visions, and been both in Heaven and Hell, that she past through
Hell to Heaven, and was like to have been stopped in the former, but that a good
Angel that guarded her, brought her out of it to Heaven, that in Heaven she
thought her Happiness so great, that she would have continued there, but her
Angel told her that she could not then, but that she should shortly really die,
and be brought thither; after which she declared these Words in the presence of
many, That if the People of London, and England, did not speedily repent from
their Sins, especially that of Pride in Apparel, and turn from the Evil of
their Ways, God Almighty would give them up as a Prey to their Enemies, and
this she declared the Man of God gave her in charge to deliver; after which she
uttered many godly savory Speeches and Expressions to the Persons then present,
exhorting them to Repentance, she then declared that her Speech would be
speedily taken from her, and that it would not be restored to her again till
St. Thomas 's-Day, at Christmas; at which time she having her Speech, should
declare many more Things; and further, That at Two a Clock in the Afternoon she
must go and meet the Black Man that had appeared to her in the Neighbors House
aforementioned, but that before that time her Speech would leave her, this
being about the Hour of Twelve, about One her Speech left her, and then she
began to throttle in her Mouth as formerly, and soon after, a Bible lying near
her, she took it up, and opened it in the presence of the Company, who
observing what place it was she opened at, they found it to be the 17th.
Chapter of the Gospel according to St. Matthew; this Chapter she seemed to read
over to her self with a buzzing Noise, pointing to every Verse and Line with
her Finger; soon after this, Two a Clock being come, with great Strength and
Violence she found her self or was forced out of the Room from her Company, and
went into the Yard, as she had before declared, where she was soon thrown to
the Ground in a strange manner, and her Fits came upon her in a worse manner
than ever, yet at the same time, though all the Company went into the Yard
after her, there was no Form or Shape visible to them, that could occasion her
Fall. It Is very observable, and has often remarked by the Persons present, that
though the Evil Spirit in her Fits permits her to be somewhat quiet just before
any Divine comes into the Room where she is, yet as soon as ever they come, she
begins (or the Spirit in her rather) to be troublesome, sometimes falling out a
Laughing, other times making Faces at them, and when ever they go to Prayers,
or name the Name of God or Christ, the Evil Spirit will bark in her like a Dog,
or make other most hedious Noise, and seem to spit in their Faces, though the
Maids Lips do not move, sometimes the Spirit will throw her from one end of the
Bed to the other, and make her tear her Shift and Bed-Cloaths with great force
and violence, that scarce six Men can hold her in, yet she has many Intervales
from these Fits, and is at other times very quiet: At this Instant of Writing,
this poor Creature continues a sad Spectacle of humane Misery, being daily
visited with great Numbers of People, sometimes she has lowed like a Bull,
roared like a Lion, making other strange kind of Noises, the Devil presenting
before her the hideous Shape of a Monstrous Fiery Dragon, other whiles a Lion;
the Man of God pulling one way, and the Devil another.

Dear Countrymen,
I shall now proceed to give you an Impartial Relation of the several Cures I
have lately perfected (through God's Mercy) and Restored the Persons to their
proper Senses again, to Admiration, viz.

Jane Walter of East-Basham near Feaknam in Norfolk, who was Bewitched for a
long time, her Tongue was tied in her Head with a Hempenstring, and run full of
Pins, and she had many strange Fits, sometimes 20 or more in a day. The
primitive cause, as it is supposed, was by a Toad, which offered to creep
several times into her Lap, the which was thought to be the Familiar of one
Teecle's Wife, a suspected Witch; for they took the Toad, and offered to burn
it, and it vanished away, that none knew what became of it.

A Young Man at the Town of Swould in Suffolk, who was under the like
Circumstance, Witness the Magistrates of the said Town, and the Witch died for
it. Those that are dissatisfied, let them send, and they may be further
informed of the same.

The Daughter of one John Ballard of Ditchingham-Dam, near Bungy in Norfolk,
who was Bewitched for above 2 Years, she voiding out of her Mouth many Stones,
Crooked-pins, a piece of Glass, a Buckle, Buttons, and other things, which the
Father of the Child has now by him to show, the Girl having many strange Fits
in a day. All which was shown and attested before the Mayor and Aldermen of the
City of Norwich by the Child's Father, and many others.

Ann Burgess in St. Edmunds Parish, near Fiv^ Bridge, in Norwich, who was
Bewitched for sev^ral Years, she having above Twenty Fits in a day besides she
voided many Pins, Nails, Quills, T^bacco pipes, and a bended Farthing, with
sev^ral other things before many Witnesses, all whi^^ has been showed and
attested before the May^^ of Norwich, and I have them now by me to shew^

Grace Brown, the Daughter of John Brown in Cu^ford in the City of Norwich, who
was Bewitc^^^ for several Years, she voiding many scores ^^ Pins out of her
Body, some of which I have ^^ show, it being likewise attested before the May^^
of the City of Norwich.

Many more Instances I could Insert of wond^^ful Accidents in this Nature, but
having a Bo^^ already in the Press copiously treating on t^^ Subject, and my
Bounds at present being too n^^row, I shall wave them, Courteous Reader,

Subscribing my self your Friend, Richard Kirby
From my Lodgings at Mr. Loft's, in King Street, St. Ann's, Westminster.
FINIS.

