THE TRANSACTIONEER With some of his Philosophical Fancies: IN TWO DIALOGUES.

(...).
-- Adag. ap. Erasm. LONDON; Printed for the Booksellers of London and
Westminster. 1700.

THE PREFACE.
BY the following Dialogues it is Apparent, that by Industry alone a Man may
get so much Reputation almost in any Profession as shall be sufficient to amuse
the World, though he has neither Parts nor Learning to support it. The Person who
makes the Chief Figure in them, has certainly nothing but a bustling temper to
recommend him, and yet has gained so much upon many People, that they will
scarce believe the Evidence of their own Senses; but it is probable that those
who are not past cure may now be undeceived.

I have treated him under two Characters: as an Author and an Editor. In the
former I have considered his own personal Capacity: In the other, his Judgment
in the choice of his Friends, and of the Discourses that he Publishes.

I know it may be said, he Writes in Hurry, and has not time to correct and
finish it. But then who obliges him to Write at all? What occasion is there for
it? Or what is the use of it? Besides he Publishes Notes forsooth, and Pieces
of no more than 4, 6, or perhaps 8 lines; and what time can there be required
for the Composal of such? It Is plain a Man that is himself once possessed of
any Subject, can express it to another, if he has but Language. If his Head be
clear, and the Things rightly digested in it, there can be no Difficulty in the
conveying them thence. But where a Man has no real Parts; and is Master of only
Scraps picked up from one and from another, or Collected out of this Book or
that, and these all in confusion in his Head, it is obvious what a Writer he
must needs make. No, our Transactioneer should have kept to his old way of
bustling, vying with Dr. Salmon at Auctions, mustering up Books for a show, and
of acting by Signs, Scrapes and Wriggles. Half-Sentences, and broken Phrases,
with these Assistances, passed pretty well upon some. But he must appear in
Print, stripped of them, and now all is out; the World having got at length the
true Measure of his Abilities.

Perhaps it may seem strange, that I who am no Member of the R. S. should deal
so freely with the Person, and some Correspondents, of one who is slipped into
the Post of Secretary to that Illustrious Body. But I am moved by the Respect I
have for Natural Studies, and a fear least those Men who have made such great
Advances in it, and thereby gained the Applause of all the Learned World,
should lose any part of it by the trifling and shallow Management of one who
wants every Qualification that is requisite for such a Post. All who read his
Tranactions either in England, or beyond the Seas, cry out that the Subjects
which he writes on are generally so ridiculous and mean: and he treats of them
so emptily; and in a Syle so confused and unintelligible, that it is plain he is
so far from any useful Knowledge, that he wants even common Grammar. This is
so Notorious from every line he has published, that his own Words will be the
best Proof of what I say, and I have been so careful in producing them, that I
defy him to show he is once Misrepresented. Nay, there is so little need of
that, that I challenge any Man with all his Art to imitate the Bulls and
Blunders which he so naturally pours forth.

His Correspondents are most of them so like himself for Learning and
Understanding, that a Man may almost swear they were cast in the same Mold:
Indeed he has had a very lucky hit in the choice of them.

I am sorry to see that Excellent Society in any hazard of being Eclipsed by
the wretched Gambols of these People. Learned Men abroad have ever verry justly
had a vast esteem for the English Society: But I find that now like to decline;
they having no other way of judging of it but by the Philosophical
Transactions. The World every where looks on them as a kind of Journal of the
R. Society, though there is no Ground for that Opinion; for they were begun by Mr.
Oldenburg, who all along declared the R. Society were not concerned in those
Transactions, but that they were a Work of his own and some Friends. At that
time they were carried on in such a manner that they met every where with
Approbation, and were of real use. But since this new Secretary-ship all agree
a more useless Paper no where appears, and I was concerned that such a one
should pass for a Work of the R. Society.

It Is their Vindication that has drawn me to undertake this, and if I can but
disabuse the World by it I have my end. I can truly say that I have no
personal Prejudice to the present Transactioneer or any of his Friends; For I
am but little known to any of them: And if they now think I have no design to
recommend myself to their Acquaintance, I fancy the Reader will not believe
they are mistaken.

The CONTENTS.
THE Present Compiler of the Philos. Transact. Page 3 -- The Excellency of his
Style, 4 -- His Clearness and Perspicuity 5 -- Genius to Poetry 8 -- Verses on
Jamaica Pepper, ibid. -- Politics in Gardening, 9 -- Skill in Botanicks, 10
Mr. Ray's Definition of a Dil -- oe 11 Ipecacuana harmless and helpful 12
Cynocrambe (or Ratsbane) not to be taken in too great Quantities, ibid.
Swallowing Pebles dangerous, and why, 13 A China Ear-Picker 15 Picking the Ears
too much, Dangerous ibid. Instruments for pairing of the Nails 17 A Curry-Comb
for a Man 18 A pair of Brass Tweezers. ibid. A wide toothed Comb. A small
toothed Comb, ibid. A sheet of Paper from China. A Scarlet Butterfly, ibid. A
Fossile Mandible 19 A Description of the Great Irishman, 20 -- of
Posture-Master Clark, 21 Beans that Traveled from Jamaica to Ireland. 23
Drunkards not drowned by drinking, 26 What drowning is ibid. That Men cannot
swallow when they are dead 28 That a Shell is not a Crust 31 Mt. Pett -- rs
specimens of Magnificence 35 -- 20 Volumes in Folio filled with Trees 36 --
Blackmores teeth so called for their Whiteness ibid. -- Eyes of a Tortoise
bigger than its Head ibid. -- Affrican Materia Meddica 37 -- Skill and Tallent
in Compliments 38 Irish Makenboy purges not in the Pocket 39 Charles Worth his
Man and Maid, all merrily besh -- t ib. W. Matthews and his Family much in the
same pickle 41 A Woman that talked Obscenely and offered her Cow for a Bag-pipe
44 Of Ambergreese Ben 45 Old Jenkins older than Old Patr by computation 46 Dr.
Lister bit by a Porposs, and how his Finger fell sick thereupon 48 A Medicinal
Spring with an Oak over it 50 The Medicinal Qualities of Bread and Cheese 51
Scurvy Consequencies of Marrying too soon 53, 54 A Head that was a Bag 56 A New
way to preserve a Maidenhead ibid. Women in Tunquin begin betimes ibid. Wits
on Tenterhook to make Turnip Bread 47 A Faetus 16 Years in Vtero 58 Mr.
Transactioneer's prodigiously large Feather of the Bird Cuntur ibid. Eggs in
the Cauda of a Barnacle ibid. The whisking Oystershels of Bantam 59 A Buck in a
Snakes Belly 60 Four pounds worth of Glass broke by Hail 61 300 Scarts murdered
in one Night 62 Fish different from one another ibid. No Fish die of Feavours,
63 A Shower of Whitings 64 A shower of Butter to dress 'em with 65 A Tree
bearing Tallow, 66. Hoggs that sh -- te Soap ib. Cows that sh -- te Fire 67
Verses on an Ele and a Pike ibid. A Lamb Suckled by a Weather 68 Martial
Discipline of Grasshopers 69 A stout Butchers Dog that run under a Bed 70, 71
Mr. Hone O Hones Traveling Irish Bog 72 Of Mr. Gratrix's Stroaking 74, 75, 76
A Discourse more painful than a Blister 77 Cantharides armed with Swords and
Daggers k8 Hanging Mortal 79 -- Apoplectical ibid. The feirceness of a Sable
Mouse 91 That a Fox is lawful, and a Fox is unlawful 83 Four sorts of Lady Bugs
84 Clogs cloven with Thunder ibid. The true way of the Generation of Fleas
discovered by indifatigable Industry ibid. Who was the first Coffee-Man 85 That
Coffee-Houses promote the Trade of News Papers, and make People sociable. 86
DIALOGE I. Between a Gentleman AND A VIRTUOSO.
Virtuoso. PRAY Sir what Philosophical News have you heard of late amongst our
Friends, and what New Discoveries or Improvements have they made?


Gentleman. Truly Sir, I have scarce en^uired after Philosophical News, since
Dr. ^lot and Mr. Oldenburg were taken from amongst us; not but that there are a
great many Men of Learning and Merit still remaining, who bear not only the
Titles of Virtuosi, but really deserve them.


Virtuos. And are not the Improvement they make worth enquiring after?


Gent. Yes Sir, But, those are only communicated to Friends; and since* they
have thought fit to conceal them, I know no^ whether I may take the liberty of
divulgin^ what is kept as Secret by the Authors.


Vituos. Nay, whatever has been communicated as a Secret, I shall not desi^^
you to divulge, though methinks it is a pi^^ any thing should be kept private,
th^^ might be of Public Use, and promo^^ Natural Knowledge: But may I take t^^
liberty to ask you why they are unwilli^^ to Publish them.


Gent. Since you desire me to tell you t^^ Reasons; I shall acquaint you with
the^ as far as I am able.


Virtuos. Sir, I shall esteem it a singul^^ Favor.


Gent. Then you must know Sir, the Gentlemen have that vast Opinion of t^^
present Philosophical Transactions, and t^^ Papers communicated therein, that
th^^ are unwilling to Publish their poor D^^coveries or Improvements, amongst
Subjec^^ so Noble in themselves, and so accurate writ.


Virtuos. Truly their Caution (...) ^^quisite, for in the Late Transaction^
(...) of the Subjects are indeed most prodigiously sublime; and penned too in a
Wondrous manner, So that it is a hard matter for the generallity of Virtuosi,
who imitate Bacon, Boil, or Men of that Character, to write in the Language
observable in most of those Papers; for there the Expressions are suitable to
the Sublimity of the Subjects, and consequently mighty Mysterious, and above
the reach of these Gentlemen.


Gent. Yes Sir, The Sublimity of the Style makes it inaccessible to those that
are not accustomed to such Flights.


Virtuos. Why, it is no wonder, The Compilling the Transactions the Work of a
single Person.
for you must know the Philosophical Transactions come through the Hands of
one; who takes care that every thing be nobly and clearly expressed; and by his
own Writings, which so plentifully adorn those Papers, One may see, he is
abundantly Qualified for the Task he has taken upon him.


Gent. Pray are not the Philosophical Transactions then Published by direction
of the Royal Society.


Virtuos. No, no, Sir, far from it, that lies all upon one Man's Head; and it is
happy he has so good a Head-peice.


Gent. May one be so bold as to ask the Compilers Name?


Virtuos. I suppose you cannot but have heard of one who is so famous and keeps
Correspondence with so many Learned Men his Name is sufficiently known amongst
the Learned.


Gent. If I guess right at the Man; I must needs say, I have heard a great many
mighty things said of him; very fine things indeed! And much to his Renown.


Virtuos. O Sir, The Excellency of ^his Style.
he is a great Man; for besides his wonderful Skill in Physic and Philosophy,
he has a strange Tallent at Style, his Knack at that is admirable; to convince
you of this, I shall refer you to the Philosophical Transactions, Numb. 252. p.
188. where you will find, the following Representation of a Limestone Marble
found in Wales, when polished; so his Intelligencer Phrases it.


Gent. Admirable indeed!


Virtuos. Why! There lies the Rarity of the Thing, for an ordinary Reader would
think it was polished before it was found. But Sir, the Transactioneer himself
far outstrips him in his Note upon this remarkable piece; take it in his own
Words. This Stone is a sort of Coral, and the Lapidis Astroitidis sive
stellaris primum Genus. Boet de Boadt, or Astroites Worm, Mus. It grows in the
Seas adjoining to Jamaica; It is frequently found fossile in England. I have
some of it found here that will polish as well as Agat, which was many Years
since found out by Mr. Beaumont. There are many other things growing in the
Seas adjoining to Jamaica, and not to be found in these Parts, which are
frequently dug up in the Inland Parts of England, and elsewhere, where they do
not naturally grow.


Gent. Pray Sir let me desire you to give me the meaning of what you have
related in plain English, for the Sublimity of this way of Expression is above
my mean Capacity.


Virtuos. The Dignity of the Subject will by no means admit of it; besides it
will be an injustice and lessening of the Authors performance.


Gent. However for Discourse sake pray let me ask you, What he means by that
proposition this Stone is a Coral?


Virtuos. O Sir, His meaning is very apparent. It Is as much as if one should
say, this Elephant is an Apple Tree. Now I hope it is plain? There are some
tatling People likewise that say, they cannot tell what he means by Astroitidis
neither: They say there is no president of any such word; but if they look into
the Jamaican Catalogue they will find thousands of like kind. Why a Person of his
Figure may make Presidents Man! For what follows, one poor simple Fellow that
read it thought it had been a Charm.


Gent. Verry like! But pray Sir how are we to interpret him, when he says, the
Limestone Marble that was found in Wales and was a Coral, and the Lapidis, and
the Lord knows what, grew in the Seas adjoining to Jamaica? Besides what he has
about its being found and found again has almost confounded me I must confess.
His Intelligencer says, 'twas found in Wales. He, that it grows in the Seas of
Jamaica: That it is frequently found Fossile (mark the Phrase) in England: That
he has some of it found here, which was many years since found out by Mr.
Beaumont: That there are many things found in the Seas of Jamaica, not to be
found in these Parts, (i. e. in England) which are frequently to be dug up in
the Inland Parts of England, where yet after all they do not grow. This in my
sense is to say it was found in Wales but grow in Jamaica: 'Twas frequently
found in England, and by way of reinforcement 'twas found here, and many years
since found. And that there are many things growing in those Seas, (...) found
in these Parts of England, which are frequently dug up (or found) in the Inland
parts of England, where yet they do not grow, or are not found. This to a Man
of Ordinary Understanding is pretty odd! What would the drift of this be did
the Author put it into English.


Virtuos. I see Sir you are altogether a Stranger to the Language of our
Author's Writings and the present Philosophical Transactions, otherwise you
would easily have known the meaning of all this. Had you read them as often as
I, our way of expressing our selves would have been a little more familiar to
you, therefore have but recourse to 'em, and your difficulties will vanish,
mean while to proceed to other Instances of the Excellency and Perfections of
our Authors Style. Numb. 237. p. 52. We are informed, That the Herb taken by
Dampier to be Jews Ear is the Lichen terrestris cinereus described by Mr. Ray,
-- and grows in most barren places about London, and all over England.


Gent. I thought Barren places had not been so well stocked with Herbs.


Virtuos. Strange! What it is to be unacquainted with a Modern Style. You
altogether misapprehend the Authors peculiar way of expressing himself.


Gent. I must confess I don't well understand it; for I thought that since they
grew in Barren Places and all over England, the Author had thought all England
Barren.


Virtvos. No, by no means, all England is not Barren; but I shall leave the
Author to explain himself, I shall rather proceed to other Instances of our
Transaction-Writer's great Abilities. I suppose you have heard of Jamaica
Pepper. See Transaction Numb. 192. p. 464.


Gent. Yes Sir, every Kitchen Girl about the Town knows Jamaica Pepper. But why
do you ask me that Question?


Virtuos. Because if you had not heard of it I should have given you a fuller
account of it. His Genius in Poetry.
But since you know it already, I shall entertain you with a Copy of Verses
upon it, writ by our Author.

Myrtus Arborea foliis laurinis aromatica: sive
Piementa, Jamaica Pepper or all-Spice-Tree.
This Tree has a Trunk as thick as ones Thigh,
Rising straight for about 30 foot High;

Gent. Most excellent Poetry indeed!


Virtuos. Yes Sir, It is a mixture of designed Poetry and Accedental Poetry.


Gent. Pray what distinction do you make betwixt designed and Accidental Poetry.


Virtuos. Why, the two First Verses were designed for Verses, but the Third and
Fourth were writ for Prose; and happened to be Poetical; according to our
Author's Genius.


Gent. In what Parts of Jamaica does this Tree grow?


Virtuos. It grows on the hilly Parts of the Island of Jamaica, Politics in
Gardening.
but chiefly on the Northside thereof; and wheresoever these Trees grow, they
are generally left standing when others are felled, or they are sometimes
planted where they never grew, because of the great Profit from the cured fruit.


Gent. The Truth of the Matter is, these Gardiners are generally Politicians in
their Way: for if I misremember not the same measures are generally taken in
England; for Apple and Cherry-Trees are generally left standing, and planted
sometimes where they never grew, though other sort of Trees are felled down and
burnt, and not otherwise regarded. Skill in Botanickss*
But now you talk of Gardening; if I remember right, I have heard that this
same Learned Gentleman is a great Botanist.


Virtuous. An Extraordinary one! Numb. 182. he gives the following just Account
of the Arbor Baccifera, laurifolia, aromatica Fructu viridi calycularo ramoso,
The Bark consists of two parts one outward, and another inward.


Gent. That Is common to all Barks, for I know none but it has an outside and
an inside.


Virtuos. But you misapprehend; this Bark is different from all others, for
it is Two Barks; our Author uses Parts and Barks as synonimous Terms.


Gent. But how will your Author make the Bark, Two Barks?


Virtuos. This he does by dividing the word Bark in Two Parts, and then calling
each of those Parts a Bark, for says he, The outward Bark is thin as a milled
Shilling, the inward Bark being as thick as a milled Crown piece. Mark the
aptness of the Similies. But the Excellency of our Author in describing Plants
will be much more evident if we look upon what follows, for a little after he
adds, The ends of the Twigs are branched into bunches of Flowers, standing
something like Umbels, each of which has a Foot-stalk, on the Top of which is
a Calix made up of some soliola, in which stand Five Purple Petala, within
which is a Large Stylus.


Gent. Pray where lies the Excellency of all this? The Style is so lofty I am
not able to discern it.


Virtuous. The Excellency! Where should it lie but in the Umbels, the Calix,
the Foliola, and the Purple Petala; these are high flowing Words, and not
common English. But to proceed, To these follow so many Calyculated Berries.


Gent. Pray what is the meaning of Calyculated Berrios?


Virtuos. It Is only a Term of our Author's.


Gent. And is not the Phrase ( To these follow) your Author's too.


Virtuos. Yes, Yes, a peculiar Phrase of his own.


Gent. Indeed he is a happy Man in forming new Phrases, and in coining of Words.


Virtuos. Our Friend Mr. Ray Sir, is every whit as happy at Invention, for
Numb. 221. in his Account of our Author's Catalogue of Jamaica Plants, he not
only tells us, that the Dr. resolves many Doubts and Diffities in it relating
to the Toddy-Tree, the Sower-sop, the Bonavists, and the Dildoe. But to make it
more useful and entertaining, has added this very Learned Note of his own.
Ceterum Dildoe nonnullis Priapum fictitium significat, quo effraenis lascivae
mulierculae abuti solent ad nefariae quoddam libidinis genus seu coitum
umbratilem exercendum. But why do I insist so much upon our Author's Skill in
coining Words and in Botanicks, The Author's Sagacity and Skill in Physic.
since his Skill in Physic alone would be enough to establish a lasting
Reputation for him, for Numb. 238. He has by his great Sagacity and Skill in
that Art, not only discovered Ipecacuanha to be harmless and helpful, but --


Gent. O dear Sir, you need insist no longer on that Topic, he must be a Man
of a wonderful Sagacity, and Skill to discover that a helpful Medicine was
harmless,


Virtuos. I profess, it argues much clearness of Judgment, and insight into the
Fabric and Constitution of a Human Body. But for a farther Confirmation of his
profound Judgment, I shall add, a Caution he has seasonably given to the
World, relating to the use of Cynocrambe, see Numb. 203. for Matthews and his
Wife and Three Children, having been lately very ill and like to dye by eating
too much of it. Our Learned Annotator, gives the following Advice, Whether the
Quality or Quantity of this Herb were the Cause of its Effects I know not, but
I think, that every body will do well to be cautious and wary in the use of it
in such Quantities after such a warning.


Gent. Truly, I think, the Author has done extraordinary well to caution the
World; for if it had such dreadful Effects upon Matthews and his Wife; it would
have been a great Reflection upon the Prudence of such People, as, through
Indiscretion, should have suffered by it, after so fair a warning, for want of
this Caution.


Virtuos. The Doctor could have no other end in it, besides the good of Mankind
and his own Reputation. Which Considerations have induced him to publish much
more for the benefit of Mankind; for after he has informed us, Numb. 253.
That there are many People who are of Opinion, that the swallowing Stones or
Pebbles is very beneficial to the Health, because they see Birds languish
unless they swallow Gravel or small Stones. He adds, I was consulted, but was
always against this Practice in Men, for I knew one that dyed by the use of
them. Now what a vast insight into the Effects of Non-Naturals upon Human
Bodies must a Man have to be thus aware of them. I was always against the use
of them, says he, because I knew one who suffered by them.


Gent. Every Body must own he is a great Man in his way.


Virtuos. In his way? He Is a great Man in every thing; he is Universally
Qualified: A great Botanist, a great Physician, a great Philosopher, a great
Man, and a great Naturalist.


Gent. Pray what has he done in that Way.


Virtuos. Done, Sir, he has exceeded the Age in every thing, he has been so
Curious that nothing almost has passed him.


Gent. What are the most Considerable Passages in Natural History, Discoveries
in Natural History.
which he has taken notice of?


Virtuos. The first piece I shall mention is, an Account of a China Cabinet.
This Sir, is a Rarity that few People have thought worth their while to write
Dissertations about, or indeed, worth their Notice; but I can assure you, our
Virtuoso, who is indeed the wonder of his Age, values it at a high Rate, and
has taken care to adorn several of the Transactions with an Account of its
Contents and has Graven them curiously upon Copper Plates, see Trans. Numb.
346.


Gent. O dear! a great deal of Curosity must needs lie in those things: And the
Curosity of the Dr. as well as his Humility in stooping to take notice of such
Trifles is very Commendable.


Virtuos. Sir, He has not so much as nelected an Ear-picker or a Rusty Razor,
for he values any thing that comes from the Indies or China at a high Rate; for
were it but a Pebble, or a Cockle-shell from thence, he would soon write a Comment
upon it, and perpetuate its Memory upon a Copper-plate.


Gent. Pray do you remember whose Picture that is, that is Graven among the
Razors and Tooth-pickers, what is it the Author's?


Virtuos. Fie! No, It Is a Chinesses Eigure, wherein is represented one of that
Nation, using one of these Instruments (that is an Ear-picker) and expressing
great satisfaction therein. See Transact. Numb. 246.


Gent. A great deal of satisfaction, indeed for a Man to stand picking his
Ears? But pray of what use are the China Ear-pickers of, in the way of
Knowledge?


Virtuos. Why, the Learned Author has made this useful Comment upon it, says
he, Whatever pleasure the Chinese may take in thus picking their Ears. I am
certain most People in these Parts who have had their Hearing impaired, have
had such Misfortunes first come to them, by picking their Ears too much.


Gent. Why then were they brought into these Parts, if they be of such
mischievous Consequence?


Virtuos. The chief design was to entertain the Philosophical Secretary; for he
took as much satisfaction in looking upon the Ear-Picker as the Chinese could
do in picking his Ears. And truly I think that Learned Naturalist is obliged in
Gratitude to make some suitable Return of our English Rarities to the Chinese.
And I hope in time to see in the Philosophical Transactions, not only the
Pictures and Descriptions of all the old Razors and ill-shapen Knives in China;
but it is to be hoped that the Rarities of our own Country will be taken into
Consideration, and likewise their Pictures curiously engraven upon Copper.


Gent. Yes by all means; especially since they may be purchased at so cheap a
Rate; for any Cobbler about the Town will be willing to communicate an odd
figured Knife to a Curious Person if it may any way contribute to the
Advancement of Natural Knowledge.


Virtuos. Contribute to the Advancement of Natural Knowledge? There Is no doubt
of it, or any thing of less moment; for there is not an odd colored or an ill
shapen Pebble in the Kingdom, but the Secretary will manage it so as to make it
contribute to the general heap of Transactions; he makes it his peculiar
Business; and of late he is become one of the most complete, I had almost said a
most accomplished Naturalist.


Gent. Truly any body in his Senses would think so, for he is a Man of
prodigious Qualifications, and Wondrous Natural Parts. But pray what other
Rarities has he received from China?


Virtuos. Numb. 247. This Learned Person gives an account of a kind of Down of
a dark yellowish snuff color, shining like silk, some of it a quarter of an
Inch long; and that which makes it more remarkable, is, not only its being like
Snuff and like Silk but it also resembles the Lanugo of Scandent and Tree
Ferns, and some of our Capillaries at the same time.


Gent. I am afraid, it resembles so many different things at the same time that
it can scarce be like it self; but what use do they make of it?


Virtuos. It is pretended, That some of the small Down may, by being swallowed,
easily slip into the Windpipe, without choking the Person.


Gent. That Is an odd Quality indeed. But what other Rarities are described in
this China Cabinet?


Virtuos. Page 462. Eight several Instrumemts made for pairing the Nails, at
which in China the People are very curious and dextruous. As also an Instrument
much like a Horse Curry-comb, with which they curry the Natives, as we do
Horses. But besides these, our Learned Author tells us, it contained a
Seahorse Tooth, a Pair of Brass Twezers, a Purse made of Straw, One
wide-toothed Comb, One strait-toothed Comb, an Instrument to clean the Combs, a
Sheet of brown Paper from China, a Black Scarabeus, a Scarlet Butterfly, an
Ash-colored Capricorn, a Locust and a Phalaena all to pieces, a Painter's
Brush, etc.


Gent. These things must needs be of great use, especially the Brass Twezers
and the Combs.


Virtuos. Of extraordinary use! and It were to be wished, says our Curious
Annotator, that other Travelers into Foreign Parts, would make such Enquiries,
into such Instruments and Materials that are any manner of way for the Benefit
or innocent Delight of Mankind. As Tooth-pickers, Razors, Earpickers, etc.


Gent. I profess, we are much obliged to the Doctor, for he is a great Promoter
of Philosophical and Innocent Mirth; for there is scarce any thing that is
Comical and Diverting, but he takes care to place it in the Philosophical
Transactions.


Virtuos. But these are not all the Rarities we are obliged to the Doctor for
from beyond Seas; for says he, N. 232. A Fellow of the College of Physicians
and Royal-Society did me the favor sometime since, to show me a considerable
Number of Fossile Bones and Shells of several sorts he had lately come to his
Hands from Maryland. One of these Fossiles I had the favor to carry home with
me to compare with the Tongue of a Fish I had observed in Jamaica, and
comparing them we found a perfect agreement of the Tongue that was dug up in
Maryland, and that taken from the Pastinaca Marina, frequent in the Seas of
Jamaica. A part of one of the joints of this Tongue was dug up in England.


Gent. Pray what does this contribute to the Advancement of Natural Knowledge?


Virtuos. You mistake the Design, it was never intended to advance Natural
Knowledge; For who is the wiser for knowing that the Bones of a dead Fish have
been dug up, or where? No, the true use of the Story is to amuse the Ignorant;
for if they Talk of things that are out of the way; we presently make an
Harangue about the Mandibulum of a Pastinaca Marina found Fossile in Maryland,
and then they are silenced at an instant.


Gent. By this I perceive your Secretary is a Politician.


Virtuos. Yes, and a Virtuoso too, of a new Sort; for he has Honored several
Persons of his own Kidney with the Titles of Virtuoso's. and it is to be hoped,
they will contribute their Mites in a little time: But Alas! most of these of
his Creation are mere Beuxes, they are afraid of discomposing their
Intellectuals by Studying.


Gent. Nothing is to be expected from them as yet: Besides, the Secretary wants
not Materials for the Transactions.


Virtuos. No, Rarities in the Animal Kingdom.
no, he has Materials enough, from his Country Correspondents; and if he
should not he can substitute Historical Relations picked up by his own
Industry. As for Example, Numb. 240. He gives us Account of one Edmund Melleon,
Born at Port Leicester, he was Seven Foot Six Inches high; the length of his
Span Fourteen Inches; of his Cubit Two Foot Two Inches; of his Arm Three Foot
Two Inches and a half; from the Shoulder to the Crown of his Head 11 and Three
fourths; his Name Edmund Melleon. How long his depending Parts were, I did not
Enquire, nor whether he was Pot-bellied.


Gent. What was his Father's Name, and of what Stature?


Virtuos. What Is that to Edmund Melleon, what his Father's Name was?


Gent. Altogether as necessary as to know that Melleon's Name was Edmund? But I
don't urge it further: Pray proceed to set forth the Excellency of the Doctor.


Virtuos. That sets forth itself: Grammar remarkable.
But if you please, I shall proceed to give you an Account of another
Remarkable Passage taken notice of in the Philosophieal Transactions, N. 242.
for which we are obliged to him: In Pall Mall at London lived one Clark, who
was called the Posture Master; that had such an absolute Command of his Muscles
and Joints, that he can (i. e. could) dis-joynt almost all his whole Body. He
was a well grown Fellow, yet he would appear in all the Deformities that can be
imagined, as Hunch-backed, Pot-bellied Sharp-breasted; he dis-joynted his Arms,
Shoulders, Legs and Thighs, that he will (instead of would) appear as great an
Object of Pity as any Man, and he has often Imposed on the same Company where
has been just before to give him Money, as a Cripple. He turns his Face into
all shapes, so that by himself he Acts all the uncouth Faces, of a
Transactioneer pausing over a China Ear-picker.


Gent. How came this Man to Act the part of a Conjurer so Naturally, what is
the Secretary's Opinion of it?


Virtuos. He Is of Opinion, That it depended upon bringing his Body to it, by
using himself to it.


Gent. Ah! Doubtless, if he had never been used to it he could never have done
it.


Virtuos. It Is an Old Saying, That Custom makes perfect.


Gent. Yes Sir, and therefore your Learned Author is so perfect in the Points
you have mentioned; but I suppose, you have more of his Discoveries to produce
yet, they are so diverting I would scarce wish them at an end.


Virtuos. Never fear that, they are not at an end; but I am almost weary of
repeating them. However, I shall give you an Account of Two or Three things
more worth your Observation. Have you any Skill in Navigation?


Gent. Very little.


Virtuos. But do you think, Skill in Navigation.
you could Guide a Ship from Jamaica to Scotland, or Ireland?


Gent. I believe not.


Vituos. Alas! You understand very little then indeed; for our Secretary gives
us a^ Account of Four silly Beans that could Stea^ that Course; though they never
understood the least Navigation.


Gent. What Beans are those pray?


Virtuos. They are frequently run ashore on the Orkney Islands, Numb. 222.
They are thrown up pretty frequently in great Numbers, and are no otherwise
regarded than as they serve to make Snuff-Boxes. Yet they show them much more
favor than we do our Beans; for they are devoured by Horses and Hogs.


Gent. These are strange Beans indeed.


Virtuos. Yes Sir, says he, I have had a great desire to see what these Beans
were, they talked so much of them, thinking they might be something more than
Beans.


Gent. And did he get a sight of them at the last?


Virtuos. Yes, and discovered, that Three of them grew in Jamaica,. The First
is called Cocoons, by me Phaseolus maximus perennis folio decomposito Lobo,
maximo contorto. It is well figuered by the Name Perim Kakuvalli in the Hortus
Malabricus, and ill figured in another Place; and ill described in this Place.

The Second sort of Bean is called the Horse-Eye-Bean, for its resemblance to
the Eye of that Beast, by reason of a Hilus almost surrounding it.

The Third kind of Bean, is called the Ash-colored Nickar, as being very like
a Nickar.

The Fourth kind of Bean, is well described and ill figured by Clusius.

But now I come to the Navigation; for How these several Beans should come to
the Scotch Isles and one of them to Ireland, seems very hard to determine. Yet
our Author says too; It is easy to conceive.


Gent. How can that be? Hard to determine, and easy to be determined too!


Virtuos. If you will have patience you will see it is hard to determine; for they
might be tossed with Storms and driven out of the most Obvious Road; but it is
easy to conceive, that growing in Jamaica in the Woods, they may either fall
from the Trees into the Rivers, or be any other way conveyed by them into the
Seas. It is likewise very easy to conceive that being got to the Sea, and
floating in it, and the Neighborhood denying them the Liberty of Landing in
their own Country, they may take a Resolution of Transplanting themselves into
another Country, and meeting with a stop on the main Continent of America, is
forced (mark the Grammar, they is forced) through the Gulf of Florida, or
Canal of Bahama, going there constantly East and into the North American- Sea.
But how they should come the rest of their Voyage I cannot tell; (for they
could give no Account of themselves, except the Beans being brought North by
the Current of the Gulf of Florida, are put in the westerly Winds way, and may
be supposed by this means at last to arrive in Scotland; little thinking, that
after so long and difficult a Voyage, instead of Propagating their Species,
they should be turned into Snuff-Boxes, and no otherwise regarded.


Gent. This it is to come into a strange Country without being able to give an
Account of one's self.


Virtuos. Phoo! There was no need of giving an Account of themselves, there was
one in England that had given them a Visit in Jamaica that was able to do that
sure.


Gent. Yes? Indeed he is a most Accomplished Gentleman.


Virtuos. Gentleman! He Is a Doctor of Physic, and understands the Structure of
a Man's Body so well, that not the least Accident can happen in any Part of it,
but he presently gives you the Rationale of it. To confirm what I have said in
this Respect. I need allege no more, than what he has offered concerning
Suffocation, for when the Point was Debated at Hartford Sizes about Mrs.
Stout's being Drownned; he very Learnedly delivered his Opinion of Drowning in
the following words; and says, See Mr. C^^per's Trial.
Water swallowed by the Gullet will not Drown.


Gent. And does he prove it too?


Virtuos. Prove it? Therer's no need of proving it, it is self-evident;
nevertheless, to convince those who do not use to swallow by the Gullet, he
adds, Drunkards who swallow freely a great deal of Liquor, and those who are
forced by the Civil-Law to Drink a great quantity of Water have no Suffocation,
or Drowning upon them.


Gent. Truly those are Two Instances sufficient to convince any Reasonable Man,
that he may be Drunk, or Drink Water without being Drowned: But what is this
Learned Man's Definition of Drowning?


Virtuos. He says, He takes Drowning in a great measure, to be thus, viz. That
though it is very likely, when one struggles (he may to save himself from being
Choked) swallow some Quantity of Water, yet that is not the cause of his
Death; but that which goes into the Windpipe and Lungs.


Gent. If swallowing Water is not the cause of his Death; how does that which
goes into the Windpipe cause it, does not the Person swallow that? Or does he
swallow it to save himself from being choked?


Virtuos. Swallow it to prevent Choking? By no means; he does not swallow it
at all. It goes into the Windpipe; and though Water swallowed will not Choke;
yet when it goes into the Lungs it will; which this Learned Physician thus
Demonstrates, In Prescriptions when People are very weak, or forced to take
Medicines, I have observed some Spoonfuls in that Condition (if it went the
wrong way) to have Choked or Suffocated the Person; whence it appears, that
Choking is not caused by swallowing Water, but by its entrance the wrong way.
In which Case it may be said to go into the Lungs.


Gent. But what is this to the Question first Debated?


Virtuos. Why, The Qustion being put Whether the Woman was Strangled and so
Suffocated; or whether she was Drowned? Our Learned Evidence, only offers to
show, That if she was Suffocated or Choked by Water, it must get into her
Lungs. Whereas in those that are Choked or Strangled, nothing at all gets into
them. So that the Sum of our Doctor's Evidence proves, That if she was
Strangled or Choked before she was thrown into the Water, she could not be
Choked again in the Water, except Water went the wrong way, as in
Prescriptions, etc. And thus much might be sufficient to show our Doctor's
great Skill in the Machanism of a Body: One of the main Points necessary in an
Accomplished Physician. But as a further Instance of his great Knowledge, I
shall add another Passage of his Evindence, which is, That without force after
Death little Water will get into the Stomach, because for that it should
swallowing is necessary, which after Death cannot be done. In which Passage the
Phrases not only come very Naturally from the Doctor (as for that it should,
etc.) but he very Judiciously tells us, that Men cannot swallow after Death,
and therefore those who would put Water into a Dead Man must use force to get
it in. Which I think, is a demonstration of the Doctor's great Skill in Anatomy.


Gent. Yes indeed, and if all you have said of him be True, he is not only a
great Physician, but a Botanist, and a Naturalist, and every thing. Pray where
does he live, and what are his Hours? I have something to communicate to him,
which perhaps may be acceptable.


Virtuos. His Hour in an Afternoon is betwixt Six and Seven, any Body will tell
you where to find him; pray if you light of him, give my Service to him.


Gent. I Will certainly do that.


Virtuos. He Is a very Modest Civil Gentleman; you must be sure to Compliment
him; and he will take it very kindly, for the Envious World so seldom does it,
he will be both surpised and mightily pleased at it.


Gent. I shall take care to Compliment as well as I can; and I don't know well
how I can fail, for I can think of none of his Performances but I must either
hold my Tongue, or Compliment.


Virtuos. I am glad you have so good an Opinion of him.


Gent. Sir, I have no other Opinion of him but what he deserves, and how good
it is, I shall leave to his Friends to judge. Sir your Servant.


DIALOGE II. Between a Gentleman AND A TRANSACTIONEER.
Gent. SIR, I am very glad I have the Happiness to meet with you, so
opportunely; I have been just now Talking with a Friend of yours concerning
some Passages in the Philosophical Transactions: And the great Character he
has given you, and the Learned Passages of your own Writings which he has
Collected together to justify that Character, have made me uneasy, till I had
the Happiness, to pay my Humble Respects to you.


Transact. Indeed I am very much obliged both to him and you.


Gent. Sir, the chife end of my Visit now, next to paying my Respects to you,
is to Communicate some Philosophical Matters, which if you think fit to Publish
in your Philosophical Transactions, are at your service.


Transact. Pray what may they be?


Gent. Sir, at present I shall only offer you a Definition of a Shell, and a
Crust.


Transact. I desire a sight of it.


Gent. Here it is, Sir.


Transact. A Shell properly is such a hard substance as covers an entire
Animal, N. 219.
as an Oyster-shell: A Crust is such a hard substance as covers only One
particular Joint of the included Animal. Sir I am your Servant if you light of
any thing of this Nature you will oblige me very much in communicating it, and
do the World a great deal of service.


Gent. I shall be glad if any thing I can offer may oblige one the World has
such an Opinion of.


Transact. Truly I am obliged to the World, for their Opinion of me. And if any
thing I can do to promote Natural Knowledge may be of Service to them, I shall
not spare my Labor.


Gent. O Sir, you have taken a great deal of Pains already; for the Compiling
so many Philosophical Volumes in Quarto, must take up a great deal of Time, nor
could they be made fo Polite and Correct, without as great Application.


Transact. It is indeed, a Laborious Work; for besides Compiling of so many
Volumes; the great Correspondence which I am obliged to keep, is no small
trouble.


Gent. It cannot choose but be troublesome, but your Happy Choices and the
Philosophical Returns they make you recompense the Trouble.


Transact. If it were not for that, it would be a mere piece of Slavery; but as
you say, the Discoveries and Improvements which are Communicated by my
Correspondents make me value the Trouble much less; for I think, for Weight,
Usefulness, and other Circumstances, the Papers I have Published in the
Transactions are not inconsiderable.


Gent. Inconsiderable! You have quite outdone Mr. Oldenburg, for the World
never thought he Published enough; but you heap Philosophical Relations
together at such a Prodigious Rate, that you Publish Transactions as fast again
as they desire you. The World is quite overpowered with them.


Transact. Why truly I have used my utmost Diligence and Care, that not the
least thing in Nature should escape my Notice, And I am infinitely obliged to
my Correspondents for their Industry.


Gent. Truly they are to be commended; But methinks it would be of great use to
the World, if the most Considerable Passages in those Papers were Collected
together, and Published for the use of the Learned.


Transact. I have done that already; and if you please I will give you an
Account of those which I have a more peculiar Relish for, and value at the
highest Rate.


Gent. Sir. it will be a very great Favor, and I shall be very much obliged to
you.


Transact. I can never be to seek where to begin then, as long as there is such
a Personage as Mr. J -- Pet -- r in the Philosophical World. He Is a F. of the
R. S. indeed! I made him so. It Is my way of Rewarding my Friends and
Benefactors. We now begin to call it Our Royal-Society ( mus Pet. C. 5.) One
would never think it that looks upon him, but he is certainly the Darling of the
Temple Coffee. House Club.


Gent. Pray what is that?


Transact. Oh lay! Why don't you know? Where can you have lived? Why you must
be an utter Stranger to Philosophy, and all pretty Things? never heard of the
Temple Club? Oh for shame, let us see you there a Friday Night. I Am President
there, and I Will assure you there are many odd Things. And Mr. Pet -- r is, Gad
he is every thing. He Is the very Muffti, the Oracle of our Club. For my part I
never saw any thing like him exactly.


Gent. No, I believe not.


Transact. Oh then I perceive you know Mr. James --


Gent. No indeed, not I.


Transact. No, I wonder at that, you ought to be acquainted with him. I Will be
the Instrument of bringing it about. Sir, he and I are all one. You must know
we club Notions, laying them up in a kind of Joynt-Stock, and have all things
in common: Sometimes he draws, and sometimes I, as we have occasion. But he
pays in most plenteously. By my good will I would never be without him. I call
him the Philosophic Sancho, and he me Don. I own I have learnt more of him
than ever I did at Orange, or any where else.


Gent. Orange, Sir?


Transact. Yes, I knew 'twas quicker and cheaper than at Leyden or Padua, so I
was Dubbed Doctor there. En passant, whip and away. But for Mr. Pet -- r he is
an Author, and has Treated on the same Topics that I have. Have you read the
Musaeum Pettiverianum, or his Treatises in my Transactions.


Gent. No really; but I observe, all People smile when they mention him, I
believe he is mighty Diverting.


Transact. The most of any thing in Nature. But how should a Man of his Parts
be otherwise? Oh the Specimens of Modern Magnificence and Improvement, he has
given the Learned World ( Trans. N. 236.) His First Century, consists of
several Animals and Plants wholly New. (Trans. N. 224. And pray mark how
Considerable they are; and how much Mankind are indebted to his Labor and
Study. The Animals are Snails, and Beetles, Caterpillars, Spiders, and others
of the like sort: The Plants Rushes, Thistles, Mosses, with abundance more of
equal worth. But above all, Butterflies are his main Delight. He gives'em
strange Cramp Names, and values himself for being the first Catcher. Papilos
leucomelanos, says he, is not yet clearly Described by any Author, Trans. N.
224. And perhaps had never been Described, woe the day! had it not been for this
Author. He looks as big upon his Botanick Acquisitions. Say he, Be it known
that I have this Year (besides several before) received near 20 Volumes in
Folio filled with fair and perfect Specimens of Trees, (Mus Pet.) But he is most
lucky in the assigning the Reasons of the Names of his Rarities. He has Shells
called BLACKMOORS TEETH, I suppose, says he, from their WHITENESS. (Trans. N.
224.) Now we are on this Subject, I ought to acquaint you, he values nothing
that has not as many Titles and Names as the King of Persia. He will find in
one Author or other 20 Names for the same Thing! And thinks it impossible to
Enumerate the many Advantages that will occur from thus synomizing of Authors
(ib.) and Elsewhere he speaks very big of the English, that is himself and me*
as to their Critical Methods in their Discoveries of Non-descript Species, and
their Judicious References to the synonimous Names of various Writers, whereby
the terrible Vices of Confusion and Multiplicity have been much Corrected.
(Trans. N. 236.) There Is my Style too exactly: Only a little more clear. He Is
as successful in his Descriptions as in his Synonimizings. Take an Instance in
his Tortoise, says he, It Is guarded along the Back with around Edge. Do you
mark? His Head about the bigness of a Horse-Bean; the Orbits of his Eyes very
large.


Gent. How? The Head no bigger than a small Bean, and yet his Eyes very large!
Why sure his Eyes are not in his Head.


Transact. Pray let me go on. His Snout like a Parrot's Bill, his upper Jaw
including the under: Is not that pretty? Each Foot has Four sharp Claws like a
Mouse.


Gent. Claws like a Mouse?


Transact. Ay, and his Tail taper and about half an Inch long. Trans. N. 246.
Is not this Admirable! But he is not Inferior as to Physic. He has an Affrican
Materia Medica, whose innocent Practice consists of no more Art than
Composition. Trans. N. 232. My own Phrase again! it is as much as to say,
harmless and helpful. Vid. page 12. But hear this Affrican Doctor -- He has
Aclo^a good for Crocoes or Itch. Bumbunny boiled and drank causes to Vomit.
Affunena boiled and drank causes a Stool. Ambetuway causes an Appetite to any
Sick Person. Attrumaphee boiled and drank causes the great sort of Pox to skin
and dry -- and is good against the Phrensy. Mening is good for the stoppage of
the Head. Apputtasy is good for the Scurvey in the Mouth. Of the two last he
and I have taken abundance, but without Effect. Nor is Mr. Pett -- r's Physic
beyond his Breeding; really he is a Person of singular Address. It is, says he
to me, my great Ambition to approve my self your obliged humble Servant. See my
Trans. N. 232. He styles mine A most Excellent Catalouge of Jamaica Plants, ib.
Nay he says, I have been pleased to show such an admirable Skill and Talent
this Way, as will hardly be matched either in past, present or future Ages. And
this I have taken care to Print in my Transactions. N. 236.


Gent. Truly you are mighty happy in the Applause of a Person of his Judgment.
And give ye your due, ye vouch heartily for one another. Shure that is the
reason so few others speak well of ye.


Transact. Oh no, It Is Envy, mere Envy. The invidious World cannot bear the
Luster we cast. Mr. Pett -- r concludes his Musaeum, with a Catalogue of his
Kind Friends. I Will read them.


Gent. Indeed I Will save you the Labor. Let them stand as they do. No body sure
will disturb, or Envy them the Honor of being in that Catalogue. And for
Collections of Rarities, they must needs be in mighty Renown and Credit since
Mr. Pett -- r has been pleased to show such an admirable Skill and Tallent that
way. But pray Sir proceed in the Account of your Transactions.


Transact. The next thing I take notice of as very Considerable, and of
Extraordinary Use to the Curious, is, the great Skill in Botanicks, Observable
in my other Correspondents, for you must know, my peculiar Genus is most
inclined to Botanicks.

And First, Skill in virtues of Herbs.
As for the Virtues of Medicines, it has not only been discovered by Dr.
Mullen that Irish Mackenboy Root may be carried in the Pocket three days
without purging, but what has been observed of the strange Effects of Papaver
Corniculatum is very remarkable, for N. 242. we have the following account. In
my Itinerary from London to Margaret Island. (mark the Elegancy of the Word
Itinerary) and thence most by the Seashore to the Lands-End, to observe what
Plants each Part produced. Between Pentsants and Macketjew, lived one Charles
Worth an Apothecary, The Case of Charles Worth.
who causing a Pie to be made of the said Poppy -- and eating of the said Popy
Pie, whilst hot, was presently taken with such a kind of a Dilirium, as made
him fancy that most that be saw was Gold, and calling for a Chamber Pot, being
a White Earthen one, after having purged by stool into it; he broke it into
pieces, and bid the bystanders to save them, for they were all Gold.


Gent. Methinks your Correspondent is very Circumstantial in Relating the
Circumstances and Symptoms of the Dilirium.


Transact. O dear Sir! There was an absolute necessity to be exact in
Particulars, for had he only told us, that the Herb Purged and caused a
Dilirium, how must we have known that he made use of an Earthen-Chamber-Pot,
that he purged into it, and then broke it.


Gent. Truly as you say we should have been altogether at a loss there: And to
speak Truth; the most diverting Circumstances would have been wanting.


Transact. Yes, The Pleasant Circumstances set off the Story, for People purge
into Chamber-Pots and are Dilirious, that never took Papaver Corniculatum.


Gent. But pray, What does this contribute to the Advancement of Natural
Knowledge?


Transact, If it increases Knowledge, it certainly advances it: And pray, Does
not a Man know more that knows the Chamber Pot was broke, than he that hears of
a Dilirium, and Purging? But these were not all the Effects of Papaver
Corniculatum. For, The Man and Maid Servants, having also eat of the same Pie,
stripped themselves quite naked, so danced one against another a long time.


Gent. Truly they had more satissaction in their Dilirium, than the Master
could have in breaking a dirty Chamber Pot, one would think. But did not the
Master and the Maid dance one against another?


Transact. If they had, it would have been Papaver Corniculatum inddeed, but I
cannot tell that; only The Mistress, who was gone to Market, coming home, and
saying how now? What is here to do? The Maid turned her brich against her, and
purging stoutly, said, there Mistress, is Gold for you.


Gent. This Papaver Corniculatum is a very strange kind of an Herb.


Transact. There Is scarce another in Nature, except Cynocrambe that can cause
such Symptoms.


Gent. Say you so Sir.


Transact. Yes, W. Matthews his Case.
For in Numb. 203. Will. Matthews, his Wife and Three Children, have been
lately ill, and like to die. The manner of their Sickness was very odd, and
therefore I shall give you a particular Account of it.


Gent. Pray do Sir.


Transact. About Three Weeks ago the Woman went into the Feilds to gather some
Herbs, and (having first boiled them) fried them with Bacon for her own and her
Families Supper.


Gent. A very fine piece of Cookery indeed, and very requisite the World should
be acquainted with it, especially the Philosophical Part, they are much obliged
to your Correspondent.


Transact. If I had not thought it useful to Philosophers, I had not taken
notice of it. But pray let me go on with my Story.


Gent. I beg your pardon, for Interrupting you.


Transact. After they had been about Two Hours in Bed, One of the Children fell
very sick, and so did the other Two presently after, which obliged the Man and
his Wife to rise, and take the Children to the Fire, where they spewed and
shit, and within half an Hour fell fast asleep.


Gent. Truly, I think this Cynocrambe is as bad as Papaver Corniculatum, for
those that took that, had some sort of Pleasure in its Operation.


Transact. Indeed, upon second Thoughts, I think it is worse, for they took the
Children to Bed as they were asleep, and they themselves went to Bed too, and
fell faster asleep too than ever they had done before. The Man waked next
Morning about Three Hours after his usual time, went to his Labor at Mr.
Newports, but he says, He thought his Chin had been all the Day in a Fire; and
was forced to keep his Hat full of Water by him all the Day long, and
frequently dipped his Chin in it as he was at Work.


Gent. Pray Sir, Expatiate no more upon this Account, for I think, it no great
matter, whether his Hat was full of Water, or not.


Transact. What? Would you have me give an Account of a Philosophical
Transaction, and not be exact in Relating Matter of Fact.


Gent. O good Sir, Pardon me, be as Circumstantial as you please. It Is a very
Philosophical Transaction indeed. A Woman boiled Herbs and Bacon for Supper;
the Children Purged; the good Man Slept longer than ordinary; went to Work at
Mr. Newports; filled his Hat full of Water, and was so discerning as to think
his Chin was all the Day in the Fire, though he dipped it often in Water. A very
Philosophical Relation, I must needs say, and very fine Circumstances to be
particular in.


Transact. Truly Sir, we ought to be particular in the Circumstances of Things
so Remarkable; for this Herb is described and figured in several Authors, and
therefore we ought to take Notice of its Effects.


Gent. But pray what Inferences, or what Consequential Use do you make of this
Observation?


Transact. Why, from the Effects of this Plant, I draw this Inference, That
whether the Quantity or Quality of this Herb were the Cause of its Effects, I
know not, but think that every Body will do well to be cautious and wary in the
use of it in such Quantities, after such a Warning. For if the Man and his Wife
had Purged as well as the Children, they would have been in a most dreadful
nasty pickle.


Gent. Truly the Caution you give, and the Reasons alleged for it are equally
weighty. But pray are these all the New Discoveries made by your Correspondents
relating to the Virtues of Plants.


Transact. No, Sir. Numb. 231. We are informed, One that would have changed a
Cow for a Bagpipe.
That a certain Woman eating by mistake some Roots of common Hemlock amongst
Parsnips, was immediately seized with Raving and Madness, talked Obscenely, and
could not forbear Dancing, on which Exercise she was so intent, that she would
have given her Cow for a Bag-pipe.


Gent. Poor Woman; it is a pity she should have wanted Company; Why did they not
give some body a Dose of Papaver Corniculatum, to Dance against her.


Transact. I suppose, they were in too much concern to see her so Obscene, and
so foolishly Merry. But not to insist too long on one Subject, I shall proceed
to give you a fuller Account of the Products of my Correspondents, and as soon
as I have given you a couple of Instances of the Aetymology of Words and their
Skill in Logic, I shall proceed to their Medicinal and Chirurgical
Observations.


Gent. Pray Sir use what Method you please, It Is no great matter how they are
ranged.


Transact. Then the First thing I shall offer, is, an Account of the Aetimology
of Ambergreise Ben's Name. Of Ambergreise Ben.
The whole Story runs thus, Numb. 232. I shall at the present let you know the
Account I received from Ambergriese Ben; for so the Man is called from the vast
quantity of that Valuable Commodity he found Two Years ago near
Ambergreise-Point. Now who could ever have guessed at the Reason of this Man's
Name, had it not been accounted for in the Philosophical Transactions.


Gent. Indeed, I believe they would have been at a loss. But pray proceed to
the Logic.


Transact. Yes, Sir, I was longing to let you hear that, for you must know,
Numb. 221. my Correspondent has been able by close Arguing, to tell that Old
Jenkins was Older than Old Parre.


Gent. Pray how does he prove that?


Transact. Thus, Henry Jenkyns departed this Life, Jenkyns Older than Parre.
the Eighth Day of December 1670.

The Battle of Flowdenfield was Fought upon the Ninth Day of September in the
Year of our Lord 1513.

Henry Jenkyns was 12 Years Old wheu Flow denfield was Fought, so he lived 169
Years.

Old Parry lived 152 Years, Nine Months. Ergo, Henry Jenkyns outlived Old
Parre by Computation Sixteen Years.


Gent. Hah! hah! This out-liviving by Computation! Admirable indeed! Well Old
Jenkyns is certainly proved Older than Parre.


Transact. It Is undeniable.


Gent. Pray how came your Friend by a particular Account of all the
Propositions included in the foregoing Argument.


Transact. Take it in his own Words, When I came first to live at Bolton in
Yorkshire, I have forgot my Landlord's Name, but it was told me, That there
lived in that Parish a Man near 150 Years Old. That he had Sworn as a Witness
in a Cause in York* to 120. Years, which the Judges reproving him for, he said,
he was Butler at that time to the Lord Conyers, but truly, it was never in my
Thoughts, to enquire of my Lord Darcy, Whether this last Particular was true,
or no.


Gent. Truly that was a great Oversight; it would have given much Satisfaction
to the Learned World, had my Lord Darcy confirmed it.


Transact. Indeed, I should have been better satisfied my self, for I believed
little of the Story for a great many Years; till one Day being in my Sister's
Kitchen, Henry Jenkyns came in to beg an Alms; I had a mind to examine him; I
told him, he was an Old Man.


Gent. Pray did not he know that before?


Transact. What then? He Would be the apter to believe it.


Gent. You say true indeed.


Transact. And therefore, I desired him to tell me how Old he was? He paused a
little, and said, that to the best of his Remembrance, he was 162 or 3; I asked
him what Public Thing he could remember? He said, Flowdenfield. I asked
whether the King was there? He said, No. I asked him, how Old he might be then?
He said, I believe, I might be between Ten and Twelve; for said he, I was sent
to Northallerton with a Horse-Load Load of Arrows, but they sent a bigger Boy
from thence to the Army.


Gent. You are very Circumstantial indeed in your Relations; but pray of what
use are they to the Advoncement of Knowledge.


Transact. Advantage? Any thing about Old Jenkyns, or Old Parre is very
acceptable to me; and that is enough to make it appear under the General Title
of Philosophical Transactions for the Advancement of Natural Knowledge. But
thus much being said of Old Jenkyns, I shall proceed to Relate promiscuously
what has been of late Discovered relating to Medicine and Chyrurgery,


Gent. Certainly those must be of great Use.


Transact. I suppose you have heard of what happened to Dr. L -- ter.


Gent. What pray?


Transact. Sir, He had the Misfortune to be Scratched by the Tooth of a Porpos,
sometime after the death of it, so that tandem tertius digitus male se habuit,
i. e. at last his Third Finger was sick, Numb. 233.


Gent. Truly I think the Doctor had been happy had he never been sick any where
else but in his Fingure; but since he commenced Author, I fear a Metastasis of
the Morbifick Matter into the Seat of his Understanding.


Transact. I should be concerned for him should it be so. But I shall proceed
to Relate, what I just now promised you, viz. Some of the most Remarkable
Observations in Physic and Surgery, And first, I shall give you an account
of two Medicated Springs, the one Communicated to me by a Welsh Philosopher, A
Medicinal Spring.
and the other by a French Man; The Description of the first is as follows.
There is a Rill about an Ell broad between two Collines, covered with Wood,
about twelve yards from this Spring; The Rill, which falls from a Rock eight or
nine foot high, which makes a very grateful Noise. Numb. 233.


Gent. A very fine Description of a Medicated Spring; surely that grateful
Noise will invite several Curious Persons to take a view of it: But is that the
only Medicinal Quality?


Trans. All that our Philosopher take Notice of. But he tells us farther, The
Spring comes out of a pure white Marle; I thought there had been no white Marle
in Wales, for the Earth is red.


Gent. An Admirable Thought indeed! And it is a Wonder there is any Chalk in
England, for the Soil is not of that Color; this Ingenious Conclusion puts me
in mind of those Verses in Virgil,

Urbem quam dicunt Romam, Melibaee, putavi
Stultus ego huic Nostrae similem --
Sic Canibus catulos similes, sic Matribus haedos
Noram; sic Parvis componercere Magna solebam.
And he must needs be a Man of Wonderful Sagacity in my Opinion, to conclude
all things he knew not, were like those he had before his Eyes.


Transact. But that is not all that may be said, for our Philosopher, for he
has further adorned his Account of this Spring with a Description of a Tree
that grows over it, for says he, About the Spring spreads an Old Oak with Hoary
Moss on the boughs whereof two Crutches.


Gont. A great Ornament indeed! And That grateful Noise, the Hoary Moss and the
two Crutches in the Oak must needs contribute much to the Advancement of
Natural Knowledge, and to the understanding the Nature of this Medicated Spring.


Transact. Truly I must needs own, the French Philosopher has quite outdone
him in that Point, for in his Account of the Mineral Waters at St. Amands, he
tells us not what Trees grow about it; Number. 247.
But that most Sick People are willing to drink some, thinking to swallow in
great Glasses, their Health along with that Water. And likewise, That Acid
Spirits have not fermented at the first with that Water, but afterward it has
made some little Bubbles, which remained to the sides of the Glasses, wherein
were contained the Liquors. Now this Story I admire mightily, especially for
the Elegancy of the Style.


Gent. Yes, It is Extraordinary, it is almost as fine as your own: Remained to
the fides of the Glass, is admirably expressed and much better than stuck to
them, Besides he has said something of the Nature of the Waters.


Transact. And he farther tells us; One may also wash in the Mud of that
Fountain, as Hogs do in our Country. But to proceed to Chirnrgical
Observations. Numb. 233. Medicinal Qualities of Bread and Cheese*
Many in the High-lands, who pretend not to any Skill in Surgery; do venture to
cut the Uvula off when they are troubled with it; and prescribe for a Remedy
thereafter, a piece of Bread and Cheese.


Gent. That Is very remarkable indeed, for very few English People are able to
eat Bread and Cheese when their Throats are cut.


Transact. No matter for that! If the thing be true, that is sufficient
satisfaction. But pray now we are talking of the Uvula. Give me your Opinion of
the Reason of a Cough.


Gent. You are a Physician, and methinks it would be more proper for me to ask
you that Question.


Transact. I think indeed I may as well tell you, for you may guess a thousand
times before you hit on the right Cause.


Gent. Pray what may it be?


Transact. In short, A Cough proceeds from the Chamberlins Landing.


Gent. How can that be?


Transact. That Is a hard Question to Answer. But I am sure it is True. For I
received an Account of it from one of my Correspondents.


Gent. And how does he make it out.


Transact. Why, Number. 233. He tells us, That the Inhabitants of St. Kilda are
every Summer infected with a Cough upon the Chamberlins Landing.


Gent. That Is odd indeed; But how do they Cure it?


Transact. The usual remedy is Giben drank upon Brochan.


Gent. So that the Qualities of the Remedies are as occult as the Cause of the
Cough.


Transact. No, no, The Cause of the Cough is evidently the Chamberlins Landing.
Thus much being said relating to Physic, I should immediately proceed to tell
you the Symptoms of Two Brass Farthings, But I think it more Instructive to
communicate to you some Cautions about Marrying too soon, and some things
relating to Midwifry. And First it has been observed, Arguments against
Marrying soon.
Numb. 233. That Anna George, who continued in the State of Virginity till the
One and fiftieth Year of her Age, Married and brought forth a Boy in the Two
and fiftieth Year of her Age. But Numb. 229. A Negro, in Nevis who Married
before she was in the One and fiftieth year of her Virginity, had this
misfortune. Her Navel did begin to swell and Impostumate, so that most People
did believe she would die. And after one Year and half being with Child, was at
the last delivered by the Navel, for after voiding of a great deal of Ichor and
Matter, there did appear some Bones, which did prove to be a Child. (not the
Bones of a Child, but the Bones were a Child) After the Extraction of the Bones
the Woman was easy, and the Woman did Recover.


Gent. Very Strange indeed!


Transact. Numb. 233. Another Woman who was likewise married before the One and
fiftieth year of her Virginity, was seven years bringing forth a Child Bone by
Bone, and all by the Fundament.


Gent. A long Birth truly! And very strange!


Transact. But Sir, I have another Story as strange as that, For Margaret Parry
lying in with the last of her three Children, some Bones of a Foetus came from
her, after this several other Bones came away, and diverse worked their way by
degrees through the flesh above the Os Pubis. Numb. 243.


Gent. Very strange too! But I am afraid you are imposed upon by your
Correspondents; for I am apt to believe Wounds of the Matrix are not so slight
as to lie open so long as these Stories require, without being Mortal.


Transact. I rely so much upon the sincer^^^ of my Correspondents that I cannot
tell h^w to disbelieve it.


Gent. But do you believe all the Children were born perfect, notwithstanding
Bones came away at several times. Truly I think it impossible: And I wonder how
you should be so apt to believe them.


Transact. I beg your Pardon, If I tell you it is no wonder, for I am not
inclined to destrust Mankind.


Gent. To speak the Truth, indeed you have a peculiar faculty of believing
almost any thing: But pray what Reasons can be given to justify the sincerity
of your Correspondents?


Transact. Reason! Psha! I don't trouble my self to enquire after the Reason of
every thing that is told me; if I should, I should have Work enough to find
Reasons for every thing that is Communicated in the Transactions.


Gent. Nay, I confess, that would be too hard a Task. But I am afraid I have
interrupted you to long.


Transact. Not at all Sir, The next thing I shall give you an account of is, of
a Monstrous Birth: for Numb. 233. another Gentlewoman who lost her Virginity
before the 51 Year of her Age bore an In^^^^ who had Two Heads; A Child's Head
like the Hood of a Monk.
one Head was a Bag ^^sembling the Hood of a Benedictine Monk. But how far he
was concerned in the getting of it, no Body knows but the Parties concerned in
Ipso Facto. It was observable, this Child did not come out Bone by Bone, nor
through the Navel, or the Fundament, but the other way.

Numb. 226. gives an Account of a Child born without a Brain, which had it
lived long enough would have made an Excellent Publisher of Philosophical
Transactions.

Numb. 228. gives an Account of another, that had his Brains in the Nape of his
Neck.

But the most Remarkable Passage which I would have you take notice of is that
Numb. The use of Hermes Seal.
233. Mr. Barrier, found in a Girl about 11 or 12 Years Old instead of a
Matrix, a very thin Membrane placed where the Matrix is. The outward Orifice
was Hermetically sealed up. And if the Chemists in England would take the same
method with some of our Females, they probably might be Maids at 51. And were
the same Method used at Tunquin, News from Tunquin.
it could not be much amiss; for Numb. 243. we are told, That at Tunquin, there
are Women common to any that will hire them, at 8 or 9 Years of Age. But in
England, they are not Women so soon, though they hire themselve betimes too.


Gent. These are most Admirable Stories indeed, to be Published in the
Philosophical Transactions. Pray Sir, how do you come by them?


Transact. Come by them? I am oblged to my Correspondents.


Gent. Indeed your Correspondents are as Judicious, in making Observations, as
you are in Publishing them.


Transact. Pray Sir, don't Compliment me; what I do is for the good of Mankind,
and for the Advancement of Natural Knowledge, and not to gain Applause.


Gent. Truly Sir, you are very Modest, and therefore, I shall decline giving
you what I otherwise by all means think your due.


Tranct. Ay! Pray forbear any thing of that Nature; It Is better to pass our
time away in Inquiries after Knowledge, than Compliments. And therefore I shall
proceed to acquaint you with several promiscuous Observations in Natural
History, which I am infinitely obliged to my Correspondents for, and which you
will say the World will be obliged to me for putting them in the Philosophical
Transactions. And First, I shall let you know, That of late the poor People
have set their Wits, as if it were on the Tenter-hooks, to make Turnep-Bread in
Essex.


Gent. By all means, the World will be very much obliged to you; for Teaching
them to make Turnep-Bread; but I admire the Language of your Correspondent so
much, that I profess, I am the less desirous to hear any thing more of your
Bread,


Transact. I thought the Novelty of the Style would surprise you.


Gent. Surprise me! I am amazed at it. Set their Wits, as if it were on the
Tenter-Hooks! The Simile is very close and noble; But pray proceed to your
Philosophical Entertainment.


Transact. I was about to acquaint you in the next place, with an Account of
the Giants Cause-way in Ireland, which I was very exact in getting from a
person who was rei Compos, and perhaps peritus. But the Prelixity of a
Philosophical Description, will be too tedious at this time. See Numb. 205. I
thought likewise to have told you something of an Arch in Two Stone Chimneys in
Northamptonshire, Numb. 166. As also of a Faetus 16 Years in Utero, Numb. 139.
A Monstrous Child in Jutland, Skulls of Fowls described, and of a Prodigiously
large Feather of the Bird Cunter. But passing by these; I shall proceed to tell
you, That of late, Dr. Ballflour found several Eggs in the Cauda of a Barnacle.
Numb. 222.


Gent. Indeed, if you were not in haste, these things would be very
entertaining.


Transact. They art great Curiosities; and since you like them so well, I care
not much if I give you a particular Account of them.


Gent. Nay, Sir, you are in haste; Pray proceed to the next.


Transact. Then the next thing I shall entertain you with, is, an Account of
some Observations made in the East Indies; Oyster-Shells in Bantam.
almost as Remarkable, as the Contents of the China Cabinet; for Numb. 243. we
are told, That there has been seen an Oyster-shell in Bantam, that has been
about Eighteen Inches Diameter, and several in Moccao, that has been 18 Inches
long.


Gent. Those are Rarities indeed! Several has been 18 Inches long. The
Elegancy of the Style is very singular too.


Transact. This Sir, is true Modern Language, most of my Correspondents
endeavor to imitate me.


Gent. They may imitate, but they will come far short of their Mark; your Style
is too intricate for them. But pray, as to the matter of Fact; You say, there
has been seen a Shell, which has been so big. Was it not so big when it was
seen, if not, as your Story intimates, how could they tell several has been so
big?


Transact. I see you make your Remarks upon every thing I offer almost; And
therefore I must beg your Pardon, if I pretend not to solve Philosophical
Difficulties. But to proceed, I shall give you an Account of stranger things
than these? for Numb. 243. I am informed by the Person that did see it, That at
Batavia, a whole Duck was taken out of the Belly of a Snake: A Duck in the
Belly of a Snake.
And that in Achin they did kill a Snake. that had a whole Deer in it is Belly.


Gent. Prodigious! And almost Incredible.


Transact. These are not half the Strange Stories, delivered in the
Philosophical Transactions, Numb. 225. From Fort St. George, I have the
following Account, In a few Days after my Arrival, the fruits of my Gomroon
Journey showed themselves. For a little below the Instep of my Left Foot a Worm
put out it is Head, which cost me much trouble. But I am told, some People breed
Magots in their Heads without much trouble.


Gent. Yes, Sir, they are Natural to some People.


Transact. God send they breed not in the Heads of any of my Correspondents;
for it will be a great disadvantage to the Public.


Gent. It was very well wished; and I wish they are not got into them already.


Transact. Well, let us hope the best, and proceed to our Philosophical
Entertainment, Numb. 229. we are told, Glass-windows broke by Hail.
That in Hartfordshire, a Storm of Hail broke vast numbers of Pigeons Wings,
and fell foul upon the Crows and Rooks; and broke as many Glass-Windows as cost
4 l. repairing.


Gent. That was an unfortunate Shower indeed to the Master of the House.


Transact. Truly it would vex a Man.


Gent. And mightily entertain a Transactioneer.


Transact, O dear, mighty Diverting. But pray have you heard of such a Bird as
the Scart?


Gent. Why Sir?


Transact. Because I am going to tell you something of it, which is Remarkable.


Gent. Pray what is that?


Transact. Why, Numb. 133. we are told, That all Tribes of Birds are observed
to have their Sentinels. A Scart that stood Sentinel, surpised.
The watchfulness of the Scart is true to a Proverb. I know one who by
surprising the Sentinel, catched 300 in a Night.


Gent. That Is Remarkable indeed: So that if a Virtuoso has a mind to catch
Scarts, he must endeavor to surprise the Sentinel. Is not that the
Philosophical use you make of this Story?


Transact. Yes Sir, That Is the way to catch Scarts.


Gent. That Is sure of mighty use in Natural Philosophy: To know how to catch
Scarts, makes a Man much wiser.


Transact. Certainly, it is something, to know how to surprise them. But to
proceed, Numb. 225. Fish different from one another.
we are informed, That Fish are not only different from other Animals; but
likewise differ very much from one another, there being scarce a Species of
them, that has not remarkable differences.


Gent. That Is really very true, for the Herring is much different from the
Lobster, and the Lobster differs much from the Whiting, and the Whiting from
the Cockle.


Transact. But besides this more obvious Observation it is worth Remarking. That
Fish have their Blood Naturally less hot than ours. So that the Natural Heat of
Ours would be a Fever in them and Mortal: For which Reason they Drink no strong
Liquors, No Fish dye of a Fever,
such as Ale, Beer or Wine; but live continually in the Water, and drink
nothing else. But whether they do this by Instinct, or Tradition I am not yet
informed; but this I can say. I never heard, that so much as one ever dyed of a
Fever.


Gent. That Is very Remarkable indeed.


Transact. But they dye of other Distempers; for Fish are found to dye in Water
frozen over. Occasioned by the freezing of the Water. Their Fins and Tail
assist them in their Passage through the Water, whether they will; but the
dilation of the Air in the Bladder makes them capable of Swimming, after the
same manner as the dilating of the Lungs, and Thorax bear him up in Water.


Gent. Very well observed indeed.


Transact. Flat Fish have none of this Bladder, for they are able by reason of
their Breadth to keep themselves upon the Water.


Gent. But I think a broad Stone is as apt to sink as a narrow one; as a
Millstone will sink as another Stone that is not quite so broad.


Transact. I shall not Dispute that. But in the next place proceed to give you
an Account of a Shower of Fish, Numb. 243. we have the following Words, Since
my last to you, I have received an Account of the Prodigious Rain you long ago
desired of me, and this Opportunity offering of conveighing it safely to you, A
Shower of Whitings.
I would no longer delay it, and had I received the Account as you promised me
of the Herrings, I might possihly have said something more, but I shall now
leave that to you.


Gent. The great Concern You and your Correspondent seem to have been in; make
me long for the Story of the Fishes.


Transact. I shall come to that presently. The Account I had from a worthy
Gentleman of this Country, who had a Box full of these Fishes, which he
preserved; but that being mislaid, he could not perform his promise of giving
some of them, though he says, he will certainly do it when he finds it.


Gent. And pray Sir, cannot you give an Account of the Fishes till then?


Transact. Yes, yes, I told you I should come to it presently. On Wednesday
before Easter, a Pasture-Field at Branstead near Wrotham in Kent about Two
Acres, which is far from the Sea, or any Branch of it, and a Place where there
are no Fish Ponds, but a scarcity of Water, was all overspread with little
Fishes, conceived to be Rained down, there having been at that time a great
Tempest of Thunder and Rain: The Fishes were about the length of a Man's little
Finger, and judged by all that saw them to be young Whitings. The Field
belonged to one Hare a Yeoman. But why they should fall into this Yeoman's
Ground only no body knows.


Gent. But pray how came they to be Rained?


Transact. That Is unknown too, only it may probably be guessed, that the Bird
Cunter having robbed a Fish-Market, could carry the Prey no further: But
however it was. I think this Yeoman would do well to make a Fish Pond against
the next Shower.


Gent. Truly this Story of the Fish is a very Strange one: It Is almost
Incredible.


Transact. If you think this strange, A Shower of Butter.
what will you think of a Shower of Butter for the Fish?


Gent. It Is impossible! Is it not?


Transact. As impossible as you may think it, you will find it Recorded as a
Truth, Numb. 220. in the following Words, We have had of late in the County of
Limerick -- Showers of a sort of matter like Butter or Grease -- Lay it by the
Fire, and it grows hard.


Gent. How then can it be said to be like Butter?


Transact. Because my Correspondent positively says, it was a Shower of Butter.


Gent. That Is a good Reason indeed.


Transact. No Stranger than True: But if you will not believe this, how will
you believe there is a Tree bearing Tallow? A Tree bearing Tallow.
N. 229. p. 587.


Gent. I confess, were it not in the Transactions one would not be apt to
believe it.


Transact. It Is strange enough. But pray, Did you ever hear of the Hogs that
shit Soap, and the Cow that shit Fire?


Gent. No truly.


Transact. Why, Numb. 263. we are informed, Hogs that shit Scap, etc.
That in Lincolnshire, they gather up Hogs Dung and steep it in Water, and
having well stirred it, strein it, and so use it to wash Clothes. Hence the
Proverb, In Lincolnshire, where the Hogs sh -- Soap, and the Cows sh -- Fire.


Gent. Truly we are much obliged to you and your Correspondent for this
Proverb, and its Explication.


Transact. I must needs say, a great many Philosophers would never have heard
of this Proverb, had it not been Published in my Transactions.


Gent. But if they be ignorant now, its none of your fault.


Transact. No, truly, I would not be guilty of letting so Useful a Proverb be
lost for want of taking notice of it. But did you hear the Copy of Verses upon
an Eel?


Gent. Not that I remember.


Transact. Numb. 223. we have the following,

An Ankham Eel, and a Witham Pike,
All England cannot show the like

Gent. Then you keep Cerrespondence with Poets.


Transact. Any Body that can furnish me with Philosophical Matters.


Gent. Pray how were these Verses occasioned?


Transact. Because that River is Remarkable for good Eels.


Gent. A weighty Reason indeed. But are these all the most Considerable
Passages in the Transactions?


Transact. No, A Wound by the strength of Imagination.
Sir, Numb. 221. Doctor Cyprianus, gives us an Account of a Lady that was
Delivered of a Child, with a Wound in her Breast above Four Fingers long --
occasioned by the strength of Imagination.


Gent. That indeed, is very strange.


Transact. It is so; and in my Opinion, it is strange, That a Lamb should be
suckled by a Weather: And yet Numb. 214. we are told, That Sir William Lowther
had a Ewe that had Two Lambs, and she dying left them Young to shift for
themselves, One of them was entertained by a Weather Sheep -- The Lamb sucked
the Weather, and brought him to Milk, and was maintained by him all this Summer.


Gent. This is a very Philosophical Story indeed; this will employ the Wits to
account for it.


Transact. Ay, Sir. But these are not all the Remarkable Passages taken Notice
of, in these Philosophical News Papers; for Numb. 240. we have an Account of
Glowworms Volant, and Butterflies Eggs that were testaceous, and near as big
as Wren's, most gloriously bestudded with Gold and Silver, and they Hatch in
the Windows, and are a sport for Children.


Gent. Pray how came your Correspondent to take notice of Things only fit for
Children; What? did he think your Genius lay the same way as Childrens do?


Transact. I know no Reason why innocent Diversion should not be encouraged
amongst me and my Correspondents, as well as amongst Children.


Gent. Indeed, I must confess, if it be agreeable, I have nothing to say
against it, but shall rather admire the Noble Genius of of your own happy Self,
and of your Correspondents.


Transact. O good Sir, forbear, pray don't Compliment me. But to proceed, N.
240. there are likewise, Tortoises Eggs by Ponds sides in great quantities --
Our Dames scruple not to use them as Hens Eggs in Puddings. N. 240. Grasshoppers
in July become Volant, and have a kind of Regimental-Discipline, The
Martial-Discipline of Grasshoppers.
and as it were, some Commanders, of such Valor, that they are always ready to
fly away, and rise first when they are pursued by the Fowls* which I have
often seriously remarked, and wondered at the simplicity of our Commanders, who
instead of Running away, are so fool hardy as to stand to Fight, regardless of
their Lives, not minding the Example of these Creatures, who take more care of
their own Safety.


Gent. Very Philosophical indeed!


Transact. Philosophical! O dear Sir, these Things are nothing to what I shall
relate to you, I shall in the next place, give you an Account of one of the
most Unmannerly Dogs that ever you heard of.


Gent. What Is that pray?


Transact. Why, The Effects of the Peace upon a Mastiff-Dog.
Numb. 235. upon the Proclaiming of the Peace, about a Week ago, Two Troops of
Horse Dis-mounted, were drawn in a Line in order to fire their Vollies, the
Center of their Line was against the Butcher's Door.


Gent. But when will you let me hear the Story of the Dog?


Transact. Alas! Sir, you have not patience; this is part of the Story. This
Butcher kept a very large Mastiff Dog, the biggest in our Town; A Dog of great
courage for Fighting. This Dog was laid by the Fireside asleep, but upon the
first Volley the Soldiers made, he immediately started up.


Gent. A very stout Dog, I must confess, was this Dog the biggest in your Town?


Transact. Yes, Sir, he was the biggest; but alas! You are quite mistaken, it
was not his Courage that made him start up, he ran into a Chamber and hid
himself under a Bed.


Gent. And was this your stout Dog?


Transact. Yes, Sir, he might be a stout Dog, and yet be frightened at such a
surprising Noise, and I believe, had you or I been asleep, we should have been
surprised too:


Gent. Nay, I have nothing to Answer to that. But pray go on with your Story.


Transact. The Maid Servant going to beat him down (he never using to go up
Stairs) as she was so doing, a second Volley came, which made the Dog rise and
run several times about the Chamber with Violent Tremblings.


Gent. And is that all you have to say of this Dog?


Transact. Yes, Sir, and enough too.


Gent. Nay, enough of all Conscience; I find no fault with that; but I find no
Philosophy in it.


Transact. No Philosophy; Do you know what Philosophy is Pray?


Gent. What do you say it is?


Transact. I don't trouble my Head about such things; it is enough for me to
tell you that it is Philosophy.


Gent. Very strange Philosophy.


Transact. Strange. It Is the only Philosophy that I and my Correspondents take
delight in. But if our Philosophy does not please you, I shall urge it no
farther.


Gent. Yes, yes, Sir it pleases me much; but the Novelty of the thing makes me
ask so many Questions. Pray favor me with a further Account of your
Discoveries.


Transoct. I proceed, and shall next entertain you with what has been very
Ravishing unto me, and the more because it relates to my own Country. An
Account of Traveling a Bog.
In the County of Limerick in Ireland, on the 7th Day of June, a great
Rumbling, or faint Noise was heard in the Earth, N. 233.


Gent. Pray how could that be? How could a great Rumbling, be a faint Noise?


Transact. Alas! What a Question you ask! Soon after, to the great Terror and
Astonishment of a great number of Spectators, a more wonderful Thing happened:
For in a Bog streching North and South, the Earth began to move, viz. Meadow and
Pasture-Land that lay on the side of the Bog; and separated by a large Ditch.


Gent. Sir, the Language you express this Story in, is too high for me, it is
unintelligible, I cannot understand how the Meadow and Pasture-Land that lay on
the side of the Bog, could be in a Bog.


Transact. If you cannot understand Philosophical Language, I cannot help that;
but must give you the remaining part of the Story in the Words of the Author;
for I have none else but Philosophical Words to express my self in. His words
are these, The Pasture-Land rising very high -- overran the Ground beneath it,
and moved upon its surface, rouling on with great pushing violence, till it had
covered the Meadow; and is held to remain on it 16 Foot deep.


Gent. Held to remain. That Is Remarkable truly.


Transact. In the Motion of this Earth, it drew after it the Body of the Bog,
part of it lying on the place, where the Pasture-Land, that moved out of the
Place it had before stood -- And so it continues at the present, to the great
wonderment of those that pass by.


Gent. Truly, Sir, you have told me a Story now, that is a great Wonderment,
not only because the Meadow was held to remain upon the Pasture-Land; but that
which is the greatest Wonderment to me, is, that the Meadow should be able to
move forward of itself, and draw the Body of the Bog after it, according to
your New Philosophy, whereas, according to Boil, or Cartesius, I should have
thought, that both the Bog and the Land had been protruded by some Internal
Cause.


Transact. Strange! How readily you have learned to speak in the Language of
the Moderns, methinks you spoke it as Naturally as my Correspondents.


Gent. Sir, I always strive to Imitate those I admire: But pray, let me not
divert your farther Account of the late Transactions.


Transact. The next Story I shall relate, The effects of Greatriax his
stroaking.
is this, Numb. 256. Mr. Greatrix coming to our House, and hearing of my
Brother's Illness, desired to see him, he ordered the Boy to strip himself to
his Shirt, which he did, and having given present ease to his Head by only
stroaking him with his Hands, he fell to rub his Back, which he most complained
of. But the Pain being frightened, presently fled from his Head to his Right
Thigh; he followed it there, it fell to his Knee, from thence to his Leg, but
he still pursued it to his Ancle, thence to his Foot, and at the last to his
great Toe. As it fell lower, it grew more violent, especially when in his great
Toe, it made him roar out; but upon rubbing it there, it stole out at his
Toe-end; and the Boy cried out, it is quite gone.


Gent. I confess, this Story is very Philosophical, Medicinal, and
Circumstantial. And first, for the Circumstances, That Greatrix has a desire to
see the Boy; That he desired the Boy to strip; seem very requisite Preparatives
for the Cure, which to me is not a little surprising; for how this Humor
should be so frightened, and have such an Antipathy to Greatrix's Hand as to
run away from it, and that too where there was no Passage or Vessels for it to
pass through, I cannot comprehend.


Transact. It is indeed very strange. But this Greatrix has done more than
that; for a Smith whose Name was Peirson, near us, had Two Daughters, extremely
troubled with the Evil; the one in her Thigh, the other in her Arm: He Cured
them both at my Father's, one of them lives still in the Town, I was with her
Yesterday, she is a healthy Woman, the Mother of several Children, she showed
me her Arm. But whether the other showed her Thigh, or not, I think not at all
material to relate. But this Greatrix had another very excellent Quality, for
he would presently take off Fits of the Mother, by laying his Glove on their
Heads.


Gent. Pray Sir, was your Correspondent Compos Mentis, when he sent you that
Relation, or was he in a Fright?


Transact. Why do you ask such Questions?


Gent. Because he seems to be out of Breath, or to Breath short in his Account
of the Smith's Daughters; one would think, his inconnexion an effect either of
some disaffection of his Intellectuals, or that he was mightily surpised at
something.


Transact. Truly, I cannot tell that; perhaps he might be in some little
Consternation at the strange Effects of Greatrix's stroaking.


Transact. Indeed, they are so strange, that I have not Faith enough to believe
them.


Transact. If you have not Faith enough to believe what my Correspondents
Discover and Relate? perhaps it may be because you have not Application enough
to search into the Causes of Things. Pray what think you of the Operation of a
Blister, when it Cures a Fever.


Gent. That it has a very good Effect.


Transact. Any Body would conclude that; but a mighty Scot's Virtuoso, and one
of my particular Acquaintance has made a long Discourse upon this Subject; and
indeed, he is so sensible of the Length of it himself, that like an Orator, with
unparalleled Eloquence, after a long Proaemium, he thus speaks to his
Auditors, Numb. 252. Do but think then, had I insisted on Vesication in
general; what had I done for Time and Patience, to you O my Hearers, in a
Discourse about a Blister. Any one but your selves, should be ready to believe,
that there can be nothing of that Consequence in the thing.


Gent. That Is a great Compliment upon the Auditors; but methinks he chiefly
designed it home upon you, because your Industry extends it self so far as to
take notice of things, in which others see nothing of that Consequence.


Transact. Truly I cannot tell whether he had a particular design to Compliment
me, A long discourse more painful than a Blister.
but thus he proceeds, and that they would rather throw away Medicine
altogether, at least Blisters out of Physic; than to be troubled with a
Discourse so long, that is more painful than a Blister it self.


Gent. This is most sharp Wit; but pray, good Sir, if this Discourse be so very
painful, I had rather you would pass it by.


Transact. No, Cantharides armed with Swords and Daggers.
no, be not afraid of it; I Will take care it shall not be so painful to you, I
shall only take notice of a few of the wittiest Sentences, and the most
valuable Passages. I must beg leave to tell you, says he, that I have employed
Microscopes to look upon this Fly, and its Powder, to see if I could discover
any sharp Instruments, Swords, Daggers, or the like sort of Armiture, in these
Warlike and Wounding Creatures.


Gent. That Is an Admirable Passage. Dead Flies, Warlike and Wounding Creatures!
Your Correspondent truly, was in the right to disarm such sort of Creatures;
for if they are able to make use of Swords and Daggers after they are dead,
there is no safety amongst them. But what Arms were discovered by your
Correspondent.


Transact. None at all; For, says he, whatsoever else I found, I could meet
with no Arms at all, which makes me think, that if they have any, as needs they
must, they are concealed, and are to be discovered in another way.


Gent Nay, if they conceal their Weapons, no Body knows how to deal with them.
I wonder how your Hero durst venture to stay so long in their Company.


Transact. It is dangerous indeed, Creatures that have set all the Physic in
this Town in a Combustion, or Ferment. And truly since a great Man complained
of Experientia being a fallax, I think he did very impudently to meddle with
them.


Gent. And are these all the Remarkable Passages in his painful Discourse?


Transact. No, Sir, he tells us, Hanging Mortal.
Since Death, or no Circulation of the Blood, is the Consequence of Poison, we
must find as many Kinds of Poison, as there are ways of stopping the Bloods
Motion.


Gent. Then Hanging is Poison, for that is one way of Death, or no Circulation
of the ^^ood.


Transact. Truly, my Correspondent never considered that Consequence: Hold! Now
you talk of Hanging; One of my Correspondents is of Opinion, That Hanging is
not Poison; for Numb. 240. Hanging Appoplextical.
says he, speaking of Men that are hanged. The Remarkable lividness of their
Faces, with the extraordinary distortion of the Jugulars, in the several
Branches above the Ligature, argue, they dye in a great measure Apoplectick.


Gint. Very Learnedly concluded. Then I suppose hanging hereafter will not be
accounted an Ignominious Death; for it is no disgrace to die of an Appoplexy.
But pray proceed to the rest of your Philosophical Relations.


Transact. Numb. 251. we have the following Account of a Child's Head. I did
take off the three upper Vertebre of the Neck before I could find the Medulla
Spinalis -- The Tongue was fresh, and doubtless had performed the Deglutition
to make the Child swallow the Colliquamentum. The Larynx and all the Parts of
the Throat, were as the rest of the Body were, in a good and natural condition
as can be. I leave others to explain how this Child could live without Brains.


Gent. Oh, dear Sir, that should nev^^ have been omitted, 'twas the main thing
in the Relation. Besides, The Explaining that would have solved a Problem at
present much Debated in the World, which is, How most of your Correspondents
can live under the very same Circumstances with that Child. But pray what use
did he make of the Bones?


Transact. That, Sir, he tells you very expressly. Says he, I keep the Bones of
that Skull in my House, to convince any Body, that they are Bones, if they
should Question it.


Gent. Truly, I cannot Imagine for what other uses you should keep them. But
pray, if the Child wanted Brains, I understand not how the Larynx and all the
Parts of the Body, could be in a good and natural Condition.


Transact. That is only as I told you before, our way of expressing our selves,
for as amongst the Beauxs a careless Dress is the most admired, so we
Philosophers signalize our selves, by a careless use of Language. But to
proceed. I shall give you a short Account of what happened lately in Lapland,
Numb. 251. we have the following Account of a small sort of Creature, called
Sable-Mice, they are so fierce and angry that if a stick be held out at them,
they will bite it.


Gent. That Is very daring indeed!


Transact. In their March they keep a direct Line, and are innumerable
Thousands in each Troop -- They March by Night, and in the Twilight, and sleep
by Day: As the Mouse in the Fable used to do.

If they meet any thing in their way that might stop them, they avoid it not,
though it were Fire, a deep Well, a Torrent, or a Lake; and by that means
Thousands of them are destroyed.


Gent. Mighty Resolute truly!


Transact. When they are met in Woods or Fields and stopped, The Language of a
Sable Mouse.
they set themselves upon their hinder Legs like a Dog, and make a kind of
barking, or squeaking noise -- defending their Line as long as they can, and if
at the last they are forced out of it, they creep into holes, and set up a cry
sounding like bi^bb, bi^bb. Quarter! Quarter! Is not the Language of these Mice
very Remarkable?


Gent. Very Remarkable and entertaining for a Philosopher: It enriches a Man's
Understanding much, to know the Fury and Conduct of a Mouse, and what Noise it
makes when it is frightened. But pray Sir, let me beg the Favor of an Account
of the Moors of West-Barbary, and their Customs?


Transact. Ay, with all my heart Sir, Numb. 254. p. 248. we are told, That the
Barbary Moor, when he rises in the Morning washes himself all over, and
dresses, then goes to their Giama or Church, says his Prayers, and returns
home, where his Wife, Concubine, or Slave has his Breakfast ready for him,
which is sometimes made of Barley, or Wheat Gruel -- I have been often Treated
with warm Bread, fresh Butter and Honey in a Morning, as also a Hasty-pudding
with Butter. In Sufe I had a Bag of Honey presented to me with Poppy Seeds in
it, it made me sleepy, but I sound my self well and in good Temper of Body
after it.

They seldom use a Knife, and a Fork is a strange thing amongst them. They are
dextrous at this way of Carving, and never flinch though they burn their Fingers,
for that would look mean; when they have done they lick their Fingers, as
Plow-Men do in our Country. After they have eat the Meat, they dip the Bread in
the Sauce or Broth, and eat it. For their Meat to be strongly seasoned is no
great fault and if one should say, it is too high of Pepper, they will reply,
It Is better to be Ah then Faugh.

They have good Capons, Snipes, Pipers and Antelopes. They Will eat a Fox if fat,
but not if lean; whence the Proverb, Hellel Deeb, haram Deeb. A Fox is lawful,
and a Fox is Unlawful, i. e. Fat lawful, Lean unlawful.

When the Moors have feasted, every one washes his Hands and Mouth, thanks God
-- they talk a little, or tell some Story, and then lie down to rest, where I
shall leave them at the present, and do beg your Pardonfor so firesome and
frivolous a Discourse


Gent. Upon my Word Sir, I think, your Friend concludes rightly.


Transact. Concludes rightly, Sir, why all my Friends conclude so.


Gent. Ay, to be Tiresome and Frivolous.


Transact. O dear Sir, no; but if the length of this, has been something
tedious; I will now entertain you with one which may make emends; for Numb.
249. we received the following Letter, Herewith you will receive a C^rvus
Velans, diverse sorts of Scarabs, and three or four sorts of Lady-Buggs. But not
to pass too much Time away upon this, I shall rather tell you, That Jeremiah
Skeleton, Ibid.
observing a Storm coming, said, I think it will be Rain, I will go and gather
in some of the Corn -- While at this Work, bringing in a Burden and casting it
upon the Barn floor, the Tempest begun as he came forth again; whereupon he
stepped aside for shelter into the Barn Door, and while there, was struck with a
dreadful flash of Fire. A Young Woman that lived with her Father in the House
that belonged to this Farm, leaves the House, and not seeing the Young Man
about the Barn, goes with speed and tells the Family he was related to, That
she feared he was slain. They came to the Barn and found it even so, a sad
Spectacle! His Clogs driven from his Feet, one not to be found and the other
cloven, and his Hat not to be found after search. This Young Man would have
been 22 Years of Age next June, is said to have been sober and hopeful, was
Buried at Luddenden the Monday following.

To this, I have but Two more Philosophical Matters to add, the first is, an
Account of the Generation of Fleas. See Numb. 249. p. 2. At last is discovered
by the Indesatigable Industry of Signior D'iacinto Cestone, the true way of the
Generation of Fleas, their Worms, and entire Metamorphoses which have hitherto
been obscure, though sought after. The Fleas bring forth Eggs (or a sort of Nits)
from these Eggs are hatched Worms; these Worms make to themselves Bags like
Silkworms, and from out of these Bags come Fleas.

Having thus given you an Historical Account of the Generation of Fleas. I
shall proceed to a Discourse of Coffee, Numb. 256. p. 311. Of the Berries
Boiled in Water, is made a Drink, and drank much amongst the Arabians and
Turks, and also now in Europe.

As for the manner of its being first made a Trade of in England, I shall give
you the following Account, Anno 1652. One Edwards came over into England, and
Married the Daughter of one Alderman Hodges -- This Hodges settled to drink
Coffee with Edwards with much delight. After this, Edwards set up one Pasqua
for a Coffee-Man -- The Alehouse keepers fearing it would spoil their Trade,
Petitioned the Lord Mayor against him. Upon this Hodges joined as a Partner
with Pasqua one Bowman, at the last Pasqua dyed, and Bowman kept the Trade --
and when he dyed left his Wife, who had been Hodges's Cook-Maid, pretty Rich;
but she dyed Poor.

John Painter was Bowman's first Apprentice, Bowman dyed, and after a Year his
Wife let the House to one Batler, whose Daughter Married Humphrey Hodskins
Bowman's second Apprentice. And after some time the Trade grew universal; but
what was the Rise of Batsons, Wills, or Richards, I cannot tell.

But this I have been told, Coffee has greatly increased the Trade of Tobacco
and Pipes, Earthen Dishes, Tin Wares, News Papers, Coals, Candles, Sugar, Tea,
Chocolate, and what not? Coffe-hauses make all Sorts of People sociable, they
improve Arts and Merchandise, and all other Knowledge. And a Worthy Member of
this Society, has thought that Coffee-Houses have Improved Useful Knowledge
very much.

I thought to have proceeded to give you an Historical Account of the most
Remarkable Trades in England, as Chimney-Sweping, Tinkers, Pedlars, etc. And
what were the Names of those that were first of that Employment, as also the
Names of their Apprentices, and who they Married: But since I have pressed upon
your Patience so long, I shall force no more upon you than you are willing to
bear. But pray, let me ask your Opinion of these Philosophical Transactions,
and what Thoughts you have (...) my Friends; are they not Men that take a great
deals of Pains to Improve Knowledge; and let nothing pass that is worth Noting?


Gent. Much Pains, it must be allowed ye have taken, it is pity ye had not
considered to what Purpose.


Transact. Why, is there not a great deal of Natural Knowledge to be learned
from what I have wrote, and Published?


Gent. Sir, one may learn how prettily You and your Correspondents are
Employed: But nothing that will make a Man wiser, or more a Philosopher; for
what am I the wiser, for knowing the Mice creep into holes, or how nastily the
Moors pull their Meat? Nor is what you have acquainted me with, of the
Generation of Fleas; any more than what a Lowzy Beggar could have told many
Years ago. And as for your Coffee Story, I take it to be a Tale fit to be
Related only amongst Old Women, and Mechanics.


Transact. And is that all you can see in such Improvements?


Gent. No, Sir, it is not all, for your Correspondent tells us, That Coffee
promotes the Tobacco Trade, and consumes Pipes and Candles. But I suppose, any
Coffee-Woman knows that, without the assistance of your Friend to inform her.


Transact. Well, since I see you are resolved not to think so well of my
Correspondents as I could wish; I beg your Pardon for entertaining you so long
with such Philosophical Relations, which I perceive, instead of diverting, have
made you uneasy. But yet, I must tell you, my Correspondents will not be
discouraged from pursuing their Design, though the whole World Laugh at them.


FINIS.

