THE Everlasting Covenant, A Sweet CORDIAL for a drooping Soul: Or, The
Excellent Nature of the Covenant of Grace Opened: IN A SERMON Preached January
the 29th. At the FUNERAL of Mr. Henry Forty, Late Pastor of a Church of Christ,
at Abingdon, in the County of Berks.

Who Departed this Life Jan. 25th. 1692/3. and was Interred at Southwark.

WHEREIN The ARGUMENTS urged to prove the Covenant of Redemption a distinct
Covenant from the Covenant of Grace, are Examined, Weighed, and found Wanting.

To which is added, An ELEGY on the Death of the said Minister.

PSALM. 89.33. My Covenant I will not break, nor alter the thing that is gone
out of my Lips.

By BENJAMINE KEACH, Pastor of a Church of Christ, Meeting at Horsly-down,
Southwark.

London, Printed for H. Barnard at the Bible in the Poultrey, 1693.

To the Congregation at Horsly-down, who were the Auditors of this Sermon, the
Author wishes all the Blessings of the Everlasting Covenant, even the sure
Mercies of David.
Beloved,
THE Subject treated on, in this ensuing Discourse, is of the highest
Concernment; and though the Substance of what is herein contained, you have heard
from the Pulpit, yet I am persuaded, it will not be unpleasing to you, to see
those great Truths presented to your view from the Press. Some of you know,
that I had not time to go through the Whole of my Work the first time,
therefore I insisted again on it, the Lord's Day following; and yet some Things
I have added, which was at neither of those seasons delivered, the better to
perfect the Work. I told you, the Text was left me by our honored Brother
deceased, on his Deathbed; this Covenant being all his Support, Salvation, and
Consolation, (as it was David's) both in his Life, and at his Death. Nothing
like Experience, no Doctrine like to this to die in, (as some of the Papists
themselves have confessed.) Men may talk of their own Righteousness, and
Gospel-Holiness; yet I am persuaded, they will not dare to plead, in Point of
Justification, on their Deathbeds, nor in the Judgment-Day: No, no, it is
nothing but Christ, and his Righteousness, his Merits, can give Relief to a
wounded, and distressed Conscience. I have endeavored to show, That the
Distinction some Men make between the Covenant of Redemption, and the Covenant
of Grace, is without Ground, being but one and the same Covenant; and, That the
Covenant of Grace, comprehends that between God, and Christ for us, as
Mediator about our Redemption, which was as full of Grace, in the first making
of it, as in the Revelation, and Application thereof, according to what was
promised thereupon, 2 Timothy 1.9. Tit. 1, 2. its Rise, and Constitution, was from
Eternity, though the Revelation, and Publication, was in Time: Christ did not (as
one observes) purchase a Covenant of Grace for us, to enter into with God; for
the Covenant it self, Christ, and all the Grace, and Glory thereof, lay in the
eternal Counsel of God's Will, and accordingly transacted with Christ, as the
Representative of all the Elect.

This Covenant is the only City of Refuge, for a distressed Soul, to fly to for
Sanctuary, when all the the billows and waves of Temptations run over him, or
Satan does furiously assault him: If We fly to this Armory, We can never want
Weapons to resist the Devil, nor doubt of Success against him. And now that it
may be of Use to you all who shall read it, shall be the Prayers of your
unworthy Servant, in the Gospel,

BENJAMIN KEACH.


THE Everlasting Covenant. A Sweet CORDIAL for a drooping Soul: OR, The Blessed
Nature of the Covenant of Grace Opened.
Beloved,
THE Solemn Occasion of this Assembly, may put us all in mind of our Mortality,
Death is certain; all must dye (as the Psalmist says) What Man is he that
lives and shall not see Death? Can he deliver his Soul from the Hand of the
Grave? Psalm. 89.48.

Wicked Men dye, so do the Godly, and as do the People, so do their Ministers,
The Fathers, where are they? and the Prophets, do they live for ever? Yet there
is a vast Difference between the Death of the Ungodly, and the Death of the
Godly, etc. But to proceed, the Text I am to speak to, was left me by our
Honored Brother deceased, which shows the comfortable Hopes he had in Death,
which is that in the 2. of Sam. 23.5. Although my House be not so with God, yet
he has made with me an everlasting Covenant, ordered on all things and sure:
for this is all my Salvation, and all my Desire, although he make it not to
grow.

My Text contains some of David's dying Words, or Words which he uttered upon
the near approach of his Death, see verse. 1. Now these be the last Words of
David the Son of Jesse, and the Man who was raised up on high, the Anointed of
the God of Jacob, and the sweet Psalmist of Israel. Though it may be doubted,
whether these Words, contained in the First verse, were uttered by David or
not, but rather by the sacred Penman of this Book, yet the Words following,
it is evident, were spoke by him, verse 2. The Spirit of the Lord spoke by me,
and his Word was in my Tongue. I utter not these Words (as if he should say) as
by my own Spirit, but the Matter is dictated and given to me, by God's Spirit,
which is the great Teacher of his Prophets and People. verse. 3. The God of
Israel said, the Rock of Israel spoke to me; he that rules over Men must be
Just, ruling in the Fear of God. Here are laid down the Two great and principal
Parts of the Duty of Kings, and Supreme Rulers of People and Nations, Justice
toward Men, and Piety toward God. verse. 4. And he shall be as the light of
the morning, when the Sun rises, even a morning without Clouds; as the tender
Grass springing out of the Earth by clear shining after Rain. These Words may
be applied to the Good and Righteous Government of any Godly King, etc. but
chiefly, no doubt they contain a Prediction of the blessed Effects of the Reign
and Kingdom of the Messiah, of whom David (but more-especially Solomon his Son
and his Peaceable Kingdom) was a Type or Figure of.

And thus I hasten in order to my Text, with what speed I well could. Although
my House be not so with God; a little first by way of Explication: Although my
House be not so with God, how is that? i. e. It Is not as a Morning without
Clouds, nor as the tender Grass springing out of the Earth, by clear shining
after Rain; for my Morning (as if he should so say) has been over-cast, dark
and dismal Clouds seem to attend my Kingdom, and my Children have not hitherto
been like the tender Grass springing out of the Earth, by the sweet Influences
of the Sun, and distillation of Rain, but rather like the Grass that withers
away, or is cut down before its due time: I have not so walked with God, as his
infinite Mercies obliges me to do; but have had many Weaknesses and
Infirmities attending me, Yet he has made with me an everlasting Covenant. Though
I have broke Covenant with God on my part, yet God will perform his Covenant
with me, my Sins (as if he should so say) he has pardoned, his Covenant is
everlasting, on his part he will keep it, and the Messiah shall come of the
Fruit of my Loins, whose Kingdom shall be as a Morning without Clouds, etc. And
his Covenant with me he will not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of
his Mouth, see Psalm. 89.32, 33, 34. He intimates, that his House or Family,
God had not made to grow, increase, or flourish with that Glory, Peace and
Prosperity, as he expected; nor had he such clear Evidences of God's gracious
Presences, and Communion with him in his Soul, as he might have had, had he not
sinned, and grieved his Spirit; but though it was thus, yet he saw he was in
Covenant with God, and in an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things, for
God's Glory, and for his eternal Good; and this was all his Hope, he foresaw
Christ's Blessed Day, with whom this Covenant stands fast, and this was all his
Desire, my Soul only has Comfort in this Covenant, and desires to build alone
upon it: For it is ( says he) all my Salvation, I expect Salvation no other
ways; it is not a part of it, but the whole of it from First to Last; here began
my Hope, and here I stay my self, and will close my Days in the Faith of a dear
Redeemer, that shall in due time be revealed, who is my Lord as well as he,
shall be, according to the Flesh, my Son, or Offspring, and this shall be
accomplished, although it do not seem to grow, or but small Appearances are
manifested as yet, either in me, or in my House or Family.

In the Words are Three Parts.

1. Something supposed, (or taken for granted) wherein is employed David's great
Grief and Trouble, viz. Although my House be not so with God.

2. Something asserted, which signifies his Faith and Confidence in God, Yet he
has made with me an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things and sure.

3. A comfortable Inference, or Conclusion from thence; for this is all my
Salvation, and all my Desire, although he make it not to grow.

And from hence I shall observe Three Points of Doctrine,

1. Doct. That Darkness, Troubles, and Afflictions, with a decay of Grace, or
spiritual Liveliness, may attend the State of Christians sometimes, while in
his Life, which they cannot but acknowledge and mourn under the sight and sense
of.

2. Doct. That God has made with True Believers a blessed and well ordered
Covenant.

3. Doct. That the Covenant of Grace which is made with Believers in Christ, is
an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things, and sure, and is the only
Spring or Fountain of their Salvation, Hope, Desire and Consolation, both in
Life and Death.

It is the last Proposition or Point of Doctrine I shall now Prosecute,
(judging it may most fitly Answer that which was the chief Design and end of
our Honored Brother deceased, in choosing this Text to be opened at his
Funeral, from whence he doubtless found so much Comfort under those grievous
Afflictions and Trials in his Life, and also at the time of his Death)

Four Things I purpose to do.

First, Show you what this Covenant is, and with whom it was primarily made,
and for whom.

Secondly, Open the Excellent Nature of the Covenant of Grace.

Thirdly, Show how all a Believer's Salvation, Hope, Desire and Consolation in
Life and Death, lies in this Covenant.

Fourthly, Shall make some Application of it.

Beloved, This Covenant was Primarily made with Jesus Christ, the Second Person
of the blessed Trinity, as Mediator, and as the Root, common Head and
Representative of all the Elect, or all that the Father has given to Christ,
we read of Two Covenants, an Old, and a New, a First, and a Second, a Covenant
of Works, and a Covenant of Grace.

The First Covenant was made with the First Adam, for himself and his
Posterity, as the common Head of all Mankind, and so also there was a Covenant
made with the Second Adam for himself, and all those chosen in him, or all his
Seed; and though this Covenant (as to Revelation of it) is called the Second
Covenant, yet it was made with Christ for all the Elect Seed, before the World
began; God foreseeing Man would fall from his First Estate, and break his
Covenant, and so plunge himself and all his Posterity under Divine Wrath and
Misery.

Now that there was some Gracious Covenant Transactions, between the Father and
the Son, from before all Worlds, about the bringing in and establishment of
this blessed Covenant of Grace, for the Redemption of Fallen Man, appears
evident from many Texts of Holy Scripture; see that in Zach. 6.12.13. And speak
unto him, saying, thus says the Lord of Hosts, saying, Behold the man called
the branch, and he shall grow up out of his place, and he shall build the
Temple of the Lord, ver. 12. Even he shall build the Temple of the Lord, and he
shall bear the glory, and he shall sit and rule upon his throne, and he shall
be a Priest upon his throne, and the counsel of Peace shall be between them
both, ver. 13.

I know, some understand by them both, the Kingly, and Priestly Office of Jesus
Christ; First, That as our great High Priest, he should offer the great
Sacrifice to God, to make an Atonement and Reconciliation for us, and rule as
King, and give Laws; and thus (say they) the Peace made for God's People, shall
rest between these two, viz. The Kingly, and Priestly Office of Christ; by his
Priestly Office, he shall make their Peace with God, and by his Kingly Office,
he shall deliver them from the Tyranny of Sin, and Satan, etc. By Priestly
Operation and Undertakings, he shall expiate Sin, and by his Kingly Office he
shall subdue and extirpate Sin; as a Priest he makes Peace, and as a King he
maintains that Peace he purchased as a Priest, and protects as a King; and thus
say they, the Covenant of Peace is between them both. --

I will not deny, but that this may in part, be intended in the Text, -- yet I
doubt not but by them both, is also meant the Persons spoken of, viz. The
Father and the Son, the Lord of Hosts, and the Man called the Branch; for, by
them, it is most Congruous certainly, to take it for the Persons, or the two
Parties mentioned; and the Covenant of Peace, it is plain from other Texts of
Scripture, was between the Father and the Son; although I grant the Son on his
part, brings it about by his being a Priest, and as a King, sitting and ruling
on his Throne, he maintains our Interest: compare this with Isa. 49.3, 4, 5, 6.
God calls Christ forth by the name of Israel, ver. 3. Thou art my Servant O
Israel, in whom I will be glorified, (the Name of the Body being given here to
the Head, as sometimes the Church bears Christ's Name, so here he bears the
Name of the Church, that the Church in Union with Christ, is called Christ; see
1 Cor. 12.12.) as if the Father should so say to the Son, I have fixed my
Thoughts upon thee to be the great Sponsar, and Surety for my Chosen; and I
will enter into a Covenant no more with them, without thou will undertake for
them, and in their Nature and Stead, satisfy for their Sins, and accomplish
all my Pleasure; so Isa. 42.6. I the Lord have called thee, and will hold thy
Hand, and will keep thee, and give thee for a Covenant of the People, for a
light of the Gentiles, to declare my Righteousness; or, as it is said, Romans
3.26. That God might be Just, and the Justifier of him that believes in Jesus;
that I (as if God should say) may appear a Pure, Just, and Righteous God, and
so magnify the attribute of my infinite Holiness, which shines forth in my
just and righteous Law, and yet appear also, as I am a merciful and gracious
God; therefore I have called thee whom I long ago entered into a Covenant with,
for, and in behalf of them, whether Jews or Gentiles, who are chosen; and I
will give thee to be for a Covenant, or, the Angel of the Covenant, and the
Mediator and Surety thereof, in and by whom the Covenant of my Grace is made
and confirmed with my People. To this purpose, speaks also Reverend Mr. Pool,
in his Annotations on this Place.

2 dly. Also, Christ declares his Agreement and hearty Consent, to undertake in
this Covenant as it is hinted, Heb. 10.7. Then said I, lo I come (in the volume
of thy book it is written of me) to do thy will, O God, thy law is in my heart;
my delight (says he) was with the Children of Men, Prove. 8.31. And this,
before the Mountains were settled, before the Hills were brought forth, I was
set up from everlasting, from the beginning, or ever the Earth was. He was
ordained as the Head, and great Representative of all that shall be Saved, to
undertake for them, and dye for them, and to bring many Sons to Glory: he
therefore said, he laid down his Life as the Father gave him Commandment; he
was obedient as a Servant, willingly undertook this Work and Office upon him,
and so consented, and struck hands with his Father, not for himself but for us,
to dye and make an end of Sin, and bring in everlasting Righteousness, Dan.
9.24.26. He consented to take our Nature on him, a body have thou prepared me,
and to pay our Debts, to perform the Righteousness of the Law, and to be made a
Curse for us, to deliver us from the Curse of the Law which we had broke, Gal.
4.4, 5. The Lord God has opened mine Ear, and I was not Rebellious, Isa. 50.5.
I readily did and suffered all that he enjoined upon me, I have not turned away
mine Ear from any of God's Commands, nor my Feet from going where he would send
me, how difficult or hard soever my Work was; I gave my back to the smiters,
and my cheeks to them that plucked off the hair; I hid not my face from shame
and spitting, ver. 6.

Question, Is not that Covenant which was made between the Father and the Son
(considered as the latter, is Mediator) called the Covenant of Redemption, made
from all Eternity a distinct Covenant from the Covenant of Grace?

Answ. I Answer, The Stores of Sacred Wisdom, Grace, and Truth, which are
treasured up in Divine Revelations, concerning the Nature of God's Covenant, is
so mysterious and difficult for us to know, or find out, that it behooves us to
take heed how we too boldly speak, or write about it; and, yet nevertheless,
though the Thing is in it self so sublime, the Mystery of it so great, the
declaration of it in the Scripture so Extensive, and diffused through the whole
body of it, yet the concernment of it is such, as to our Faith and Comfort, and
for the Prevention of Errors and Mistakes, none can be blamed according to
their Light, to pry and search into it. I must confess, I have formerly been
inclined to believe the Covenant, or Holy Compact between the Father and the
Son, was distinct from the Covenant of Grace; but upon farther search, by means
of some great Errors sprang up among us, arising (as I conceive) from that
Notion, I cannot see that they are Two distinct Covenants, but both one and the
same glorious Covenant of Grace, only consisting of Two Parts, or Branches; for
as that blessed Compact does peculiarly respect Christ's Person as Mediator;
and as he is so considered in the Covenant, I do not say it was a Covenant of
Grace to him, for he obtains all by Desert and Merit; yet seeing God entered
into that Covenant with him, for us, as our Head, Surety and Representative,
and not for himself singly, considered, it cannot be any thing else but the
Covenant of Grace, as well as the Foundation, or primary Spring of all that
Grace, and divine Goodness, that the Elect had, or ever shall partake of, or
receive from God; for it is (as I may so say) the opening the Sluices or
Floodgates of all divine Love and Mercy, to poor lost and undone Mankind, nay,
the Grace of God to us in entering into this Covenant with Christ, as our
Mediator from before all Worlds, is doubtless, ground of the highest Admiration
to Saints and Angels.

And therefore I see not (I say) but that they are but one and the same
Covenant of Grace, yet so as that Christ has his Part, Work and Reward distinct
from us; he has all by hard Work, and Merit, that we might have the Blessings
he merited freely by Grace alone; Christ in the Covenant of Grace, is the
Mediator, we are those he mediates for; Christ is the Head, we are the Body,
the covenanted for; Christ is the Surety, we the Poor Debtors and Criminals, he
struck hands to satisfy God's Justice for; Christ is the Redeemer, we the
Redeemed; Christ the Savior, we the Saved; Christ is the Purchaser, we are the
Inheritance he purchased, and that it might be thus, Christ entered into this
Covenant with the Father for us, out of his infinite Grace and divine Goodness;
and it was even like inconceivable Grace and Mercy in God the Father, to find
out in his infinite Wisdom, this way, and substitute his own Son in our stead,
accept of his Son, prepare a Body for his Son, enter into a Covenant with his
Son, anoint and send his Son to redeem us from Sin, Wrath, and Hell. If this
Covenant be not the Covenant of Grace, where shall we find it; God's actual
taking us into Covenant, it is but that we might drink of this Fountain, or
rather, that we might have actual Interest in this Covenant, and whatsoever
Christ did in time; or when the fullness of time was come, it was but to put
into Execution this Covenant, and to ratify and visibly confirm this blessed
Covenant, that God had made with us in him, before the World began. The
Covenant of Grace (says Mr. Petto) was made or established, not only with us,
but jointly with Christ and us in him, so as both are within one and the same
Covenant; for the great Transactions with Jesus, yea even the giving and
sending of him, and his accepting the Office of a Redeemer, and undertaking for
us; these are all of Grace, as well as what is promised to us, through him.
Therefore the Covenant of Grace (says he) must take in all that conduces
(otherwise than by a mere Decree) to our Restoration and eternal Life. Petto on
the Covenant; which is recommended by Dr. Owen, Page 18.

2. Where do we read in all the Holy Scripture of Three Covenants, viz. 1. A
Covenant of Works, 2. A Covenant of Redemption, 3. A Covenant of Grace: Evident
it is to all, that the Holy Ghost only holds forth, or speaks but of Two
Covenants, a Covenant of Works, and a Covenant of Grace; the First is called,
the Old Covenant, the Second, the New Covenant, although both these Covenants
had several Revelations, Ministrations, or Editions; as First, the Covenant of
Works was primarily made with the First Adam, and all Mankind in him; by virtue
of which, he was justified by his own perfect Obedience, before he sinned:
True, there was another Edition or Administration of it given to Israel, which
though it was a Covenant of Works, i. e. Do this and live, yet it was not given
by the Lord to the same End and Design, as the Covenant was given to our First
Parents, viz. It was not given to justify them, or to give them eternal Life;
For if Righteousness had been by the Law, then Christ is dead in vain, Gal.
2.21. And again says Paul, For if there had been a Law given, that could have
given Life, verily Righteousness should have been by the Law, Gal. 3.21. But
indeed, it was impossible Life, Justification, or Righteousness, could be by
the Law, or by any Law, because Man has sinned, and is now unable to answer
the Law of perfect Obedience, all have sinned and come short of the Glory of
God: We must therefore now be justified by the Grace of God, through the
Redemption which is in Jesus Christ; but though Man had lost his Power to obey,
yet God has not lost his Power to command. Therefore, as Dr. Owen shows, it
(was added or) revealed in the Wisdom of God, as instructive; as also, to show
the Excellency of that State and Condition, in which we were created; with the
Honor that God put upon our Nature: from whence Directions unto a due
Apprehension of God and our selves, may be taken or derived. It served to show
what a Righteousness Man once had, and by his Transgression lost, and also what
a Righteousness it is, which the Holiness of God does require, in order to our
Justification in his sight; for the Law, doubtless, results not from God, as a
simple act of his Sovereignty, but also as a Transcript of the Holiness of his
Nature and Rectitude of his Will; for without a sinless, or perfect
Righteousness, no Flesh can ever be justified in God's sight; and therefore,
such a Righteousness must either be inherent in us or else, according to the
Wisdom and Grace of God be imputed to us and therefore, he chose his beloved
Son, and entered into a gracious Covenant for us, with him, that he in our
Nature and Stead, as our Head and Surety, might yield perfect Obedience to the
Law which we had broke and for which breach, his Justice, by Christ's Death,
must be satisfied also therefore the Compact, or gracious Covenant, that was
before all Worlds made between the Father and the Son, was part of the Covenant
of Grace, respecting poor lost and perishing Man, since there was no Redemption
without the shedding of Christ's Blood; hence the Blood of Christ, is called
The Blood of the New Covenant. The Father (says Mr. Petto) is Contracting with
the Son, Isa. 41.6. I will give thee for a Covenant of the People; therefore
that with the Son (says he) and with the People, is one and the same Covenan^*
indeed as that which partaketh of the Nature, or is a part, is put for the
whole; so that with the People alone, even here, bears the Name of a
Covenant, with in the grand Contract with Jesus Christ, as a Branch or Parcel
thereof yet both together make up that one Covenant of Grace, as appears thus,

1. There is no Scripture Evidence for making these Two Covenants distinct one
of Suretyship or Redemption with Christ, and another of Grace and
Reconciliation with us: that distinction which some use, is improper, for the
Parts of it are co-incident, seeing that, as with Christ, was out of me Grace
also, Joh. 3.16. And it was promised, that Jesus Christ should be given for a
Covenant; and therefore, it is of Grace, that we are redeemed by him, 2. Tim.
1.9. There was Grace before the World was, and that must be in the Covenant, as
with Jesus Christ which was for reconciling the World unto the Father, 2. Cor.
5.18, 19* Col. 1.20, 21.

It is true, Christ is our Surety and Redeemer, not we in our own Persons; yea,
he is our Head, our Lord and King; and on that Account of his standing in those
different Capacities, he has some peculiar Precepts and Promises appropriated
to him, which are not afforded to us in the same manner and degree, yet this
hinders not the oneness of the Covenant with him and us, etc.

3. That Holy Agreement or Compact between the Father and Son, was the Rise, or
Spring of the Covenant of Grace, it was made with Jesus Christ, and with us in
him; therefore I see no Reason to call them Two distinct and complete
Covenants, but two Subjects (as the same Author intimates) of the same Covenant
as with Jesus Christ, it had its Constitution from before all Worlds, or we had
a Being, though as with us, it has its Application in time after we exist, and
are actually in Christ, as part of the promised Seed.

1. The Work of Redemption to expiate Sin, and make Reconciliation; this was
Christ's Work for us.

2. For Application, this is with us by him.

3. He was chosen, Mediator, and undertook the work of Redemption, and so
struck up the Covenant from Eternity; but in time he executed it, and
intercedes for our Participation in it, Petto p. 21.

4. Therefore as Adam being a common Person or Head of all his Seed, and we in
him fell under Sin, Death and Condemnation, by virtue of the Covenant of Works:
made with him; even so in Jesus Christ all the Elect partake of Grace and
Justification unto Life by that one Covenant of Grace made with him; and in him
with all his Seed, he being (I say) a common Person or Head to all the Father
has given to him, in the said Covenant; and indeed, whatsoever was necessary
unto our Redemption and Reconciliation he agreed to work it out; they agree in
their end, which was God's Glory, and our Good, (as by and by I shall, God
assisting, show) Salvation of the Seed is the grand Design of it, and therefore
the highest Grace and Goodness imaginable to us; and whatsoever we stood, or do
stand in need of, in order to Interest by way of Application, is also contained
in this Covenant, as it was made with Christ; as 1. Justification by his
Knowledge (or by the Knowledge of him) shall my righteous Servant justify
many; for he shall bear their Iniquities, Isa. 53.11. and that all his Seed
shall have such a knowledge or Faith, God says, they shall all know me, etc.
for he shall bear their Iniquities; that is, he shall satisfy the Justice and
Law of God, and therefore they must be justified or acquitted, otherwise says
Mr. Pool, the same Debt should be twice required and paid: a new Heart is
promised to us, Jer. 31.31. and was not this promised to Christ for us, in the
Text I last mentioned, Isa. 53.11. (in knowing of God) is not a new Heart
comprehended, in these words he shall see his Seed, the fruit of his travel and
anguish he passed through; that is, they shall be made his, by Regeneration, or
Renovation, etc.

5. Is not Union with Christ, the only way to the promised Blessings? and
therefore I must say with some of our late worthy Writers, the Covenant is made
jointly with him and us, all the promises of God are in him, ye, and in him
Amen, 2 Cor. 1.2. and shall infailably be made good and accomplished.

6. As Mr. Petto well observes the Covenant expressure from the beginning ran
first to Christ, and in him to us.

1. The Promise to Adam, primarily runs to Christ, as the Woman's Seed, and
so to us in him.

2. To Abraham, in thee, and again, in thy Seed shall all the families of the
Earth be blessed, Genesis 12.3. Genesis 22.18. that this Promise refers to Christ,
see Gal. 3.16. and to us in him, see verse. 29.

3. The Covenant with David runs to Christ, and also in him to us, Psalm.
89.20.28, 29. I have found David my Servant, my Covenant shall stand fast with
him; when did God find him, Was it not before the World began? Christ we know,
is often called David.

But I cannot further enlarge on this, I shall therefore in the next place
consider what is brought in Opposition to what I have said upon this Account.

Object. It Is objected, First, that the Parties are distinct, in the one
Covenant, the Father and the Son are the covenanting Parties; in the Covenant
of Grace, God and Man; in the Mediatory Covenant, there are two Persons equal:
in the Covenant of Grace, there is a superior God, and an inferior Man.

Answ. 1 st. I would know whether all the Elect were not considered in Christ,
and was it not for us that he entered into that Covenant? Is not the Debtor a
party with the Surety, and so the Elect a party with Christ? Did Christ enter
into a Covenant for himself? though we say he is the Savior, the Redeemer, the
Surety, and not we; yet he entered into that Covenant for us, i. e. as our
Savior and Surety, to satisfy for our Sins, and perfect our Redemption; make
us no party in the Salvation of this Covenant (though not the saving or
satisfying party) and all our hopes are gone for ever.

Sirs, We shall find the Top Glory of the Covenant of Grace to lie here; was it
not infinite Grace and Goodness that moved God to fix upon this way to redeem
us, i. e. to propound, offer and accept of a Surety for us, when he might
justly have exacted Satisfaction from us, the guilty Debtors and Criminals?
Nay, and to choose his own Son to be our Savior and Surety, and was it not
infinite Grace in Christ to accept so readily and heartily of it: It Is plain,
here began the Covenant of Grace, i. e. God's entering into a Covenant with his
Son for us, and thus is God the Father the efficient cause of our Redemption.

2. I would know whether in the Covenant of Grace God is said to enter into
Covenant with Man, simply considered as in himself; or whether it is not with
Christ, and so in him with us; if Christ be the Surety of the Covenant of
Grace, then God does not take Christ distinct from us into Covenant with
himself: and certainly, our credit was so lost and gone with God, that he would
not trust us, with any Covenant-Transaction any more without a Surety, they
continued not in my Covenant, and I regarded them not says the Lord, Heb. 8.9.
I would have no more to do with them in a Covenant way; therefore all the
Promises of Grace are in Christ, all is managed in Christ, even all the whole
Will of God, concerning our Salvation; we are dead till he quickens us, blind
till he opens our Eyes; have stony Hearts, and unregenerate, till he breaks our
Hearts and renews us by his Spitit: and was not all this comprehended or
included in that Covenant our Brethren call the Covenant of Redemption? how
then can that be a distinct Covenant from the Covenant of Grace; is dead Man,
vile, and depraved Man, capable to enter into a Covenant with God? and is not
the quickening and changing of his Heart one great Part of the Covenant of
Grace, that God promised upon Christ's Undertakings, that he would do for us,
as I have showed.

Object. 2. The time of making these Covenants is different, the Covenant of
Grace was made in time after Man had broken the Covenant of Works; but the
Covenant of Redemption was made from Eternity, I was set up from Everlasting,
etc. The Revelation of the Covenant of Redemption was in time, but the
Stipulation was from Eternity, the Father and Son being actually in Being, and
so Stipulators; the Decree of making the Covenant of Grace was from Eternity,
but not the actual Covenant, because there was no Soul to Covenant with.

Answ. I wonder at this Expression: was not the Covenant of Grace, (as I said
before) made with us in Christ, as our Head and Representative before the
Foundation of the World? and was not those Covenanting Transactions as well as
the Spring or Fountain of the cause of all the Grace we receive in the Covenant
of Grace, upon the Account of what Christ Covenanted to do, and suffer for us,
or in our room and stead: True, the Members were not actually in Being, but the
Head was; and if it be not thus, what does the Apostle mean? Tit. 1.2. In hope
of Eternal Life which God that cannot lie promised before the World began. It
could not actually be promised to us, we (as they say) having then no Being;
therefore it was promised to us in our Head: with whom the Covenant was then
for us made? was not Christ set up as Mediator from Everlasting? Was not then
the Covenant of Grace as Ancient? We were considered in him, because chosen in
him; though Christ's Redemption was not the cause of our Election, yet we were
chosen in him as our Head and Redeemer; therefore I say, the Stipulation of the
Covenant of Grace, was from Eternity, and the Revelation of it was in time, and
not till Man had sinned, and broke the Covenant of Works: so that it was more
then by Decree and Purpose; the Covenant of Grace in my Text, is called an
Everlasting Covenant, and it may referr before time, as well as after all time;
even from Eternity to Eternity.

For none can doubt, but David was a Type of Christ, and so represented in my
Text; the Covenant here spoken of, is that they call the Covenant of Grace, and
tho it was Primarily made with the True David, yet so as in him with David the
Son of Jesse also; the very same thing we may see in Psalm. 89. I have found
David my Servant, with my Holy Oil have I anointed him, v. 20. he is said to be
one chosen out of the People, and one that is Mighty, v. 19. and with him this
Covenant is said to be made: My Mercy will I keep with him for evermore, and my
Covenant shall stand fast with him; his Seed also will I make to endure for
ever, and his Throne as the days of Heaven, ver. 26, 29. Now this they confess
chiefly respects Christ, of whom David was a Figure, and also refers to
that which they call the Covenant of Redemption; if so, then say I, this
Covenant must be the Covenant of Grace, because it was made with David the Son
of Jesse, I mean it refers to him in Christ, and the like with all Believers
also, as all their Salvation and Desire; it cannot rationally be supposed, but
that David in my Text does allude to the Covenant mentioned in this Psalm;
although none are actually brought into it, until they Believe, or have actual
Union with Christ; yet made with all Believers in Christ from Eternity. I
cannot think they will deny that the Covenant of Grace, that Well-ordered
Covenant in all things and sure, was primarily made with Christ and with us, in
him as our Head; and if so, then say I, if that which they call the Covenant of
Redemption be distinct and not this, when was the Covenant of Grace made with
him for us? It must either be made before Time, or after Time.

Besides, it is evident, that it is by the Blood of Christ's Covenant that we are
Redeemed. The Father sends out the Prisoners by the Blood of Christ's Covenant;
that is, according to the Sacred Terms and Conditions agreed upon between them
both, and sure I am, the Blood of Christ's Covenant, is the Blood of the
New Covenant; therefore I cannot see that that which they call the Covenant of
Redemption, is a distinct Covenant from the Covenant of Grace.

Object. 3. The Conditions are different, Death and Satisfaction for Sin was
the Condition of the Covenant of Redemption. Faith is the Condition of the
Covenant of Grace: Death required on Christ's Part, Faith required on Man's
Part; the giving Christ a Seed, and Eternal Life to that Seed, is the Condition
on God's Part to Christ; the giving Eternal Life only to the Party Believeing,
is the Condition on God's Part in the other. So that the Reward in that
Covenant, is larger than the Reward promised to us in the Covenant of Grace. In
the Covenant of Grace, the Condition runs thus; Believe in the Lord Jesus
Christ, and thou shall be saved; in the Covenant of Redemption, the Condition
runs thus: Make thy Soul an Offering for Sin, and thou shall see thy Seed.

Answ. I wonder at the Learned Author, who makes these Distinctions, I cannot
be of his Mind, I rather judge the difference in the Covenant of Grace or
Covenant of Redemption lies here, viz. Christ had some great Work to do, (as
the Condition of this Blessed Compact with the Father) on, and in the behalf of
his Elect, which was Peculiar to him, i. e. he was to die, and make
Satisfaction to offended Justice; he, in the Covenant of Grace or
Gospel Covenant, merited all for us, so that we might have all freely given to
us through the Redemption of his Blood, etc.

1. Christ worked for Life, but we work not, but believe on him that justifies
the ungodly.

2. Christ has not what he has by Grace, but by Desert; but though our Savior
had his Reward in the Covenant on meriting Conditions, viz. upon his Perfect
Obedience to the Law of Works, and being made a Curse for us, and so made a
plenary Satisfaction to God's Justice for our Sins: yet pray what was his
Reward? Was he sure or certain of any one Soul, as the Reward of all this hard
Work and Sufferings? etc. Why, this Author tells us, he shall see his Seed, or
have a Seed; that is, he shall have all the Elect brought in, and united to
him, viz. be sure of them, or have this certain Reward, (and not left on
uncertain Conditions of Faith and Obedience to be performed by the miserable,
depraved and wretched Creature,) which Condition we could not perform; and if
this be so, then the Father must bring us in, or draw us to Christ; for except
he does that, no one Soul can come to him as Christ himself positively affirms,
Joh. 6.44. No man can come to me, except the Father which sent me, draw him:
and from hence I ask, whether Power to perform that, which they call the
Condition of the Covenant of Grace was not included, or comprehended in the
Covenant of Redemption? And if so, how could they be Two distinct Covenants?
certainly, in it there was infinite Grace showed toward us.

3. As to the other Condition in the Covenant of Redemption, it being larger to
Christ, than that in the Covenant of Grace. I answer, as the Covenant was
primarily made with Christ, it was made with him for all the Elect, as their
Head and Surety; and therefore, it must needs be larger as well as it was a
meriting Reward: but as we are concerned in the same Covenant, we have nothing
as a Reward, because we work not; and as considered as particular Persons, it is
enough our own particular Souls and Bodies shall be eternally saved, who are
united to him as the Reward of his Work: the Condition therefore being made to
him as the Head of the whole Body, it must needs be so large and extensive; but
as to the particular Members, that cannot comprehend more than he or she that
believes as a part of the Seed which he was to see; it is enough therefore, that
we are the Saved, the Redeemed, and not the Saviors or Redemers of others.

But if by Virtue of the Covenant of Redemption we are not Redeemed, call it no
more the Covenant of Redemption -- therefore -- 1 st. I would know whether
Faith which is called the Condition of the Covenant of Grace, was not the Fruit
of Christ'd Suffering in pursuit of that Holy Compact? and is it not
particularly employed in those Words, he shall see his Seed? but if they be
adult Persons, he can never see them if Faith be not given to them (unless the
Holy Spirit, that great Promise of the Father be given to them) whereby they
are enabled to believe, I will put my Spirit within them, Ezekiel. 36.27. I will
put my fear into their Hearts, a new Heart will I give them, and a new Spirit
will I put within them; I will pour my Spirit upon thy Seed, Isa. 44.3. Thy
Seed, Who does he speak to? why, to his Servant, does not these Promises referr
to that Covenant made with Christ, which you call the Covenant of Redemption?
and was not Christ assured by the Father, that these Promises should be made
good to his Seed; and yet it is evident they belong to the Covenant of Grace,
therefore I see not how they can be Two Covenants distinct from each other.

Obj. 4. Christ is the Mediator of the Covenant of Grace, but not the Mediator
of the Covenant of Redemption, but a Party; he was the Surety of the Covenant
of Grace, the Covenant of Redemption had no Surety, the Father and the Son
trusted one another upon the Agreement: the Covenant of Grace is confirmed by
the Blood of Christ; but we cannot say that the Covenant of Redemption was
confirmed properly by that Blood, any more than as it was a necessary Article
in that Covenant.

Answ. All that can be said (as I conceive is this) viz. our Lord Christ when
he first entered into the Covenant with the Father for us, to bring in, and
accomplish the Covenant of Grace, agreed then to be Mediator and Surety of this
Covenant: There are some Transactings where Suretyship is required, which a
Surety must do, i. e. he must accept and freely and readily agree to do all
that is necessary to be done which the Creditor requires, and the Nature of the
said Covenant calls for: yea, and some things that peculiarly belong to him, as
Surety. And so it might be here about those glorious and gracious Transactions
between the Father and the Son, about the completing the Covenant of Grace
concerning the Elect, and (indeed the greatest Expressions and Demonstration of
God's Grace to us appeared in those Covenant Transactions, and all the good we
receive (I say again) by he Covenant of Grace are but the Fruits and Product of
the Covenant, as it was made with Christ our Head, Mediator and Surety; but
among Men, those Things and Covenant Transactions between the Creditor and the
Surety, which peculiarly appertain to him; in which, nevertheless the poor
Debtor is mainly concerned* it being such things that must be performed by the
Surety for him, or he can have no Benefit by the said Covenant) are never
called a Covenant distinct in it self from that it refers to, and is a Branch
of; or however there is no need of such a formal distinct Covenant, between
each covenanting Parties (as primarily considered) when the Covenant which
those Transactions refers to, was immediately made. For I know not of any other
Covenant of Grace made with Christ for us about our Salvation, but that which
they call the Covenant of Redemption, distinct from it, and to say that God
enters into a Covenant of Grace with us, as simply considered in our selves,
without Christ being the Chief and Primary Covenanting Party, in our behalf, is
of a dangerous Nature to ^ffirm, and must not be admitted of, as will appear
hereafter. Besides, the Mediatory Covenant, or that in which Christ is
Mediator, is called the New Covenant, or Covenant of Grace, as the term
Mediator clearly holds forth; which Covenant to confirm, he shed his own Blood,
and the Original making of that Covenant, was at that time, and by that Compact
between the Father and the Son for us; for Christ, for himself, had no need to
become a Mediator, or to enter into any Covenant with the Father; therefore, I
know not what these Men's nice Distinctions signify, unless it be to amuse the
World, except it be for a worser purpose, viz. To confirm their new Notion of a
conditional Covenant of Faith, and sincere Obedience.

3. The Distinction lies not in Two Covenants, but in the distinct Parts of the
said one entire Covenant; one part as it referrs to Christ, the other as it
respects us in the Applicatory part of it by his Grace.

2. Also, in respect of the time of the making of the Covenant, and the
Revelation, Execution, and the Application thereof.

1. Christ in the Covenant, First Articled with the Father, to be a Mediator,
and in the Execution of the Covenant, actually discharges that Office, and the
like, as a Surety.

Obj. 5. Christ performed his Part in the Covenant of Redemption: and by virtue
of his Mediatory Covenant, performed the Covenant of Works, but he did confirm,
not perform, the Covenant of Grace.

Answ. This is the worst of all, and it seems to be calculated, rather to
unfold Arminianism, then to establish sound Divinity.

1 st. Has Christ performed his part so in the Covenant of Redemption, that he
has no more to do, by virtue of his Mediatory Covenant? God forbid, he has
not yet delivered up his Kingdom to the Father. I shall now give you my Reasons
(under this particular Branch) why I accept and argue against the Notion of Two
distinct Covenants. What says the Arminian, viz. Christ has performed or
fulfilled the Covenant of Works, and made such a full Satisfaction for the
breach of the Law, so for all the whole World, that no Man is under the Curse
of it, but that all are Justified from that; and he has put all Men into a
capacity to be saved, if they perform the Condition of the Gospel, i. e.
Repent, Believe, and live a godly Life to the end of their Days, which God has
given all Men Power to do, if they do but exercise that Power: Christ has put
all Men on their Feet again, and has made the Condition possible, if not
easy, for all to be saved. Christ is not to perform the Condition of the
Covenant of Grace, though he did perform, and so take away the Law of Perfect
Obedience, or is the end of the Law, for Righteousness; but let them read the
whole verse, it is but to every one that believes, and sure they forget that all
Men are dead in Sins and Trespasses, and must by Christ have a Principle of
Spiritual Life insused into them, before they can live, move, or believe in
him, Can Man change his own Heart? or, Will that Grace, God affords to all Men
do it? What short of Almighty Power can form the Image of God in the Soul, or
create us again in Christ Jesus?

2 dly, And what is it, which our new Doctrine (in opposition to the ancient
Doctrine, on which Saints formerly built all their Hope and Salvation) does
hold forth? Why, Is not the purport of it this? i. e. Christ as Mediator, has
so far satisfied for the breach of the Law of perfect Obedience, or given to
God such a valuable Recompense, that he might justly wave, and not exact or
execute the Law of Works, or has relaxed the Severity thereof, and taken it
away, and has obtained and given, as he is a Lawgiver, or Govenour, a milder
Law of Grace; and if Men perform the Conditions of Faith, and sincere
Obedience, or Faith and Gospel Holiness, they shall be Justified and Saved; so
that our Right to Life, and the Favor of God, Peace of Conscience, and Hope of
Salvation, do depend upon our Obedience to the Gospel, or New Law, and this
Christ has purchased, should be accepted as our Righteousness, by which we
must be Judged. They deny not, but that the Merits of Christ are the Cause of
this Gospel Law; his Righteousness imputed, is the Cause for which we are
Justified (or rather, it is for his Sake) we are Justified and Saved, when we do
answer the Rule of the Gospel. I have heard them Preach and have read their
Books, and if this be not, in part, what they say, I do not understand them,
it is such a Mystery of, etc. However, Christ has done and performed his part
in the Mediatory Covenant; the Law of perfect Obedience cannot hurt us, if we
conform to the Rule of this milder Law, which Christ does not perform for us,
etc. What do they mean? Is it this? i. e. Christ does not believe for us; Who
says he does? but

2 dly, Has not he obtained Grace for us, to enable us to believe? Is not he
the Author and Finisher of our Faith? Does not he begin the good Work in us,
and will he not perform it unto the end? St. Paul affirms his Confidence in
him, that he would do it, Phil. 1.6. And does not performing imply a Covenant
or Promise he has made to do it? If so, then it appears Christ has more to do
for us, then only his performing the Covenant of Works, and confirming the
Covenant of Grace. Does he not say, Other Sheep I have, which are not of this
fold, and them I must bring, Joh. 10.16. Must bring, Does not that Obligation
that was upon him, referr to the Covenant made with the Father? and again, he
says, All that the Father has given me, shall come unto me, Joh. 6.37. And
that it is his Father's Will that sent him, that of all that the Father has
given him, he should lose nothing.

Is not Christ the Mediator? (as I have said before of Two) i. e. Is he not to
bring us to God, as well as God to us? Who can remove that Enmity that is
naturally in our Minds against God, Romans 8.7. but he only? Why is Christ called
a Quickening Spirit, and so full of Grace? Is it not that he might Quicken us,
and Communicate of his Grace to us, as he is our Head and (Mediator) and we his
Members? Can we subdue the Powers of darkness, or break Satan's Chains? are we
stronger than the strong Man ^rmed? Math. 12.29. Must not Christ perform all
these things for us? or, Does not the Performance of all this, belong to the
Covenant of Grace.

3 dly, I suppose the Mistake lies here, viz. Our Authors do only insist upon,
or speak of the Application of the Covenant of Grace; true, Christ as Mediator,
performed the Covenant of Works for us, without us; he alone, in his own
Person, did that, and I must say, he does not so perform the Applicatory part
of the Covenant of Grace, for we act with him, but how? even as we are acted
and moved, like as when our Savior, quickened Lazarus, he then arose and had
Life and Motion, and could come out of the Grave; so when he has quickened us,
who were dead in Sin, when the dead hear the voice of the Son of God, by his
Spirit they then can act and move, can believe and obey, and do for God from a
Right Principle, and to a Right End. Is it not said it is God that works in us
to will and to do of his own good Pleasure, Phil. 2.13. And does not David say,
he would cry to the Lord that performed all things for him, Psalm. 57.2.

Pray let me here note Four Things, as touching the Covenant of Grace.

1. The Time when 'twas made with Christ for us: and that was from eternity.

2. When it was first revealed; and that was to our First Parents as soon as
they fell, and broke the Covenant of Works.

3. When it was executed, confirmed, and touching the outward Dispensation of
it, took its rise or beginning; it was executed by Christ as our Head, when he
came into the World, in part, i. e. in his Life, and ratified and confirmed by
his Blood: and the rise or beginning of the outward Dispensation of it, was at
his Death and Resurrection, when the Old Covenant ceased or was abrogated.

4. When and how are we said to have it made with us, or performed to us
actually and personally, so as to have real Interest in all the Blessings and
Privileges thereof? (For as it respects us, it only contains free and
absolute Promises, like the Waters of Noah: And not a Law of conditional Faith
and Obedience to be performed by us) Now we have not actual Interest in it, and
so personally it cannot be said to be made with us, until we have actual Union
with Christ, and do believe in him: For want of these Distinctions, I fear some
Men run astray. For it seems as if some Men would have us believe, that the
Covenant of Grace in the latitude of it, is but that merciful conditional
Covenant of Faith, and Gospel Holiness, that God is pleased to enter into with
us, and we with him, in our Baptism, and if we perform that Covenant to the
end, we shall be Justified and Saved; nay, and so far as we do act in sincere
Obedience, so far, we are already Justified; and if this be the Notion of these
Men and that we must believe, as they do) then say I, we are not under Grace,
but under a Law that will keep us in Doubts and Bondage as long as we live; and
if we have no other Righteousness than this, which is either within us, or
wrought by us, we shall certainly drop down into Hell when we come to die.

4thly. And by making the Covenant of Redemption distinct from the Covenant of
Grace, (in respect of what I am now speaking of) I fear it lay^ a Foundation
for those Errors which are got among us; as if we are to enter into a Covenant
with God without Christ's undertaking for us, as our Surety: for say they,
Christ did perform the Covenant of Works, but does confirm, not perform the
Covenant of Grace.

What is the Purport of this Doctrine, as it is improved by our new Methodists?
Why, this, viz. In the Mediatory Covenant, Christ made God amends for our
breach of the Law of Perfect Obedience by himself alone and for himself, that
so he might be a fit Mediator, and merit a New Law of Grace of sincere
Obedience; which New Law or Covenant he confirmed by his Death, (so that God
now enters into a Covenant with Mankind again) and if we perform the Conditions
of it, we shall thereby assuredly have Justification and Eternal Life.

Not that Christ in the Covenant of Grace has undertaken to perform it for us,
but has left us to work out our Salvation our selves, though not without the
Assistance of the Holy Spirit; and thus Christ is our legal Righteousness in
his Mediatory Covenant, yet so too, that by his Merits we have all
Gospel-Blessings -- How is that? Why thus, i. e. he merited the New Law of
Grace, by satisfying for the Law of Works, or as Mediator, gave God a
satisfying Recompense for our breach of it: but our inherent Faith and
Gospel-Holiness with Christ's Merits (as before) is our Evangelical
Righteousness, by which we are justified.

And this is the dangerous Consequence (which I perceive) does attend the
allowing of the distinction of two Covenants, which at once (in my Judgment)
tends to overthrow the Nature of the Free Grace of God in the Covenant of
Grace, which is ordered in all things and sure, as it was made with Christ for
us.

Obj. 6. By the Covenant of Redemption, Christ could challenge his Reward upon
his own Account; but in the Covenant of Grace, Believers have a Right to the
Reward only upon the Account of Christ; there is an intrinsic Worth in the
Obedience of Christ, whereby he merited; for there was a Proportion between it,
in regard of the Dignity of his Person: but there is no intrinsic Worth in
that Grace, which is the Condition of the Covenant of Grace, to merit any
thing: there was a Condition of a valuable Consideration required of Christ:
the Condition required of us has no valuable Proportion to the Greatness of
the Reward, the Reward was of Debt to him, etc.

1. Answ. I would know what that Reward is which Christ does challenge, is it
not Grace, Righteousness and Eternal Life for all the Elect? True, we merit
nothing; but did not Christ merit all for us? Did he merit for himself, and for
us only a conditional Covenant? as I showed before.

2. And may not Believers in Christ lay claim to Christ's reward? i. e. the
Blessings purchased by him as the Fruits of his Merits in a way of
Righteousness and Justice, upon the Account of Christ's Undertakings, as well
as in a way of Grace and Mercy: what says the Apostle, 1 John ^.9. God is
faithful and just to forgive us, etc. which (says our Annotators) more
strictly taken, permit him not to exact from us a Satisfaction, Which he has
accepted in the Atonement made by his Son, in his own way ^^plyed, and on his
own Terms to be accounted to us, that he will not fail to forgive us our Sins,
etc.

3. Still the Distinction must (as I conceive) run thus, i. e. Christ had his
part in this one Covenant, by Merit he is the Savior, we have our part in it
freely by Grace, being the saved; and what though there is no intrinsic Worth
in that Grace which we receive in the Applicatory Part of the Covenant, in
order to our actual interest therein: yet there was an intrinsic Worth in his
Merits that purchased that Grace for us, and does not the intrinsic Worth and
Merits of Christ appertain to the Covenant of Grace, as it was with him for us
as our Mediator and Redeemer? Nay, and is it not from hence Faith and all other
Grace is given to us, and cannot Christ challenge of the Father all those he
became a Surety and a Redeemer for in the Covenant? The chief Grace still (say
I) lies in that you call the Covenant of Redemption, and distinct from the
Covenant of Grace.

Obj. 7. The Mediatory Covenant respects others as well as Christ, viz. his
Seed; and giving them Glory: but in the Covenant of Grace, the Promise respects
only the Particular Person that believes, answering the Terms of the Covenant,
etc.

Answ. 1. I see not but here they give away their Cause, and contradict
themselves in respect of their first Objection; it appears now they see there
were more than two single Parties concerned in the Covenant of Redemption: they
here assert, it respects others as well as Christ, viz. All his Seed.

2. We have showed how none but particular Persons who believe, are concerned
in the Application of the Covenant of Grace. -- But

3. Does not the Scripture say Christ is the Mediator of the New Covenant, viz.
the Covenant of Grace? And does not this respect as they confess, all his Seed?
and can any perform the Terms of this Covenant without Christ, in the Execution
of his Office as our Mediator and Surety? He is our Savior in the Covenant of
Grace, that was his Work, his Part; and so consequently he engaged, and will
quicken us, renew us, save us, and bring all the Father gave him, to Glory.

Obj. 8. If the Covenant of Grace and that of Redemption were the same, then
Christ should be both the Testator and a Party: A Testator makes not a Will to
bequeath Legacies to himself.

Answ. There are diverse Disparities between other Testators and the
Testatorship of Christ.

1. A Testator among Men, cannot be a Witness to his own last Will and
Testament; but so is Christ: he is given by the Father for a Witness to the
People of all those Gospel or Covenant-Blessings, he himself a Testator of his
own last Will and Testament bequeathed to all Believers^ he witnesses these
things are his Will, as well as the Father's, and he is the true and faithful
Witness.

2. A Testator among Men, cannot Enjoy or Possess that Kingdom* Estate or
Inheritance himself after his Death, which he has given away* but Christ the
Spiritual Testator, though he has given the Possession of Glory, etc. to
Believers by his last Will and Testament; yet is he a Co^Heir of the same Glory
and blessed Inheritance himself, and shall possess it jointly with them.

A Testator among Men, cannot see his own Will executed, but he leaves it to
others to be Executors of it: but Christ, by his Spirit, sees his Will executed
for though he was dead, He is alive; and behold, he lives for evermore: he is
also a Party with us, he is the Head, we are his Members; and now to close with
this, consider the Covenant of Grace was first made with Christ, and with us in
him; thus it runs, i. e. Christ purchases and we possess; Christ in this
Covenant obtains all by his Work and Merits, we have all of mere Grace: It Is
Grace in the Original, in the first making of it with Christ for us; it is of
Grace in the Execution of it, Confirmation, Publication, and in the
Application, in order to our actual Interest.

From the whole, it appears that Covenant they call the Covenant of Redemption,
contains the whole Sum; even Matter and Form* Condition and Promises of the
Covenant of Grace: in that Covenant is contained all the Grace God has
promised, and which we receive; all is obtained upon the Account of Christ's
satisfying for our Sins, and so all the Promises of Grace and Salvation run to
us in him: no Love, nor Divine Goodness is manifested to us but in and through
that Covenant: therefore not two, but one and the same Covenant; so that the
Covenant of Grace it appears, was made by the Holy God, in the Person of the
Father, with us in the Person of the Son; mind that Text, Who has saved us,
and called us with an holy Calling, not according to our Works, but according
to his own Purpose and Grace, which was given to us in Christ Jesus, before the
Work began, 2 Timothy 1.9. But to proceed

2dly. I shall open the Excellent Nature of this Glorious and Everlasting
Covenant*

1. It Is, you have heard, all of Grace, as it respects us, though Jesus Christ
paid dear for it; he procured all the Blessings of it for us, by his Merits* i.
e. by his Perfect Obedience and Suffering: By Grace ye are saved through Faith,
and that not of your selves, it is the Gift of God, Ephesians. 2.8. not of Works;
lest any man should boast: for we are his Workmanship created in Christ Jesus
to good Works, r. 10. not by Works of Righteousness that we have done, but by
his Mercy he saved us, Tit. 3.5.

2. It Is as it appears from hence, an Absolute, and not a Conditional Covenant:
not if we do this and that, viz get a new Heart, and perform the Condition of
Gospel-Holiness and Obedience, we shall have pardon and ^e justified; no, but
otherwise: He that works not, but believes on him that justifies the
ungodly, his Faith is counted for Righteousness, Romans 4.5. all is freely of
Grace through Christ's Merit, I will take away the Heart of Stone, and give
them a Heart of Flesh, a new Heart I will give them, and ^ new Spirit I will
put within them: I will be their God, and they shall be my People.

Now it is questioned, (says Reverend Cotton,) whether the Promise wherein the
Lord gives himself, be Absolute or Conditional? Faith to receive Christ is
ever upon an Absolute Promise. If you will say, it is a Promise to a Condition,
what kind of Condition was it? There is no Condition before Faith, but a
Condition of Misery, a lost Condition; or if a gracious Condition, it is a
Condition subsequent, not pre-existant, no Condition before it, whereby a Man
can close with Christ: and if it was a Condition after Faith unto which the
Promise was made, then Faith was before; and thatsoever follows Conversion,
is no ground of Faith, but a fruit and Effect of it: therefore I say, our first
coming to Christ cannot be upon a Conditional, but an Absolute Promise.

And indeed (says he) if ever the Lord minister Comfort unto any Man, true
Comfort upon good grounds, it is built upon a Promise of Free Grace, (...) be
unto Justification received: it is true indeed, a gracious Qu^^^^^tion and a
Promise to it, may give a good Evidence of its Aposteriore: Cotton's Treatise
of the New Covenant, p. 56, 57. and again (he says) God does give himself in
working Faith, before Faith can be there; and therefore it is the Fruit of the
Spirit that Faith is wrought in the Soul, and this Faith does receive the
Presence of the Lord Jesus Christ himself by his Spirit, and does receive also
Justification and Adoption: Again (says he) a man is passive in his
Regeneration as in Generation, only the Lord gives us his Spirit and that does
unite us unto Christ, which is received by Faith, together with Justification;
and yet by the Act of Believing we are justified, also Gal. 2.26. that is
manifested to be justified in our own Consciences, p. 55. thus far Mr. Cotton.

What are we able to do, when dead in Sin and Trespasses? Can we believe before
the Habit is infused from whence the Act proceeds? or move before we have
Life or are quickened?

3. It is a well ordered Covenant: for that Covenant that is ordered in all
things, is well ordered, etc. but to make this further manifest, I shall show
you that it is well ordered, 1. In respect of God (I mean) for his Glory, in all
his glorious Attributes. 2. It Is well ordered in respect of the Glory clear
Revelation, and Manifestation of the Three Persons in the Godhead, that bear
witness in Heaven, the Father, the Word and the Spirit; these Three are One in
Essence, yet three Subsistances. 3. It Is well ordered to confound and destroy
the grand Works and Design of the Devil. 4. It Is well ordered in respect of
God's Holy Law, that the Sanction and Honor of the Law might not be lost or
suffer the least Eclipse. 5. And lastly, it is well ordered for our good. A
little briefly to each of these.

First, His Covenant is well ordered, in respect had to the Glory of all God's
Attributes.

1. The Sovereignty of God shines forth gloriously in the Contrivance and
bringing in this Covenant; for God he having Absolute Dominion for ever over
the Works of his Hands, to dispose and determine them as seems him good; and
doubtless to manifest his own Sovereignty, he created both Angels and Men; And
part of the first sinning against him, he leaves for ever under that Wrath and
Misery they brought upon themselves; and the other he determined out of his
Sovereignty to confirm in their Primitive State.

And also part of Mankind he left under that Wrath they brought upon themselves
by original and actual Iniquity, and affords no eternal Redemption to; and
indeed, it is only Sovereign Grace he afforded a Savior for any of the
Offspring of fallen Man: for he was not under any Obligation to enter into a
Covenant for any of them, any more than he was not to redeem the fallen Angels:
he would therefore have been just, if he had let us all have perished under
Sin, and his own fearful Wrath, as he dealt by them.

2dly, His infinite Wisdom shines forth in this gracious Covenant, and hence
the Gospel is called the manifold Wisdom of God, Ephesians. 3.10. which may refer to
the whole Economy of our Redemption, as also to the several Forms and Manners
of God's revealing of it to his Church and People: it is called the Wisdom of
God in a Mystery, even his hidden Wisdom which was ordained before the World
began to our Glory, 1 Cor. 2.7. Divine Wisdom has admirably in this Covenant
mixed all the Attributes together with unexpressible Sweetness and exact
Harmony, that Justice cannot triumph over Mercy, nor Mercy glory over Justice,
but they meet together and sweetly kiss each other, and it was infinite Wisdom,
(I say) that found out this way: therefore it is hereby wonderfully glorified in
the sight of Men and Angels.

3ly. God's Divine Love, Mercy and Goodness to lost Man, to admiration is
displayed hereby, God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son,
etc. Joh. 3.16. rather than Mankind should be utterly lost, he will enter into
a Covenant with his own Son, and substitute him our Mediator, Head and Surety
to satisfy for our Sins; and be made a Curse for us: that so by his own
Free Grace through the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ, we might be
reconciled, justified and eternally saved i. e. by his Merits and Righteousness
imputed to us: there was nothing in Man to oblige God to pity him, we were his
Enemies, when Christ died for us; and he offered and propounded this glorious
Contrivance of his Wisdom to his Beloved Son in the Covenant of our Peace, out
of his infinite Love and Goodness, as seeing us fallen, and lying in our Blood,
it was as we were in that woeful Condition he first loved us, and as the
Effects of that Love entered into a Covenant with the Son for us.

4thly. His Divine Justice and Infinite Holiness shines forth hereby also, that
God might be Just, and the Justifier of him that believes in Jesus, Romans 3.26.
that is, that God might appear to be Just as well as Gracious: true, God had
been just if Mankind had been left for ever under his divine Wrath and
Vengeance (as it is upon the fallen Angels) but then his Mercy had for ever
been veiled, and had never appeared to any of his Creatures; and yet that
Justice might not suffer the least Eclipse or lose any of its Glory, Christ
shall bear our Sins upon his own Body on the Tree, and suffer that Wrath that
Justice denounced upon the Sinner for the Breach of the Holy Law. God can as
soon cease to be God, as cease to be Just; nor could any Justice or
Righteousness justify us, but that which is Pure and Spotless, or without Sin,
(Justice is not to be considered in God, as it is in Man; who can forgive,
without requiring Satisfaction wherein he has been wronged?) The Law was but a
Transcript or written Impression of his Holy Nature, and discovers what a
Righteousness it is we must be found in, if we are ever justified in his sight.

If God had not been gracious, he had not accepted of a Substitute, and if his
Justice had not been satisfied, and his Wrath appeased, he had never raised
this Substitute from the dead.

This Crucified Redeemer (says Reverend Charnock) only was able to effect this
Work; he was an infinite Person, consisting of a divine and humane Nature, the
Union of the one, gave Value to the Suffering of the other; the Word of God was
past in his threatening, his Justice would demand its right of his Veracity: a
Sacrifice there must be to repair the Honor of God, etc. Justice must have
Satisfaction, the Sinner could not give it without Suffering eternal
Punishment: Christ then puts himself into our place, to free us from the Arrest
of Justice -- So that now God can pardon the Sins of Believers with the Glory
of his Righteousness, as well as of his Grace; and legally justify a believing
Sinner without the least impeachment of his Justice.

5thly. God's divine Power and Omnipotence also, is exalted by this Covenant;
in his raising up a poor fallen and lost Creature, sunk as low as Hell (under
the weight of fearful Guilt and Wrath, lying under the powers of infernal
Spirits) to dwell with him in the highest Heavens for ever: but God's Power,
does not only appear in respect of that glorious Conquest Christ obtained over
Sin, Satan, and Death, at his Resurrection, in the actual Execution and
Accomplishment of his holy Compact, with the Father without us; but also in
working in us, by his putting forth his Almighty Power in working Faith in our
Souls, after the same manner that he wrought in Christ, when he raised him from
the Dead, Ephesians. 1.19, 20. he raised us with Christ from the Dead, when Christ
was raised vertually, as he was our Head; and also does actually quickens us,
and raises us up by his Spirit, Ephesians. 2.1, 2. destroying those evil and vicious
Habits, Sin and Satan had infused into us, and so bingeth us out of Darkness
into Light, and from the power of Satan, unto God.

6thly. God's Veracity and Faithfulness shines forth also hereby: his
threatening is made good upon us in Christ's undergoing Death and the Curse, due
to us for our Sins; as also in making good what he swear to the True David, and
promised to his Seed, in sending of his Son, when the fullness of time was come,
made of a Woman, made under the Law, to redeem them that were under the Law,
Gal. 4.4. the Woman's Seed has bruised the Head of the Serpent: so much as to
this. -- But,

Secondly, In this Covenant there is a clear Revelation or Manifestation of the
Three Persons in the Deity, Reader, This Head is added, it was not delivered in
the Sermon.
and their Glory does equally and jointly shine forth: every one acting a part
in it under the Old Covenant, there was but a dark Discovery of God personally
considered, though it was made known as soon as the Covenant of Grace was
manifested to Man; in the Gospel, is a full Declaration of their distinct
Personality; the Father sending the Son as a Mediator, the Son dying for our
Sins, and the Spirit sanctifying our Souls: the Father by eternal Generation
begetting the Son, the Son begotten of the Father, and the Spirit proceeding
from the Father and the Son; yet all Three are but one and the same God. But to
proceed.

1. The Glory of God the Father shines forth in the Covenant of Grace; for the
Father is holden forth as the Primary, and efficient Cause, (in his Wisdom,
Grace and Love) of our Salvation, and of all those Blessings of Peace and
Reconciliation we have therein: All things are of God, who has reconciled us
unto himself by Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 5.18, 19. God was in Christ, reconciling
the World to himself. Though the whole Trinity are concerned in our Salvation,
yet (as our Protestant Writers observe) each Person acts a distinct Part in it,
the Father chose and substituted Christ to do this glorious Work, and accepted
him in our stead, as our Surety and Savior; God the Father prepared him a
Body, a Body have thou prepared me, Heb. 10.5. he sent him also into the World,
(as our Savior asserts) many times in the Gospel Recorded by St. John, the
Father anointed him with the Holy Spirit above his fellows, to undertake for us
in this Covenant, the Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed
me to Preach the Gospel to the poor, etc. Luke 4.18. the Father calls him his
Servant, whom he upheld and strengthened in doing that great Work, and he is
said to be raised up from the Dead by the Power or Glory of the Father: the
Father is indeed represented as the injured Person, he had therefore the only
Right to offer and fix on such Terms which the Purity of his Holy Nature, and
Honor of his Sovereign Majesty, required as rightful Judge and Governor; had
not the Father chosen, accepted and approved of him for doing of this great
Work, his undertakings could not have availed us to the Salvation of our Souls;
besides the Glory of God the Father must not be eclipsed, while we exalt the
eternal Son in our Redemption: all the Benefit therefore we receive by the
Blood and Merits of Christ, are ascribed to the free Grace of God the Father,
after that the Kindness and Love of God our Savior appeared, Tit. 3.4. the
Father chose us in Christ, as well as gave him for us, and commanded him to lay
down his Life to redeem us.

2dly. This Covenant is so well ordered, that the Glory of Jesus Christ is
magnified herein wonderfully.

1. In that herein he is proclaimed the Only True God, by whom the World was
made the Brightness of the Father's Glory, and express Image of his Person,
Heb. 1.3. and when he brought him into the World. he says, and let all the
Angels of God Worship him. Now Divine Worship appertains to none but to him
that is God by Nature.

2, Christ's Love shines forth in this Covenant, as well as his Deity, or
Godhead; in his ready, gracious and voluntary Acceptance of that glorious
Design of saving us miserable Creatures; it was Christ who wrought out the
Garment or Robe of Righteousness for us, though the Father prepared him a Body to
do it: Christ kept the Law of the first Covenant, for us, and overcome all our
Enemies hence he said, Be of good cheer, I have overcome the World, Joh. 16.33.
why should we be of good cheer upon his overcoming the World, if it was not for
us, and to assure us that we shall overcome it? Nay, and we did overcome it in
him, he overcame Sin, made an end of Sin as to its killing and Soul-condemning
Power, Dan. 9.24. he shed his Blood to make our Peace with God the Father; he
received the Spirit without Measure, to communicate it to us. Christ loved us,
and washed us from our sins in his own Blood, Rev. 1.5.

He makes Intercession for us, who is he that Condemns, it is Christ that
dyed; yea, or rather, that is risen again, who is even at the Right Hand of
God, who also makes Intercession for us, Romans 8.34. He pleads his own
Sacrifices with the Father for us, he presents our Persons (as the High Priest
under the Law did the Names of the Children of Israel, when he appeared before
the Lord, on the Breast Plate of Judgment) before the Father, and in him also
our spiritual Services are accepted: we are justified in him, he is the Lord
our Righteousness, we have pardon of sin through his Blood, he is our
Bridegroom, he came from Heaven to offer his Love to us, and to espouse us for
himself; he that has the Bride, is the Bridegroom; it is he that offers up our
Prayers as sweet Insense to the Father, he is the Author and Finisher of our
Faith, he is the Covenant it self, our Head, our Mediator, our Priest, our
King, our Prophet, our Surety, our Shepherd, our Captain; he is made of God,
unto us wisdom, and righteousness, sanctification, and redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30.
Christ is all, and in all, in this Covenant, so that his Glory shines forth
admirably in it*

3dly, The Glory of the Holy Ghost, the Third Person in the Blessed Trinity
shines forth in this Covenant also.

1. The Holy Ghost is positively declared in the Gospel to be God: St. Peter
told Annanias, He had not lied unto Men, but to God, Act. 5.3. His Sin was
against the Holy Spirit; and to aggravate it, the Apostle told him, the Holy
Spirit was God, to whom he had lied. Ye are the Temple of the Living God, as
God has said, I will dwell in them; and again, Know ye not, that ye are the
Temple of God. All acknowledge, God in these places, referrs to the Holy Ghost;
moreover, we are Baptized in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Spirit; and so we Dedicate and Devote our selves in Baptism, to serve and
worship the Holy Ghost, as well as the Father and the Son. Does not Paul close
his Epistles, with a sort of Prayer, to the Holy Spirit, as well to the Father,
and to the Son? The Grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Love of God, and
the Communion of the Holy Ghost be with you all, Amen. 2. Cor. 14.14.

2. As touching his Work and Operations, the Holy Spirit convinces of Sin,
this is his Office in this Covenant, He shall convince the World of sin, of
righteousness, and of judgment, John 16.8, 9. The Spirit convinces our Souls of
the great Evil of Sin, (as it is against a Holy, Gracious, and Good God) he
convinces the Soul of all Sin, of Secret and Heart Sins, and particularly of
the Sin of Unbelief, He shall convince the World of Sin, because they believe
not in me: The Law cannot do this, nor the Light within; also, the Spirit
convinces us of that great Enmity, that is in our Hearts naturally against
God, Romans 8.7. He convinces us of the guilt of Sin, and of the pollution of
Sin; the Holy Spirit convinces Sinners of the want of God's Image, and shows
them how unlike God they are naturally, and how much like the Devil: the Holy
Spirit convinces Sinners of the Prevalency of Sin, His Servants you are, to
whom you yield your selves up to Obey; he convinces of the Danger of Sin, of
the Soul-killing and damning Power thereof: Also, The Holy Spirit convinces us
of the want of Righteousness in our selves to justify us in God's sight; and
also convinces us, That Christ's Righteousness is able to justify and save
us; because Christ thereby went to the Father, his Righteousness carried him to
the Father, (as our Representative) and that Righteousness that carried him to
the Father, as Mediator, will bring us thither: Who believe in him, or are of
his Seed.

3. The Work and Office of the Spirit, in this Covenant, is to quicken all that
the Father has given to Christ.

4. The Spirit renews, regenerates, or renovates our Souls; it is the Spirit
that works God's Image in us, we are Changed from Glory to Glory, even as by
the Spirit of the Lord, 2. Cor. 3.18.

5. The Glory of the Holy Ghost shines forth in the Covenant of Grace, ^s our
Sanctifier; for it is the Spirit that infuses new Habits, divine and gracious
Qualities in our Souls, new Thoughts, new Desires, new and holy Affections, new
Delights, Joy, Peace, and Consolation; the Spirit is an Earnest of future
Glory, it is the Spirit that is our Comforter, it is he that strengthens us, and
bears up our Souls in Trouble.

6. The Holy Spirit puts on the Robe of Righteousness upon us, by uniting of
our Souls to Jesus Christ.

7. The Holy Ghost works all Grace in us, Faith is called, the Faith of the
Operation of God; (the Spirit is God) likewise, Faith is called, a Fruit of the
Spirit, Gal. 5.22. The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts, also by the
Holy Ghost, Romans 5.5.

In a word, all the Graces are by, and from the Spirit; hence he is called, The
Spirit of Grace: But we had never drank of this sweet Stream, had not Christ,
in the Covenant, opened the Fountain. The Spirit was not yet given, because
Jesus was not yet glorified, Joh. 7.39. The Spirit is promised first to Christ,
and then to his Seed: Thus (and in many other Respects) the Holy Spirit is
glorified, and his excellent Operations show themselves, and shine forth in the
Covenant of Grace; the ministration of the Gospel, is called, the Ministration
of the Spirit. So much as to this.

3dly, I shall proceed to show you, That the Covenant is well ordered to
confound and destroy the Works and grand Design of Satan. To this purpose was
the Son of God manifested, that he might destroy the Works of the Devil, 1 John
3.8.

1. By this Covenant, Satan is defeated, and his Hopes overthrown; who,
doubtless, thought to have trodden Mankind under his Feet for ever. How would
he have Gloried and have Blasphemed God, had not this Covenant been provided?
would not he have said, Where is thy Creature Man, that thou made but a
little lower than the Angels, and made a Ruler over thy nether Creation? Have
not I done his Business for him? Lo! he is become my Creature, he has cast
thee off, and his Obedience to thee. Where is that Image now which thou stamped
on his Soul?

2. Is it not said, The Seed of the Woman shall bruise his Head? This was one
grand Cause, why God entered into this Covenant with Christ; and remarkable it
is, and ever to be Remembered, that Satan entered into Judas to betray our
Savior; he concluded, doubtless, if he could bring Christ to Death, he should
do his business; but that way the Devil thought to gain all, he lost all, and
overthrew himself, and his Kingdom, for ever. Christ by death, destroyed death,
and him that had the power of death, which is the Devil, Heb. 2.14. He has led
captivity captive, Ephesians. 4.8. And having spoiled principalities and powers, he
made a show of them openly, triumphing over them in it, Col. 2.15.

4. By the New Covenant, God has greatly honored his Holy and Righteous Law;
that receives no Damage hereby, nor does its Glory suffer the least Eclipse,
but contrariwise, it is magnified to the wonderment of Men, and Angels, and that
Two ways.

1. In respect of Christ's perfect Conformity to it, in his holy and spotless
Life, in our Nature and in our Stead; who, by Reason of Sin, could not fulfill
the exact Righteousness thereof; but rather than it should lose the least Part
of its Glory, the Second Person of the Trinity shall come from Heaven, and
assume Man's Nature, and discharge the whole active Obedience which it did
require of us. -- And then

2 ly, In his cursed and bitter Death, by which he answered for our breach of
it, and considering the Dignity of his Person, he being God, as well as Man,
his Death and Suffering was a far greater Satisfaction for our Sins then if we
had suffered in Hell, because we thereby should have always been a paying, but
never could have paid our Debt to satisfy Divine Justice and therefore, must
have lain in Prison under incensed Wrath, to the Day of Eternity: And thus he
Answered the Law, and Silences the condemning Power thereof, and break all his
strong Cords and Bands to pieces, that kept us down under Wrath; and thereby
dissolved all its grievous Anathema's; for Christ being made a curse for us,
has redeemed us from the curse of the law, Gal. 3.13. viz. From that amazing
Sentence of the Holy God, denounced in his Law against us offending and guilty
Sinners: So that now there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus,
Romans 8.^ Because they are, by the Body, and Sufferings of Christ become dead to
the Law (or rather, that dead to them) which was fully effected at his glorious
Resurrection; it was indeed the Law, respecting the Penalty of it that brought
Christ to death, whose full Sentence in the Execution of it he endured on the
Cross, as he was substituted in our Place, that so we in a way of
Righteousness, might be Justified, as well as be Pardoned in a way of free
Grace: (because God, and not we, found out the surety, way and manner of the
satisfying both the Law, and his own infinite Justice, we have all freely,
without Money, or Price.) And thus God, in and by Jesus Christ, as he before
purposed, did magnify his Law, and make it honorable. Do we (says the
Apostle) make void the law through faith? God forbid: yea, we established the
Law, Romans 3.31. God did not Repent, he gave the Law of perfect Obedience; for
what could suit better with the Purity of his Holy Nature; nor could any
Righteousness, short of a perfect Righteousness, Justify us: He did not
therefore Design, by the Mediation and Obedience of Christ, to destroy the Law,
or take any Recompense in the room of it, that every way did not Answer the
Righteousness it required, and make Satisfaction for the Breach thereof:
therefore, by Faith (that is) by having Christ's perfect Righteousness imputed
to us, in his exact Conformity to the Law, by his active and passive Obedience;
we establish the Law, and make it honorable. If by any Law, as God is a Rector
or Governor, Justification, or eternal Life, is to be had, it must be a Law of
perfect Obedience, God's Holy and Righteous Nature requiring it; and no Law of
imperfect Obedience, though never so Sincerely performed, can answer God's
Justice, nor be agreeable with the Purity of his Nature, infinite Wisdom and
Holiness: For, if such a Law could have been consistent with the Wisdom,
Holiness, and Justice of God, certainly he would never, at First, have made a
Law of perfect Obedience, which, to remove out of the way, (that he might bring
in the latter) must cost him the Blood of his own dear Son.

1. Therefore, it was the Law of Innocence, the Law of Works, or that Law which
required perfect Obedience, given to Israel, which Jesus Christ fulfilled for
us; and not a peculiar Law of his own Mediation, made up of some Moral
Commands, some Jewish, and some peculiar to his own Person, (as some assert) And

2 dly, That he did Obey, and suffer in Obedience to the Law, in our stead; and
we are accepted by, and for that Obedience of his, (for else, the Glory of that
Law is darkened) and not that his Obedience did only procure, or merit a milder
Law, or easier Terms of Life, and Righteousness, and we not be dealt with,
according to the Law of Works, but according to the New Law of Grace; and in
the Third Place.

3 dly, The Righteousness, and Benefits of Christ's Righteousness, is made
ours, when we rely, or trust to God's free Promise, as the immediate and sole
Cause of Pardon and Life, (as all true Protestants formerly affirmed) and not
by Christ's procuring a New Covenant for us to enter into with God, which if we
answer the Condition thereof, i. e. repent and believe, we shall be saved*
Which Faith (as Mr. Baxter, Mr. W, etc. assert) taken in the full Extent and
Latitude, is nothing else but universal Obedience, and that so it is to be
understood, when it is said, that Faith, alone Justifies, viz. Faith and all
other Graces, both in Habit and Exercise, Mr. Baxter's Aph. 65. And they that
thus believe and obey the Gospel, shall be saved, though their Obedience be not
perfect; but if Christ fulfilled the Law for us, then (say I) that Obedience of
his, must be imputed to us, as if we had wrought it, and so we, by the
Application of that Righteousness, are Justified in God's sight, from the
Accusation of the Law, without any Works, or procuring Conditions, performed by
us. But (as one observes) when these Men speak of Faith, as a single Grace,
it is defined to be a sincere Acceptance of Christ, as Lord and Savior, and so
it Justifies merely, as it is a consenting, to be ruled and saved by Christ;
which is, (says he) neither an Assent to the Truth of the Promises, nor
Assurance or Trust in them (one, or both of which, all Men understand by Faith,
both in Scripture and common Speaking) but it is an Act of Obedience, or rather
a Covenant, or Promise of Obedience, whereby a Man engages, That he will seek
after Salvation, in ways of Obedience to Christ's Commands; and indeed, they
referr to the Baptismal Covenant made in Infancy: And thus Faith Justifies, (as
they intimate) as it does in part, fulfill the New Law, by engaging us to
Obedience; and in all this, Christ is looked upon as King or Rector chiefly,
and not as a Savior; for, (as Mr. Troughton notes) if Christ's Righteousness
does not immediately Justify us, and is made ours, then he is a Savior but
remotely as the Word is usually taken, to denote his making Satisfaction for
us, as a Priest, viz. As by his Death he procured a Possibility of Pardon, and
makes way for a New Covenant to be made with Man; so that Christ's main
Business, as a Savor, by this Opinion, is to grant new and tolerable Terms of
Salvation, to command Faith, Repentance and Obedience, and to annex a Promise
of eternal Life to them, and so to justify and save us, if we fulfill these
Conditions to the end of our Days; and that God, as a just and impartial Judge,
will give Sentence for, or against us, according to this Law, so that we are
justified by our Obedience to this Law, and saved by a King, proceeding
according to his own Law; and Faith is nothing else but a submitting to this
Law, and to the Terms required in it; which things, (says he) certainly make a
Covenant of Works, though it differs from the First Covenant of Works; and this,
if I mistake them not, is their Covenant of Grace; by which I never expect to
be saved. But to proceed,

5thly, The Covenant of Grace is well ordered, in all things, for our good; for
all things which we need, are contained in it, either in respect of deliverance
from present and future Evil, and to our being possessed, or invested with all
true spiritual and eternal Good.

1. We were Enemies to God, by Sin, and God an Enemy to us, but by this
Covenant, God is reconciled to us: Jesus Christ has so pacified his Wrath,
that now God says, Fury is not in me, Isa. 27. When we were Enemies, we were
reconciled to God by the death of his Son, Romans 5.10. The Angels that first
brought the Tidings of our Savior's Birth, cried, Peace on earth, good will to
men. Christ by the Blood of this Covenant, has made up that Breach, and
Reconciled God to us; and by his Spirit, he removes that Enmity, that naturally
is in our Hearts against God, and so reconciled us to God; he is our Days-man,
that lays his Hand upon both; he is not a Mediator of one, that is, not of God
only, but of Man also; he brings God to Man, and Man to God.

2. We were the Children of Wrath, and under the Curse of the Law; but by the
Grace of this well ordered Covenant, we are made the Children of God, and we
are delivered from the Curse of the Law: Christ has delivered us from the
curse of the law, being made a curse for us -- That the blessing of Abraham
might come on the Gentiles, through Jesus Christ, Gal. 3.13, 4.

3. We had lost the Image of God, but by this Covenant it is restored to us
again, and so restored, that we shall never lose it any more.

4. We were dead, blind, naked, in bonds, in prison, but by the Grace of God,
in this Covenant, we are quickened, Ephesians. 2.1, 2. have the eyes of our
understandings enlightened, Ephesians. 1.18. have our naked Souls clothed with the
robe of righteousness, are brought out of Prison, and all our Wounds are
healed, Sent out of the pit wherein was no water, by the blood of the covenant,
Zech. 9.11.

5. We were guilty and filthy Creatures, but by this Covenant, we are justified
and sanctified, we are acquitted, pronounced righteous, and all our Sins
pardoned, and washed away in the Fountain of Christ's Blood, 1 Cor. 6.11. Rev.
1.5.

6. We were condemned, and ready to have the Sentence executed upon us, and
cast into Hell, to be burned alive for ever and ever, even there, where the
worm dies not, and the fire is not quenched; but by the Grace of this
Covenant, we are saved, and shall be eternally; we are not only delivered from
all Evil, or from whatsoever was hurtful to us, but are invested with all true
internal and eternal Good. We by this Covenant, have union with God, adoption,
free access to the Father, yea all things that appertain to life and godliness,
and when this Life is ended, eternal Life and Glory in Heaven; therefore, it is
well ordered, in all things, for our good.

Fifthly, It is a sure Covenant, ordered in all things, and sure.

1. It Is a sure Covenant: because it was made in, and with our blessed Surety,
Jesus Christ, the Lord would not enter into Covenant with us, any more, nor
take our Bond for that great Sum of Ten thousand Talents, that vast Debt,
which we had contracted, and were never able to pay; for we had nothing, no not
one Farthing: And therefore, unless a Surety could be found, who was able and
sufficient to enter into Bond with God, for us, we must have perished for ever;
we were Arrested by the Justice of God, for breach of his Holy Law, and in
Prison, and must suffer Infinite Wrath, and divine Vengeance, for the just
demerit of our Sin, had not the Wise and Almighty God, sought out a Surety to
pay our Debt, and undertaken this New Covenant for us: Now Jesus Christ stepped
in, and undertook for us, and put his Name into our Bond and Obligation. Jesus
Christ was made a surety of a better covenant, Heb, 7.22. Reverend Dr. Owen,
most excellently resolves this Doubt, viz. Whether Christ be a Surety to God
for us, or of us to God, and shows God needs no Surety, nor is he capable of
having any Surety, properly so called, neither do we need any, on his part to
confirm our Faith in him. But we, on all Accounts, stand in need of a Surety
for us, or on our behalf; neither without the interposition of such a Surety
(says he) could any Covenant, between God and us, be firm and stable; or, an
everlasting covenant, ordered in all things, and sure: Dr. Owen, on the Hebr.
7.22. p. 223. God never broke at first with Man, therefore needs to give us now
no Surety; but we broke and failed in our Covenant with him. The First Adam
had, indeed, no Surety; and hence it was, that he failed, therefore God has
found out a way to prevent the like danger of Miscarriage on our part, any
more: And evident it is, that God entered into this Covenant with us in Christ,
before the World began and substituted Christ, then in the Covenant, our Surety
and Mediator, etc. The Assembly, in their Catechism, confirm this blessed
Doctrine: Take their Words.

Quest. With whom was the Covenant of Grace made?

Answ. The Covenant of Grace was made with Christ, the second Adam; and in him,
with all the Elect.

Thus Christ, and his Seed, are but one Party in the Covenant of Grace, as it
was primarily made between the Father and Son, who was set up from everlasting,
as our Head. And thus, in Christ, Grace was gave to us before the World began,
as the Apostle says, 2 Timothy 1.9. Who has saved us, and called us with an holy
calling, not according to our works, but according to his own purpose, which
was given to us in Christ, before the world began. Christ therefore became
Surety for us, to make firm and sure, all Covenant Blessing, to us; indeed if
Man could not, did not stand, but break Covenant with God, when he had no Sin,
no depraved Nature, when he had Power to have performed his Covenant with his
Maker, How unlikely was it, that we (who are so corrupted, so weak and feeble,
so depraved in every Faculty, no Power to do that which is spiritual Good, that
are attended with such a Body of Sin and Death, Romans 4.24.) to undertake to
enter into Covenant with God any more? or, What Reason is there for us to
think, God would trust us without Security, and the Suretyship of another
Person, whom he knew well, could not fail? He said, That he would lose nothing
that was given him; none of his Sheep shall perish, Joh. 10.38. and ver. 28.

2. This Covenant is made upon the unchangeable Decree and Council of God, and
his Decrees are compared to Mountains of Brass, Psalm. 89.28. to the 34 My mercy
will I keep with him for ever, and my covenant shall stand fast with him, his
seed shall endure for ever, etc. ver. 28, 29. My covenant I will not break, nor
alter the thing that is gone out of my mouth, ver. 34. If you can break my
covenant of the day and night, then may also my covenant be broken with David,
Jer. 33.20, 21. It Is the free Promise of God, like the Covenant of Day and
Night; and this stands upon the Pass of God's eternal Counsel; therefore, it is
sure.

3. It Is confirmed by the highest Witnesses in Heaven and Earth.

1. God the Father is a Witness to it himself; he bore Witness to Christ, in
the Gospel, and to every Precept and Promise therefore the Father himself which
has sent me, has born witness of me, Joh. 5.37.

2. The Son also, though the Surety of the Covenant, yet he is a Witness to
this Gospel Covenant also, (though this is not so, cannot be so among Men, i. e.
The Surety can be no Witness, but it is otherwise here) To this end was I born,
and to this end came I into the world, that I should bear witness unto the
truth, Joh. 18.37. That he is a King and Head of his Church; that he is
Mediator, and Surety; that he is our Savior; and, that the Covenant of
Salvation is made with him, and established in him. This he is a Witness of,
and to these, and other great Truths of the Covenant, he was Born, and came
into the World to bear Witness to, and he is called The Faithful and True
Witness. Rev. 1.5. And Jesus said, Though I bear record of my self yet my
record is true, for I know whence I came, and whither I go.

3. The Holy Apostles were also Witnesses to this New Covenant, touching the
Truth thereof in the execution, declaration, and publication of it; And we are
witnesses of all things that he did, Act. 1.39. and again, they are called
chosen witnesses, ver. 41. Whatsoever Precept or Promise is made in the Gospel,
or Threatening, they Witnessed to the Truth thereof, as well as to the
sufferings and resurrection of Christ; God speaking of Paul, says, he shall be
a witness unto me, Act. 26.16.

4. All those wonderful Miracles our Savior wrought, bear Witness to Christ,
and the Truth of the Gospel; and in them the Holy Spirit is a Witness also, as
well as many other ways. The works that I do, they bear witness of me, Joh.
5.36.

4 thly, It Is a sure Covenant, because it was confirmed by Blood, even ratified
and confirmed by the Blood of the Testator, Jesus Christ: Certainly, that
Covenant that is ratified by the Blood of Christ, must needs be sure to all the
Seed. Hence we have for a Sign and Token of this Confirmation, the Ordinance of
the Lord's Supper: This is the Blood of the New Covenant that is shed for you,
to make Peace for you, to procure Justification, Reconciliation, Pardon of Sin,
and eternal Life for you, and it is Sealed to you by my Blood: This is a Sign or
Token of it (as if he should so say) There is no altering a Covenant that is
confirmed by the death of the Testator; all the Legacies bequeathed in this
Covenant, are sure to the Legatees, as the Ordinances of Heaven by this means.

5 thly, The Covenant of Grace is sure, and all the Blessings thereof, because
the Execution of Christ's last Will and Testament, is put into the Hands of the
Holy Spirit; he is the great Executioner of this Covenant. I have not time, nor
room to open this.

6 thly, The Covenant is sure, by virtue of the Promise of God the Father, he
promised Christ, That he should see his Seed This was Abraham's Title to the
Blessings of the Covenant of Grace, Heb. 6.13. and so to David, and in them, to
all the true Heirs of the same Grace, and Promise: it is promised by God, that
cannot lie, to Christ, and to us in him; For all the Promises of God, in Jesus
Christ, are not yea and nay; but yea and amen, unto the glory of God the
father, 1 Cor. 1.20. God has engaged his very Faithfulness, as touching the
Performances of them.

7 thly, They are Sure, because not only made to us by the Father, but he has
confirmed them by his Oath, Heb. 6.13. Because he could not swear by no
greater, he swear by himself, wherein God is willing, more abundantly, to show
unto the heirs of promise the immutability of his counsel, confirmed it by an
oath, ver. 17. That so, by two immutable things, in which it is impossible for
God to lie, we might have strong consolation, ver. 18. What God promised, nay
swear to give to Abraham, in the Covenant of Grace, he promised and swear to to
all his believing Seed, or to all the Elect; and if this does not make sure the
New Covenant, and all the Blessings thereof, and Eternal Life to every
believing Soul, though he or she has but the least Dram of Grace; nothing can
make any thing more sure in Heaven nor Earth; it is far more firm and sure than
what any Man or Angels can make any Matter or Thing.

Soul, whatever Grace thou need'st, God will and must give it; how when, and in
what Degree he pleases, and to Heaven thou must come at last I might add,

7 thly. It Is sure, because we have received, who do believe the Earnest all
Covenant Blessings and Eternal Life, which is the Holy Spirit, See Ephesians. 13.14.
the Spirit is called there the Earnest of our Inheritance, until the Redemption
of the purchased Possession unto the Praise of his Glory.

8 thly. We have the Holy Spirit also to make it sure to us, as a Witness o^
this Covenant, the Spirit also bears witness with our Spirit, that we are the
Children of God, and if Children, then Heirs, Heirs of God and joint, Heirs
with Christ Rom 8.16.17. The Holy Spirit witnesses by it self, by an inward an
secreted Persuasion or Suggestion, that God is our Father, and we his Children,
and also by the Testimony of his Graces and powerful Operations, though not in
the like Degree and Clearness to all Believers: yet Christ in us is our hope of
Glory and if any Man has not the Spirit of Christ, the same is none of his
Romans 8.9.

9 thly. After all, if any thing can be added to make it yet more sure to us,
God will in his abundant Grace and Goodness let us have it: and therefore we
have this Covenant and all the Blessings of it, and Eternal Life Sealed to us
also by the Holy Ghost: after ye believed, ye were sealed with that Spirit of
Promise, Ephesians. 1.13. and again, grieve not the Holy Spirit of God, by which you
are sealed to the day of Redemption, Ephesians. 4.30. God has set his Mark, and his
Seal upon us.

Sixthly. It Is an everlasting Covenant, he has made with me an everlasting
Covenant it shall never; can never be broke: see that in Isa. 54.9, 10. For
this is as the Waters of Noah unto me: for as I have sworn the Waters of Noah
shall no more go over the Earth, so I have sworn that I would not be wrath with
thee, nor rebuke thee; for the Mountains shall depart, and the Hills shall be
removed, but my loving Kindness shall not depart from thee; neither the
Covenant of my Peace be removed (says the Lord) that has Mercy on thee:
compare it with Isa. 55.3. So much to the Second general Head.

Thirdly, I shall show you how this Covenant is all the Hope, Desire, Salvation
and Consolation of every True Believer in Life and Death.

By what I have already said, all may perceive how, or which way, all their
Salvation and Comfort lies in this Covenant, so that I need say but little to
this. But to proceed.

1. It Is all our Hope, Desire, Salvation and Consolation; because this Covenant
was the Contrivance of the Infinite Wisdom of God, the Top Glory of all his
Transactions, for, and in the behalf of Man from all Eternity: Nay, such
manifold Wisdom, such depth of Wisdom shines forth in it, that the glorious
Angels desired to pry into it, 1 Pet. 1.12. the Word signifies (as our
Annotators intimate) a bowing down the Head, or stooping to look into a thing;
O! they behold this Mystery of Salvation by Christ, in this Covenant with holy
Amazement, and are willing to learn by the Church: and this Mystery is to this
end, in part, manifest by the Gospel, that they might make it the Subject of
their Thoughts, Contemplation and Meditation and VVondermenti (as I may so say)
it is to affect those glorious Spirits; to the intent that now unto the
Principalities and Powers in heavenly Places might be known by the Church, the
manifold Wisdom of God, Ephesians. ^.10. Angels, Sirs, do attend our Assemblies, to
know, and hear, and understand the Mysteries of this Covenant and Redemption by
Christ: Is it then any wonder? it is all the Desire, Hope and Delight of
Believers, who are so eminently concerned in this Salvation, Christ is not a
Redeemer of the Angels, for they who stood needed none. Yet as our Divines
show, he is their Confirmer, he is the Head of Angels, as well as of the
Church, and they Worship Him, as well as we.

2. It Is the Saint's Desire and Delight, because it is suited so admirably to
Exalt God in all his Holy Attributes, and abase, sinful Man; to Exalt Christ,
put the Crown on his Head, and lay us at his Feet: this is that Jehovah,
designed and aimed at, and this all Believers and truly gracious Souls aim at
also; this is all their Desire, and therefore they are so taken with this
Covenant. O let such look to it, that any ways go about to lessen or eclipse
the Glory of God's Grace in this Covenant, or magnify and exalt sorry man in
the least degree.

3. It Is because it is a great, a full, and complete Salvation that is contained
in this Covenant: This is all my Salvation, it is not a part of it; Christ in
this Covenant did not work out a piece of it, and leave us to work out the
rest: all our Salvation is of Grace, whatever we as Sinners, or as Saints do
want, it is contained in this Covenant. Christ is not only given for us, but
also given to us; not only the Medicine, and but a Hand also whereby it is
applied. Faith is the Gift of the Promise, therefore not the Condition of it;
they are Foederalia relata: Can a Promise or a Gift be a Condition of it self?
This Exalts Christ, and abases Man; Christ has no Coworker with him, though he
has some poor Instruments (that he applies in his Hand) yet he alone is the
only Agent that does all: We have this Treasure in Earthen Vessels, that the
Excellency of the Power may be of God, and not of us, 2 Cor. 4.7. The
Redemption in the Covenant of Grace, is by a Price which Christ as Priest laid
down to satisfy the Law and Justice of God, and which as a King, he applies by
his conquering of the Power, of Sin and Satan: Can a Man be redeemed and saved
from Slavery in Turkey by a Ransom paid or laid down, and yet he abides under
the power of a cruel Tyrant that holds him in strong Chains, and will not let
him go, until the Redeemer has subdued his merciless Master? Now sinners are
in Satan's Chains and Fetters, and under the power of Sin, and until Christ
destroys and overcomes those cruel Enemies, they are not redeemed; this
Salvation therefore in this Covenant is complete, i. e. we are not only
redeemed out of the Hands of Justice and Divine Wrath, but out of Satan's Hands
likewise, and from the power of Sin: nay, redeemed from a vain Conversation by
Christ's Blood, 1 Pet. 1.18. for as a Priest he purchased subduing and
cleansing Grace for us, though as a King he applies that Grace to us. To this
very purpose, Christ gave himself i. e. to redeem us from all Iniquity, and
purified to himself a peculiar People zealous of good Works, Tit. 2.14. Sirs,
assure yourselves, all that Christ came to redeem, shall be redeemed; he cannot
be said to be a Redeemer of such who never were, nor shall be redeemed by him:
not one drop of his Blood was shed in vain, he will have his whole purchase.
Here is Grace the Holy Spirit, A broken Spirit, a new Heart, Justification,
Adoption, Regeneration, final Perseverance, and Eternal Life, and all we want
is in this Covenant; therefore it is a complete and full Salvation, and so all
our Salvation.

4 thly. This Covenant is all our Desire, all our Hope and Salvation, because
there is no Relief, no Justification, no Pardon, no Salvation any other ways:
there is no Water of Life, but in this Fountain, no Justification, but by this
Righteousness; nor Riches, but in this Treasury; no Corn; but in this Garner;
no Light, but in this Sun of Righteousness that is given to us for a Covenant,
and to be a Light unto the Gentiles. No pardon of sin; but by this Redemption;
no Grace, but at the Throne which God has Erected in this Covenant. No
Strength, but by this Arm of the Lord: no Cure, but by the Balsom of this
Covenant, and Covenant Physician: no Sanctification, no cleansing from Sin and
Pollution, but by washing in this River.

5 thly. This Covenant is all our Desire, Hope, Delight, Consolation and
Salvation, because it is a tried Covenant: it never failed one Man that ever
laid hold of it, or applied the Blood thereof by Faith to his own Soul; he that
believes on Christ, builds on this precious Stone, this sure Foundation, shall
never be ashamed, nor confounded: he that builds on this Covenant, or does
venture his Soul thereon, must be saved, and ever were saved. Let them be never
so great sinners it will not fail them; this Covenant has provided for the
chiefest of Sinners, and for the weak Saints: here is a Pardon for all manner
of Sinners and Blasphemers, against both the Father and the Son: O what black,
what guilty, what filthy, and what bloody sinners have been saved by the Grace
of, and Blood of this Covenant. Such were some of you, what an abominable Such
were they, see 1 Cor. 6.9, 10, 11.

6 thly. This Covenant is all a Believer's Desire, Consolation and Salvation;
because of those glorious and mighty Gifts that are given to them in this
Covenant: nothing can the Holy God give which is greater, for he has given us
himself, and all he is, and all he has; as far forth as it is communicatable,
he gives himself to them by way of special Interest, (not as he was the God of
the whole house of Israel, in that legal Covenant made with them as they were
the natural Seed of Abraham as such) God gives himself, and in himself, his
Son, his Spirit, his Ordinance, his Ministers, Paul, Peter, all is ^rap'd up in
this Covenant: Grace here, and Glory hereafter, all is yours; ^ Christ in this
Covenant is yours, you have God and Christ, and God for ^^er, Christ for ever.
You shall not lose him again, the Covenant is ordered in all things and sure,
and so are all the Gifts and Blessings thereof, such that cannot be lost, they
are even the sure Mercies of David.

7 thly. Because this Covenant is so comfortable in all States and Conditions a
poor Child of God can be in, it is suited to relieve us under all outward
afflictions, Trials and Calamities we meet with here in this World: O this ^ur
honored Brother deceased, found by sweet Experience, this was all his Hope,
and all his Desire, all his Comfort under all his former sore Sufferings; when
for more than Twelve Years he lay in Prison for Jesus Christ's sake, and under
all his late heartbreaking Sorrows and bodily Distempers, that but a few were
acquainted with, had it not been for this Covenant, he had ^ainted in his
Afflictions: This bore up the Spirit of poor David, he found all his Relief and
Support lay in this Covenant. When Saul pursued him, when his Friends forsook
him, and talked of stoning him, here, and in this Covenant, and in his God,
given to him in this well ordered Covenant he comforted and encouraged himself,
1 Samuel 30.6.

8 thly. And lastly, all the Desire, Hope, Consolation and Salvation of a
Believer lies in this Covenant, because it is so well ordered and suited for our
Support and Comfort, under all inward Trouble, Fears, Doubtings, Temptations
and spiritual Dissertions, whatsoever.

No Cordial like what this Covenant has provided for us, to bear up and revive
our drooping Spirits; and whoever you are, that under your Fears, Doubtings,
Temptations or Despondings, that seek Relief any where else, will but deceive
your own poor and deluded Souls: will your own Righteousness cheer your
Spirits? Dare you plead it at God's Bar? Will you venture your Souls upon it?
Will you plead your sincere Obedience? your fervent Prayers you have made, the
many good Sermons you have heard, the many good Works and good Deeds you have
done, will not Satan show you notwithstanding all your sincerity you have in
your Hearts, great Hypocrisy? and for all your Faith and constant trusting in
God, you have much Unbelief, and many Fears and Doubtings arising in your
Spirits: though you have prayed often, and have not fainted; yet with what
Deadness, with what Coolness, with what Wanderings of Heart and Vanity of
Thoughts; and though you have done much good, will not your Consciences tell you,
you might have done much more? you gave a Shilling may be to this poor, and
that poor and distressed Object, when may be you ought to have given a Pound. O
Sirs! your Relief lies in Christ, and in the Covenant of Grace, in Christ's
perfect and complete Righteousness in his Death, or you have none, nor never
will. You must take the Directions that Anselm gave to a poor sick and tempted
Soul, as I find it quoted by Reverend Dr. Owen on Just. p. 13.14.

Quest. Do thou believe that thou can not be saved, but by the Death of
Jesus Christ? The sick and distressed person answered yes. Then let it be said
unto thee, go to then, and whilst thy Soul abides in thee, put all thy
Confidence in this Death alone, place all thy Trust in no other thing; commit
thy self wholly to this Death, cover thy self wholly with this alone, cast thy
self wholly on this Death, wrap thy self wholly in this Death: and if God would
judge thee, say, Lord, I place the Death of our Lord Jesus between me and thy
Judgment, and other ways I will not contend with thee: And if he shall say unto
thee, that thou art a sinner; say, I place the Death of our Lord Jesus Christ
between me and my sins; if he should say unto thee, that thou deservest
Damnation, say, Lord, I put the Death of our Lord Jesus Christ between thee and
all my sins, and I offer his Merits for my own which I should have, and have
not: if he say that he is angry with thee; say, Lord, I place the Death of our
Lord Jesus Christ between me and thine Anger.

O Soul! here is thy Relief, even in the Blood of this Covenant in Christ's
Death; under all thy Fears, and Temptations of Satan, and under the sad
Accusations of thy own Conscience: O! at the hour of Death, how can thou lift
up thy Hands to plead thy own sincere Obedience, when thou art just going to
stand before the Tribunal of God; thy Hands will be weak and thy Heart faint,
and thy Confidence will deceive thee, and fail thee: if thy Hope and Desire,
thy Faith and Dependence be on any thing else, then on Christ in this Covenant;
but here is Succor in his Covenant, here is a Salve for every Sore; what though
thou have sinned, what says God in this Covenant? I will be merciful unto their
unrighteousness, and their sins and iniquities I will remember no more, Heb. 8.
If thy Conscience say, thou have backsliden from God, he says; I will heal all
their backslidings, and love them freely, Hos. 14.4. If thou wants
Righteousness and Strength, say, Christ is thy Righteousness, in the Lord have
I Righteousness and Strength: thus there is Relief in this Covenant for poor
doubting and desponding Souls in all their Troubles and Temptations.

APPLICATION.
First by way of Reprehension.

First. THIS reproves those (and may serve to convince them of their horrid
Blindness and Unbelief) that look on Sin as a trivial thing, a small matter;
and so go on in a wicked and ungodly course of life, who add Drunkenness to
Thrist; and yet say they shall have Peace: O Souls! do you not tremble to think
of the evil of sin? When you hear nothing but the Blood of the Son of God can
atone for it, nor satisfy God's offended Justice and injured Law, do you think
God will spare you? pardon you while you live in your sins, and make Provision
for the flesh to fulfill the Lusts thereof, did he not spare his own Son, when
he stood in our place, charged with our Iniquities? but let out his Wrath upon
him, and will he spare you? that have your own sins and horrid guilt and
pollution charged upon your own Souls? if you refuse the Lord Jesus Christ, and
the Merits of his blood, and do not fly to him, cleave to him, embrace him, and
the tender ^f God's Grace in and by him, but do neglect so great Salvation, and
the means of it, down to Hell you will be brought every Soul of you with
vengeance. Nothing shows the evil of sin more than the bleeding Sides, bleeding
Heart, and bleeding Hands, and bleeding Feet of the Son of God: and did he
suffer thus to satisfy for our sins? for your sins? and shall any Soul alive
think, if they slight him, believe not in him, he shall escape Divine Wrath;
how can your hands be strong in any way of Wickedness, whilst you look up and
see Jesus Christ hang languishing on the Cross, and crying out, My God, my God,
why have thou forsaken me?

2. This reproves all those (and may tend to convince them of their Fol^y and
Ignorance) whose hopes lies in something else, and not in this Covenant.

Those whose hope lies in their sober and civil Lives, they conclude all is
well with them, because they are not guilty of those immoral Impieties and
greatest Wickedness which others are defiled with: Alas! what good will this do
you? when one evil Thought is a breach of that Holy Law that lays you under
Wrath and the fearful Curse thereof; will you trust to your honest moral Lives,
and sober Conversations, and so slight and neglect the Grace of God offered by
Jesus Christ in this Covenant: Why Sirs, do you think God sent his Son into the
World? if by leading a moral and sober Life Men might be saved.

3. This reproves also those who mixed their own Inherent Holiness and
Evangelical Obedience with Christ's Righteousness, in point of Justification
and Acceptance with God, who make Faith in the large Extent, i. e. Faith
withal the Concomitants of it, a Condition of Justification, who distinguish
between Christ doing for us, as a Redeemer in the Flesh by dying, and render
that more extensive, than what he does by the Spirit; as if he was the Head of
all Mankind in dying, and all, as so consisidered, have Union with him: but
that many of those he dyed for, shall never be saved by his Life; because they
do not answer the Condition of Faith and sincere Obedience; intimating, that
Faith is not a Fruit of Christ's Death, but is wrought out by the Creature
through the help of the Spirit; though we have Faith for Christ's sake, for
Christ's Merits (in a remote sense) as we have fair weather, Pacifick paper, p.
5. For had not Christ atoned an satisfied for sin, and the breach of the Law of
Works, we could not have had any Blessings either temporal or spiritual: but if
it were only thus, then the Covenant of Grace is not so well ordered and sure
as we believe it is, but how do they understand that Text, Romans 5.10. for if
when we were Enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, much
more being now reconciled, we shall be saved by his Life. Were not all the
Elect, or all Christ dyed for, vertually (as in our Head) reconciled to God by
the Death of Christ? and does not the Apostle assure us that we shall much more
be saved by Christ's Life, if he reconciled us to God by his Death? was not the
Gift of Christ in his death for us a greater gift than the gift of the Spirit
to us? Did not we all rise from the dead with Christ, vertually when he was
raised? And does not that give us Assurance that we shall be actually quickened
and raised* First from a death in sin, respecting our souls; and also be all
raised to Eternal Life and Glory, at the last day respecting our Bodies. He
that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not
freely give us all things, Romans 8 32. may it not from these two Scriptures be
confidently asserted, that all Christ dyed for shall be saved, i. e. shall have
Grace here and Glory hereafter? does not the Apostle argue from the greater
Gift of God's Grace to the lesser Gift? and that he that gave the greater will
not stick to give the lesser.

Were not all that Christ died for, chosen in him before the foundation of the
World? that they should be holy, and without blame before him in love, Ephesians.
1.4, 5. and did not the Father promise him that he should see his Seed and does
not Christ say, all that the Father gave to him, shall come to him; that is,
shall have Faith: and can any come that were not given to him? If Faith and
Repentance be given to the Elect, who are saved? Can others come to Christ who
have not the like Faith and Repentance given to them? does not Faith flow from
a Principle of divine Life? and can there be such a noble Effect without the
cause from whence it proceeds? Can a dead Man quicken himself? or can he refuse
to live that has life infused into him? Thy People shall be willing in the day
of thy Power, Psalm 100.3. in the Beauty of Holiness: Is Christ a true and
proper Redeemer of all? and yet a multitude are left under sin and wrath, and
never redeemed, nor many of them never hear of this Savior or Redeemer at all.

4. This also reproves all such who render the Covenant of Grace in its nature
like the Covenant of Works, i. e. if we perform the Condition we stand, if we
perform it not we fall; it being made with us, and so our Covenant: God expects
we discharge our Obligation therein, for it is evident, as we enter into
Covenant with God, according to these men's Notions at our Baptism, (or be it
before, and Baptism be but a Sign or Token of it,) there is no surety here to
engage for us (unless it be as it is among some of this sort, those they call
Godfathers and Godmothers) O! what a dangerous state are we in? if this be
so, i. e. if Christ be not to perform his Obligation for us, as our Surety to
God, that we may not be lost nor miscarry; but that all depends upon our own
performances on our holy Watchfulness and sincere Obedience, for if Man at
first did not stand, when he had no sin, no corrupt nature, no body of sin and
death, how should we stand and weather the Storm, now we are so corrupted, so
depraved, and have a thousand Snares laid for us in every place, that have such
a deceitful Heart, such a deceitful Devil, and a bewitching World to encounter
^t withal: if, as Doctor Goodwin hints, Man suffered shipwreck, when he ^^d so
firm, so strong, and well built Ship; and when he had so good a ^^lot, as his
Will was to him before he fell, and a calm Sea; who will be (...) mad to
venture to Sea now, on such a leaky and rotten Vessel? and ^^ve no better a
Pilot, than his own base, depraved, and corrupt Will to ^^eer this ship on such
tempestuous and dangerous Seas.

The truth is, the Covenant of Grace is not ordered in all things and ^^e, if
what these men say be true; that a Man may be a Child of God (...) day, and a
Child of the Devil to morrow; and that justified Persons ^ay so fall away, as
to perish for ever.

5. This reproves all such, who when convinced of their sinful and lost
condition by nature, then presently set upon a Work of Reformation, and (...)
on duties of Humiliation, and then begin to see (as they think) a great change
is wrought in them, and on that rest, and Hope all is well. Like (...) Herod
who heard John and reformed many things, Mark 6.20. Alas Sirs! ^^l this
building will fall to the ground; is this to take hold of the Covenant? Is this
to get Union with Christ? is this Regeneration? is this to believe on the Lord
Jesus, Act. 16.31. that you may be saved, ^our own Works be they what they
will; like Chaff they shall be bur^ed up. True, if you reform not your Lives
(which the Terrors of the ^aw, and Laws of the Land may force some of you to
do, or Shame, and reproach, and Fear of Hell Torments) you shall certainly be
damed: yet his you may do, and yet never be saved, it is so far from a bare
Reforma^ion of Life; that will stand you in stead, that a Saint's Salvation,
Hope and Desire lies not in a changed Heart, nor in inherent Grace, nor ^^ncere
Obedience, but in Christ, in his Righteousness, it lies in this Covenant, not
in their Baptismal Covenant, not in being Church Members, not in Praying, and
hearing Sermons, and breaking of Bread, but in Christ, and in the Covenant of
Grace; this is all my Salvation, and all my Desire, etc.

6. This reproves such likewise that remain under the Spirit of Bondage, and
slavish Fear, after God has graciously awakened them, convinced them of their
Sins and lost Condition without Christ, and has let out- a Spirit of burning
upon them, that has burned up all their former Hopes, Faith and Confidence,
which they once had in the Flesh, and are bro^en into pieces in the sight and
sense of the evil of Sin. Souls what aileth you? what is the cause of your
Disquietments and Sorrow? Is there no Help? No Relief for your Souls in this
Covenant? Dare you not venture on Christ? Is there not all things that you want
in Christ, and ^n this Covenant? May be you will say, O! your sins are great,
what though there is great pardoning Mercy in this Covenant, a great Savior ^or
you; are you sinners, wounded sinners, sin-sick sinners, lost and undone
sinners? then I declare, nay, proclaim Peace to you in Christ; good News, O
Soul! is brought this day to your Ears; here is a Christ for you, Pardon for
you in this Covenant, I will forgive their Iniquities, their Sins I will
remember no more.

Will you make God a Liar? and not believe the Record he has given of his Son?
Joh. 5.10.

Secondly, By way of Exhortation, I must exhort you that lead ungodly* Lives to
tremble, you who are condemned, and refuse the Offers of God's Grace by Christ,
in this Covenant: What do you mean? will you value your base Lusts above God?
above Christ, above the Salvation of your Souls; can you think God will give
himself to you? or Christ espouse you, that live in, and love your sins, your
dishonouring and Soul-damning Pride, Covetousness, Uncleanness, Drunkenness,
etc. or any Deeds of Darkness, which God's Soul loathes; be exhorted to adhere
to the Truth of God's Justice, the Veracity of his Word, the Denounciations of
his Wrath, which is revealed from Heaven against all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of Men, Romans 2.18. Shall Christ and all Covenant Mercies be
offered to you? a Feast of fat Things provided for you, and will you make light
of this Offer? and gracious tender of Salvation.

2. You heart-broken Sinners be exhorted to look up to Christ, behold him whom
the Father has chosen and laid help upon, one mighty to save, look to your
Physician, he is come to ease your burdened Consciences, to heal your wounded
Souls, to pour in his Oil and Wine, he will do it all freely, though you have no
Money, no Price or Mony-worth; yet in this Covenant, here is Wine and Milk for
you also, and your Souls shall live, and you shall be taken into his Covenant,
and have Interest in the sure Mercies of David, Isa. 55.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.

3. Let such be exhorted, to lay to heart and repent, who darken the Doctrine
of God's Free Grace, and eclipse the Glory of the Everlasting Covenant, that
turn it into a Law of conditional Obedience, and mixed Works, done by the
Creature with Christ's Merits; have they not stumbled many an honest Christian
already, and filled others with many Fears and Doubtings, whilst they set them
to seek after-Justification by their own sincere Obedience and Gospel-Holiness,
and join that (some way or another) with the Merits and Righteousness of
Christ, and would have them not to count their own personal Holiness (as Paul
did) even Dung, that they may be found in Christ not having their own
Righteousness* but the Righteousness of God which is by Faith, whether their
Doctrine tends most to promote true Gospel-Holiness, and the Honor of God, or
ours; will appear at the last day. I hope they may mean well, but may they not
fear they mistake? in going about to remove the Ancient Landmark: why should
that glorious Doctrine of Justification, that shone forth in the days of Martin
Luther, and has been the Ground of so many godly Christian's Hope; nay,
Martyrs, now be struck at? and by which means, new Animosities and Divisions
are let in among God's People, to the Reproach of his Holy Name, and Grief of
Thousands of faithful Christians.

3. Consolation, This may be much improved in the last place, by way of Comfort
and Consolation to Christians in every Condition, both in Life, and at the Hour
of Death.

1. Is the Covenant of Grace made with Christ for us? and has he undertaken for
our Souls as our Surety? is it ordered in all things and sure? Then poor
doubting Soul, here is a Foundation of Comfort for thee; O! how does the Love
of the Father abound toward us? as to enter into a Covenant for us, with his
own Son; here is infinite Love, and Condescen^^on: know, Christ equally engaged
for all the Father gave him; Care is ^^ken for the weakest Saint, as for the
strongest; nay, Christ therefore ^^rries his Lambs in his Arms, lays them in
the Bosom of his Covenant. Souls, ^emember God calls it his Covenant, where is
it called our Covenant? we may break with God, but he will not break with us;
Although my house be not (...) with God, yet he has made with me an Everlasting
Covenant.

This Covenant stands firm, this Foundation of God is sure, it was E^tablished
from all Eternity by an Eternal Act of God, that cannot be Repealed, Altered or
Changed: God is thine, Christ is thine, if thou have Union with him, all is
thine; and the Oath of God, the Truth and Faithfulness of God is engaged for
the making good all the Blessings that are contained in this Covenant; God is
thine, and Christ is thine for ever.

Thou art given to Christ, and Christ will not lose any one Soul the Father
gave unto him; none can pluck thee out of his hands, Joh. 10.28.

2 Art thou afflicted for thy sins? Look into this Covenant, here is a Cordial
for thee, His Seed also will I make to endure for ever, and his Throne as the
days of Heaven, Ps. 89.29. If his Children forsake my Law, and walk not in my
Judgments, v. 30. If they break my Statutes, and keep not my Commandments, v.
31. then will I visit their transgressions with the Rod, and their iniquities
with stripes, v. 32. But my loving kindness will I not utterly take from him,
nor suffer my faithfulness to fail, v. 33. My Covenant will I not break, nor
alter the thing that is gone out of my mouth, v. 34. Is not here Relief for
thee, if thou art afflicted? it is a sign thou art beloved; it is for thy profit,
than thou may partake of his holiness, Heb. 12.10.

3. Art thou backsliden from God? see that in Hos. 14. I will heal their
backsliding, I will love them freely, for mine anger is turned away from him,
v. 4.

4. Art thou like a dry withered Tree? see his promise in this Covenant, I will
be a dew to Israel, he shall grow as the Lilly, and cast forth his root as the
Lebanon, they shall revive as the Corn, and grow as the Vine, v. 7. Though I walk
in the midst of trouble, thou will revive me, says David: this he saw was in
God's Covenant, Psalm. 138.7.

5. Do thy sins appear grievous to thee? he has (as you heard promised in this
Covenant) to be merciful to their unrighteousness, their sins and iniquities
will I remember no more, Heb. 8 12. Heb. 10.17.

6. But O the Power of them! Soul, mind his promise in this Covenant, sin shall
not have dominion over you, because you are not under the law, but under grace,
Romans 6.14.

7. Art thou tempted? look into the Covenant, there has no temptation taken
you, but such that is common to man, and God is faithful, who will not suffer
you to be tempted above what you are able, but will with the temptation make
way to escape, that ye way be able to bear it also, 1 Cor. 10.13. Christ having
suffered, being tempted, is able to succor them that are tempted, Heb. 2.18.

8. Art poor? and afraid thou shall want Bread? either for thy Body, or for thy
Soul; see that in Psalm. 111.5. He has given meat to them that fear him, he is
ever mindful of his Covenant, he will abundantly bless her provision, and
satisfy her poor with bread, Psalm. 132.15.

9. Art thou afraid thou shall sometime or another depart from God, or fall
away from him? mind his Covenant, I will put my fear into their hearts, and
they shall not depart from me, Jer. 32.40. Though they fall, they shall not
utterly be cast down, for the Lord upholdeth him with his right hand, Psalm.
37.24.

10. Do thou fear Satan will be too hard for thee? Look into this Covenont,
God shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly, Romans 16.20. O the Comfort this
Covenant affords to us in every Condition, he will give Grace and Glory, and no
good thing will be withold from them that walk uprightly.

Christians. what remains for you to do, that you may have the Comfort that is
in this Covenant, but to go to God by Christ your Mediator, he pleads his own
Merits and Righteousness for us. I took flesh, O my Father, I suffered death
according to thy good Pleasure; in their stead I gave my Soul a Ransom for
them, I was made a Curse for them, wounded, to heal their Wounds, I bore their
Sins, and carried their Sorrows; O condemn them not for their Iniquities which
met in me: they are my Purchase, my Members, I have paid their Debts, and
brought in everlasting Righteousness for them: he is heard all ways, O! pray in
his Name, and all your wants shall be supplied.

2. let the Fruits of God's Grace shine forth in your Lives: what shall we
render to God for all his Covenant-Blessings? You are bought with a price, and
are not your own, therefore glorify God in your Body, and in your Spirit,
which is the Lord's, 1 Cor. 1.19, 20.

Quest. But methinks I hear some poor sinner crying out, How may I come to be
in this Covenant?

Answ. Soul, it is by thy being united to Christ, or by Union with him through
the Spirit, it is by Faith: O close with Christ, cry to God for his Spirit,
attend on the means of Grace, see if thou can find in thy heart to love
Christ, to espouse him, enter into an Holy Contract with him, to this end he
sends his Ministers. O that thou did but see the w^^t of him! and behold the
Beauty that is in him, he that has the Son, has Life, he is actually in this
Covenant, but know this is the Work of Christ; it is he must make thy heart
willing, and dissolve those Bonds thou have tied with other Lovers. Thou art
not first to enter into a Covenant with God, or offer thy Terms of Gospel-Faith
and Holiness, so as on that Condition, to oblige God to enter into a Covenant
with thee: no, Christ is first given, and then God gives us to him; nay,
himself with him: Christ's Love is first set on us, before we can love him, and
when we were in our blood (not washed) that was the time of his Love, and then
he entered into a Covenant with us, Ezekiel. 16. Reverend Mr. Cotton says, The
Lord is the first thing that he gives by his Covenant, and with himself all
things else, Rom 8.32. and there is the Precedence, Christ is given, and in him
all spiritual Blessings, Ephesians. 1.3. and this for the Order of Nature in giving
in the Covenant: not Obedience first, nor Faith first, nor any thing else
first, but himself: Donum primum and primarium, and in him all his Goodness. p
14. on the Covenant. Art thou weary? do thou thirst? art a wretched sinner?
then take Christ, go to him and drink.

Thou art not O sinner! first to wash thy self from thy Wickedness, and get a
clean heart, and then come to the Fountain of Christ's Blood; but as a poor,
vile, lost sinner to come unto him: believe in him that justifies the ungodly,
Romans 4.5. Also it is Christ who is thy Physician, it is he that has undertaken
thy Cure, and must apply the Remedy, and none can do it but he, and though thou
have no money, yet this Physician is to be had, and his Medicines too, and all
freely, Isa. 55.1, 2.

But to close, Let us reflect a little on the Deceased, my Brethren, whose
Corpse is it we are to follow to the Grave this Evening: Sirs, it is the Corpse of
a godly Man; nay, a Minister, an ancient Minister: one who long and faithfully
served Jesus Christ, under many Afflictions, great Trials and Sufferings: O how
many of late have we lost? and how few raised up in their stead? the harvest is
great, but the laborers are few, one drops here, and another there; some by
Distempers of Body made unable to labor before death comes, (as it was with
our honored Brother deceased) while others are taken away in their full
strength: have we not cause to fear what is coming on? See that in Isa. 57.1,
2. God calls home his Ambssadours, a-pace, what may we expect? O look for
approaching Judgments, God has given us diverse ways warning, before Wrath
breaks out upon us; the sins of the Nation are near fully ripe, and the sins of
God's people tend to fill up the measure.

But though we must all die, as well our painful Ministers as the people, yet in
this Covenant death is ours, 1 Cor. 3.22. it is a Blessing, it is Gain, the
Sting is taken away by the Lord Jesus; so that we ought not to mourn for our
godly Friends that die, (as such who have no hope) for the righteous (in this
Covenant) have hope in their death: This God is our God, and he will be our
Guide even unto death. Thus is the Covenant of Grace, all the Desire, Hope, and
Consolation of Relievers, both in Life, and Death. Our honored Brother is
fallen asleep in the Lord, i. e. in Union with Christ; and as Death has put an
end to all his Sorrows, so now his Spirit possesses all eternal Joy and
Comfort: for though (he as well as we) was attended with weakness, and many
Infirmities, yet he could say, God had made with me an everlasting Covenant,
ordered in all things and sure, and this is all my Salvation, and all my
Desire, although he makes it not to grow.

FINIS.
AN ELEGY Upon the Death of That Reverend and Faithful Minister of the Gospel
Mr. Henry Forty, Late Pastor of a Church of Christ at Abingdon, in the County
of Berks, who departed this Life in the 67 th. Year of his Age, and was
Interred in Southwark, Jan. 27 th. 1692/3.
MOurn, mourn, O Sion! thou have Forty lost,
Wave upon wave, with Tempest thou art tossed
Our Sorrow's great, and worser things draw near,
Sad Symptoms of most dismal Days appear:
Christ's blessed Ambassadors are called away,
And few these things unto their hearts do lay.
Many we lost before, for which we mourn,
And shall we Forty lose without a Groan?
Shall we not sigh for him who lately fell?
Or not deem him a Prince in Israel?
Say if you can, what cause gave he to fear,
He was not every way a Man sincere?
How many years did he his Master serve?
And never from Christ's Truth did start or swerve
Shall Envy then his Name or Glory stain?
Or Prejudice wound him to death again?
O let his Name! his precious Name still live,
And to his Ashes no Abuses give.
Near Twelve long Years he did in Prison lie,
As Exeter can fully testify,
For witnessing unto God's holy Truth,
Which he most dearly loved from his Youth;
An Instrument was he in Jesus Hand
In his Converting many in this Land:
Nay, his own Father and his Mother were
Even both Converted by him (I do hear)
I think without offense, I may declare
Few godly Preachers, gone more spotless were;
Or with more Clearness did the Gospel Preach,
And in his Life shone forth what he did teach.
He was no flas^, he liked no upstart Strains,
New Schemes he loathed, which now our glory stains:
By the Text he left to be insisted on,
And opened when he was dead and gone;
You may perceive on what Foundation he
Did build his Hope of blessed Felicity.
Although my house is not even so with God,
My Heart is dead, and I under the Rod:
Though Grace in me does greatly seem to fade,
And many Deaths and Sorrows me invade;
Though friends seem strange, and wants do theaten me,
And Pain and Anguish much increased be;
Although I faint for the sweet water Streams,
And feel not those Soul-warming Sun-like Gleams,
Though in my Father's House I cannot appear,
To have Communion my poor Soul to cheer
At the blessed Table of my dearest Lord,
Which formerly did so much Strength afford;
Though I sit all-alone and weep each day,
And nights seem grievous rest b'ing took away,
Although my Heart is alost broke with Grief,
Sin so abounds, and Sion wants Relief;
Her Sorrows still abide on every hand,
Her Sons divided are, so is the Land;
Sad Wars without, and Wars also within
Such Wars amongst Saints has scarcely ever been.
Both Earth and Heaven too, now shaken be
Plain signs of some dismal Catastrophe:
Although my Faith is small and Love is cold,
And am distressed by what I behold;
And though the Pillars of my house do shake,
My Eyes grow dim, and Hands grow very weak,
And though in my own self I nothing am,
And for my Sins* God might me justly damn:
Yet he a Covenant has made with me,
Which is Eternal, cannot broken be;
For it is ordered well in every thing,
And it is from hence my Hope and Joy does spring.
Nay, this is all my Hope, and my Desire,
It Is this that raises up my Soul yet higher.
And when on this I do contemplate
I neither matter Men's nor Devils Hate:
This Covenant affords me such Relief
It strengthens me, and kills my unbelief:
I hereby see, and know God is my God,
And though I for my sins do bear his Rod;
Yet he his Loving Kindness will not remove,
Although he does me fatherly reprove.
After this sort, methinks I heard him speak,
Whilst he was here, and lay so sick and weak;
But now he is gone to that sweet place of Joy,
Where Sin nor Sorrow shall him more annoy:
He fell asleep in Jesus, and shall lie
In his sweet Arms unto Eternity.
This Covenant has set upon his Head
That glorious Crown his Savior merited;
A Morning without Clouds his Soul does see,
Which so shall last unto Eternity.
Like to the Sun's sweet shining after Rain,
Or, like a Captive Prince turned home again
That has in Bondage been for many year
And when Christ comes, his Glory will appear
Which now approaches and draws very near.
His Body therefore though Entombed in Earth,
Shall quickly rise and gloriously shine forth.
Awake ye Virgins then, and sleep no more
Prepare with speed, the Bridegroom's at the door;
O watch! look out! ye little think or know,
What things the mighty God's about to do.
EPITAPH.
HEre Forty lies a little while asleep,
'Twill not be long before he shall awake;
Forbear therefore his Friends and do not weep
For of great Glory does his Soul partake.
He Is gone before, see you as ready be
For Joy above, and blessed Felicity.
ADVERTISEMENT.
NEanomianism Unmasked; the 1 st. 2 d. and 3 d. Part, being an Answer to Mr. D.
William's Book, Entitled, Gospel Truth Stated and Vindicated, by Isa. Chauncy.

A Rejoinder to Mr. D. William's. Reply.

Examen Confectionis Pacificae, or a friendly Examination of the Pacifick
Paper, by the same Author.

The Banqueting House, or a Feast of Fat Things; Opening many Sacred Scripture
Mysteries, profitable for all who would attain to the saving Knowledge of
Christ. By B. Keach. Sold by H. Barnard, at the Bible in the Poultrey.

The Ax laid to the Root, on Mat. 3.10. in two Parts, Printed for J. Harris, at
the Har^^ in the Poultrey. By B. K.

Reader, These Errata's that have escaped the Press, thou art desired to
correct with thy Pen.
PAge 14. line 19. blot out the. p. 14. l. 30. for ( he) read the. for are, r.
is. in p. 32. l. 29. for pass, r. basis. p. 33. l. 38. blot out not; in p. 35.
l. 7. for wonderment, r. wonderment. in p. 35. l. 30. blot out (and.) l. 35.
for applies, r. implies. p. 34. l. 28. for Everlashing, r. Everlasting. p. 36.
l. 32. for (were). r. be saved. p. 40. l. 27. for nor, r. nay. in p. 42. l. 19.
add hear; hear and your Souls shall live; hear, is left out. p. 40. l. 26. for
silled, r. filled.

There are also many false Pointings, that greatly spoil the Sense; which,
Reader, likewise thou art desired to correct with thy Pen.

These BOOKS next following, are published by Benjamin Keach.
SInging of Psalms, proved to be a Gospel Ordinance, Price Bound, One shilling
Six pence.

2. Rector Rectified, and Corrected; being an Answer to Mr. William Burket's
Treaty of Infant Baptism, Rector of Mildin; in Suffolk. Price Bound, One
Shilling.

3. Answer to the Athenian Society, concerning Infant Baptism.

4. The Counterfeit Christian; containing Two Sermons: Being an Exposition of
that Parabolical Text, Mat. 12.43, 44. When the unclean spirit is gone out,
etc. These Four Printed and Sold by the Author, at his House, near Horsly-down.

5. The Everlasting Covenant: A Sermon, Preached Jan. 29 th. 1692/3. at the
Funeral of Mr. Henry Forty, Minister of the Gospel. Printed for H. Barnard, at
the Bible, in the Poultrey.

6. The Ax laid to the Root, 1 st. Part: Containing Two Sermons, by way of
Exposition, on Matthew. 3.10. Proving, That God made a Twofold Covenant with
Abraham; and, That Circumcision, does not appertain to the Covenant of Grace,
but to the Legal Covenant God made with Abraham's natural Seed as such.

7. The Ax laid to the Root, 2 d. Part: Wherein the last Arguments of Mr. John
Flavell, in his Reply to Mr. Philip Carry, are Answered; also, A brief Answer to
Mr. Rothwell's Book, entitled, Paede-Baptismus Vindicatus, as to what seems
most Material: To which is added, some Reflections, by way of Reply, in
confutation of a New Book, called, Plain Scripture Proofs, That John Baptist
did certainly Baptize Infants, as the Adult. Written by one Mr. Exell Minister
of the Gospel. These Two Sold by John Harris, at the Harrow, in the Poultrey.

8. The Marrow of Justification: Two Sermons, on Romans 4.5. But to him that
works not, but believes, etc. Printed for Dorman Newman, at the King's-Arms
in the Poultrey.

These Six last, in Quarto, stitched, may be had all bound together, and sold
by John Harris, and H. Barnard.

9. Mystery Babylon, proved to be the Present Church of Rome: Together with the
Time of the End. Price Bound 1 s. Sold by N. Crouch, and the Author.

10. The Old Man's Legacy to his Daughters. Wherein the Hidden Mysteries of
Faith, and Experience, are briefly discussed and laid down. In a plain and
familiar Dialogue, in Six several Conferences, betwixt the Authors Two
Daughters, Elizabeth, and Margaret. To which is added, some Choice Discoveries
of the Author's most excellent Experiences. In Two Parts. Written by N. T.
Deceased, when near Ninety Years of Age, for the Private Use of his Daughters
aforesaid, and now made Public at the Request of many.

11. Chirurgus Marinus: Or, The Sea-Chirurgion. Being Instructions to Junior
Chirurgic Practitioners, who design to serve at Sea in this Employ. In Two
General Parts. The First Part contains Necessary Directions, how the Surgeon
should furnish himself with Medicines, Instruments, and Necessaries, fit for
that Office; together with a Medicinal Catalogue, and an Exemplary Invoyce. The
Second Part contains the Surgions Practice at Sea, both Chirurgical and
Physical; which Practical part serves as well at Land as at Sea. By John Moyle,
Sen. One of their Majesty's Superannuated Sea Chirurgions.

12. The History of Mademoiselle de St. Phale. Giving a Full Account of the
Miraculous Conversion of a Noble French Lady, and her Daughter, to the Reformed
Religion. With the Defeat of the Intriegues of a Jesuit their Confessor.
Translated out of French.

13. Christ alone Exalted in Dr. Crisp's Sermons, Partly confirmed in Answering
Mr. Daniel William's Preface to his Gospel Truth stated; by alleging
Testimonies from Scripture, and the Doctrine, of the Church of England, in the
Book of Homilies established by Law, and other Orthodox Authorities: Showing,
How he had wronged as well the Truth, as the said Doctor in the great Point of
Justification, by the Neonomian Doctrine.

These Four last Books, are to be Sold by Henry Barnard, at the Bible in the
Poultrey: Where is to be Sold, at the same place, the Book, Entitled, Christ
made Sin.


