THE LAST SPEECHES OF THE TWO MINISTERS Mr. JOHN KING, and Mr. JOHN KID, At the
Place of EXECUTION AT EDINBURGH On the 14 th day of August, 1679.

Printed in the Year, 1680.

THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
HAving observed that of late years it is become Customary to publish the dying
Speeches of such as have been in a Public manner Executed as Criminals; I
thought the sight of these Speeches (not as Speeches or Discourses only, but)
as the Speeches of these two (so much talked of) Men, would to most be very
acceptable; all persons I believe being curious to know what they would say in
their Circumstances, I did not think it necessary to make any Animadversions
upon them, but lea^e it to the (...) of every Reader to make his own Remarks,
(it being as easy to animadvert in this Case as to read) I would as
unwillingly impose my Comment upon others, as I would be imposed upon my self.

Farewell.
THE SPEECH OF Mr. JOHN KING.
Men and Brethren,
I Do not doubt but that many that are Spectators here, have some other end,
than to be edified by what they may see and hear in the last words of one going
to Eternity; but if any one of you have Ears to hear, (which I nothing doubt
but some of this great gathering have) I desire your Ears and Attention, if the
Lord shall help and permit me to speak, to a few things.

I bless the Lord, since infinite Wisdom and holy Providence has so carved out
my Lot to dye after the manner that I do, not unwillingly, neither by force:
It Is true, I could not do this of my self, Nature always having an Inclination
to put the evil day far off, but through Grace I have been helped, and by this
Grace yet hope I shall: It Is true, through Policy I might have shunned such a
hard Sentence, if I had done some things; but though I could I durst not, God
knows, redeem my life with the loss of my Integrity and Honesty. I bless the
Lord that since I have been apprehended and made a Prisoner, God has very
wonderfully upholden me, and made out that comfortable word, Fear not, be not
dismayed, I am with thee, I will strengthen thee, I will uphold thee by the
right hand of my Righteousness, Isaiah 42.10. I thank the Lord he never yet
gave me leave so much as to have a thought, much less to seek after any shift
that might be in the least sinful: I did always, and yet do judge it better to
suffer Affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of Sin
for a Season; therefore I am come hither to lay down my life; I bless the Lord
I dye not as a Fool dies, though I acknowledge I have nothing to boast of in
my self: yea I acknowledge I am a Sinner, and one of the chiefest that has
gone under the name of a Professer of Religion; yea amongst the unworthiest of
those that have Preached the Gospel; my Sins and Corruptions have been many,
and have defiled me in all things; and even in following and doing of my Duty,
I have not wanted my own sinful Infirmities and Weaknesses, so that I may truly
say, I have no Righteousness of my own, all is evil and like filthy Rags; but
blessed be God that there is a Savior and an Advocate, Jesus Christ the
Righteous, and I do believe that Jesus Christ is come into the World to save
Sinners, of whom I am the chief, and that through Faith and his Righteousness I
have obtained Mercy; and that through him, and him alone, I desire and hope to
have a happy and glorious Victory over Sin, Satan, Hell, and Death; and that I
shall attain unto the Resurrection of the just, and be made Partaker of Eternal
Life. I know in whom I have believed, and that he is able to keep that which I
have committed unto him against that day. I have, according to my poor
Capacity, preached Salvation in his name; and as I have preached, so do I
believe, and withal my Soul have commended it, and still do commend to all of
you the riches of his Grace, and faith in his Name, as the alone and only way
whereby to come to be saved.

It may be many may think (but I bless the Lord without any solid ground) that
I suffer as an Evil-Doer, and as a busy body in other men's matters; but I
reckon not much upon that, having the Testimony of my own Conscience for me. It
was the lot of our blessed Savior himself, and also the lot of many of his
eminent precious Servants and People to suffer by the World as Evildoers: Yea
I think I have so good ground not to be scared at such a lot, that I count it
my non-such-honour; and Oh what am I that I should be honored so, when so many
Worthies have panted after the like, and have not come at it: My Soul rejoices
in being brought into Conformity with my Blessed Lord, and Head, and so Blessed
a Company in this way and lot; and I desire to pray that I may be to none of
you this day upon this account a Stone of stumbling, and a Rock of Offense; and
blessed is he that shall not be offended in Christ and his poor Followers and
Members, because of their being Condemned as Evil doers by the World.

As for these things for which Sentence of Death has past against me, I bless
the Lord my Conscience does not condemn me, I have not been Rebellious, nor do
I judge it Rebellion for me to have endeavored in my Capacity what possibly I
could for the born-down and ruined Interest of my Lord and Master, and for the
Relief of my poor Brethren afflicted and persecuted, not only in their
Liberties, Privileges, and Persons, but also in their Lives; therefore it was
that I joined with that poor handful; the Lord knows, who is the searcher of
hearts, that neither my design nor practice was against his Majesty's person
and just Government, but I always studied to be Loyal to lawful Authority in
the Lord, and I thank God my heart does not condemn me of any Disloyalty; I
have been Loyal, and I do recommend it to all to be obedient to higher Powers
in the Lord.

And that I preached at Field-Meetings, which is the ground of my Sentence; I
am so far from acknowledging that the Gospel preached that way was a Rendezvous
of Rebellion, as it is so termed, that I bless the Lord that ever he counted
me worthy to be Witness of such Meetings; which have been so undoubtedly
countenanced and owned, not only to the conviction, but even to the Conversion
of many; therefore I do assert, That if the Lord has had any purer Church in
the Land than other, it has been in and amongst these Meetings in Fields and
Houses, so much now despised by some, and persecuted by others.

That I preached up Rebellion, and taking up Arms against Authority is untrue,
I bless the Lord my Conscience does not condemn me for that; this never being
my design; if I could have preached Christ, and Salvation through his name, it
was my work; and herein have I walked according to the Light and Rule of the
Word of God, as it did become me, though one of the meanest of the Ministers of
the Gospel.

I have been looked upon by some, and represented by others to be of a
divisive, and Factious Humor, and one that stirred up division in the Church,
but I am hopeful that they will all now give me their Charity, being within a
little to stand before my Judge, and I pray the Lord forgive them that did so
misrepresent me; but I thank the Lord whatever men have said against me
concerning this, that on the contrary, I have often dissuaded from such ways
and practices, as contrary to the Word of God, and of our Covenanted and
reformed Religion; and as I ever Abhorred division, and Faction in the Church,
as that which tends to its utter Ruin, if the Lord prevent it not. So I would
in the bowels of my Lord and Master, if such an one as I am may presume to
persuade, and Exhort both Ministers and Professors; if there be any Consolation
in Christ, if any comfort of love; if any Fellowship of the Spirit, if any
bowels and mercies that you be like minded, having the same Love, being of one
accord, of one mind in Lowliness of mind; let each esteem others better than
themselves, Phil. 1.12. Harmoniousness and Honesty in the things of God, can
never enough be sought after, and things that tend to the prejudice and hurt of
Christ's interest, can never enough be fled from and avoided.

And as I am come hither willingly to lay down my Tabernacle, so also I die in
the belief, and faith of the Holy Scriptures, and in the faith of the Apostles,
and primitive Christians, and Protestant Reformed Churches, and particularly
the Church of Scotland, whereof I am a poor member: That have been so
wonderfully carried on against so many Oppositions, by the mighty Power and
goodness and Wisdom of God, I bear my Witness and Testimony to the Doctrine
and worship, Discipline and Government of the Church of Scotland, by Kirk
Sessions, Presbyters, Synods with Assemblies.

Here he also bore his Testimony to the Solemn League and Covenant.

Also I bear Testimony to our public confessing of sins, and Engagements to
duties, and that either as to what concerns the reformation of the whole Church
in general, as also the causes of Gods wrath, the neglecting of which is
feared, to be one of the greatest causes of Gods wrath this day against the
Land: I also give witness and Testimony unto the protestation, given in against
the Receiving the Malignant party into places of power and trust, contrary to
our Solemn Engagements, and Obligations to God, also I adhere unto our
Confession of Faith, Larger and shorter Catechisms. I witness my Testimony
against Popery, which is so greatly increased, yea so much Countenanced, and
professed openly by many, and that without the least punishment; I bear witness
against the Antichristian Prelacy now -- established by a Law contrary to our
Vows to Almighty God, and against defending all our Solemn Oaths, and
engagements, as a thing that Calls for Divine Vengence.

Here he bore witness against all Oaths contrary to the Covenant: And then
proceeded thus.

Also I bear my Testimony against all Error, Schism, Heresy, contrary to our
engagements to God, and especially against that Reviving again, and Soul
deluding evil or rather Devilry Quakerisme so much Connived at, if not allowed
and Countenanced by many, whose Office it is to restrain it, as also against
all the Steps and Courses of Backslidings, defections, which have been and now
are on Foot in the Land, and against all branches and parties thereof, under
whatsoever name or Notion; moreover, I bear my Testimony to all the Testimonys
both formerly and of late, by suffering and banished witnesses, and to all the
Testimonies by our first suffering Gentlemen, Noblemen, and others, that have
suffered in this City and Kingdom, who Cheerfully laid down their lives with
admirable Divine Assistance, and all those who have laid down their lives, as
also to those who have Sealed their Testimony, either with suffering
imprisonment or Banishment upon this account, Score, and quarrel.

Here he bore his Testimony against their Act of Supremacy.

As also I bear my Testimony against the Cess imposed by the late Convention of
Estates, whereby the Enemies of Christ, and his Church, are supplied with all
necessaries, for the utter extirpating of the interest of Christ in this Church.

And there is one thing more I would say, that the Lord seems to be very wroth
with the Land. The causes are many, first the dreadful sleights our Lord Jesus
Christ, has received in the Offers of his Gospel.

Secondly, The Horrid profanity that has overspread the whole Land, That not
only Religion in its Exercise, but even Common Civility is gone.

Thirdly, there is the Horrid perjury in the matters of our vows and
engagements, its to be feared will provoke the Lord to bring his Sword upon
these Lands.

Fourthly, The dreadful formality and stupidity in the duties of Religion,
which is introduced, like that which came upon the Careless Daughters.

Fifthly, Horrid ingratitude, what do we render to him for his goodness? is not
the most of all that we do, to work wickedness, and to strengthen our selves to
do evil, and want of Humility under all all our Breaches? We are brought Low,
and yet we are not Low in the sight of God, what a dreadful Covetousness, and
minding our own things more than the things of God, and that amongst all Ranks?
would to God that there were not too much of this among many, who are Enemies
to the Cross of Christ, and mind earthly things.

And yet I dare not say, but there are many faithful and precious to him in
Scotland, both of Ministers, and Professors, whom I trust God will keep
steadfast, and who will Labor to be found faithful to their Lord and Master,
and whom I hope he will make a brazen wall and Iron Pillars, and as a strong
defenced City, in the following of their duties in these sad evil times; but it
were to be wished, That there were not too many to strengthen the hands of the
evildoers, and make themselves Transgressors, by endeavoring to build again
that which formerly they did destroy; but let such take heed of the flying
Roll, Zach. 5. And let all the Lords Servants and Ministers take heed that they
watch, and be steadfast in the faith, and quit themselves like men, and be
strong, and set the Trumpet to the mouth, and give Seasonable and faithful
warning to all Ranks Concerning sins, and duties, especially against the sins
of this sinful time: it is to be Lamented and sadly Regretted by many of the
Lords people, That there has been so much silence and fainting, even amongst
Ministers of how great Concernment it is; now in this sad Juncture, let
Ministers consider well, what it is that God calls for at their hands; To be
silent now, especially when so many Cruel and Horrid things are Acted, when
they are so much called, and ought to be concerned to speak even upon the Peril
of their lives, certainly a dreadful sin in the light of God, their silence
must be. I shall only desire that the Lord would open the mouths of his
faithful servants, that with all boldness, they may speak out the mind of their
Master, that so the work, interest, Crown and Kingdom of our Lord Jesus
Christ, may not be destroyed, and that the troubles of his poor people, which
are precious to him, may not without a Testimony be ruined* I Shall but say a
few words.

First, All you that are profane, I would seriously Exhort you that you return
to the Lord by serious Repentance; if you do, iniquity shall not be your Ruin;
if you do not, know that the day of the Lords Vengeance is near and hastneth
on! Oh know for your comfort, there is a door of mercy yet open, if you be not
despisers of the day of Salvation. And you that have been, and yet are,
Reproachers and persecutors of Godliness, and of such as live Godly; take heed,
Oh take heed, sad will be your day, when God arises to scatter his Enemies, if
you repent not for your ungodly deeds.

Secondly, All those who are taken up with their own private interests, and if
that go well they Care the less for the interest of Christ, take heed and be
zealous, and repent, lest the Lord pass the Sentence, I will spew you out of my
mouth.

Thirdly, For the truly Godly, and such as are Lamenting after the Lord, and
are mourning for all the abominations of this City, and are taking pleasure in
the very Rubbish and Stones of Zion, be of good Courage, and Cast not away your
Confidence, I dare not say any thing to future things, but surely the Lord has
a handful that are precious to him, to whom he will be Gracious; to these is a
dark night at present, how long it will last the Lord knows! Oh let not the sad
disasters, that his poor people meet with, though very astonishing, Terrify
you, beware of snares that abound, Cleave fast to your Reformed Religion, do
not Shift the Cross of Christ, if you be called to it, it is better to suffer
than sin, account the reproaches of Christ greater Riches than all the
Treasures of the World.

In the last place, let not my Death be Grievous to any of you, I hope it will
be more profitable both for you and me, and for the Church and interest of God,
than my life could have been. I bless the Lord, I can freely and Frankly
forgive all men, even as I desire to be forgiven of God, pray for them that
persecute you, bless them that Curse you. As to the cause of Christ, I bless
the Lord I never had cause, to this day, to repent for any thing I have
suffered, or can now suffer for his name. I thank the Lord who has showed mercy
to such a vile sinner as I am, and that ever he should advance me to so High a
dignity, as to be made a Minister of his blessed and everlasting Gospel; and
that ever I should have a Seal set to my Ministry, upon the hearts of some in
several places and Corners of this Land: the Lord visit Scotland with more and
more faithful Pastors, and send a Reviving day unto the people of God; in the
mean time be patient, be steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work of
the Lord; and live in Love and peace one with another, and the Lord be with his
poor Afflicted Groaning people, that yet remain.

Now I bid farewell to all my friends, and dear Relations; Farewell my poor
Wife and Children, whom I leave in the good hand of him who is better than
seven Husbands, and who will be a Father to the fatherless. Farewell all
Creature comforts, Welcome everlasting life, everlasting glory, Welcome
everlasting love, everlasting praise; bless the Lord, O my Soul, and all that
is within me.

Sic Subscrib. John King.
August, 14th. 1679. Tolbooth, Circa horam Septimam.
THE LAST SPEECH OF Mr. JOHN KID. AT THE PLACE OF EXECUTION, ON The Fourteenth
day of August 1679.

Printed in the Year, 1679.

THE SPEECH OF Mr. JOHN KID.
Right Worthy and well beloved Spectators and Auditors.
COnsidering what bodily distempers I have been exercised with since I came out
of the Torture, ( viz.) Scarce two hours out of my naked bed in one day, it
cannot be expected, that I should be in Case to say any thing to purpose at
this Juncture, especially seeing I am not as yet free of it, however I cannot
but Reverence the good hand of God upon me, and desires with all my Soul to
bless him for this my present Lot.

It may be there are a great many here that Judge my Lot very sad and
deplorable. I must confess death it self, is very Terrible to Flesh and blood,
but as it is an outlet to sin, and an inlet to righteousness, it is the
Christians great and inexpressible privilege, and give me leave to say this,
that there is something in a Christians Condition, that can never put him
without the reach of insufferableness, even shame, death, and the Cross being
included.

And then if there be peace betwixt God and the Soul, nothing can damp peace
with God through our Lord Jesus Christ, this is a most supporting ingredient in
the bitterest Cup, and under the sharpest, and firiest Trial he c^n be exposed
unto* this is my mercy, That I have something of this to lay Claim unto, viz.
The intimations of pardon, and peace betwixt God and my Soul.

And as concerning that, for which I am condemned, I magnify his grace, that I
never had the least challenge for it, but on the contrary, I Judge it my
Honor, that ever I was counted worthy to come upon the Stage upon such a
consideration; another thing that renders the most despicable Lot of the
Christian, and mine sufferable, is a felt and sensible presence from the Lord,
strengthening the Soul when most put to it, and if I could have this for my
Allowance this day, I could be bold to say, Oh death where is thy sting, and
could not but cry out Welcome to it, and all that follows upon it: I grant the
Lord from an Act of Soveraignity may come, and go as he pleases, but yet he
will never forsake his people, and this is a Cordial to me in the Case I am now
exposed unto.

Thirdly, The exercising and putting forth his glorious power, is able to
Transport the Soul of the believer, and mine, above the reach of all Sublunary
difficulties, and therefore seeing I have hope to be kept up by this power, I
would not have you to look upon my Lot, or any other that is or may be in my
Case, in the least deplorable, seeing we have ground to believe, that in more
or less he will perfect his power and strength in weakness.

Fourthly, That I may come a little nearer to the purpose in hand, I declare
before you all, in the sight of God, Angels and men, and in the sight of that
Son and all that he has Created, that I am a most miserable sinner, in regard
of my Original and Actual Transgressions. I must confess they are more in
number then the Hairs of my Head. They are gone up above my Head, and are past
numbering, I cannot but say as Jacob said, I am less then the least of all Gods
mercies, yet I must declare to the exalting of his free grace, That to me who
am the least of all Saints is this grace made known, and that by a strong hand,
and I dare not but say he has loved me, and washed me in his own blood from all
iniquities, and well is it for me this day, That ever I heard or read that
faithful saying; that Jesus Christ, came into the World to save sinners, of
whom I am chief.

Fifthly, I must also declare in his sight, I am the most unworthiest that ever
opened his mouth to preach the unsearchable Riches of Christ in the Gospel. Yea
the sense of this made me altogether unwilling to fall about so great a work,
until by the importunity of some whose names are precious and savoury to me and
many others, I was prevailed with to fall about it, and yet I am hopeful not
altogether without some fruit, and if I durst say it without vanity, I never
found so much of the presence of God upon my Spirit, as I have found in
exercises of that nature, though I must still confess attended with
inexpressible weakness, and this is the main thing for which I must lay down my
Tabernacle this day, viz. That I did preach Christ and the Gospel in several
places of this Nation; for which I bless him (as I can), That ever such a poor
obscure person as I am, have been thus privileged by him, for making mention
of his grace as I was able.

Sixthly, Give me leave to add this word farther, that though there be great
appearances, for spreading and preaching this Glorious Gospel, yet I fear there
is a snare at the bottom, and poison in that dish which may gender, and be
productive, of not only greater Scarcity of Honest preaching and preachers, but
a Real Famine of the Word, this I say is my fear, and I hope God will keep his
servants and people from fomenting any thing to the detriment of the Gospel.

Seventhly, I am also afraid that the Lord is intending to multiply his strokes
upon the Land, we have walked seven times contrary to him, and therefore we may
lay our account (unless Repentance prevent it) that he will walk seven times
contrary to us, there is more and more grounds to fear that a Sword is
Brandished in Heaven, a Glittering Sword, sharpened and forbished against the
Guilty and Harlot Scotland.

Eighthly, As for the Fifth Cause in my indictment, upon which my sentence of
death is founded, ( viz.) Personal presence, Twice or thrice, with that party
whom they call the Rebels; for my own part I never Judged them such: I
Acknowledge and do believe there were many there that came in the simplicity of
their hearts, like those that followed Absalom long ago, and I am as sure on
the other hand there were a great party there that had nothing before them but
the repairing of the Fallen work, and the restoring the breach, which is wide
as the Sea, and I am apt to think that such of these who were most branded with
mistake, will be found to be most single: but for Rebellion against his
Majesty's person or Lawful Authority, the Lord knows my Soul Abhors the name
and thing; Loyal I have been, and I wish every Christian to be so, and I was
ever of this Judgment, To give to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to
God the things that are Gods.

Ninthly, Since I came to prison, I have been much branded with many that I
must call Aspersions whereof Jesuitisme is one, I am hopeful there was never
one that did converse with me that had the least ground for laying this to my
Charge, I know not how it comes to pass it is laid upon me now, except
implacable prejudice that some have been prepossest with against me. I am not
Ignorant that near two years ago, a person of some note in this Church while
Living, was pleased to say, I was dyed in that Judgment: after he was better
informed, he Changed his Note, and said it was misinformation: but now the
Lord, before whom I must stand, and be Judged by and by, knows I have a perfect
Abhorrence of that thing. And that it was never my Temptation directly nor
indirectly. Though I must confess, some few years ago, some were very pressing
upon me that I would conform, and embrace Prelacy? But for Popery, and that
Trash, it never came nearer my heart than the Popes Conclave, and the Alcoran,
which my Soul Abhors.

Tenthly, I Have also been branded with factiousness, divisive, and seditious
preaching, and practices. I must confess if it be so, it was more then ever I
was aware of: according to the measure that God has given me, it was my
endeavor to commend Christ to the hearts and Souls of the people, even
repentance toward God and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ, according to
the word of God, confession of faith, and Catechismes Larger and Shorter, yea I
did press them, when God did cast it in my way to remember their former
Obligations in Doctrine, worship, Discipline and Government, and that they
would make it their work to stand to it, in substance and Circumstance, seeing
it is so Cried down in this day, and if this be divisive preaching, I cannot
deny it.

Eleventhly, I am pressed in Conscience to bear my Testimony to and Abhorrence of
every Invasion, Usurpation, and incroachment that is made or has been made
against Christ's Royal prerogative, Crown, and Kingdom, Originate upon and
derivate from that which they call the Supremacy, I was never free to say a
Confedcracy with those that I Judge have in a great part said a Confederacy
with that thing, and the Lord is my record, I was never free in my Conscience
for that that is called indulgence, neither first nor second, as it was
tendered by the Counsel, and as it was embraced by a great many Godly men in
this Land, yea it was never Laudable nor expedient to me, and in effect this is
one of the main grounds, why I am rendered so Obnoxious to so many imputations,
that I have been all along contrary to that indulgence in my Judgment, I
confess I have been so, and I die in my Judgment contrary to it, and this I
Crave Leave to say without any Offense given to the many Godly and Learned,
that are of another Judgment.

Twelfthly, I Judge it fit likewise in this Case to leave my Testimony against
that Stent, Taxation and Cess, that has been so injustly imposed, so
frivolently founded, and vigorously carried on by the Abettors of that
contention, and merely upon no other account imaginable, but to make a Final
Extirpation of Christ, and his Gospel Ordinances out of the Land, and how
Lamentable it is to consider how many professors did willingly pay it, and were
most forward for inciting others to do the same.

In the next place, though to many I die desired, yet I know to not a few my
death is not desired, and it is the rejoicing of my heart, that I die in the
faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has loved me, and given himself for me, and
in the faith of the Prophets and Apostles, and in this faith that there is not a
name under heaven by which men can be saved, but the name of Jesus, and in the
Faith of the Doctrine and Worship of the Kirk of Scotland, as it is now
established according to the word of God, Confession of faith, Catechisms
Larger and shorter, and likewise I join my Testimony against Popery, Perjury,
Profanity, Heresy, and every thing contrary to sound Doctrine.

In the Close, as a dying person, and as one who has obtained mercy of the Lord
to be faithful, I would Humbly leave it upon godly Ministers to be faithful for
their Lord and Master, and not to hold their peace in such a day, when so many
ways are taken for injuring of him, his name, way, Sanctuary, Ordinances, Crown
and Kingdom, I hope there will be found a party in this Land, that will
continue for him, and his Matters, in all Hazzards, and as faithfulness is
called for in Ministers, so professors would concern themselves that they
Countenance not, nor abet any thing inconsistent with former Principles and
practices. Let the Land consider how Neuteral and indifferent we are grown in
the matters of God, even like Ephraim long ago, a Cake not turned.

Next how far we are fallen from our first love, how far we are degenerated
from the noble Vine into which the Lord did once plant us; Lamentable it is how
far we are gone in the way of Egypt, drinking the Waters of Sichar, etc.

Again, What a woeful Spirit of bitterness is predominate in this Land, in this
our Age, Ephraim vexing Judah, and Judah Ephraim; Manasseth Ephraim, and
Ephraim Manasseth, the growing dogedness of this temper almost amongst us all,
portends terrible things from the Lord against Scotland.

Fourthly, Reformation neither designed nor practiced; what means all this
deformity that is come to pass in these days, instead of the contrary? how many
of us are pulling down that which we have been building up; how many of us
calling good evil, and evil good, dis-owning and dis-savouring that which
sometime we judged our honor to testify for and to avouch.

Fifthly, A Public Spirit in contending for God in his matters, in substance
and circumstance, according to our Vows and Obligations, is much wanting
amongst us at this day.

Farther I am pressed in Conscience to make honorable mention of all those
glorious things that God has done in Scot. since the year 1638. the abundant
measure of his spirit that has been power'd out upon his people.

Here he spoke much concerning the Solemn League and Covenant; and afterward
proceeded as follows.

And moreover I bear my Testimonies against all other Confusions, Imprisonment
and Blood, that is or may be intended against those of the Land that desire to
keep their Garments clean, whether in Prison or out of Prison

6thly, As concerning that which is the ground of my death, viz. Preaching here
and there in some Corners, I bless my God I have not the least challenge for
it; and though those that Condemned me are pleased to call such Preachings
Rendezvouses of Rebellion, yet I must say this of them, they were so far from
being reputed such in my Eyes, that if ever Christ had a People or Party
wherein his Soul took pleasure, I am bold to say these Meetings were a great
part of them; the shineing and Glory of God was eminently seen amongst these
Meetings, the convincing Power and Authority of our Lord went out with his
Servants in those blasphemously nicknamed Conventicles; this I say without
reflection upon any; I have a word to say farther, that God is calling persons
to Repentance, and to do their first work; Oh that Scotland were a mourning
Land, and that Reformation were our practice, according as we are sworn in the
Covenant.

Again, that Christians of Grace and Experience would study more streightness
and stability in this day, when so many are turning to the right hand, and many
to the left; he that endures to the end shall be saved; he has appointed the
Kingdom for such as continue with him in his Temptations.

Next, if ever you expect to have the Form of the House showed you in all the
Laws thereof, goings out thereof, and comings in thereof, then think it no
shame to take shame to you for all that has been done, sitting down on this
side Jordan is like to be our bane. Oh when shall we get up and run after him
till he bring us into the promised Land, let us up and after him with all our
heart, and never rest till he return.

I recommend my Wife and young one to the care and faithfulness of the God of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, the God that has fed me to this day, and who is the
God of my Salvation, their God and my God, their Father and my Father, I am
also hopeful, that Christians, Friends, and Relations, will not be unmindful of
them when I am gone.

Lastly, I do further bear my Testimony to the Cross of Christ, and bless him
that ever he counted me worthy to appear for him in such a lot as this: Glory
to him that ever I heard tell of him, and that ever he fell upon such a method
of dealing with me as this, and therefore let none that loves Christ and his
Righteous Cause be offended in me.

And as I have lived in the faith of this, that the three Kingdoms are married
Lands, so I dye in the faith of it, that there will be a resurrection of his
Name, Word, Cause, and of all his Interest therein, though I dare not determine
the time when, nor the manner how, but leave all these things to the infinitely
wise God, who has done, and will do all things well. Oh that he would return to
this Land again, to repair our breaches, and take away our backsliding, and
appear for his work: Oh that he were pacified toward us; Oh that he would pass
by Scotland once again, and make our time a time of Love, Come Lord Jesus, come
quickly. Himself hasten it in his own time and way. The Lord is my light and
life, my joy, my song, and my salvation; the God of his chosen be my Mercy this
day, and the enriching comforts of the holy Ghost keep up and carry me fair
through, to the Glory of his Grace, to the edification of his people, and my
own eternal advantage. Amen.

Sic Subscrib. John Kid.
August, 14th. 1679. Tolbooth, Ante horam Septimam.
FINIS.

