SOME Seasonable and Modest THOUGHTS, Partly occasioned by, and partly
concerning the Scots East India COMPANY.

Humbly offered to R. H. Esquire; a Member of the present PARLIAMENT.

By an unfeigned and hearty Lover of ENGLAND.

Printed in the Year 1696.

Some seasonable and modest Thoughts, partly occasioned by, and partly
concerning the Scots East India Company.
SIR,
THIS Paper would not come addressed to you, if I knew any in your House, to
whom for all intellectual and moral Qualities it might more justly be inscribed
and dedicated: Your admirable Knowledge, steady Virtue, unstained Honor, and
unwearied Application, which do so well qualify you at all times, and
especially at this critical Juncture, to be an useful Member of the Great
Senato, and which do so singularly adapt you to cooperate with such others
there, as are guided by Love to their Couutry, and the old Maxims of English
Policy, to save this Nation from menacing and impending Ruin, to recover it to
Honor abroad, and preserve it in Peace at home, and to retrieve our Traffic,
and render it safe and prosperous, do make you the worthy Object of all honest
Men's Love and Esteem, and do conciliate all those to be your Servants as well
as your Friends, who do either respect themselves or their Posterity. Nor could
any thing have entitled you to be thus applied unto by an unknown Person, save
the Opinion which I have of your Wisdom and Justice; and that as you are able
to judge of what is here represented, that you will likewise do it with an
Equity becoming the Merit of the Cause, and not under the Biass either of
ancient Piques, or of supposed present Emulations between these two British
Kingdoms.

SIR, I shall not now dispute, whether the World might not have been happier by
its continuance under Consinement, and staked down to Agriculture, and those
Mechanic Arts that are needful to the Conveniences of Life, (without purveying
for our Pride and Sensuality) than it is by launching out into that measure and
degree of Mercantile Commerce which has excited our Lusts as well as fed them,
and given provocation to Vice by yielding Fuel to it. But some Nation having
departed from the ancient simplicity of Living concented with the Productions
of their own Countries, and having by Navigation and Trade, raised themselves
to Wealth, Power, and increase of Inhabitants; it thereupon grew necessary for
other Nations to fall into the like Methods, lest otherwise they should have
been a Prey, as well as a Derision, to them whom Trade had rendered Mighty and
Opulent: So that now the Application unto, and the Encouragement and Protection
of Trade, is not a Matter of mere Choice and Discretion, but of indispensible
Necessity for every Kingdom that is qualified by their Situation for it, and
would not be contemned and insulted, and lie continually exposed to be
conquered by any ambitious and encroaching Neighbors, whom Trade has made
Wealthy and Powerful: For as Trade is a richer and more durable Mine than any
in Mexico or Peru, and whence a Nation may constantly derive an Increase of
Bullion and Coin, so in proportion to its plenty of Money will it flourish at
Home, and be terrible Abroad; and answerable to the Measures that any Country
or Kingdom arriveth at in Foreign Commerce and Traffic, will it proportionably
grow, not only in Naval Strength, but in Military Force by Land: Of which not
only the Phenicians and Carthaginians of old, and long after them the
Venetians, Genouese, and Portuguese are famous instances; but whereof the Dutch
are in a special manner an amazing and illustrious Example; who tho they have
narrow and scanty Territories, live under a bad Air, dwell upon a watery and
unhealthy Soil, and have scarce any native Productions of their own, but are
forced to fetch their Bread, their Drink, their Raiment from elsewhere; yet
through the mere pursuit of, and application to Trade, they not only rival the
greatest Kings and most potent Kingdoms in powerful Navies, and warlike Armies,
but they give Laws to several mighty Monurchs and States in all the known Parts
of the World. And forasmuch as Money will always procure Men, they do in the
Virtue thereof supply themselves from time to time with vast Numbers of
Soldiers from diverse parts of Europe; and without employing any, or at least
very few of their own People, they do by their Acquisitions in way of Trade,
muster and keep up large Armies, both for their own Defense in times of Peace
as well as of War; which their living upon a Continent surrounded with
Neighbors who envy their Prosperity, and are jealous of their Power, rendereth
necessary; and also for the Offense of those that seek to encroach upon or
insult them. So that by their mere Money, which is the Result and Product of
Trade, they purchase Men to shed their Blood, and to lose their Lives in
defending them against, and in the making Conquests for them upon others: And
the Nature of War being changed from what anciently it was, when Courage and
Bravour often decided a Quarrel between States and Kingdoms in a Day, and
seldom missed putting an End to a War, either by Victory or Accommodation,
within the Circle of one Campaign; the Success of it now is come to depend upon
the largest Purse, and not the bravest Troops; and they who have most Money,
tho not always the valiantest Men, will have the better in the War, though they
may sometimes have the worst in a Battle: So that no poor Nation can in the way
that War is now managed, carry an Offensive War against a Wealthy, tho it may
possibly through some Advantages peculiar to it, be in a condition to maintain
a Defensive; as the Switzers, who through plenty of brave Men, and by reason of
the situation of their Country, may continue a Defensive War, at least for a
time, against any Nation that shall have the boldness to attack them. But I do
say, that no necessitous and indigent Nation can make an Offensive War against
a wealthy Kingdom or State, unless they can make their Enemies Country the Seat
of it, and by the Plenty and Riches thereof both subsist and pay their own
Army: Whereas the Dutch, through their being wealthy by reason of Trade, have
heretofore lived many Years in War without growing weary of it; and tho they
have seldom made great Acquisitions, yet they have as seldom sustained any
considerable Losses, yea, they have been able by their Money, which is the
Product of their Commerce, to prevail upon others to assist them, when the
Subversion of their State has been most menaced, and their Country in the
greatest Jeopardy; tho they have also (to be restored to the free and quiet
following of their Traffic) purchased sometimes their own Peace at their
Friends Expense, and have abandoned those Allies that came in to succor them.

NOR need I tell you, Sir, that Trade is like a nice and coy Mistress, which
you must not only industriously court to get possessed of it, but sedulously
pursue, and as tenderly cherish if you would preserve and secure it: For the
Dangers inseparably incident to Trade, are of that Variety and Number, that
unless it be encouraged by Immunities from grievous Impositions, few will
embark in it, and fewer persevere to follow it. For who would expose their
whole Fortune and Capital to the Hazards which unavoidably accompany Navigation
and Traffic, if all that thereby accrues to them be, to bear the chiefest
Burden in the supporting the Government, and by heavy Taxes upon them to ease
those from National Impositions, who either wallow in Plenty and Luxury,
through having Estates in Land, or who subsist comfortably on Agriculture and
Mechanic Imploys, without being exposed to the Dangers or running the Hazards
which attend long Voyages and foreign Commerce? And as the Instances are many
and obvious to every one's Observations, that is in any degree acquainted with
the World, or conversant in History, that as Trade has always forsook and
abandoned those places where it has come to be too much loaded and burdened,
tho its Residence may have antecedently been fixed there, for Ages as well as
Years: So it is not unworthy of Remark, that Trade seldom, if ever, returned to
a Place which it had once forsook; nor has it been found, that they who by
grievous Impositions have at any time drove Trade away, could be able to
recover it again by any Change of their Conduct, or other Methods which they
have fallen upon. And considering the many Advantages that arrive to Kingdoms
in the Increase of Manufactures and Rise of Rents, both of Lands and Houses,
through the Prosperity and Success of Trade; it is a wonder that any People,
who have but Wit to govern themselves by Interest, if they will not by the
Measures of more refined Wisdom and Justice, should burden and overload Trade,
which is the Source and Fountain of so many and great Advantages to them: nor
should there be more needful, both to inform and convince the Nobility and
Gentry of the Benefits arising by the Protection and Encouragement of Trade,
than that within the Compass of little more than a Century of Years, in which
Trade began to augment, the Value of Lands in England is risen to a full
Moiety; and it is as demonstrable as any Problem in Euclid, that were our
Tunnage and Poundage and other Impositions on Trade, that starve and cripple
it, taken off, or at least abated, both the Lands of the Gentry would still
rise higher in their Value, and the Manufactures of the Kingdom would be more
plentifully exported, and thereupon proportionably increase and multiply: so
that if Trade were more eased and privileged from Impositions in times of
Peace, tho Lands might thereby come to be the more loaded; yet such a Method
would not only be greatly to the Advantage of the Kingdom, but would turn to
the Benefit of the Freeholder and Landlord, in that Lands and Houses would
thereupon be both Let and Sold at such Rates and Values (beyond what they now
are) as would be more than an Equivalent of such a Burden. And would Men allow
themselves to think calmly of this Matter, the Heritor at the Rebound would
sind his Interest as much in the relieving Trade from Impositions and Taxes as
the Merchant would do immediately: But then to continue not only Burdens upon
Trade in time of War, but to increase them proportionably to the growth of the
Charge and Expense that the Kingdom is forced to be at, in the supporting and
defraying it, is so irreconcilable to all the Rules of Wisdom as well as of
Justice, that the doing it is a Reproach upon the Understandings of People, as
well as a Reflection upon their Equity: For the Hazards which Traders are then
exposed unto more than other Persons, and the Losses which at such a time they
must unavoidably meet with, in whatsoever they either Export or Import, will be
found to affect the Merchant's Estate and Capital so far, that it ought both in
Prudence and Justice to be allowed to pass instead of his Quota to all public
Taxes. But alas! such have been the Ways and Means of raising Money for the
carrying on the present War, that the Merchants have not only born a great
Share in the whole Charge and Expense of it at home through Taxes imposed upon
Shipping as well as upon Merchandise, but they have also by reason of the
neglects in protecting Navigation, had the Misfortune to defray a great part of
the Enemies Expense in the War they make upon us, as you may easily comprehend,
upon considering the vast Number of Ships with their Cargoes, which they have
taken from us since the Commencement of it; and which (if calculated at the
lowest Value) must amount to several Millions Sterling. In a word, the less the
Impositions are upon Trade, the more Money the Merchant has to employ in it,
and to apply to the Enlargement of it; and the more vigorously it is carried
on, the further it is enlarged, he more our Manufactures will multiply at home;
and all that we can fabric will be the better transported abroad. And as the
Trade of England is capable of great Improvements, and of being far extended
beyond what it is yet arrived at, and this both as to the Productions of Art
and Nature at home, and as to the enlarging our Commerce in the Commodities of
Foreign Countries; so nothing has so much discouraged, crippled and narrowed
it, as the draining those large Sums and vast Proportions of Money out of the
Merchant's Stock and Capital, by his paying high Impositions, Customs and
Taxes, which without those Burdens upon Trade would have been all applied unto
the Increase of his Stock, and employed in the Enlargement of Commerce and
Traffic. Nor would it derogate from the Prudence of our Legislators, if the
received Practice and the present Posture of Affairs will not allow them to
make this Kingdom a free Port; yet at least to imitate the Dutch, (that know so
well how to grow strong and opulent) who tho they have little Land to tax
toward the defraying the Charges of their Government, and who are also by
Nature precluded from several other ways and means of raising Money for the
Defense of their State, which lie open and are practicable to us; yet even they
do with singular Care and in a most special Manner, cover and excuse Trade from
all extraordinary and grievous Impositions, and do choose rather to raise Money
for the answering the Necessities and Exigencies of their Government, in a
hundred other Methods, than to clog Traffic, or to make the Merchant uneasy
through large and mortifying Impositions.

AND, Sir, you will readily imagine, that if Trade, in order to the being
preserved and enlarged, must be so tenderly cherished and so carefully indulged
where it is already established, and has gained the Esteem and Affections of a
People; it must then be more amorously Courted and Addressed unto in all the
ways that are Charming, in order to give a beginning unto it, and six it a
Settlement where it has had little Footing, and scarcely been entertained: And
the more enticing must the means be to allure a People to it, and to make them
espouse it with Ardour, where not only the Genius and Inclinations of a Nation
have generally stood biassed another way, but where (through being habituated to
greater Frugality than their Neighbors) they have for the most part sat down
contented with their own home Productions, as being sufficient both to
accommodate all the needful cravings of Nature, and to yield Supplies for the
common conveniences of Life; or they have only extended their Trade to an
intercourse with those adjoining Nations, that could both take off those few
Superfluities which their Country yields, and might furnish them with all
those Supplies which modern Vanity, Pride and Luxury have rendered as it were
necessary. And if Penal Laws have been found necessary to withdraw the Native
Irish from their ancient rude Custom of making their Horses plow and draw by
the Tails; you will not wonder if Beneficial Laws be thought needful to turn
the Applications of the Scots into another Channel, than that in which most of
them have hitherto exercised their Parts, and employed their Industry: and by
how much any Kingdom or State finds that others have been long embarked in
Traffic before them, by so much must the Encouragement be the greater, and the
prospects of Success and Advantage made the more visible and morally certain,
to obtain their People to start so late, and so far behind those interested in
Trade previously to them, that they do in a manner see the Prize of the Course
in which they are engaging in the Possession and Enjoyment of others, before
they can set out and begin. Nor is there any thing more universally practiced
by all Nations, and particularly by England, than to grant large Privileges to
the Authors and Inventors of any thing Natural or Artificial that may be
profitable to Makind, and beneficial to the Community: and various as well as
many Instances, fall under every Man's Observation and View, how that the
Projectors and Authors of the least thing that has seemed to have a tendency
to public and National usefulness, have had all the Profits that were likely
for several Years to accrue from it, vested in them in the way of a Monopoly,
as the Recompense and Reward either of their Skill or of their Industry; nor
can any be ignorant, who are conversant either in our History, or in our
Statute-Book, what Concessions, Privileges and Immunities have been heretofore
granted to the Walloons and others, to tempt them hither, and by them to get
possession of, and to establish those various Manufactures, which have been of
so much Reputation, as well as of Advantage to the Kingdom. Yea, while the
Ingeny, Vigor and Industry of the Natives of England, spent themselves
heretofore in other Ways, Exercises and Applications, than those of Traffic;
what large Favors and Immunities were then granted unto, and bestowed upon
Foreigners, to procure them to settle a Staple of Commerce here, and to
cultivate Trade? For how much soever the English have within this last Age
addicted themselves to Trade and Navigation; yet before the middle of Queen
Elizabeth's Reign, their Application was not much greater thereunto than that
of their Neighbors; and so unprovided was this Kingdom at that Time, both of
Ships and Mariners, and that no less for Traffic than for War, that the
Government was forced to hire the one as well as the other, from the
Hanse-Towns. It Is true, that long before, upon the Burgundians having procured
of John Duke of Brabant the Incorporation of a Company of Merchant Adventurers,
Anno 1248. our Politic as well as Warlike Prince Edward the 3 d, found means
to allure it hither, and to get it transplanted into England; where being
established by him with many and great Privileges, it was likewise afterward
confirmed by most of the Kings of England that succeeded him: But besides its
being fallen in Queen Elizabeth's Time under some decline, had it been in its
great Vigor, it could not have been able to support, extend and enlarge Trade
to the Measure and Degree which the Balance of Europe at that time, and the
growth of Navigation and Traffic in other Nations made necessary to be
attempted here; which as it occasioned Commerce to be cast, as it were, into a
new Mould, and to put on a different Face from that in which it formerly
appeared; so it procured those Encouragements unto Trade, and gained it such
Privileges as might serve to promote its Propagation and Increase, to a
Proportion that should not only equal that of other Nations, but exceed it. Nor
is it improbable but that the Prospect which all People then had of England and
Scotland's being likely soon after to be united under one Sovereign, might give
great Encouragement to this Kingdom to apply it to Navigation and Commerce more
than it had been accustomed to do, and that not only upon the hopes of being
delivered from those Wars for the future, which had for, many Ages been too
frequent between these British Nations, and consequently great Obstructions to
Trade; but 'en that these Kingdoms becoming to be so far incorporated, as to be
under one Monarch, England should have thence forward little cause of
Apprehension of War with any of its Foreign Neighbors, and especially with
France; and that partly by reason or the Addition of Strength, which this
Conjunction of the two Nations would give against any Enemy, and partly because
the Alliance and Friendship between Scotland and France (which had often
rendered the French the bolder to make War against England, would by this Union
be unavoidably dissolved. Nor is it needful that I should expatiate in
representing, how that when this Nation began to apply it self industriously
and extensively to Trade, all the Methods imaginable of Kindness unto, and Care
over Merchants and Navigation, were made use of by the Government, to encourage
them and cultivate it: For as there was a Naval Strength always in readiness,
and (upon every Emergency and needful Occasion) employed to protect it, so the
Impositions upon it were extremely Moderate, in comparison of what (as appears
by the Book of Rates, and the several Acts of Parliament which charge
Navigation and Trade, with so many Duties and Imposts) they are grown up into
since: For all the Taxes then exacted of Merchants, were rather little
Recognitions of their Dependence upon the Crown, and small acknowledgments of
the Countenance and Defense which they received from the Government, than any
Burdens and grievous Encumbrances, by which they might be discouraged, and
Traffic loaded; so that the whole Carriage of those then in Authority toward
Commerce, and those embarked in it, spoke an indulgent Care toward it and
them, and such a tender regard of both, as became the Infancy of Trade, and the
Difficulties which Beginners were to encounter with: and particularly as to the
Society that was erected to Trade to the East Indies, there was all the Wisdom
and Goodness exercised toward it that might be subservient to the promoting of
it; for upon its first Incorporation, Anno 1599. it had not only many
Immunities granted unto it, but was Incorporated into a Company with a Right
and Authority vested in it, of Trading to the Indies, preclusive of all their
Fellow Subjects that were not of that Corporation. For tho it be inconsistent,
both with the Wisdom and the Justice of the Government of England, and also
with the Rights and Liberties of the People, to erect all Traders into every
Place, into Companies, exclusive of other English Natives and Freemen, to
Traffic thither, where the Trade may be effectually and advantageously carried
on by single Dealers, or by voluntary Associations, seeing such incorporated
Societies would be so many Monopolies, which are Nusances in a Country where
the Ends of Commerce may be otherwise compassed and obtained; yet it has
always been the Prudence of the Government, to devolve Trade unto such Places
upon an Incorporated Company, where it could neither be protected nor enlarged,
save by a Society trading and acting on a Joint Stock. And as the Interest of
the Kingdom, with respect to the Quality of the Place, where a Trade is to be
managed, must give rules for the Method, and determine the way in which it is
to be carried on: so in that case where it would be to the Loss and Prejudice
of the Kingdom, to have a Trade laid open to whosoever will be dealing in it,
the Public and National Benefit ought to be preferred to that of particular
Persons. And as we do know how the Trade of England to the East Indies, was in
a manner wholly lost from the Kingdom, during the Usurpation of the Rump
Parliament, and of Oliver Cromwell, by their putting it out of the Channel in
which it had been managed by an Incorporated Society, and leaving to every one
that pleased to venture upon it: So the Indulgence given of late Years to
Interlopers, has both had fatal Effects upon that Trade, and has not much
commended their care of the Nation, who either allowed or connived at it. For
as single Traders will be easily tempted at so great a Distance, to commit
Depredations upon the Natives of those Countries, and thereby provoke them as
well to make Reprizals upon us, as to renounce all friendly and amicable
Commerce with us; so no Dealers save in the way of an Incorporated Company
trading upon a Joint Stock, can erect and maintain Forts, establish Factories,
and raise, and pay that armed Force in the Places they have chosen for their
Residence and the Seat of their Traffic, as will either discourage those
Nations that rival us in Trade from supplanting them, or the Natives upon every
imagined Offense from insulting them. To which I crave Liberty to add, that
every Nation or State in Europe, which upon Motives of Interest have
established a Society that might trade to the Indies, have at the first
Erection of such a Corporation, granted vast Privileges unto it for its
Encouragement; of which the Dutch are a famous and instructive Example, who tho
they had acquired some beginnings of a Trade thither by the Industry of private
and particular Dealers, yet that wise People being sensible that it could
neither be much enlarged, nor long preserved in that Method of Trade, they
thereupon in the Year 1602, gave Establishment to a Company that might trade
thither, exclusive of all other of their own Subjects; and for their
Encouragement (notwithstanding all the Necessities of the State at that time)
excused them from all Taxes and Impositions upon that Trade, for the space of
21 Years, and only obliged them, in way of an acknowledgment of their
Dependence upon the States General, to pay in the whole, within the Compass of
the first ten Years, the Sum of Five and twenty thousand Florins, which
amounted to little more than 2000 l. Sterling; and was rather a Recognition of
whom they held their right of Trading thither, than a Burden upon that
Traffic. So that through the Privileges and Immunities which were granted into
them then, most whereof have been still continued to them since, they are
become the most opulent and powerful Trading Society of the World, and the
chief Pillar of the Dutch State; and tho they be but in the quality of Subjects
at Home, they are great Sovereigns in the Indies, and not only give Laws to
many Easterr Princes, but ingross from Europeans what parts of the Indian
Traffic they please. And if such Encouragements have been thought needful
toward the giving a beginning and an increase to an East India Trade, when
there were none, or at least very few of those Difficulties and Dangers to be
conflicted with, from Rival Nations, that are now unavoidably to be
encountered; and if such Immunities were sit to be granted at a Season when the
Trade was not forestalled, preoccupied, nor previously possessed to any
considerable Degree by other Europeans; it is easy to imagine how indispensibly
necessary it is for those that would now begin a Trade thither, to give all the
Encouragements to it that are under the Power, and within the Circle of a
Government and Nation to grant. And experience in our Neighboring Kingdoms may
teach us, how weak and ineffectual the Concession of the greatest Privileges is
toward the establishing such a Trade to the Indies, as may answer the Pains
and Cost in endeavoring it, and bringing it to turn to such an account, as may
bear proportion to the Expense, as well as to the Industry and Hazards of
attempting it, after so wealthy and potent Nations as England and Holland have
gotten antecedent Possession, and will endeavor to ingross that Trade to the
Exclusion of all others: For not only all the large Privileges and Immunities
granted by the King of Denmark and the Elector of Brandenburgh, for the raising
and promoting of an East India Trade, have proved insignificant in advancing
the End and Design which they proposed, at least, not to such a Degree as may
turn to their own Honor, and the Profit of their respective Countries; but
even those vast Encouragements given by the great Monarch of France, to raise
the Genius and quicken the Industry of his People to the beginning and carrying
on of an Indian Trade, have proved little better than abortive: So that instead
of blaming the Scots for what we esteem extravagant Concessions, in order to
their founding a Trade to the East Indies, all those Indulgences may be rather
looked upon as means much below, and disproportioned to what they are aiming
at: And they who will judge of things impartially, will rather judge them to have
been deficient than excessive in the Privileges they have granted; for as some
other besides those mentioned in the Act, could not escape falling under their
Thoughts and View, so the granting them would have been Wise and Just in it
self, and congruous to the Undertaking which they would give Being unto.
However, as the offering and granting less would have left them under an
imputation of Folly and Weakness, in proposing to compass mighty Ends by feeble
Means; so they will be more fortunate than others have been, if the Success
upon those Encouragements do either answer the Wishes they have, or the Hopes
they entertain.

AND, Sir, instead of its giving any just Occasion of Surprise, that the
Parliament of Scotland should endeavor at last to excite their People to a
Share in Trade, somewhat proportionable to what other Nations have attained
unto, it is rather matter of Astonishment and Wonder that their Nobility,
Gentry and Burgesses who constitute their Senate, being generally Men of equal
Wit with those of the like Qualities in neighboring Countries, and being also
most of them so well acquainted with the World, as to understand the Advantages
which redound to Kingdoms by Traffic; and that the Figure which one Nation
makes above another, proceeds, caeteris paribus, from Wealth, which is the
Result and Product of Trade; they should have so long omitted the giving those
Encouragements to it, which they might, and which other Nations have done. For
tho the Biass of their People seems generally to lie another way, as I have
already said; yet that is merely the effect of Custom and not of Nature: and as
it would not have been difficult at any time heretofore to have diverted and
turned their Inclination and Humor from Soldiery to Commerce; so it is not to
be doubted, but that upon their being once brought to apply unto it, they would
be found as ingenious and diligent in Trade, as they have had the Character to
be skilful and brave in War; nor are they worse qualified by their Indian and
African Traffic than their Neighbors are: but if any will in that pretend to
an Advantage above another, it indisputably falls to the Lot of the Scots, in
that they have neither long and dangerous Channels to pass, before they arrive
at their Ports from an Indian or African Voyage; nor yet a tedious and
perilous Course to run about the North of Ireland and Scotland, but that they
may immediately out of the Ocean enter into safe and convenient Harbors. And
then as for convenient Numbers of Men fit to be employed in Navigation, they
are by reason of the Populacy of their Country, answerable to the Dimensions of
it; and that there are proportionably more of them of the inferior Rank, than
are elsewhere, as well furnished with Persons capable to be Mariners, as any
Country whatsoever, and those generally, who through the Strength of their
Constitution and the Hardiness and Frugality of their Education, are not only
as able as any to undergo long Voyages, with all the Incidents of Heat, Cold,
and sometimes scarcity of Provisions for Subsistence, that do attend them; and
who, through an Obedience they are bred to from their Youth, are not so liable
to mutiny as some others may be, but who can (equally with, if not better than
most) endure Foreign Climates, and with less despondency of Mind, and fee
bleness of Body, encounter those Diseases which Strangers are obnoxious unto,
upon their first Arrival in Africa and the East Indies. So that considering all
the natural Advantages which the Scots have to encourage their Application to
Trade, it would strangely reflect upon the Wisdom of the Parliament of that
Kingdom, and greatly detract from the Love which they ought to bear to their
Country, and from the Care as well as Zeal which they ought to express for the
Honor and Prosperity of it, in their having so long neglected to establish,
cultivate and promote Trade with a greater Vigor, and more extensively than
they have done, were there not some Reasons (which tho they may already lie
under the View of a Person of your Penetration, I shall nevertheless for the
sake of others represent them unto you) that may serve in some measure to
excuse, though possibly they may not wholly justify their Conduct in this
matter. Whereof take this for the first; namely, That it is not long since the
African and East India Trades grew into that Reputation in Europe of
Profitableness, or came so to flourish through the Industry of these Northern
Nations, as to raise Emulation in their Neighbors of obtaining a Share in
them: For as it is within less than thirty or forty Years, that this part of the
World grew so fond of many of the Productions of those Places, or that trading
Societies to them being established, had outwrestled and conquered the
Difficulties that attend Beginnings of that kind, or had brought them to answer
the Dangers and Expense, which those Companies were forced to be at, in laying
the Foundations of their Traffic thither, and in rendering it first safe there,
and then advancing it to be gainful and profitable here: So that it is no
wonder if Scotland (that is a Kingdom inferior to England in Power and
Opulency) should suspend and delay Attempts of endeavoring to settle a
Commerce thither, until they should see what success would ensue upon the Care
and Industry of those English Companies, which were erected for the Cultivation
and Management of those two respective Trades. Nor did the Conduct of Scotland
in this matter differ much from the Behavior of other Kingdoms, and
particularly of France, with which Scotland pretends not to compare it self in
largeness of Territories, numbers of People, or greatness of Treasure: And the
adverse Fortune which the English long wrestled with, with the Difficulties and
Losses which they encountered to the weakening, if not almost ruining of the
Undertakers, before they could bring the Trade to India, to be either
profitable to themselves and the Kingdom, or honorable to the Government,
might well discourage the Scots from being forward in embarking in a Course of
Traffic, under the Discouragements and Arduousness whereof their richer and
more powerful Neighbors were ready to succumb; whereas having now seen, that
the establishing and carrying on of that Trade both with Credit and vast
Profit, is not only practicable, but that by reason of the Humor that is now
grown predominant in Europe, of preferring the Productions of those Countries
to any of the Fruits of Nature, or the Manufactures of Art, which Nations
nearer home do afford, the Money of those States and Kingdoms, who are not
immediately interested in that Trade, is drawn away from them, and comes into
the Possession of those, who deal in the Original importing of the Commodities
of the East Indies, first into their own Countries, and then in vending them to
other Nations: and the Scots being as ready to run into the Fashion of the
World as other Nations about them are, tho they cannot spare so much Money to
be drawn out of their Country, as the gratifying their Vanity in Expenses of
that kind will require; have therefore found it necessary to erect an
East India Company, both for supplying themselves, and thereby keeping their
Money at home, and also to export and vend abroad to others, and by that means
to draw Bullion and Cash into the Kingdom from those Countries, where their
Indian Goods come to be disposed. And they have the more reason to to fall upon
all the Methods, and to use all the Ways they can to increase their Coin,
seeing neither Nations for Persons are now valued, as anciently they were, by
their Ingeny, Fortitude and moral Worth, but according to their Wealth, and the
Proportion of Silver that they weigh at, in the Scale of Quantity; the Scarcity
whereof in Scotland, through want of Trade (which in the Source and Fountain of
its being any where plentiful) has given occasion to some of their opulent
Neighbors (whom Wealth has made haughty and disdainful) to fasten upon them
the Character of beggarly Scots; and the which, as it appears by their neglect
of Trade, they have hitherto born with a Tameness, as if they were not ashamed
of the Reproach. And truly were the Estimate of Kingdoms and Persons made now,
as formerly it was wont to be, and as it really ought, Poverty (where it is
compensated by true intrinsic Moral and Intellectual Worth) is not such an
Ignominy as it is meant, both by those that charge it upon others, and as it is
commonly taken by them, upon whom it is fastened; seeing as there may be sound
Kingdoms that are poor and indigent in Coin, which nevertheless are valorous,
noble and generous; and Nations (on the contrary) vastly rich, who can never
emerge from being Rustic and Boorish; so there is nothing more apparent, tho
less acknowledged, than that some Persons with a very light Purse may be
genteel, meritorious and honorable, while others of twenty and forty thousand
Pound Capital, do deserve to be as much reckoned in the Number of the Mob, as
they who sell Brooms, or cry Small Coal. But then, Sir, allow me to add in the
second place, that the Scots were for many Years, after the English and they
came under One Sovereign, treated with that Equality and Indulgence, with
reference to the mutual Traffic of the Kingdoms, or at least with that Respect
and Fairness, that the Scots had not that Cause and Occasion administered unto
them, of establishing and pursuing Trade upon a separate and distinct Bottom of
their own, as they have had for these several late Years, and still have; in
that upon the two Nations first coming to be the Subjects of one and the same
King, besides the Prospect which the Scots had, and the Hopes that were given
them, that the two Kingdoms should be so cemented and united, as to become
equally interested and vested in the same civil and political Liberties, Rights
and Privileges, they had in the mean time immediately granted unto them (by the
Concession and Adjustment of the Commissioners of both Nations, who soon after
King James the First had attained to the Crown of England, were called and
authorized to meet and sit about the debating and perfecting a complete Union
between the two Kingdoms) that the Scots should be under no Restrictions in
matter of Trade more than the English were, save that they were to stand
prohibited from the Exportation of Wool, and a few other English Productions.
And as this Privilege was not envied, or denied them by the English for many
Years: So the Scots had no reason all that while of complaining, that they were
unkindly or unequally dealth with, or of falling under the Temptations of
erecting Trading Societies, with larger Immunities than were granted in
England. But on the contrary, they lay under all the friendly Obligations
imaginable of acquiescing in that Share and Proportion of Traffic, that was so
cheerfully allowed them. Nor was the Trade of England to the East Indies, and
to the American Plantations, and much less to Africa, (which have since proved
the Occasion of the English entering upon other Measures of Commerce, and of
laying those Restraints and Inhibitions upon the Scots in the Matter of Trade,
that were not formerly dreamed of) arrived at that Maturity and Perfection, as
to be the Mine of Wealth for the enriching those that were licensed to pursue
it; and by Consequence it would create no great Emulations, and much less Envy
or Discord between the Kingdoms about being interested in it. And as there was
not any considerable Alterations made, from what I have mentioned, through the
Conduct of the English toward the Scots in the Business of Trade, during the
Reigns of James I. and Charles I. So every one knows that these Privileges,
during the Administration of the Parliament 1641, and of Oliver Cromwell's
Usurpation, were rather enlarged toward the Scots Nation, than any ways
diminished and abridged. So that except the Diversion given to the Scots from
following Trade with Application, which the War begot, that Scotland was for
several Years engaged in, sometimes for, and sometimes against England, they
had no Cause given them of Offense or Complaint, by reason of those
Preclusions, Restrictions and Hardships which have been put upon them in Matter
of Trade since the Restoration 1660. And I am sorry to say it, considering
that they had both suffered so much for King Charles, and cooperated with
General Monk, to the Degree they did, toward his Reestablishment upon his
Thrones, that they were soon after not only put out and debarred from all the
Privileges in Traffic, which they had formerly enjoyed; but were in all
Particulars, that respect Trade, put into the perfect State and Condition of
Aliens; tho the doing so, was directly repugnant to all the Laws and judged
Cases, relative to the Postnati. For by several Acts of the Parliaments of
England immediately, or soon after the Restoration, particularly by that 12
Car. 2. styled. An Act for the encouraging and increasing Shipping and
Navigation; and by another, 15 Car. 2. called, An Act for the Encouragement of
Trade; the Scots are not only treated distinguishingly worse than any other of
the Subjects of the King of Great Britain, but they are placed in the same
Circumstances as to Traffic, with French and Hollanders; which as the Scots
think, could be designed for no other End, than the putting them into a worse
Condition, than that both of a Province, and a Conquered People, which Ireland
is; to which they grant the Privileges which they refuse to Scotland. You will
not thereupon be amazed, or think it strange, if the Scots have been
endeavoring all along since, to vindicate themselves from that Dishonor, as
well as to relieve themselves from that Loss and Damage, by settling their
Nation on a Basis and Foot of Trade, that may not leave them obnoxious to be so
easily contemned as they have been, nor continue them exposed to those
Dependences upon the Grace and Favor of the English, which are merely
precarious, and may be withdrawn and denied when they please.

Which leads me to the third Thing which I am to lay before you, on the Head
that I am upon, concerning the Neglect which the Scots seem guilty of, in their
failing to countenance and advance Trade; namely, that the Act of the late
Session of the Parliament of Scotland, for the Erecting an East India and
African Company, is not the first, since the Year 1660, (in which the
Foundation of their being disabled and crippled in Traffic was laid) that they
have passed and enacted with large Immunities, for the settling, encouraging
and promoting Trade in their Country. For besides the Act for encouraging a
Foreign Trade, made by the present Parliament of Scotland, Anno 1693, (wherein
there are diverse Concessions for the raising and quickening the Genius of the
Kingdom, to an Outlandish Traffic) and which was only designed to be
preparatory and introductive to this latter Act, and to pave the way for it,
there were diverse other Acts, granting great Liberties and Immunities, enacted
in the first Parliament of Charles II. immediately after the many severe
Preclusions and Restrictions laid upon the Scots by the Parliament of England,
for debarring them from all share in the Trade, which the English drive either
with Foreigners, or with the American Plantations. Among which other Acts and
Statutes of the Scots Nation subservient hereunto, that Act is in a special
manner worthy of Remark, which they past in the Year 1661, for Fishings, and
for promoting of the same; in which, as the Privileges and Immunities
vouchsafed by it, are both many and very considerable; so they were all granted
and ordained to continue for ever: Whereas the Concessions of the late Act,
which do make so much noise in World, are confined to a certain Term of Years,
some of them being limited to Tin, and those of the longest Duration
circumscribed to One and Twenty. And the Reasons why that Act produced not
better Effects, nor more signally answered the End it was designed for, are so
obvious, that they need not be insisted upon, but only to be hinted at, namely,
that the said Act was not so much designed to be put in execution, as it was
projected to try what could be procured in behalf of Scotland, from the Grace
and Favor of our Princes, and thereby to gain a Precedent of their Mercy and
Justice, in order to something that might be more conducible in Point of Trade,
to the Honor and Interest of that Kingdom. To which may be added, that it was
enacted rather to alarm England, and to reduce the English from the unkind and
severe Methods they were upon toward Scotland, than that any firm Resolutions
were taken by the Scots for the pursuing of it. I may likewise subjoin, That a
main Reason of its failing in the Execution, was the Scarcity of Money then in
Scotland, to support and promote it, to the Degree that was necessary against
our Holland Rivals; and the not inviting Foreigners to have a Portion in the
Profit, upon their bearing a Share in the Expense. Nor in the 4 th place is it
improbable but that our Opulent Neighbors the Dutch, who do in a manner wholly
subsist, as well as gain so much by fishing on our Seas, might bribe some one
or more great Men, employed in the Head of that Concern, secretly to supplant,
and clandestinely to overthrow it. And to conclude this Paragraph, it may be
farther added, That as the Genius of the Nation was not so much excited toward
Trade then, as it is now: So the Business of Fishery was not a Game, that a
People otherwise habituated, could be gained so easily to sly at, nor a Quarry
they would be prevailed upon so industriously to dig in, as a Trade to the
Indies and Africa is; the prosecution whereof will both bring more Reputation
and Gain, than the catching of Herring and Cod could be supposed, either by
Undertakers, Merchants, or Mariners to do.

But suffer me, Sir, to add, That upon the unequal Terms which England and
Scotland stand together, in matter of Traffic, it were better for Scotland
that the two Nations should be under distinct Kings, as they are distinct
Kingdoms, than that under one and the same Sovereign their Interests in point
of Commerce, should be made so inconsistent with, and repugnant to one another,
as the English will have them to be. For were Scotland a Nation subdued by the
People of England, it were neither prudent nor safe for them, to treat the
Scots with the Rigor and Severity which they do, by excluding them from all
other Share in the Commerce of England, or with it, save what they do in a
manner allow to all sorts of Aliens and Foreigners. Nor is it unworthy of
Remark, that the Romans of old carried for the most part better, and behaved
themselves both more generously and gently to those States and Nations which
they conquered, than the English are willing to do to the Kingdom of Scotland;
which besides its being under the same King as they are, is as free a Nation as
England it self, and altogether independent upon it. For whenever the Romans
subdued any People, unless they were such as had often revolted from, and
rebelled against them, they not only left them in the enjoiment of all the
Rights and Liberties which they had possessed before, but they both commonly
enlarged, and increased them; and many times admitted those they had subdued,
to a Share and Participation of all the Privileges of Rome, and of the Roman
Republic. And the more tenacious they found any People to be of their Liberty,
and the greater Estimate they observed them to set upon it, the more Favor and
Honor they judged that People worthy of. Whereof tho it were very easy to give
a multitude of Examples, yet for brevity's sake, I shall assign only but one
Instance, which is that of their dealing with the Privernates, whom having upon
a Revolt again subdued, and having brought some of them into the Senate House,
to receive and hear their Destiny; they asked of them in what manner they would
keep Peace with the Romans for the future, in Case they should forgive them?
And being (as Livy tells us) answered, Si bonam dederitis, fidam and perpetuam;
si malam, haud diuturnam: That, If the Terms were good, they would perpetually
observe it; but if they should be bad, they would in that case keep it no
longer than they should find themselves in a Condition with security to break
it. With which Reply, some of the wisest of the Roman Senators were so
ravished, as well as pleased, That they cried out, Viri, and liberi, vocem
auditam esse; nec ullum populum, aut hominem in ea condition, cujus eum
paeniteat, diutius quam necesse sit, mansurum. That they had heard the Language
of a brave People, and just Valuers of Freedom; adding, that no Nation, or
particular Person would be willing to remain longer in any State or Condition
that was disgustful to them, than until they were able to rescue and deliver
themselves. And if this was the Opinion of the wise Romans, in reference to a
People whom they had subdued; can any that are Masters of common Sense imagine,
and believe that a free, unconquered, and independent People will be contented
to be depressed by a neighboring Nation, without seeking to relieve themselves
in all the just and lawful Methods that lie within their Circle? To which I
might add, that there are many and fatal Examples of the Discords that have
arisen between Nations under the same Monarch, when the one of them has
endeavored to ingross and monopolize either the foreign, or the home Trade of
that Sovereign's Dominions, and to preclude the rest from having a due and
equal Share in it; witness the Revolt of Portugal from the Crown of Spain,
because the Castilians debarred them from all Share in their Trade to the
West Indies. For that was the principal Reason (tho there were likewise some
others of a different kind) why the Portuguise struck off the Government of the
King of Spain, and set up the Duke of Braganza to be their King. Nay, I might
also subjoin how that it has often come to pass, that through a Nation's
precluding even foreign States and Kingdoms, from a Share in Traffic to its
own peculiar Plantations, there has been formed, as it were, an universal
Conspiracy of all those Nations, that have been thus shut out and debarred,
either for the wresting of that Trade from it, or for making it unprofitable
and useless to it. The first whereof is verified in the Portuguise, who are in
a manner wholly beaten out of their vast East India Trade, through the
Provocation they gave to other Nations by their striving to ingross it. And as
to the latter, the Spaniards are now sunk under the Experience of it, in
relation to their Traffic to their own West Indies; whose Trade thither,
instead of continuing to be beneficial to them, is turned and improved to their
Prejudice, by those whom they excluded from all Participation in it. How much
less then will free and independent Nations patiently endure, that one or two
Kingdoms or States should monopolize to themselves all the Trade to Africa,
India and America; as likewise in effect to several Places of Europe? Yea
should the Scots tamely acquiesce in this, all they would gain by their being
under one and the same Monarch with the English, would be to become involved in
all the foreign Wars and Troubles, in which the English may be at any time
engaged; but to have little or no Share in the Blessings and Benefits of its
Prosperity and Peace. And seeing most of the Trade of Scotland lies with
neighboring Nations, and especially those which England has oftnest
Provocation to quarrel with; and the Scots driving very little Traffic with
Countries far remote; it consequently follows that upon the Commencement of a
War with those adjacent States and Kingdoms, the Scots do become in a manner,
shut out from, and deprived of all foreign Trade; while in the mean time the
English do continue to carry on a vast and Beneficial Trade to Turkey, Africa
and the East Indies, as well as to and from their own American Plantations. Of
which, as the Kingdom of Scotland has had oftener than once the woeful
Experience, upon any Rupture that has happened between the Crown of England and
the States of Holland, with whom, as most of the Scots Trade lies, both as to
the Exportation of their Superfluities, and the Importation of what they want
and need; so the most of their Traffic has in those Cases, been wholly
interrupted and in a manner entirely ceased; while at the same time the English
have kept up a large and beneficial Trade to other places, in which the Scots
are by several English Acts of Parliament debarred and precluded from all
dealing. Yea the present War with France does, caeteris paribus, more affect
Scotland, in point of Traffic, than it does England; because as those
Productions and Commodities which the Scots used to export thither, must
necessarily lie upon their hands, through their having no other Place, to which
to carry them; so they must be contented to want those French Goods which they
were accustomed to bring home in Lieu and Exchange of their own; while in the
interim the English make a shift both to vend their Productions elsewhere, and
to supply themselves in other Places, with what may answer those Commodities
they used to import from France. To which may be added, that if Scotland remain
not only under those Exclusions, Limitations and Restrictions in matter of
Trade, to which it is staked down and consined by the Acts of the Parliament of
England, for the encouraging and increasing of Shipping and Navigation, and for
the Encouragement of Trade, and against the Importation of foreign Cattle; but
be withal discouraged, envied, depressed and counteracted, when (to prevent the
Violation of, and out of respect to those English Acts) they apply themselves
to a new Method and Course of Traffic, and endeavor to settle themselves on
another Basis and Bottom of Trade than they were formerly accustomed to: I say
(if these be the Circumstances they must abide under) the Scots instead of
being Gainers, are great Losers by the two Kingdoms coming to be united under
one Sovereign. In reference whereunto, tho I could assign several Particulars,
wherein they are thereby come to be endamaged; yet I shall only give an
Instance in one; namely, that by their Incorporation with England under one and
the same King, their ancient, long and firm Alliance with France is entirely
dissolved, issued and come to a final Period: Which as it had been many times
of singular advantage both to France and Scotland; so it was of great Profit,
as well as Honor to the Scots, through the many signal Privileges arising from
that Confederacy, which the Scots, in Contradistinction from all other Nations,
peculiarly enjoyed, but are now totally lost to them. Upon which, Sir, it were
not difficult to make those just and natural Reflections, which would show that
the present Conduct of the Kingdom of England toward Scotland, is not (if we
will take the Opinion of the Scots) so temperate, prudent and discreet, as
might be expected from a People that are so grateful, generous and wise, as the
English have been always charactered to be. But to prevent giving Offense, I
shall supersede and wave them all, and satisfy my self, in that I have by the
bare mention of the last Particular, started Matter worthy of the maturest
Thoughts of those of the greatest Penetration, either in our Senate or out of
it. And therefore I shall only, on this Topic of Discourse, further subjoin,
that upon the Terms on which the Scots stand, with relation to all the
beneficial Trade in which the English are concerned, they are not only in as
bad, but in a worse Condition than the Subjects of any foreign Prince are;
because that as they of a foreign Kingdom or State, may for and upon their
being excluded from Trading into the English American Plantations, etc. make
Reprizals upon the English, in debarring them from the Liberty and Benefit of
Traffic to such Places, as are under the Power and Jurisdiction of those
respective Kingdoms and States; and from and with which they drive and pursue
their most useful and enriching Commerce; so the Subjects of foreign Princes
and States are through the alone Countenance, Concession and Authority of their
own proper and respective Sovereigns, always at liberty to erect and establish
what Trade they please, to Places either unpreocoupied, or where freedom of
Commerce is allowed promiscuously, to those of all Countries that shall think
fit to deal with them: Wherein as Foreigners fall not under the Control of the
English, nor are discouraged by their Menaces; so in reference to those Princes
and Rulers, under whom those Foreigners live, there is no room to make
impression upon them, to withdraw from countenancing their own People, by the
little Arts and the various means of Influence which the English are in a
Condition to use, and are supposed sometimes to practice, for diverting the
Kings of Great Britain from giving that equal Encouragement to the Scots, in
matter of Trade, which the People of England think they have a Right both to
demand and to expect, and which (through the Favor of the Common Sovereigns of
both Nations) has been distinctively vouchsafed them. Which leads me to the
next thing that I do crave the liberty to lay unpartially before you.

Which is, that the Kingdom of Scotland is as much a free and independent
Kingdom as the Kingdom of England is. That it is neither a Subdued nor a
Tributary Nation, nor in the quality of a Province, peopled by a Swarm and
Colony from hence. For tho it may and does acknowledge England to be a more
large, more populous, opulent and powerful Kingdom than it self, yet it is far
from owning any Subjection or Inferiority to it. For as to all the mutual
Duties and Offices, which may only argue the Esteem and Respect which one
Independent Nation yields to another; these it both confesses to be due, and
is ready to pay unto England: But to receive Laws from it, or yield an
Obedience to its Authority, it neither ought to do it, nor will. And of how
near Affinity and Alliance soever the two Kingdoms may be to one another, with
respect to Identity of Language, Similitude of Manners, Analogy of Customs, and
Agreeableness of Essential Rights and Liberties, and by reason of their being
under one and the same King: Yet they do nevertheless preserve and maintain
distinct and different Jurisdictions and Authorities, have separate and
independent Parliaments, and are governed by their own proper, peculiar and
respective Laws, as if they were the Subjects of several Kings, and each of
them ruled by a distinct Monarch. Nor are the Parliaments of Scotland less the
Representatives of that Kingdom and People, or under less Obligations of
consulting for, and promoting the Welfare and Prosperity of their Country, than
the Parliaments of England are. Neither can the latter comptrol or supersede
the Acts of the former, more than the former can the Acts of the latter: For it
is not with the Parliament of Scotland, as it is with that of Ireland; in that
the Irish Parliament have not so much as a Consultative Power about a Bill, and
much less are they clothed with a Right and Authority so far to pass it, as to
offer it prepared and agreed upon for the Royal Assent, unless it has
previously received the Approbation of the Privy Council of England, and has
been transmitted thither, under the Stamp and Impression of the Broad-Seal of
England, granting them Liberty and Permission so to do: Whereas the Parliament
of Scotland has both a full and plenary, as well as the sole Right of
introducing, moulding, preparing and passing whatsoever Bills it judges to be
subservient to the King's Honor, adapted to the preservation of the Public
Peace, and conducible to the advancing the Trade and Prosperity of that
Kingdom, without being obliged to have the least antecedent regard to what
Opinion the Privy Council, or the Kingdom of England, either in its Great
Senate, or in its Inferior Courts, may have of those Bills which the Scots
bring in, debate and vote in order to their being enacted into Laws. Nor is the
King of Great Britain under less Obligation, both by the Duty of his High and
Sovereign Station, and by his Regal Oath, to seek and promote the Good and
Welfare of Scotland, than he is bound by the like Ties, to contrive and pursue
the Prosperity and Happiness of England. And as England does not allow it to
fall within the Circle and Verge of the Royal Authority to supersede, vacate
and dispense with Laws once enacted: So the Scots do no less disclaim such a
Prerogative in the Sovereign, especially with respect to beneficial Laws, and
such as are of a civil and political Nature: Yea, they have as much blamed and
withstood all Pretensions of their Monarchs, of dispensing with Laws that are
penal, and about Religious and Ecclesiastical Matters, as the English
themselves have done; tho possibly they have both withstood that Claim of their
Kings, as much to their own Damage, and the Prejudice of their true Interests,
as to the Restraint upon, and Diminution of the Regal Prerogative. And then as
for that Right, commonly granted to be resident in the Kings of Great Britain,
and to be an Incident inseparable from the Sovereignty, of putting a Negative
(whenever they judge it necessary) on Parliamentary Bills, it is the same in
whosoever is King of these two Kingdoms, in reference to England, that it is to
Scotland* And whatsoever Limitations are conceived by the English to lie upon
the Prerogative of our Monarchs, as to their giving a Negative to Bills of
Right, and such as are of a National Vtility, the Scots do plead the same
Restrictions to be upon the Sovereign Power, in reference to Bills, claiming
either the Confirmation of ancient Legal Privileges, or containing and making
Provision of such greater or lesser National Benefits, which (without extreme
Prejudice to their public and general Interest) they cannot be without, nor
account themselves either Happy or Easy, through the want of their passing into
Laws. So that, Sir, this being the Nature, Frame and Constitution of the
Government of Scotland, and a true and just Account of the Jurisdiction, Power
and Authority of the Parliaments of that Kingdom; I do not see why the Scots
(while they do nothing that interferes with their Allegiance to the King, or
that does lie in the least repugnancy to the two Kingdoms remaining united
under one Monarch, or that imports so much as Shadow of Hostility against
England) may not consult, contrive and enact Laws for the promoting their own
Good and Prosperity, without regarding whether such Laws do either immediately,
or in the remote Consequences of them, lessen and prove somewhat prejudicial to
the Trade and Opulency of England. Nor can the English justly complain of, or
blame this Conduct of the Scots, considering what they have so often done
themselves, for the advancing their own Traffic and Wealth; not only without
respecting whether the Methods, in which they did it, might not be prejudicial
to the Scots Nation, but both under an apparent prospect that it would
infallibly be so; and upon the Influence of those Motives, which directly
imported that what they did, should unavoidably be to the Damage of Scotland,
by depressing it, and keeping it impotent and indigent. And so justifiable as
well as lawful, the English judged this manner of procedure toward the Scots
to be, that they have adapted it for one of the Maxims of the Politics of
England, that in order to render this Kingdom Honorable, Potent and Wealthy,
Scotland must by all imaginable Means be kept Weak and Poor, and thereupon
contemptible. Nor has this been less the Consequence and Effect, than it was
the projected and designed End of those English Laws, bearing the Titles which
I have formerly mentioned: So that upon Supposition that the late Scots Act was
made not only under View, but out of Intention of lessening and abridging the
Trade of England, by means of extending and enlarging the Traffic of Scotland;
yet it is no more but meting to the English, as they have measured to the
Scots; and it is but drawing them a Copy of what was an Original of their own.
To which I shall only add on this Head, that there never was a Nation that was
independent upon another, (under whatsoever Incorporations, Confederacies and
Unions they might otherwise be) that did ever neglect, depart from, or forbear
the endeavoring the Advancement of its own Benefit and Reputation in the
World, merely because the Consequence and Effect thereof might be the lessening
the Profit, and obstructing the growing and menacing Power and Opulency of
another Nation, by which it was overshadowed and depressed.

Which conducteth me, Sir, to the next thing, which I shall presume to lay
before you, namely how much, many of your great People, through denying
themselves liberty to think, as well as of your forty thousand Pound Men of the
Mob at Garraways, (to whom God has given Riches for denying them Understanding
and good Nature) are mistaken, first in believing themselves, and then in
attempting to impose their belief upon others, that the Scots Act for the
Erecting of a Company to trade to Africa and the East Indies, will be of
prejudice to the Kingdom of England, and to the Commerce and Traffic thereof.
Whereas upon the Use of all the Sense I have, and after the outmost exercise of
that reasonable Faculty which God has given me, I am so far from being of
their Mind, that I do judge nothing to be more calculated and adapted for the
Advantage of this Kingdom, than the Establishment of that Company is; and that
the obstructing the Execution of that Scots Act, will be of fatal Consequence
to England, and especially to their Societies trading to Africa and the
East Indies; seeing this Company which the Scots are establishing, is not to
drive a Traffic with some little Island, or diminutive Place, where all the
Trade is already preoccupy'd, engrossed and monopolized, but it is to carry on
a Commerce on two vast Continents, and all their adjacent Islands; where
(besides what is already entered upon and possessed by the English) there are
many large Territories, for others to occupy and found a Traffic in, and these
no less fertile in Productions and Manufactures, fit to be imported into
Europe, and there vended and disposed to great Profit, than they are willing,
inclinable and prepared to take of what we can export unto them, of both Kinds
of our own. Indeed were the Scots Act framed and intended to worm and supplant
the English out of those Shares of the Indian and African Trades, of which they
are possessed, or to drive them from their Forts and Factories, I do think he
should not have English Blood in his Veins, who would not warmly resent the
Design, and endeavor not only to prevent the Execution of it, but to revenge
the Attempt upon those that have projected it. But as the Scots have no
intention of making the least Encroachments upon the English, in any of those
particular Places where they have established a Commerce: So it will be both
for the Honor of Great Britain, and prove exceeding contributory to the
Opulency of England, as well as of Scotland, to get a larger Share of the
African and East India Trades into their joint and associated Hands, than the
two Companies of England of those Denominations trading thither, have been
hitherto able to compass and obtain, or can be in a Condition singly to carry
on and support. Seeing as it may be done without the one's encroaching upon, or
interfering with the other there; so there is Vent in Europe for more
East India Goods than both the Nations can import and bring from thence, were
the Stocks of each of them larger, and their Trades more flourishing than that
of the one ever was, or than there is any prospect that either of them will at
any time hereafter come to be. And while several other Nations (betwixt whom
and England there are none of the Obligations of Friendship, mutual Aid, and
Assistance which are between the English and the Scots) are endeavoring to
establish, promote and support Trades both to Africa and the East Indies, it is
matter of Wonder and Surprise, that the English should rather desire to have
the French, Danes, Brandenburgers, etc. become Partakers and Sharers in those
Trades, and with as large Privileges and Immunities as any mentioned in the
Northern Act, than that the Scots should have any Portion in them; which would
provoke some, that are not very ready to entertain Jealousies, to think that
notwithstanding the two Kingdoms have been so long under the same Sovereign,
and have lived in the mutual Exercises of many Offices which had an exterior
show of Friendship, that yet after all there remains too much of the ancient
National Pique: And God grant that it arrive not at last to a Rupture, and
thereupon to such an Enmity as uses to be the Effect of Strife and Discord,
when those that have been Friends, and supposed to lie in one another Bosom,
come to quarrel and fall out. Nor is it unworthy of Remark, how that in Edward
the Confessor's Days, the Amity between these two Nations was so warm and
seemingly indissoluble, that (notwithstanding their being under different
Monarchs) that good King would not suffer the Scots to be styled nor accounted
Aliens, and much less to be treated as such, (as some of late, in Contempt as
well as Neglect of their being under one Sovereign, have been endeavoring they
should) which yet soon after (upon Motives which I shall not now mention) not
only grew cold, but became exchanged into that mutual Hatred, which many Ages
could not allay, nor those Seas of Blood, shed in their Wars against one
another, totally and finally extinguish, until by the Wise and Gracious
Providence of God, they became the Subjects of one and the same King; and
instead of continuing to be distinguished by the Titles of the Kingdoms of
England and Scotland, which had been the Badges of their Variance, they grew so
far united into one Monarchy, as to be denominated by the style of
Great Britain, which is equally applicable unto, and comprehends both. To which
allow me to add, that the Dutch having already possessed themselves of the most
beneficial Parts of the African, as well as of the East India Trades, and
having not only raised themselves to wonderful Grandeur and Opulency in the
Indies, but attained to that Sovereignty of Power, as both to give Laws to most
of the Princes of those Eastern Dominions, and to make Depredations and
Encroachments upon, and subdue and dispossess whom they please; it is matter of
great Amazement, that the English should not be willing to admit the Scots to
establish a Trade to the East Indies, if it were but that by their joining, and
uniting their Force and Power with that of the English, the Dutch may be
resisted and withstood in those Invasions and Rapines which they are inclinable
enough to commit upon the English. And there is reason to expect that England,
even through the Advice of their own East-India-Company, should encourage the
Scots in what they are attempting, rather than to obstruct and dishearten them,
considering what the Dutch, by Force as well as Fraud, have wrested from and
dispossessed the English of; and that chiefly through their want of sufficient
Numbers of Men in the East Indies, to protect and defend their Forts, Factories
and Plantations, with which Scotland can both easily and abundantly furnish
them, if the late Act of that Kingdom, for erecting an East India Company,
obtain and have the Success that is designed by it, and meet not with
Opposition from those, whose true Interest it is to further and promote it.
Concerning which Act and Company it was enacted to give an Establishment unto,
I will assume the liberty further to say, that the one seems framed, and the
other erected under view, and with an Intention of as much Advantage to accrue
to England, as what Scotland it self proposes to gain, or can have any
prospect of. For as a full Moiety, if not two Thirds, designed to be raised
upon the Encouragement and in the Execution of that Act, will (or at least may)
be the Money of Englishmen, continuing to live and reside in this Kingdom: So
the Profit that arises from the management of the Scots Stock, will (in
proportion thereunto) fall to the English, and become a Part of their Capital.
So that besides the Satisfaction which (by this Means) will be given to many
English, who have been discontented, through their want of Shares in the
East India Company of England, and have therefore run upon Interloping, (which
this will also put a Period to) most of all the Gain arising by the Trade of
the Scots Company, will center in England, and in time add greatly to the
Treasure of this Kingdom. Which Benefit being National and Universal, may be
accounted more than a Compensation for any Damage, that the Scots East India
Company can be supposed to do to the English Corporation of that Denomination.
And forasmuch as the Northern Society cannot prejudice their Southern
Neighbors in the Vent of their Commodities, either as to what the Scots
themselves used to take off, nor in what they used to dispose elsewhere; seeing
that as the greatest Part, if not the whole Indian Goods that have been
consumed in Scotland, were usually brought in and imported from Holland, where
they are purchased cheaper than they can be in England: So the English Company
can be no ways prejudiced, in relation to those Indian Commodities which they
have hitherto disposed elsewhere in any Parts of Europe; Because that as these
Foreign Countries are ready to take off and consume more than both the English
and Scots Companies can furnish them with, it will likewise be many Years
before the Scots Company (by reason both of the vast Charge they must be at, in
settling their Trade, and the many Difficulties and Losses incident to
Beginners) can be in a Condition to under, sell the English, which is the only
way they can be imagined to have, of worming the English out of the Vent and
Sale of their Commodities: So that the whole Prejudice which can be supposed to
befall the English East India Company, through the Execution of the Scots Act,
resolves it self into the Immunity of the Scots from paying Customs for 21
Years, while the English remain all that while under such a Tribute, Tax and
Imposition: which, Sir, suffer me to say, is not a Matter of that Importance,
as to deserve all the Noise that is made about the Scots Company. And tho I be
not so much a Philosopher, as either to smile at the seeing an Ass eat
Thistles, or at the beholding a Gown-man of 70 reading a Madrigal with his
Spectacles on; yet I can hardly forbear laughing to find a Nation that is
called Wise, and which really is so, to fill both the Kingdom, and the adjacent
Parts of the World, with Clamor and Twattle, because the English East India
Company pays Customs for all it imports from thence, while the Scots are for a
few Years to be exempted from it; but who are during that time to be at the
Expense of double the Value of that Imposition in the necessary Charges they
must be at, in the erecting Forts and establishing Factories, and toward the
settling of their Trade, to make it practicable as well as safe: Which if they
prove so fortunate as to compass and effect, they will not only after the
Expiration of that Term of Years, be contented to be liable to pay Customs; but
that Kingdom may in that time, by the Means of their acquired and improved
Trade, be in a Condition to contribute more, both to the Support of the Civil
Government of these Nations; and to the defraying of the Charges of any War,
which the Kingdoms may come to be engaged in, than they have hitherto been in a
Capacity to do, and thereby lessen the Expenses of England, greatly beyond what
they are for 21 Years to be excused from in Customs.

Sir, before I ease you of the Trouble which I have given you, I should lay
under your View the several Ways and Methods which your House, as well as the
House of Peers, are taking to defeat the Design of the Scots Act, and should
make those Reflections upon them which are just and natural, as well as
obvious. But the whole Procedure in that Matter being somewhat extraordinary, I
shall not venture upon it, seeing it cannot be done as it ought, with that
Respect and Reverence which is due to such awful and august Bodies. And
therefore all I will say, shall be only these two Things: First, That the two
Houses seem to contribute fully as much to the Interest and Reputation of the
Scots Company, as the Parliament of that Kingdom has done in giving it being,
by thinking it worthy of so much of their Notice, Time and Debate, as they have
bestowed upon it; especially at this Season, when their whole Time and utmost
Abilities are little enough to be employed in the redressing the Grievances of
their own Country, and in finding out Ways and Means for carrying on the War
against France, and for enabling the King to touch that Foreign Monarch in the
sensible Part. For, believe me, Sir, the generality of Mankind have conceived a
greater Esteem for the Scots East India Company, and have entertained more
favorable Thoughts of its Success than otherwise they would, merely from the
Jealousies you have expressed, and the Opposition you are giving unto it. And
then, secondly, That all the Ways and Methods you have hitherto fallen upon for
the obstructing the Execution of the Scots Act, and the giving Discouragement
to their Trade to Africa and the East Indies, is perfectly a Conspiracy against
your selves, and the carrying on a Plot to endamage and mischieve England: For
do you think, Sir, that by forbidding any of the Subjects of England to build
Ships for, or to sell to the Scots such as are built already, you will disable
and incapacitate them from proceeding in their Undertaking? seeing they may buy
of the Hollanders as many as they will, and of what Bulk they please, and at
cheaper Rates than they could do here. So that this, instead of being an
Obstruction to the Scots, will only injure your selves, and benefit the Dutch.
And then as for the prohibiting any of the Subjects of England to become
Partners in the Scots Stock; as it will tempt many of your wealthy People to
leave England and to withdraw to Scotland, which few Men (out of mere fondness
to their Country) will forbear to do, when their Interest tempts them to it; so
the Scots cannot want enough of other Nations to become Partners in their Stock
and Trade, upon the English declining of it. And as hundreds of the Dutch
particularly, will both greedily and thankfully embrace the Proposal; so I
dread to mention the Consequences which may ensue upon such a Conjunction
between the Scots and them. Nor will I call over the other Methods you have
been upon for frustrating the Scots Attempt in the Erection of an East India
Company, because the very mentioning of them would be to expose them, which the
great Honor that I bear for those Assemblies at Westminster, will not admit me
to do: And therefore I will here end, and only assure you, that tho I be a
Stranger to you, yet the very taking the liberty to address this Paper to you,
shows how Ambitious I am, and how much I do value my self, upon the obtaining
any Occasion of testifying with what Sincerity I am,

SIR, Jan. 1. 1695-96. Your most humble and most obedient Servant, C. K.


