A COUNTER-ANTIDOTE, To purge out the Malignant Effects Of a Late COUNTERFEIT,
Prepared by Mr. GYLES SHUTE, An Unskilful Person in Polemical Cures: BEING An
Answer to his Vindication of his pretended Antidote, to prevent the Prevalency
of Anabaptism.

Showing that Mr. Hercules Collins's Reply to the said Author remains
unanswered.

Wherein the Baptism of Believers is evinced to be God's Ordinance, and the
Baptized Congregations proved true Churches of Jesus Christ.

With a further Detection of the Error of Pedo-Baptism.

To which is added, An Answer to Mr. Shute's Reply to Mr. Collins's Half-sheet.

By BENJAMIN KEACH.

LONDON: Printed for H. Bernard, at the Bible in the Poultry. M DC XC IV.

THE INTRODUCTION.
I Cannot, without Grief and Sorrow of Heart, reflect upon the sad Consequences
of our present Differences in and about the smaller Matters of Religion,
whereas we agree in all the Essentials thereof; but do much more resent that
bitter and censorious Spirit many show, and particularly appears in the
Person I have now to do with, which all that read his Books will quickly
perceive. Pray do but see what a kind of Advertisement he put twice into the
City Mercury of his last Treatise, etc. wherein he positively denies those he
calls Anabaptists to be Churches; and their Baptism he affirms to be a
Counterfeit, which is the Baptism of Believers or adult Persons; and that
because we do not ground Gospel-baptism upon the Covenant God made with
Abraham, but upon the great Commission our blessed Savior gave to his
Disciples after he rose from the Dead, as it is contained, Mat. 28. 19, 20.
Mark 16. 15, 16. This is such an Attempt, that none of our Brethren who are
Pedo-baptists (nor any that ever I read of) assayed to do. Whether our Baptism
be a Truth of Christ, or a Counterfeit, will appear in our Answer; but why are
we no Churches? Certainly we are Churches; for a Church may consist of wicked
Men as well as of good Men; but I suppose he means we are not true Churches of
Christ; he, as I judge, not knowing from what Theme that word is derived, we
must be wicked Persons or else Churches of Christ. This Man has come too near
to the Expressions and bitter Reflections John Child uttered against us,
falsely called, Anabaptists; who soon after fell under fearful horror of
Conscience and Desperation. He wrote a Book against us, rendering us very odious
to the World, and casting Contempt upon our saithful Ministers, but quickly was
convinced of his horrid Design, crying out, in Despair, That he had touched the
Apple of God's Eye; for, said he, if God has any People in the World, those
that I have vilified are his, or to that effect. The Lord deliver this Man from
such a Spirit and dismal end; but it is bad modling (as we used to say) with
edge Tools. Our Savior shows the danger of rash Judgment; and what have ^e to
do to judge our Fellow Servant, much less Churches? We may judge of Things, and
freely speak our Minds, according to Light received; but to censure a People
after this manner, and only because (...) differ from him about the Subject and
Mode of Baptism, is hard; (...), considering, that we are in all other things
of the same Faith with himself, and such that he has daily Church Communion
with; is this lovely or just? is this the Spirit of Jesus Christ? O^ does he
appear in the Wisdom that is from above, that is first Pure, then Peaceable,
Gentle, ^a^^e to be Entreated, full of Mercy and good Fruits, without
Partiality and without Hypocrisy, and the Fruits of Righteousness that is sown
in Peace of them that make Peace, Jam. 3. 17, 18. What kind of Scoffing,
Reproaching, Railing and opprobious Language he has cast on us, I shall
collect and set down in its proper Place; and yet at the same time he bears
very hard upon his Antagonists for using such kind of Terms, etc. p. 4. How
will he escape, who says a Man should not Steal, if he Steals? Or, that a Man
should not commit Adultery, if he commits Adultery? Romans 2. 22. Or that says, a
Man should not scoff or rail on, and vilify his Brother when he does the same
thing, and yet pretends he has not do^e it; I will not render Railing for
Railing, these are his Words; and again says, I shall labor to declare in the
Spirit of Meekness, page 4. Has he been as good as his word, or has he not?
(they are proper Judges who have read his Book.) I think few Men who have had
to do with us in this Controversy showed a more four Spirit than Mr. Eaxter;
and yet did he ever deny us to be Churches, or call our Baptism a Counterfeit?
Pray take his Sentiments of us, when in a co^l Spirit, these are his words,
viz. That the Anaebaptists are godly Men; that differ from us in a Point so
difficult that many Papists and Prelatists have maintained that it is not
determined in in the Scripture, but depends upon Tradition of the Church; and
I know as good and sober Men of that Mind as of thei^s, who are most against
them, etc. And again he says, That Augustine and many Children of Christians
were baptized at Age, and that the Controversy is of so great Difficulty, that
if in all such Cases none that differ be tolerated, we may not live together
in the World or Church, but endlesly excommunicate or persecute one another,
Baxter's Book, Principle of Love, page 7. But Mr. Shute has appeared so bold
and rash as if he had an infallible Spirit, and seems to be so lifted up as if
he has done more in his short Tract, than all those learned Men who have
formerly and of late times asserted Pedo-baptism.

And that now we are totally confuted, and We, and our Cause of Believers
Baptism gone for ever. See his Title Page.

And in page 113. says he, Thus I have given you one Broad side more, by which
I have brought your whole Opinion by the Lee, and all the Carpenters and
Calkers in the Nation cannot save it from Sinking.

I wish he knew his own Spirit and Weakness better, and not thus to admire what
he has done: Does he think there is none can answer his Arguments? No saving
our Baptism and Churches from sinking to the bottom, which he has so furiously
attacked? sad Case! What could Goliath of Gath, or proud Rabshaketh say more?

But he forgot the old Proverb, Let not him boast that puts on his Armor as he
that puts it off.

If I or my Reverend Brother Collins, have in any Writings of Ours used hard
Words, we have cause to be troubled, for the Truth never gained any thing that
way: It Is not hard Words, but hard Arguments that must do the Business; A soft
Answer (as Solomon says) turns away Wrath.

I must say, I had rather have to do with a Man that has more Argument and
less Confidence than I can find in his Writing, or Spirit.

I am sorry he had no better Counsel, or followed no better Conduct, at such an
hour as this is* it sure concerns us all to study the things that make for
Peace, and that by which we may edify one another; the Breach is too wide
already. O what want of Love is there in Christians to each other, who are all
Members of the Mystical Body of Christ, and Children of one Father, and Heirs
of the same glorious Inheritance! Sure we shall love one another when we come
to Heaven; and I hope His Reverend Pastor (whom I have more cause both to love
and honor than ten thousand Instructors in Christ, he being the blessed
Instrument in my Conversion all most forty Years ago) gave no Encouragement to
him thus to write and abuse his Brethren. I would he had considered the Text,
He that hates his Brother, is in Darkness Joh. 2. 11. For my part I hope I can
say I love them in whom I see the Image of God, that differ from me, in the
like degree as those of mine own Opinion. I am persuaded the want of Love to
one another is one of the greatest Sins of this Age, and that which is a high
Provocation to God; and if that which this Man has done is a fruit of Love, or
tends to promote it, I am mistaken. True, I have (may be) wrote as much of late
as another on the Subject of Baptism; but never without Provocation, by means
of diverse Persons who have of late times wrote against us. I have not begun the
Controversy, but have still been on the defensive Side; nor can any justly
blame us to clear our selves, and defend that which we believe to be the Truth
of Christ when urged to it.

As to his Answer to Mr. Collins, he has said something, it is true, to one or
two of his Arguments, but the rest he has passed by in silence, and left the
chief Argumentive part, in a great measure, unanswered. And as to his Reply to
me, I cannot see he has said any thing that deserves my notice at all; but
lest the easy, unwary and prejudiced Reader, should conclude he has done
Wonders, should we aot return an Answer. I have examined the stress of all that
seems Argumentive, which contains but a small part of his Book, and having
studied Moderation and Tenderness, I hope it may tend to allay and quench the
Fire of his Passion, and bring him to a more moderate Temper.

However, I shall leave it to the Blessing of God to dispose of the Issue of
it, as he shall seem good in his all-wise Providence; and to help the Reader, I
have divided his Book into Chapters in my Answer; and since he begins with the
form or manner of baptizing there, I shall begin also.

CHAP. I. Wherein it is proved, That Baptism is not Sprinkling nor Pouring of
Water on the Face, nor Dipping of the Head only; But that it is Dipping or
Plunging of the whole Body under Water.
I Shall begin with Mr. Sbute's Fifth Page, and shall show him that he has not
yet buried Mr. Collins his answer, but that it is still alive, and as lively as
it was before his pretended Answer came forth. In page 6. he r^cited what Mr.
Cobins mentioned in the 2d page of his Reply to his Antidote, viz. where Mr.
Cobins says, The right mode of Baptism is by Dipping. To which Mr. Shute says,
(in p. 5.) I think there is more to be said for Sprinkling or Pouring Water on
the Face in Baptism than there is for Dipping or Ducking over Head and Ears in
a River or Pond: For the latter is more like a Punishment of Criminals than the
Solemnizing of an Ordinance of God; pray hear what the Scripture says of
Sprinkling and of Pouring Water upon Sinners to cleanse them. Heb 12. 24 And to
Jesus, the Mediator of the New Covenant, and to the Blood of Sprinkling, and c.
^ Pet. 1. 2. Elect according to the Foreknowledge of God the Father through
Sanctification of the Spirit, unto Obedience and Sprinkling of the Blood of
Jesus Christ. And Isa. 44 3. For I will pour Water upon him that is thirsty,
and F^oods upon the dry Ground: I will pour my Spirit upon thy Seed, and my
blessings upon thine Offspring. Ez ^ 36. 25. Then will I sprinkle cl^an Water
upon you, and ye shall be cl^an from all your Filthiness, and from all your ^
^ols w^^ I cleanse you. Ed^d. 2^ 8.

Here you see (say you) we do not read of Dipping, nor Ducking in all those
spiritual Metaphorical Baptisms, which are all nearly re^ued unto the Ordinance
of Baptism and t^n^ to the fam thing, but more effectually and perfectly, and
are accompanied with the same Promises, namely, the Remission of Sins,
Sanctification by the Spirit, and the Gift of the Holy Ghost; compared with
Acts 2. 38, 39.

Answer 1. You might have added many other Places of Scripture, where we read
of Sprinkling: But what would it signify? the Sprinkling and Pouring mentioned
in these Scriptures, refer not to Water* Baptism: Read your learned Annotators
and Expositors, and you will find they agree as one Man* That Sprinkling and
Pouring of Water (in Isaiah and Ezekiel, etc.) do refer to the graci us
Effusion of the Spirit in the Times of the Gospel, and to the Purifying and
Purging Virtue of the Blood of Christ; and so that in Heb. 12 24. is to be
understood, you should not only say, but prove Baptism to be here intended, and
then you had said something.

2. Should the Sprinkling or Pouring in these Scriptures, be meant of Baptism,
then it would follow that Baptism has mighty Virtue in it indeed, even to wash
away all Sin and Filthiness: I thought nothing could cleanse from Sin out
Christ's precious blood, as it is applied by the Spirit, through Faith.
Baptism, Peter tells you, washes not away the Filthiness of the Flesh. Not the
putting away of the Filthiness of the Flesh, but the answer of a good
Conscience toward God, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 3. 20.

3. If you should say, Baptism is chiefly a Sign or lively Symbol of our being
sprinkled with the Spirit, or with the Blood of Jesus Christ, we do deny it.
You have not attempted to prove it, it is evident Baptism is principally a Sign
or Symbol of Christ's Death, Burial and Resurrection, see Romans 6. 3, 4. Col. 2.
12, 13. compared with this in 1 Pet. 3. 20. which Sprinkling or Pouring cannot
hold forth.

4. But you intimate, That these Spiritual Metaphorical Baptisms are nearly
related to the Ordinance of Baptism.

I answer, by pouring Floods of Water, or by the great Effusion of the Spirit;
I deny not but the Baptism of the Spirit may be held forth; and the Baptism of
the Spirit signifies Immersion. Ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost, etc.
Acts 1. 5. The Greek Word (...) says Casaubon, Is to Dip or Plunge, in which
Sense, says he, the Apostles might be said to have been Baptized, for the
House in which this was done, was filled with the Holy Ghost, so that the
Apostles might seem to have been plunged into it, as in a large fi^h-pond. See
Dr. Duveil on Acts 1. 4, 5.

The learned Casaubon was a Pedo-baptist, yet knew better than to assert
Baptizo is to Sprinkle or Pour, but to Dip or Plunge, as you here.

Friend, what do you mean by saying, All those metaphorical Baptisms are nearly
related to the Ordinance of Baptism; if you intend both signifies Sprinkling, I
deny it, for both of them signify Dipping or Overwhelming, and so does the
Baptism of Afflictions also, it is not every small degree of Suffering that is
the Baptism of Suffering: Great Afflictions are so called, and that from the
literal and genuine Signification of the Word Baptizo, to dip, to plunge under;
and hence (as I have elsewhere showed) Vossius notes, That every light
Affliction is not the Baptism of Affliction, but like that of David, Psalm. 32.
6. He drew me out of deep Waters; hence also Sufferings and Afflictions are
called Waves, Thy Waves and thy Billows are gone over me, Psalm. 42. 7. it
refers to Christ's Sufferings, who was overwhelmed with Afflictions, even unto
Blood and Death. The same as I have hinted is to be noted as to the Baptism of
the Spirit, it signifies the miraculous effusion of the holy Spirit, like that
at the Day of Pentecost, Acts 2. 1, 2.

Now, in this respect the Metaphorical Baptisms, are nearly related in
Signification with the Ordinance of Baptism: I do confess, for to Baptize in
the Name of the Father, etc. is to dip in the Name of the Father, etc. and for
a more full and clear Demonstration of this from a multitude of learned Men,
both Ancient and Modern. See my late Answer to Mr. Burki^, entitled, The
Rector rectified, from page 157. to page 206.

Scapula and Stephens, Two famous Men for their great Learning, and accounted
Masters of the Greek Tongue, tell us, That Baptizo from Bapto, as to the first
and proper Signification, signifies Mergo, Immergo, item tingo quod fit
imm^rgendo, inficere, im^uere, viz. to dip, plunge and overwhelm, put under,
cover over, to die in Colors, which is done by Plunging. Grotius says, it
signifies to dip over Head and Ears.

Pasor, an immersion, dipping or submersion, it appears you neither know nor
enquire after the proper, literal and genuine Signification of the Word, if you
did you would certainly not say, You think there is more to be said for
Sprinkling; for I would have you ask such as can tell you, Whether in those
Places in the Hebrews, where Sprinkling is mentioned, the Word signifies
Baptizing, or whether it is not rantizing, another Word and of another
Signification.

And as you regard not the literal, so you mind not the mistical Signification
of Baptism; which is not chiefly to represent the Sprinkling of Christ's Blood,
but to hold forth in a lively Figure his Death, Burial and Resurrection,
together with our Death unto Sin, and rising again to walk in newness of Life;
as will farther appear in its proper Place. See our late Annotators on Matthew.
3. 6. And were baptized of him in Jordan. A great part of those who went out to
hear John, say they, were baptized, that is, dipped in Jordan.

Though they would have the Word to signify washing also, which we deny not; but
then say we, it is such a Washing as is by Dipping, always, when applied to this
Ordinance.

5. You seem very bold, in saying, Dipping over H^^d and Ears is more like a
Punishment of Criminals than the solemnizing of an Ordinance of God. It Is no
marvel you reproach us, when you dare cast such contempt upon Christ's Sacred
Institution; it is to me a trembling Consideration thus to arraign the Wisdom
of God: Nor will it salve the matter should you say, You do not think Baptism
is Dipping, for it may be so as far as you know; and if you had read what a
multitude of learned Men (who were Pedo Baptists) do affirm it is Dipping, you
would not sure have adventured to assert such a thing: Suppose it be found at
the last Day to be Dipping, the Lord give you Repentance, that you may have
this Evil, and all others done away through his Blood. Sure there was as much,
nay more cause for during Men to have cast such a Reflection on that legal
ordinance of Circumcision.

But you say Page 6, 7. We do not find that there was either a River, or Pond
of Water in the Jaylors House for himself and all his Household (...) be Dipped
o^ Ducked under Water, for they were all Baptized the same hour of the Night,
etc.

1. Answer, Sir, you should take more heed to your words and to what you
assert. Is it said they were baptized in the Jaylors House? if it (...) been
done in a House, our Savior needed not to have gone to the River Jordan to be
Baptized; much less into Jordan. Nor was there any reason for Philip and the
E^^^ch to have gone into the Water.

2. Moreover, does not the Holy Scripture tell you that John also was Baptizing
in Aenon near Salim, because there was much water, John 3. 23. Pray Reader note
this well; mind the reason why the Holy Ghost ^aith, he Baptized in Aenon; it is
po^sitively affirmed, because there was much Water in that place, intimating
clearly that a little Water will not serve to Baptize Persons in: Also observe
what Mr. Pools Annotations say on this place of Scripture; thus you will find
it expressed, viz. It is from this apparent, that both Christ and John Baptized
by Dipping the Body in Water, else they need not have sought places where had
been great plenty of Water. These are his words that wrote those Annotations.
And if it be so apparent, it is as apparent you have been too bold to say, that
Dipping is more like a punishment of Criminals than an ordinance of God.

3. What though we do not read that the Jailer had a River, or Pond, in his
Yard, or near his House ('it is rediculous to talk of a River or Pond in his
House) yet we ought to believe there was Water enough by, or near his House, to
Baptize him and all his, who believed. You see it is granted by your own worthy
Brethren, Baptizing is Dipping; there was n^ need for the Holy Ghost to speak
of the place where this Water was, or whether it was a Pond or River: And
certainly they did not Baptize some, and sprinkle or ^antize others;
Gospel-Baptism being but one and the same, as to the subject and mode of
Administration.

4. How can you say Page 7. that they were all Baptized in his own House, when
the Text speaks not any such thing?

2. How can you presume to assert, that they did not go out of the House?
Reader observe the Text well, Acts 16. 30. And brought them out and said, Sirs
what must I do to be saved?

Verse. 31. And they said, believe on the Lord Jesus Christ and thou shall be
saved, and thy House; and they spoke unto him and to all that were in his
House, verse. 32.

And he took them the same hour of the Night and washed their Stripes; and was
Baptized ^e and all his, straight way.

Now from these words Mr. Shute affirms, that they were all Baptized in his
House, that is, in the Jaylors House.

2. That they were Baptized the same hour of the Night.

3. That they did not go out of the House to a River. If you can see these
three Things in these Verses you have better Eyes than I have.

As to what was done the same hour of the Night it is directly in plain words
asserted, viz. He washed their Stripes. As to the time when Baptized, it is
said, Straight way. If you will have the same Hour and Straight way to intend
both the washing their Stripes, and their being Baptized, it is more than can
be gathered therefrom; but if that be granted, might they not in that hour go a
little way out of the House and be Baptized? it is evident he abuses the Sacred
Text.

4. What reason has he also to affirm, that none believed but the Jailer
himself? for so he asserts. These are his words. Page 7. We do not read of any
one Soul of them that did believe besides the Jailer himself, before they were
Baptized; nor of any one act of Faith they exerted.

1. Answer, We do read in verse. 34. And when he had brought them into his House
he set Meat before them, and rejoiced, believing in God with all his House.

2. He will say, may be, this was after they were Baptized. I answer, we read
not one word of the Jaylors believing himself tell then: I mean though he
believed before, and all his House believed before either were Baptized; yet
it is not expressed by the Holy Ghost until after they had been Baptized, and
were come into his House, and he set Meat before them believing in God with all
his House; So that here is as much mention made of that act of Faith his whole
House exerted, as of the Jaylors own Faith, and as soon also.

3. And is it not evident likewise that they were before out of the Jaylors
House, else why is it said when he had brought them into his House, etc. that
is, after they were Baptized; take heed how you write at another time, lest you
provoke God by adding and diminishing from his Sacred Word.

In Page 12 (you say) you believe, that there were more modes in Baptism than
one, for some went down into the Water, and others were Baptized in their
Houses: but (say you) I understand not that any were Ducked all under Water; it
is possible their Faces might be Dipped, without Plunging the whole Body under
Water, or by pouring Water on their Faces.

1. Answer, That which you again assert. I again affirm, is not true, viz. That
some were Baptized in their Houses; what you have said of the Jaylors being
Baptized in his own House, all may see is without Book, and without the least
shadow of proof, nor do you, nor can you prove it of any other.

2. If there were more modes of Baptism than one, then there were different
significations of the same ordinance, and all of them could not be held forth
in the Baptism of each person; for such that were Dipped, though it was but the
Head only, were taught the proper Mysteries represented thereby, and those that
were sprinkled only with Water, or had Water poured upon them, were taught the
proper Symbols or signification of that mode; but how absurd that would be I
leave to all impartial wise Men to consider.

3. And if this was so, how then was the way and ordinance of God in their Holy
administration, one and the same in all the Churches of the Saints? you may as
well say the modes of the Administration of the Lords Supper were more than
one, and so allow of the Popish mode therein, who deny the Lai^y the Cup. Is
this to make the Holy God, a God of order, or of confusion?

4. If Dipping was one mode and Sprinkling another, then would Baptism and
Rantism be both ordinances of Christ, ask the learned what the word for (
Sprinkling) is in the Greek Tongue, and if they do not tell you (if they speak
the truth) it is (Rantising) I will confess I have in this done you wrong, and
mistook my self: But we deny Sprinkling is Baptism for Dipping of the whole
Body; is an essential, not an accident of Baptism. Baptism is compared to a
burial, that is clear from Romans 6. 3, 4. as it is confessed by a multitude of
learned Men who were Pedo Baptists, as you shall hear anon. Now will you say,
if the Face or Head only of a Dead Corpse was covered with Earth, and not the
whole Body, that the Corpse was buried? if you should, would you not be laughed
at? Our Savior was buried, not his Head only, but his whole Body also in the
Heart of the Earth, and he whose whole Body is not covered all over in the
Earth, is not buried; no more is he whose whole Body is not covered all over in
the Water-Baptised. Baptism is a lively Figure of the Burial of our Blessed
Lord, and of our Death to Sin and being Buried with him both in Sign and
signification.

In Page 12. (say you) produce one positive command or example to prove, that
ever any Woman went down into a River, or Pond to be Dipped, or Ducked, all
under Water in Baptism, throughout the Book of God, or else take your human
invention to your self; these are your words.

Answer, If we prove that a Woman by name was Baptized, then we prove a Woman
was Dipped, because Baptized in Greek is Dipped in English: and the Dutch (as I
have elsewhere showed) have so Translated the Word, viz. Dooped or Dipped in
the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Now in Act. 16.
we read of Lydia who was Baptized, that is, Dipped; and in Act. 8. 12. when
they believing Philip preaching the things concerning the Kingdom of God, and
the name of Jesus Christ, they were Baptized, both Men and Women: That is,
says the Dutch Translation, they were Dooped both Men and Women: our
Translators have left the Greek word untranslated into our Tongue. What
difference is there between Baptisma (Greek) and Baptism?

2. But Sir, I cannot but take notice how often you add Ducking to Dipping: Is
not this to reproach and cast contempt upon us, and on the ordinance of Christ
of Dipping believers in his name? The Lord open your Eyes and give you
repentance, in mercy to your poor Soul.

In Page 13. because every Sinner God draws to Christ must come to him naked,
etc So you say it must be in Baptism, viz. that part of the Man, Woman, or
Child that is Baptized must be naked, and so plead only for the Baptizing of
the Face.

1. Answer, Sir, what reason do you give for this? have you any ground to run
that parallel from any Text of Scripture? Is it not of your own making and
devising? But since you are for plain Texts of Scripture for every thing, pray
where do you read that any Man, or Woman^ Face, or Head, was only Baptized, or
that ^ver John Baptists or Christ's Disciples Baptized any person naked? You
tell us of the immodesty and evil of such a practice, and that it may tend to
gratify the Devil and to the sin of Adultery; certainly such a thing is
utterly to be condemned and never was practiced, you know well enough, by us
whom you reproachfully call Anabaptists. As touching what Mr. Baxter (to which
you might have added Dr. Featly) has said concerning Baptizing persons naked;
we know they as well as you, were too much guilty of backbiting, v^lifying, and
reproaching of us; yet they had no ground in the least to cast this odium upon
us; we challenge all Men or any person living to produce one instance that ever
any Man or Woman by any of our persuasion was Baptized naked. As to what Mr.
Tombs said to Mr. Baxter, of a former custom in some nations of Baptizing
naked, it affects not us, nor do I believe there was ever any such custom used
among any godly Christians. Nor did Mr. Tombs ever so Baptize any Maids in
Bewdeley nor any where else. If he said he could do it, it was doubtless his
weakness so to speak; but I am not bound to believe all that Mr. Baxter has
wrote of worthy Mr. Tombs; but since they are both dead we will say no more to
that; but any thing you can catch up you resolve it is plain to make the
greatest use of imaginable to reproach your godly Neighbors and the truth of
Christ.

In Pape 15. the Anabaptists (you say) make a great deal of pudder and stir
about the Apostles words in Romans 6. 3, 4. and have pressed them into their
service; the words are as follows; therefore we are buried with him by
Baptism; they will (say you) have it that this respects burying in Water over
Head and Ears in Baptism, and therefore they make it an argument for Dipping:
The Apostle (you say) seems to have been stirring them up, and putting them in
mind of their Baptismal vows and Obligations: It may be as well to Children of
believing parents that were grown up, as to themselves; for in verse. 3 says
he, know ye not that so many of us as were Baptized into Christ, were Baptized
into his Death? that is (say you) as they were Baptized into all the
privileges, that were purchased by the Death of Christ, so they were baptized
also into the sufferings of Christ, for they were obliged by their Baptismal
Covenant to take up their Cross and follow the Lord Jesus Christ, etc.

1. Answer, You shall now see whether it is only those whom you call
Anabaptists, that make such improvement of this Text (you say pudder and stir
about it) or whether others who were and are Pedo Baptists, do not make the
like use of it, viz. to prove Baptism is an Image, Symbol or representation of
Christ's Death, and burial and Resurrection, together with our Death unto sin,
and vivification to a newness of Life: But before I shall quote the Authors I
must tell you the Apostle is not in the context speaking of the sufferings of
believers, not a word of bearing the Cross: Therefore from the Scope and
coherence of the Text you cannot infer any such conclusion as you do. Pray
Reader take notice of the 5th Chapter and the beginning of this 6th, and see if
I or this Man speak the truth of the Texts in, verse. 1. of this Chapter; the
Holy Apostle says thus, i. e. What shall we say then? Shall we continue in Sin
that grace may abound, God forbid; how shall we that are dead to sin live any
longer therein, verse. 2. Know you not that so many of us as have been Baptized
into Jesus Christ, were Baptized into his Death, verse. 3. Therefore we are
buried with him by Baptism into Death: That like as Christ was raised up from
the Dead by the Glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of
Life, verse. 4. For as we have been planted together in the likeness of his
death, we shall be also into the likeness of his Resurrection, verse. 5. Is here
a word of the Cross, or suffering for Christ, or that we are Baptized to show
we must suffer Martyrdom with Christ? no, no, unless it be the Death or
mortification of sin or the old Man. Though I deny not but such that are Baptized
must look for suffering.

You say, our Savior calls his suffering his Baptism, and a Blood Bloody
Baptism it was; but I have a Baptism to be Baptized with, and how am I
straightned till it be accomplished? now (you say) the Apostle draws his
argument from the premises in verses 4, 5, p. 16.

Answer, It Is very true, the Apostle does draw his argument from verse. 4, 5.
etc. but not from Luke 12. 50. the Text you mention about Christ's Baptism of
suffering, so that it is evident to all you have abused this Sacred Text also,
and pressed it in, to serve your purpose: Pray read all the Annotators you can
get on the place particularly, Mr. Pools, and see if any favor your exposition
of it.

2. Though I have said enough to silence this Man or any other upon this Text,
Romans 6. 3, 4, 5. in two Treatises, yet left they come not into the Author or
Readers Hand, I shall repeat some passages once again.

Let all Men consider in the fear of God, and take notice of the gracious
design, and condescension of our blessed Savior in his instituting of the two
great ordinances of the Gospel, viz. the Lords Supper and Baptism; for as that
of the Lords Supper does in a lively Figure represent the breaking of his Body,
and the pouring forth of his Blood, so the ordinance of Baptism does as clearly
(if rightly Administed) represent or hold forth the Death, Burial, and
resurrection of the same Lord Jesus: Together with our death to sin and rising
again to walk in newness of Life; and that this appears from this Text and that
in Col. 2. 12. shall, God assisting, be evinced. The whole Church of the
Romans, and every member thereof were to reckon themselves dead to Sin, and
were bound to live no longer therein, because by Baptism, as in a lively Figure
they had held forth the same thing, nay by that Baptismal covenant they were
obliged to live and walk in newness of life.

See Pools Annotations on the place, where you will find these words, viz. he
seems to allude to the manner of Baptizing in those warm Countries, which was
to Dip or plunge the party Baptized, and as it were to bury him for a while
under water: See the like Phrase, Col. 2. 12. Baptism does not only represent
our Mortification, and death unto sin, but our progress and perseverance
therein; Burial implies a continuing under death, so Mortification is a
continual dying unto sin: Look as after the Death and Burial of Christ there
followed his Resurrection, so it must be with us, we must have Communion with,
and conformity to the Lord Jesus Christ, in his Resurrection as well as in his
Death; both these are represented and sealed to us, in the Sacrament of
Baptism, etc. thus Pools Annotations.

The Assembly also in their Annotations on this Text say much the same things,
viz. In this Phrase the Apostle seems to allude to the Ancient manner of
Baptizing, which was to Dip the party Baptized, and as it were to bury them
under Water for a while, and then to raise them up again out of it, to
represent the Burial of the old Man and the Resurrection to newness of Life.
Diodate in his Annotations says the same. Cajetan upon the place says we are
buried with Christ by Baptism into death; by the ceremony of Baptism, because
he (that is, the party Baptized) is put under Water, and by this carries a
similitude of him that was buried who was put under the Earth. Now because none
are buried but dead Men, from this very thing that we are buried in Baptism we
are assimulated to Christ buried, and when he was buried.

Tilenus a great Protestant writer in his dispute on this Text Page 88, 89.
speaks fully to this case: Baptism, says he, is the first Sacrament of the New
Testament instituted by Christ, in which there is an exact Analogy between the
Sign, and the thing signified. The outward Rite in Baptism is threefold.

1. Immersion into the Water 2. Abiding under the Water 3. A Resurrection out
of the Water.
The form of Baptism, viz. External and Essential, is no other than the
Analogical proportion which the signs keep with the things signified thereby;
for the properties of the Water, washing away the defilements of the Body, does
in a most suitable similitude set forth the Efficacy of Christ's Blood in
blotting out of sin; so dipping into the Water in a most lively similitude sets
forth the Mortification of the old Man, and rising out of the Water, the
vivification of the new Man -- The same plunging into the Water (says he)
holds*forth to us that horrible Gulf of Divine Justice, in which Christ for
our sakes for a while was in a manner swallowed up; abiding under the Water
(how little a time so ever) denotes his descent into Hell, even the very
deepest of Lifelesness, which lying in the sealed or guarded Sepulcher, he was
accounted as one dead: Rising out of the Water holds forth to us a lively
similitude of the conquest which this dead Man got over death; in like manner
we being Baptized into his death and buried with him, should rise also with
him, and go on in a new Life. Thus far the learned Tilenus.

Sir, it is time for you to lay to Heart what you have done in trampling upon
dipping or Baptising, that is such a glorious significant ordinance as these
Authors tell you, and no doubt speak the mind of God: And in the room of it
exalt an humane and an insignificant invention. Does Rantism or sprinkling bear
any proportion to those great mysteries, here mentioned? does that figure o^
hold forth the burial of Christ, or that of the old Man? can a few drops on the
Face represent that; or what representation is there in that of a Resurrection?
Alas! you know not what you do. ^ut to proceed.

Ambrose says, Water is that wherein the Body is plunged, to wash away all
sin. (1 suppose (...) means it is a sign of this,) i. e. that all sin is buried.
Chrysostom says, that the old Man is buried and drowned in the Immersion under
Water; and when the Baptized person is afterward raised up out of the Water,
it represents the Resurrection of the new Man to newness of Life.

(...) us Epist. ad Tradit. Philadelph. says, that ^^l^^ving in his death we
may be made partakers of his Resurrection by Baptism. Baptism was given in
memory of the death of our Lord.

We perform the Symbols of his death (Mark it Reader) not of the pouring forth
of, or sprinkling of his Blood, nor of the Spirit; no, no; but as these Authors
say, it is a Symbol of his Death, Burial and Resurrection, which sprinkling in
no manner of way can represent. Justin Martyr says, we know but one saving
Baptism, inregard there is but one Resurrection from the Dead, of which Baptism
is an Image.

And from hence we know nothing of your Infants sprinkling. See more in Sir
Norton Knatchbul's Notes Printed at Oxford 1677. who to the same purpose quotes
Basil the Great, Lactantius, Bernard, etc.

Mr. Perkins 2. Vol. Cap. 3. on Gal. says, the Dipping of the Body signifies
Mortification or fellowship with Christ in his death, the staying under the
Water signifies the burial of Sin, and coming out of the Water the Resurrection
from Sin to newness of life: And in another place says, the ancient custom of
Baptizing was to Dip all the Body of the Baptized in Water. To these Ancient
Writers let are once again add here for your further conviction, what some of
the chefest Prelates of the Church of England have very lately said on, Romans 6.
3, 4.

The Reverend Dr. Sharp the present Lord Archbishop of York, in a Sermon
preached before the Queens Majesty on Easter Day, March 27, 1692. says he, and
this in ancient times was taught every Christian in and by his Baptism; when
ever a person was Baptized, he was not only to profess his Faith in Christ's
Death and Resurrection, but he was to look upon himself as obliged in
correspondence therewith to mortify his former carnal affections and to enter
upon a new State of Life.

And the very form of Baptism (says he) did lively represent this obligation
to them: For what did their plunging under water signify, but their
undertaking, in imitation of Christ's Death and Burial, to forsake all their
former evil courses; As their ascending out of the Water did their engagement
to lead a Holy and Spiritual Life? This our Apostle (says he) does more than
once declare to us thus, Romans 6. 3. 4. We are buried with Christ by Baptism
unto Death, that like as Christ was raised up by the glory of the Father, so we
should walk in newness of Life. Thus Dr. Sharp.

Dr. Fowler (Now Lord Bishop of Gl^cester) in his Book of design of
Christianity Page 90. on Romans 6. 3, 4. says, Christians being plunged into the
Water, signifies their undertaking and obliging themselves in a Spiritual
sense, to die and to be buried with Jesus Christ in an utter renouncing and
forsaking all their Sins, that so answering to his resurrection they may live a
Holy and godly life.

Also Dr. Sherlock (Dean of St. Paul's) in his Sermon, Charity without usury, on
Romans 6. 3, 4. says, Our conformity to the Death and Resurrection of our
Savior, consists in dying to Sin and walking in newness of Life: Which says
he, St. Paul tells us is represented by the External ceremony of Baptism, and
rising out of his watery Grave a new creature.

Moreover, unto these let me add what Dr. Tillotson, the present Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury has wrote; see his Book styled Sermons on several
occasions 5th. Edit Page 188, 189. Speaking also of the same Text, Romans 6. 3,
4. Anciently, says he, those who were Baptized put off their garments, which
signified the putting off the Body of Sin; and were immersed and buried in the
Water, to represent the Death of Sin; and then did rise up again out of the
Water, to signify their entrance upon a new Life. And to these customs the
Apostle alludes when he says, How shall we that are dead to Sin live any longer
therein? Know ye not that so many of us that were Baptized into Jesus Christ,
were Baptized into his Death, etc.

Dr Duveil on Act. 8. Page 292, 293. cites a most learned Anonimous French
Protestant Writer in his answer to the famous Bishop of Meaux, speaking thus,
viz. it is most certain, says he, that Baptism has not hitherto been
Administered, otherwise than by sprinkling, by the most of Protestants. But
truly this sprinkling is an abuse, thus custom which without any accurate
examination, says he, they retained from the Romish Church, in like manner as
many other things, makes their Baptism very defective; it corrupts its
institution and ancient use, and that nearness of similitude which is needful
should be betwixt it and Faith, repentance and resurrection. This reflection of
Mr. B^ssuet deserves to be seriously considered, to wit, says he, that this
use of plunging has continued for the space of a whole thousand and three
hundred years; hence we may understand that we did not carefully as it was
meet, examine things which we have received from the Romish Church.

Calvin also says l. 4. c. 16. that Baptism is a form or way of burial; and
none but such as are already dead to sin, or have repented from dead works, are
to be buried.

But now say we, sprinkling and pouring is not the form of Baptism, because not
the form of a Burial; nor can Infants be the subjects of it; because as the
learned observe, Baptism is a Symbol of present, not of future regeneration;
it is an outward sign of that Death unto sin, which the party Baptized passed
under then, or ought to have had before Baptized; they then professed
themselves to be Dead to sin, i. e. when they were Buried with Christ in their
Baptism, for the argument of the Apostle lies in that respect, How shall we
that are Dead to sin live any longer therein? know you not, that so many of us
who were Baptized into Christ were Baptized into his Death, both in sign and
signification? And therefore as Dr. Sherlock says, they rise out of that watery
Grave as new born Creatures; it denotes not only what they should be hereafter,
but what they were actually at that time. So that as this Text and arguments
drawn there from utterly condemn sprinkling and pouring, as that which is not
Christ's true Baptism, so it excludes Infants from being the true subjects
thereof, because in them appears no such Death to Sin, nor can they be said to
come out of that Watery Grave as new born Creatures.

I will only quote one Author more and proceed, and that is learned Zanchy on
Col. 2. 12. There are (says he) two parts in regeneration i. e. Mortification
and Vivification, that is called a burial with Christ, this a Resurrection;
with Christ; the Sacrament of both these is Baptism; in which we are
overwhelmed or buried, and after that do come forth and rise again: It may not
be said truly but sacramentally of all that are Baptized, that they are buried
which Christ and raised with him, but only of such who have true faith. Thus
Zanchy.

Now Sir, see what a stir and pudder (as you call it) these Pedo-Paptists make
on this Text, Romans 6. 3, 4. Col. 2. 12. to prove Baptism is Dipping or a figure
of a burial? Would you not have us give the true sense of the Word wherein we
concur with all learned Men? I hope, by this time Reader, thou art fully
satisfied that this Man has said nothing to weaken our Arguments or Grounds
for Dipping, though 'twice as much we have said on this Account, in that Treatise
called The Rector Rectified; but this shall suffice here, as to the Mode of
Baptizing.

CHAP. II. Wherein Mr. Shutes Reply to Mr. Hercules Collins Answer about
habitual Faith is considered, detected and clearly refuted; proving that
Infants are not required to believe, nor are they (without a miracle) capable
so to do, nor are they intended in those places of Scripture that Enjoins Faith
on the Adult.
BEfore I proceed to take notice of what this Man has said about Infants
having habitual Faith, I shall note two or three things by the Way.

1. It Is very remarkable, and worthy the Readers observation, to see how the
asserters of Infant Baptism differ among themselves about that Faith they
suppose to be in Infants; for, as I noted in by Answer to Mr. Smythies Cold
resined, Page 144, some of them, as Thomas Aquinas asserts, They have the Faith
of the Church, that being intailed upon all who are within the Pale thereof;
others say, they have the Faith of the Gossips or Sureties; thus the Church of
England, etc. Musculus seems to assert, they have an Imputed Faith; Mr. Blake
intimates, They have a Dogmatical Faith only; Mr. Baxter would have it be a
saving Faith; but does not tell us how it agrees or differs from the Faith of
the Adult; some as Mr. Danvers observes, say, It Is a Physical; some, a
Metaphysical Faith some a hyperphysical Faith: Some say, They are born
Believers, which proceeds from their Patents being in the Covenant and being
Believers; but this is to intail Grace to Nature, and Regeneration to
Generation; nay, and to assert, all are not Children of Wrath by nature, or as
they are born and come into the World; others say, They are made Believers by
Baptism, that Ordinance conveying grace, as Mr. Rothwell. This Man asserts,
they have habitual Faith; the like do the Athenian Society seem to intimate.
But which of all these shall we give credit to? The Truth is, they all speak
without Book, having no ground from Gods word to say what they do.

2. We desire it may be considered and carefully heeded, lest we still are
abused as Mr. Collins has been, that we steadfastly believe and readlly grant
it, as an Article of our Faith, That all Infants are under the Guilt and stain
of original Sin as they come into the World, and that no Infant can be saved
but through the Blood and Imputation of Christ's righteousness: And also we do
believe, That all those dying Infants who are ^aved, God does in some way or
another (which is not known to us) Sanctify them; for no unclean thing can
enter into the Heavenly Jerusalem. See our confession of Faith.

3. We do believe, that no dying Infant can be saved that is not in the
Covenant of Grace, for it is (through or) by the Grace, Mercy and Inconceivable
Love of God, as it is contained in the Covenant of Grace, that Christ, and all
Blessings of Christ, are made over to all the Elect, whether Adult or little
Infants. We therefore never asserted, That no Infants of Believers, or of
unbelievers either, are in the Covenant of Grace; but we do assert, all Elect
Infants are in it; Yet we do deny, that the Infants of Believers as such, or as
so considered, as bring their Natural Offspring, are in the Covenant of Grace.
Having noted these three Things, I shall proceed. First, take what Mr. Collins
has asserted in his Answer to Mr. Shutes pretended Antidote; See Page 3. viz.
That Infants are saved by Christ we have asserted, because we know of no other
Name but Jesus; but that they are saved by Faith, habitual Faith in Christ, I
must confess I never read in all the Book of God; I could wish he could show me
the Chapter where Christ said any such thing, i. e. that Infants are saved by
habitual Faith. And what would this Man make a new Bible, have a new rule, to
tell us of things never heard of? These are Mr. Collins's words, Take Mr.
Shutes reply; pray look into that Chapter, says he, where you find that God
has declared two ways for saving Elect persons; one for the saving of aying
Infants, without the Grace of Faith; and the other for saving adult Believers
by Faith: And then he asks two other as impertinent Queries. But (...) last
he sixes upon one Text to prove habitual Faith in Infants, viz Joh. 3. 9.
whosoever is born of God does not commit sin, for his seed remains in him;
and he cannot sin because he is born of God.

Answer, We say there is but one way to be saved, and that one way is Jesus
Christ; it is by his Sacrifice, by his Blood, by his merits, that is, by the
imputation of his righteousness; but that there is the same Way or Mode and no
other, for the Application of the Blood and Merits of Christ respecting elect
dying Infants, as there is for the Adult; and that God does not, cannot
sanctify dying Infants any other way but by infusing the same habit of Faith,
which he infuseth into the Adult who believe, he should prove. God is a free
Agent, and may have ways to apply the Blood of Christ and Sanctify dying
Infants, that we know not of.

2. As to the Text he brings to prove habitual Faith in Infants, of believers,
if it be not brought to prove that, that Seed or divine Habit is in infants of
believers, as such, it does not concern the present controversy; it is Joh. 3.
9 which we will now consider and examine. And let it be well noted, That the
Seed remains in him, that sacred habit abides in him, that has it; it
remains and shall remain in every Soul in whom it is infused* grace in the
habit cannot be lost, It Is a Well or Spring of living Water, that springs up
unto Eternal Life, Joh. 4. 14. Christ has prayed, That our Faith fail not;
that is, the Seed or Habit thereof; for the Act, in the exercise of it in part
may fail now and then; if the Infants of Believers have the Habit of Faith in
them, be sure those Habits will appear, and they must be true Believers and be
saved, because the Seed remains in them.

3. Why do you not answer Mr. Collins Argument, Page 7. of his reply to you,
faith he, those Children of Believers which die in an unconverted state, either
never had the Habits of grace, or else if they had them they have lost them;
but there is no losing. Habits of grace, ergo they never had them.

Reader, see what Mr. Shute has said to this Argument in Page 42. of his last
Book, these are his words, viz. Therefore I will put it to a fair issue, which
shall be this, produce me but one place in all my Book where I have asserted
this you have charged upon me, and I will turn Anabaptist immediately, etc.

Answer, If you have not said that the Infants of Believers as such have
habitual Faith, what is it you argue for, why do you plead for the habit of
Faith to be in them, if you say you plead only for habitual Faith to be in
Elect Infants?

1. Then I hope you will only have Elect Infants to be Baptized, and how do you
know which they are, since they can make no confession of Faith?

2. Moreover, I also conceive you may allow Baptism to the Infants of
Unbelievers: For sure you dare not deny but some of their Seed are comprehended
in Gods Eternal Election.

3. The controversy or difference between us and you lies not how dying Elect
Infants are Sanctified, etc. whether by the habit of Faith or by some other
way, by which God may apply Christ's Merits to them, etc. But whether the
Infants of Believers as such have the habit of Faith, or Faith in any sense, by
which they come to have right to that ordinance, what have we to do with dying
Infants? did you Baptize no Infants but such that dye and were sure that all
the dying Infants of Believers were elected, it might seem some what to the
purpose; though not so much neither as you may Imagine; for, I do affirm you have
as much ground to give them the Lords Supper as you have to Baptize them,
because such who are the proper subjects of Baptism, have an immediate right
according to the order of the Gospel to the Lords Supper.

You must have a command or Authority from Christ's word to Baptize them, or you
ought not to do it; but you have no such command nor Authority.

4. The habit of Faith without the Act gives not a right to that Sacred
ordinance, for Faith and a confession of Faith is required: But I must confess
I see not how there can be the habit and not the Act; for though the habit may be
Antecedent to the Act in order of nature, yet not in order of time in any
Believer: Prove, if you can, any person that was a Believer, had the habit of
Faith, and yet not the Act of Faith at the same time: For as all learned Men
generally agree, as soon as life is infused into a dead sinner, there is Heat,
Motion, Activity, etc. the habit of grace is a Vital Principle, and as they
say, it is naturally active, it is a Spring of perpetual motion, as Mr. Charnock
shows.

5. You say Infants may believe: And you would have them to be such Children of
the Jaylors Household, who are said to believe, and yet would have it to be only
Faith in the habit: But all Men of understanding know believing refers to the
Act or exercise of Faith; you may as well say the Jailer had no more than the
habit of Faith, for read the words again, viz. be rejoiced believing in God
with all his House.

6. If Infants believe they know the object of their Faith; can any believe in
him, whom they know not? Faith all Men (I think) agree has its Seat in the will
and understanding, the understanding is illuminated and sees the need,
necessity and excellency of Jesus Christ, and so assents that he is the only
Savior as well as the Will consents, bends and bows down in subjection to him:
And can any either young or old be said to be Believers or to have Faith, and
yet in them is nothing of this? But say you Page 22. For as much as the
Creature is wholly passive in the reception of grace, and Christ is all in all,
from the foundation of Man's Salvation to the topstone, therefore a young Child
in the Womb or Cradle is as capable of being born again as well as an old one,
for both young and old are dead in sin and Trespasses before they are converted.

Answer, You seem to refer to the Almighty power of God: It Is very true, he can
if he please infuse grace into a Babe in the Womb or Cradle, nay of Stones
raise up Children to Abraham; but the question is not what God can do, but what
God does do: Though we do believe the creature is passive in the first
reception. of Grace, yet how do you prove God does regenerate Infants in the
Womb or Cradle? Gods Grace is infused into fit and proper subjects; and tho the
Grace by which we believe is from God, yet it is the Creature that does believe.
Why do we say that Irrational creatures are not fit Soil for the Seed of the
word? is it not because they have no understanding? and though Infants have
rational Souls yet till they come to maturity they have no knowledge nor
understanding; the design of God in sowing the Seed or Habit of Grace is, that
the Fruits thereof may be produced and brought forth: But you must say the
Fruits of grace do not appear in Babes, which is Love, Joy, Peace,
Longsuffering Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meckness, Temperance, etc. Gal. 5.
22. Nor is it possible it should without a Miracle.

Such as is the Cause, such is the effect or product of it. How God does
Sanctify dying Infants (I speak as to the Mode of it) no mortal Man I am sure
can tell; if it is by infusing Grace, let it be so, though it cannot be proved
whilst the World stands, yet Gods design therein could not be the same in them
as it is in others; he expects no such fruit from them: Nor can any Gospel
ordinance be the right of such Infants nor any other, without a precept or
example from Gods word.

Baptism (as you have heard) is a significant ordinance, it is an outward sign
of mortification of sin and of Vivification to a new life, and ^aith is
required in respect of the act of it touching the gracious promise of God made
to all such who are the true subjects thereof, see what Dr. Tailor Late Bishop
of Down speaks about this notion of Infants having habitual faith, viz. are
there any Acts precedent* concomitant or consequent to this pretended habit?
this strange invention is absolutely without Art, without Scripture, Reason, or
Authority. And further, says he, if any run for succor to that exploded
Cresphu^eton, that Infants have faith or any other inspired habit of I know not
what, or how, we desire no more advantage than that they are constrained to
answer without Revelation, against reason, common sense and all experience.

Again, he says, how can any Man know they have faith, since he never saw any
sign of it, neither was he told so by any that could tell? Thus Dr. Tailor.

In Page 22. He strangely reflects upon Mr. Collins, and endeavors to infer
that from his Arguments, which no way can in honesty be drawn therefrom, viz.
that the whole strength of his arguments against Infant Baptism naturally tends
to the making Adult Believers the Authors of their own Faith and Eternal
Salvation.

Answer, Let all Men consider the nature of this Man's Spirit; what little
ground there is for this Conclusion will soon appear to all that read Mr.
Collins arguments; does he deny the infusion of Sacred habits in Believers, or
that it is not by the grace of God alone, that they are quickened and
regenerated, because he knows not that Infants have the like Sacred habits
infused into them.

We say the same with worthy Mr. Marshal, in Page 78. of his Book; which you
recite in the 24th. Page of yours, viz. that Union between Christ and the Soul
is fully accomplished by Christ giving the Spirit of Faith to us, even before
we can Act Faith in the reception of him; because by this grace or Spirit of
Faith, the Soul is inclined to an active receiving of Christ. What of this?
though it is thus in the Adult, must this Spirit of Faith or the Habit of Faith be
therefore in Infants of Relievers also? Sir, let me ask you two or three
questions here before I leave this.

Is Regeneration in your Infants that are Regenerated, the fruit or product of
that Spirit of Faith or Habits which you plead for, to be infused into them
when Infants? sure if they had any such Habits, when Infants, they need no
other inspired Habits when they are grown up.

2. I would know since you speak only of those habits to be in Believers
Infants, whether they were infused before they were born or after?

3. Seeing some Infants of Infidels or Unbelievers may be elected, nay and it
appears to us by Gods working upon the Hearts of such when grown up, (that they
were comprehended in his electing love) had not they likewise when Infants
habitual Faith and so an equal right to Baptism?

In Page 26 you say, all the Seed of Believers under the Gospel do partake of
all the benefit and privileges of the Covenant of Grace, as much as ever the
Seed of professing Jews did under the Law.

Answer, I say so too; and more: All our Children partake of greater benefits
and privileges of the Gospel of the New Covenant than theirs did of it, under
the Law, (as to outward dispensation and revelation) when grown up, set under
the clear and plain Revelation and Ministration of it: But of what this,
therefore say you, they have as good, a right to the initiating Seal or Token
of the Covenant, namely Baptism, as ever the Jews Children had to the
initiating Seal of the Covenant, namely Circumcision.

Answer, You go too fast; how do you prove that Baptism is an initiating Seal
of the Covenant, some call it an initiating rite into the visible Church, but
is it indeed an Ordinance of initiation into the Covenant of Grace; then your
Infants are not in the Covenant before Baptized, I know nothing to be the Seal
of the Covenant but the Holy Spirit, Ephesians. 1. 13, 14. and cap. 4. 30. as
touching Circumcision, that was I grant a rite that belonged to the Male
Infants of Abraham and his Seed, if it was initiating it, only let them into
that National Church, but I doubt not but that the Seed of Abraham according to
the Flesh, were all both Males and Females Born Members of that Church.

2. We shall prove by and by, that Circumcision did not appertain unto the
Covenant of Grace; read the Arguments in the 1st and 2d. Part of the Ax laid to
the Root of the Trees: And when you write again answer them, for you have not
touched one of them; yet Sir you have a great deal of Work cut out all ready
for you, before this comes to your Hand. But to proceed, you in page 26. go on
to prove what you have asserted, viz.

That it is so (say you) does clearly appear from our Savior Christ's carriage
and department toward those little Children that were brought to him.

You say those Children were the Children of believers.

Answ. I deny it, se how you are able to prove it, there is no such thing
recorded of them, viz. That they were the Children of believers: again, page
27. you say Christ did bless them with spiritual blessings.

Answer, Friend, may not you be found (as far as you know) to assert false
things of Jesus Christ? Is it said he blessed them with spiritual blessings?
but since you know so well, pray what spiritual blessings were they? You
confess he did not Baptize them; did he them give them habitual Faith for that
blessing you plead for to be in Infants? Reader, It Is evident Christ's way of
healing the Sick, was by putting or laying his Hand on such, how do we know but
it was the blessing of healing, he prayed for, and blessed them with? but Mr.
Shute tells us; God out of the Mouths of Babes and Sucklings has perfected his
praise, page 23.

Answer, Now you have hit it. I do not doubt but those Babes, out of whose
Mouths God has perfected his praise, but that they had more than habitual
Faith. Friend, what Babes were they Peter Speaks of? 1 Pet. 2. 1, 2. that he
calls Newborn Babes, out of the Mouths of such Babes, God has Ordained
Strength no doubt.

You say Christ prayed for none, but for the Elect. page 27.

Answer, Not for spiritual blessings* but how do you know he never prayed for
Healing, and other Temporal blessings, for such, that were not of his Elect?
you lay down strange and bold assertions. You say page 28. As soon as adult
Heathens were Conversed and Baptized, if they had Children, they were all
Baptized also with them, as being part of themselves.

Answer, I deny that likewise; show what Heathens Children, after the Parents
believed and were Baptized their Children also were Baptized.

2. If Children be part of their Parents, then certainly if the Parents go to
Heaven all their Children must likewise, for the Whole of believers shall be
saved, not a Part of them only. Also if the Children be part of their Parents,
and a part of the Person, namely the Face, only is sufficient to be Baptized,
then say I the Parents Baptism may serve for the Child: And the truth is, as
the Bishop of Down noted, viz. Since as some affirm the Parents Faith serves
for the Child, why may not the Parents Baptism serves for the Child also^ You
say, That little Children by the Cooperation of the Holy Spirit may have Faith,
and the heart of an Adult Person is no more capable of changing himself than a^
Infant, and Quote Luther in the case.

Answer, It Is true little Children may have Faith if God please to work a
Miracle, and Inspire them with his Spirit: But does God do this to the Infants
of Believers ^ I ask also, Whether the Infants of (...) not as capable of this
Faith? nay I^rffirm* that as many of the Children of Infidels and unbelievers
may have the Cooperation of the Spirit in them as the Infants of believers.
Disprove it if you can?

2. Does not God work ordinarily upon such Subjects as have the exercise of
Reason, and understanding: Though the grace is given by which we do believe, yet
is not the act ours. Can God be said to believe for us, or can there be faith
in any subject, and yet no knowledge of the object, no nor one rational act
exerted?

But (if this be so, that the Infant believes himself) why do you hint in the
Text words, That a Man is as truly bound to lay hold of the promise for his
Children, as for him. himself? There Is no need for the Parents to believe for
their Children, if they can believe for themselves: Sir p^ay resolve the doubt,
say what faith* it is. Infants have is it their own, do they believe themselves
or their Parents for them?

To put this out of doubt, you in Page 20. go about to prove Infants did
believe, and so may believe; the Text you bring is that in Mat. 18. 2* 3, 4, 5,
6. And Jesus called a little Child unto him, and set him in the midst of them,
And said, Verily I say unto you, Except ye be converted, and become as little
Children*, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Verse. 6. But whos^
shall offend one of these little ones which believe in me, etc.

Here you make a great stir telling us that Christ speaks of Old Disciples and
of Young Disciples, Page. 33. Here is the Young Disciple (be) 2 the Old
Disciples (them) 3 Christ takes his Observation from the believing Young
Disciple, etc.

Answer, I utterly deny that Child, or those little Children, who are
positively said to be believe in Christ, to be Infants.

1. For it is expressly said, Christ called that Child to him he was able to
come, no doubt whom Christ called: Could an Infant do that?

2. To put the matter out of doubt, it is evidentas to matter of fact, God has
in our days wrought by his Spirit, savingly on several little Children, some
three or four years old, others about six or seven, as Mr. Jenaway in his token
for little Children shows and names the Children: Now it might be such a little
Child Christ called to him, and who did belive in him, and it is such little
Children he speaks of that do believe in him, who are able to believe; but what
is this to prove Infants ^o believe and are able to believe. If this be so, you
need not plead only for the habit of Faith to be in them, for now you think you
have proved they have Faith it self, for believing refers not only to the
habit, but to the act also.

3ly. Besides, if we may not conclude they were such little Children, yet (as
Mr. Collins observes and diverse others) it may intend such believers who have
such and such qualities that are in young Children, viz. harmless, humble,
Innocent, etc. as Paul speaks, in malice be you Children.

From hence you say, 535. that it appears infallibly that little Children of
believing Parents are Church Members, and have an indubitable right unto the
Ordinance of Baptism, etc.

Answer, I grant those little Children who do believe in Christ, have an
indubitable right to Baptism and to the Lords Supper also, as soon as they are
Baptized: But not Infants.

In Page 28. You say that Timothy was Baptized when he was a Child.

Answer, I am subject to think he was very young when he did first believe and
was Baptized, may be he was a Child; but prove he was Baptized when he was an
Infant and I will become a Pedo Baptist. And since his Mother and Grandmother
were both believers, no doubt had he been Baptized when an Infant Christ would
have left it upon Record, to have put an end to this controversy, which he
knew and foresaw in after times would arise.

But this is no whereto be found, so that you are wiser then what is written.

2. But Sir, are your Infants Church Members with you; does the Church you
belong unto consists of such as of the Adult?

I thought none accounted their Infants to be Church Members but those who are
for national Churches; Infant Baptism seem as if it was continved according to
the nature of such a constitution, and not for a Gospel Church constitution,
which consists only of a Congregation of godly Men and W^men.

In Page 34. You positively affirm, this is the Church of which a^ the Seed of
Believers, are Members as much now as ever the Jews, Children were under the
Law. For it is the same Church state, though in another dress or under another
dispensation. Our Savior did not destroy the Church state when he
^^communicated the unbelieving Jews etc.

1. Answer, I thought that the Church you are a Member of was congregational,
not national, and I am satisfied that it is so, and that they do own no
national Church to be a true Church of Christ, I mean such that consists of
Parents; and their Children as under the Law in the national Church of the Jews.

2. I deny that all or any Infants of believers are Members of the Gospel
Church*; prove it if you can; and also I do affirm the State or Constitution of
the Gospel Church, is not the same now as it was under the Law: It Is evident
all the Jewish Infants were born Members of that Church; it being national.

But now the Church is built up of living Stones consisting of the Spiritual
Seed of Abraham only, not of the natural or carnal Seed of Believers.

And I am persuaded, though your. Reverend Pastor is for Infant Baptism, yet he
will not allow of what you here affirm.

But Sir, if your Infants are all born Church Members, How can Baptism be an
initiating rite to them. I allow not, nor you neither, any person to be a right
regular member of a Gospel Church until Baptized: But you, in page 35. say,
that little Children of believing Parents are Church Members, and so seem to
argue for their being Baptized; but if all believers Seed are born Church
Members, ours are as good* Church Members as yours, though not Baptized.

You in the last place seem greatly to miss the matter in one great case, viz.
you distinguish not between the visible and invisible Church under the Law: The
invisible Church is but one and the same in every age, that consists only of
all the elect; we grant, but the visible Church is not the same now as it was
under the Law.

That the whole State and Constitution of the national Church of Israel or
natural Seed of Abraham is gone and dissolved, your learned Brethren will not
deny, and there is no national Church in its room constituted by our Lord Jesus
Christ. So that it is not an excommunication of the Jewish only, but an absolute
dissolution of their Church State, as Mr. Cotton, Mr. Charnock, Dr. Owen, and
many others assert.

In page 99, 100, etc. you again positively declare, that the State of the
Christ is the same now as it was under the Law, and has the same Attributes,
and made of the same ingredients, and has the same Titles, and lives upon the
same Food, and was a Baptized Church, and (...) in the same relation to God and
Christ as the Gospel Church does now.

You proceed to make these things to appear.

1. You begin with the Attributes of the Church under the Law. viz. if you obey
my voice indeed and keep my Covenant, then ^e shall be a peculiar treasure unto
me above all People etc. and ye shall be unto me a Kingdom of Priests, and
(...) holy Nation, Exodus 19. 5, 6. You quote also, Psalm. 135. 4.

1. Answer, Though they upon their obedience and keeping Gods Covenant had such
promises, yet it is evident that they were a National Church: God took the whole
House of Israel into a visible External Covenant Church State, and as so
considered separated them from all other Nations and People in the World, to be
a peculiar people and Treasure (in that Covenant) unto himself; and in this
sense, he was said federally, or by Covenant to be Married to the whole House
of Israel, and became an Husband, to them; see Jer. 31. 31. God there made a
promise to Israel and Judab, viz. I will make a new Covenant, etc. not
according to the Covenant I made with y ur Fathers in the day that I took them
by the Hand, to bring them out of the Land of Egypt, which Covenant they broke,
although I was an Husband to them, says the Lord, v. 32. Now in that Covenant
God made with them when he brought them out of the Land of Egypt, he gave them
their Legal Church State and many External Earthly Blessings, Laws and carnal
Ordinances; and like as a Husband cares and provides for the Wife, so did God
care and provide for them and preserve them so long as that Law (I mean the Law
of their Husband) did continue: But that Law is now dead, Romans 7.4. And God is
now no longer such a Husband to them: Nor has he Married any other External
Nation or People (as so considered) in the World: But now God in the Gospel
Covenant is an Husband indeed to them he was a Typical Husband; nor is the
Gospel Church Married to the Lord by that old* Covenant Law, but by the new
Covenant, which is not according to the old: Moreover, they not keeping that
Covenant were not such a peculiar treasure to the Lord, as Believers are to him
in the New Covenant: Christ has undertook for all the true members of his
mystical Body, they are married to him for ever and they are to him an Eternal
excellency, therefore the legal Jewish visible Church differed from the Gospel
Church -- Yet

2. I also grant that all those under the Law who were members of the invisible
Church, or elect ones, were as choice a treasure to God as any Believers are
now, and in the like safe condition.

3. It Is evident that the legal Church of the Jews was not made up of the same
matter, or ingredients, as the Gospel Church is; for according to the
Institution of the Gospel Church, none ought to be made members of it but
Believers only. But in the Jewish Church the fleshy or carnal Seed were
admitted by Gods ordination and appointment, God did allow of the fleshy Seed
as such then to be members of that Church, but he does not allow of such to be
in the Gospel Church.

You mention, in Page 100. that in Exodus 25. 31. And thou shall make a
Candlestick of pure Gold, etc. and you hint this was the Church and the
ordinances of God: And therefore the ingredients are the same under the Gospel
as the Church was under the Law.

Answer, I Though the Candlestick of pure Gold had been a shadow or Figure of
some thing to come, and that it referred not to the legal Church, but to the
Church under the Gospel, and this being so, how can this prove that Church
consisted of the same matter and ingredients as the Gospel Church does?

3. You say that the Church of God under the Mosaic Law, lived upon the same
Spiritual Food as the Church of Christ does now, etc. Page 93.

1. Answer, All that were of the mystical Body of Christ then, it is true, did
feed on the same spiritual food.

2. But pray consider what you say. Can any of those that feed on the Flesh of
Christ and drink his Blood, perish? for it is evident, many who (are said to)
Eat of the same spiritual Meat, and drank the same spiritual Drink, perished in
the Wilderness, 1 Cor. 10. 5, 6, 7, 8.

3. They all Eat the same Manna that Caleb and Joshua did, which is called
Heavenly or Spiritual Meat, and Drank of the Water out out of the Rock that was
a Typ, of Christ, The Jews, say our Annotators, Eat the same Spiritual Meat
that we do now; they in the Type, we in the Antitype; they as a Church had but
the Shell comparatively, and we the Kernel: they had the shadow, we the
substance; their Ordinances were called Carnal Ordinances and their promises
Earthly, ours are Spiritual Ordinances, and better promises: Therefore the
Church under the Gospel does not feed on the same food which the Church did
under the Law.

4. You say the Church under the Law was Baptized, Men Women and Children. And
there can be no true Church but what is so now.

You mention that in 1 Cor. 10. 1. 2. Here is a Church, say you Baptized, etc.
and not one of them Dipped or Duck'd over Head and Ears.

Answer, You mistake, the Jewish Church was no Baptized Church, they had no
Ordinance of Baptism, this was but a Typical Baptism; but if they were) as they
passed through the Sea) Baptized, and yet only Sprinkled, by Rain faling upon
them from the Cloud, then you will make the Church of Israel all Anabaptists,
for they were all Sprinkled after they passed through the Sea, see Exodus 24 ^.
and Moses took the Blood and Sprinkled it on the People, both the Book and all
the People, Heb. 9. ^9.

It Is evident you by this render them to be all Rebaptised, should what you say
be granted.

2. But Sprinkling is not Baptising; nor was that a real, but a Typical
Baptism, i. e. when they passed through the Sea; nor was their Children any
more Baptized, than was that mixed People which were with them; for so it is said
and much Cattle also: But that Typical Baptism bears great Analogy with
Dipping, as Mr. Pools Annotations well observes on the place. The Apostle uses
that term in regard (say they) of the great Analogy betwixt Baptism (as it was
used) the persons going down into the Waters and being Dipped in them, and the
Israelites going down into the Sea, the great receptacle of Water; though the
Water at that time was gathered on heaps on either side of them, yet they
seemed buried in the Water. This they give (from some) as the most probable
sense of the place. And,

This being so you need not call the Anabaptists to wonder at, what you thought
you had got here.

Do you think that among the Jews that passed through the Sea, there were not
some Unbelievers as well as among that mixed People; will you plead for the
Baptising of Profane and ungodly persons? for this will justify their being
Baptized as far forth as that of the Infant Seed of Believers.

Thus I have answered all your arguments, to prove there is no difference
betwixt the State and Nature of the Gospel Church and that under the Law; and
further to convince you of your mistake in pleading for such a Church, take Dr.
O^^ens sentiments and some other Reverend Independents of a Gospel Church, and
of the Dissolution of the Jewish Church.

Question, What is an Instituted Church of the Gospel? (he answers.)

Answer, A society of persons called out of the world, or their natural Worldly
state, by the Administration of the Word and Spirit, unto obedience of the
Faith or knowledge and Worship of God in Christ joined together in an Holy Band,
or by special agreement for the exercise of the Communion of Saints in due
observation of all the Ordinances of the Gospel. Catech, p. 19.

See also Page 91. how he distinguishes a Gospel Church from the Church under
the Law, which he calls a National Church.

Again, he says, Page 93. the National Church of the Jews with all the
Ordinances of it, being removed and taken away the Lord Christ, has appointed
particular Churches or united Assemblies of Believers, etc. See Reverend Mr.
Fords Gospel Church opened, Chap. 1. Page 5. where he gives a right description
of a Gospel Church Instituted by Christ, viz. a society of Godly Christians who
give themselves first to the Lord and then to one another, etc.

In Chap. 3. Page 22. he shows the matter of a Gospel Church more fully, and
that it does consist only, of regenerate and converted persons: Such as are
Married to, and have put on Christ, such that are savingly, and powerfully
enlightened and enlivened, quickened, and convinced of Sin, of Righteousness,
and Judgment.

Now are Infants capable of these things, again, he says, Page 25. that all
Church Members ought to be sincere hearted Believers, etc.

Where is your Infant Church Membership, if what these worthy Ministers say, be
right as be sure it is? I cite these Authors to convince you that you have not
a right notion of a Gospel Church, in that you say it differs not from the
Church of the Jews which was national; if you are no Independent, but are for a
National Church, bring forth your arguments; but first consult Dr. Owen, etc.

The Dr. says further, viz. that God does require regeneration as an
indispensable condition in a Member of his Church* a Subject of his Kingdom;
for his Temple is now built of living Ston^s ^ Tet. 2. 5. M^n Spiritual and
savingly quickened from their Death in Sin, and by the Holy Ghost (whereof they
are made partakers) made a meet habitation for God, Ephesians. 2. 21, 22. 1 Cor. 3.
16. etc. Page 106.

Also see Reverend Mr. Cotton of New England on the Covenant, speaking of the
Ax being laid to the Root of the Trees, Mat. 3. 9. Page 177, 178.

The first is, says he, the Root of Abraham's Convenant, which this People much
trusted upon, and that is that which John Baptist speaks of is the Ax laid to
the Root of the Trees, think not to say with in your selves, we have Abraham to
our Father, verse. 8. So that all their confidence they had in Abraham's
Covenant, Temple, and Tabernacle, and such things, is burnt up, and so they
have no Root left them to stand upon. But 2ly. The Lord he says has cut us
off from the righteousness of our Parents and from boasting of his Ordinances.

Again, he says, it is spoken of the Ministry of John Baptist, which did burn
as an Oven, and left them neither the Root of Abraham's Covenant, nor the
Branches of their own good works; he cutteth them off from the Covenant of
Abraham and so by cutting them off from the root, he leaves them no ground to
trust to, Page 21, 22. you say the new creature in the Womb, or in the Cradle,
is as perfect and complete in all its lineaments as in the oldest Saint on
Earth, Page 40. etc.

Answer, Sir, do not mistake your self, if Infants are any of them regenerated
in the Womb, then Regeneration in them is the first, birth but Regeneration is
a being born again, or a second Generation which is wrought by the Holy Spirit,
therefore it cannot proceed from believing Parents in any wise, they can by
their Faith contribute nothing to the second Birth: Now show at what time it is
that regeneration is wrought in your Infants. O take heed; for though God does
regenerate the Souls of dying Infants, that are saved. Yet what is this to the
Infants of Believers, as such?

Besides, if John Baptist, or Jeremiah the Prophet were Regenerated in the
Womb, or any other Infants, then it would follow they were not born Children of
wrath as others: Nor could their Regeneration be called a being born again (as
I hinted before) but their first Birth must be so called.

You I see apply those Scriptures where our Lord Jesus Speaks of the Adult, to
Infants, as that, Mark 16. 16. John. 3. 3. So that Infants by your notion are
required to believe and to be born again; nay you, in Page 24, 25 Ch^llenge Mr.
Collins in the name of the Lord to produce ^at one Text of Scripture that d^^h
discover any other way or means, wherein God has ordained and appointed to
save Elect. dying Infants in; differing in any point or part of it, from that
wherein he saves Adult believers? Again in Page 19. say you, where will you
find two ways for the saving Elect Persons, etc.

Answer, As to the way of Salvation, it is we g^ant but one, viz. Christ is the
way, nor is there Salvation in any other: But the mode or manner may differ
about the Application or means of that one way in some points, as may appear to
all, viz.

1. The Adult (except Idiots) are not saved without the Act and exercise of
Faith, dying Infants are. 2ly. The Adult are not saved without actual
repentance, but dying Infants are, 3ly. The Adult are not saved without
Mortification of Sin, taking up the Cross, and following of Christ. But Infants
are saved without any of these, or any other Sacred Acts of obedience
whatsoever; and yet will you say the way (as to the Mode or manner) of the
Salvation of dying Infants, differs in no one point from Adult persons: How
will you prove that it is the habit of Faith, and not the Act of Faith, that
applies Christ's merits and Righteousness to the Soul in adult persons* is it
not from the habit, the Soul is enabled to believe, and say hold on Christ; and
is it not thus that Christ saves the Adult, and does he just so and in the same
mode or manner save dying Infants?

As to the producing one Text in the Case, I say the Holy Ghost is wholly
silent as touching the way or manner of the application of Christ's merits, to
dying Infants, or how their sinful natures are sanctified; yet that the modes
differ in many respects, as I have showed, is evident.

As to what you say in Page 4^. I ask, how do you kn^^ but that some of the
dying Infants of ^fi^^ls may be elected as well as some Infants of believers,
and so in as good a condition? ^^y, ^^w (...) on know but that all Infants
dying in Infancy may be elected? sure I am, naturally all are born in ^in, and
I know no difference in that respect, nor is there any when grown up till grace
is infused: '(...)e and not the natural Birth that makes any difference between
the Children of Believers, and the Children of unbelievers; and I do affirm,
till Children have actual Faith, or do believe and repent, they have no right
to the Ordinance of Baptism, nor have you proved the contrary, nor ever will.

The Church of England acknowledge the same, viz. that Infants are not able to
perform Faith and Repentance, the two great prerequisits of Baptism, by reason
of their tender age, therefore they have found out sureties to engage for them.

In Page 57. you greatly abuse Mr. Collins, in saying that he allows not Elect
dying Infants, to be in the Covenant of Grace. Does it follow, because he
denies the Infants of believers, as such, to be in the Covenant of grace,
therefore he denies elect Infants to be in the Covenant of Grace? Sir, you
ought, not to bear false witness against your neighbor, as you have done; he
will tell you and has told, you that all that are saved, are in the Covenant
of Grace.

Reader, Pray note how disengenuous this Man seems to be, and how he has
strangely encumbred the present controversy, in talk* of habitual grace in
dying; Infants for what is that to the purpose, since he refers not to such
Infants of believers that live? he himself acknowledges that all their Infants
who live have not the habit of Faith: Nor can he prove any of them have it, or
such that die either; therefore unless no other but dying Infants were baptized
by the Pedo Baptists, this can no ways concern the controversy.

2. Consider, that since those supposed habits in Infants of believers, do not
appear to us, nor do we know which they are, what ground it there to Baptize
any of them? For what appears not is not (as to us) Should we Baptize any Adult
persons in whom no Fruit, Sign, or demonstration of Faith appears than what
appears in Infants, certainly we should be worthy of the greatest blame
imaginable: For it is evident that in all whosoever that are the true subjects
of Baptism, ought the habits of Faith not only to be, but the Act, confession
and fruits of it also. True, we might plead thus; what though we see no fruits of
Faith in some, yet they may be elected, and the habit of Faith may be in them:
Nay, this allowed, viz. that they may Baptize all the Infants of Believers
promiscuously, supposing some are true Subjects and have habitual Faith, why
say, I may they not also Baptize (by the same argument) the Infants of Infidels
or Unbelievers, since among them may be some elected allo; and if so, why not
as much the habit of Faith as any Elect Infant of Believers?

To conclude with this, take three or four Arguments.

Arg. 1. That which cannot be proved of this nature from the word of God,
nothing being directly or indirectly spoken about it, is absur^d and vain for
any person to assert.

But it cannot be proved from the word of God that one Infant of Believers or
any other, have habitual Faith; there being nothing directly or indirectly
spoken about it, ergo it is absurd and vain for any person to assert that any
Infant of Believer has habitual Faith.

Arg. 2. It Is forbid, and a sinful thing for any to p^y into Gods secrets: All
they that pry into the way how God applies the merits of Christ to dying
Infants, and sanctifies them, do pry into God, Secrets, ergo it is forbid and a
sinful thing to pry into that, etc.

The Text says positively, secret Things belong unto God, not unto us That is,
such secret things which God has not made known to his dearest Children; for
we deny not but some things that were kept secret, are now revealed, and some
things also that are made known to the godly, are kept secret from the wicked;
hence it is, said the Secrets of the Lord are with them that fear him, and he
will show them his Covenant, Psalm. 2^. 14. The Covenant of grace that is hid
from others is revealed to believers, they understand the nature, Blessings,
and duties of it; they know no person can be saved but by the Grace of God in
this Covenant, nor without the merits of Christ and Sanctification: But yet how
the merits of Christ or the blood of the Covenant is applied to Infants that
die, or how they are Sanctified is no where revealed to the godly (therefore
one of Gods Secrets) if this Man knows it, let him show where it is written, or
has he it by Revelation?

But this Man says Page 129. That the Salvation of all the Elect is revealed;
and Christ says, there is nothing covered that shall not be revealed, and hid
that shall not be known.

Answer, Sure those words must be taken with restriction, for there are many
things not* revealed, and though it is revealed that all the Elect are saved and
Sanctified by Christ, yet show me where it is revealed or made known that
Infants have habitual Faith.

Arg. 3. They who have had an Habit of Faith infused into them, can never lose
it.

But such Infants that live may lose your supposed Habit of Faith; Therefore.

Such Infants never had an Habit of Faith infused into them. For proof of the
Major Proposition, See 1 John 3. 9. The Seed remains in him, Luke 22. 23. I
have prayed for thee, that thy Faith fail not.

Arg. 4. Those Infants who have your supposed Habit of Faith infused into them
are Regenerated, and when grown up to maturity, need no other Regeneration: But
those Infants when erown up to maturity do need Regeneration; Therefore.

Those Infants have no such Habit of Faith infused into them.

If he should say those habits infused in Infancy do regenerate their Soul, let
him prove it: How does it come to pass then that some of the Children of
Believers are not regenerated till they are (may be) 30 or 40 or 50 years old?
Strange that such habits should be in them, and yet lie asleep so long, and
evil habits predominate in them till that time.

This Man in Page 45. positively affirms, that some Children have had Faith
though he cannot prove any Infants have it that are now living:

If he by Children means Infants, I do deny, it, and b^d him prove what he
says, for the* Text he mentions in Luke 1. 41. proves no such, thing: What tho`
the Babe leaped in the Womb of Elizabeth, does that prove the Babe had faith or
the habit of it? Neither does that in 2 Timothy 1. 5.

What though St. Paul was persuaded that Timothy had when an Adult person, like
unfeigned says that was in his Gran mother Lois, and in his Mother Eunice does
that prove he had the habit of Faith in him when an Infant?

If you say that the habit of Grace may be in a person, and yet nor appear, act
nor influence or dispose the person according to the nature and quality of it,
you may as well say there may b^ a principle of life in a person and yet he may
be dead, or have no Life, Sense, feeling, or motion in him; or there may be
Fire, and no Heat, a Sun and no light, Water and no moisture; also you
contradict all Divines and wise Men in the World in their notions about a habit
of Grace or vital Principle: they say where these habits are there is Divine
Life, there is a Spirit of love and other Graces, whereby as their
understandin^s are possessed with knowledge of the excellencies of Gods ways, so
their wills are seasoned by the power of those habits, and as the old nature is
the habit of Sin, so the new nature is the habit of Grace; where the habit of
Faith is, they tell you there is a ready disposition to every good work, and as
it is ready in respect of disposition so it is in the activity of motion, yea
that it is naturally active according to its Divine nature; and voluntary
active. And where these habits are there is a kind of natural necessity of
motion from life and habit, etc.

Now if these habits do remain in any Infants of Believers that live: How comes
it to pass there is none of these effects and Operations, but the direct
contrary till new habits be infused?

If you say these habits may be quite lost, then there is a possibility of
falling quite from true Grace.

Reverend Dr. Owen in his discourse of the Holy Spirit, Page 416. says, That
the habit of Grace is a virtue, a Power, a Principle of Spiritual Life,
wrought, created, infused into our Souls, and laid in all the faculties of them
constantly abiding and unchangeably residing in them. --

And again says, this abides always in, and with all that are sanctified. --
And hereby are they prepared, disposed and enabled unto all duties of
obedience.

Thus you see that there is not in any Infants of Relievers that live, any
habit of Faith, and if you still affirm it you will run upon one Rock or
another which will sink your Ship down to the bottom without remedy.

In Page 41. Mr. Sh^te reflects upon Mr. Collins because he calls Infants
ignorant Babes, See his words, viz. He seems to make the ignorance of young
Infants to be too hard a match for the Wisdom and Power of God, and renders
Infants, wholly incapable of receiving the Seeds of Grace.

Answer, Does Mr. Collins question the wisdom and power of God, because he
affirms Infants are morally incapable of those habits of Faith which are in
Adult persons? What cannot God do? no doubt he that placed in Infants the Seed
or habit of natural knowledge, will, affections, etc. can inspire Infants with
the habits of Divine Grace, nay, and as easily bring those Natural and Divine
habits in their Infancy when infused, into Acts and Exercise also, according to
their distinct natures and Operations as in the Adult: But for any to assert
that God does this is the business, and it is that which we do deny, and say,
God infuses no such habits into any Infants (that we know of) who are out of a
moral capacity to Act and improve those habits, according as they dispose,
incline, and empower all that have them.

2. And let it be also considered whether this Man does not go about to limit
the holy one of Israel: When he argues that because God saves and sanctifies
the Adult by infusing the habits of Grace into them etc. that therefore God
must that way and no other, sanctify and apply the Blood and righteousness of
Christ to dying Infants.

We know that Men can differently apply the same medicine to a sick person, and
yet it shall have the same effect in curing: So (say we may God some other way
apply Christ's merits to dying Infants and sanctify them (which we know not of)
besides his infusing the same habits which believers are inspired withal, who
is a free agent and whose ways are wonderful and past finding out.

CHAP. III. Proving that Infants of Believers, as such, are not in the Covenant
of Grace God made with Abraham; and that there was a twofold Covenant made with
Abraham, one that peculiarly referred to his Natural Seed, as such; and the
other to his Spiritual Seed, as such; with a full Answer and Confutation of
what Mr. Shute has said in his last reply to Mr. Collins, and to Benjamin
Keach, in his Treatise, The Ax laid to the Root, about the Covenant of Grace,
and that of Circumcision.
I Shall pass by several things in your Answer, because they are over, and
over, fully answered, in our late Treatise wrote on this Controversy, as that
in page 44. of your Book concerning Federatal Holiness, from 1 Cor. 7. 14. See
our Answer to the Athenian Society, and Rector Rectified, and that in page 71.
about the promise, Acts 2. 38. But to proceed.

This first of all the Reader is desired to consider of, and that carefully,
that our Adversary has dealt very unfairly with my Reverend Brother Collins, I
hope it is through his Ignorance or great oversight, viz. first, he positively
concludes and takes it for granted, that Mr. Collins has endeavoure^ (...)
^rove the Covenant of Grace which God made with, or rather promis`d to Abraham
is dissannulled and taken away. Secondly, that Mr. Collins by his often
repeated distinction of the Covenant of peculiarity God made with Abraham, does
mean and intend the Covenant of Grace, when this is as far from his intention
and expressions any where in his Book or Judgment, as the East is from to the
West: I have seen many Men undertake in Controvertible Points, but never saw
any (except one) abuse his Antagonist worse, nor after such a sort; it is
evident there was two Covenants contained in those transactings of God with
Abraham, one peculiarly respected only his Natural Seed or Offspring, as such,
which Mr. Collins calls the Covenant of peculiarity, (as others have done
before him) which Circumcision was a Sign of, and this he has proved, was not
the Covenant of Grace which God promised to Abraham for the Covenant of Grace
God Promised to him, did not peculiarly relate to Abraham's Natural Seed that
were Elect Persons; but to all the Gentiles also, who believe in Christ; for
that comprehends none but the Elect, or the true Spiritual Seed of Abraham, as
such. Reader, if you read Mr. Colline first Book, or his answer to Mr. Shute,
you will find this is as plainly laid down by him, as any thing could well be:
I am afraid that this Man`s over heated Zeal would not suffer him distinctly to
read over, and seriously weigh, what Mr. Collins has wrote and said upon this
account, before he attempted to write an Answer, for through this gross mistake
(as one that has read Mr. Shutes Book, observed and told me) he has wrote
near twenty Leaves to no purpose, i. e. to prove that which no body denis, viz.
that the Covenant of Grace God promised to Abraham, is not dissolved, cast out,
or disannulled, but abides the same forever, which we all as steadfastly believe
as Mr. Shute, therefore he has but set up here on this respect, a Man of Straw,
and then fights with it; And upon search and examination of Mr. Shutes reply, I
see that what the Gentleman told me is very true, and that those Leaves do
begin about 74th. page and so on: And in the said 74th. page Mr. Shute begins
with this easy assay, viz. To prove the Covenant of Grace God made with (or
rather promised unto) Abraham, abides for ever and ever, he urges that
blessed Text Psalm 89. 34, 35, etc. My Covenant I will not break, nor alter the
thing that in gone out of my Lips; once have I sworn by my my Holiness that I
will not lie unto David, etc. Do we say or Imagine, that the promise of the
Covenant of Grace God made to Abraham, is abrogated? God forbid: for that
stands firm for ever and ever, as the Spring of all our comfort and consolation
in Life and Death, being confirmed by the Oath of God, who cannot lie, Heb. 6.
13. 15, 16, 17, 18. and so does the Invisible and Mystical Church, or Body of
Christ, remain and abide for ever also, against which the Cates of Hell shall
never prevail.

But the question is, viz. Whether or no, there was not a Covenant of
Peculiarity made with Abraham and his Natural Seed, (or Offspring) as such,
viz a Covenant that only, did belong or appertain to the Jews, in which
nobelieving Gentiles, nor their Seed, as such, were concerned, of which
Circumcision was a Sign, for this is that which we affirm.

Now Reader, observe Mr. Collins's Argument, and Mr. Shutes Reply in his 76.
page viz.

The Natural Branches are broken off, Ergo, Childrens visible in Covenanting is
repealed: thus Mr. Collins, Take the Answer as follows.

Now Sir you shall see, says Mr. Shute, That this does no more prove, that the
Children of believing Parents, were cast out of the everlasting Covenant which
God made with Abraham, than, etc.

Answer, By the Everlasting Covenant, you mean the Covenant of Grace, that God
promised to Abraham. Friend, we say all the Elect Infants of believers, or of
unbelievers were Included in that Covenant, and they are not, nor can they be
cast out of it: But you mistake the Argument, `tis not about the Spiritual
Seed, but the Natural Seed of Abraham; the Controversy lies not, about who are
Members of the Invisible, but who are Members of the Visible Church in Gospel
days; the Argument is about Childrens Visible in Covenanting. I am sorry you
distinguish no better, either you do not see where the Stress of the Point
lies, or else will not see it.

I ask you whether there was no Covenant made with Abraham, that belonged to
his Natural Seed as such only? and whether Circumcision did not belong to that
Covenant, and so a Covenant of Peculiarity? i. e. in which Gentile believers,
and their Seed were no ways concerned; was not Christ to come only of Abraham
and his Seed, according to the flesh? Besides, if this were not so,
Circumcision could not be said to be an advantage to the Jews, (upon the
account of the Law) above the Gentiles, Romans 3. 1, 2. is it not said unto them
(that is, the Jews) appertained the Covenants, etc. Romans 9. 4. is not here more
Covenants than one? it is not Covenant, but Covenants: Now the Covenant of
Circumcision that belonged to them, as they were the Natural Seed of Abraham,
(though wicked Persons) and so did the giving of the Law and Service of God under
that dispensation: but the Covenant of Grace belongs only to Abraham, Spiritual
Seed. First such of them that proceeded from his Loins; and Secondly, those of
the Gentiles, also that were comprehended in Gods Election of Grace; hence
Christ says, he was not sent, but to the lost Sheep of the House of Israel,
that is, to all that God has given him among the Jews, not sent, that is not
first, the promise runs first to the Jews, to the Jews first, and also to the
Gentiles, Romans 1. 16.

1. Let this therefore be carefully considered, viz. that God made a twofold
Covenant or two Covenants with Abraham and his Seed one a formal Covenant, the
other held forth in promise, which by and by I shall further evince.

2. That the Gospel Covenant run first to all the Elect that were the Natural
offspring of Abraham, and then to the Gentiles, and from hence it is said, Romans
11. That when the Jews are called and brought in again, they shall be grafted
into their own Olive Tree. Their own because the Covenant of Grace or Gospel
Covenant, first in the blessings of it, was to them or to such amongst them,
that were Gods Elect. 2. Because the true Olive does according to God(...)rnal
pupose and free Grace; Peculiarity belong to all the Elect and called ones of
God, -- but

3. Let it be considered that there was a National Covenant of Peculiarity
also, made with Abraham's Carnal Seed, as such in which Circumcision, the Land
of Canaan, the giving sorib of the Law on Mount Sinai, their Visible Church,
and Church Membership, and all the Statures, Ordinances, and Services of the
Law did appertain, and this brings me to what Mr. Shute has said by way of
answer to my Sermon on Ma^h. 3. Now is the Ax laid to the Root of the Trees.
Where I do not only assert, but prove that two Covenants were continued in Gods
Transactions with Abraham; but first observe, Reader, his abuses and
misconstructions of my words, as in page 115. as if I had left out on purpose
the 7. verse in Genesis 17. where the Covenant of Circumcision is called, an
everlasting Covenant. It Is evident I did not only mention that verse, but
answered Mr. Flavels Argument drawn there from, as in part 2. page 13. But
still he affirms positively again that in all my Discourse, I have not so much
as named this, viz. an Everlasting Covenant, and so compares me with the Devil,
who left out part of a Scripture; see his Book page 116. Now this being a
matter of Fact, let such who are in Communion with him consider it, for if they
read my Sermons, page 13, 14. they will see that it is a great untruth. What
though I left it out at such times when the writing it was not to my purpose in
Hand, seeing I mention it at another, and answer what our opponents draw there
from? In page 117. he says, If there were two Covenants made with Abraham, then
there would have been three Covenants in being at once, two of Works, and one
of Grace.

Answer, This I have fully answered in those Sermons called, the Ax laid at the
Root, see page 14, 15, 16, 18. Second Part. Thus you will find I express my
self, viz. Though there is but one Covenant of Work's yet there was more than one
Addition or Administration of the said Covenant. This is evident, although given
upon a different End, Purpose, and Design by the Lord: The Covenant of Works
was primerly made with Adam; yet another addition or ministration of it, was
given on Mount Sinai, and to that Covenant, I there prove Circumcision did
appertain, Ax 2d. Part page 17, 18. Also I there showed that though there is but
one Covenant of Grace, yet there were several distinct Additions or
Administrations of that. Also, in page 125. he misrepresents my words again, he
cites an Objection I mention in page 25. part 1. viz.

Object. If Infants as such were not included in the Covenant of Grace God made
with Abraham, how can dying Infants be saved?

My Answer is, Must Infants of believers, as such, be comprehended in that
Covenant, God made with Abraham, or else can they not be saved? how then were
any dying Infants saved before Abraham's days, or before the Covenant was made
with him?

Now Mr. Shute says, page 125. That I have answered this Objection; as if there
had been no Covenant of Grace before that time God did declare and make that
Covenant with Abraham.

Answer, I will appeal to all Men, whether or no the very purport of my Answer
is not to signify that the Covenant of Grace was from the beginning, made
primarly with Christ before the World begun for us, and that those Infants that
were saved before Abraham's time, were saved by the said Covenant of Grace,
otherwise I had said nothing; the very Stress of my Argument lies upon that
foot of account.

In page 132. Mr. Shute he says if God made two distinct Covenants with Abraham
and his Seed, then.

1. There must be that in the one that is peculiar to his Spiritual Seed.

2. There must be that in the other that is peculiar to his Carnal Seed; but we
find (says he) it is altogethor unscriptural; for

1. Both the Seeds of Abraham had a right to all the External Benefits and
Privileges of the everlasting Cevenant which God made with Abraham, very few
excepted.

Answer, I have largely proved in the said Sermons called, The Ax laid to the
Root, That there were some things in one peculiar to his Spiritual Seed, that
no ways related to his Carnal Seed, as such, which proved the Covenant
contained in promise to be distinct, page 15, 16. and some things in the other
that belonged to his Natural Seed, that appertains not to his Spiritual Seed,
as such, of which this Man takes no notice.

I begin there with those things that belonged to Abraham's, Natural Seed, as
such, as peculiar to them.

1. The first that I Name, is, That of Gods multiplying his Seed by Isaac.

2. The Birth of Isaac by Sarah Abraham,s Wife, Genesis 17. 16, 19.

3. The continuation of his Covenant, with all that should proceed from Isaac
according to the Flesh, Genesis 17. 6.

4. The coming of Christ out of Isaac according to the Flesh.

5. The bringing the Natural Seed of Abraham by Isaac out of Egypt.

6. The promise of giving his Natural Seed the Land of Canaan for their
Possession. Now can any of these things concern, or belong to Abraham^
Spiritual Seed, as such, that is, do they concern us Gentiles who do believe?

Observe also, that as these things peculiarly appertained to his Natural Seed,
as such; so Circumcision is expressly called Gods Covenant, Genesis 17. Thou shall
keep my Covenant, every Man Child among you shall be Circumcised, verse 10. And
ye shall Circumcise the Flesh of your Fore Skins, and it shall be a token of
the Covenant betwixt me and you, verse 8. And I will give unto thee, and to thy
Seed after thee, the Land wherein thou art a Stranger, all the Land of Canaan,
etc. so Genesis 15. 8. Now this Covenant and these promises I affirmed, cannot
belong to the Spiritual Seed of Abraham as such, page 16. therefore a Covenant
of peculiarity; to which he has given no answer.

Secondly, I have showed also what those things are, that are Peculiar to the
Covenant of Grace, and so to Abraham's Spiritual Seed, as such, which Covenant
only, was by promise, not a formal Covenant like the other, viz. that of
Circumcision, Genesis 17. 7.

1. See Genesis 15. 5. Look toward Heaven, tell the Stars, if thou art able to
Number them; and he said unto him, so shall thy Seed be; and he believed in the
Lord, and it was counted to him for Righteousness. This was not in the Covenant
of Circumcision, and referrs to Abraham^ numerous Spiritual Seed.

2. So again, I have made thee a Father of many Nations; meaning Gentile
Believers, as diverse Expositors show.

3. In thy Seed, shall all the Nations of the Earth be Blessed, Genesis 12. 3.
Genesis 18. 18. Genesis 22. 18. I cited the Apostles words, Gal. 3. 8. The Scripture
foreseeing, that God would Justify the Heathen, through Faith Preached the
Gospel to Abraham, saying, in thy Seed shall all the Nations of the Earth be
Blessed.

It Is remarkable the Holy Ghost does not here refer to the Covenant of
Circumcision, Gen 17. 7, 8, 9, 10. But to the free promise of the Covenant of
Grace, which Paul says positively Abraham received not in Circumcision, Romans 4.
9, 10. Faith was reckoned to Abraham for Righteousness; how was it then
reckoned, when he was in Circumcision, or in Uncircumcision? not in
Circumcision, but in Uncircumcision.

Now I desire it may be well considered by all Christians, that the Covenant of
Grace, was only by promise, and no Formal Covenant with any of the Saints under
the Old Testament; thus the Covenant of Grace run to Adam, to Abraham, to
David, etc. 11, 12. only by promise, not a Covenant, where there was a mutual
restipulation between God and his Elect ones: As in the Covenant of
Circumcision, there was between God and Abraham, in respect of his Carnal Seed;
this Dr. Owen asserts also on Heb. 8. 6. page 227.

When God renewed, says he, the promise of it to Abraham, he is said to make a
Covenant with him, and he did so; but it was with respect unto other things;
especially the proceeding of the promised Seed from his Loins; but absolutely
under the Old Testament, it consisted only in a promise. 1. It wanted its
solemn confirmation and establishment, by the Blood of the only Sacrifice,
which belonged to it. 2. This was wanting, says he, the Spring, Rule, and
Measure of all the Worship of the Church, this does belong to every Covenant,
properly so called, that God makes with his Church, that it be the entire Rule
of all the Worship, that God requires of it, which is that which they are to
restipulate in their entrance into Covenant with God; but so the Covenant of
Grace was not under the Old Testament; thus Dr. Owen.

This is further confirmed by those expressions, Jer. 31. 31. I will make a new
Covenant with the House of Israel, etc. clearly intimating he had not so made
it before with any, except it was with Christ as our Head, Representive, and
Mediator, with whom it was made for us, and in him with us, before the
Foundation of the World, Tit. 1. 2. 2 Timothy 1. 9.

Object. Does not David say God had made with him an everlasting Covenant, etc.

Answer, I answer, David was a Type of Christ, Psalm 89, 28, 34, 35. with whom
the Covenant of Grace was made before the World began, this therefore refers to
the true David, who was only able to answer the Condition agreed upon, between
the Father and himself as Mediator, For the Covenant of Peace was between them
both, Zech. 6. 13. For unto us the Covenant of Grace is not a Conditional, but
an Absolute Covenant.

I will be their God, and they shall be my People, etc.

To Adam the promise runs The Seed of the Woman shall Bruise the Sepents Head,
etc.

To Abraham, In thy Seed shall all the Families of the Earth be blessed. In
both places it contained only a gracious promise: To Abraham, and to his Seed
the promise was made; it is not said Covenant, therefore when I say God made a
Twofold Covenant with Abraham, I mean that there were two Covenants contained
in those Covenant Transactings of God with him, one a Formal Covenant with him
and his Carnal Seed, which contained a Covenant upon mutual restipulation,
which was the Covenant of Circumcision, which Abraham and his Carnal Seed
subscribed to the other a free promise or Covenant of Grace to him and all is
true Spiritual Seed, which is confirmed by Christ's Blood, and which believers
consent to, and enter into, when Baptized upon the profession of their Faith,
in Gospel days, though I deny not, but that they have actual interest in it; as
soon as they have Union with Christ, or do believe in him.

Moreover it was through Faith only, in the free promise of Christ and in the
Covenant of Grace that all the faithful were justified and saved who lived
under the old Testament, though the Covenant it self was not then formerly a
Covenant with them, it being not Ratified nor confirmed by the Blood of Christ
or Death of the Testator, nor could it so be till the typical Covenant was
taken away.

This being so it follows clearly that the Covenant, Genesis 17. was only a
peculiar external and Typical Covenant made with Abraham and his carnal Seed,
in which, Justification, pardon of sin, Adoption, and Eternal Life was not
contained, but in the free Promise only God made to him, that Covenant had in
it; it is true, temporal Blessings, apolitical Church state and typical
worship, and visible, legal Church Membership given to Israel in subserviency
to the Gospel Covenant.

And further to prove that the promise of the Covenant of Grace did not belong
to Abraham's natural Seed as such, Paul shows in Gal. 3. 16. Now to Abraham and
to his Seed was the promise made; he says not to seeds, as* of many; but to
thy Seed, which is Christ.

And therefore says he, verse. 29. and if ye be Christ's, then are you Abraham's
Seed, and heirs according to the promise.

Ye must say I reckon from Christ, not from Abraham; but Mr. Shute
misrepresents me here also, as if I set Abraham before Christ, when it is
evident I intimated no other thing than this, i. e. you must see your selves
first in Christ before you can reckon your selves to be Abraham's Seed: Again, I
cited Page 17. part, 1. that in Romans 9. 7, 8. Neither because *they are the
Seed of Abraham are they all Children, but in Isaac shall thy Seed be called,
7. That is, they which are the Children of the Flesh, these are not the
Children of God. But the Children of the promise are counted for the Seed.

What can be more clear than this, viz. that the natural Seed of Abraham, as
such (called here the Children of the Flesh) are not his Spiritual Seed to whom
the Covenant of Grace does belong unto, that is (says the Apostle) They which
are the Children of the Flesh, these are not he Children of God, that is, as
such, or as simply so considered: For some of the natural Seed of Abraham, though
not all, were the Children of the promise; for says he, they are not all
Israel that are of Israel, verse. 6.

This Man meddles not with my arguments, and what he catches up he generally
wrongs and abuses me in, rendering me to speak that which I speak not nor,
intended.

But to proceed (he says) Page 132. Both the Seeds of Abraham had a right to
all the external benefits and privileges of the everlasting Covenant, God made
with Abraham, very few excepted.

Answer, What few he means that are excepted, I know not; but if all the
Spiritual Seed of Abraham had right to all the external benefits and
privileges of the external Covenant God made with him, then all believing
Gentiles and their Elect Infants have, or had a right to circumcision, the
giving of the Law, the possession of the Land of Canaan, and all other rites of
the Mosaical Law.

2. If by the everlasting Covenant he means the Covenant of Grace, then all
Abraham's natural Seed, as such, a few excepted, have or had a right to Baptism,
the Lords Supper and all Gospel Churche-priviledges; and if so, why were the
Saddu^ees and Pharisees, and Multitudes more of Abraham's natural Seed refused
and not admitted to the external benefits and privileges of the Gospel or
Covenant of Grace?

Think not to say, says John Baptist, within your selves, ye have Abraham to
your Father, when they came to be Baptized; he proceeds to prove several things
that none denis: A^ that the Covenant of Works was made with Adam and all
mankind in him, and that there is but two Covenants; that all the elect under
the Law were in the Covenant of Grace, etc.

Then in Page 134, Shows what a Straight he is in, and knows not which to
wonder at most.

1. At our boldness and confidence and imposing our sallacious corrupt Doctrins
upon the People.

2. Or at the Peoples ignorance to suffer themselves to be so horribly deluded
and imposed upon.

Answer, I do not much wonder at such lines, because I know who wrote them, and
in what Spirit, but Sir, you should first have proved any Doctrine we maintain
to be corrupt and fallacious.

2. That we impose those Doctrins upon the People: Dare you falsely charge and
condemn the innocent? we are not yet convicted nor tried at a lawful Bar: But
both you and we must appear at a righteous and just tribunal ere long -- You
proceed to renew your charge against me for leaving out everlasting Covenant.
Friend, I quoted those Verses that concerned the point I had in hand, and have
cited that Verse and answered it too, where circumcision is called an
everlasting Covenant; see Ax laid to the Root and I will now recite what I
there wrote.

2. Part Page 1^. viz. the Covenant of circumcision was called an everlasting
Covenant. My Answer there to this, is as follows.

Answer, It Is not unknown to our Opponents that the word everlasting, sometimes
signifies no more than a long continuance of time; and so extensive was the
promise of Gods peculiar favors to the natural Seed of Abraham; and the
original of their claim therefrom, that the severity of that ^aw afterward
given to them, was so far restrained as that notwithstanding their manifold
breach of Covenant with God and forfeture of all legal claims, of their right
and privileges in the Land of Canaan thereby, that they were never cut off
from that good Land and ceased to be peculiar People unto God, until the End or
period of that time determined by the Almighty was fully come: Which was at the
Revelation of the M^ssiah, and the setting up his Spiritual Temple under the
Dispensation of the Gospel; and thus far the word everlasting does extend. It Is
said, God promised to give the Land of Canaan to Abrahhm and to his Seed for
ever; and again, Genesis 17. 8. for an everlasting inheritance, whereas it is
evident they have for many ages been disposessed of it. Nor may this seem
strange if we consult other Texts where the same Terms are used with the like
Restriction, for the Priesthood of Levi is called an everlasting Priesthood,
Numb. 25. 13. And so the Statutes to make an Atonement for the Holy Sanctuary,
and for the Tabernacle and for the Altar, is called an everlasting Statute,
Levit. 16. 34. Yet we know they all ended as did the Covenant of circumcision
in Christ: See more in Page 14. Ax laid to the Root.

1. Now let any person see what blame this Man does in Justice deserve for
saying I have not mentioned the word everlasting in all my Book, viz.
circumcision being called an everlasting Covenant; you also see, what little
argument lies in that to prove the Covenant of circumcision is a Gospel
Covenant or appertaining to the Covenant of Grace*

Reader, in those Sermons I laid down eleven arguments, proving that the
Covenant of Circumcision was part of the old legal and external Covenant God
made with the Jews or the natural Seed of Abraham, so not belonging to the
Gospel Covenant, and because thou may not meet with them, I shall give thee
here the heads or sum of them as follows, see Page 18. 1. Part.

Arg. 1. Because the Law or Covenant of circumcision was made, as to the design
and end of it to separate the natural Seed of Abraham in their national Church
state, from all other Nations, and to give them the Land of Canaan, so that
they might not mixed themselves with the Heathen.

1. Will any say the Gospel Covenant or any precept of it; in the end and
design of it, is institured to separate all believers and their fleshy Seed as
a national Church from all other People in the World? if this be so, farewell to
all Spiritual incorporated congregations of Christians. See Dr. Owen.

2. Does any Gospel ordinance assure us and our Children of the Land of Canaan,
or any worldly and earthly Blessings, or is not the new Covenant established
upon better promises?

Arg. 2. Because some who were not in the Covenant of promise, had a positive
right to, and where commanded of God to be circumcised, as Ishmael, Esau, etc.
and all the Male-Children, though wicked Men's Children that sprung from Isaac in
their generations, etc. also some of Abraham's Spiritual Seed were not to be
circumcised, nor had they any right there too.

1. As all his Male-Children who died before eight days old.

2. All his Females, who were elected persons and some others, who lived in
Abraham's Days, as Melchisedeck and Lot, etc.

Arg. 3. Because some of Abraham's natural Seed to whom circumcision did belong,
were nevertheless denied Gospel Baptism; though their plea was Abraham is our
Father.

1. From hence it follows, circumcision was no Gospel Law; for that which gave
right to circumcision was not sufficient to give right to Gospel Baptism.

2. It also appears that the Covenant of Grace, was not the adequate reason of
circumcision, but the mere positive command of God to Abraham; So that if they
could prove the Children of believers in the Covenant of Grace, it would
nevertheless be no argument to Baptize them, unless they had a command or
ground from Christ so to do.

For the Covenant God made with Abraham speaks nothing of Baptism. And had not
our Blessed Savior given it forth as an instistution of the Gospel, we had
never heard of it nor known it had been a duty or ordinance, should we have
read the Covenant made with Abraham a thousand times over: Therefore if all
they say about the Infant Seed of Believers as such should be granted, being in
the Covenant of Grace that God made with Abraham, (which cannot) yet it would
not follow from thence, Infants ought to be Baptized for, none ought to be
Baptized but such that Christ's Commission and positive command, does authorize
so to be, which are none but those who by preaching, and the working of the
Holy Ghost are made Disciples, or do believe; and make a confession of their
Faith; in matters of mere positively right. We must always keep to the direct
will and words of the Lawgiver like as Abraham did in circumcision: No adding
nor altering no pleading for Females to be circumcised, if Males only are
expressed in the institution of it.

Arg. 4. Circumcision could not be a Gospel rite, because all in the Gospel
Church, it is expressly said, shall know the Lord, Jer. 31. 31.

And shall not need to be taught to know him.

Now under the old Legal Covenant Infants were admitted Members of the Jewish
Church, who did not know the Lord, but had need when grown up to understanding
to be taught to know him; in this the old Covenant differs from the new; and
old Church Membership from new Church Membership; for our Children before
admitted into Gods Church, must know the Lord; we and they too must believe or
be made Disciples by teaching; we must know Christ or fix our Faith on him, in
saving knowledge which Infants cannot do.

To the last of these arguments he seems to say some thing; see Page 119. where
he cites these words out of my Sermons, Page 21. viz. in the old Covenant
Infants were Members who did when taken into that Covenant and made members of
that Legal Church, not know the Lord.

Mr. Shute says, here I mention but one Covenant, and acknowledge Infants were
in that one Covenant: So that he has confused himself, and let him or any of
their opinion prove by Scripture God did ^ast young Infants out of that one
Covenant; he has destroyed his two Covenants by thus contradicting himself; a
Man under his circumstances had need to have a good Memory.

Answer, That Covenant which I mention was I tell you the Legal Covenant that
God made with the whole Church and House of Israel, and how do I contradict my
self? Infants I own were Members of the Jewish Church, and does not the
Scripture say, cast out the Bond woman and her Son, etc. is not the old
Covenant the Jewish Covenant gone? did not God take away the first, that he
might establish the second? what Covenant is that which the Apostle says, is
took away and difanulled? it is not you, will say, the Covenant of Grace.

I also ask you whether the Jewish Church that was founded upon that Old
Covenant, is not gone and dissolved? if so what does your arguing prove, nor is
there a new Gospel national Church like the Church of the Jews instituted in
the room of the old? since you plead for Infants Church Membership, you must
come to the new and last Will and Testament, if Christ has not willed Infants,
their right to Baptism, and Church Membership in the Gospel, they cannot have it
by the former Testament which is disannulled.

Tou ask if faith and repentance was not required under the Law, Page 119.

I answer, Not to make any Members of the Jewish Church, you are in Page 120.
121. etc. upon your old argument, that both young and old, Infants and the
Adult are saved by faith: We have answered that already. Such that can believe,
that Infants do believe or know the Lord, let them, I believe it not, nor can
he nor all the Men of the World prove it. I shall repeat the substance of my
other arguments, to prove that circumcision did not appertain to the Covenant
of Grace.

Arg. 5. Because the Terms of it runs according to the Sinai Covenant, which is
said not to be of Faith. But the Man that does these things shall live in them,
Gal. 3. 22. Life was promised to their obedience, death threatened to their
disobedience: The promises were earthly, etc. and thus runs the Covenant of
circumcision, Genesis 17. 9, 10. Thou shall keep my Covenant, etc. and I will give
to thee, and to thy Seed after thee, the Land of Canaan. And the uncircumcised
Man-Child whose Flesh of his Fore-^^in is not circumcised, that Soul shall be
cut off, etc. verse 14.

6. The covenant of circumcision was of the Letter and not of the Spirit that
is, of the Law or first Testament, and not of the Gospel or second Testament,
See Romans 3. 29.

7. That Covenant in which Faith was not reckoned to Abraham for righteousness,
was not the Covenant of Grace, or Gospel Covenant; but Faith was not reckoned
to Abraham in circumcision, ergo. See Rom, 4. 9, 10. See more Page 22. 1 Part.

Arg. 8. That Law or Covenant that is contra-distinguished or opposed to the
Covenant of Faith, or Gospel Covenant could not be one and the same in nature
and quality with it.

But the Apostle lays down the Covenant of circumcision, as contra-distinct or
opposed to Faith or the Covenant of Grace, ergo.

9. That Covenant or precept that could profit none unless they keep the whole
Law perfectly, it could not appertain to the Covenant of Grace, but so it is
said of circumcision, S^e Romans 2, 25.

10. That Law or Covenant that obliged those that conformed to it, to keep the
whole Law, could not belong to the Covenant of Grace, but so did circumcision
oblige, See Gal. 5. 3. See our last Annotators on that Text.

11. That Covenant that is called a Yoke of Bondage, could not be the Covenant
of Grace. But circumcision is called a Yoke of Bondage, ergo. See Act. 15* Gal.
5. 1, 2.

12. All those that are in the Covenant of Grace God promised to Abraham, have
an undoubted right to all the saving Blessings of the said Covenant, but all
those that were in the Covenant of circumcision had not an undoubted right to
all the saving Blessings of the Covenant of Grace, ergo, etc.

13. All those that are in the Covenant of Grace God promised to Abraham, have
a sure and strong ground of consolation, that is, Spiritual Consolation; and
they should be saved, Heb. 6. 13, 14, 15. But many of them that were in the
Covenant of circumcision had no sure ground of consolation, that is, Spiritual,
nor have many of our Children who are Believers any such ground of consolation,
but some of them may perish, ergo.

Sir, why did you not answer these arguments? you have said nothing, that is
worth regard to me. Also show if you writ again what profit your Infants
receive by Baptism, and in what sense they are in the Covenant of Grace, and
how they can be Members of your Churches, and yet are not Members nor received
as such, until they actually believe and repent, -- But remember if you could
prove them in the Covenant of Grace, yet that does not prove you ought to
Baptize them: Baptism is of mere positive right: You must have authority from
Christ to Baptize them, or you sin if you do it.

In Page 136. You tell us, That the form of circumcision was transient, and is
ceased -- Yet the Essential part thereof remains in the Flesh, for nothing
could be more a Type of Baptism than Circumcision, etc.

Answer, I promised to forbear hard words; but a Man that argues thus should be
severely dealt with one way or another, i. e. either by writing, or rather in a
Church way be severely reproved. Does the Essential part of circumcision remain
in the Flesh, then the mark it made in the Flesh does no doubt remain, for I
know not what was else the essential part of it remaining in the Flesh save
that, the form was the cutting off the foreskin.

If you had said the essential thing signified by it does remain in the Heart
of true believers, you had said some thing to the purpose -- But.

Did ever any Man before now intimate that Baptism is the essential part of
circumcision? If this were so, circumcision could not be circumcision in the
Flesh without Baptism, because a thing cannot be where the essential part of it
is wanting.

He proceeds to give a reason why the essential part of circumcision remains in
the Flesh, Page 136. viz. how says he, could this token of the Covenant be
everlasting, if the Essence thereof was dissolved upon the coming in of the
Gospel? This cannot be, for it is a contradiction in it self; for everlasting
and dissolution are opposites.

1. Answer, This Man by this argument gives cause to fear he may erelong plead
for circumcision, and turn Jew, for he is for the essential part of it, and
that in the Flesh too already: I am sorry he understands no better the
difference between a Type and the Antitype, for there can no part of the Type
remain (much less the essential part of it when the Antitype is come) -- But he
runs into this error from his ignorance of the word Everlasting; which as I
have showed is sometimes to be taken with restriction, and refers to a long
period of time. -- He may as well say Aarons Priesthood remains, or the
essential part of it, because called an Everlasting Priesthood, Numb. 25. 13.

2. We deny Baptism was the Antytipe of circumcision: To prove it was not, I
have given many reasons, which he answers not.

1. Both Circumcision and Baptism were in full force together for some time,
even from the time John Baptized, until the Death of Christ.

2. Because one thing that is a figure or shadow cannot come in the room of, as
the Antitype of another thing that is a figure. See 12 Reasons more in Rector
Rectifiea Page 4. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, etc.

One of them Mr. Shute takes notice of, which is this, viz. Circumcision
belonged only to Male Children, Baptism belongs to Males and Females who
believe.

To this he answers, that the Females was included in the Males, because Man is
the head and representative of the Woman, and Woman is a part of Man.

Answer, Why then let your Females be Baptized in your Males: for from hence it
will follow when your Males are Baptized, your Females are Baptized also, as
much as the Jews Females were circumcised.

Neither need your Wives eat the Lords Supper, for when you receive, they
receive it. But sure, Sir, you mistake; your learning fails you: Will the food
you eat feed your Wife? or will your Faith serve her? Does she believe when you
believe, because she is part of you, as here you intimate?

In page 12. 7. he reflects on me for saying, God may have many ways to save
dying Infants, which we know not: He can apply the Benefits and Merits of
Christ's Blood to them in ways we are wholly ignorant of, etc. For this I
Quoted Dr. Tailor Bishop of Down.

Take his answer, viz. Pray take notice this Man contradicts himself* for in
page 21. (he says) They must believe and repent, and bring forth good Fruits,
etc. Yet here, ^e says, God has many ways to save dying Infants: And in page
30. for this Mr. Shute says, There is no saving of any Person, Old or Young,
without the Grace of Faith. The, you see there is (says he) but one way to
eternal Life.

1. Answer, I cannot see but that you have by your arguing, thus excluded all
Infants that dye, out of the Kingdom of Heaven; for if no Infant can be saved,
unless they Believe, Repent, and bring forth good Fruits as the Adult must, if
they are saved, how is it possible any Infant can be saved?

2. I did not contradict my self, I spoke not there of Infants, but of Adult
Persons: And why did you before only plead for habitual Faith to be in dying
Infants, that go to Heaven, since row you here intimate that they must believe?
For you cite Mark 16. 16. He that believes and is Baptized, shall be saved, and
he that believes not shall be damned. If our Savior in these words refers to
Infants, as well as to Men and Women, I am mistaken, and all Learned Men I ever
met with. Friend, it wi^ not help you to say Christ performed these conditions
for them, viz. Faith and Repentance, page 123. Nor does the Meritorious death
of Christ, without the infusing divine Faith into the Soul, render any Man a
Believer: Besides, though it is by the Grace and power of Christ's Spirit, that we
Believe, Repent, and bring forth good Fruit: Yet it is we that Believe, and
Repent, the act is ours, though enabled by Divine Power. to do it. Now prove that
God gives any Infant such power to Believe and Repent, etc. who know not the
object of Faith, nor have any understanding. Friend, they are more excusable,
who say God may have many ways to apply the Blood and Merits of Christ, and so
Save and Sanctify dying Infants, which we know not of, than you who assert
that not one of them can be saved unless they Believe, etc. and if they do not
do so, they shall be Damned: For you positively affirm there is no way of Gods
saving Elect dying Infants, differing in any point from that of his saving
Adult persons it is well you may Err, for should what you say be true, it is
enough to bring sorrow and amazement upon Godly Parents, about the State of
their dying Infants.

CHAP. IV. Wherein Mr. Shutes arguments to prove our Churches no Churches, and
our Baptism a counterfeit, are examined and answered.
1. IN page 186. he asserts, That Adult believers have nothing to do with the
Ordinance after the first institution or Plantation of the Gospel in a Family,
unless it be such, whose Parents deprived them of it in their Infancy: But
Baptism of Right is devolved upon the Infant Seed of Believers.

1. Answer, If this be true, then the Children of unbelievers have no right to
Baptism, neither as Infants nor when Adult believers, it the right be devolted
upon the Infants of believers. -- This in the first place is enough to convince
him of his great error and mistake, (...) he will not say that unbelievers
Children have any right thereto in their Infancy. Though his evidence that
Abraham's natural Seed, though ungodly persons, were required to Circumcise their
Children, and their Children had the same right to it; for were none but godly
Jews to circumcise their Male infants? Pray observe this.

2. Besides, did not God expressly command Abraham as well to circumcise his
Male Infants as himself; and so his offspring their Children after him in their
generations? And now did our Savior give such a Commission about Gospel
Baptism, viz. that first those that believed should be Baptized, and then their
Infants; or was there not the same purity of reason for Christ's Commission
about Baptism to have run thus, as there was for Gods Commission so to run to
Abraham about circumcision? If what you say was true but we will come to his
reasons to prove our Baptism a counterfeit, and our Churches no Churches of
Christ.

In Page 186. first, because, says he, they disown the Covenant God made with
Abraham, in which the very foundation; for Baptism, was laid; let them find
another foundation for it, if they can; for that Covenant is founded upon
Christ himself, etc.

1. Answer, This in the first place is not that he charges us with, viz. that
we disown (...) Covenant God made with Abraham; for the Covenant of Grace, God
promised to him (...) contend for it as far forth as any can -- But we do say
the Covenant of circumcision is disannuled; that we do disown to be in force
now.

2. Could he prove that Baptism is founded upon the Covenant made with Abraham,
he would seem to say some thing: But we deny that utterly; for had not Christ
Instituted or given it forth in the New Testament, none could have known that
Baptism had been an Ordinance; it was not Imprinted on the Hearts of Men, but
it is a mere positive precept.

3. I will show you therefore another foundation for it, and not the Covenant
God made with Abraham, viz. the great Commission of Jesus Christ, Mat. 28. 18,
19, 20. Mark. 16. 16. If we have it not here, says Mr. Richard Baxter, where
have it we? But you are wiser it appears than that Pedo-Baptist. Now Friend,
since our Baptism is founded on Christ's Commission, both as to subject and mode
of Baptising, our Baptism is no counterfeit, and so you will know one day.

2. Your second reason is, because we Baptize the Adult Seed of Believers, th^^
were Baptized in their Infancy, as they ought not.

Answer, You do but beg the question. We it is true, do Baptize the Adult Seed
of some Believers, but we deny they were Baptized in their Infancy, they were
but Rantized; but had they been in their Infancy Baptized, i, e. Dipped, yet
not having the prerequisites of Baptism, viz. Faith and Repentance, they were
not the true subjects of that Gospel ordinance. But Friend, do we do well to
Baptize the offspring of unbelievers, since by your argument they in their
Infancy could not have true right to it, it being intayled on Believers Seed
only? is that Branch of our Baptism a counterfeit also?

3. You say their Baptism cannot be good, because they deny it to their own
Seed and offspring; when as the Covenant is made to Believers and their Seed:
So that either they are no believers themselves, or else they Reprobate their
own Children.

1. Answer, Our Baptism may be good in your own opinion, I suppose, if our
parents were unbelievers -- But Friend, whose authority renders any Ordinance
good? If we act according to the authority of Christ in Baptism, is not our
Baptism good? We deny Baptism to our Children, because all are required to
believe, repent, etc. before Baptized, Mat. 28. 19, 20. Mark 16. 16, Act. 2.
36, 37. Act. 8. 12, 14, 39, etc.

But do we reprobate our Children because we Baptize them not? is that in our
power? or can Baptism bring into, or cast out of Gods election?

3. Friend, we deny that the Covenant of Grace, God promised to Abraham, gives
any a right to Baptism. No, no, it is Christ's positive command. If the Covenant
of Grace gave Lot no right to circumcision, as it did not, because not
commanded of him, how can the Covenant of Grace give right to Baptism to any,
person but to such only that Christ has commanded to be Baptized?

4. And lastly, you say their Baptism cannot be good, because their Principle
is to Baptize Adult Believers, but not their Seed; which is to Baptize, but
part of the believer; whereas they should Baptize, not only a part of him, but
all of him: So that their Baptism is but a counterfeit Baptism.

Answer, Is this to show your great wisdom? But are our Children a part of our
selves and are we not believers without our Children? How if our Children
should prove unbelievers, then I fear we shall not go for complete believers,
but one part of us is a believer, and the other part of us an unbeliever; also
then if your Child should perish, but a part of you would be saved; is it fit
such stuff should be Printed? Do not mistake your self, you are one complete
Man, and your Son another, and you are no less complete a Man if you have no
Child at all: So it you are a believer you are a complete believer and want no
part, and if your Child is an unbeliever: yet you are not less a complete
believer.

But you that Sprinkle only the Face, I am sure you do not Baptize the whole
person of a Child, nor any part of it, nor of the Adult neither: What shall I
call your Baptism. --

In Page 187. you quote our three Queries, but answer none of them.

1. Whether Children are in the Covenant of Grace, absolutely or conditionally?
^. Whether that can be an ordinance of Christ to which there is neither precept
nor example? 3. Whether in matters of mere positive right, such as Baptism is,
we ought not to keep expressly and punctually to the revealed will of the
Lawgiver?

Had you answered these three queris to the purpose, you had done, ten times
more than what is contained in your whole Book.

But instead of answering you ask this question, viz. where do you find any
command for the Infant Seed of believers, to stay till they are Adult, to be
Baptized?

1. Answer, Where did God expressly forbid Abraham to circumcise his Male
Infants, on the 7th or 9th day, or not to circumcise Female Infants?

2. There needs no Negative Law where there is a Law in the affirmative; if on
the 8th day, it follows not on the 7th or 9th; if Males only are expressed, not
Females; so if believers, if such who are taught and made Disciples by
teaching, are commanded to be Baptized, then all must stay till they do
believe, and are taught and made Disciples, before Baptized.

3. Was not the Gospel, think you, planted in Joseph and Mary's House, and yet
the Holy Child Jesus stayed till he was about 30 years old, before Baptized.
Also Gregory Nazianzen in his 4th Oration, says Dr. Duveil, gives an instance
of those who died without Baptism by reason of Infancy.

And the same Nazianzen, says he, though he was a Bishops Son, being a long time
bred up under his Father, was not Baptized until he came to Man's age; and so
Basil the Great, who was born of pious Parents, and instructed from his
Childhood, was not Baptized until a Man.

The like he says of Hiorem, Ambrose, Chrysostom, Augustine, etc.

Nothing of this nature ought to be done in Gods worship, without authority
from his wor^; prove if you can, one Infant was Baptized from the beginning of
Matthew, to the end of the Revelations of John.

Arguments to prove that those Churches who are gathered by Faith and
Repentance, and upon the profession of Faith are Baptized (which are called
Anabaptists) are true Churches of Christ* which Mr. Shute den^es so to be.
1. ARgument All those Churches who are rightin matter and form are true
Churches.

But those Churches, falsely called Anabaptists, are right in matter and form
^rgo they are true Churches.

The matter of true Churches are godly person, or true believers; the true form
is the order or (...) of the Gospel Church, viz. The A^ult upon the profession
of Faith and Repentance, Baptized; and so with joint consent give themselves up
to the Lord, and one to another, to walk in fellowship and commanion in all the
Ordinances of the Gospel.

2. Arg Those Churches which consist of godly persons owning all the essentials
of the true religion, among whom the word of God it truly preached, and the
Sacraments are duly administered, are true Churchs of Jesus Christ.

But th^se Baptized Churches we contend for, falsely called Anabaptists, do
consist of godly persons owning all the essentials of the true religion, among
whom the word of God is truly preached, and the Sacraments duly and truly
administered, ergo they are true Churches of Jesus Christ.

3. Arg* Those Churches that are constituted according to the direct pattern
laid down in the New Testament; are true Churches of Jesus Christ.

The Baptized Churches, falsely called Anabaptists, are constituted according to
the direct pattern laid down in the New Testament, ergo they are true Churches
of Jesus Christ.

To these let me add the fourth, which Mr. Collins has in his half Sheet.

4. Arg. Those Churches who make Christ's merits the foundation of their
Salvation, and his Doctrine the foundation of their Churches constitution, are
true Churches, and their Baptism is Authentic: But the Baptists do thus, ergo.

5. Arg. If the ordinances of Christ are to be kept as they were first
delivered to the Saints, and as practiced by the Apostolical Church, our
Baptism, which you call ^ counterfeit, is Christ's true Baptism.

But the Ordinances of Christ are to be kept as they were first delivered to
the Saints, and as they were practiced by the Apostolical Church, ergo, our
Baptism is Christ's true Baptism.

But Friend, how can you hold Communion with such persons who have a
counterfeit Baptism? for I hear you break Bread with some who own no other
Water Baptism but that of Believers only, and deny Infants to be subjects
thereof. I think none of our godly Brethren who are Pedo-Baptists, ever denied
our Baptism, though they strive to justify theirs: which of them will call the
Baptism of believers, yea, though such who were Sprinkled when Babes, to be a
counterfeit? Without repentance you must be accountable for this one day.

CHAP. V. Containing an account of some of Mr. Shutes onseemly, Scoffing and
opprobrious language cast upon Mr. Collins, and my self together, with his
false and abusive representation of us, and of several places of Holy
Scripture; with his Impertinences, Inconsistences and self-contradictions, as
also those abuses he has cast on the Baptized Congregations, in which Romans 11.
16. is explained, viz. if the Root be Holy so are the Branches. And if some of
the Branches were broken off, etc.
FIrst I shall begin with Mr. Shute's unbecoming and Scoffing expressions as
they lie here and there in his Book. 1. Page 5. He intimates we are horribly
bigoted to our opinion.

In Page 4. he says he will not render railing for railing. Yet in Page 5. you
will find these expressions, speaking to Mr. Collins, you have charged me
falsely You bogled and jugled with the sac^ed Scriptures. Yet he has not made
either of these things to appear. In the said 5 Page he says, here thou have
the Cavils of the adversary Answered.

In Page 42. Because Mr. Collins says, that the habit of Faith if it be in all
Infants of believers, it cannot be lost; there being no losing the habits of
Grace, etc.

Mr. Shute, says this Gentleman (meaning Mr. Collins) does as little Boys,
that make a thing of Rags in Imitation of a Cock, and when they have set it up
throw at it. But gives no other Answer (as appears to me) than by denying that
he asserted, all Infants of believers have habitual Faith; yet it is from that
Topic he seems to plead for the Baptising of all believers Infants?

In Page 46. he says, Mr. Collins is troubled with a grumbling in his gizzard.
Are those comely expressions.

He says in Page 57. that Mr. Collins is pleased to mock at habitual Faith,
because he compares Faith Potential and habitual: Faith in the Infants of
believers, as such, with Transubstantiation, etc.

He renders me worse then the Devil. Page 116. The Devil left out part of a
Scripture once to tempt our Savior with; but in my weak Judgment, says Mr.
Shute, this Author had done it three times successively to maintain this error,
etc. the better to beguile and deceive poor ignorant bigoted Souls, etc.

The Lord knows I did not leave out part of the Text at any time, to avoid
answering their objection, or to favor our cause: But quoted then what was to
the purpose in Hand: And that objection I designed to answer afterward, as I
did in the second part in order. As the Reader may see that has the Book.

In Page 82. he says, speaking of Mr. Collins, was there ever such Legerdemain
played with the Sacred Scripture? In Page 23. he speaking to Mr. Collins, cries
out, O for shame cease from bringing your Carnal reason, etc. Whereas it is he
himself that infers false conclusions from Mr. Collins words, and then cries
out, O for shame.

Page 24. Where are you now with your humane invented, Lame, Decrepit
Salvation, etc. Are not these Unchristian Reflections? Resides, he had no
ground given him thus to abuse Mr. Collins, as if his Salvation was lame and
decrepid.

In Page 56. he abuses Mr. Danverse, who is dead, who was cleared by several
Learned Ministers upon the answer of an Appeal of his Adversaries.

Mr. Sh^^^s's abusive and false Representations of us, and false Interpretation
of several places of Holy Scripture, and Gods Holy Ordinance of Dipping
Believers in the Name, etc.
FIrst, in Page 6 he calls Dipping, Ducking, and the like in several other
places; as i^ we had Believers to a (...) when we Baptize ^^^m: And again to
vili^^^ that Holy Ordinance, in the same 6 Page, he says Dipping is more like a
punishment of criminals, than the (...) of an Ordinance of God: Yet Dipping was
generally owned by all Pedo-Baptists formerly, and by many of late.

In Page 7* he says, The Jailer and his House were Baptized the same h^ur of
the Night; whereas the Text only says, he washed their S^ripes the same hour of
the Night, and was Baptized, he and all his straight way, Act. 16. 33. In Page
7. he says, They were all Baptized in the Jaylers House; which is a palpable
abuse of the Text that they did not go out of his House to a River:

Yet the Text clearly intimates, Act 16. 34. that after they were Baptized,
(he) that is, the Jailer brought them into his House. Does not that imply they
went out of it? And it might be to a River, as far as he knows.

He also says, That we read not of one Soul of the Jaylors House, that did
believe before Baptized, besides the Jailer himself.

Whereas we read that all his House believed as well as himself, and as soon
too as we read of the Jaylors own Faith; so that he may as well say, the Jailer
did not believe himself, before he was Baptized, as so to affirm concerning his
House. He says, Page 11. John Bapti^^ Baptized all that came unto him; yet the
Text clearly Implies, he rejected the Pharisees and Sadducees, bidding them to
bring forth Fruits meet for repentance.

He asserts in Page 33. that those little Children our Savior says, did
believe on him, were little Infants, calling them Infant Believers*

He vilifies Mr. Collins for leaving out in his quotations a word in one or two
Texts of scripture, whereas he destroys not the Sense of the Texts by so doing,
nor done to favor his own ^^tion* as that in Isa. 44. 3. where his Seed, (...)
put for thy Seed* and that in Acts 2. 39. Nor does he wrong his Antagonist in
the least, and therefare no cause of complaint*

But palpable it is, Mr Shutes abuses that Text greatly, Act* 2. 39. for the
promise is to you and to your Children, and to all that are af^r off, even so
many as the Lord our God shall call.

Now see this Man's exposition of these worth in Page 71. viz. That was to all
the Elect Gentiles and their Children; for the promise runs in the same
Channel, to the Gentiles and their Children in the Text, without any variation,
as is ^id to the Jews and their Children.

Answer. If he had said to the Elect Gentiles and to their Children or
offspring also, that are elected and called, then he had not wronged the Text;
for the promise, that is, that of remission of S^n, and of the Holy Ghost,
which runs first to the Jews that are called, and to their Children or
Offspring that are called, and so in like manner also unto the Gentiles that
are called, and to their Off spring that shall be called, not to the Jews, and
their Children as such, i. e. whether Effectually called or not; but to no more
of the Jews, nor Gentiles themselves, nor their Children but even so many as
the Lord our God shall call* Dr. Hammond confessed this Text is to little
purpose brought to prove Infant Baptism:

Seeing by Children is meant offspring, and refers not to Infants as such; It
certainly intends no Children of Jews, or Gentiles, but such only who are
elected, and called ones.

Besides, this Man has left out words in several Texts of Scripture quoted by
himself in his Book, yet blames his Antagonists for so doing at a strange
manner: For because I left out the words Everlasting Covenant, he comparies me
to the Devil. See Page 116. in Page 21. he (...) Ger. 17. 9. 10 11. but ( says
he) neither in these ^^^ee quotations, nor in his whole Book, has (...) so
much as named that which is the quintessence of the Covenant, etc. namely as
Everlasting Covenant. The Devil left out part of a Scripture, etc.

Answer, I fear he saw but part of my Book; for it is a great untruth which he
affirms, viz. that I never named Everlasting Covenant; for I, as you have heard
(in this Answer) did not only name it, but answered the argument that is raised
from thence, See Part 2. Page 9, 10.

Now that Mr. Shute has left part of the words in some Texts, and added words
in other he has quoted, See Page 120. Where he mentions the words of that Text
1 Cor. 15. 22. For as in Adam a^ dye, so in Christ shall all be made al^ve; he
has wrote thus for as in Adam all the Elect dye, so in Christ they shall all be
made alive; this is all in the same Italick Letter: Where he adds (Elect) and
(they) rendering the sense as if none should have a resurrection but the Elect,
which is against the Sense of the Apostle.

So in Page 133. mentioning Mark 16. 16. viz. He that believes and is Baptized
shall be saved, but he that believes not shall be damned.

He has wrote it thus, viz. He that believes shall be saved, but he that
believes not shall be damned.

(Baptized) is left out to favor his design, I fear; for though faith be the
same in every age, yet the the Ordinances are not the same, under the Gospel,
as under the Law, for Baptism is no legal Ordinance, nor the Lords Supper, etc.

Also he has given a false exposition on several Verses, in Romans 11. and has
in so doing abused Mr. Collins also; these are Mr. Collins words (as repeated
by Mr. Shute) Page 75, 76. The natural Branches are broken off, ergo Childrens
visible incovenanting, is repealed; the Antecedent of this Enthymem is clear
from the Apostles assertion, Romans 11. 19, 20, 21. by the natural Branches
without controversy, is to be understood the natural Seed of Abraham

Now Mr. Shute leaves out Mr. Collins demonstration following, to prove his
argument, i. e. by the branches says he, without controversy, is to be
understood the natural Seed of Abraham; and the breaking off, must either be
meant, from visible Church Membership, and external privileges thereunto
belonging; or the Everlasting Covenant of grace: It cannot, says he, be the
latter, because that Covenant is immutable, therefore it must be the former.
Thus Mr. Collins: And he argues to the purpose, for it is impossible for any to
be broken off from the Covenant of Grace, who were once in that; and it is as
clear that the Jews or natural Seed of Abraham, as such, are broken off, from
being any more a visible Church, and that the legal Covenant, for their
incovenanting, i. e. both Parents and Children, as such, is gone and taken
away; he took away the first that he might establish the Second, Heb. 10. 9.

There is a First, and a Second, an Old and a New. Now the first is only taken
away, as a Covenant of works, do this and thou shall live; and as it was given
to the whole House of Israel, by virtue of which they held their Church State,
and Church Membership, and all their external Rites, Ordinances, and
Privileges, for the Priesthood being changed there is made of necessity a
change of the whole Law, Heb. 7. 12.

Though it was for the Jews unbelief they were broken off, yet the dispensation
being changed, it was impossible for them to keep their Church State and
external Legal Rites, and Privileges any longer; for it is evident that those
Jews that believed in Christ, abode no longer members of their Old Church; but
were transplanted into the Gospel Church; what can be more clear than this,
viz. the Old House and Old legal Right of Church Membership is overturned and
r^oted out for ever?

And say I, if the Covenant for incoveannting of the fleshly Seed, as such, is
abolished, and no new Law is given forth for the bringing in again professing
Parents and their Carnal Seed, as such, what is it this Man contends for, yet
what a mighty stir he makes about that in Romans 11. you may See in Page 76, etc.
This Man makes it his main business to prove that the Covenant of Grace is not
taken away, which we assert with as much Zeal as he; but see how he abuses the
Text, Romans 11. 17. viz. as those Jews which were these Branches were broken
off, and their Children with them were cast out of the Covenant: So the
Gentiles, and all their Children were taken into Covenant, in their room, and
did partake of the same Privileges, with those ^ews that did abide firm in the
Covenant, etc.

1. Answer, This Man does not distinguish one Covenant from another, i. e. the
Legal from the Gospel Covenant; nay he owns but one so that he ass^rts the
unbelieving Jews, were broken off of the Covenant of Grace, and their Children
too; by which he seems to plead for Arminianism or final falling o^^ of the
Covenant of Grace: Nay worse, i. e. that the Children were broken off from the
Covenant of Grace for their Parent^ Sin and unbelief, (...).

For if the first Fruit be Holy, the lump is also Holy; and if the Root be
Holy, so are the branches, verse. 16.

^ the Root is doubtless meant Abraham; but then know that Abraham was a
twofold (...) as well as a twofold Father, viz the Root of all his natural
Seed, and the Root or Father of all his true Spiritual; now for a Man to say
that the Apostle here refers to Abraham as a natural Root, and so to his
natural or Carnal Seed as such, is to destroy the whole scope and drift of the
Holy Ghost in this Chapter; in the close of the 10 Chapter the Apostle shows
the Jews were rejected, and the Gentiles called; and in the beginning of this
(...). Chapter he prevents an objection; some might be ready to say if this be
so, then God has cast away his Covenant People. To this he Answers, verse. 2.
God has not cast away his People whom he for knew that is, his Elect or the
Spiritual Seed of Abraham that were among the Jews, See verse. 5. even so then
o^ this present time there is a Remnant according to the Election of Grace:
Again, in verse. 7 what then Israel had not obtained, etc. (that is the natural
seed as such,) but the Election has obtained it, and the rest were blended;
and though the main Body of the Jews were rejected for their unbelief, yet in the
Latter Days God will call all those and bring them in, who belong to the
Election of Grace, and so all Israel, (that is the Spiritual Israel) shall be
saved, See verse. 15. and ^6.

And from hence the 16. verse is brought in, viz. for if the first Fruit be
Holy, the lump is also Holy, (...).

Is the Apostle speaking here of a Legal Federal Holiness? No, not a word of
any such matter: But of such a Holiness as was in the Post, i. e. in Abraham
who was Spiritually Holy, being an Elect Person; and to that Holiness the
Apostle refers. viz. first in respect of Gods Election, Personal, and inherent
in Gods intention.

Now then to apply the Holiness and Infection here, to outward Dispensation
only in the whole Church, which is meant of saving Grace in the invisible, and
to make every believing Parent a like Root to his posterity with Abraham to his
Seed, as some have done, and this Man seems to do; is a great abuse of the
Sacred Text.

For this would be to set up another wall of separation or partition betwixt
(believers and their seed, and unbelievers and their Seed,) as the Old one wa^,
which is now broken down between Jews and Gentiles according to Ephesians. 2. 14, 15.
as also a knowing of Men after the Flesh, i. e. after fleshly Descent, external
Privileges, etc.

2. The first Fruit spoken of we understand to refer to Isaac, Jacob, and the
Holy Partriachs, who were given to Abraham as the first Fruit of the Covenant
of Grace God made with him, who were all Holy as Abraham, their Root was Holy,
that is, Spiritually and Inherently Holy.

3. By the Lump may be meant the whole Body of the Elect or Spiritual Seed of
Abraham, who lived from the time the first Fruit was given him until the Gospel
Days, who were all Holy as the Root also.

By Lump cannot be intended the whole Nation of the Jews, as Mr. Shute
positively affirms, in Page 82. for it so, what consistency can there be in the
Apostles words and Argument? The Apostle speaks of the Elect Israel, not of the
fleshly and Carnal Israel; take this Man's words the first Fruit the Jews, etc.
the Lump or whole Nation of them; and here is the same Root, on which the
Gentiles are grassed, Page 82. He confounds the first Fruit and Lump together,
and says by it is meant the whole Nation of the Jews. What Text can be wronged
worse? We grant it is the same Root that all Gentile believers partake of the
fatness of which the godly Jews pertook of under the Law, viz. the Blessings of
the Covenant of Grace made with the Root Abraham; but what is this to our
Carnal Seed as such?

4. By the Branches who are said to be Holy also, certainly is to be understood
those Elect ones of Israel who were living in the Apostles Days, as verse. 5.
even so then at this time also there is a Remnant according to the Election of
Grace.

Now observe the Apostle speaks, in verse. 17. of some Branches that were broken
off, and of the Gentiles who were like a Wild Olive Tree, being grassed in;
these Branches that were broken off, were the unbelieving Jews, who at that
time comprehended the whole national Church of Israel; for all that believed
that were Jews, were transplanted into the Gospel Church, these Branches that
were broken off sprang from the same Root as Abraham, was their Father
according to the Flesh and Legal Covenant, and for a time seemed true Branches,
they were of Israel, though not Israel, Romans 9. 6. they were the Children of
the Flesh, but not the Children of the promise, they were in the external
Covenant, but being not in the Covenant of Grace, by Faith, and the Old
Covenant being now gone and taken away, they were cut off and no more looked
upon as Branches in any sense.

They were Branches in the Old Testament Church, but there is a new will made,
a new and last Testament confirmed, and ratify by the Death of the Testatour
Jesus Christ, and the fleshly Seed as such have no such legacy, left them as in
the Old Testament, viz. to be Members of the New Testament Church, that running
to none but to such who believe, etc. but they not believing, or for their
unbelief were cut or broken off.

1. Not broken off the Covenant of Grace, as Mr. Shute intimates, because they
never were in that Covenant.

2. Not broken off Gods Election, for to that they did not belong: But,

3ly. They were broken off and their Children as such (or as so considered) so
that they are no more a visible Church of God, nor a People in any Covenant
relation to him.

Yet we are not to conceive although those unbelieving Jews were in this Sense,
broken off from their old standing and Church state that their Children who
believed were rejected and lost, no, no; they that did believe in Christ and
submit to the new dispensation, were by Faith grafted into Christ, and upon the
profession of their Faith were united also to the Gospel Church and became
members thereof.

And so with the believing Gentiles did partake of the fatness of the Covenant
of Grace God made with Abraham, and of the Blessings and Privileges of the
Gospel Church, and doubtless this is the very truth of the matter according to
the main Scope and design of the Holy Ghost, in this Chapter: Now then Mr.
Shute greatly wrongs this place of Sacred Scripture.

1. Whilst he argues that the Jews were broken off from the Covenant of Grace.

2. He wrongs the Text, whilst he says it was no dissolution of the Jewish
Church, but an excommunication of those unbelieving Persons out of it, by which
he intimates as if the Jewish Church state still remains, and that the
believing Gentiles are grafted into that old Legal Church that is removed and
gone for ever.

3. He wrongs this Text, whilst he would have all unbelievers Children of the
Jews, broken off the Covenant of Grace, for to that he seems to refer: For
those of them that were in it were not broken off from that Covenant nor could
be; and those of the Jewish Children, that believed, were in the like good
Estate with believing Gentiles, and their believing Children; and many of the
Children of the unbelieving Jews did no doubt own Jesus Christ, believe in him,
and were implanted into the Gospel Church.

4. Whilst he pleads for believing Getiles and their Infants, as such, to be
taken into the Covenant of Grace, and so made Members of the Church of Christ
now, as the Children of the Jews were Members of the Church, under the Law; for
this he affirms Page 81, 82.

5. Whilst he applies the Holiness and Infection here meant, to outward
Dispensation, only in the visible Church, which is meant of saving Grace in the
invisible.

6. Whilst he makes every believing Parent a like root to his posterity with
Abraham to his Seed, he may as well say every believer is a common Father, to
all that believe, as Abraham was -- For both these Conclusions I infer from his
notion.

1. Reader, Pray observe, that the Jews that believed not, were broken off from
being any more the People of God, in any Covenant relation to him, and this was
for their unbelief, and their Church State being gone by the Dispensation of
the Gospel, and by the bringing in the Gospel Church.

2. That whosoever either Jews or Gentiles who are grafted into Christ the true
Olive, and into the Gospel Church, must believe or be grafted in by Faith, i.
e. by their own Faith and own consent, not by the Faith of their Parent be made
Members of the Church under the Gospel; no, but must believe themselves as well
as their Parents; it is not enough now to say we have Abraham to our Father, or
that our Parents were believers and in Covenant, because the Church now does
not consist of the carnal Seed, but of the true Spiritual Seed only.

Mr. Shute says in Page 82. to Mr. Collins, if you have not enough you shall
have enough, before I have done with you.

I am satisfied and he too, he has said too much unless it were better or to
better purpose.

He appeals to any experienced Christian among us, or of our party to judge
whether there can be a more full Text of Scripture produced, to prove the
continuation and Stability of the Covenant, etc.

If he will take my thoughts (who am it is like in his opinion as well as my own
an unexperienced Christian) I must tell him he has mistaken his Antagonist and
the Text too: Cannot the Jewish Legal Church State go, but the Covenant of
Grace must go, with them? God forbid.

The Apostle it is evident in this Chapter, Romans 11. speaks of Gods Election,
which ran first to Abraham's natural Seed, according to the Covenant of Grace,
that is, to the Elect among the Jews, and so argues God had not cast away his
People whom he foreknew; and from hence he shows that all that belong to the
said Election of Grace shall be called, and in the Latter days be brought in,
or grafted into their own true Olive tree, i. e. into Christ and into the
Gospel Covenant and Church, for all (the true) Israel shall be saved, as it is
written, etc. it is said they are Holy that is they are decretively and in Gods
sight and intention Holy: I wonder at some Expositors who conclude, that it is
an external relative Federal Holiness the Apostle speaks of here, which
Holiness is not mentioned in all the New Testament, as an eminent* Writer
observes.

And this brings me to what Mr. Shute says, to that Text 1 Cor. 7. 14. Else
were your Children unclean, but now are they Holy: Which Scripture he mistakes
also whilst he asserts it is Federal Holiness, as well as Matrimonial Holiness,
for no doubt the Sanctification of the unbelieving Husband to the believing
Wife, is the same Sanctification or Holiness that is said to be in the
Children, that is, the Husband and Wife were Sanctified, or set apart for the
use of one another, by Gods ordinance of Marriage, and so their Children were
Holy, i. e. Legitimate, lawfully begotten, and not Bastards; for no doubt their
Children that were born when both were unbelievers, were Holy in the Sense the
Apostle speaks of, as such that were born when one was a believer: But see a
full answer to this Text in Rector Rectified, from Page 113. to Page 120.

And when he writes again let him answer what is there said Mr. Shute also
gives a false exposition of that Text, Romans 6. 3, 4. Page 15, 16. Whilst he
refers there to the Baptism of suffering, telling us the Apostle was there
exerciting the Saints, to prepare for sufferings; which is not true.

Likewise he abuses that Text, 1 Cor. 2. But God has chosen the weak things of
the World, etc. by intimating as if the Apostle means little Children, and who
are weaker (says he) than Children? Page 23.

Also that in Psa. 82. I think he would have to refer to Infants, i. e. out of
the Mouths of Babes and Sucklings thou have perfected thy praise, Page 23.

In Page 130. that in Mark 16. 16. Joh. 3. 3. he applies to Infants, viz. he
that believes and is Baptized shall be saved, but he that believes not shall be
damned. And so pleads for like necessity, for infants to believe if saved, as
the Adult.

In Page 10. he seems to infer that John Baptist Baptized little Infants,
because it is said, there went out to meet him all Judea and Jerusalem, and all
the regions round about Jordan, and were Baptized.

Which I have answered, Ax laid to the Root; in my reply to Mr. Exell, see 2
Part Page 35. to 54.

In Page 174. Mr. Shute citing Romans 11. 6. if it be by Grace then it is no more
of Works; he infers if dying Infants are saved without Faith then they must be
saved by works.

Which is an abuse of that Text; for as the Apostle speaks not of Infants, so
he speaks of Gods Grace and Favor, in opposition to works o^ merits, according
to that in Ephesians. 2. 8. by Grace you are saved; he puts Faith in the place of
Grace: We say no Infant can be saved but by Grace; yet we do say we see not how
it can be said that Infants do or can believe.

And now let me infer from his notion, viz. if Infants cannot believe, they
must all perish and be damned, this follows clearly from what he asserts: He
had need to see he is certain of what he affirms.

In Page 92. (he says,) it is common for Men of our opinion to bring in, and
set up our own Carnal Reason, in opposition to the Wisdom of God; is not this
an Unchristian charge? Besides, he proves not what he says, nor attempts to do
it.

Sure some gracious Person or Persons he is concerned more particularly with in
Churchfellowship, will look upon themselves bound in duty to inquire into some
of these grand enormities, false acusations, and other evils this Man is found
guilty of in his Writings.

In Page 13. he says, that part of the Man, Woman, or Child, that is Baptized,
must be naked; and if the whole Body must be Baptized, then the whole Body must
be all naked also.

And he quotes a passage of Mr. Baxter; as if Mr. Tombs could, or did Baptize
Women naked, to render such a practice odious as indeed it would be, should any
do it; but to cast that on us, is Unchristianly done. In Page 19. he intimates
as if we had found two ways to Salvation, because we know not that dying
Infants have Faith, or can believe.

In Page 20. he abuses Mr. Collins, as if he was ignorant of any such thing as
habitual Faith, because he knows nothing of such habits in Infants, and says he
derides habitual Faith, which is a notorious falsehood, and that which Mr.
Collins abhors to do.

In Page 20. he would have his Reader think that Mr. Collins had rendered Mr.
Charnock an Anabaptist, because he quoted him to detect his notion of habitual
Faith in Infants

In Page 43. because Mr. Collins said unless Children have personal actual
Faith, they are not to meddle with Gods most holy things, Mr. Shute says, by
this man's opinion Elect dying Infants must be lost and damned; he would have
those Children to be Infants that cried Hosanna to the Son of David:

For if it be not that he means it is nothing to his purpose; for we deny not,
but some little Children have and may have a work of God upon their Hearts,
though not above five or six years old.

In Page 68. he infers four false Conclusions upon Mr. Collins, denying Faith
to be in Infants.

1. That God cannot work Faith in young Infants, because they are not able to
help him, etc.

Does Mr. Collins question Gods power, or intimate God cannot work, without
help of the Creature?

2. That he does tacitly declare that God is not able to make them capable of
the Reception of Grace. Because they are not of years to exercise i^, as if Mr
Collins did not know God was infinite in power.

3. That Adult persons do qualify themselves for the reception of Grace; or at
leastwise are Copartners with the Spirit of Grace, in the working of it.

4. If this be so, says he, then it is not Gods Grace, but Man's work, etc.

Which are all false Conclusions and great abuses cast on Mr. Collins, and no
ways to be inferred from his positions.

In Page 73. he renders the Baptists to be cunning deceivers, take his words,
i. e. I am not, says he, all together ignorant of their devices, and
stratagems by which they uphold their opinion, in which their Principles are
enveloped and lie Dormant.

In Page 115. he says, Benjamine Keach does reckon Abraham of greater antiquity
than Christ.

Answer, This is a false charge likewise, and no such consequence can be
gathered from my words, to which he refers, as my Answer shows in this reply.

In Page 126. he says, this Author is for the saving Elect Dying Infants by
some other Covenant, and not by the Covenant of Grace.

Answer, This is also false and a great abuse, for I no where hint any such
thing, but say, it is impossible any Infant or Adult Person either should be
saved by any other Covenant but that though I say they may be saved and not be
Members of the visible Church; as some Infants were before God made known, the
Covenant of circumcision and set up the legal Church of Israel.

In Page 134. he calls our Doctrine a fallacious Doctrine; and knows not which to
wonder at most, viz. our boldness and confidence: Or our Peoples ignorance to
be so horribly deluded and imposed upon. What Enemy could reproach us worse?

In Page 113. says he, Thus I have given you one broad side more, by which I
have brought your opinion by the Lee, and all the Carpenters and Calkers in the
Nation cannot save it from sinking.

Answer, Friend you mistake our, cause, and opinion is an firm and as sound as
ever, and needs no Carpenters nor Calkers to mend those Breaches you have made.

In Page 140. he says, Thus you see the Covenant God made with Abraham, and all
his Seed both Spiritual and Carnal, stands fact and firm to Gospel Believers,
and all their Seed both Spiritual and Carnal; notwithstanding Hercules with his
Club and Benjamin hewed it with his broad Ax, they cannot destroy it, because
it is an everlasting Covenant. 1. Answer, Are these Savoury expressions? my Ax
Friend, is Gods word; the Title of that Book was the words of the Text, viz.
the Ax laid at the Root, and this Ax will cut down all your Thorns and Briers,
do what you can.

2. How he has proved that Covenant God made with Abraham, and his Carnal Seed
as such, does remain, let the Reader now Judge.

3 How came (if this be so) Abraham's natural Seed to be unchurched as he
himself confesses in, Page 37. nay that they unchurched themselves. In his
Postscript, Page 190. he says, tho he has thus written concerning the
Anabaptists, and proved their Congregations to be no Churches, and their
Baptism to be a counterfeit, and their Opinion Sacrilegious, in that they Rob
the Church of her treasure, etc. -- These are very hard words, and also false;
for he has not done what he says, and never will, nor can he do it.

An Account of some of Mr. Shute's Impertinences, Inconsistences and
Self-contradictions.
IN the last place take a few of his Impertinences, etc. In Page 49. If you can
prove, says he, by plain Scripture Testimony that ever Christ or any of his
Apostles, etc. did forbid the Baptising the infant Seed of Believers, etc.

Answer, Now how impertinent is this? Where did Christ forbid Infants of
Believers, the Lords Supper? and indeed they may have that as well as Baptism,
and the first Fathers that established Infant Baptism, gave them the Lords
Supper also:

2. Where is crossing in Baptism forbid, or Popists Salt Spittle, or Crisom or
other Popish rites? These in plain words are not forbid, are they therefore
lawful? If Christ would have them to be Baptized, it would have been expressed
in the affirmative; and is this horribly to impose our own uncouth notions as
you affirm in the said 49. Page of your Book?

Where has Christ forbid Baptizing of Turks, and Insidels, or the Children of
unbelievers?

In Page 98. he says the Church of the Jews was not a legal Church, take his
words, viz. the Church of God under the Mosaic Law was not a Carnal legal
Church. Strange contradiction! What, a Church under the Law and not a legal
Church? he may as well say the Church of God under the Gospel, is not a Gospel
Church.

In Page 97. he distinguishes not on the Covenant made with Abraham, but
positively asserts that off from that Covenant God made with Abraham, viz. The
Covenant of Grace, some of the natural Branches were broken; yet in
contradiction to this he shows, in Page 74. from Psa. 89. That the Covenant of
Grace is firm and abides for ever, and else where shows that there is no final
falling from grace; all those therefore say I, that are in that Covenant cannot
fail of Salvation; therefore those Branches never were in the Covenant of Grace.

In Page 25. he says, God saves Elect dying Infants in no ways or means
differing in any one point or part from that wherein he saves Adult believers.
Yet in Page 65. he owns Infants cannot exercise grace in an ordinary way, and
that nothing is required of them personally but passive Obedience. Is nothing
required say I, of Adult believers but passive Obedience? If there is then the
way or mode of Gods saving dying Infants differs in some part or point from the
way or means of saving the Adult; and clear it is that more than passive
obedience is required of Adult persons.

One while he says all Abraham's Seed are in the Covenant of Grace God made with
him, and he denies final falling out of that Covenant, yet in Page 12. he says,
one of Abraham's Sons or Seed is praying to him in Hell: And to be Abraham's Seed
will not serve their turn.

He is for a Congregational Church, and yet in Page 34. Speaking of the Gospel
Church, he says, all the Seed of believers are Members as much now as the
Jewish Children were under the Law. And that it is the same Church State, though
in another dress, and denis the dissolution of the Jewish Church, Page 35.

Can a natural Church consisting of whole Parishes, Families, and Provinces, be
all one with Gospel Congregational Churches of believers only?

Why did this Man leave the Church of England? also then the Jewish
Church State by his opinion continues still: He may say the invisible Church is
the same now as then; but not the visible, the matter, as well as the form is
changed, -- Ye also as living Stones are built up a Spiritual House, etc. 1
Pet. 2. 5.

Was not the Gospel Church gathered out of the Jewish and Heathenish Nations,
consisting only of such Men and Women who made a profession of their Faith? let
him prove any one Infant was ever received into the Gospel Church if he can.

In Page 167. he inquires whether a Farmer destroys his Barn or hurts the
Floor, when he takes a great keap of Corn and Chaff and Winnows the Corn, and
Fans away the Chaff, etc.

Answer, I ask whether or no Christ did not remove by the Gospel Dispensation,
all the Wheat out of the old Barn, nay, and pull down that Barn, viz. the
Jewish Church, and Fan quit away the Carnal Seed as such, and all the Chaff:
And erect a new Garner or Gospel Church, into which he put his Wheat, i. e.
Believing Men and Women, whether Jews or Gentiles.

In Page 136. he intimates that the essential part of circumcision is Baptism,
and that the essential part thereof remains in the Flesh still.

Answer, Then say I, circumcision could not be circumcision without Baptism,
nor Baptism be Baptism without circumcision, which is such a piece of Stuff and
Impertinences as I never met with all; can a thing be where the Essence or the
Essential Part of it is wanting?

In Page 130. he intimates, because I deny Infants to have right to Baptism (or
that they can believe) that I assert two ways to be saved.

He also there says, viz. there is no saving any Person old or young without
the Grace of Faith; he Cites Mark 16. 16. Joh. 3. 16. Thus you see, says he,
there is but one way to Eternal Life, either for old or young, that is, through
Faith in the righteousness and merits of Christ. Woe be to poor Infants then say
I, if they cannot believe as the Adult do; if it be thus, we say there is no way
to be saved, but by Christ's merrits and righteousness imputed, and that
Infants must be sanctified that are saved also; but yet we dare not say they do
or can be said, to believe as the Adult, and if they do not they must be damned
according to his notion because that is true of all the Adult that believe not.

One while he seems to say that the Infants of believers as such, have habitual
Faith.

At another time confesses he cannot prove, that this or that Infant of
believers has Faith, or the habit of it, without he had a new Bible, Page 45.

Doubtless the Tree is known by the Fruit if we speak of the Adult, we may know
who do believe; (though I deny not but we may be mistaken in some;) how did
Paul know that the Saints at Thessalonica were Elected, 1 These. 1. 4, 5.
Knowing, beloved, your Election of God. He shows how he came to know they had
true Faith, and were Elected, for our Gospel came not to you in Word only, but
in power, etc. Mr. Shute says in Page 1. 90 that the Anabaptists Congregations
be has proved no Churches, and their Baptism to be a counterfeit, and their
opinion Sacrilegious. Yet he has Communion at the Lords Table with some of
them who have this counterfeit Baptism, and deny Infants to be the Subjects of
that Ordinance, and Sprinkling to be Baptizing and so are guilty of like
Sacrilege with us, there being diverse Baptists in that Church to whom he
belongs.

AN APPENDIX; BEING A Reply to Mr. Shute's last single Sheet, in Answer to Mr.
Collins's half Sheet; wherein the Covenant of Circumcision, etc. and free
Promise of Grace, God made to Abraham, are further and distinctly opened;
showing how they differ from each other.
SInce I wrote this reply to Mr. Shutes last Book, I have met with a single
Sheet, which he calls an Answer to Mr. Hercules Collins last Shift, etc.

Which discovers more of his bitter Spirit, and what ill Influences he is
under, -- I thought it not amiss to make some remarks upon this Sheet, though I
suppose Mr. Collins will think himself concerned to vindicate his innocence,
from his undue, Unchristian, and false charges: This Paper of Mr. Shutes
manifests very great confidence touching his notions of the Covenant God made
with Abraham, and as much ignorance: As will quickly appear to all discerning
Men who shall read it.

In Page 1st he says, I have cleared and vindicated the aforesaid Antidote from
that foul Aspersion, and totally confuted all the Aspersors in my last Book, in
the Judgment of all wise Judicious and Impartial Persons that have read it.

Answer, Let those wise persons he speak of, first read this precedent answer
to his Book and then let them impartially Judge of it.

In Page 2. he speaks of Mr. Collins his five Arguments to prove the Covenant
of peculiarity God made with Abraham.

To this Mr. Shute says, pray where do you find this distinction concerning the
everlasting Covenant God made with Abraham, and his Seed?

Answer, You shall see Friend that there is such a distinction found in the
Scripture, and that your reverend Ministers confirm the same thing, viz. That
God made a Covenant with Abraham's natural Seed as such, which is removed; and
also a Covenant with Abraham's Spiritual Seed as such, which runs to Christ, and
all that are his elect ones (See Gal. 3. 16. Now to Abraham) and his Seed were
the promises made. He says not, and to Seeds, as of many; but as of one, and
to thy Seed, which is Christ.

Compared with verse 29. and if ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's Seed, and
heirs according to the promise.

Now Friend, if you say this promise which the Apostle speaks of, (which is the
everlasting Covenant of Grace, God made with Abraham) was made with many, i. e.
both with Abraham's natural and Spiritual Seed as such, you contradict the Holy
Ghost. Paul says, And not to Seeds as of many, But you say to Seeds, i. e. all
his natural and Spiritual Seed, Page 5. See also Romans 9. 5, 6, 7, 8.

They are not all Israel, which are of Israel: Neither because they are the
Seed of Abraham, are they all Children: But in Isaac shall thy Seed be called.
That is, they which are the Children of the Flesh, these are not the Children
of God: But the Children of the promise (Mark it) are accounted for the Seed.
Is not that distinction Mr. Collins speaks of, clearly laid down in these
Scripture? does not the Apostle exclude the Carnal Seed of Abraham as such;
from being included in the Covenant of Grace?

2. I need not go about to prove, there was a Covenant made with Abraham and
all his natural Seed as such, since that is so clearly and fully spoken of in
the Scripture; viz. That the whole House of Israel both Parents and Children,
were taken into the legal Covenant and all were Members of the Jewish Church;
read Genesis 17. 9, 10, 12, Dent. 29. 9, 10, 11. 12, 13. But that legal Covenant
we affirm is abrogated and taken away: If it were not so, what is it which our
Apostle speaks in Heb. 10. 9. He took away the first, that he might establish
the Second. Compared with Heb. 8. 7, 8, 13.

Sure none can once Immagin that this Covenant was the Covenant of Grace: Also
what does the Apostle mean when he says, cast out the Bond Woman and her Son,
Gal. 4. 30. Does he not tell us by the Bondwoman is meant the Old Covenant
given to the whole House of Israel, or the lineal Seed of Abraham; not the
Covenant given to all Mankind in the first Adam; and does he not tell us by the
Son of the Bondwoman is meant the fleshly Seed of Abraham as such? Who were all
taken into Covenant with God under the Old Testament: And yet is there no
Covenant that peculiarly was made with Abraham's natural Seed, as such.

In Page 7. Mr. Shute repeats. Genesis 17. 7. And I will establish my Covenant
between me and thee, and thy Seed after thee in their Generations for an
everlasting Covenant, to be a God to thee and to thy Seed after thee.

Here he leaves out the following verse, wherein the Covenant is Mentioned
(which he charges as an high crime in others) viz. this is my Covenant, which
ye shall keep between me, and you, and thy Seed after thee; every Man-Child
among you shall be circumcised. Verse 10. and ye shall circumcise the Flesh of
your Foreskin, and it shall be a token of the Covenant betwixt me and you,
verse 11.

He that is born in thy House, and he that is bought with thy Money, must needs
be circumcised: And my Covenant shall be in your flesh; for an everlasting
Covenant, verse 13. these Verses he Cites not.

Now Mr. Shute Judges this Covenant is the Covenant of Grace made with Abraham,
and that for two reasons (as I suppose.)

1. Because it is called an everlasting Covenant.

2. Because God promised in this Covenant to be the God of Abraham, and the God
of his Seed after him in their Generations, which no doubt refers to his
natural Seed as such. Taking in both those of his offspring that did believe
in Christ to come, and such also that did not so believe that proceeded from
Abraham's Loins by Isaac.

1. As to the Term everlasting, I have showed in the precedent, Answer, that
some times in the Scripture it is taken with restriction, and denotes only a
long period of Time, viz. during that Dispensation, or until the M^ssi^s should
come^; the Priesthood of Aaron is upon the same account called an everlasting
Priesthood.

Indeed this Covenant could continue no longer than the Token of it abode or
was to abide in their Flesh: Read the words again verse 13. and my Covenant
shall be in your Flesh for an everlasting Covenant.

2. Circumcision being as our Adversaries say, the Seal of the Covenant, now,
say I, since the Seal, namely Circumcision, is broken off and gone, as it was
it at the death of Christ: I ask what is become of that Covenant it was a Sign
or Seal of, is not the Covenant gone and dissolved, when it is cancelled? (...),
read your Annotators on Genesis 17. 13. And ^^r the sign of it, say they, it is so
called, because it was to endure through all Generations till the coming of the
Messiah, the word Olim here and elsewhere rendered everlasting or for ever,
being (...) used to express not only simple Eternity, but any long continuance
for ma^^ages, (...) some time for a Man's Life, Exodus 21. ^. Deuteronomy. 15. 17. ^
King 9. 3. thus Mr. Pools Annotations.

This being so, to what purpose do you make such a stir about the word
Everlasting?

^ly. As to this second reason, viz. God in that Covenant gave himself to
Abraham to be his God, and the God of his Seed in their Generations.

1. Answer, I would know whether God is now in Covenant with Abraham's natural
Seed as such; or are they not rejected? how then could this be the unchangeable
Covenant of Grace?

Read my 14. Arguments in the precedent Answer, to prove the Covenant of
circumcision was not the Covenant of Grace.

2. Was God the God of all Abraham's Carnal Seed as such; by way of special
interest? if so, they shall no doubt be all Eternally saved; as well as all the
Children or Carnal Seed of Believers: Which you will not admit of.

Therefore consider that God may be said to be the God of a People, two manner
of ways.

1. By the free promise or Covenant of Grace, in a Spiritual Sense: Or by
Divine Union with him, through faith and the indwelling of the Holy Spirit;
it is this gives special interest in God to all Adult Persons, and thus he was
not the God of all Abraham's Carnal Seed, no, but of a few of them only
comparatively, for though the number of the Children of Israel be as the Sands of
the Sea, yet but a Remnant shall be saved.

2. God may be said to be the God of a People, by entering into an external,
outward or legal Covenant with them; and thus he was the God of Abraham, and of
all his Carnal Seed or Offspring, or whole House of Israel: Under the Old
Covenant, or Dispensation of the Law: God made them as a Nation, a peculiar
People unto himself, and was said to be married to them.

See Dr. Bates one of your own Ministers in his Sermon preached at Mr. Baxters
Funeral.

1. He shows that God is the God of all Mankind by Creation.

2. God is the God of a People, upon the account of external calling and
profession; and thus, says he, the posterity of* Seth, are so called; and the
entire nation of the Jews etc.

Friend, This I desire you to weigh well, for God was not by way of special
interest, in a Spiritual Sense the God of Abraham's Carnal Seed as such:
Therefore it was this external Covenent, no doubt that Mr. Cotton intends when
he says the Ministry of John the Baptist did burn as an Oven, and left the Jews
neither the Root of Abraham's Covenant, nor the Branches of their own good
works, Co^ton on the Covenant Page 21, 22 Friend, you speak as if your
Ministers had (...) those notions of yours into you, about the Covenant God
made with Abraham; I am satisfied you abuse your Ministers; I am sure Dr. Owen
taught you no such Doctrine, as I have already showed; and I shall here again
faithfully cite two or three passages more of that Reverend Minister of Christ:
See his Exposition on the 8th Chapter to the Hebrews, Page 219, etc.

1. He shows that the Covenant God made with the whole House of Israel, was not
that Ministration of the Covenant of Works God made with all Men in the first
Alam.

2. That it was not the Covenant of Grace:

1. Says he, Page 224. the Old Covenant, the Original Covenant of works made
with Alam and all Mankind in him is not intended, for this is undoubtedly a
Covenant different in the Essence and Substance of it from the New. In Page
219. He says, but it is evident that the Covenant intended, was a Covenant
wherein the Church of Israel walked with God, until such time as this better
Covenant was solemnly introduced, this is plainly declared in the ensuing
context, he says, it was bec^me old and ready to disappear. Wherefore it is not
the Covenant of works made with Adam, that is intended when this other is said,
to be a better Covenant: Thus the Doctor.

Friend does not he hereby clearly lay down a Covenant of peculiarity made with
Abraham's natural Seed as such, or a Covenant that only and peculiarly belonged
to them; and it is as plain this began in that Covenant God made with Abraham.

In Page 288. he says, we must grant two distinct Covenants to be intended
rather than a twofold Administration of the same Covenant merely to be
intended.

He also shows that the old Covenant which God made with the natural Seed of
Abraham could not be the Covenant of Grace, because there was no reconciliation
with God, nor Salvation to be obtained by virtue of that Covenant.

Observe the Doctor speaks not of Adams Covenant, but of that Covenant God gave
to the whole House of Israel, or natural Seed of Abraham.

He further shows that the Covenant of Grace, until Christ came, was only
contained in promise, by which Covenant, all that lived under the Old Testament
who had Faith in it were saved, to Abraham and his Seed was the promise made,
Gal. 3. 16. That was the Covenant of Grace, therefore say we, the Covenant of
circumcision, and Sinai Covenant where there was mutual stipulation betwixt God
and the whole House of Israel, could not be the Covenant of Grace; besides,
it is said that that Covenant they broke, and by so doing, lost all the external
blessings of it, as the Prophet Zach. Chap. 11. 10, 14. shws, because of the
Jews unbelief, and putting the Messiah to Death, God broke his Covenant with
that People.

Zech. 11. 10. And I took my Staff, even beauty, and cut it asunder: That I
might break my Covenant which I made with all the People. What is become now of
your everlasting Covenant, God made with all the People of Israel or natural
Seed of Abraham? Is it not gone, are his Carnal Seed as such still in Covenant
with God, or are they not with their external legal Covenant cast out? Sir the
everlasting Covenant of Grace, that stands firm it is true, that is confirmed by
the Oath of God, and Blood of Christ; but the Covenant in which was contained
circumcision, and all the Legal Rites and Jewish Church, and Church Membership
is gone and taken away.

The New Covenant is not according to that Old Covenant God made with the whole
House of Israel or Carnal Seed of Abraham; if it be not according to it, then
it was not the same in Essence, nature or quality: See Jer. 31. 32.

1. This, says the Doctor, is the nature and substance of that Covenant, which
God made with that People ( viz.) a peculiar temporary Covenant, etc. Page 235.
Mark it Reader.

He adds and concurs with the Lutherans, who deny that by the two Covenants is
meant only a twofold Administration of the same Covenant, but that two
Covenants, substantially distinct are intended.

`1. Because in the Scripture they are often so called, and compared with one
another, and some times opposed to one another; the first and the last, the new
and the old.

2. Because the Covenant of Grace in Christ is eternal, immutable, always the
same, obnoxious unto no alteration, no change or abrogation, neither can these
things be spoken of it with respect unto any Administration of it, as they are
spoken of the Old: Page 226, 227.

1. He shows again that by the Old Covenant is not intended the Covenant of
Works made with Adam Page 227. When,

2. We speak of the New Covenant, says he, we do not intend the Covenant of
Grace absolutely, as though that were not in being and efficacy before the
Introduction of that which is promised in this place: For it was always the
same as to the substance of it. From the beginning it passed through the whole
Dispensation of times, before the Law and under the Law, of the same nature and
Efficacy unalterable everlasting, ordered in all things and sure. -- Again he
says, when God renewed the promise of it to Abraham, he is said to make a
Covenant with him, and he did so, but it was with respect unto other things
(Mark it) especially the proceedings of the promised Seed from his Loins; but
absolutely under the Old Testament it consisted only in a promise: And as such
only is proposed in the Scripture. Page 227. it appears that the Doctor
understands the Covenant God made with Abraham, as we do viz. the promise to
Abraham's Seed, viz. Christ and all Eternal blessings with him, to intend the
Covenant of Grace; but whereas it is said God made a Covenant with Abraham,
etc. that has respect to other things, that which concerned his natural Seed
and out of whose Loins Christ was to come, That Is the Covenant of peculiarity;
he proceeds and gives three reasons why the Covenant of Grace could not
absolutely in it self, but in the promise of it only be called a formal)
Covenant: Page 227.

1. Because it wanted its solemn confirmation and establishment by the Blood of
the only Sacrifice, which belonged unto it; before this was done in the Death
of Christ, it had not the formal nature of a Covenant, etc.

2. This was wanting, (says he) it was not the Spring, rule and measure of all
the worship of the Church i e. this does belong unto every Covenant, properly
so called, that God makes with the Church; that is the entire rule of all the
worship that God requires of it, which is that they are to restipluate in their
entrance into Covenant with God; but so the Covenant of Grace was not under the
Old Testament, for God did require of the Church many duties of worship, that
did not belong thereunto; but now under the New Testament this Covenant, with
its own Seals and appointments is the only rule and measure of all acceptable
worship, wherefore the new Covenant promised in the Scripture and here opposed
unto the old, is not the promise of Grace, Mercy, and Life, and Salvation by
Christ, absolutely considered, but as it had the formal nature of a Covenant
given unto it in its establishment by the Death of Christ, etc. Page 227.

1. Now pray observe, does not the Doctor clearly hint thereby, that no Rite,
Sign, or Seal properly of the Old Testament can be a Rite Sign or Seal properly
of the New Covenant, how then could circumcision be the Seal of the said
Covenant of Grace?

2. It is evident in the Covenant of circumcision, there was a restipulation at
their entrance into that Covenant with God, so that that was a formal Covenant,
but the Covenant of Grace, he tells us was no formal Covenant; but only a free
promise under the old Testament.

Therefore there was two Covenants held forth in Gods Transactions with Abraham.

First a formal Covenant made with him and all his Fleshly Seed, of which
circumcision was a Sign at their entrance into it, which they thereby
subscribed unto.

Secondly, The Covenant of Grace held forth only in Gods free promise to him.

3. Whilst the Church enjoyed all the Spiritual benefits of the promise (faith
he) wherein the substance of the Covenant of Grace was contained, before it was
confirmed and made the sole Rule of Worship, unto the Church, it was not
inconsistent with the Holiness and Wisdom of God, to bring any other Covenant
(Mark it) or prescribe unto it forms of Worship he pleased: Page 228.

Then he proceeds further.

1. That this Covenant did not (says he) disannul or make in effectual the
promise, but that it does still continue the only means of Life and Salvation,
and that this was so our Apostle proves at large, Gal. 3. 17, 18, 189.

2. That this other Covenant with all the worship contained in it, or required,
by it, did but direct and lead unto the future establishment of the promise, in
the solemnity of a Covenant, etc.

By these words and in other places he shows, that, that Covenant God made with
Abraham's natural Seed or whole House of Israel, though it was not the Covenant of
Grace: Yet it was given in subserviency unto the Gospel Covenant.

3. These things being observed, (says he,) we may consider that the Scripture
does plainly and expressly make mention of two Testaments, or Covenants, and
distinguishes between them in such a way, as what is spoken cannot hereby be
accommodated unto a twofold Administration of the same Covenant; The one is
mentioned Exodus 20. Deuteronomy 5. namely the Covenant God made with the People of
Israel, etc. The other promised Jer. 31. 31. Cap. 32. 40. Which is the new
Gospel Covenant as before explained: And these two Covenants or Testaments are
compared with the other, 2 Cor. 3. 6, 7, 8, 9, Gal. 4. 24, 25. Heb. 7, 22.
Chap. 9. 15, 16, 17, 18. Page 228.

These things being, so it follows that the Doctor utterly overthrows, what Mr.
John Flavel and other Pedo Baptists assert about the Covenant made with the
People of Israel at Sinai, to which circumcision appertained, viz. that it was
only Administration of the Covenant of Grace, and not a distinct Covenant.

1. The Doctor then proceeds in Page 229. to prove that the Covenant made with
Israel according to the Flesh, did not abrogate the Covenant of Works God made
with Adam, and substitute that in the room of it.

2. But that it revived, declared, and expressed all the Commands of that
Covenant in the Decalogue, that being nothing but a Divine Summary of the Law
written in the Heart. -- Says he.

3. It revived the Sanction of the first Covenant in the curse or sentence of
Death which it denounced against all transgressors, Death was the penalty of
the transgression of the Covenant of works.

`So say I, was Death, the penalty of the transgression of the Covenant of
circumcision; the Male-Child the Flesh of whose Foreskin is not cut off, shall
dye the Death; which clearly shows it was of the same nature of the Sinai
Covenant.

4. It revived the promise, says he, of that Covenant of Eternal Life, upon
perfect obedience, Romans 10. 5.

So say I, did the Covenant of circumcision, in that he that was circumcised
was bound to keep the whole Law Gal 5. 3.

Now, says the Doctor, this is no other but the Covenant of Works revieved;
nor had this Covenant of Sinai any such promise of Eternal Life annexed to it
as such, but only the promise inseparable from the Covenant of works which is
revieved, saying, do this and li^ve.

Hence, says he, when our Apostle disputes against justification by the Law,
or by the Works of the Law, he does not intend the Works peculiar, unto the
Covenant of Sinai; such as were the Rites and Ceremonies of the Worship then
instituted, but he intends also the Works of the first Covenant, etc.

Let this be well considered, for it is from hence Paul excludes circumcision,
Romans 4. As being a work or duty opposed to Faith, and so appertaining to the
Old Covenant.

He then proceeds in sixteen particulars to prove that the two Covenants differ
from each other, Page 236, 237, etc.

1. That they differ in circumstance.

2. That they differ in the circumstance of place, Gal 4. 24, 25.

3. That they differ in the manner of their promulgation,

4. In their Mediators.

5. That they differ in their subject matter, both as unto the Precepts and
Promises, all sin forbid upon pain of Death, and gave Promise of Life upon
perfect Obedience, no promise of Grace to Communicate Spiritual strength to
assist in Obedience. Had,

Promises of temporal things in the Land of Canaan, in the New Covenant, says
he, all things otherwise.

6. That they differ in the manner of their Dedication and Sanction, that they
differ in their substance and end, the old Covenant was Typical, Shadowy and
removable, Heb. 10. 1.

That they differ in their extent of their Administration, the first was
confined unto the posterity of Abraham according to the Flesh, etc. excluding
all others from the participation of the benefits of it.

But the Administration of the New Covenant is extended unto all Nations under
Heaven.

That they differ in their Efficacy, the Old made nothing perfect, the first
Covenant says he, became a special Covenant unto that People, that People were
the posterity of Abraham, Page 232.

Sir, What think you now of two Covenants, and of a Covenant of peculiarity
with Abraham's Carnal Seed? You must consult your Ministers better before you
write again. I doubt not but your Pastor is of Dr. Owens Judgment in this
matter.

In Page 5. you say, In my last Book I have clearly made out, that whatsoever
the Covenant God made with Abraham, was to himself and Seed both Spiritual and
Carnal that were in the Covenant, is the same now to believers and all their
Seed, etc.

1. Answer, Then it follows, that Abraham's Carnal Seed who were ungodly
Persons, were in the Covenant of Grace; for circumcision belonged to them and
their Male Children as far forth as it did appertain, to believers and their
Male Children who were of his race.

2. It will follow then also, that we Gentiles that believe, and our natural
Offspring have the same Right to the Land of Canaan, and all other Privileges
of the Jewish Church with Abraham's Carnal Seed. There is no ways to save your
self from the greatest absurdities imaginable, without distinguishing between
those two Covenants and the two Seeds, or between the Covenant of circumcision
made with Abraham, etc. and the promise of the Covenant of Grace made to him,
and to all his Spiritual Seed as such.

3ly That Christ should come out of Abraham's Loins according to the Flesh, and
of none else was in that Covenant God made with him, and a special part it was,
of the Covenant of circumcision, and was that made to the Gentiles that
believe, or was it not peculiar to Abraham's Seed only according to the Flesh.

4. Also when the Apostle speaks of the Gospel which God preached to Abraham,
or promise of the Covenant of Grace; he does not mention the Covenant of
restipulation in Genesis 17. 7, 8, 9. But that in Genesis 12. 3. Chap. 18. 18. and
Chap. 22. 8.

In thy Seed shall all Nations be Blessed: Mark it well.

You say, The Covenant God made with Abraham and his Seed was never Repealed,
nor Dissolved, nor their Church State taken up by the Roots at the coming in of
the Gospel; for if it had, say you, how could the Blessing of Abraham, come
upon the Gentiles, as promised Genesis 12. 3.

1. Answer, Is not the Jewish Church State dissolved, and does not Dr. Owen
tell you their Old Covenant is gone? Yet,

2. Do we say, the promise of the New Covenant God made to Abraham is
dissolved? God forbid, for that is unalterable, and by the Virtue of which it
is that believing Gentiles partake of the Blessings of Abraham.

But Friend, the Gentiles receive not the Blessings of Abraham through the Law,
nor through the Covenant of Circumcision, but by Faith in the Promise of the
Covenant of Grace made with Abraham, viz. in thy Seed shall all the Families of
the Earth be Blessed. Nay Abraham himself, it is evident, received not that
blessedness in the Covenant of circumcision, That Faith was reckoned to Abraham
for Righteousness, The Apostle asserts Romans 4. 9. How was it then reckoned?
When he was in circumcision, or in uncircumcision? Not in circumcision, but in
uncircumcision. Verse 10. There was no need of this distinction, if
circumcision appertained to the Covenant of Grace; we see how it is
contra-distinguished to the Covenant of Faith:

And he received circumcision, a Seal of the righteousness of the Faith he had,
yet being uncircumcised: That he might be the Father of all that Believe,
though they be not circumcised; that righteousness might be imputed to them
also.

From hence I argue that circumcision was a Seal to none but Abraham.

1. Because it is said to be a Seal of the righteousness of the Faith, Abraham
had being yet uncircumcised for so it could not be a Seal to others, because
they were circumcised before they believed.

2. Because also it was to assure him of that peculiar Blessing and privilege
of being the Father of all that believe. -- And none had that prerogative but
Abraham only.

3. Take this Argument.

If Abraham received the Spiritual Blessing, viz. Righteousness and
Justification by Faith in the promise of the Covenant of Grace made to him, and
received not the Blessing of Righteousness and Justification in the Covenant of
circumcision; then there were two Covenants contained in those Covenant,
transactions of God with Abraham. But the former, and latter is true. Ergo
there were two Covenants contained in those Covenant transactions God made with
Abraham.

In Page 3. Mr. Shute says, the Olive Tree or Covenant God made with Abraham,
was not dissolved: For the Jews are to be grafted into their own Olive Tree
again; but if the Covenant were dissolved and repealed, how can they be taken
into it again; for* it is called their own Olive Tree, Romans 11. 11, 12, 17.

1. Answer This Man mistakes the Holy Ghost: The Apostle speaks not of the
Jews, as being Abraham's Carnal Seed as such, but of them that belong to the
Election of Grace*

2. Now who doubts but that the Covenant of Grace was their Covenant, or Olive
Tree, even all of them that shall be taken into it of the Jewish race, in the
latter days, as much as it was their Covenant, who were Jews and Elect ones who
lived in the Apostles time.

3. It might be called their Olive Tree or Covenant, because the Covenant of
Grace as it was made with Abraham, ran first to his natural Seed who were the
Children of the promise, i. e. the Elect of God; hence Christ said he was not
sent but to the lost Sheep of the House of Israel: That is, not first sent,
they were first to have the offer of all New Covenant Grace and Blessings; to
them appertained the Covenant and Adoption, etc. viz. in the first place.

4. Do we plead for the dissolution of the Covenant of Grace, God made with or
promised to Abraham, because we say the Legal and external Covenant made with
him and his Carnal Seed, as such is removed, by virtue of which they had their
political Church State, and visible Church Membership and all other Fleshly and
Legal Privileges?

Or do we say, those Jews that believed or their Elect Infants were cast out of
the Covenant of Grace? God forbid.

No, for if the Children of unbelieving Jews did believe, it shows they are in
covenant also. In a word. All that believe, let them be whose Children they
will, they are all in the Covenant of Grace: For there is now no difference,
Jews and Gentiles, Old and young, bond and free, are all one in Christ Jesus.
Now no knowing Men after the Flesh, i. e. upon the account of Fleshly or
external Privileges, by descent from Abraham according to the Flesh:
Circumcisioa nor uncircumcision, avails nothing, but a new Creature; old
things are past away and all things are become new 2. Cor. 5. 17.

Should this Man object and say, as to Dr. Owen he speaks of the Sinai
Covenant, or the Covenant made with the People of Israel, after they came out
of Egypt, and not of the Covenant of circumcision.

Answer, I answer that it is evident where Paul excludes the Law as not being
of Faith, nor the Covenant of Grace, but opposed unit, he also excluded upon
the same Foot of account circumcision, Romans 4. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
Gal. 3. 21. Gal 5. 3. Romans 2. 25, 26, 27. Also Mr. Sbute says, the Covenant,
Deuteronomy. 29. 11, 12, 13. is the same G^^ made with Abraham: Take his own words
^age 17. note this (says he) by the way, he has dropped the 13. verse, wherein
is the explanation of the Covenant to be the same God made with Abraham and his
Seed. Which verse does indeed clearly show that the Covenant of circumcision
was the same (and but a farther establishment of it) with that given in Horeb,
thou shall enter into Covenant with the Lord thy God, etc. viz. That he may
establish thee to day, for a People to himself, and that he may be unto thee
aGod, as he has said unto thee, and has vowed unto thy Fathers Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob.

You ask, What was the personal actual sin which those young Babes committed at
the coming in of the Gospel, that provoked God to cast them out of Covenant?
for you do own that the Seed of believers were once in Covenant, and were
Church Members; but if you cannot prove what the transgression was, then all
your arguments ought to be committed to the custody of the Essex Jayl Keeper
thus Mr. Shute.

Answer, You Should first prove it was a gracious privilege to Babes or the
Carnal Seed of Abraham, that they were in the Legal Covenant and national
Church of Israel, before you ask that question.

The Apostle says not, that circumcision was a Privilege, unless they kept the
Law, and by it they were obliged to keep it perfectly, and hence it is called a
yoke of Bondage.

2. It was not for the Sins of little Babes, that the Legal Covenant and Legal
Church was dissolved, at the coming in of the Gospel: But it was the will and
pleasure of God to take that Covenant away, that he might establish the second
and better Covenant. And God it appears has done Infants no hurt hereby, since
the promise of God made to Abraham, touching Salvation by Christ in the
Covenant of Grace stands fast for ever, and is brought in, and established to
all the Elect, both of Jews first; and also of the Gentiles. True, the
unbelieving Jews were cast off for not believing, for had they believed they
had pertaken of like Gospel Grace with those that did believe: But the
believing Jews and their Children did no longer abide in that national Church
to which they once belonged, nor were their Children until they believed,
received into the Gospel Church; yet I affirm that was no Spiritual loss to
those Babes, seeing there was no righteousness nor Salvation to be had by the
Law, Legal Covenant, nor circumcision.

Mr. Collin^ will not say that believers and their Seed only were in the Legal
Covenant and in the Legal Church, but all unbelievers also, and their Children
who sprung from Isaacs Loins, were in the same Covenant, and were
Church Members, and that by Gods appointment too; as far forth as were the
godly or believing Jews, and their Children: And Friend, it should appear that
among Abraham's Carnal Seed there were but a very small remnant that were
believers; Though all were in the Legal Covenant then, and where Churhmembers.

3. Say you, You must prove that the Gospel brought less Grace with it, than
the Abrogated law carried way.

Answer, The abrogated Law had no Grace in it at all; Grace came not by the
Law, but by Jesus Christ; the Law is not of Faith.

4. Here (say you,) you confound and contradict your self; for you say the
Church is established upon better promises, which I do own and have proved in
my Book, but the Church State is the same, and therefore that of it self is a
sufficient argument to prove that all Children of Christian believers are still
in Covenant.

Answer, Must the Carnal Seed be Members of the Gospel Church as under the Law,
or is it else not a better Covenant that God has established? Friend, many
other external Privileges as well as that is gone, the Sons of our Minishers
as such, have no right to the Ministry now; yet all the Sons of Ministers as
such, had that right under the Law: Besides, we have no Land of Canaan nor
glorious external Temple, no promise of gathering earthly riches, no Political
State of Government among our selves; yet is the Gospel Church State and Gospel
Covenant better than that under the Law.

An Account of Mr. Shutes scurrilous language as to the rest of this Sheet: I
shall only make some remarks on his hard reproachful and Opprobrious words and
abuse of Scripture.
IN Page 2. he compares Mr. Collins with the Jews, as if his Arguments were of
like nature with theirs who said, we have a Law, and by our ^aw he ought to dye.

In Page 5. You do but beat the Air, and Shoot all your Arrows against a Brazen
Wall, and there is no more Work for the Club nor Ax.

Answer, He may perceive he was mistaken, for the Ax has not done with him yet.

He in the said 5. Page abuses that Text, better promises, these are his words,
viz. for the promises are better, and that chiefly because circumcision was
changed for Baptism.

Answer, Does the Holy Ghost there refer to this change, or is Baptism a
promise or a precept?

He abuses that Text in Acts 15. 10. the former (says he meaning circumcision)
wherein Infants were chiefly concerned, was such a Yoke as they nor their
Fathers were able to bear, they were not able to see their Childrens Flesh cut
off, and we have an Instance of this in Zipporah, what made her in such a
passion with Moses her Husband, as that she called him a Bloody Husband twice?
Why she tells you her self, it was because of the circumcision.

Answer, In this he seems to charge the Holy God, who appointed and commanded
circumcision, as if it was more like a punishment of criminals than an
ordinance of God; as he calls Di^ping of Believers in the Name, etc.

2. Was it from the pain that circumcision put the Infants to, that the Apostle
calls it a Yoke, that neither they nor their Fathers could bear? or was it not
rather because it lay them under an obligation to keep the whole Law? for our
Apostle, so says in Gal. 5. 3. I testify again to every Man that is
circumcised, that he is a debtor to do the whole Law, compared with Romans 2. 25.

3. He abuses that Text Exodus 4. 15, 16.

Let him read his Annotators, she called her Husband a bloody Husband or a
Spouse of Blood, because she by Blood as it were, redeemed her Husbands Life.
God being provoked against Moses, as the 14. verse shows, and she prevented his
danger by circumcising her Son.

2. If she referred to circumcision it self, as he takes it, yet she being a
Midianitisb Woman t^^t would not Justify him, thus to reflect on that Holy
Rite and Ordinance of God.

In Page 6. says he, so this question may be sent to Essex among the Barren
Jayl Keepers.

Is it safe to Scoff and make a sport when we write about Sacred things? He
also reflects upon the whole party of the Baptists; as if we were fallen from
our former Principles about humane learning.

I cannot (says he) but observe how much this People are swerved from their
first Principles: For it is not long since they decried humane learning, and
also making a trade of preaching, -- But if they can get a few Shreds or broken
fragments of learning, or a learned Man on their side, they are ready to make
an Idol of it, and now they make a Trade of Preaching, Page 16. etc.

Answer, It appears it is the whole party he strives to bring into contempt: But
let him take heed of belying so gracious a People as the Adversaries themselves
confess them to be; did we ever decry humane learning, because we believe and
ever did that it is not an essential qualification in a Minister? We are no
more for it now than ever we were and we did and do believe that those who
preach the Gospel, ought to live of the Gospel.

He renders Mr. Collins no better than a Jesuit; take his words, this Man has
confidence and deceit enough to make a swinging Jesuit, etc. Page 16.

Again, he says, This deceitful Man hides the Sense and meaning of them from
the World; Does not this savior of great malice? Page 16.

He says Infants have Faith, yetin Page 10. (of his Book) he asks what
personal Faith a Child is capable of acting in an ordinary way; or what good
Fruit such Children are capable to bring forth?

1. In Page 8. he renders those false Teachers, who say that the Covenant God
made with Abraham is repealed, viz. the Covenant of circumcision; he may see
that we deny that the promise or Covenant of Grace God made with Abraham is
repealed though we say the Covenant of circumcision God made with him is repealed.

2. Such he says are false Teachers who say the Church State under the Law was
Carnal.

3. Such as deride and Scoff at habitual Faith in dying Infants; Mr. Collins
owns not such Faith to be in Infants is he therefore a false Teacher. But how
does he prove he derides or Scoffs, etc.

4. Such who take upon them the Work of the Ministry without Gods Call, or
being gifted or qualified he says are false Teachers.

Such we grant are not true Ministers; but does not he, think you, refer to
such who were not trained up in School Learning? I doubt not but our call from
God to the Ministry is as good as others have, though may be not every ways so
well qualified as we ought; yet humane learning is no qualification left by the
Holy Spirit in the Scripture.

In Page 7. he says, In this Authors former Book he has by excluding Infants
from Baptism exclud them from Eternal Life and Salvation; dying in their
Infancy. How false that is let all Men Judge who have read Mr. Collins Book, he
refers unto Page 41.

In Page 10. he says, How wilfully blind and dishonest are you thus falsely to
quote my words. I can see no reason for those Unchristian expressions, in Page
11. he says I suppose he means a long White Shift, as if we Baptized Persons in
a White Shift: What sport is here for the Enemies of Religion? Though I deny that
Women were Baptized in that undecent immodest shameful way and manner, says he.

He means by Dipping the whole Body: God says he, never appointed an ordinance
to draw out and gratify Men's lusts, Page 11. O see what contempt he does cast
upon that way of Baptising, which all Christians used for many hundred of years
in the Church, and which Christ appointed to the end of the World.

You represent to the World, as if our way of Baptising were immodest, and done
not as comely, or of good Report; for this you are to be accountable to the
most high God. Friend, if you please to come and see our Order in the
Administration of that Ordinance, I doubt not, but you will be convinced of
your Error, and be forced to say, That the Subject goes with more Sobriety and
Modesty, to the Sacrament of Baptism, than thousands do to the hearing of Gods
Word, or to the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper.

In Page 12. Therefore, says he, there is no more work for the Club nor the
Ax; you may lay them by as useless, or hang them up in Merchant Tailors Hall.
You may know what he intends, and is not this like those who said, is not this
the Carpenter, etc. see what a strange Prayer he makes in Page 15;

Where he pleads his Innocence, God is a gracious God; and I think the Man is
acted in Zeal, but not according to knowledge; in Page 11. he says, Our Author
has Coined a brand new Epithet, to cover that unseemly Luxurious way of
tripping and Dipping Women, etc.

In Page 18. he would suggest that Mr. Collins is possessed with a Devil:
People say there is a Maid, says he, possessed in Wapping; for my part I think
there is a Man poss^ss^d also; hard words.

In Page 20. he boasts as if Anabaptism it self has resigned up the Ghost, and
this may serve for its Funeral Sermon. In Page 21. he breaks out, I cannot tell
what to think of this Man (meaning* Mr. Collins) That should dare to have the
confidence, as to put out such scu^rilous abominable false and scandalous
things. Friend, what shall we think of you and your Papers?

In Page 23. he renders the answering Books that are put out against Infant
Baptism, a raking in Dunghils, and therefore such a one as he, he thinks, is
fit to do it.

In Page 191. of this last Book he, says that they (meaning the Independent
Congregations) are not true Churches, or else we are not: I know no reason for
this, for I doubt not but they are true Churches, as well as we, they being
godly Christians, though I do believe they may be less complete Churches: Then
those who are Baptized upon the profession of Faith, or not so orderly in their
constitution besides they have received (as we Judge a Tradition of Man in the
stead of Christ's Institution.

This man says, he can have Communion with those of our opinion, yet says our
Baptism is a counterfeit and we guilty of Sacrilege, Page 190.

But Friend, I see not how they can have Communion with you without repentance,
considering all the hard words uttered by you: You know who says Men must give
an account of all their hard Speeches, etc.

God grant those I have mentioned, and these following may not be laid to your
charge calling our Baptism a mock Baptism, and us diving Anticovenanters,
preaching without a call suggesting as if under Diabolical possession, calling
Jesuit, swinging Jesuit; calling Dipping, which was the Apostolical way of
Baptising, more like a punishment of criminals, etc.

Asserting that we make no better of Infants than Dogs, calling our Doctrine
Mountebank, etc. and a Minister a C C, by which it is concluded you intend
Coxcomb, asserting we have crasty positions, uncouth glosses, that we mince and
limit the fundamental Doctrine of Man's Salvation,

To conclude, let the Reader take notice of this, viz. Were it not more for the
Honor of God and Love to Truth, I had not concerned my self with so lin^le an
Antagoni^^ as this is. ^ and in reproach call some Arminians, Sacinians, others
gone back to Judaism, some gormandisers feasting on Legs of Muiton; in some
places reflecting on Men's honest callings God by his providence called them
once unto; that our Doctrine damns Infants, etc. whether these Speeches he ought
not publicly to acknowledge as evil?

Is not this as bad as to call his Brother Raca, i. e. a vain person in anger
or malice.

Cant Men write upon controversible points without such bitterness, and
reviling language? I desire Friend, you would go to God in Prayer, and entreat
for pardon through Christ's Blood, and no longer rest in such a Spirit and
practice: Christ is at the Door, take heed of smiting your fellow Servant. But
should you instead of answering our arguments proceed still after the same
manner, we shall find out another way to deal with you, viz.

Bring our Charge against you for Right and Justice to the Congregation you
belong unto: The Lord send, and increase Love and Charity among his People, and
unite them together in one Spirit, which he will suddenly do and wipe off our
reproach; to whom be glory and praise for ever and ever,

Amen.
ERRATA.
IN Page 5. line 7. for Burkie read Burkit p. 8. l. 20. blot out Blood, p. 16.
l. 37. f. contained r. contrived, p. 19. l. 28. f. Comma, r. Period. Also in
several other Places you will find false Pointing or Stops.

P. 22. blot out the comma in l. 21, 22, 23, 24, 25. they being this Authors
words; p. 27. l. 10. add Genesis 17. 8, 9. there begins the Covenant of
Peculiarity. p. 32. l. 29. f. purity r. parity, p. 38. l. 3. f. usurped r.
absurd, p. 39. l. 18. f. ratify r. ratified, p. 41. l. 39. f. have r. have
had, p. 42. l. 3. f. though r. the, p. 29. l. 31. add as to outward dispensation,
p. 43. l. 1. f. Natural Church r. National.

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT, Containing several Arguments (to disprove Pedo-Baptism, and to
prove Believers only the Subjects thereof:) For Mr. Gyles Shute to Answer.
Friend,
IF you will not desist but write again, you are desired to answer these
Arguments, the stress of the Controversy lying in them.

Arg. 1. If none are to be baptized by the Authority of the great Commission of
our Blessed Savior, Matthew. 28. but such who are first made Disciples by being
taught; than Infants, who are not capable to be taught, ought not to be
baptized. But none a^e to be baptized by the Authority of the great Commission
of our Blessed Savior, but such who are first made Disciples by Teaching.
Ergo, Little Babes ought not to be baptized.

Arg. 2. If Infant Baptism was never instituted, commanded, or appointed of
God, Infants ought not to be baptized. But Infant Baptism was never instituted,
commanded, or appointed of God. Ergo, They ought not to be baptized.

As to the Major; If one thing may be practiced as an Ordinance without an
Institution or Command of God, another thing may also; so any Innovation may be
let into the Church.

As to the Minor; If there is an Institution for it, etc. it is either contained
in the great Commission, Matthew. 28. Mark 16. or somewhere else. But it is not to
be found in the Commission, nor any where else. Ergo.

The Major none will deny.

The Minor I prove thus. None are to be baptized by virtue of the Commission,
but such who are discipled by the Word, as I said before, and so the Greek Word
(...) signifies.

If any should say, Christ commanded his Disciples to baptize all Nations, and
Infants are part of Nations, therefore are to be baptized. I answer;

Arg. 3. If all Nations, or any in the Nations ought to be baptized before
discipled; then Turks, Pagans, Unbelievers and their Children may be baptized,
because they are a great part of the Nations. But Turks, Pagans and
Unbelievers, and their Children, ought not to be baptized. Ergo.

Besides that, Teaching (by the Authority of the Commission) must go before
Baptizing, we have proved; which generally al^ Learned Men do assert: if the
Institution is to be found any where else, they must show the Place.

Arg. 4. Faith and Repentance are required of all that ought to be baptized.
Infants are not required to believe and repent, nor are they capable so to do.
Ergo, Infants ought not to be baptized.

The Major is clear, Acts 2, 8, 10, 16 Chapters; and it is also asserted by the
Church of England. What is required of Persons to be baptized? that is the
Question. The Answer is, Repentance, whereby they forsake Sin, and Faith,
whereby they steadfastly believe the Promise of God made to them in that
Sacrament.

The Minor cannot be denied.

Arg. 5. That Practice that tends not to the Glory of God, nor to the Profit of
the Child, when done, nor in aftertimes when grown up, but may prove hurtful
and of a dangerous Nature to him, ca^^c^ be a Truth of God. But the Practice of
Infant Baptism tends not to the Glory of God* nor to the Profit of the Child
when baptized, nor in aftertimes when grown up, but may prove hurtful and of a
dangerous Nature to him. Ergo. See Levit. 10. 1, 2. where Moses told Aaron,
because his Sons had done that which God commanded them not, that God would be
sanctified (...) all that drew (...) unto him; intimating, that such who did
that which God commanded not, did not sanctify or glorify God therein. Can God
be glorified by Man's Disobedience, or by adding to his Word; by doing that
which God has not required? Matthew. 16. 9. In vain do you worship me, teaching
for Doctrine the Commandments of Men: and that that Practice does profit the
Child, none can prove from God's Word: And in aftertimes when grown up, it may
cause the Person to think he was thereby made a Christian, etc. and brought
into the Covenant of Grace, and had it sealed to him, nay, thereby regenerated,
and that Infants are thereby ingrafted also into Christ's Church. Sure all
understanding Men know Baptism of Believers is not called Regeneration, but
only metonymically, it being a Figure of Regeneration. But they ignorantly
affirm also, that Infants then have a federal Holiness; as if this imagined
Holiness comes in by the Child's Covenant in Baptism, which may prove hurtful
and dangerous to them, and cause them to think Baptism confers Grace, which is
a great Error. How can Water, says Mr. Charnock, an external thing, work upon
the Soul physically? Nor can it, says he, be proved, that ever the Spirit of
God is tied by any Promise, to apply himself to the Soul in a gracious
Operation, when Water is applied to the Body: If it were so, then all that were
baptized were regenerated, then all that were baptized should be saved, or else
the Doctrine of Perseverance falls to the Ground. Some indeed, says he, say,
that Regeration is conferred in Baptism upon the Elect, and exerts it self
afterward in Conversion. But how so active a Principle as a spiritual Life
should lie dead and asleep so many Years, etc. is not easily conceived. On
Regen. p. 75.

Arg. 6. If the Church of England says, that Faith and Repentance are required
of all that ought to be baptized, and in so saying, speak truly, and yet
Infants cannot perform those things; then Infants ought not to be baptized. But
the Church of England says, that Faith and Repentance are required of all such,
etc. and speak truly, and yet Infants cannot perform these things. Ergo,
Infants ought not to be baptized.

Object. If it be objected, That they affirm they do perform it by their
Sureties.

Answ. If Suretiship for Children in Baptism is not required of God, and the
Sureties do not, cannot perform those things for the Child: then Suretiship is
not of God, and so signifies nothing, but is an unlawful and sinful
Undertaking. But Suretiship in Childrens Baptism is not required of God, and
they do not, cannot perform what they promise. Ergo.

Do they, or can they cause the Child to sorsake the Devil and all his Works,
the Pomps and Vanities of this wicked World; and all the sinful Lusts of the
Flesh? In a Word; Can they make the Child or Children to repent and truly
believe in Jesus Christ? for these are the things they promise for them, and in
their Name. Alas, they want Power to do it for themselves, and how then should
they do it for others? Besides, we see they never mind nor regard their
Covenant in the Case: and will not God one Day say, Who has required these
things at your Hands?

Arg. 7. If there be no Precedent in the Scripture, (as there is no Precept)
that any Infant was baptized, then Infants ought not to be baptized. But there
is no Precedent that any Infant was baptized in the Scripture. Ergo.

If there is any Precedent or Example in Scripture that any Infant was
baptized, let them show us where we may find it.

Erasmus says, It Is no where expressed in the Apostolical Writings, that they
baptized Children. Union of the Church, and on Romans 6.

Calvin says, It is no where expressed by the Evangelists, that any one Infant
was baptized by the Apostles. Iustit. c. 16. Book 4.

Ludovicus Vives says, None of old were wont to be baptized but in grown Age,
and who desired and understood what it was. Vide Ludov.

The Magdeburgenses say, That concerning the baptizing the Adult, both Jews and
Gentiles, we have sufficient Proof from Acts 2, 8, 10, 16 Chapters; but as to
the baptizing of Infants, they can meet with no Example in Scripture. Magdeb.
Cent. l. 2. p. 469.

Dr. Tailor says, It is against the perpetual Analogy of Christ's Doctrine to
baptize Infants: For besides that Christ never gave any Precept to baptize
them, nor ever himself nor his Apostles (that appears) did baptize any of them:
All that either he or his Apostles said concerning it, requires such previous
Dispositions of Baptism, of which Infants are not capable, viz. Faith and
Repentance. Lib. Proph. p. 239.

Arg. 8. If whatsoever which is necessary to Faith and Practice is left in the
Holy Scripture, that being a complete and perfect Rule, and yet Infant Baptism
is not contained or to be found therein, then Infant Baptism is not of God. But
whatever is necessary to Faith and Practice, is contained in the Holy
Scriptures, etc. but Infant Baptism is not to be found therein. Ergo.

That the Scripture is a perfect Rule, etc. we have the Consent of all the
Ancient Fathers and Modern Divines.

Athanasius says, The Holy Scriptures being Inspirations of God, are
sufficient to all Instructions of Truth. Athan. against the Gentiles.

Chrysostom says, All things be plain and clear in the Scripture; and
whatsoever are needful, are manifest there. Chrysostom. on 2 Thessalonians. and 2 Timothy 2.

Basil says, That (...)old be an Argument of Infidelity, and a most certain
Sign of Pride, if any Man should reject any thing written, and should introduce
things not written. Basil in his Sermon de Fide.

Augustine says, In the Scriptures are found all things which contain Faith,
manner of Living, Hope, Love, etc. Let us, says he, seek no farther than what
is written of God our Savior, lest a Man would know more than the Scriptures
witness. Arg. in his 198 Epistles to Fortunat.

Theophilact says, It is part of a Diabolical Spirit, to think any thing
Divine, without the Authority of the Holy Scripture. Lib. 2. Paschal.

Isychius says, Let us who will have any thing observed of God, search no more
but that which the Gospel does give unto us. Lib. 5. c. 16. on Levit.

Bellarmin says, That though the Arguments of the Anabaptists, from the defect
of Command or Example, have a great Use against the Lutherans, forasmuch as
they use that Rite every where, having no Command or ^xample, theirs is to be
re^ected; yet is it of no Force against Catholics, who conclude the
Apostolical Tradition is of no less Authority with us than the Scripture, etc.
this of baptizing of Infants is an Apostolical Tradition. Bellarm. in his Book
de Bapt. 1 1. c. 8.

Mr. Ball says, We must for every Ordinance look to the Institution, and never
stretch it wider, nor draw it narrower than the Lord has made it, for he is
the Institutor of the Sacraments according to his own Pleasure; and it is our
part to learn of him, both to whom, how, and for what End the Sacraments are to
be administered. Ball, in his Answer to the New England E^^ns, p. 38, 39.

And as to the Minor, it is acknowledged by our Adversaries, it is not to be
found in the Letter of the Scripture. And as to the Consequences drawn
therefrom, we have proved, they are not natural from the Premises; and though
we ad^^^^ of Consequences and Inferences if genuine, yet no^ in the case of an
Institution respecting a practical Ordinance that is of mere positive Right.

Arg. 9. If Infant Baptism was an Institution of Christ, the Pedo-Baptists
could not be at a loss about the Grounds of the Right Infants have to Baptism:
But the Pedo-Baptists are at a great Loss, and differ exceedingly about the
Grounds of the Right Infants have to Baptism. Ergo, it is no Institution of
Christ.

As touching the Major, I argue thus; That which is an Institution of Christ,
the Holy Scripture does show, as well the End and Ground of the Ordinance, ^s
the Subject and Manner of it. But the Scripture speaks nothing of the End or
Ground of Pedo-Baptism, or for what reason they ought to be baptized. Ergo,
it is no Institution of Christ.

The Minor is undeniable, Some affirm, as we have showed, p. 15. it was to take
away Original Sin. Some say it is their Right by the Covenant, they being the
Seed of Believers. Others say, Infants have Faith, and therefore have a Right.
Others say, They have a Right by the Faith of their Sureties. Some ground their
Right from an Apostolical Tradition; others upon the Authority of Scripture.
Some say, All Children of professed Christians ought to be baptized; others
say, None but the Children of true Believers have a Right to it. Sure, if it
was an Ordinance of Christ, his Word would soon end this Controversy.

Arg. 10. If the Children of believing Gentiles, as such, are not the natural
nor spiritual Seed of Abraham, they can have no Right to Baptism, or
Church Membership, by virtue of any Covenant-transaction God made with Abraham.
But the Children of believing Gentiles, as such, are not the natural nor
spiritual Seed of Abraham. Ergo.

Arg. 11. If no Man can prove from Scripture, that any spiritual Benefit
redounds to Infants in their Baptism, it is no Ordinance of Christ. But no Man
can prove from Scripture, that any spiritual Benefit redounds to Infants in
their Baptism. Ergo.

Arg. 12. That cannot be an Ordinance of Christ, for which there is neither
Command nor Example in all God's Word, nor Promise to such who do it, nor
Threatenings to such who neglect it. But there is no Command or Example in all
the Word of God for the baptizing of little Babes, nor Promise made to such who
are baptized, nor Threatenings to such who are not. Ergo.

That the Child lies under a Promise who is baptized, or the Child under any
Threatening or Danger that is not baptized, let them prove it, since it is
denied.

Arg. 13. If no Parents, at any time or times, have been by God the Father,
Jesus Christ, or his Apostles, either commended for baptizing of their
Children, or reproved for neglecting to baptize them; then Infant Baptism is no
Ordinance of God. But no Parents at any time or times have been by God
commended for baptizing of their Children, etc. Ergo, Infant Baptism is no
Ordinance of God.

This Argument will stand unanswerable, unless any can show who they were that
were ever commended for baptizing their Children, or reproved for neglecting
it, or unless they can show a parallel case.

Arg. 14. If Men were not to presume to alter any thing in the Worship of God
under the Law, neither to add thereto, nor diminish therefrom, and God is as
strict and jealous of his Worship under the Gospel; then nothing ought to be
altered in God's Worship under the Gospel. But under the Law Men were not to
presume so to do, and God is as strict and jealous under the Gospel. Ergo.

The Major cannot be denied.

The Minor is clear; See thou make all things according to the Pattern showed
thee in the Mount, Exodus 25. 40. and Levit. 10. 1, 2. See how Nadab and Abihu
sped, for presuming to vary from the Command of God, and Uzzah, tho but in
small Circumstances as they may seem to us. How dare Men adventure, this being
so, to change Baptism from Dipping into Sprinkling, and the Subject, from an
Adult Believer, to an ignorant Babe? Add thou not into his Word, etc.

Arg. 15. Whatever Practice opens a Door to any humane Traditions and
Innovations in God's Worship, is a great Evil, and to be avoided: But the
Practice of Infant Baptism opens a Door to any humane Traditions and
Innovations in God's Worship. Ergo, to sprinkle or baptize Infants is a great
Evil, and to be avoided.

The Major will not be denied.

The Minor is clear, because there is no Scripture-ground for it, no Command
nor Example for such a Practice in God's Word. And if without
Scripture-Authority the Church has Power to do one thing, she may do another,
and so ad infinitum.

Arg. 16. Whatsoever Practice reflects upon the Honor, Wisdom and Care of
Jesus Christ, or renders him less faithful than Moses, and the New Testament in
one of its great Ordinances, (nay, Sacraments) to lie more obscure in God's
Word, than any Law or Precept under the Old Testament, cannot be of God. But
the Practice of Infant Baptism reflects on the Honor, Care and Faithfulness of
Jesus Christ, and renders him less faithful than Moses, and a great Ordinance,
(nay, Sacrament) of the New Testament, to lie more dark and obscure than any
Precept under the Old Testament. Ergo, Infant Baptism cannot be of God.

The Major cannot be denied.

The Minor is easily proved: For he is bold indeed who shall affirm
Infant Baptism does not lie obscure in God's Word. One great Party who assert
it, say, it is not to be found in the Scripture at all, but it is an unwritten
Apostolical Tradition: others say, it lies not in the Letter of the Scripture,
but may be proved by Consequences; and yet some great Asserters of it, as Dr.
Hammond and others, say, Those Consequences commonly drawn from diverse Texts
for it, are without Demonstration, and so prove nothing. I am sure a Man may
read the Scripture a hundred times over, and never be thereby convinced; he
ought to baptize his Children, tho it is powerful to convince Men of all other
Duties.

Now can this be a Truth, since Christ who was more faithful than Moses, and
delivered every thing plainly from the Father? Moses left nothing dark as to
matter of Duty, tho the Precepts and external Rites of his Law were numerous,
two or three hundred Precepts, yet none were at a loss, or had need to say, Is
this a Truth or an Ordinance, or not? for he that runs may read it.

And shall one positive Precept given forth by Christ, who appointed so few in
the New Testament, be so obscure, as also the ground and end of it, that Men
should be confounded about the Proofs of it, together with the end and ground
thereof? See Heb. 3. 5, 6.

Arg. 17. That Custom or Law which Moses never delivered to the Jews, nor is
any where written in the Old Testament, was no Truth of God, nor of Divine
Authority. But that Custom or Law to baptize Proselytes either Men, Women or
Children, was never given to the Jews by Moses, nor is it any where written in
the Old Testament. Ergo, It was no Truth of God, nor of Divine Authority: And
evident it is, as Sir Norton Knatchbul shows, That the Jewish Rabbi^s differed
among themselves also about it: for, says he, Rabbi Eli^zer expressly
contradicts Rabbi Joshua, who* was the first I know of who asserted this sort
of Baptism among the Jews: For Eli^zer, who was contemporary with Rabbi Joshua,
if he did not live before him, asserts, that a Proselyte circumcised and not
baptized, was a true Proselyte.

Arg. 18. If Baptism is of mere positive Right, wholly depending on the Will
and Sovereign Pleasure of Jesus Christ, the great Legislator: And he has not
required or commanded Infants to be baptized: then Infants ought not to be
baptized: But Baptism is of mere positive Right, wholly depending on the Will
and sovereign Pleasure of Jesus Christ, the great Legislator, and he has not
required or commanded Infants to be baptized. Ergo, Infants ought not to be
baptized.

This Argument tends to cut off all the pretended Proofs of Pedo-Baptism, taken
from the Covenant made with Abraham; and because Children are said to belong to
the Kingdom of Heaven, it was not the Right of Abraham's Male Children to be
circumcised, because they were begotten, and born of the Fruit of his Loins,
till he received Commandment from God to circumcise them. Had he done it
before, or without a Command from God, it would have been Will Worship in him
so to have done. Moreover, this further appears to be so, Because no godly
Man's Children, nor others in Abraham's Days, nor since, had any Right thereto,
but only his Children, (or such who were bought with his Money, or were
proselyted to the Jewish Religion) because they had no Command from God so to
do, as Abraham had. This being true, it follows, that if we should grant
Infants of believing. Gentiles, as such, were the Seed of Abraham (which we
deny) yet unless God had commanded them to baptize their Children, they ought
not to do it; and if they do it without a Command or Authority from Christ, it
will be found an Act of Will Worship in them.

Arg. 19. All that were baptized in the Apostolical Primitive Times, were
baptized upon the Profession of Faith, were baptized into Christ, and thereby
put on Christ, and were all one in Christ Jesus, and were Abraham's Seed and
Heirs, according to Promise. But Infants, as such, who are baptized, were not
baptized upon the Profession of their Faith, nor did they put on Christ
thereby, nor are they all one in Christ Jesus, also are not Abraham's Seed and
Heirs according to Promise. Ergo, Infants ought not to be baptized.

Mr. Baxter confirms the Substance of the Major. These are his very Words, ^.
^. As many as have been baptized ^iv^ put on Christ, and are all one in Christ
Jesus; and are Abraham's Seed, and Heirs* according to the Promis^, Gal. 3. 27,
28, 20. This speaks the Apostle, says he, of the Probability grounded on a
credible Profession, etc. Baxter's Confirm Reconcil. page 32.

The Minor will stand firm till any can prove Infants by a visible Profession
have put on Christ, are all one in Christ Jesus, are Abraham's Seed and Heirs
according to Promise: Evident it is, none are the spiritual Seed of Abraham,
but such who have the Faith of Abraham, and are truly grafted into Christ, by a
Saving-Faith. If any object, We read of some who were baptized, who had no
Saving-Faith, but were Hypocrites. I answer; Had they appeared to be such, they
had not been baptized, nor had they a true Right thereto.

Arg. 20. Baptism is the solemnizing of the Souls Marriage-Union with Christ,
which Marriage-Contract absolutely requires an actual Profession of consent.
Infants are not capable to enter into* a Marriage-Union with Christ, no^ to
make a Profession of Consent. Ergo, Infants ought not to be baptized.

The Major our Opposits generally grant, particularly see what Mr. Baxter
says, Our Baptism is the solemni^ing of our Marriage with Christ. These are
his Words, p. 32.

The Minor none can deny: No Man sure in his right Mind, will assert that
little Babes are capable to enter into a Marriage-Relation with Christ, and to
make a Profession of a Consent: And the Truth is, he in the next Words gives
away his Cause, viz. And it is, says he, a new and strange kind of Marriage,
where there is no Profession of Consent; p. 32. How unhappy was this Man to
plead for such a n^w and strange kind of Marriage: Did he find any little Babe
he ever baptized (or rather rantize^) to make a Profession of Consent to be
married to Jesus Christ. If any should object, he speaks of the Baptism of the
Adult. I answer, his Words are these, `Our Baptism is, etc. Besides, will any
Pedo-Baptist say, that the Baptism of the Adult is the solemnizing of the Souls
Marriage with Christ, and not the Baptism of Infants. Reader, observe how our
Opposits are forced sometimes to speak the Truth, ^^ough it overthrows their
own Practice of Pedo-Baptism.

Arg. 21. If the Sins of no Persons are forgiven them till they are converted,
then they must not be baptized for the Forgiveness of them, till they pro^ess
themselves to be converted; but the Sins of no Persons are forgiven them till
they are converted. Ergo, No Person ought to be baptized for the Forgiveness of
them, till they pro^ess they are converted.

Mr. Baxter in the said Treatise lays down the Substance of this Argument also,
take his own Words, i. e. As their Sins are not forgiven them till they are
converted, Mark 4. 12. so they must not be baptized for the Forgiveness of
them, till they pro^ess themselves converted, seeing to the Church, non esse,
and non-appare^^ is all one. Repentance toward God, and Faith toward our Lord
Jesus is the Sum of that Preaching that makes Disciples, Acts 20. 21.
Therefore, says he, both these must by a Profession seem to be received,
before any at Age are baptized; p. 30. 31. And evident it is, say I, from hence
none but such at Age ought to be baptized. Philip caused the E^^ugh to profess
before he would baptize him, that he believed that Jesus Christ is the Son of
God. Saul had also, says he, more than a bare Profession before Baptism, Acts
9. 5, 15, 17. p. 28. The Promise it self, says he does expressly require a
Faith of our own, of all the Adult that will have part in the Privileges:
therefore there is a Faith of our own, that is the Condition of our Title; M^^k
16. 16. p. 16.

He might have added by the Fo^^^ of his Argument; therefore Infants should not
have the Privileges: for ^ argue thus, (...)

Arg. 2^. If there is but one Baptism of Water le^t by Jesus Christ in the New
Testament, and but one Condition or Manner of Right thereto* and that one
Baptism is that of the Adult; then Infant Baptism is no Baptism of Christ. But
there is but one Baptism, in Water lest by Christ in the New Testament, and but
one Condition and Manner of Right thereto, and that one Baptism is that of the
Adult. Ergo, Infant Baptism is no Baptism of Christ.

Mr. Baxter says, Faith and Repentance is the Condition of the Adult, and as
to any other Condition, I am sure the Scripture is silent; the Way of the Lord
is one, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, Ephesians. 4. 4.

If Profession of Faith were not necessary, says Mr. Baxter, coram Ecclesia,
to Church Membership and Privileges, then Infidels and Heathens would have
Right; also, says he, the Church and the World would be consounded. He might
have added, but Infidels and Heathens have no Right to Church Membership, etc.
Ergo, It Is a granted Case among all Christians, says he, that Profession is
thus necessary, the Apostles and Ancient Church admitted none without it; page
2^. And if so, why dare any now a days admit of Infants, who are capable to
make no Profession. He adds, Y^^ Christ in his Commission directs his
Apostles to make Disciples, and t^en baptize them, promising, He that
believes, and is baptized, shall be saved, Mark 16. 16. page 27. Furthermore
he says, I^ as many as are baptized into Christ, are baptized into his Death,
and are buried with him by Baptism into Death; that like as Christ was raised
from the Dead, so we also, should walk in Newness of Life, etc. Then no doubt,
says he, but such as were to be baptized, did first profess this
Mortification, and a Consent to be buried, etc. I^ our Baptism we put off the
Body of the Sins of the Flesh, by the Circumcision of Christ, being buried with
him, and raised with him through Faith, quickened with him, and having all our
Trespasses forgiven, Col. 2. 11, 12, 13. And will any Man (says he) ye^, will
Paul ascribe all this to those that did not so much as profess the things
signified? Will Baptism, in the Judgment of a wise Man, do all this for an
Infidel, (or, say I, for an In^^nt) that cannot make a Profession that he is a
Christian? page 31, 32. He proceeds.

Arg. 23. The Baptized are in (...) called Men washed, sanctified, justified*
they are called Saints, and Churches of Saints, 1 Cor. 1, 2. all Christians-are
sanctified o^^e^ page 33. Now let me add the Minor.

But Infants baptized are not in Scripture called Men washed, sanctified,
justified, they are not called Saints, Churches of Saints, Christians, nor
sanctified ones. Ergo, Infan^s ought not to be baptized. If any should say, why
did you not cite these Assertions of Mr. B^^tn's whilst he was living? I
answer, More then twelve Years ago I did recite and print these Assertions, and
many other Arguments of his to the same Purpose, ^o which he gave no Answer.

Arg. 24. If there is but ^ne way for all, both Parents and Children to be
ad^i^^^d into the Gospel Church to the End of the World, and that it is upon
the Profession of Faith to be baptized; then both Par^^^s and Children must
upon the Profession of their Faith be baptized, and so admitted, etc. But there
is but one way for all, bo^^ Pa^e^^^ and Children, to be admitted into the
Gospel Church to the End of the World, and that is upon the Profession of their
Faith to be baptized. Ergo.

Arg. 25. That cannot be Christ's true Baptism wherein there is not, (...) ^e ^
lively Representation of the Death, Burial and Resurrection of Jesus Christ,
together with our Death (...) S^^, and V(...)tion to a new Life. But in the
Baptizing or Sprinkling of an Infant, there is not, cannot be a lively.
Representation of Christ's Death, Burial, and Resurrection, etc. Ergo.

Arg. 26. That pretended Baptism that tends to (...) the glorious (...) and
Design of Christ in his (...) of Gospel. Baptism, or cannot answer it, is none
of Christ's Baptism. But the pretended Baptism of Infants ^en^^ to (...) the
glorious end and design of Christ (...) of Gospel Baptism Ergo.

The M^^^^ will now (...).

As to the M(...), all generally con^^^^ the End or Design of Christ i^ (...)
the Ordinance of Baptism, was in a lively Fig^^e, to repres^^^ his Death,
Burial, and Resurrection, with the Person's Death unto Sin, and his rising
again to walk in newness of Life, that is baptized, as the Sacrament of the
Supper was ordained to represent his Body was broke, and his Blood was shed.
But that a liverly Figure of Christ's Death, Burial, and Resurrection, appears
in sprinkling a little Water on the Face, I see not; and as done to an Infant,
there can no Death to Sin, and rising again to walk in newness of l^^e, be
signified; And therefore-Christ's Design and End therein is frustrated.

Arg. 27. If Baptism be Immersion, as to the proper and genuine signification
of the word Baptizo, as also of those Typical and Metaphorical Baptisms and the
spiritual Signification thereof; then Sprinkling cannot be Christ's true
Baptism. But Immersion is the proper and genuine signification of the word
Baptizo, and also of those Typical and Metaphorical Baptisms spoken of, and the
spiritual Signification thereof. Ergo, Sprinkling is not Christ's true Baptism.

1. That the proper and genuine Signification of the word Baptizo is Immersion,
or to ^ip, etc. we have proved, which is also confessed by the Learned in that
Language.

2. The Figurative Baptism was, 1st. That of the Red Sea, wherein the Fathers
were buried, as it were, unto Moses in the Sea, and under the Cloud. Pools
Annotations on 1 Cor. 10. 2. Others, says he, more probably think that the
Apostle uses this term, in regard of the great Analogy betwixt Baptism (as it
was then used) the Persons going down into the Waters, and being dipped in
them; and the Israelites going down into the Sea, the great Receptacle of
Water, though the Water at that time was gathered on Heaps on either side of
them; yet they seemed buried in the Water, as Persons in that Age were when
they were baptized, etc. The 2d. was that of Noah's Ark. See Sir Norton
Knatchbull: The Ark of Noah and Baptism, says be, were both a Type and Figure
of the Resurrection, not the Sign of the washing away of Sin, though so taken
metonymically, but a particular Signal of the Resurrection of Christ: of this
Baptism is a lively and emphatical Figure, as also was the Ark of Noah, out of
which he returned as from a Sepulcher, to a new Life.

3. Metaphorical Baptism is that of the Spirit and of Affliction: the first
signifies not a sprinkling of the Spirit, but the great Effusion of the Spirit,
like that at Pentecost, Acts 1. 4, 5. Shall be baptized, etc. on which Words
Casaubon speaks thus: See Dr. Duveil on Acts 2. The Greek Word (...) is to dip
or plunge, as it were to die Colors, in which Sense, says he, the Apostles
might be truly said to have been baptized: for the House in which this was
done, was filled with the Holy Ghost; so that the Apostles might seem to have
been plunged into it as in a large Fish Pond. Also Oecumenius on Acts 2. says,
A Wind filled the whole House, that it seemed like a Fish Pond, because it was
promised to the Apostles, that they should be baptized with the Holy Ghost. And
the Baptism of Affliction are those great depths or overwhelmings of
Afflictions, like that of our Savior's suffering, i. e. no part free; Matthew.
20. 22. where you have the same Greed Word (...) and like that of David, who
says, God drew him out of great Waters.

4. The spiritual Signification thereof is the Death, Burial and Resurrection
of Christ, and of our Death to Sin, and Vivification to a new Life.

This being so, it follows undeniably Sprinkling cannot be Christ's true
Baptism, it must be Immersion, and nothing else.

And in the last Place, Finally, To confirm that Baptizo is to dip, both from
the literal and spiritual Signification thereof, as also from those typical and
metaphorical Baptisms mentioned in the Scripture, I might add further, that
this evidently appears from the Practice of John Baptist and the Apostles of
Christ, who baptized in Rivers, and where there was much Water: and also,
because the Baptizer and Baptized are said to go down into the Water, (not down
to the Water) and came up out of the Water. John Baptist is said to baptize
them into Jordan, as the Greek Word renders it, which shows it dipping and not
sprinkling. Would it be proper to say, He sprinkled them into Jordan* The Lord
open the Eyes of those who see not, to consider these things.

FINIS.

