King Charles HIS TRIAL AT THE High Court of Justice sitting in Westminster Hall
Begun on Saturday, Jan 20. Ended Jan. 27. 1648.

Also, His Majesty's SPEECH On the SCAFFOLD, Immediately before his Execution,
On Tuesday, Ian. 30.

Together with the Several SPEECHES OF Duke HAMILTON, the Earl of HOLLAND, and
the Lord CAPEL, Immediately before their EXECUTION, On Friday, March 9. 1649.

The Second Edition, much enlarged, and faithfully Corrected.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for Pet^^ Cole, Francis Tyton, and John Playford.
1650.

King Charles HIS TRIAL AT THE High Court of Justice sitting in Westminster
Hall, Begun on Saturday, January 20. and ended Saturday, Jan. 27. 1648.
A List of the Names of the Judges and Officers of the High Court of Justice,
appointed, by an Act of the Commons of England in Parliament assembled, for the
Trial of the King.
THomas Lord Fairfax, General. Oliver Cromwell, Lievt. General. Henry Ireton,
Commissary General. Philip Skippon, Major General. Sir Hardress Waller,
Colonel. Colonel Valentine Walton. Colonel Thomas Harrison. Col. Edward
Whalley. Col. Thomas Pride. Col. Isaac Ewers. Col. Richard Ingolsby. Col.
Richard Dean. Col. John Okey. Col. Robert Overton. Col. John Harrison. Col.
John Desborough. Col. William Goff. Col. Robert Duckenfield. Col. Rowland
Wilson. Col. Henry Marten. Col. William Purefoy. Col. Godfrey Bosvil. Col.
Harbottle Morley. Col. John Berkstead. Col. Matthew Tomlinson. Col. John
Lambert. Col. Edward Ludlow. Col. John Hutchingson. Col. Robert Titchburn. Col.
Owen Roe. Col. Robert Manwaring. Col. Robert Lilburn. Col. Adrian Scroop. Col.
Alg: Sidney. Col. John Moore. Col. Francis Lassels. Col. Alexander Rigby. Col.
Edm: Harvey. Col. John Venn. Col. Anthony Stapley. Col. Thomas Horton. Col.
Thomas Hammond. Col. George Fenwick. Col. George Fleetwood. Col. James Temple.
Col. Thomas Wayt. Sir Henry Mildway. Sir Thomas Honywood. Thomas Lord Gray.
Philip Lord Lisle. William Lord Munson. Sir John Danvers. Sir Thomas Maleverer
Sir John Bowcher. Sir James Harrington. Sir William Br^reton. Robert Wallop,
Esquire. William Henningham, Esquire. Isaac Pennington, Alderman. Thomas
Atkins, Alderman. Sir Peter Wentworth. Thomas Trencher^, Esquire. John
Blackstone, Esquire. Gilbert Millington, Esquire Sir William Constable. Sir Arthur
Haslerig. Sir Michael Livessey. Richard Saloway, Esquire Humphrey Saloway, Esquire
Cornelius Holland, Esquire John Carne, Esquire Sir William Armine. John Jones, Esquire
Miles Corbet, Esquire Francis Allen, Esquire Thomas Lister, Esquire Ben: Weston, Esquire
Peregrin Pelham, Esquire John Gourdon, Esquire Francis Thorp, Esquire Sergeant at Law. John
Nutt, Esquire Thomas Challoner, Esquire John Anlaby, Esquire Richard Darley, Esquire William
Say, Esquire John Aldred, Esquire John Fagge, Esquire James Nelthorp, Esquire Sir William
Roberts. Henry Smith, Esquire Edmond Wild, Esquire James Challener, Esquire. Josias
Barns, Esquire Dennis Bond, Esquire Humph: Edwards, Esquire Gregory Clement, Esquire John Fray,
Esquire Thomas Wogan, Esquire Sir Gregory Norton. John Bradshaw, Esquire Sergeant at Law.
John Dove, Esquire John Foulks, Alderman. Thomas Scot, Alderman. Thomas Andrews,
Alderman. William Cawley, Esquire Abraham Burrel, Esquire Roger Gratwick, Esquire John
Downs, Esquire Robert Nichols, Esquire Sergeant at Law. Vincent Potter, Esquire Sir
Gilbert Pickering. John Weaver, Esquire. John Lenthal, Esquire. Robert
Reynolds, Esquire. John Lisle, Esquire. Nicholas Love, Esquire. Sir Edward
Baynton. John Corbet, Esquire. Thomas Blunt, Eq; Thomas Boon, Esquire Augustine
Garland, Esquire. Augustine Skinner, Esquire John Dickswel, Esquire Simon Main, Esquire
John Brown, Esquire John Lowrey, Esquire John Bradshaw, Esquire Sergeant at Law, Lord
President of the Court.
Counselors assistant to the Court, and to draw up the Charge against the
King, are,
Doctor Dorislow. Mr Ask. Mr Steel, Attorney General. Mr Cook, Solicitor
General. Clerks to the Court.
Mr Broughton, Mr Phelps,

Officers of the Court.
Sergeant Danby, Sergeant at Arms, and Mace-Bearer. Col. John Humphrey,
Sword Bearer. Mr King, Crier of the Court. The Messengers and Door-Keepers with
Tip-Staves.
Mr Walford, Mr Radley, Mr Pain, Mr Powel, Mr Hull,

The manner of the Trial of CHARLES STUART King of England, in the great Hall
in Westminster.
ON Saturday, being the 20. day of January 1648. The Lord President of the High
Court of Justice with near fourscore of the Members of the said Court, having
sixteen Gentlemen with Partisans, and a Sword and a Mace, with their, and other
Officers of the said Court marching before them, came to the place ordered to
be prepared for their sitting, at the West end of the great Hall at
Westminster; where the Lord President in a Crimsion Velvet Chair, fixed in the
midst of the Court, placed himself, having a Desk with a Crimsion Velvet
Cushion before him; The rest of the Members placing themselves on each side of
him upon the several Seats, or Benches, prepared and hung with Scarlet for that
purpose, and the Partisans dividing themselves on each side of the Court before
them.

The Court being thus sat, and silence made, the great Gate of the said Hall
was set open, to the end, That all persons without exception, desirous to see,
or hear, might come into it, upon which the Hall was presently filled, and
silence again ordered.

This done, Colonel Thomlinson, who had the charge of the Prisoner, was
commanded to bring him to the Court, who within a quarter of an hours space
brought him attended with about twenty Officers, with Partisans marching before
him, there being other Gentlemen, to whose care and custody he was likewise
committed, marching in his Rear.

Being thus brought up within the face of the Court, The Sergeant at Arms, with
his Mace, receives and conducts him straight to the Bar, having a Crimsion
Velvet Chair set before him. After a stern looking upon the Court, and the
people in the Galleries on each side of him, he places himself, not at all
moving his Hat, or otherwise showing the least respect to the Court; but
presently rises up again, and turns about, looking downwards upon the Guards
placed on the left side, and on the multitude of Spectators on the right side
of the said great Hall. After Silence made among the people, the Act of
Parliament, for the Trying of CHARLES STVART KING of England, was read over by
the Clerk of the Court; who sat on one side of a Table covered with a rich
Turkey Carpet, and placed at the feet of the said Lord President, upon which
table was also laid the Sword and Mace.

After reading the said Act, the several names of the Commissioners were called
over, every one who was present, being 80. as aforesaid, rising up and
answering to his Call.

Having again placed himself in his Chair, with his face toward the Court,
Silence being again ordered, the Lord President stood up and said;

Lord President. CHARLES STVART, King of England; The Commons of England
Assembled in Parliament, being deeply sensible of the Calamities that have been
brought upon this Nation (which is fixed upon you as the principal Author of
it) have resolved to make inquisition for Blood, and according to that Debt and
Duty they owe to Justice, to God, the Kingdom, and themselves, and according to
the Fundamental Power that rests in themselves, They have resolved to bring you
to Trial and Judgment; and for that purpose have constituted this High Court
of Justice, before which you are brought.


This said, M. Cook Attorney for the Commonwealth (standing within a Bar on
the right hand of the Prisoner) offered to speak, but the King having a staff
in his Hand, held it up, and laid it upon the said M. Cooks shoulder two or
three times, bidding him hold; Nevertheless, the Lord President ordering him to
go on, he said:

M. Cook. My Lord, I am commanded to charge CHARLES STVART, King of England, in
the name of the Commons of England, with Treason and high Misdemeanors; I
desire the said Charge may be read.


The said Charge being delivered to the Clerk of the Court, the Lord President
ordered it should be read, but the King bid him hold; Nevertheless, being
commanded by the Lord President to read it, the Clerk begun.

THE Charge of the Commons of ENGLAND, against Charles Stuart, KING of England,
Of High Treason, and other High Crimes, exhibited to the High Court of Justice.
THat the said CHARLES STVART being admitted King of England, and therein
trusted with a limited Power, to govern by, and according to the Laws of the
Land, and not otherwise; And by his Trust, Oath, and Office, being obliged to
use the Power committed to him, For the good and benefit of the People, and for
the preservation of their Rights and Liberties; Yet nevertheless out of a
wicked Design, to erect, and uphold in himself and unlimited and Tyrannical
Power to rule according to his Will, and to overthrow the Rights and Liberties
of the People; Yea, to take away, and make void the Foundations thereof, and of
all redress and remedy of misgovernement, which by the fundamental
Constitutions of this Kingdom, were reserved on the Peoples behalf, in the
Right and Power of frequent and successive Parliaments, or National meetings in
Council; He, the said CHARLES STVART, for accomplishment of such his Designs,
and for the protecting of himself and his adherents, in His, and Their wicked
Practices to the same Ends, has Traitorously and maliciously levied War
against the present Parliament, and the People therein Represented.

Particularly, upon or about the thirtieth day of June, in the year of our
Lord, One thousand six hundred forty and two, At Beverly, in the County of
York; And upon, or about the thirtieth day of July, in the year aforesaid, in
the County of the City of York; And upon, or about the twenty fourth day of
August, in the same year, at the County of the Town of Nottingham (when, and
where He set up His Standard of War;) And also on, or about the twenty third
day of October, in the same year, at Edg-Hill, and Keinton-field, in the County
of Warwick; And upon, or about the thirtieth day of November, in the same year,
at Brainchford, in the County of Middlesex: And upon, or about the thirtieth
day of August, in the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred forty and
three, at Cavesham-bridge, near Roding, in the County of Berks; And upon, or
about the thirtieth day of October, in the year last mentioned, at, or near the
City of Gloucester; And upon, or about the thirtieth day of November, in the
year last mentioned, at Newbery, in the County of Berks; And upon, or about the
one and thirtieth day of July, in the year of our Lord, One thousand six
hundred forty and four, at Cropredy-Bridge, in the County of Oxon; And upon,
or about the thirtieth day of September, in the year last mentioned, at Bodmin,
and other places near adjacent, in the County of Cornwall; And upon, or about
the thirtieth day of November, in the year last mentioned, at Newbery
aforesaid; And upon, or about the eighth day of June, in the year of our Lord,
One thousand six hundred forty and five, at the Town of Leicester; And also,
upon the fourteenth day of the same month, on the same year, at Naseby-field,
in the County of Northampton. At which several times and places, or most of
them, and at many other places in this Land, at several other times, within the
years aforementioned: And in the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred
forty and six; He the said CHARLES STVART, has caused and procured many
thousands of the Free-People of the Nation to be slain; and by Divisions,
Parties, and Insurrections, within this Land, by Invasions from Foreign parts,
endeavored and procured by Him, and by many other evil ways and means. He the
said CHARLES STVART, has not only maintained and carried on the said War, both
by Land and Sea, during the years before mentioned; but also has renewed, or
caused to be renewed, the said War against the Parliament, and good People of
this Nation, in this present year, One thousand six hundred forty and eight,
in the Counties of Kent, Essex, Surry, Sussex, Middlesex, and many other
Counties and places in England and Wales, and also by Sea; And particularly, He
the said CHARLES STVART, has for that purpose, given Commission to his Son,
the Prince, and others; whereby, besides multitudes of other Persons, many
such, as were by the Parliament entrusted and employed, for the safety of the
Nation; being by Him or His Agents, Corrupted, to the betraying of Their Trust,
and revolting from the Parliament, have had entertainment and Commission, for
the continuing and renewing of War and Hostility, against the said Parliament
and People as aforesaid. By which cruel and unnatural Wars by Him, the said
CHARLES STVART, levied, continued, and renewed, as aforesaid, much Innocent
Blood of the Free-people of this Nation has been spilt; many Families have
been undone, the Public Treasury wasted and exhausted, Trade obstructed, and
miserably decayed; vast expense and damage to the Nation incurred, and many
parts of the Land spoiled, some of them even to Desolation.

And for further prosecution of His said evil Designs, He, the said CHARLES
STVART, does still continue his Commissions to the said Prince, and other
Rebels, and Revolters, both English and Forraigners, and to the Earl of Ormond,
and to the Irish Rebels and Revolters, associated with him; from whom further
Invasions upon this Land are threatened, upon the procurement, and on the
behalf of the said Charles Stuart.

All which wicked Designs, Wars, and evil Practices of Him, the said CHARLES
STVARRT, have been, and are carried on, for the advancing and upholding of the
Personal Interest of Will and Power, and pretended Prerogative to Himself and
his Family, against the public Interest, Common Right, Liberty, Justice, and
Peace Of the People of this Nation, by, and for whom he was entrusted, as
aforesaid.

By all which it appears, that He, the said CHARLES STUART, has been, and is
the Occasioner, Author, and Contriver of the said Unnatural, Cruel, and bloody
Wars, and therein guilty of all the Treasons, Murders, Rapines, Burnings,
Spoils, Desolations, Damage and Mischief to this Nation, acted or committed in
the said Wars, or occasioned thereby.

And the said John Cook, by Protestation (saving on the behalf of the People of
England, the liberty of Exhibiting at any time hereafter, any other Charge
against the said Charles Stuart; and also of replying to the Answers which the
said Charles Stuart shall make to the Premises, or any of them, or any other
Charge that shall be so Exhibited) does, for the said Treasons and Crimes, on
the behalf of the said People of England, Impeach the said CHARLES STUART, as a
Tyrant, Traitor, Murderer, and a public, and Implacable Enemy to the
Commonwealth of England: And pray, That the said CHARLES STUART, King of
England, may be put to answer All and Every the Premises, That such
Proceedings, Examinations, Trials, Sentence, and Judgment may be thereupon had,
or shall be agreeable to Justice.

IT is observed, that the time the Charge was reading, the King sat down in
his Chair, looking sometimes on the Court, sometimes up to the Galleries; and
having risen again, and turned about to behold the Guards and Spectators, sat
down, looking very sternly, with a countenance not at all moved, till these
words, viz. Charles Stuart (to be a Tyrant and Traitor, etc.) were read, at
which he laughed as he sat in the face of the Court.

The Charge being read the Lord President replied:

Lord President. Sir, you have now heard your Charge read, containing such
matter as appears in it; you find, That in the close of it, it is prayed to
the Court, in the behalf of the Commons of England, that you answer to your
Charge. The Court expects your Answer.


The King. I would know by what power I am called hither: I was, not long ago,
in the Isle of Wight, how I came there, is a longer story then I think is fit
at this time for me to speak of; but there I entered into a Treaty with both
Houses of Parliament with as much public faith as it is possible to be had of
any people in the world. I treated there with a number of Honorable Lords and
Gentlemen, and treated honestly and uprightly; I cannot say but they did very
nobly with me, we were upon a conclusion of the Treaty. Now I would know by
what Authority, I mean, lawful; there are many unlawful Authorities in the
world, Thieves and Robbers by the highways: but I would know by what Authority
I was brought from thence, and carried from place to place, (and I know not
what,) and when I know what lawful Authority, I shall answer: Remember I am
your King, your lawful King, and what sins you bring upon your heads, and the
Judgment of God upon this Land, think well upon it, I say, think well upon it,
before you go further from one sin to a greater; therefore let me know by what
lawful Authority I am seated here, and I shall not be unwilling to answer, in
the mean time I shall not betray my Trust: I have a Trust committed to me by
God, by old and lawful descent, I will not betray it to answer to a new
unlawful Authority, therefore resolve me that, and you shall hear more of me.


Lord President. If you had been pleased to have observed what was hinted to
you, by the Court, at your first coming hither, you would have known by what
Authority; which Authority requires you, in the name of the People of England,
of which you are Elected King, to answer them.


The King. No Sir, I deny that.


Lord President. If you acknowledge not the Authority of the Court, they must
proceed.


The King. I do tell them so, England was never an Elective Kingdom, but an
Hereditary Kingdom for near these thousand years; therefore let me know by what
Authority I am called hither: I do stand more for the Liberty of my People then
any here that come to be my pretended Judges; and therefore let me know by what
lawful Authority I am seated here, and I will answer it, otherwise I will not
answer it.


Lord President. Sir, how really you have managed your Trust, is known; your
way of answer is to interrogate the Court, which beseems not you in this
condition. You have been told of it twice or thrice.


The King. Here is a Gentleman, Lievt. Col. Cobbet, (ask him) if he did not
bring me from the Isle of Wight by force? I do not come here as submitting to
the Court; I will stand as much for the privilege of the house of Commons,
rightly understood, as any man here whatsoever. I see no House of Lords here
that may constitute a Parliament, and (the King too) should have been. Is this
the bringing of the King to his Parliament? Is this the bringing an end to the
Treaty in the public Faith of the world? Let me see a legal Authority
warranted by the Word of God, the Scriptures, or warranted by the Constitutions
of the Kingdom, and I will answer.


Lord President. Sir, You have propounded a Question, and have been answered:
seeing you will not answer, the Court will consider how to proceed; in the mean
time, those that brought you hither, are to take charge of you back again.

The Court desires to know whether this be all the Answer you will give, or no.


The King. Sir, I desire that you would give me, and all the world,
satisfaction in this; let me tell you, it is not a slight thing you are about.
I am sworn to keep the Peace by that duty I ow to God and my Country, and I
will do it to the last breath of my body, and therefore you shall do well to
satisfy first God, and then the Country, by what Authority you do it, if you
do it by a usurped Authority, that will not last long. There is a God in Heaven
that will call you, and all that give you Power, to account: Satisfy me in
that, and I will answer, otherwise I betray my Trust, and the Liberties of the
People, and therefore think of that, and then I shall be willing. For I do
avow, That it is as great a sin to withstand lawful Authority, as it is to
submit to a Tyrannical, or any other ways unlawful Authority, and therefore
satisfy God, and me, and all the world in that, and you shall receive my
Answer: I am not afraid of the Bill.


Lord President. The Court expects you should give them a final Answer, their
purpose is to adjourn till Monday next, if you do not satisfy your self,
though we do tell you our Authority; we are satisfied with our Authority, and
it is upon Gods Authority and the Kingdoms, and that Peace you speak of will be
kept in the doing of Justice, and that is our present Work.


The King. Let me tell you, if you will show me what lawful Authority you have,
I shall be satisfied; But that you have said satisfies no reasonable man.


Lord Presid. That Is in your apprehension: we think it reasonable that are your
Judges.


The King. It Is not my apprehension, nor yours neither, that ought to decide it.


Lord Presid. The Court has heard you, and you are to be disposed of as they
have commanded.


Two things were remarkable in this days Proceedings.
1. It is to be observed, That as the Charge was reading against the King, the
silver head of his staff fell off, the which he wondered at, and seeing none to
take it up, he stoops for it himself. 2. That as the King was going away, he
looked with a very austere countenance upon the Court, with stirring of his Hat
replied, Well Sir, (when the Lord President commanded the Guard to take him
away,) and at his going down, he said, I do not fear that, (pointing with his
Staff at the Sword). The people in the Hall, as he went down the stairs, cried
out, some, God save the King, and some for Justice.
O Yes being called, the Court adjourned till Monday next, January 22. at 9. in
the morning to the painted Chamber, and from thence to the same place again in
Westminster Hall.

At the high Court of Justice sitting in Westminster Hall, Monday, January 22.
1648.
O Yes made. Silence commanded. The Court called, and answered to their names.

Silence commanded upon pain of imprisonment, and the Captain of the Guard to
apprehend all such as make disturbance.

Upon the Kings coming in a shout was made.

Command given by the Court to the Captain of the Guard to fetch and take into
his custody those who make any disturbance.

Mr Solicitor. May it please your Lordship, my Lord President,

I did at the last Court in the behalf of the Commons of England, exhibit and
give into this Court a Charge of high Treason, and other high Crimes, against
the Prisoner at the Bar, whereof I do accuse him in the name of the People of
England, and the Charge was read unto him, and his Answer required. My Lord, He
was not then pleased to give an Answer, but instead of answering, did there
dispute the Authority of this high Court. My humble Motion to this high Court,
in behalf of the Kingdom of England, is, That the Prisoner may be directed to
make a positive Answer, either by way of Confession, or Negation; which if he
shall refuse to do, That the matter of Charge may be taken pro confesso, and
the Court may proceed according to justice.


Lord President. Sir, You may remember at the last Court you were told the
occasion of your being brought hither, and you heard a Charge against you,
containing a Charge of high Treason, and other high Crimes, against this Realm
of England; you heard likewise, that it was prayed in the behalf of the People,
that you should give an Answer to that Charge, that thereupon such proceedings
might be had as should be agreeable to justice; you were then pleased to make
some scruples concerning the Authority of this Court, and knew not by what
Authority you were brought hither; you did diverse times propound your
Questions, and were as often answered, That it was by authority of the Commons
of England assembled in Parliament, that did think fit to call you to account
for those high and capital Misdemeanors wherewith you were then charged. Since
that the Court has taken into Consideration what you then said, they are fully
satisfied with their own authority, and they hold it fit you should stand
satisfied with it too; and they do require it, that you do give a positive and
particular Answer to this Charge that is exhibited against you, they do expect
you should either confess or deny it; if you deny, it is offered in the behalf
of the Kingdom to be made good against you; their authority they do avow to the
whole world, that the whole Kingdom are to rest satisfied in, and you are to
rest satisfied with it, and therefore you are to lose no more time, but to give
a positive Answer thereunto.


The KING. When I was here last, it is very true, I made that Question, and
truly if it were only my own particular case, I would have satisfied my self
with the Protestation I made the last time I was here against the legality of
this Court, and that a King cannot be tried by any Superior Jurisdiction on
Earth; but it is not my case alone, it is the Freedom and the Liberty of the
People of England, and do you pretend what you will, I stand more for their
Liberties. For if Power without Law may make Laws, may alter the fundamental
Laws of the Kingdom, I do not know what Subject he is in England, that can be
sure of his life, or any thing that he calls his own; therefore when that I
came here, I did expect particular Reasons, to know by what Law, what Authority
you did proceed against me here, and therefore I am a little to seek what to
say to you in this particular, because the Affirmative is to be proved, the
Negative often is very hard to do: but since I cannot persuade you to do it, I
shall tell you my Reasons as short as I can.

My Reasons why in Conscience, and the duty I owe to God first, and my People
next, for the preservation of their Lives, Liberties and Estates; I conceive I
cannot answer this, till I be satisfied of the legality of it.

All proceedings against any man whatsoever --


Lord President. Sir, I must interrupt you, which I would not do, but that what
you do is not agreeable to the proceedings of any Court of Justice, you are
about to enter into Argument, and dispute concerning the Authority of this
Court, before whom you appear as a Prisoner, and are charged as an high
Delinquent; if you take upon you to dispute the Authority of the Court, we may
not do it, nor will any Court give way unto it, you are to submit unto it, you
are to give in a punctual and direct Answer, whether you will answer your
Charge or no, and what your Answer is.


The KING. Sir, by your favor, I do not know the forms of Law, I do know Law
and Reason, though I am no Lawyer professed, but I know as much Law as any
Gentleman in England; and therefore (under favor) I do plead for the Liberties
of the People of England more then you do, and therefore if I should impose a
belief upon any man without Reasons given for it, it were unreasonable; but I
must tell you, That that Reason that I have as thus informed, I cannot yield
unto it.


Lord President. Sir, I must interrupt you, you may not be permitted, you speak
of Law and Reason, it is fit there should be Law and Reason, and there is both
against you. Sir, the Vote of the Commons of England assembled in Parliament,
it is the Reason of the Kingdom, and they are these that have given to that
Law, according to which you should have ruled and reigned: Sir, you are not to
dispute our Authority, you are told it again by the Court. Sir, it will be
taken notice of, that you stand in contempt of the Court, and your contempt
will be recorded accordingly.


The KING. I do not know how a King can be a Delinquent; but by any Law that
ever I heard of, all men (Delinquents, or what you will) let me tell you, they
may put in Demurrers against any proceeding as legal, and I do demand that, and
demand to be heard with my Reasons, if you deny that, you deny Reason.


Lord President. Sir, you have offered something to the Court, I shall speak
something unto you the sense of the Court. Sir, neither you nor any man are
permitted to dispute that point, you are concluded, you may not demur the
Jurisdiction of the Court, if you do, I must let you know, that they overruled
your Demurrer, they sit here by the Authority of the Commons of England, and
all your Predecessors, and you are responsible to them.


King. I deny that, show me one president.


Lord President. Sir, you ought not to interrupt while the Court is speaking to
you, this point is not to be debated by you, neither will the Court permit you
to do it, if you offer it by way of Demurrer to the Jurisdiction of the Court,
they have considered of their Jurisdiction, they do affirm their own
Jurisdiction.


The King. I say Sir, by your favor, that the Commons of England was never a
Court of Judicature, I would know how they came to be so.


Lord President. Sir, You are not to be permitted to go on in that speech, and
these discourses.

Then the Clerk of the Court read, as follows:

CHARLES STUART King of England, You have been accused on the behalf of the
People of England of high Treason, and other high Crimes; the Court have
determined that you ought to answer the same.


The King. I will answer the same so soon as I know by what Authority you do
this.


Lord President. If this be all that you will say, then, Gentlemen, you that
brought the Prisoner hither, take charge of him back again.


The King. I do require that I may give in my Reasons why I do not answer, and
give me time for that.


Lord President. Sir, It Is not for Prisoners to require.


The King. Prisoners? Sir, I am not an ordinary Prisoner.


Lord President. The Court has considered of their Jurisdiction, and they have
already affirmed their Jurisdiction; if you will not answer, we shall give
order to record your default.


The King. You never heard my Reasons yet.


Lord President. Sir, Your Reasons are not to be heard against the highest
Jurisdiction.


The King. Show me that Jurisdiction where Reason is not to be heard.


Lord President. Sir, We show it you here, the Commons of England; and the next
time you are brought, you will know more of the pleasure of the Court, and, it
may be, their final determination.


The King. Show me where ever the House of Commons was a Court of Judicature of
that kind.


Lord President. Sergeant, Take away the Prisoner.


The King. Well Sir, Remember that the King is not suffered to give in his
Reasons for the Liberty and Feeedom of all his Subjects.


Lord President. Sir, You are not to have liberty to use this language; how
great a friend you have been to the Laws and Liberties of the People, let all
England and the world judge.


The King. Sir, under favor, it was the Liberty, Freedom, and Laws of the
Subject that ever I took -- defended my self with Arms, I never took up Arms
against the People, but for the Laws.


Lord President. The Command of the Court must be obeyed; no answer will be
given to the Charge.


The King. Well Sir.

Then the Lord President ordered the default to be recorded, and the contempt
of the Court, and that no answer would be given to the Charge.


And so was guarded forth to Sir Robert Cottons house.

Then the Court adjourned to the Painted Chamber on Tuesday at twelve a clock,
and from thence they intend to adjourn to Westminster Hall, at which time all
persons concerned are to give their attendance.

At the high Court of Justice sitting in Westminster Hall, Tuesday, January 23.
1648.
O Yes made. Silence commanded. The Court called. Seventy three persons present.

The King comes in with his Guard, looks with an austere countenance upon the
Court, and sits down.

The second O Yes made, and silence commanded.

Mr Cook Solicitor General. May it please your Lordship, my Lord President,

This is now the third time, that by the great grace and favor of this high
Court the prisoner has been brought to the Bar before any issue joined in the
cause. My Lord, I did at the first Court exhibit a Charge against him,
containing the highest Treason this ever was wrought upon the Theater of
England: That a King of England, trusted to keep the Law, That had taken an
Oath so to do, That had Tribute paid him for that end, should be guilty of a
wicked design, subvert and destroy our Laws, and introduce an Arbitrary, and
Tyrannical Government, in the defense of the Parliament and their Authority,
set up his Standard for War against his Parliament and People; and I did humbly
pray, in the behalf of the People of England, that he might speedily be
required to make an Answer to the Charge.

But, my Lord, instead of making any answer, he did then dispute the Authority
of this High Court; Your Lordship was pleased to give him a further day to
consider and to put in his Answer, which day being yesterday, I did humbly
move, that he might be required to give a direct and positive Answer, either by
denying, or confession of it; but (my Lord) he was then pleased for to demur to
the Jurisdiction of the Court, which the Court did then overruled, and command
him to give a direct and positive Answer. My Lord, Besides this great delay of
Justice; I shall now humbly move your Lordship for speedy Judgment against him.
My Lord, I might press your Lordship upon the whole, That according to the
known Rules of the Law of the Land, That if a Prisoner shall stand as
contumacious in contempt, and shall not put in an issuable Plea; guilty or not
guilty of the Charge given against him, whereby he may come to a fair Trial;
That as by an implicit Confession, it may be taken pro confesso, as it has
been done to those* who have deserved more favor then the Prisoner at the Bar
has done* But besides, my Lord, I shall humbly press your Lordship upon the
whole Fact; The House of Commons, the supreme Authority and Jurisdiction of the
Kingdom, they have Declared, That it is notorious, That the matter of the
Charge is true, as it is in truth (my Lord) as clear as crystal, and as the
Sun that shines at noon day, which if your Lordship and the Court be not
satisfied in it have notwithstanding, on the People of Englands behalf, several
witnesses to produce: And therefore I do humbly pray, and yet I must confess it
is not so much I as the innocent blood that has been shed* the Cry whereof is
very great for Justice and Judgment; and therefore I do humbly pray, That
speedy JUDGMENT be pronounced against the Prisoner at the Bar.


Lord President. Sir, You have heard what is moved by the Council on the behalf
of the Kingdom against you. Sir, you may well remember, and if you do not, the
Court cannot forget what delatory dealings the Court has found at your hands,
you were pleased to propound some Questions, you have had your Resolution upon
them. You were told over and over again, That the Court did affirm their own
Jurisdiction, That it was not for you, nor any other man, to dispute the
Jurisdiction of the Supreme and highest Authority of England, from which there
is no Appeal, and touching which there must be no dispute; yet you did persist
in such carriage, as you gave no manner of obedience, nor did you acknowledge
any Authority in them, nor the high Court, that constituted this Court of
Justice

Sir, I must let you know from the Court, That they are very sensible of these
delays of yours, and that they: ought not, being thus Authorized by the supreme
Court of England, to be thus trifled withal, and that they might in Justice, if
they pleased, and according to the Rules of Justice, take advantage of these
delays, and proceed to pronounce judgment against you; yet nevertheless they
are pleased to give direction, and on their behalfs I do require you, That you
make a positive Answer unto this Charge that is against you Sir, in plain
terms, for Justice knows no respect of persons; you are to give your positive
and final Answer in plain English, whether you be guilty or not guilty of
these Treasons laid to your Charge.

The KING after a little pause, said,

When I was here yesterday, I did desire to speak for the Liberties of the
People of England; I was interrupted: I desire to know yet whether I may speak
freely or not.


Lord President. Sir, You have had the Resolution of the Court upon the like
Question the last day, and you were told, That having such a Charge of so high
a Nature against you, and your Work was, that you ought to acknowledge the
JURISDICTION of the COURT, and to Answer to your CHARGE. Sir, if you Answer to
your Charge, which the Court gives you leave now to do, though they might have
taken the advantage of your contempt, yet if you be able to Answer to your
Charge, when you have once Answered, you shall be heard at large, make the best
Defense you can. But Sir, I must let you know from the Court, as their
commands, that you are not to be permitted to issue out into any other
discourses, till such time as you have given a positive Answer concerning the
Matter that is CHARGED upon you.


The King. For the Charge, I value it not a Rush, it is the Liberty of the
People of England that I stand for; for me to acknowledge a new Court that I
never heard of before, I that am your King, that should be an example to all
the people of England for to uphold Justice, to maintain the old Laws; indeed I
do not know how to do it; you spoke very well the first day that I came here,
(on Saturday) of the Obligations that I had laid upon me by God, to the
maintenance of the Liberties of my People: The same Obligation you spoke of, I
do acknowledge to God that I owe to him, and to my People, to defend as much as
in me lies, the ancient Laws of the Kingdom, therefore until that I may know
that this is not against the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, by your favor I
can put in no particular This is as the King expressed, but I supposed he meant
Ans.
Charge: If you will give me time, I will show you my reasons why I cannot do
it, and this --

Here being interrupted, he said,

By your favor, you ought not to interrupt me; how I came here I know not,
there is no Law for it to make your King your Prisoner: I was in a Treaty upon
the public Faith of the Kingdom, that was the known -- two Houses of
Parliament that was the Representative of the Kingdom, and when that I had
almost made an end of the Treaty* then I was hurried away and brought hither,
and therefore --

Here the Lord President said; Sir, you must know the pleasure of the Court.


The King. By your favor Sir:


Lord President. Nay Sir, by your favor, you may not be permitted to fall into
those discourses; you appear as a Delinquent, you have not acknowledged the
authority of the Court, the Court craves it not of you, but once more they
command you to give your positive Answer -- Clark. Do your Duty.


The King. Duty Sir!

The Clark reads.

CHARLES STVART, KING of England, You are accused in the behalf of the Commons
of England of diverse high crimes and Treasons, which Charge has been read unto
You; the Court now requires you to give Your positive and final Answer by way
of confession, or denial of the Charge.


The King. Sir, I say again to you, so that I might give satisfaction to the
People of England of the clearness of my proceeding, not by way of Answer, not
in this way, but to satisfy them that I have done nothing against that Trust
that has been committed to me, I would do it; but to acknowledge a new Court
against their Privileges, to alter the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, Sir
you must excuse me.


Lord President. Sir, this is the the third time that you have publicly
disowned this Court, and put an affront upon it; how far you have preserved
Privileges of the People, your actions have spoke it; but truly Sir, men's
intentions ought to be known by their actions, you have written your meaning in
bloody Characters throughout the whole Kingdom; but Sir you understand the
pleasure of the Court, -- Clerk Record the default, -- and Gentlemen, you that
took charge of the Prisoner, take him back again.


The King. I will only say this one word more to you, if it were only my own
particular, I would not say any more, nor interrupt you.


Lord President. Sir, you have heard the pleasure of the Court, and you are
(notwithstanding you will not understand it) to find that you are before a
COURT of JUSTICE.

Then the King went forth with his Guard, and Proclamation was made, That all
persons which had then appeared, and had further to do at the Court might
depart into the Painted-Chamber, to which place the Court did forthwith
adjourn, and intended to meet in Westminster Hall by ten of the clock the next
morning.


Crier. God bless the Kingdom of England.


Wednesday January 4. 1648.
THis day it was expected the High Court of Justice would have met in
Westminster Hall about ten of the clock, but at the time appointed one of the
Ushers by direction of the Court (then sitting in the Painted Chamber) gave
notice to the people there assembled, That in regard the Court was then upon
the examination of Witnesses in relation to present affairs, in the
Painted-Chamber, they could not sit there, but all persons appointed to be
there, were to appear upon further Summons.

The Proceedings of the High Court of Justice sitting in Westminster Hall, on
Saturday the 27. of January, 1648.
O Yes made. Silence commanded. The Court called. Sergeant Bradshaw, Lord
President (in a Scarlet robe) with sixty eight other Members of the Court.

As the King comes in, a cry made in the Hall for Execution, Justice, Execution.

King. I shall desire a word to be heard a little, and I hope I shall give no
occasion of interruption.


Lord President. You may answer in your time, hear the Court first.


King. If it please you Sir, I desire to be heard, and I shall not give any
occasion of interruption, and it is only in a word, a sudden Judgment. --


Lord President. Sir you shall be heard in due time, but you are to hear the
Court first.


King. Sir, I desire it will be in order to what I believe the Court will say;
and therefore Sir, an hasty Judgment is not so soon recalled.


Lord President. Sir, You shall be heard before the Judgment be given, and in
the mean time you may forbear.


King. Well Sir, shall I be heard before the Judgment be given?


Lord President. Gentlemen, it is well known to all, or most of you here
present, That the Prisoner at the Bar has been several times convented and
brought before the Court to make Answer to a Charge of Treason, and other high
crimes exhibited against him in the name of the People of Here a Malignant Lady
interrupted the Court, (saying not half the people) but she was soon silenced.
England, to which Charge being required to Answer, he has been so far from
obeying the commands of the Court by submitting to their Justice, as he began
to take upon him to offer reasoning and debate unto the Authority of the Court,
and of the highest Court that constituted them to Try and judge him; but being
overruled in that, and required to make his Answer, he was still pleased to
continue contumacious, and to refuse to submit or Answer: Hereupon the Court*
that they may not be wanting to themselves, to the trust reposed in them, nor
that any man's wilfulness prevent Justice, they have thought fit to take the
matter into their consideration; They have considered of the contumacy, and of
that confession, which in Law does arise upon that contumacy; They have
likewise considered of the notoriety of the Fact charged upon this Prisoner,
and upon the whole matter they are resolved, and have agreed upon a Sentence to
be now pronounced against this Prisoner: but in respect he does desire to be
heard, before the Sentence be read, and pronounced, the Court has resolved
that they will hear him; yet Sir, thus much I must tell you beforehand, which
you have been minded of at other Courts, That if that you have to say be to
offer any debate concerning Jurisdiction, you are not to be heard in it, you
have offered it formerly, and you have indeed struck at the root, that is the
power and Supreme Authority of the Commons of England, which this Court will
not admit a debate of, and which indeed is an irrational thing in them to do,
being a Court that acts upon Authority derived from them, that they should
presume to judge upon their Superior, from whom there is no Appeal. But Sir, if
you have any thing to say in defense of your self concerning the matter
charged, the Court has given me in command to let you know they will hear you.


The King. Since that I see that you will ^ot hear any thing of debate
concerning that which I confess I thought most material for the peace of the
Kingdom, and for the Liberty of the Subject, I shall wave it, I shall speak
nothing to it, but only I must tell you, That this many a day all things have
been taken away from me, but that that I call more dearer to me then my life,
which is, My Conscience and my Honor; and if I had respect to my Life more then
the Peace of the Kingdom, the Liberty of the Subject, certainly I should have
made a particular defense for my self, for by that at leastwise I might have
delayed an ugly Sentence, which I believe will pass upon me; Therefore
certainly Sir, as a man that has some understanding, some knowledge of the
world, if that my true zeal to my Country had not overborn the care that I
have of my own preservation, I should have gone another way to work then that I
have done; Now Sir I conceive, That an hasty Sentence once past may sooner be
repented then recalled, and truly, the self-same desire that I have for the
Peace of the Kingdom, and the Liberty of the Subject, more then my own
particular, does make me now at last desire, That having something for to say
that concerns both, I desire before Sentence be given, that I may be heard in
the Painted-Chamber before the Lords and Commons, this delay cannot be
prejudicial to you whatsoever I say, if that I say no reason, those that hear
me must be Judges, I cannot be Judge of that that I have, if it be reason, and
really for the welfare of the Kingdom, and the Liberty of the Subject, I am
sure on it very well it is worth the hearing; Therefore I do conjure you, as you
love that that you pretend, I hope it is real, the Liberty of the Subject, the
Peace of the Kingdom, that you will grant me the hearing before any Sentence be
past, I only desire this, that you will take this into your consideration, it
may be you have not heard of it before hand, if you will I Will retire, and you
may think of it, but if I cannot get this Liberty, I do here protest that so
fair shows of Liberty and Peace are pure shows, and not otherwise, then that
you will not hear your KING.


Lord President. Sir, you have now spoken.


King. Yes Sir.


Lord President. And this that you have said is a further declining of the
Jurisdiction of this Court, which was the thing wherein you were limited before


King. Pray excuse me Sir, for my interruption, because you mistake me, It is
not a declining of it, you do judge me before you hear me speak, I say it will
not, I do not decline it, though I cannot acknowledge the Jurisdiction of the
Court; Yet Sir, in this give me leave to say* I would do it, though I did not
acknowledge it in this, I do protest it is not the declining of it, since I
say, if that I do say any thing but that that is for the Peace of the Kingdom,
and the Liberty of the Subject, then the shame is mine. Now I desire, that you
will take this into your consideration, if you will I Will withdraw.


Lord President. Sir, This is not altogether new that you have moved unto us,
not altogether new to us, though the first time in Person you have offered it
to the Court* Sir, you say you do not Decline the Jurisdiction of the Court.


King. Not in this that I have said.


Lord President. I understand you well Sir, but nevertheless that which you
have offered, seems to be contrary to that saying of yours; for the Court are
ready to give a Sentence: it is not as you say, That they will not hear your
King, for they have been ready to hear you; they have patiently wa^ted your
pleasure for three Courts together, to hear what you would say to the Peoples
Charge against you, to which you have not vouchsafed to give any Answer at all;
Sir, This tends to a further delay: Truly Sir, such delays as these neither
may the Kingdom, nor Justice well bear; You have had three several days to
have offered in this kind what you would have pleased; This Court is founded
upon that Authority of the Commons of England, in whom rests the Supreme
Jurisdiction; That which you now tender is to have another Jurisdiction, and a
Coordinate Jurisdiction, I know very well you express your self. Sir, That
notwithstanding that you would offer to the Lords and Commons in the Painted
Chamber, yet nevertheless you would proceed on here, I did hear you say so; but
Sir, That you would offer there, what ever it is, it must needs be in delay of
the Justice here, so as if this Court be resolved, and prepared for the
Sentence, this that you offer they are not bound in Justice to grant; but Sir,
according to that you seem to desire, and because you shall know the further
pleasure of the Court upon that which you have moved, the Court will withdraw
for a time.


King. Shall I withdraw?


Lord President. Sir, You shall know the pleasure of the Court presently, the
Court withdraws for half an hour into the Court of Wards

Sergeant at Arms, the Court gives command that the Prisoner be withdrawn, and
they give order for his return again.

The Court withdraws for half an hour and returns.


Lord President. Sergeant at Arms, send for your prisoner.

Sir, you were pleased to make a motion here to the Court to offer a desire of
yours touching the propounding of somewhat to the Lords in the Painted Chamber
for the Peace of the Kingdom; Sir, you did in effect receive an Answer before
the Court adjourned; Truly Sir, their withdrawing and adjournment was pro forma
tantum, for it did not seem to them that there was any difficulty in the thing;
they have considered of what you have moved, and have considered of their own
Authority, which is founded, as has been often said, upon the Supreme
Authority of the Commons of England Assembled in Parliament. The Court acts
accordingly to their Commission* Sir, the return I have to you from the Court,
is this; That they have been too much delayed by you already, and this that you
now offer has occasioned some little further delay, and they are JUDGES
appointed by the highest JUDGES, and Judges are no more to delay then they are
to deny Justice, they are good words in the old Charter of England, Nulli
negabimus, nulli vendemus, nulli deferremus Justitiam: There must be no delay,
but the truth is Sir, and so every man here observes it, That you have much
delayed them in your contempt and default, for which they might long since have
proceeded to judgment against you, and notwithstanding what you have offered,
they are resolved to proceed to punishment, and to Judgment, and that is their
unanimous resolution.


King. Sir, I know it is in vain for me to dispute, I am no Sceptick for to
deny the Power that you have, I know that you have Power enough; Sir, I
confess, I think it would have been for the Kingdoms Peace, if you would have
taken the pains for to have shown the Lawfulness of your Power, for this delay
that I have desired, I confess it is a delay, but it is a delay very important
for the Peace of the Kingdom, for it is not my Person that I look on alone, it
is the Kingdoms welfare, and the Kingdoms Peace, it is an old Sentence, That
we should think on long before we have resolved of great matters suddenly;
Therefore Sir, I do say again, That I do put at your doors all the
inconveniency of an hasty Sentence, I confess, I have been here now I think
this week, this day eight days was the day I came here first, but a little
delay of a day or two further may give Peace, whereas an hasty Judgment may
bring on that trouble and perpetual inconveniency to the Kingdom, That the
child that is unborn may repent it; and therefore again, out of the Duty I ow
to God, and to my Country, I do desire that I may be heard by the Lords and
Commons in the Painted Chamber, or any other Chamber that you will appoint me.


Lord Pres. Sir, you have bin already answered to what you even now moved,
being the same you moved before, since the Resolution and the Judgment of the
Court in it, and the Court now requires to know whether you have any more to
say for your self, then you have said, before they proceed to Sentence.


King. I say this Sir, That if you will hear me, if you will give me but this
delay, I doubt not but I shall give some satisfaction to you all here, and to
my People after that, and therefore I do require you, as you will answer it at
the dreadful day of Judgment, that you will consider it once again.


Lord President. Sir, I have received direction from the Court.


King. Well Sir.


Lord President. If this must be re-enforc'd, or any thing of this nature, your
answer must be the same, and they will proceed to Sentence if you have nothing
more to say.


King. Sir, I have nothing more to say, but I shall desire that this may be
entered what I have said.


Lord President. The Court then, Sir, has something else to say unto you,
which although I know it will be very unacceptable, yet notwithstanding they
are willing, and are resolved to discharge their Duty,

Sir, you spoke very well of a precious thing that you call Peace, and it had
been much to be wished that God had put it into your heart, that you had as
effectually and really endeavored and studied the Peace of the Kingdom, as now
in words you seem to pretend; but as you were told the other day, Actions must
expound Intentions, yet Actions have been clean contrary; and truly Sir, it
does appear plainly enough to them, That you have gone upon very erroneous
principles, the Kingdom has felt it to their smart, and it will be no ease to
you to think of it, for Sir, you have held your self, and let fall such
Language, as if you had been no ways Subject to the Law, or that the Law had
not been your Superior. Sir, The Court is very well sensible of it, and I hope
so are all the understanding People of England, That the Law is your Superior,
That you ought to have ruled according to the Law, you ought to have done so:
Sir, I know very well your pretense has been that you have done so, but Sir,
the difference has been who shall be the Expositors of this Law, Sir, whether
you and your Party out of Courts of Justice shall take upon them to expound
Law, or the Courts of Justice, who are the Expounders; nay, the Sovereign and
the High Court of Justice, the PARLIAMENT of England, that are not only the
highest Expounders, but the sole makers of the Law. Sir, for you to set your
self with your single judgment, and those that adhere unto you, to set your
self against the highest Court of Justice, that is not Law. Sir, as the Law is
your Superior, so truly Sir, there is something that is Superior to the Law,
and that is indeed the Parent or Author of the Law, and that is the People of
England, For Sir, as they are those that at the first* (as other Countries have
done) did choose to themselves this Form of Government, even for Justice sake,
that Justice might be administered, that Peace might be preserved; so Sir, they
gave Laws to their Governors, according to which they should Govern; and if
those Laws should have proved inconvenient, or prejudicial to the Public,
they had a power in them, and reserved to themselves to alter as they shall see
cause. Sir, it is very true, what some of your side have said, Rex non habet
parem in Regno; This Court will say the same, while KING, That you have not
your Peer in some sense, for you are major singulis, but they will aver again,
that you are minor universis; and the same Author tells you, that in exhibitione
Juris, there you have no power, but in (...) quasi minimus. This we know to be
Law, Rex habet superiorem, Deum and Legem, etiam and curiam, and so says the
same Author; and truly, Sir, he makes bold to go a little further, Debent ei
ponere frenum, they ought to bridle him; and Sir, we know very well the stories
of old, Those Wars that were called the Barons Wars, when the Nobility of the
Land did stand out for the Liberty and Property of the Subject, and would not
suffer the Kings that did invade to play the Tyrants free^, but called them to
account for it, we know that truth, That they did Frenum ponere, But Sir, if
they do forbear to do their Duty now, and are not so mindful of their own
Honor and the Kingdoms good, as the Barons of England of old were, certainly
the Commons of England will not be unmindfull of what is for their
preservation, and for their safety, Justitiae fruendi causa Reges constituti
sunt. This we learn, the end of having Kings, or any other Governors, it is for
the enjoying of Justice, that is the end. Now Sir, if so be the King will go
contrary to that End, or any other Governor will go contrary to the end of his
Government; Sir, he must understand that he is but an Officer in trust, and he
ought to discharge that Trust, and they are to take order for the
animadversion* and punishment of such an offending Governor.

This is not Law of yesterday Sir, (since the time of the division betwixt you
and your People,) but it is Law of old; And we know very well the Authors and
the Authorities that do tell us what the Law was in that point upon the
Election of Kings, upon the Oath that they took unto their People; and if they
did not observe it, there were those things called Parliaments; The Parliaments
were they that were to adjudge (the very words of the Author) the plaints and
wrongs done of the King and the Queen, or their Children, such wrongs
especially when the People could have no where else any remedy. Sir, that has
been the People of Englands case, they could not have their remedy elsewhere
but in Parliament.

Sir, Parliaments were ordained for that purpose to redress the grievances of
the People, that was their main end; and truly Sir, if so be that the Kings of
England had been rightly mindful of themselves, they were never more in
Majesty and State then in the Parliament: but how forgetful some have been,
Stories have told us; We have a miserable, a lamentable, a sad experience of
it. Sir by the old Laws of England, I speak these things the rather to you,
because you were pleased to let fall the other day, you thought you had as much
knowledge in the Law, as most Gentlemen in England, it is very well Sir. And
truly Sir, it is very fit for the Gentlemen of England to understand that Law
under which they must live, and by which they must be governed. And then Sir,
the Scripture says, They that know their Masters will and do it not, what
follows? The Law is your Master, the Acts of Parliament.

The Parliaments were to be kept anciently we find in our old Author twice in
the year, That the subject upon any occasion might have a ready remedy and
redress for his Grievance. Afterward by several Acts of Parliament in the days
of your Predecessor Edward the third, they must have been once a year. Sir what
the intermission of PARLIAMENTS has been in your time it is very well known,
and the sad Consequences of it, and what in the interim instead of these
PARLIAMENTS, has been by you by an high and Arbitrary hand introduced upon the
People, that likewise has been too well known and felt. But when God by his
Providence had so far brought it about, that you could no longer decline the
calling of a Parliament, Sir, yet it will appear what your ends were against
the Ancient and your Native Kingdom of SCOTLAND: The Parliament of England not
serving your ends against them, you were pleased to dissolve it. Another great
necessity occasioned the calling of this Parliament, and what your Designs and
Plots and endeavors all along have been for the crushing and confounding of
this Parliament, has been very notorious to the whole Kingdom; And truly Sir,
in that you did strike at all; That had been a sure way to have brought about
that that this Charge lays upon you, Your Intention to Subvert the FVNDAMENTAL
LAWS of the Land. For the great Bulwark of the Liberties of the People, is the
PARLIAMENT of England* and to Subvert and Root up that, which your aim has
been to do, certainly at one blow you had confounded the liberties and the
property of England.

Truly Sir, it makes me call to mind, I cannot forbear to express it, for Sir,
we must deal plainly with you, according to the merits of your cause, so is our
Commission, it makes me call to mind (these proceedings of yours) That we read
of a great Roman Emperor, by the way let us call him a great Roman Tyrant,
Caligula, That wished that the People of Rome had had but one neck, that at one
blow he might cut it off: and your proceedings has been somewhat like to this;
for the body of the People of England has been (and where else) represented
but in the Parliament, and could you have but confounded that, you had at one
blow cut off the neck of England: But God has reserved better things for us,
and has pleased for to Confound your designs, and to break your Forces, and to
bring your Person into Custody that you might be responsible to Justice.

Sir, we know very well, That it is a question on your side very much pressed, by
what President we shall proceed? Truly Sir, for Presidents, I shall not upon
these occasions institute any long discourse, but it is no new thing to cite
Presidents almost of all Nations, where the People (when power has been in
their hands) have been made bold to call their Kings to account, and where the
change of Government has been upon occasion of the Tyranny and Mis-Government
of those that have been placed over them; I will not spend time to mention
France, or Spain, or the Empire, or other Countries, volumes may be written of
it; But truly Sir, that of the Kingdom of Aragon, I shall think some of us have
thought upon it, when they have the Justice of Aragon, that is a man tanquam in
medio positus, betwixt the King of Spain, and the people of the Country, that
if wrong be done by the King he that is the King of Aragon, the Justice has
power to reform the wrong, and he is acknowledged to be the Kings Superior,
and is the grand preserver of their privileges, and has prosecuted Kings upon
their miscarriages.

Sir; What the Tribunes of Rome were heretofore, and what the Ephori were to
the Lacedemonian State we know, that is the Parliament of England to the
English State; and though Rome seemed to lose it is Liberty when once the
Emperors were; yet you shall find some famous Acts of Justice even done by the
Senate of Rome, that great Tyrant of his time Nero, condemned and judged by the
Senate. But truly Sir, to you I should not mention these Foreign examples and
stories. If you look but over Tweed, we find enough in your native Kingdom of
Scotland, If we look to your first King Fergusius that your stories make
mention of, he was an elective King, he dyed, and left two Sons both in their
minority, the Kingdom made choice of their Uncle his Brother to govern in the
minority; afterward the elder brother giving small hopes to the people that he
would rule or govern well, seeking to supplant that good Uncle of his that
governed then justly, they set the elder aside, and took to the younger. Sir,
if I should come to what your stories make mention of* you know very well you
are the 109. King of Scotland, for to mention so many Kings as that Kingdom,
according to their power and privilege, have made bold to deal withal, some to
banish, and some to imprison, and some to put to death, it would be too long;
and as one of your own Authors says, it would be too long to recite the
manifold examples that your own stories make mention of; Reges (say they) we do
create, we created Kings at first; Leges, etc. We imposed Laws upon them; and
as they are chosen by the suffrages of the people at the first, so, upon just
occasion, by the same suffrages they may be taken down again: and we will be
bold to say, that no Kingdom has yielded more plentiful experience then that
your Native Kingdom of Scotland, has done concerning the deposition and the
punishment of their offending and transgressing Kings, etc.

It is not far to go for an example near you, our Grandmother set aside, and
your Father ^n Infant crowned; and the State did it here ^n England, here has
not been a want of ^ome examples, they have made bold (the Par^iament, and the
People of England) to call their Kings to account, there are frequent ^xamples
of it in the Saxons time, the time before the Conquest; since the Conquest here
want not some presidents neither, King Edward the second, King Richard the
second, were dealt with so by the Parliament, as they were deposed and
deprived; and truly Sir, who ever shall look into their stories, they shall not
find the Articles that are charged upon them to come near to that height and
capitalness of Crimes that are laid to your charge, nothing near.

Sir, You were pleased to say the other day wherein they descent, and I did not
contradict it, but take altogether, Sir, if you were as the Charge speaks, and
no o^herwise admitted King of ENGLAND, but for that you were pleased then to
alledg, now that almost for a thousand years these things have been, stories
will tell you, if you go no higher then the time of the Conquest, if you do
come down since the Conquest, you are the Twenty fourth King from William
called the Conqueror, you shall find one half of them to come merely from the
State, and not merely upon the point of Descent; it were easy to be instanced
to you, the time must not be lost that way. And truly Sir, what a grave and
learned Judge in his time and well known to you, and is since printed for
posterity, That although there was such a thing as a descent many times, yet
the Kings of Enland ever held the greatest assurance of their Titles when it
was declared by Parliament: And Sir, your Oath, the manner of your Coronation
does show plainly, That the Kings of England, although it is true by the Law the
next Person in blood is designed; yet if there were just cause to refuse him,
the people of England might do it. For there is a Contract, and Bargain made
between the King and his People, and your Oath is taken, and certainly Sir, the
Bond is reciprocal, for as you are the liege Lord, so they liege subjects, and
we know very well that has been so much spoken of, Ligantia est duplex, This
we know now, the one tie, the one Bond, is the bond of perfection that is due
from the Sovereign, the other is the Bond of Subjection that is due from the
Subject, Sir if this Bond be once broken, farewell Sovereignty, Subjectio
trahit, etc.

These things may not be denied Sir, I speak it the rather, and I pray God it
may work upon your heart, that you may be sensible of your miscarriages. For
whether you have been as by your Office you ought to be, a Protector of
England, or the destroyer of England, let all England judge, or all the world
that has looked upon it. Sir, though you have it by Inheritance in the way
that is spoken of, yet it must not be denied that your Office was an Office of
Trust, and indeed, an Office of the highest Trust lodged in any single person;
For as you were the grand Administrator of Justice, and others were as your
Deligates to see it done throughout your Realms, If your great Office were to
do Justice and preserve your People from wrong, and instead of doing that you
will be the great wrong doer your self; If instead of being a Conservator of
the Peace, you will be the Grand disturb of the Peace, surely this is contrary
to your Office, contrary to your Trust. Now Sir, if it be an Office of
Inheritance, as you speak of your Title by Descent, let all men know that great
Offices are Seizable and Forfeitable, as if you had it but for a year and for
your Life; Therefore Sir, it will concern you to take into your serious
consideration your great miscarriages in this kind.

Truly Sir, I shall not particularize the many miscarriages of your Reign
whatsoever, they are famously known; it had been happy for the Kingdom, and
happy for you too, if it had not been so much known, and so much felt, as the
story of your miscarriages must needs be, and has been already.

Sir, That that we are now upon by the command of the highest Court has been
and is to try and judge you for these great offenses of yours. Sir, the Charge
has called you Tyrant, a Traitor, a Murderer, and a public Enemy to the
Commonwealth of England. Sir, It had been well, if that any of all these terms
might rightly and justly have been spared, if any one of them at all.


King. Ha?


Lord Pres. Truly Sir, We have been told, Rex est dum been regit, Tyrannus qui
populum opp^^vit, and if so be that be the definition of a Tyrant, then see how
you come short of it in your actions, whether the highest Tyrant by that way of
Arbitrary Government, and that you have sought for to introduce, and that you
have sought to put, you were putting upon the people, whether that was not as
high an act of Tyranny as any of your predecessors were guilty of, nay, many
degrees beyond it.

Sir, the term Traitor cannot be spared, we shall easily agree it must denote
and suppose a breach of Trust, and it must suppose it to be done by a Superior,
and therefore Sir, as the People of England might have incurred that respecting
you, if they had been truly guilty of it, as to the definition of Law, so on
the other side, when you did break your Trust to the Kingdom, you did break
your Trust to your Superior: For the Kingdom is that for which you were
trusted. And therefore Sir, for this breach of Trust when you are called to
account, you are called to account by your Superiors* Minimus ad majorem in
judicium vo^it. And Sir, the People of England cannot be so far wanting to
themselves, which God having dealt so miraculously and gloriously for, they
having power in their hands, and their great Enemy, they must proceed to do
Justice to themselves, and to you* For, Sir, the Court could heartily desire,
That you would lay your hand upon your heart and consider what you have done
amiss, That you would endeavor to make your Peace with God. Truly Sir, These
are your high Crimes, Tyranny and Treason.

There is a third thing too if those had not been, and that is Murder, which
is laid to your charge. All the bloody Murders that have been committed since
this time that the division was betwixt you and your People must be laid to
your charge, that have been acted or committed in these late Wars. Sir, it is
an heinous and crying sin; and truly Sir, if any man will ask us what
punishment is due to a Murderer, Let Gods Law, let man's Law speak. Sir, I will
presume that you are so well read in Scripture as to know what God himself has
said concerning the shedding of man's blood; Genesis 9. Numb. 35. will tell you
what the punishment is, and which this Court in behalf of the Kingdom are
sensible of, of that innocent blood that has been shed, whereby indeed the Land
stands still defiled with that blood, and as the text has it, It can no way be
cleansed but with the shedding of the blood of him that shed this blood. Sir,
we know no Dispensation from this blood in that Commandment, Thou shall do no
Murder; we do not know but that it extends to Kings, as well as to the meanest
Peasants, the meanest of the People, the Command is universal* Sir, Gods Law
forbids it, Man's Law forbids, nor do we know that there is any manner of
exception, not even in man's Laws, for the punishment of Murder in you. It Is
true, That in the case of Kings, every private hand was not to put forth it
self to this work for their Reformation and punishment. But Sir, the People
represented having power in their hands, had there been but one wilful act of
Murder by you committed, had power to have convented you, and to have punished
you for it.

But then Sir, the weight that lies upon you in all those respects that have
been spoken, by reason of your Tyranny, Treason, breach of Trust, and the
Murders that have been committed, surely Sir, it must drive you into a sad
consideration concerning your eternal condition: as I said at first, I know it
cannot be pleasing to you to hear any such things as these are mentioned unto
you from this Court, for so we do call our selves, and justify our selves to
be a Court, and a High Court of Justice, authorized by the highest and
solemnest Court of the Kingdom, as we have often said; and although you do yet
endeavor what you may to dis-court us, yet we do take knowledge of our selves to
be such a Court as can administer Justice to you, and we are bound Sir, in duty
to do it. Sir, all I shall say before the reading of your Sentence, it is but
this; The Court does heartily desire, that you will seriously think of those
evils that you stand guilty of Sir, you said well to us the other day, you
wished us to have God before our eyes, Truly Sir, I hope all of us have so, that
God that we know is a King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, that God with whom
there is no respect of persons, that God that is the avenger of innocent blood,
we have that God before us, that God that does bestow a curse upon them that
withold their hands from sheding of blood, which is in the case of guilty
Malefactors, and that do deserve death; That God we have before our eyes, and
were it not that the conscience of our duty has called us unto this place, and
this employment, Sir, you should have had no appearance of a Court here: but
Sir, we must prefer the discharge of our duty unto God, and unto the Kingdom,
before any other respect whatsoever: and although at this time many of us, if
not all of us, are severely threatened by some of your party what they intend
to do, Sir, we do here declare, That we shall not decline or forbear the doing
of our duty in the administration of Justice even to you, according to the
merit of your offense, although God should permit those men to effect all that
bloody design in hand against us. Sir, we will say, and we will declare it, as
those Children in the fiery furnace, that would not worship the golden Image
that Nebuchadnezzar had set up* That their God was able to deliver them from
that danger that they were near unto; but yet if he would not do it, yet,
notwithstanding that, they would not fall down and worship the Image: we shall
thus apply it, That though we should not be delivered from those bloody hands
and hearts that conspire the overthrow of the Kingdom in general, of us in
particular, for acting in this great work of Justice, though we should perish
in the work, yet by Gods grace, and by Gods strength, we will go on with it:
And this is all our Resolutions. Sir, I say for your self, we do heartily wish,
and desire, that God would be pleased to give you a sense of your sins, that
you would see wherein you have done amiss, that you may cry unto him, that God
would deliver you from blood-guiltiness. A good King was once guilty of that
particular thing, and was clear otherwise, saving in the matter of Vriah. Truly
Sir, the story tells us, that he was a repentant King, and it signifies enough
that he had dyed for it, but that God was pleased to accept of him, and to give
him his pardon, thou shall not die, but the child shall die, thou have given
cause to the enemies of God to blaspheme.


King. I would desire only one word before you give sentence, and that is,
That you would hear me concerning those great imputations that you have laid to
my charge.


Lord Presid. Sir, You must give me now leave to go on, for I am not far from
your Sentence, and your time is now past.


King. But I shall desire you will hear me a few words to you, for truly what
ever Sentence you will put upon me, in respect of those heavy imputations that
I see by your speech you have put upon me, Sir, It is very true that --


Lord Pres. Sir, I must put you in mind. Truly Sir I would not willingly, at
this time especially, interrupt you in any thing you have to say that is proper
for us to admit of, but Sir, you have not owned us as a Court, and you look
upon us as a sort of people met together, and we know what language we receive
from your party.


King. I know nothing of that.


Lord Pres. You dis-avow us as a Court, and therefore for you to address your
self to us, not to acknowledge us as a Court to judge of what you say, it is not
to be permitted; and the truth is, all along from the first time, you were
pleased to dis-avow and dis-own us, the Court needed not to have heard you one
word; For unless they be acknowledged a Court, and engaged, it is not proper
for you to speak: Sir, we have given you too much liberty already, and admitted
of too much delay, and we may not admit of any farther; were it proper for us
to do, we should hear you freely, and we should not have declined to have heard
you at large, what you could have said or proved on your behalf, whether for
totally excusing, or for in part excusing those great and heinous charges that
in whole or in part are laid upon you. But Sir, I shall trouble you no longer,
your sins are of so large a dimension, that if you do but seriously think of
them, they will drive you to a sad consideration of it, and they may improve in
you a sad and serious repentance. And that the Court does heartily wish that
you may be so penitent for what you have done amiss, that God may have mercy at
leastwise upon your better part. Truly Sir, for the other, it is our parts and
duties to do that that the Law prescribes, we are not here Jus dare, but Jus
dicere; we cannot be unmindful of what the Scripture tells us, For to acquit
the guilty is of equal abomination as to condemn the innocent, we may not
acquit the guilty; what sentence the Law affirms to a Traitor, Tyrant, a
Murderer, and a public Enemy to the Country, that sentence you are now to
hear read unto you, and that is the sentence of the Court.

The Lord President commands the sentence to be read. Make an O yes, and
command silence while the sentence is read.

O yes made. Silence commanded.

The Clerk read the sentence, which was drawn up in parchment.

Where as the Commons of England in Parliament had appointed them an High Court
of Justice for the trying of Charles Stuart King of England, before whom he had
been three times convented, and at the first time a Charge of High Treason, and
other Crimes and Misdemeanors, was read in the behalf of the Kingdom of
England, etc.

Here the Clerk read the Charge.

Which Charge being read unto him as aforesaid, he the said Charles Stuart was
required to give his Answer, but he refused so to do, and so expressed the
several passages at his Trial in refusing to answer.

For all which Treasons and Crimes, this Court does adjudg, That the said
Charles Stuart, as a Tyrant, Traitor, Murderer, and a public Enemy, shall be
put to Death, by the severing his Head from his Body.

After the sentence read, the Lord President said;

This sentence now read and published, it is the act, sentence, judgment, and
resolution of the whole Court.

Here the Court stood up, as assenting to what the President said.


King. Will you hear me a word Sir?


Lord Pres. Sir, you are not to be heard after the sentence.


King. No Sir?


Lord Presid. No Sir, by your favor Sir. Guard, withdraw your Prisoner.


King I may speak after the sentence --

By your favor Sir, I may speak after the sentence ever.

By your favor (hold) the sentence Sir --

I say Sir I do --

I am not suffered for to speak, expect what Justice other people will have.

O Yes. All manner of persons that have any thing else to do, are to depart at
this time, and to give their attendance in the painted Chamber, to which place
this Court does forthwith adjourn it self.

Then the Court rose, and the King went with his Guard to Sir Robert Cottons,
and from thence to Whitehall.


King Charles HIS SPEECH Made upon the SCAFFOLD at Whitehall-Gate immediately
before his Execution. Tuesday, January 30.
ABout ten in the Morning the King was brought from St. James's, walking on
foot through the Park, with a Regiment of Foot, part before and part behind
him, with Colors flying, Drums beating, his private guard of Partisans, with
some of his Gentlemen before, and some behind bare-headed, Dr Juxon next
behind him, and Colonel Thomlinson (who had the charge of him) talking with
the King bare-headed from the Park, up the stairs into the Gallery, and so into
the Cabinet-Chamber, where he used to lie, where he continued at his Devotion,
refusing to dine (having before taken the Sacrament) only about an hour before
he came forth, he drank a glass of Claret wine, and eat a piece of bread about
twelve at noon.

From thence he was accompanied by Dr. Juxon, Colonel Thomlinson, and other
Officers, formerly appointed to attend him, and the private guard of Partisans,
with Musketeers on each side, through the Banqueting House adjoining, to which
the Scaffold was erected, between Whitehall-Gate, and the G(...)ding into the
Gallery from S. James's: The ^caffold was hung round with black, and the floor
covered with black, and the Ax and Block laid in the middle of the Scaffold.
There were diverse Companies of Foot, and Troops of Horse placed on the one side
of the Scaffold toward Kings-street, and on the other side toward
Charing Cross, and the multitudes of people that came to be Spectators very
great.

The King being come upon the Scaffold, looked very earnestly on the Block, and
asked Col. Hacker if there were no higher: and then spoke thus (directing his
Speech chiefly to Col. Thomlinson.)

King. I Shall be very little heard of any body here, I shall therefore speak a
word unto you here: Indeed I could hold my peace very well, if I did not think
that holding my peace would make some men think, that I did submit to the
guilt, as well as to the punishment: but I think it is my duty to God first,
and to my Country, for to clear my self both as an honest man, a good King, and
a good Christian, I shall begin first with my Innocence, In Troth I think it not
very needful for me to insist long upon this, for all the world knows that I
never did begin a War with the two (...) of Parliament, and I call God to
witness, to whom I must shortly make an account, That I never did intend for to
incroach upon their Privileges, they began upon me, it is the Militia they
began upon, they confessed that the Militia was mine, but they thought it fit for
to have it from me: and to be short, if any body will look to the dates of
Commissions, of their Commissions and mine, and likewise to the Declarations,
will see clearly that they began these unhappy Troubles, not I: so that as the
guilt of these enormous Crimes that are laid against me, I hope in God that God
will clear me of it, I will not, I am in charity: God forbid that I should lay
it upon the two Houses of Parliament, there is no necessity of either, I hope
they are free of this guilt: for I do believe that ill Instruments between them
and me, has been the chief cause of all this bloodshed: so that by way of
speaking, as I find my self clear of this, I hope (and pray God) that they may
too: yet for all this, God forbid that I should be so ill a Christian, as not
to say that Gods judgments are just upon me: Many times he does pay Justice by
an unjust Sentence, that is ordinary: I will only say this, That an unjust
Sentence Strafford.
that I suffered for to take effect, is punished now by an unjust Sentence upon
me, that is, so far I have said, to show you that I am an innocent man.

Now for to show you that I am a good Christian: I hope there is Pointing to
Dr. Juxon.
a good man that will bear me witness, That I have forgiven all the world, and
even those in particular that have been the chief causers of my death; who they
are, God knows, I do not desire to know, I pray God forgive them, But this is
not all, my Charity must go farther, I wish that they may repent, for indeed
they have committed a great sin in that particular: I pray God with St.
Stephen, That this be not laid to their charge, nay, not only so, but that
they may take the right way to the Peace of the Kingdom, for my Charity
commands me, not only to forgive particular men, but my Charity commands me to
endeavor to the last gasp the Peace of the Kingdom: So (Sirs) I do wish with
all my Soul, and I do hope (there is Turning to some Gentlemen that wrote.
some here will carry it further) that they may endeavor the Peace of the
KINGDOM.

Now (Sirs) I must show you both how you are out of the way, and will put you
in (...) way: First, you are out of the way, for certainly all the way you ever
have had yet, as I could find by any thing, is in the way of Conquest;
certainly this is an ill way, for Conquest (Sir) in my opinion is never just,
except there be a good just Cause, either for matter of Wrong or just Title,
and then if you go beyond it, the first quarrel that you have to it, that makes
it unjust at the end that was just at first: But if it be only matter of
Conquest, then it is a great Robbery: as a Pirat said to Alexander, that He was
the great Robber, he was but a petty Robber: and so, Sir, I do think the way
that you are in, is much out of the way. Now Sir, for to put you in the way,
believe it you will never do right, nor God will never prosper you, until you
give God his due, the King his due (that is, my Successors) and the People
their due: I am as much for them as any of you: You must give God his due, by
regulating rightly his Church (according to his Scripture) which is now out of
order: For to set you in a way particularly now I cannot, but only this, A
National Synod freely called, freely debating among themselve, must settle
this, when that every Opinion is freely and clearly heard.

For the King, indeed I will not (then turning to a Gentleman that touched the
Ax, said, Hurt not the Ax, that may hurt me Meaning if he did blunt the edg.
. For the King) the Laws of the Land will clearly instruct you for that,
therefore because it concerns my own particular, I only give you a touch of it.

For the people: And truly I desire their Liberty and Freedom as much as any
body whomsoever, but I must tell you, That their Liberty and their Freedom
consists i^^ving of Government; those Laws, by which their Life and their Goods
may be most their own. It is not for having share in Government (Sir) that is
nothing pertaining to them; A Subject and a Sovereign are clean different
things, and therefore until they do that, I mean, That you do put the People in
that Liberty as I say, certainly they will never enjoy themselves.

Sirs, It was for this that now I am come here: If I would have given way to an
Arbitrary way, for to have all Laws changed according to the power of the
Sword, I needed not to have come here, and therefore I tell you (and I pray God
it be not laid to your charge) That I am the Martyr of the People.

In Troth Sirs, I shall not hold you much longer, for I will only say this to
you, That intruth I could have desired some little time longer, because that I
would have put this that I have said in a little more order, and a little
better digested then I have done, and therefore I hope you will excuse me.

I have delivered my Conscience, I pray God that you do take those courses that
are best for the good of the kingdom and your own salvations.


Dr. Juxon. Will your Majesty (though it may be very well known your Majesty's
affections to Religion, yet it may be expected that you should) say somewhat
for the Worlds satisfaction.


King. I thank you very heartily (my Lord for that I had almost forgotten it.
In Troth Sirs, My Conscience in Religion I think is very well known to all the
world, and therefore I declare before you all, That I dye a Christian,
according to the profession of the Church of England, as I found it left me by
my Father, and this honest man Pointing to D. Juxon.
I think will witness it. Then turning to the Officers, said; Sirs, excuse me
for this same, I have a good cause, and I have a gracious God, I will say no
more. Then turning to Colonel Hacker, he said; Take care they do not put me to
pain, and Sir this, and it please you; But then a Gentleman coming near the Ax,
The King said, Take heed of the Ax, pray take heed of the Ax, Then the King
speaking to the Executioner, said, I shall say but very short Prayers, and when
I thrust out my hands -- Then the King called to Doctor Juxon for his
Nightcap, and having put it on, he said to the Executioner, Does my hair
trouble you? who desired him to put it al^ under his Cap, which the King did
accordingly by the help of the Executioner and the Bishop: Then the King
turning to Doctor Juxon, said, I have a good Cause and a gracious God on my
side.


Doctor Juxon. There is but one Stage more. This Stage is turbulent and
troublesome; it is a short one: But you may consider, it will soon carry you a
very great way: it will carry you from earth to heaven; and there you shall
find a great deal of cordial joy and comfort.


King. I go from a corruptible to an incorruptible Crown; where no disturbance
can be, no disturbance in the world.


Doctor Juxon. You are exchanged from a Temporal to an Eternal Crown, a good
exchange.

The King then said to the Executioner, is my hair well? Then the King took off
His Cloak and his George, giving his George to Doctor Iuxon, saying, Remember
It is thought for to give it to the Prince.
-- Then the King put off his Dublet, and being in his Wastcoat, put his Cloak
on again, then looking upon the Block, said to the Executioner, You must set it
fast.


Executioner. It is fast Sir.


King. It might have been a little higher.


Executioner. It can be no higher Sir.


King. When I put out my hands this way, Stretching them out.
then --

After that having said two or three words (as he stood) to himself, with hands
and Eyes lift up; Immediately stooping down, laid his neck upon the Block: And
then the Executioner again putting his hair under his Cap, the King said
(Thinking he had been going to strike) stay for the sign.


Executioner. Yes, I will, and it please your Majesty.


And after a very little pawse, the King stretching forth his hands, The
Executioner at one blow severed his head from his body.

That when the Kings head was cut off, the Executioner held it up, and showed
it to the Spectators.

And his Body was put in a Coffin covered with black Velvet for that purpose,
and conveyed into his Lodgings there: And from thence it was carried to his
house at S. James's, where his body was put in a Coffin of lead, laid there to
be seen by the people; and about a fortnight after it was carried to Windsor,
accompanied with the Duke of Lenox, the Marquess of Hartford, and the Earl of
Southampton, and Doctor Iuxon, late Bishop of London, and others, and Interred
in the Cappel-Royal in the Valt with King Henry the eight, having only this
Inscription upon his Coffin. Charles, King of England, etc. 1648.

Sic transit Gloria Mundi.
FINIS.
THE SEVERAL SPEECHES OF Duke Hamilton, Earl of CAMBRIDG, HENRY Earl of
HOLLAND, AND ARTHUR Lord CAPEL, UPON THE SCAFFOLD Immediately before their
EXECUTION, on Friday March 9. 1649.

Also the several Exhortations, and Conferences with them upon the SCAFFOLD, BY
D. Sibbald, M. Bolton, and M. Hodges.

London, Printed for Peter Cole, Francis Tyton, and John Playford. 1650.

The several speeches of the Earl of Cambridg, the Earl of Holland, and the
Lord Capel, upon the Scaffold, etc.
UPon Friday the ninth of this instant, being the day appointed for the
Execution of the Sentence of Death upon the Earl of Cambridg, the Earl of
Holland, and the Lord Capel, about ten of the Clock that morning L. Col.
Beecher came with his Order to the several Prisoners at S. James's requiring
them to come away; According to which Order they were carried in Sedans with a
Guard, to Sir Thomas Cottons house at Westminster, where they continued about
the space of two hours, passing away most of that time in Religious and
seasonable Conferences with the Ministers there present with them. After which,
being called away to the Scaffold, it was desired, that before they went, they
might have the opportunity of commending their souls to God by Prayer, which
being readily granted, and the room voyded, Mr. Bolton was desired by the Lord
of Holland to take the pains with them, which was accordingly done with great
appearance of solemn Affection among them. Prayer being concluded, and hearty
thanks returned by them all to the Minister who performed, as also to the rest
who were their assistants in this sad time of trouble; the Earl of Cambridg
prepared first to go toward the place of Execution; and after mutual embraces,
and some short ejaculatory expressions, to and for his Fellow Sufferers, he
took his leave of them all, and went along with the Officers, attended upon by
Dr. Sibbald, whom he had chosen for his Comforter in this his sad condition.

The Scaffold being erected in the new Pallace-yard at Westminster, over
against the great Hal-Gate, in the sight of the place where the High Court of
Justice formerly sat (the Hal-doors being open,) there was his Excellencies
Regiment of Horse commanded by Cap. Disher, and several Companies of Col.
Hewsons and Colonel Prides Regiments of Foot drawn up in the place: When the
Earl came from Westminster Hall nere the Scaffold, he was met by the
Undersheriff of Middlesex, and a Guard of his men, who took the charge of him
from Lievt. Col. Beecher and the Partisans that were his Guard; The Sheriff of
London being also, according to command from the High Court of Justice; present
to see the Execution performed.

The Earl of Cambridg being come upon the Scaffold, and two of his own servants
waiting upon him, he first spoke to the Doctor as follows:

Earl of Cambridg. Whether shall I Pray first?


Dr. Sibb^ld. As Your Lordship pleases.


Earl of Cambridg. My Lord of Denbigh has sent to speak with me.

I know not the fashion. I may ask you Sir; Do these Gentlemen expect I should
say any thing to them, or no; They cannot hear?


Dr. Sibbald. There will be a greater silence by and by. It will not be amiss,
if your Lordship defer your speaking till you hear from his Lordship.


Cambridg. There is something in it. He was with the House.


Dr. Sibbald. I suppose he would give no interruption to your Lordship, at this
time, were there not something of concernment in it.


Cambridg. He is my Brother, and has been a very faithful servant to this
State, and he was in great esteem and reputation with them.

He is in the Hall, and sent to speak with a Servant of mine, to send something
to me.


Dr. Sibbald. It will not lengthen the time much if you stay while you have a
return from him. My Lord, you should do well to bestow your time now in
meditating upon and imploring of the Free-mercy of God in Christ for your
Eternal Salvation, and look upon that ever-streaming Fountain of his precious
Blood, that purges us from all our sins, even the sins of the deepest dye* The
Blood of Jesus Christ washes away all our sins, and that Blood of Christ is
poured forth upon all such as by a lively Faith lay hold upon him. God so loved
the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, to the end, that whosoever
believed in him should not perish, but have everlasting Life; That is now, my
Lord, the Rock on which you must chiefly rest, and labor to fix your self in
the Free-mercy of God through Christ Jesus, whose mercies are from everlasting
to everlasting, unto all such as with the Eye of Faith behold him: Behold Jesus
the Author and Finisher of your Salvation, who has satisfied the Justice of
God by that Al-sufficiency of his Sacrifice, which once for all he offered upon
the Cross for the sins of the whole World, so that the sting of Death is taken
away from all believers, and he has sanctified it as a passage to everlasting
blessedness: It is true, the Waters of Jordan run somewhat rough and surly,
betwixt the Wilderness and our passage into Canaan; but let us rest upon the
Ark (my Lord) the Ark Christ Jesus, that will carry us through and above all
those waves to that Rock of Ages, which no flood nor waves can reach unto, and
to him who is yesterday, to day, and the same for ever, against whom the Powers
and Principalities, the Gates of Hell, shall never be able to prevail; Lift up
and fasten your eyes now upon Christ Crucified, and labor to behold Jesus
standing at the right hand of his Father, (as the Protomartyr Stephen) ready to
receive your Soul, when it shall be separated from this Frail and Mortal body:
Alas, no man would desire Life, if he knew beforehand what it were to live, it
is nothing but sorrow, vexation and trouble, grief and discontent that waits
upon every condition, whether public or private; in every station and calling
there are several miseries and troubles that are inseparable from them;
Therefore what a blessed thing it is to have a speedy and comfortable passage
out of this raging sea, into the Port of everlasting Happiness: We must pass
through a Sea, but it is the Sea of Christ Blood in which never Soul suffered
shipwreck, in which we must be blown with winds and Tempests, but they are the
Gales of Gods Spirit upon us, which blow away all contrary winds of diffidence
in his Mercy.

Here one acquainting the Earl, his servant was coming, he answered, So Sir;
And turning to the under-Sheriffs son, said,


Cambridg. Sir, have you your Warrant here?


Sheriff. Yes, my Lord, we have a Command.


Cambridg. A Command.

I take this time, Sir, of staying, in regard of the Earl of Denbighs sending
to speak with me; I know not for what he desires me to stay.


Dr. Sibbald. I presume Mr. Sheriff will not grudg your Lordship a few minutes
time, when so great a work as this is in hand.

His Lordships servant being returned, and having delivered his Message to the
Earl of Cambridg privately, he said, So, it is done now; and then turning to
the Front of the Scaffold, before which (as in all the rest of the Palace)
there was a great concourse of people, He said;


Earl of Cambridg. I think it is truly not very necessary for me to speak much,
there are many Gentlemen and Soldiers there that sees me, but my voice is so
weak, so low, that they cannot hear me, neither truly was I ever at any time so
much in love with speaking, or with any thing I had to express, that I took
delight in it; yet this being the last time that I am to do so, by a Divine
Providence of Almighty God, who has brought me to this end justly for my sins.
I shall to you Sir, Mr. Sheriff, declare thus much, as to the matter that I am
now to suffer for, which is, as being a Traitor to the Kingdom of England:
Truly Sir, it was a Country that I equally loved with my own, I made no
difference, I never intended either the generality of it is prejudice, or any
particular man's in it; What I did was by the Command of the Parliament of the
Country where I was born, whose Commands I could not disobey, without running
into the same hazard there, of that condition that I am now in: The ends, Sir,
of that Engagement is public, they are in Print, and so I shall not need to
specify them.


Dr. Sibbald. The Sun perhaps will be too much in your Lordships face; as you
speak.


Cambridg. No Sir, it will not burn it. I hope I shall see a brighter Sun then
this Sir, very speedily.


Dr. Sibbald. The Sun of Righteousness. my Lord.


Cambridg. (But to that which I was saying Sir.) It pleased God so to dispose
that Army under my Command, as it was ruined; and I, as their General, clothed
with a Commission, stand here, now ready to dye; I shall not trouble you with
repeating of my Plea, what I said in my own Defense at the Court of JUSTICE, my
self being satisfied with the Commands that are laid upon me, and they
satisfied with the justness of their procedure, according to the Laws of this
Land. God is just, and howsoever I shall not say any thing as to the matter of
the Sentence, but that I do willingly submit to his Divine Providence, and
acknowledge that very many ways I deserve even a wordly punishment, as well as
hereafter, for we are all sinful, Sir, and I a great one; yet for my comfort I
know there is a God heaven that is exceeding merciful; I know my Redeemer sits
at his right hand, and am confident (clapping his hand to his breast) is
mediating for me at this instant, I am hopeful through his Free Grace and
all-sufficient merits, to be, pardoned of my sins, and to be received into his
mercy, upon that I rely, trusting to nothing but* the Free Grace of God through
Jesus Christ, I have not been tainted with my Religion I thank God for it,
since my Infancy it has been such as has been professed in the Land, and
established, and now it is not this Religion, or that Religion, nor this or that
fancy of men that is to be built upon, it is but one that is right, one that is
sure, and that comes from God. Sir, and in the Free Grace of our Savior. Sir,
there is truly something that Observing the Writers.
(had I thought my Speech would have been thus taken) I would have digested it
into some better method then now I can, and shall desire these Gentlemen that
does write it, that they will not wrong me in it, and that it may not in this
manner be published to my disadvantage, for truly I did not intend to have
spoken thus when I came here.

There is, Sirs, terrible Aspersions has been laid upon my self; truly such as,
I thank God, I am very free from; as if my actions and intentions had not been
such as they were pretended for; but that notwithstanding what I pretended it
was for the King, there was nothing less intended then to serve him in it. I
was bred with him for many years, I was his Domestique servant, and there was
nothing declared by the Parliament, that was not really intended by me; and
truly in it I ventured my Life one way, and now I loose it another way: and
that was one of the ends, as to the King; I speak only of that, because the
rest has many particulars, and to clear my self from so horrid an Aspersion as
is laid upon me: neither was there any other design known to me by the incoming
of that Army, then what is really in the Declaration published. His Person, I
do profess, I had reason to love, as he was my King, and as he had been my
Master: it has pleased God now to dispose of him, so as it cannot be thought
flattery to have said this, or any end in me for the saying of it, but to free
my self from that Calumny which lay upon me: I cannot gain by it; yet truth is
that which we shall gain by for ever.

There has been much spoken, Sir, of an invitation into this Kingdom: it is
mentioned in that Declaration, and truly to that I did, and do remit my self:
and I have been very much labored for discoveries of these Inviters. It Is no
time to dissemble. How willing I was to have served this Nation in any thing
that was in my power, is known to very many honest Pious and Religious men; and
how ready I would have been to have done what I could to have served them, if
it had pleased them to have preserved my Life, in whose hands there was a
power: They have not thought it fit, and so I am become unuseful in that which
willingly I would have done. As I said at first, Sir, so I say now concerning
that point; I wish the Kingdoms happiness, I wish its peace; and truly Sir, I
wish that this blood of mine may be the last that is drawn: and howsoever I may
perhaps have some reluctancie with my my self as to the matter of my suffering,
for my Fact, yet I freely forgive all; Sir, I carry no rancor along with me to
my grave: His will be done that has created both heaven and earth, and me a
poor miserable sinful creature now speaking before him. For me to speak, Sir,
to you of State-business, and the Government of the Kingdom, or my opinion in
that, or for any thing in that nature, Truly it is to no end, it contributes
nothing: My own inclination has been to Peace, from the beginning; and it is
known to many, that I never was an ill instrument betwixt the King and his
People; I never acted to the prejudice of the Parliament; I bore no Arms, I
meddled not with it; I was not wanting by my Prayers to God Almighty for the
happiness of the King; and truly I shall pray still, that God may so direct him
as that may be done which shall tend to his Glory, and the peace and happiness
of the Kingdom.

I have not much more to say, that I remember of; I think I have spoken of my
Religion.


Dr. Sibbald. Your Lordship has not so fully said it.


Cambridg. Truly I do believe I did say something.


Dr. Sibbald. I know you did, it is pleasing to hear it from your Lordship again.


Cambridg. Truly Sir, for the Profession of my Religion, That which I said was
the established Religion, and that which I have practiced in my own Kingdom
where I was born and bred; my Tenants they need not to be expressed, they are
known to all, and I am not of a rigid opinion; many Godly men there is, that
may have scruples which do not concern me at all at no time; they may differ in
opinion, and more now then at any time; differing in Opinion does not move me
(not any man's) my own is clear: Sir, The Lord forgive me my sins, and I forgive
freely all those, that even I might as a Wordly man, have the greatest
animosity against; We are bidden to forgive; Sir, It Is a Command laid upon us
(and there mentioned) Forgive us our Trespasses, as We forgive them that
trespass against us.


Dr. Sibbald. It Is our Saviors Rule, Love your Enemies, bless them that curse
you, Pray for them that Persecute you, do good to them which despightfully use
you.


Cambridg. Sir, it is high time for me to make an end of this, and truly I
remember no more that I have to say, but to pray to God Almighty a few words,
and then I have done.

Then kneeling down with Doctor Sibbald, He prayed thus.

MOST Blessed Lord, I thy poor and most unworthy Servant come to th^^,
presuming in thy infinite mercy and the merits of Jesus Christ, who sits upon
the Throne, I come flying from that of Justice, to that of mercy, and
tenderness for his sake which shed his blood for sinners, that he would take
compassion upon me, that he will look upon me as one that graciously hears me,
that he would look upon me as one that has redeemed me, that he would look
upon me as one that has shed his blood for me, that he would look upon me as
one who now calls and hopes to be saved by his All-sufficient merits; for his
sake, Glorious God, have compassion upon me in the freeness of thy infinite
mercy, that when this sinful Soul of mine shall depart out of this frail
carcass of clay, I may be carried into thy everlasting Glory; O Lord, by thy
Free Grace, and out of thy infinite mercy hear me, and look down, and have
compassion upon me; and thou Lord Jesus, thou my Lord, and thou my God, and
thou my Redeemer, hear me, take pity upon me, take pity upon me gracious God,
and so deal with my soul, that by thy precious merits I may attain to thy Joy
and Bliss; O Lord, remember me so miserable and sinful a creature; Now thou O
Lord, thou O Lord that dyed for me, receive me, and receive me into thy own
bound of mercy; O Lord I trust in thee, suffer me not now to be confounded,
Satan has had too long possession of this soul, O let him not now prevail
against it, but let me, O Lord, from henceforth dwell with thee for evermore.
Now Lord it is thy time to hear me, hear me gracious Jesus, even for thy own
goodness, mercy, and truth; O Glorious God, O blessed Father, O holy Redeemer,
O gracious Comforter, O holy and blessed Trinity, I do render up my soul into
thy hands, and commit it with the mediation of my Redeemer, praising thee for
all thy dispensation that it has pleased thee to confer upon me, and even for
this, praise, and honor, and thanks of this time forth for evermore.


Dr. Sibbald. My Lord, I trust you now behold with the Eye of Faith the Son of
Righteousness shining upon your soul, and will cheerfully submit unto him, who
has redeemed us through his blood, even the blood of Jesus Christ, that you
may appear at the Tribunal of God, clothed with the white robe of his unspoted
Righteousness; The Lord grant that with the eye of Faith you may now see the
heavens opened, and Jesus Christ standing at the right hand of God, ready to
receive you into his arms of mercy.


Cambridg. Then the Earl turning to the Executioner, said, shall I put on
another Cap, must this hair be turned up from my neck? there are three of my
servants to give satisfaction.


Dr. Sibbald. My Lord, I hope you are able to give all that are about you
satisfaction, you are assured that God is reconciled unto you through the blood
of Christ Jesus, and the Spirit of the Lord witnesses to you that Christ is
become now a Jesus unto you; My Lord, fasten the eyes of your Faith upon Jesus
the Author and finisher of your salvation, who himself was brought to a violent
death for the redemption of mankind, he cheerfully submitted to his Fathers
good pleasure in it, and for us, blessed and holy is he that has part (my Lord)
in the first resurrection; That is, in the first riser Jesus Christ, who is
both the Resurrection and the Life, over him the second death shall have no
power, it is the unspeakable joy of a believer. That at the hour of death his
soul has an immediate passage from this earthly Tabernacle to that Region of
endless Glory, yea, to the presence of God himself, in whose presence there is
fullness of joy, and at whose right hand there are pleasures for evermore.

Then the Earl of Cambridg turning to the Executioner, said, which way is it
that you would have me lie* Sir?


Executioner. The Executioner pointing to the front of the Scaffold, The Earl
replied, What, my head this way? Then the Under-sheriffs son, said; My Lord,
the Order is that you should lay your head toward the High-Court of Justice.

The Earl of Cambridg, after a little discourse in private with some of his
servants* kneeled down on the side of the Scaffold, and prayed a while to
himself.

When he had finished his prayers, D. Sibbald spoke to him thus:

My Lord, I humbly beseech God, That you may now with a holy and Christian
courage give up your soul to the hand of your Faithful Creator and gracious
Redeemer; and not be dismayed with any sad apprehension of the Terrors of this
death: And what a blessed and glorious exchange you shall make within a very
few minutes!

Then with a Cheerful and smiling Countenance, The Earl embracing the Dr. in
his Arms said,


Cambridg. Truly Sir, I do take you in mine arms, and truly, I bless God for
it, I do not fear, I have an assurance that is grounded here; (laying his hand
upon his heart.) Now that gives me more true joy then ever I had, I pass out of
a miserable world to go into an Eternal and glorious Kingdom; and Sir, though I
have been a most sinful creature, yet Gods mercy I know is infinite, and I
bless my God for it, I go with so clear a Conscience, That I know not the man
that I have personally injured.


Dr. Sibbald. My Lord, it is a mavelous great satisfaction that at this last
hour you can say so, I beseech the Lord for his eternal mercy strengthen your
faith, that in the very moment of your dissolution, you may see the arms of the
Lord Jesus stretched out ready to receive your soul.

Then the Earl of Cambridg embracing those his servants which were there
present, said to each of them, You have been very faithful to me, and the Lord
bless you.


Cambridg. Then turning to the Executioner, said,

I shall say a very short prayer to my God, while I lie down there: and when I
stretch out my hand (my right hand) then Sir, do your duty; and I do freely
forgive you, and so I do all the world.


Dr. Sibbald. The Lord in great mercy go along with you, and bring you to the
possession of everlasting life, strengthening your Faith in Jesus Christ. This
is a passage, my Lord, a short passage unto eternal glory. I hope, through the
free grace of your gracious God, you are now able to say, O Death, where is thy
sting? O Grave! where is thy victory? and to make this comfortable answer,
Blessed be God, blessed be God, who has given me an assurance of victory
through Christ Jesus.

Then the Earl of Cambridg said to the Executioner, Must I lie all along?


Execut. Yes, and't please your Lordship.


Camb. When I stretch out my hands -- but I will fit my Head, first, tell me if
I be right, and how you would have me lie.


Execut. Your shirt must be pined back, for it lies too high upon your
shoulders, (which was done accordingly.)


Dr Sibbald. My Lord, now, now lift up your eyes unto Jesus Christ, and cast
your self now into the everlasting arms of your most gracious Redeemer.


Then the Earl having laid his Head over the Block, said, Is this right?

Dr Sibbald. Jesus the Son of David, have mercy upon you.


Execut. Lie a little lower Sir.


Camb. Well, stay then till I give you the sign.

And so having layn a short space devoutly praying to himself, he stretched out
his right hand, whereupon the Executioner at one blow severed his Head from his
Body, which was received by two of his Servants, then kneeling by him, into a
Crimsion Taffety Scarf, and that with the Body immediately put into a Coffin,
brought upon the Scaffold for that purpose, and from thence conveyed to the
house that was Sir JOHN HAMILTONS at the Me^^es, where it now remains.

This execution being done, the Sheriffs Guard went immediately to meet the
Earl of Holland, which they did in the mid way between the Scaffold and
Westminster Hall, and the Under-Sheriffs son having received him into his
charge, conducted him to the Scaffold, he taking Mr. Bolton all the way in his
hand, passed all along to the Scaffold discoursing together: upon which being
come, observing his voice would not reach to the people, in regard the Guard
compassed the Scaffold, he said:


Holland. It is to no purpose (I think) to speak any thing here. Which way must
I speak? And then being directed to the front of the Scaffold, he (leaning over
the rails) said; I think it is fit to say something, since God has called me
to this place. The first thing which I must profess, is, what concerns my
Religion, and my breading, which has been in a good Family that has ever been
faithful to the true Protestant Religion, in the which I have been bred, in the
which I have lived, and in the which by Gods grace and mercy I shall dye. I
have not lived according to that education I had in that Family where I was
born and bred: I hope God will forgive me my sins, since I conceive that it is
very much his pleasure to bring me to this place for the sins that I have
committed. The cause that has brought me hither, I believe by many has been
much mistaken: They have conceived that I have had ill designs to the State,
and to the Kingdom: Truly I look upon it as a Judgment, and a just Judgment of
God; not but I have offended so much the State, and the Kingdom, and the
Parliament, as that I have had an extreme vanity in serving them very
extra-ordinarily. For those actions that I have done, I think it is known they
have been ever very faithful to the Public, and very particularly to
Parliaments. My affections have been ever expressed truly and clearly to them.
The dispositions of affairs now have put things in another pasture then they
were when I was engaged with the Parliament. I have never gone off from those
principles that ever I have professed: I have lived in them, and by Gods grace
will dye in them. There may be alterations and changes that may carry them
further then I thought reasonable, and truly there I left them: but there has
been nothing that I have said, or done, or professed, either by Covenant, or
Declaration, which has not been very constant, and very clear upon the
principles that I ever have gone upon, which was to serve the King, the
Parliament, Religion (I should have said in the first place) the Commonwealth,
and to seek the Peace of the Kingdom: That made me think it no improper time,
being prest-out by accidents and circumstances, to seek the Peace of the
Kingdom, which I thought was proper, since there was something then in
agitation, but nothing agreed on for sending Propositions to the King; that was
the furthest aim that I had, and truly beyond that I had no intention, none at
all. And God be praised, although my blood comes to be shed here, there was I
think scarcely a drop of blood shed in that action that I was engaged in. For
the present affairs, as they are, I cannot tell how to judge of them: and truly
they are in such a condition, as (I conceive) no body can make a judgment of
them: and therefore I must make use of my Prayers, rather then of my opinion,
which are, that God would bless this Kingdom, this Nation, this State; that he
would settle it in a way agreeable to what this Kingdom has been happily
governed under; by a King, by the Lords, by the Commons: a Government that (I
conceive) it has flourished much under, and I pray God the change of it bring
not rather a prejudice, a disorder, and a confusion, then the contrary. I look
upon the Posterity of the King, and truly my Conscience directs me to it, to
desire, that if God be pleased that these people may look upon them with that
affection that they ow, that they may be called in again, and they may be, not
through blood, nor through disorder, admited again into that power, and to that
glory, that God in their birth intended to them. I shall pray with all my Soul
for the happiness of this State, of this Nation, that the blood which is here
spilt, may be even the last which may fall among us: and truly I should lay
down my life with as much cheerfulness as ever person did, if I conceived that
there would no more blood follow us: for a State or Affairs that are built upon
blood, is a foundation for the most part that does not prosper.

After the blessing that I give to the Nation, to the Kingdom, and truly to the
Parliament, I do wish with all my heart, happiness, and a blessing to all those
that have been authors in this business; and truly that have been authors in
this very work that brings us hither: I do not only forgive them, but I pray
heartily and really for them; as God will forgive my sins, so I desire God may
forgive them.

I have a particular relation as I am Chancellor of Cambridg, and truly I must
here, since it is the last of my prayers, pray to God that that University may
go on in that happy way which it is in, that God may make it a Nursery to plant
those persons that may be distributed to the Kingdom, that the Souls of the
people may receive a great benefit, and a great advantage by them, and (I hope)
God will reward them for their kindness, and their affections that I have found
from them. Looking toward M. Bolton.
I have said what Religion I have been bred in, what Religion I have been born
in, what Religion I have practiced; I began with it, and I must end with it. I
told you that my actions and my life have not been agreeable to my breeding, I
have told you likewise that the Family where I was bred has been an exemplary
Family (I may say so I hope, without vanity) of much affection to Religion, and
of much faithfulness to this Kingdom, and to this State. I have endeavored to
do those actions that have become an honest man, and which became a good
Englishman, and which became a good Christian. I have been willing to oblige
those that have been in trouble, those that have been in persecution, and truly
I find a great reward of it; for I have found their prayers and their kindness
now in this distress, and in this condition I am in, and I think it a great
reward, and I pray God reward them for it.

I am a great sinner, and I hope God will be pleased to hear my prayers, to
give me faith to trust in him, that as he has called me to death at this
place, he will make it but a passage to an eternal life through Jesus Christ,
which I trust to, which I rely upon, and which I expect by the mercy of God.
And so I pray God bless you all, and send that you may see this to be the last
execution, and the last blood that is likely to be spilt among you. And then
turning to the side-rail, he prayed for a good space of time; after which Mr
Bolton said:

My Lord, now look upon him whom you have trusted. My Lord, I hope that here is
your last prayer: there will no more prayers remain, but praises: And I hope
that after this day is over, there will a day begin that shall never have end:
And I look upon this (my Lord) the morning of it, the morning of that day. My
Lord, you know where your fullness lies, where your riches lie, where is your
only rock to anchor on. You know there is fullness in Christ: If the Lord comes
not in with fullness of comfort to you, yet resolve to wait upon him while you
live, and to trust in him when you dye, and then say, I will dye here, I will
perish at thy feet, I will be found dead at the feet of Jesus Christ.
Certainly, he that came to seek and save lost sinners, will not reject lost
sinners when they come to seek him: He that entreats us to come* will not
slight us when we come to entreat him. My Lord, there is enough there, and fix
your heart there, and fix your eyes there, that eye of Faith, and that eye of
hope, exercise these graces now, there will be no exercise herafter. As your
Lordship said, here take an end of Faith, and take an end of Hope, and take a
farewell of Repentance: and all these, and welcome God, and welcome Christ, and
welcome Glory, and welcome Happiness to all Eternity; and so it will be a happy
passage then, if it be a passage here from misery to happiness. And though it
be but a sad way, yet if it will bring you into the presence of joy, although
it be a valley of tears, although it be a shadow of death, yet if God will please
to bring you, and make it a passage to that happiness, welcome Lord. And I doubt
not but God will give you a heart to taste some sweetness and love in this
bitter potion and to see something of mercy and goodness to you, and show you
some sign and token of good, so that your soul may see that which we have had
already experience of (blessed be God for it) many experiences, many
expressions, not only in words, but tears; God has not left us without much
comfort nor evidence, and I hope, my Lord, you that have given so many
evidences to us, I hope you want none your self; but that the Lord will be
pleased to uphold and support you, and bear up your spirit, and if there want
evidence, there is reliance; my security lies not in my knowing that I shall
come to heaven, and come to glory, but in my resting and relying upon him: When
the Anchor of Faith is thrown out, there may be shakings and tossings, but
there is safety; nothing shall interrupt safety, although something may
interrupt security; my safety is sure, although I apprehend it not: And what if
I go to God in the dark? What if I come to him, as Nicodemus did, staggering in
the night? It is a night of trouble, a night of darkness; though I come
trembling and staggering in this night, yet I shall be sure to find comfort and
fixedness in him: And the Lord of heaven be the strength, stay, and the support
of your soul, and the Lord furnish you with all those graces which may carry
you into the bosom of the Lord Jesus, that when you expire this life, you may
be able to expire it into him, in whom you may begin to live to all eternity,
and that is my humble prayer. --


Holland. Mr Bolton, God has given me long time in this world, he has carried
me through many great accidents of Fortune; he has at last brought me down
into a condition, where I find my self brought to an end, for a disaffection to
this State, to this Parliament, that (as I said before) I did believe no body
in the world more unlikely to have expected to suffer for that Cause: I look
upon it as a great Judgment of God for my sins. And truly Sir, since that the
death is violent, I am the less troubled with it, because of those violent
deaths that I have seen before, principally my Savior that has showed us the
way, how and in what manner he has done it, and for what cause, I am the more
comforted, I am the more rejoiced. It is not long since the King my Master
passed in the same manner, and truly I hope that his purposes and intentions
were such, as a man may not be ashamed, not only to follow him, in the way that
was taken with him, but likewise not ashamed of his purposes, if God had given
him life. I have often disputed with him concerning many things of this kind,
and I conceive his sufferings, and his better knowledge, and better
understanding* (if God had spared him life) might have made him a Prince very
happy toward himself, and very happy toward this Kingdom. I have seen and
known, that those blessed Souls in Heaven have passed thither by the gate of
sorrow, and many by the gate of violence: and since it is Gods pleasure to
dispose me this way. I submit my soul to him, with all comfort, and with all
hope, that he has made this my end, and this my conclusion, that though I be
low in death, yet nevertheless this lowness shall raise me to the highest glory
for ever.

Truly, I have not said much in public to the People, concerning the
particular actions that, I conceive, I have done by my counsels in this
Kingdom, I conceive they are well known, it were something of vanity (methinks)
to take notice of them here, I Will rather dye with them, with the comfort of
them, in my own bosom; and that I never intended in this action, or any action
that ever I did in my life, either malice, or bloodshed, or prejudice to any
creature that lives. For that which concerns my Religion, I made my profession
before of it, how I was bred, and in what manner I was bred, in a Family that
was looked upon to be no little notorious, in opposition to some liberties,
that they conceived then to be taken; and truly, there was some mark upon me,
as if I had some taint of it, even throughout my whole ways, that I have taken;
every body knows what my affections have been, to many that have suffered, to
many that have been in troubles in this Kingdom, I endeavored to relieve them,
I endeavored to oblige them, I thought I was tied so by my Conscience, I
thought it by my Charity, and truly very much by my Breeding; God has now
brought me to the last instant of my time, all that I can say, and all that I
can adhere unto, is this, That as I am a great sinner, so I have a great
Savior, that as he has given me here a fortune, to come publicly in a show
of shame in the way of this suffering (truly I understand it not to be so,) I
understand it to be a glory, a glory when I consider who has gone before me,
and a glory when I consider I had no end in it, but what I conceive to be the
service of God, the King, and the Kingdom, and therefore my Heart is not
charged much with any thing in that particular, since I conceive God will
accept of the intention, whatsoever the action seem to be: I am going to dye,
and the Lord receive my Soul; I have no reliance but upon Christ, for my self I
do acknowledge that I am the unworthiest of sinners; my life has been a vanity,
and a continued sin, and God may justly bring me to this end for the sins I
have committed against him, and were there nothing else but the iniquities that
I have committed in the way of my life, I look upon this as a great Justice of
God to bring me to this suffering, and to bring me to this punishment, and
those hands that have been most active in it, if any such there has been, I
pray God forgive them, I pray God that there may not be many such Trophies of
their Victories, but that this may be, as I said before, the last show that
this People shall see of the blood of persons of Condition, of persons of
Honor: I might say something of the way of our Trial, which certainly has
been as extraordinary as any thing I think has ever been seen in this Kingdom;
but because that I would not seem as if I made some complaint, I will not so
much as mention it, because no body shall believe I repine at their actions,
that I repine at my fortune: It is the Will of God, it is the Hand of God under
whom I fall, I take it entirely from him, I submit my self to him, I shall
desire to roll my self into the Arms of my blessed Savior, and when I come to
this place, (pointing to the Block) when I bow down my self there, I hope God
will raise me up; and when I bid farewell, as I must now to Hope and to Faith,
that Love will abide, I know nothing to accompany the Soul out of this World
but Love, and I hope that Love will bring me to the Fountain of Glory in
Heaven, through the Arms, Mediation, and the Mercy of my Savior Jesus Christ,
in whom I believe, O LORD help my unbelief.


Hodges. The Lord make over unto you the Righteousness of his own Son, it is
that Treasury that he has bestowed upon you, and the Lord show you the light
of his countenance, and fill you full with his joy and kindness, O my dear
Lord, the Lord of Heaven and Earth be with you, and the Lord of Heaven and
Earth bring you to that safety.


Holland. I shall make as much haste as I can to come to that Glory, and the
Lord of Heaven and Earth take my Soul; I look upon my self entirely in Him, and
hope to find mercy through Him, I expect it, and through that Fountain that is
opened for sin, and for uncleanness, my Soul must receive it, for did I rest in
any thing else, I have nothing but sin and corruption in me; I have nothing but
that, which instead of being carried up into the Arms of God and Glory, I have
nothing but may throw me down into Hell.


Bolton. But, my Lord, when you are clothed with the Righteousness of another,
you will appear glorious, though now sinful in your self; The Apostle says, I
desire not to be found in my own Righteousness, and when you are clothed with
another, the Lord will own you, and I shall say but thus much, Doubt not that
ever God will deny Salvation to sinners, that come to him, when the end of all
his death and sufferings was the Salvation of sinners, when as, I say, the
whole end, and the whole design, and the great Work that God had to do in the
World, by the death of Christ, wherein he laid out all his Counsels, and
infinite Wisdom, and Mercy, and Goodness, beyond which there was a Non ultra in
Gods thoughts, when this was the great design, and great end, the Salvation of
siners, that poor Souls should come over to him and live; certainly when
sinners come, he will not reject, he will not refuse. And my Lord, do but think
of this, the greatest work that ever was done in the World, was the Blood of
Christ that was shed, never any thing like it; and this Blood of Christ that
was shed, was shed for them that come, if not for them, for none, it was in
vain else: You see the Devils they are out of capacity of good by it, the
Angels they have no need of it, wicked men will not come, and there are but a
few that come over, and should he deny them, there were no end nor fruit of the
blood and sufferings of the Lord Jesus; and had your Lordship been with Christ
in that bloody Agony, when he was in that bloody sweat, sweating drops of
blood, if you had asked him, Lord what art thou now a doing? Art thou not now
reconciling an angry God and me together? Art thou not pacifying the wrath of
God? Art thou not interposing thy self between the Justice of God and my Soul?
Would he not have said, Yea? and surely then he will not deny it now. My Lord,
his passions are over, his compassions still remain, and the larger and
greater, because he is gone up into a higher place, that he may throw down more
abundance of his mercy and grace upon you; and my Lord, think of that infinite
love, that abundance of riches in Christ: I am lost, I am empty, I have
nothing, I am poor, I am sinful: be it so, as bad as God will make me, and as
vile as I possibly can conceive my self, I am willing to be; but when I have
said all, the more I advance that riches, and honor that grace of God. And why
should I doubt, when by this he puts me into a capacity, into a disposition for
him to show me mercy, that by this I may the better advance the riches of his
grace, and say, grace, grace to the Lord to all eternity, that God should own
such a creature, that deserves nothing; and the less I deserve, the more
conspicuous is his grace: and this is certain, the riches of his grace he
throws amongst men, that the glory of his grace might be given to himself; if
we can give him but the glory of his grace, we shall never doubt to partake of
the riches of it, and that fullness, my Lord, that fullness be your comfort, that
fullness of Mercy, that fullness of Love, that fullness of Righteousness and Power
be now your riches, and your only stay, and the Lord interpose himself between
God and you; as your faith has endeavored to interpose him between God and
your soul, so I doubt not but there he stands, my Lord, to plead for you, and
when you are not able to do any thing your self, yet lie down at the feet of
him that is a merciful Savior, and knows what you would desire, and wait upon
him while you live, trust in him when you dye, there is riches enough, and
mercy enough, if he open not, yet dye at his door, say, there I Will dye, there is
mercy enough.


Holland. And here is the place where I lie down before him, from whence I hope
he will raise me to an eternal glory through my Savior, upon whom I rely, from
whom only I can expect mercy; into his Arms I commend my spirit, into his
bleeding Arms, that when I leave this bleeding body that must lie upon this
place, he will receive that soul that arises out of it, and receive it into
his eternal mercy, through the merits, through the worthiness, through the
mediation of Christ that has purchased it with his own most precious blood.


Bolton. My Lord, Though you conclude here, I hope you begin above; and though
you put an end here, I hope there will never be an end of the mercy and
goodness of God: and if this be the morning of Eternity, if this be the rise of
Glory, if God pleases to throw you down here, to raise you up for ever, say,
Welcome Lord, welcome that death that shall make way for life, and welcome any
condition that shall throw me down here, to bring me into the possession of
Jesus Christ.


Hodges. My Lord, if you have made a Deed of Gift of your self to Jesus Christ,
to be found only in him, I am confident you shall stand at the day of Christ,
my dear Lord, we shall meet in happiness.


Holland. Christ Jesus receive my soul, my soul hungers and thirsts after him,
clouds are gathering, and I trust in God through all my heaviness, and I hope,
through all impediments, he will settle my Interest in him, and throw off all
the claim that Satan can make unto it, and that he will carry my soul, in
despite of all the calumnies, and all that the Devil and Satan can invent, will
carry it into eternal mercy, there to receive the blessedness of his presence
to all Eternity.


Hodges. My Lord, it was his own by Creation, it is his own now by Redemption
and purchase, it is likewise his own by Resignation* O my Lord, look therefore
up to the Lamb of God, that sits at the right hand of God, to take away the
sins of the World; O that Lamb of God!


Holland. That Lamb of God, into his hands I commit my soul; and that Lamb of
God that sits upon the Throne to judge those twenty four that fall down before
him, I hope he will be pleased to look downward, and judge me with mercy that
fall down before him, and that worship him, and that adore him, that only
trusts upon his mercy, for his compassion; and that as he has purchased me, he
would lay his claim unto me now, and receive me.


Bolton. My Lord, think of this, There is no condemnation to them who are in
Christ: Who is it that can condemn? it is Christ that justifies; and therefore
look now upon this, my Lord, upon this Christ, upon this Christ that justifies:
Hell, Death, Sin, Satan, nothing shall be able to condemn, it is Christ that
justifies you.


Holland. Indeed if Christ justify, no body can condemn, and I trust in God,
in his Justification; though there is confusion here without us, and though
there are wonders and staring that now disquiet, yet I trust that I shall be
carried into that mercy, that God will receive my soul.


Bolton. I doubt not, my Lord, but as you are a Spectacle and of pity here, so
you are an object of Gods mercy above.


Holland. Then the Earl of Holland looking over among the people, pointing to a
Soldier, said, This honest man took me prisoner, you little thought I should
have been brought to this, when I delivered my self to you upon conditions: And
espying Captain Watson on horseback, putting off his Hat, said to him, God be
with you Sir, God reward you Sir.


Bolton. My Lord, throw your self into the arms of mercy, and say, There I will
Anchor, and there I will dye, he is a Savior for us in all conditions, whither
should we go? he has the words of eternal life, and upon him do you rest, wait
while you live, and even trust in death.


Holland. Here must now be my Anchor, a great storm makes me find my Anchor,
and but in storms no body trust to their Anchor, and therefore I must trust
upon my Anchor, ( Upon that God, said Mr Bolton, upon whom your Anchor trusts,)
yea, God, I hope, will anchor my soul fast upon Christ Jesus; and if I dye not
with that clearness and that heartiness that you speak of, truly, I will trust
in God, though he kill me, I will rely upon him, and in the mercy of my Savior.


Bolton. There is mercy enough, my Lord, and to spare, you shall not need to
doubt, they shall never go begging to another door, my Lord, that come to him.
Then the Earl of Holland speaking to Mr Hodges, said, I pray God reward you for
all your kindness, and pray, as you have done, instruct my Family, that they
may serve God with faithfulness, with holiness, with more diligence, then truly
I have been careful to press them unto: You have the charge of the same place,
you may do much for them, and I recommend them to your kindness, and the
goodness of your Conscience.

Dr Sibbald standing by upon the Scaffold, in his passage to Col: Beecher,
expressed himself thus to his Lordship:


Dr Sibbald. The Lord lift up thought of his countenance upon you, and you
shall be safe.


Holland. Then the Earl of Holland embraced Lieut: Col: Beecher, and took his
leave of him: After which he came to M. Bolton, and having embraced him, and
returned him many thanks for his great pains and affections to his soul,
desiring God to reward him, and return his love into his bosom. Mr Bolton said
to him, The Lord God support you, and be seen in this great extremity; the Lord
reveal and discover himself to you, and make your death the passage unto
eternal life --


Holland. Then the Earl of Holland turning to the Executioner, said, Here, my
friend, let my Clothes and my Body alone, there is Ten pounds for thee, that is
better then my Clothes I am sure of it.


Executioner. Will your Lordship please to give me a sign when I shall strike?
And then his Lordship said, You have room enough here, have you not? and the
Executioner said, Yes.


Bolton. The Lord be your strength, there is riches in him; The Lord of Heaven
impart himself to you, he is able to save to the uttermost: We cannot fall so
low, as to fall below the everlasting Arms of God; and therefore the Lord be a
support and stay to you in your low con^^^n, that he will be pleased to make
this an advantage to that life and glory that will make amends for all.


Holland. Then the Earl of Holland turning to the Executioner, said, Friend, do
you hear me, if you take up my Head, do not take off my Cap. Then turning to
his Servants, he said to one, Fare you well, thou art an honest fellow: and to
another, God be with thee, thou art an honest man; and then said, Stay, I will
kneel down, and ask God forgiveness; and then prayed for a pretty space, with
seeming earnestness.


Bolton. The Lord grant you may find life in death.


Holland. Which is the way of lying? (which they showed him.) And then going to
the front of the Scaffold, he said to the People, God bless you all, and God
deliver you from any such accident as may bring you to any such death as is
violent, either by War, or by these accidents; but that there may be peace
among you, and you may find, That these accidents that have happened to us, may
be the last that may happen in this Kingdom; it is that I desire, it is that I
beg of God, next the saving of my soul: I pray God give all happiness to this
Kingdom, to this People, and this Nation. And then turning to the Executioner,
said, How must I lie? I know not.


Execut. Lie down flat upon your belly: and then having laid himself down, he
said* Must I lie closer?


Execut. Yes, and backwarder.


Holland. I will tell you when you shall strike; and then as he lay, seemed to
pray with much affection for a short space, and then lifting up his head, said,
Where is the man? and seeing the Executioner by him, he said, Stay while I give
the Sign; and presently after stretching out his hand, and the Executioner
being not fully ready, he said, Now, now, and just as the words were coming out
of his mouth, the Executioner at one blow severed his Head from his Body.

The Execution of the Lord of Holland being thus performed, the Lord Capel was
brought to the Scaffold as the former, and in the way to the Scaffold, he put
off his Hat to the people on both sides, looking very austerely about him: And
being come upon the Scaffold, Lieut: Col: Beecher said to him, Is your Chaplain
here?


Capel. No, I have taken my leave of him; and perceiving some of his Servants
to weep, he said, Gentlemen, refrain your selves, refrain your selves; and
turning to Lieut: Col: Beecher, he said, What, did the Lords speak with their
Hats off or on?


Lieut: Col: Beecher. With their Hats off: And then coming to the front of the
Scaffold, he said, I shall hardly be understood here, I think; and then began
his Speech, as follows.


Capel. THe conclusion that I made with those that sent me hither, and are the
cause of this violent death of mine, shall be the beginning of what I shall say
to you: When I made an Address to them (which was the last) I told them with
much sinceri^y, That I would pray to the God of all mercies that they might be
partakers of his inestimable and boundless mercies in Jesus Christ, and truly,
I still pray that Prayer; and I beseech the God of Heaven forgive any injury
they have done to me, from my soul I wish it. And truly, this I tell you, as a
Christian, to let you see I am a Christian; but it is necessary I should tell
you somewhat more, That I am a Protestant: And truly, I am a Protestant, and
very much in love with the profession of it, after the manner as it was
established in England by the Thirty nine Articles, a blessed way of
profession, and such a one, as truly, I never knew none so good: I am so far
from being a Papist, which some body have (truly) very unworthily at some time
charged me withal, that truly, I profess to you, that though I love good
works, and commend good works, yet I hold, They have nothing at all to do in
the matter of Salvation; my Anchor-hold in this, That Christ loved me, and gave
himself for me, that is that that I rest upon. And truly, something I shall say
to you as a Citizen of the whole world, and in that consideration I am here
condemned to dye: Truly, contrary to the Law that governs all the world, that
is, The Law of the Sword; I had the protection of that for my life, and the
honor of it; but truly, I will not trouble you much with that, because in
another place I have spoken very largely and liberally about it, I believe you
will hear by other means what Arguments I used in that case: But truly, that
that is stranger, you that are English men, behold here an English man now
before you, and acknowledged a Peer, not condemned to dye by any Law of
England, not by any Law of England; Nay, shall I tell you more (which is
strangest of all) contrary to all the Laws of England that I know of. And
truly, I will tell you, in the matter of the Civil part of my death, and the
cause that I have maintained, I dye (I take it) for maintaining the fifth
Commandment, enjoined by God himself, which injoyns reverence and obedience to
Parents: All Divines on all hands, though they contradict one another in many
several Opinions, yet all Divines on all hands, do acknowledge, that herin is
intended Magistracy and Order; and certainly I have obeyed that Magistracy and
that Order under which I have lived, which I was bound to obey; and truly, I do
say very confidently, that I do dye here for keeping, for obeying that fifth
Commandment, given by God himself, and written with his own finger. And now,
Gentlemen, I will take this opportunity to tell you, That I cannot imitate a
better nor a greater ingenuity then his that said of himself, For suffering an
unjust Judgment upon another, himself was brought to suffer by an unjust
Judgment. Truly Gentlemen, that God may be glorified, that all men that are
concerned in it, may take the occasion of it, of humble repentance to God
Almighty for it, I do here pre^ess to you, that truly I did give my Vote to
that Bill of the E. of Strafford, I doubt not but God Almighty has washed that
away with a more precious blood, and that is, with the blood of his own Son,
and my dear Savior Jesus Christ, and I hope he will wash it away from all
those that are guilty of it; truly, this I may say, I had not the least part,
nor the least degree of malice in the doing of it; but I must confess again to
Gods Glory, and the accusation of mine own frailty, and the frailty of my
Nature, that truly it was an unworthy Cowardice, not to resist so great a
torrent as carried that business at that time. And truly, this I think I am
most guilty of, of not courage enough in it, but malice I had none; but
whatsoever it was, God, I am sure, has pardoned it, has given me the
assurance of it, That Christ Jesus his blood has washed it away; and truly, I
do from my soul wish, That all men that have any stain by it, may seriously
repent, and receive a remission and pardon from God for it. And now, Gentlemen,
we have had an occasion, by this intimation, to remember his Majesty, our King
that last was; and I cannot speak of him, nor think of it, but truly, I must
needs say, That in my Opinion, that have had time to consider all the Images of
all the greatest and vertuousest Princes in the world; and truly, in my
Opinion, there was not a more virtuous, and more sufficient Prince known in the
world, then our gracious King Charles that dyed last: God Almighty preserve our
King that now is, his Son; God send him more fortunate and longer days, God
Almighty so assist him, that he may exceed both the virtues and sufficiencies
of his Father: For certainly, I that have been a Councellor to him, and have
lived long with him, and in a time when discovery is easily enough made, for he
was young (he was about thirteen, fourteen, fifteen or sixteen years of age)
those years I was with him, truly I never saw greater hopes of virtue in any
young person then in him, great Judgment, great Understanding, great
Apprehension, much Honor in his Nature, and truly, a very perfect English man
in his inclination; and I pray God restore him to this Kingdom, and unite the
Kingdoms one unto another, and send a great happiness both to you and to him,
that he may long live and Reign among you, and that that Family may Reign till
thy Kingdom come, that is, while all Temporal Power is consummated: I beseech
God of his mercy, give much happiness to this your King, and to you that in it
shall be his Subjects, by the grace of Jesus Christ.

Truly, I like my beginning so well, that I will make my conclusion with it,
that is, That God Almighty would confer of his infinite and inestimable grace
and mercy to those that are the Causers of my coming hither, I pray God give
them as much mercy as their own hearts can wish; and truly, for my part, I will
not accuse any one of them of malice, truly I will not, nay, I will not think
there was any malice in them; what other ends there is, I know not, nor I will
not examine, but let it be what it will, from my very soul I forgive them every
one: And so the Lord of Heaven bless you all, God Almighty be infinite in
goodness and mercy to you, and direct you in those ways of obedience to his
commands to his Majesty, that this Kingdom may be a happy and glorious Nation
again, and that your King may be a happy King in so good and so obedient
People; God Almighty keep you all, God Almighty preserve this Kingdom, God
Almighty preserve you all.

Then turning about, and looking for the Executioner (who was gone off the
Scaffold) said, Which is the Gentleman? which is the man? Answer was made, He
is a coming: He then said, Stay, I must pull of my Dublet first, and my
Wastcoat: Then the Executioner being come upon the Scaffold, the Lord Capel
said, O friend, prithee come hither: Then the Executioner kneeling down, the L,
Capel said, I forgive thee from my Soul, and not only forgive thee, but I shall
pray to God to give thee all grace for a better life: There is Five pounds for
thee; and truly for my clothes and those things, if there be any thing due to
you for it, you shall be very fully recompensed; but I desire my body may not
be stripped here, and no body to take notice of my body but my own servants:
Look you friend, this I shall desire of you, that when I lie down, that you
would give me time for a particular short prayer.


Lieu. Col. Beecher. Make your own sign, my Lord.


Cap. Stay a little, which side do you stand upon? (speaking to the Executioner)
Stay, I think I should lay my hands forward that way (pointing fore-right,) and
answer being made, Yes; he stood still a little while, and then said, God
Almighty bless all this People, God Almighty stench this blood, God Almighty
stench, stench, stench this issue of blood; this will not do the business, God
Almighty find out another way to do it. And then turning to one of his
Servants, said, Baldwin, I cannot see any thing that belongs to my wife, but I
must desire thee to beseech her to rest wholly upon Jesus Christ, and be
contented and fully satisfied: And then speaking to his Servant, he said, God
keep you; and Gentlemen, let me now do a business quickly, privately, and pray
let me have your prayers at the moment of death, that God would receive my soul.


Lieut. Col. Beecher. I wish it.


Capel. Pray at the moment of striking join your prayers, but make no noise
(turning to his servants) that is inconvenient at this time.


Servant. My Lord, put on your Cap.


Capel. Should I, what will that do me good? Stay a little, is it well as it is
As he was putting up his hair.
now? And then turning to the Executioner, he said, Honest man, I have forgiven
thee, therefore strike boldly, from my soul I do it. Then a Gentleman speaking
to him, he said, Nay, prithee be contented, be quiet good Mr -- be quiet. Then
turning to the Executioner, he said, Well, you are ready when I am ready, are
you not? And stretching out his hands, he said, Then pray stand off Gentlemen.
Then going to the front of the Scaffold, he said to the People, Gentlemen,
though I doubt not of it, yet I think it convenient to ask it of you, That you
would all join in Prayers with me, That God would mercifully receive my soul,
and that for his alone mercies in Christ Jesus. God Almighty keep you all.


Execut. My Lord, shall I put up your hair?


Capel. I, I, prithee do: and then as he stood lifting up his hands and eyes,
he said, O God, I do with a perfect and a willing heart submit to thy Will: O
God, I do most willingly humble my self: And then kneeling down, said, I will
try first how I can lie; and laying his head over the Block, said, Am I well now?


Executioner. Yes.

And then as he lay with both his hands stretched out, he said to the
Executioner, Here lies both my hands out, when I lift up my hand thus, (lifting
up his right hand) then you may strike. And then after he had said a short
prayer, he lifted up his right hand, and the Executioner at one blow severed
his Head from his Body, which was taken up by his Servants, and put (with his
body) into a Coffin, as the former.


FINIS.

