ACCOUNT FROM Colonel KIRK, Of the Relieving of LONDONDERRY, Brought by Mr.
BEALE the Messenger, in an Express to the COURT: Together with an Account of a
Great Fight between the Duke of Berwicks's Forces and the Protestants, with all
the Particulars.
Licensed and Entered according to Order.



MR. Beal the Messenger being sent Express by the way of Scotland, to
Major General Kirk, returned yesterday morning about eight of the Clock, having
left Major General Kirk on Tuesday last, being the thirtieth Day of July, in
the Island of Inch in Lough Swille: He brings Advice, That Major General Kirk,
with the Ships and men under his Command, having continued a considerable time
in Lough Foyl, and seeing that it was impossible to Relieve the Town by that
way, till such time as he should be Reinforced with Forces from England, he
thought it necessary and Requisite to Sail to Lough Swille, to join Colonel
Stuart, who is Posted in the Isle of Inch: And accordingly he did set Sail, in
order to perform that Voyage; upon which the Irish drew all their Forces from
Lough Foyl, in order to oppose their Designs: And withal, to prevent the People
of Inniskilling and Ballyshannon, etc. from joining them, leaving only an
inconsiderable Party, with two Pieces of Cannon, to Guard the Bomb, having
carried the rest of the Guns with them. Upon notice of their so doing,
Major General Kirk sailed back to Lough Foyl, where he soon put the Irish to
flight, and broke the Bomb with little or no opposition, having lost but one
Man in the Action. Then he Sailed to Londonderry, where he was joyfully
received by the Inhabitants, who began to want Provisions, being reduced to
that scarcity, that they were obliged for some days together to eat
Horseflesh, and were allowed but one Biscuit a piece every day. The Inhabitants
of the Town sent on Board the Fleet to acquaint Major General Kirk, that they
wanted no Men in the Town, nor Ammunition, but Provision; and in regard they
had been so long Commanded by the Reverend Colonel Walker, and had been so
successful by the Blessing of God in their several Sallies, they humbly desired
him not to Land his Men there, but to Sail and join Colonel Stuart; telling him
withal it might occasion Grumbling in the Town, if so be the Inhabitants should
be commanded by strange Officers. They likewise desired to land what Provisions
he had for them, which he accordingly did; and afterward according to their
desire, Sailed to the Isle of Inch, where he is now Arrived, and has a Body of
Six thousand brave Men, and has a free Correspondence with the People of
Inniskilling and Ballyshannon, who have lately marched out of that Island, and
fought the Duke of Berwick in the Field, with that resolution and bravery,
standing the Brunt of the Battle, till all the Shot on both sides were spent,
and then they went to work with the But-end of their Muskets. At length they
beat the Enemy out of the Field, killing some hundreds upon the Spot, and
taking several Prisoners, with Two Hundred Scarlet Cloaks, the Duke of Berwick
himself narrowly escaping. It Is generally believed, that they have joined those
of the Isle of Inch ere this; if Major General Kirk had but Arms, they would be
able to make a Body of Thirty Thousand Men, which would, in all probability,
soon destroy the Irish Army, they being so often already defeated, and the
Protestants flusht with Victory.

Edinburgh, Reprinted in the Year, 1689.


