Let this be Printed.

Nottingham.
White Hall, October. 15. 1691.
THE STATE OF THE PROTESTANTS OF IRELAND Under the late King James's
Government; IN WHICH Their Carriage toward him is justified, and the absolute
Necessity of their endeavoring to be freed from his Government, and of
submitting to their present Majesty's is demonstrated.

LONDON: Printed for Robert Clavell, at the Peacock, at the West End of St.
Paul's. 1691.

HEADS of the DISCOURSE.
The INTRODUCTION.
Containing an Explication of the Doctrine of Passive Obedience, and stating
the true Notion and Latitude of it. page 1 N. 1. That a King who designs to
destroy a People, abdicates the Government of them ib. 2. The Assertors of
Passive Obedience own this, but allege the Case is not to be put p. 2 3. The
Arguments of Passive Obedience from Reason and Scripture reach only Cases where
the Mischief is particular or tolerable p. 3 4. A War not always a greater Evil
than Suffering p. 5 5. The Division of the whole Discourse into four parts ib.
Chap. 1. That it is lawful for one Prince to interpose between another Prince
and his Subjects when he uses them cruelly p. 6 N. 1. This Point already
cleared by several ib. 2. 1. Argument. One Prince may have an Interest in the
People and Government of another Prince ib. 3. 2. Argument. That tho
Destruction of a People by their Prince may only be a step to the Destruction
of his Neighbors ib. 4. 3. Argument. Charity and Humanity oblige every one,
who is able, to succor the oppressed p. 7 5. 4. Argument. God seems for this
Reason to have divided the World into several Principalities ib. 6. 5.
Argument. From the Authority of Christian Casuists p. 8 7. 6. From the Practice
of Christian Princes, Constantine the Great, Constantine his Son, King Pepin,
the Holy War, etc. ib. 8. The Objection from the Oath of Allegiance, etc.
answered from Falkner p. 9 9. From it not being lawful to assist any Prince in
an ill Cause p. 10 10. From King James' abolishing those Oaths here in Ireland
ib.
Chap. 2. King James designed to destroy the Protestant Religion p. 12 Sect. 1.
The possibility of a King's designing the Destruction of his Subjects ib. N. 1.
That it is necessary the Princes Design should be very evident to justify the
Opposition of his Subjects ib. 2. An Answer to the Objection, who shall be
Judge? ib. 3. Example of Princes that have had such Designs against their
Subjects p. 13
Sect. 2. Showing from the Obligations of his Religion that King James designed
to destroy Protestant Subjects p. 14 N. 1. Proved from the Councils of Lateran
and Constance, from King James's Zeal, Confessors and Allies ib. 2. That no
Promises of the Prince, nor Laws of the Land can secure Protestant Subjects p.
16 Account of Jerome of Prague's safe Conduct* p. 17
Sect. 3. King James's Design to ruin his Protestant Subjects, proved from the
Profession of that whole Party that were most privy to his Councils, who
privately warned their Protestant Friends of it ib.
Sect. 4. The same destructive Designs proved from the Officers employed by him
p. 19 N. 1. The Ground of the different Interests of Ireland. Account of the
Rebellion in 1641 ib. 2. The Subjects Security is, that the Officers employed
by the King are responsible for what they do amiss p. 20 3. The Officers
employed by King James not only not responsible, but fitted to destroy us, upon
account of the five Qualifications following p. 21
Sect. 5. Upon Account of their being Men generally of no Fortune p. 22 N. 1.
King James employed such in the Army and Civil Offices* and such were his
Favorites p. 22 2. He employed such in Corporations p. 23 3. Men of Estates
that followed him out of England had little Interest with him ib. 4. The Reason
of this that they might not stick at illegal Commands p. 24
Sect. 6. Upon Account of their Insufficiency for their Emploments ib. N. 1.
The Roman Catholics generally insufficient for Business by their long Disuse
ib. 2. The Inconveniences of this in the Courts, and City p. 25 3. In the
Country p. 26 4. Those employed were incapable of Improvement p. 27
Sect. 7. Upon account of their loose Principles and want of Moral Honesty ib.
N. 1. Knavery, Robbery or Forgery no Bar to Preferments in King James his Army,
or Employments ib. 2. The lewdest Converts favored p. 29 3. All of them very
uncharitable, and void of Compassion to Heretics p. 30 4. Many Perjuries
amongst them ib.
Sect. 8. Upon Account of their Genius and Inclination to destroy the Laws,
etc. p. 31 N. 1. The ancient Condition of the Tenants and Landlords of Ireland
ib. 2. The Landlords that did not forfeit their Estates 1641, retained the
Genius of their Ancestors p. 32 3. The Humor and Way of Living of such as
formerly forfeited, or had sold their Estates ibid. 4. The English Laws were
intolerable to the old Landlords, that retained their Estates p. 33 5. Much
more to those that had lost them, and most of all to the Popish Clergy ibid. 6.
King James employed and trusted those most, whose Interest and Temper made them
greatest Enemies to the Laws p. 34 (...)

by the Laws in employing Soldiers ibid. 8. Secondly, That Protestants would
not serve his turn. Answer, This only shows what he designed against us p. 57
9. Thirdly, That such Levies were necessary in the Kings Circumstances. Answer,
The Papists had brought that necessity. The raising and modeling this Army a
plain instance of King James's design to destroy us ibid.
Sect. 3. Secondly, King James's dealing with the Courts of Judicature p. 58 1.
Justice in the Hands of ^it Persons the support of a Kingdom. King James put it
into the most unfit Hands; being such as were bent to destroy the Protestants,
and English Interest ibid. 2. Chancery, Primate Boil, and Sir Charles Porter
removed. Fitton put in. His Character. His Inclination and Behavior toward
Protestants; and great partiality to them. ibid. 3. Masters of Chancery of the
same sort p. 60 4. On the other Benches, one. Protestant Judge kept in for a
Color, without Power. The like done by Burgesses in Corporations p. 61 5.
Kings Bench, Nugent's Character, great Partiality. Instance in Captain Fitz
Gerald, an^ Sir Gregory Birn. Nugent's great hand in the Bill of Attainder*
etc. Sir Bryan o Neal's Character p. 61, 62 6. Exc^equer, Sir Stephen Rice's
Character. His Inveteracy to Protestants, and enmity to the Act of Settlement
p. 63 7. Common Pleas little to do, Keating's and Daley's Characters p. 64 8.
Circuits. Alike ill for Protestants. Instance Tirrell's Affidavit ibid. 9.
Attorney General, Sir Richard Nagle, his Character and Partiality. Instance in
Fitz Gerald and Sir William Petty, Speaker* of the House of Commons, drew up
the Acts of Repeal and Attainder, and betrayed the Kings Prerogative p. 65, 66
10. Administration of the Laws turned to the Protestants ruin p. 66 11.
Instances in beating and injuring Protestants ibid. 12. In disarming them p. 67
13. The Dispensing Power of more mischief still, than ill Administration.
First, Only to be allowed in Cases of Necessity ibid. 14. Secondly, In such
Cases the People have as much right to it as the King. Instance in the Sheriff
of Warwickshire, from Dr. Sanderson p. 68 15. Thirdly, The wickedness either in
King or People in pretending Necessity where there is none p. 69 16. King
James's employing Popish Officers was such a Dispensation ibid. 17. And no
Necessity for it, unless such as was Criminal p. 70 18. King James dispensed
with all, when it was against Protestants p. 71
Sect. 4. Thirdly, King James's dealing with Civil Offices, and the Privy
Council p. 72 1. Several outed notwithstanding Patents ibid. 2. Act of
Parliament for voyding Patents. Irish hereby made Keep^rs of Records; which
before, they had corrupted, when they could get to them p. 73 3. Revenue
Officers changed for Roman Catholics, though to the Prejudice of the Revenue
p. 74 4. Sheriffs and Justices of Peace, from the Scum of the People ibid. 5.
Privy-Councellors, all in effect Papists p. 76
Sect. 5. Fourthly, King James's dealing with Corporations p. 77 1. The Peoples
security in these Kingdoms, is the choice of Representatives in Parliament. To
preserve this, Papists excluded from Corporations in Ireland. Protestants had
made great Concessions to the King by their New Rules for Corporations. The
King not satisfied with this, but would have all p. 77, 78 2. Rice and Nagle's
managing of Quo Warranto's; a horrid Abuse of the Kings Prerogative and the Law
p. 78, 79 3. Other methods of destroying Charters p. 80 4. Particular
Corporations in Dublin how ordered ibid. 5. Voyding Charters led to voyding
Parents for Estates ibid. 6. Corporations by the New Charters made absolute
Slaves to the Kings Will. First, by Consequence no free Parliament could be
Returned. Secondly, Protestants could not serve in the Corporations p. 80, 81
7. Protestants hereby driven from the Kingdom ibid.
Sect. 6. Fifthly, King James's Destruction of the Trade p. 82 1. Trade to be
destroyed that the King might have his Will of his Subjects. Poor People
willing to serve for little in an Army, as in France ibid. 2. In order to ruin
the Protestants, who were the chief Traders, Driven hereby out of the Kingdom
p. 83 3. This ruined a great many that depended on them ibid. 4. The Irish in
employ, who had the ready Money, gave it only to Papist Tradesmen p. 84 5.
Exactions of the Revenue-Officers, great discouragement to Merchants and
Traders p. 85 6. Protestant Shoopkeepers quitted for fear of being forced to
Trust ibid. 7. Transportation of Wool connived at by Lord Tirconnell, to ruin
our woollen Trade p. 86 8. Roman Catholic principal Traders ruined also by
King James, by the Act of Repeal p. 87
Sect. 7. Sixthly, King James's Destruction of our Liberty p. 88 1. No general
Pardon at King James's Accession to the Crown. Protestants hereby questioned
for things in the Popish Plot, on false Evidences ibid. 2. Protestants sworn
into Plots and seditious Words. Instance, 1. In County Mead. 2. In County
Tipperary p. 88, 89 3. New Magistrates in Corporations, plagued Protestants p.
90 4. New Levies and Rapparee's, imprisoned those that resisted their
Robberies. Instance in Mr. Brice of Wicklow. Maxwel and Levis, Queens County.
Sir Laurence Parsons. p. 91 5. General imprisonment of Protestants from
Midsummer 1689. to Christmas. No Habeas Corpus's allowed. Protestants of
Drogheda barbarously used at the Siege, and of the County of Cork, by
imprisonments p. 92, 93 6. Hard Usage of Protestants in Prisons. Powder placed
to blow them up. Leak's Evidence against the Prisoners in Dublin, defeated by
an Accident p. 93 7. K. James aware of all the ill Treatment of Protestants,
informed at large by the Bishop of Limrick. All Protestants confined by his
Proclamation to their Parishes p. 94 8. Arts to conceal this in England.
Intolerable staying in Ireland. Necessary to close in with King William p. 95
Sect. 8. Seventhly, King James's destruction of our Estates. 1. By disarming
the Protestants, by Lord Tirconnell p. 97 1. Government dissolved that does not
preserve Property ibid. 2. The Irish very low at the Prince of Oranges's
Invasion. Would easily have been brought to submit. Protestants able to have
mastered them. Lord Mountjoy opposed seizing Tirconnell p. 97, 98 3.
Protestants resolved not to be the Aggressors: were inclined to submit to King
James, till they found his destructive designs. Monsieur d' Avaux complained of
the Measures put on King James by Tirconnell p. 98, 99 4. Tirconnell's Arts and
Lies to gain time, pretending to be ready to submit to King William, till he
formed his new Levies, Lord Chief Justice Keatings Letters and Observations on
it p. 99 5. New Levies necessary to be subsisted on Plunder. This gave credit
to the Letter to Lord Mount Alexander, December. 6. 1688. p. 101 6. And made
Derry shut its Gates against the Earl of Antrims Regiment p. 102 7. Obliged to
do thus by their Foundation p. 103 8. Provoked to it by the unjust taking away
their Charter p. 104 9. This made also the Enniskiliners, refuse two Companies
sent by Lord Tirconnell, and the Northern Gentlemen to enter into an
Association for their own defense ibid. 10. Lord Tirconnell hastened to run
them into blood, before King James's coming p. 106 11. Justification of their
declaring for their present Majesty's ibid. 12. Their defense of themselves of
great benefit to the Protestant Cause, and almost miraculous p. 107 13. Lord
Tirconnell's Lies and Wheedles to Lord Mountjoy to send him to France p. 109
14. Lord Mountjoy's Reasons to accept it. Articles granted to him by Tirconnell
for the Protestants, not kept p. 110 15. Lord Tirconnell proceeds to disarm the
Protestants. Manner of doing it, and taking away their Horses. A perfect
Dragooning p. 111 16. Proclamation issued, after it had been done by verbal
Orders p. 113 17. The Arms for the most part embezled by the Soldiers who took
them. This had like to have occasioned a worse Dragooning, prevented by the
Bishop of Mead p. 113, 114 18. The manner of taking up and embezling Horses p.
114 19. Miserable condition of the Protestants, being disarmed amongst their
Irish Enemies. Protestants had the highest Legal Property in their Arms. The
Government by taking them away, must design their ruin p. 115 20. No Reason for
disarming us but to make us a Prey p. 116 21. It was necessary in King James's
Circumstances: but the Necessity occasioned by his own fault ibid.
Sect. 9. Secondly, Lord Tirconnell's Attempts on the Protestants Personal
Fortunes p. 117 1. Which he destroyed by encouraging Popish Tenants against
their Protestant Landlords, and swearing them into Plots. Gentlemen forced to
live, for some time before the Turn, on their Stocks p. 117, 118 2. Forced into
England with little ready Money. Many burnt out of their Houses in the Country.
Many robbed, and some murdered p. 118, 119 3. Protestants impoverished by
vexatious Law Suits p. 119 4. By Delays, and the Treachery of Popish Council p.
120 5. By defending their Charters, and being forced to take out new ones ibid.
6. By free Quarters. Inkeepers and Houskeepers ruined p. 121 7. By the burden
of Priests and Friars p. 122
Sect. 10. Thirdly, King James's own Attempts on the same p. 123 1. Quartering
on private Houses, contrary to the Articles to Lord Mountjoy. Most Soldiers had
many Quarters. Mischievous in their Quarters. Instance in Brown, who robbed his
Landlord, and swore Treason against him p. 123, 124 2. Plundering and killing
the Protestants Stock. Vast numbers destroyed, and stolen p. 125 3. Irish
encouraged to do so: no Redress upon Complaints p 126 4. Nugent avowed it.
Rapparees Necessary Evils. Stop put to this Trade, when they began to rob one
another p. 127
Sect. 11. Fourthly, King James's further Methods to complete the ruin of the
Protestants Personal Fortunes p. 128 1. Taking away Absentees Goods. Bill for
it in Parliament ibid. Methods to drain those that staid, of their ready Money
p. 129 1. By Licenses for Ships to go for England ibid. 2. By pretended Liberty
of Transporting Goods p. 130 3. Licenses for Persons to go for England ibid. 4.
By Protections granted, and voided ibid. 5. By seizing Money and Plate upon
Informations ibid. 6. Boiselot's Dragooning of Cork ibid. 7. Act for the
Subsidy at 20000 l. per Month on Lands ibid. 2. Second Subsidy of 20000 l. per
Month on Personal Estates ibid. Debates in Council about this, and Manner of
ordering it ibid. 3. Tax for the Militia p. 132 4. Tax for fortifying the
Avenues of Dublin ibid. 5. Tax for quartering Soldiers, called Bed-Mony p. 133
6. Brass Money. Illegal. Void the necessity of Parliaments ibid. Of what Metal,
and how much coined (viz. 965375 l.) in one year p. 134 Forced to be taken in
all Payments ibid. Fitton forced it on Trustees for Orphans p. 135 7. Lutterell
forced it on pain of Death, by the Provost-Martial ibid. On Smith, Leeson,
Bennet, Widow Chapman, her barbarous usage ibid. Papists not forced to receive
it from Protestants p, 136 8. Seizing of Protestants Wool, Hides, Tallow p.
137 Peircy to have bin hanged for saying he was not willing to part with them
p. 138 Protestants not permitted to Export them. Their Imports seized ibid. 9.
Seizing of Corn and Malt. The Treason of having Biscuit. Giles Meigh p. 139
Difficult for Protestants to get Corn or Bread, this before Harvest would have
forced out all their Silver ibid. 10. Seizing Wool as soon as shorn p. 140
Searching Houses for Copper and Brass for the Mint; and taking private Accounts
of what else the Protestants had in in their Houses. ibid. 11. Lord Mayors
rating of Merchant Goods. Forced on the Protestants, but disregarded by the
Papists: instance in the very Lord Mayor himself. ibid. 12. Proclamation to
Rate Silver and Gold in Exchange for Brass, on pain of death. p. 141 13.
Inference from the whole. ibid.
Sect. 12. Fifthly, King James's destruction of the Protestants Real Estates.
p. 142 1. Explication of old and new Interest, and account of the Acts of
Settlement, and of the Tenure by which the Protestants held their Estates.
ibid. The Papists outed of their Estates by the late Rebellion still kept up a
claim to them, and made Jointures and Settlements of them, which were confirmed
in King James's Parliament. p. 143 2. King James at his first coming to the
Crown, gave out he would preserve the Acts of Settlement. Lord Clarendon, Lord
Chancellor Porter, and the Judges in Circuit directed to declare it. ibid. The
Papists knew it was only color p. 144 Nagle's Coventry Letter first openly
broke the matter, October 26. 1686. ibid. Tirconnell, at his coming Governor,
leaves it out of the Proclamation ibid. Nugent and Rice sent to England to
concert the methods of Repealing it, but concealed for the present their
success p. 145 At their return prepared for a Parliament ibid. For which
Matters had been fitted by the Quo Warranto's, and reversal of Outlawries
against the Irish Peers ibid. 3. Papists had not patience to wait for their
Estates till a Parliament; but*went to work by counterfeit Deeds, and by old
Injunctions of the Court of Claims p. 146 4. Matters ripe for a Parliament, but
put off till the Parliament which was to sit in England, November 1688. should
take off the Penal Laws, etc. p. 147 5. at King James's arrival in Ireland, it
was against his Interest to call a Parliament, First, because of loss of time;
the Kingdom not reduced ibid. 6. Secondly, which was King James's Allegation
for not calling one in England, this reflected on his sincerity p. 148 7.
Thirdly, It was the way to disoblige all that were inclined to him in England,
and Scotland ibid. 8. Fourthly, It disobliged a great many of the Irish
themselves ibid. 9. Fifthly, It rendered all not under his power, desperate p.
149 10. Against all Reason and Interest he called one, being resolved to Dye a
Martyr or Establish Popery ibid. 11. This Parliament fitted for our ruin, both
in respect of the King and of both Houses. ibid. 13. Method of filling the
House of Lords with Popish Peers. Only four or five Protestant Temporal, and
four Spiritual Lords ibid. Several Acts past not by consent of these last;
though it be pretended in their Preambles p. 150 14. House of Commons how
filled. Manner of Electing Members, Only two Protestants (that could be called
such) in it p. 151 15. The whole House a slave to the Kings Will. No
Protestations allowed p. 153 16. How much Reason we, as well as England, had to
dread Papists in a Parliament p. 154 17. First, Account of the Act of Repeal
ibid. Secondly, Of the Act of Attainder p. 155 Thirdly, Clause in it of holding
Correspondence since Aug. 1. 1688. ibid. Fourthly, Clause of cutting off
Remainders p. 156 Fifthly, No Protestant might hope to be reprized by the Act
of Repeal ibid. Sixthly, Clause in the Act of Attainder against the Kings
Pardoning, which was the Reason this Act was kept so secret. Copy procured by
Mr. Coghlan. Upon account of Sir Thomas Southwell's Pardon Solicited by Lord
Seaforth. King James in a Passion with Sir Richard Nagle, for betraying his
Prerogative by this Clause against Pardoning p. 157, 158, 159 18. Observations,
First, King James could not dispense when the Irish pleased ibid. Secondly,
Near three thousand Protestants condemned for not coming in by a day, and yet
the Act, never published but kept* secret ibid. Thirdly, Folly of attainted
Persons to think of ever being Pardoned, if King James be restored, since it is
not in his power p. 160 Fourthly, Papists got into their Estates before the
time set in the Act of Repeal ibid. 19. Means how the Papists got Possessions
p. 161 First, Popish Tenants attorn'd to their old Popish Landlords ibid.
Secondly, Advantages taken of Clauses in the Act of Repeal ibid. Thirdly, From
Orders about Garrisoning Mansion-Houses. Sending the Protestant Owners to the
Goal, who must never have expected either their Houses or Lives, if King James
had prevailed ibid. Estates of Absentees disposed of, and promised to Papists
p. 162 20. Objection, That King James did not know the Consequence of Repealing
the Acts of Settlement ibid. Answer, First, King James understood them better
than any; and held ten thousand pounds a year by them when Duke of York ibid.
Secondly, King James would not hear the Protestants plead at the Bar against
the Repeal p. 163 Thirdly, Bishop of Mead, in a Speech in the House, set forth
the ill Consequences at large ibid. Fourthly, The Protestants opposed it from
Point to Point ibid. Fifthly, Protestants were resolved to use their utmost,
that the ill intents of their Adversaries might appear the more p. 164 Sixthly,
Lord chief Justice Keating's Paper given to King James in behalf of Purchasers,
rejected ibid. 21. Protestants lost more in Ireland, than all that favor King
James's Cause in England are worth. p. 165
Sect. 13. Eighthly, The danger into which King James brought the lives of his
Protestant Subjects in Ireland ibid. 1. At King James's Coming no General
Pardon, though it had been his Interest in respect of England ibid. 2. Is not
chargeable with particular Murders further than by arming such Men as would be
guilty of them p. 166 3. The Governments Design upon our Lives ibid. First, by
feigned Plots; and Protecting the Perjured Witnesses. Instance in Spikes Case.
The Dumb Friar p. 167 Secondly, By wresting Facts to Treason. Nugent declared
Protestants, having Arms, to be so p. 168 Thirdly, By violating Articles. Mr.
Brown of Cork. Town of Bandon. Earl of Inchiquin. Captain Boil. Sir Thomas
Southwell and his Party. Lord Mountjoy's Soldiers. Fort of Culmore. King
James's approach to Derry. Captain Dixy. Kenaght Castle p. 169, 170 Fourthly.
By violating Protections p. 171 Protestants of Down p. 171 Protestants brought
before Derry by General Rosen. Bishop of Mead applied to King James about it.
King James excused Rosen p. 173, 174 Captain Barton of Carrick Mac Cross p. 175
Fifthly, By private Orders and Proclamations with the penalty of Death. Several
Instances p. 178 Sixthly, By the Act of Attainder. Abstract of it. Archbishops
2 Duke 1 Temporal Lords 63 Ladies 22 Bishops 7 Knights 85 Clergymen 83 Esquires
and Gentlemen 2182 -- 2445
p. 179, 180 Not equalled by the Proscription at Rome. Great part Attainted on
Common Fame p. 182 Observations on the Act ibid. 1. Leaves no room for the King
to Pardon ibid. 2. The Act concealed. Out of the Power of an English Parliament
to Repeal it, by the Act for cutting off Ireland from England p. 183 3. The
have in drawing it up ibid. 4. Many left out, particularly the Collegians, and
how ibid. 5. Applications in behalf of Protestants made their Case worse p. 184
6. Allowing of time to prove Innocence, a mere Collusion ibid. 1. None knew
what time was given ibid. 2. None knew what they would call Innocence. Instance
Desmineer and Ginnery ibid. 3. The Embargo on this side would not let them know
on the other side. 4. The Embargo on the other side would not let them come
hither. 5. To have come would have been an unwise Venture p. 177 4. Objection,
That few Protestants lost their Lives. p. 178 Answer, 1. When it is known how
many have perished, they will not appear few ibid. 2. The Irish Papists would
not venture at much Murdering, till they were past an after Reckoning, they
feared such Cruelty would be revenged on Roman Catholics in England ibid. 3.
Protestants were cautious not to provoke them, and were true to one another p.
179 4. We don't know what would have been done with Attainted Persons ibid. 5.
Protestants if Obnoxious absconded or escaped ibid. 6. The Support of King
James's Army depended on the Protestants p. 179 Scotch Officers that came here
wondered to find how Protestants were used, having heard so much the contrary
at home p. 180 The same given out in England. Pity but those who believed and
forwarded it, had been sent hither ibid. The Irish doing what they did in their
Circumstances, what would they have done if left to their swing? ibid.
Sect. 14. Ninthly, The method King James took to destroy our Religion p. 181
1. The Attempts against our Lives and Fortunes, no sudden thing but the result
of a long Design; for which Tirconnel had 20000 l. per annum ibid. 2. King
James pretended Liberty of Conscience; but not to be expected from a Roman
Catholic ibid. 3. The Laws and Coronation Oath secured our Religion. The
Clergy had merited from King James by opposing the Exclusion; and disobliged
their People p. 182 4. At his coming to the Crown, the Roman Catholics
declared that his Promises to the Church were not intended for Ireland p. 183
Sect. 15. First, By taking away our Schools and Universities p. 184 1. Lord
Tirconnell put the Schools, contrary to Law, into the hands of Papists ibid. 2.
And would have put in Popish Fellows into the College ibid. 3. Stopped the
College Pension of 388 l. per annum from Easter 1688. turned out the Fellows
and Students; seized on the Library and Furniture p 193 4. Forbid three of them
on pain of Death not to meet together p. 194 5. King James did not fill up
vacant Bishoprics and Livings in his Gift ibid. 6. And allowed nothing for
supplying the Cures p. 195 7. All the Bishops and Livings in the Kingdom would
soon have come into the Kings hands. p. 196 8. This not the effect of our
Constitution, the same in Popish Countries. Thirty five Bishoprics void in
France in 1688. King James's Ungratefulness to the Protestant Clergy ibid.
Sect. 16. Secondly, By taking away the Maintenance of the Clergy p. 197 1.
Book-Mony denied by the Papists from King James's coming to the Crown ibid. 2.
Priests put in for Tithes. Hardly recovered by Protestants p. 198 3. An Act of
their Parliament applied Papists Tithes to the Priests ibid. 4. And Protestants
Tithes too when the Priests had the Benefices ibid. 5. The Priests forced into
Possession of Glebes, where there were any p. 199 6. Protestant Clergy little
better for the Tithes left to them. Protestants had little Tythings left.
Priests by Dragoons seized what there was; never wanted Pretenses ibid. 7.
House-Mony in Corporations taken away by their Parliament. Pleaded against
before the House of Lords, but in vain p. 200 8. The same took away Ulster
Table of Tithes p. 201 9. Duties payable to the King out of Livings, were
exacted wholly from the Protestant Incumbents though they had nothing left to
them of their Livings: their Persons seized and sent to Goal ibid. Colonel
Moore Clerk of the First Fruits, imprisoned because he would not be severe
against them. p. 202
Sect. 17. Thirdly, By taking away the Jurisdiction of the Protestant Church
ibid. 1. The Churches Right by Prescription to Jurisdiction ibid. 2. Act of
their Parliament destroyed this Jurisdiction, by exempting all that please to
be Dissenters p. 203 3. In most Diocesses the Bishops Dead or Attainted ibid.
4. They encouraged the most Refractory Dissenters ( Quakers) against the Church
p. 204 5. Likewise lewd and debauched Converts ibid. 6. The Kings Courts
hindered Bishops Proceedings against debauched Clergymen. Instance in Ross and
the Bishop of Killmore ibid. 7. King James appointed Chancellors. Gordon a
Papist in Dublin. King James asserted a Power over his Protestant, though not
over his Roman Catholic Clergy. A gross breach of Trust and provoking
Temptation to his People p. 205, 206 8. Papists encouraged Debauchery; and had
rather have us of no Religion than Protestants. p. 206
Sect. 18. Fourthly, By taking away their Churches p. 208 1. Priests declared
they would have our Churches. Act of their Parliament gave them to them, with
the Livings, as they fell ibid. 2. At Duke Schonberg's landing they set the
Rabble to deface them. Instance in Trim and other Rudenesses p. 209 3. The
Churches seized in Dublin, Feb. 24. 1688. to put Arms in. September 6. 1689. to
search for Arms. Barbarities used in them. In October and November the Churches
seized throughout the Kingdom ibid. 4. By the Officers or Magistrates of the
Army. Christ Church Dublin seized p. 210 5. Protestants Complain and press to
King James the Act for Liberty of Conscience. Are referred by him to the Law
ibid. 6. The injustice of this p. 211 7. For a color to England and Scotland
King James issues a Proclamation against seizing Churches, which served only to
hasten the doing of it ibid. 8. Priests slighted the Proclamation p. 212 9.
Applications made to the King for Relief ibid. 10. On behalf of Waterford and
Wexford. King James Orders Restitution; but is refused to be obeyed by the
Mayors and Officers ibid. 11. On new Applications from the Protestants, he
refers Waterford Petition to the Earl of Tyrone Governor of Waterford, who
calls their Church a place of strength. and turns it into a Garrison. The Mayor
of Wexford turned out, but the Church never restored p. 213 12. When King James
would have kept his word to us, it was not in his Power, by means of his Clergy
ibid. 13. Act for Liberty of Conscience provides not against Disturbers of
Assemblies p. 214 14. Many Disorders committed by their Soldiers in our
Churches ibid. 15. Christ Church, Dublin, shut up September 6. Seized October
27. September 13. all Protestants are forbid to assemble. July 13. 1689. all
Protestants confined to their Parishes though two or three Parishes have but
one Church. June 30. more than five Protestants forbid to meet on pain of
Death. Had King James succeeded at the Boyne, we should never have had our
Churches again. Liberty of Conscience brought to this p. 215, 216
Sect. 19. Fifthly, By encouraging Converts; and ill Treatment of the
Protestant Clergy p. 216 1. Protestant Wives severely treated by their
Husbands. Servants by their Masters. Tenants by their Landords ibid. 2. Those
that turned escaped Robberies, etc. p. 217 3. Protestant Clergy sure to be
Plundered. Bishops of Laughlin and Waterford ibid. 4. Without Horses in the
Country, and afronted in the Streets of Dublin p. 218 5. Dr. Foy's Treatment
for resuting Mr. Hall. Dr. King's in his own Church. Mr. Knight's by the Mayor
of Scarborough, etc. ibid. 6. Oaths tendered them, and upon their refusal
imprisoned. Hindered from visiting their Sick by Priests p. 219 7. Forced the
Ministers to go about to take the number of their Parishoners p. 220
Sect. 20. Sixthly, By Misrepresentations of them and their Principles p. 221
1, 2. Priests told ignorant People that our Church allowed the King might
oblige all his Subjects to be of his Faith ibid. 3. From the Doctrine of
Non-Resistance, they told us, the King might use us as the Grand Seignior or
the French King does his Subjects ibid. 4. King James warned the young Mr.
Cecills against our Bishops as ill Men, and all false to him p. 222 5. Yalden's
weekly Abhorrences. Scandalous falsehood of Dr. King and Dr. Foy ibid. 6.
Defense upon the whole of desiring and promoting King William to rescue us p.
224 7. From the lawfulness of the Grecians to desire or accept the like from a
Christian Army ibid.
Chap. IV. That there remained no prospect of Deliverance for us but from their
present Majesty's p. 225 1. There remained no defense for us from the Laws, or
King James ibid. 2. Unreasonable to trust to a new Miracle ibid. 3. Our
Adversaries scoft us with Preaching Patience, as Julian did the Christians
ibid. 4 Mad at their Prey, being rescued by his present Majesty p. 226
CHAP. V. A short Account of those Protestants who left the Kingdom, and of
those that stayed. 228 Sect. 1. Concerning those who went away ibid. 1. Reason
of this Section ibid. 2. No Law against Subjects Transporting themselves into
the English Dominions ibid. 3. The Danger of staying, and no prospect of doing
good by their stay in Ireland 229 4. No prospect of being able to subsist in
Ireland ibid. 5. The Reason of Clergy Men's going 230 6. The going away of so
many of all sorts could not be without sufficient cause p. 231 7. Nor from a
sudden and panick fear: because it continued to the last p. 232
Sect. 2. Concerning those that stayed p. 233 1. Distribution of those that
stayed, into four sorts ibid. 2. First, The meaner People, either could not get
away, or were left in charge with the Concerns of those that went ibid. 3.
Secondly, The Gentlemen dreaded to beg or starve in England ibid. 4. Were
willing to secure what they had, if they could p. 234 5. Were desirous to
Protect their poor Dependants ibid. 6. Were useful in interceding for, and
relieving many Distressed p. 235 7. In Counselling and advising inferior
Protestants ibid. 8. Thirdly, Those that had Employments; their stay of great
importance in preserving Records, etc. p. 236 9. Not safe for them to decline
Acting till they were forced p. 237 10. In many Cases they were very beneficial
to their Fellow Protestants ibid. 11. The few that did otherwise ought to
suffer ibid. 12. Fourthly, The Clergy need no Apology for staying. Their
Serviceableness in several instances p. 238

Conclusion.
1. DIsclaiming Prejudice and Partiality. p. 239 2. It were to be wished that
Commissions might issue to enquire into the Damages of Protestants ibid. 3. The
Irish may blame themselves for what they shall suffer in Consequence of these
Troubles ibid.
Index of the Appendix.
THE Act of Attainder in Ireland at large p. 241 The Persuasions and
Suggestions the Irish Catholics make to his Majesty: supposed to be drawn up
by Talbot, Titular Archbishop of Dublin, and found in Colonel Talbot's House
July 1. 1671. p. 298 A Copy of a Letter of the Irish Clergy to King James in
favor of the Earl of Tirconnell, found amongst Bishop Tirrell's. Papers in
Dublin p. 301 The Copy of a Letter sent the King August 14. 1686. found in
Bishop Tirrel's, but imperfect p. 303 Lord Clarendon's Speech in Council, on
his leaving the Government of Ireland. p. 310 A General Abstract of the Gross
Produce of his Majesty's Revenue in Ireland in the three first years of the
Management, beginning at Christmas 1682. and ended Christmas 1685. p. 312
Sheriffs for the year 1687. p. 313 Lord Lieutenants, and Debuty Lieutenants of
Counties p. 324 Privy Counselors appointed by Letters from King James, dated
February 28. 1684. and such as were sworn since by particular Letters p. 333
The Civil List of Officers, and the times of their entering on their Offices p.
334 An account of the General and Field Officers of King James's Army out of
the Muster Rolls p. 341 A Copy of the Letter dispersed about the Massacre said
to be designed on December 9. 1688. p. 345 Lord Mountjoy's Circular Letter on
his going to France p. 346 Judge Keating's Letter to Sir John Temple, December
29. 1688. p. 347 Proposals humbly offered to the Earl of Tyrconnell, Lord
Deputy, by the Bishop Mead, about the intended search for Arms p. 353 An
account of the Conditions made in the Field, between the High Sheriff of
Gallway, and the Prisoners afterward condemned p. 356 A Copy of a Letter from
Bishop Maloony to Bishop Tyrrell, the Original found amongst Bishop Tyrrell's
Papers, March 8. 1689. p. 360 Presentment of the Grand Jury of Tipperary
against Protestants p. 365 A List of all the Men of Note that came with King
James out of France, or that followed him after; so far as could be Collected
p. 366 A List of the Lords that sat in the pretended Parliament at Dublin,
held May 7. 1689. p. 369 The names of the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses
returned to the Parliament, beginning May 7. 1689. p. 370 An Address to King
James in behalf of Purchasers under the Act of Settlement, by Judge Keating p.
377 The Lord Bishop of Meath's Speech in Parliament, June 4. 1689. p. 389
Copies of the Orders for giving Possessions p. 388 Albaville's Instructions to
the Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer p. 392 A Petition of the Minister of
Wexford for his Church, and the Order thereupon p. 395 Mr. Proud, Minister of
Trim, his account of the remarkable Accident that happened upon Plundering the
Church of Trim p. 397 General Rosen's Order to bring the Protestants before
Derry p. 399 Advertisement, as it was published by Mr. Yalden in his weakly
Abhorrence, concerning Dr. King and Dr. Foy p. 404 Colonel Lutterell's Order
for numbering Protestants p. 406 Colonel Lutterell's Order forbidding above
five Protestants to meet any where. p. 407
THE STATE OF THE Protestants of Ireland Under the late King James's
Government; IN WHICH Their Carriage toward him is justified, and the absolute
Necessity of their endeavoring to be freed from his Government, and of
submitting to their present Majesty's is demonstrated.
INTRODUCTION. Containing an Explication of the Doctrine of Passive Obedience,
and stating the true Notion and Latitude of it.
1. IT is granted by some of the highest assertors of Passive Obedience, that
if a King design to root out a people, or destroy one main part of his Subjects
in favor of another whom he loves better, that they may prevent it even by
opposing him with force; and that he is to be judged in such a case to have
Abdicated the Government of those whom he designs to destroy contrary to
Justice and the Laws. This is Grotius's Opinion in his Book De jure Ait idem
Barclaius amitti regnum si Rex vere hostili animo in totius populi exitium
feratur; quod concedo: confistere enim simul non possunt voluntas imparandi and
voluntas perdendi: quare qui se hostem populi totius prositetur, is eo ipso
abdicat regnum: Sed vix videtur id accidere posse in rege mentis compote, qui
uni populo imperet: quod si pluribus populis imperet, accidere potest ut unius
populi in gratiam alterum vult preditum.
Belli and Pacis, lib. 1. cap. 4. 11. where, citing Barclay, he says, If a King
be carried with a malicious design to the destruction of a whole Nation, he
loses his Kingdom, which I grant, since a will to Govern and to Destroy cannot
consist together, therefore he who professes himself an Enemy to a whole
People, does in that very act Abdicate his Kingdom: But it seems hardly
possible that this should enter into the heart of a King who is not mad, if he
govern only one people: but if he govern many, it may happen that in favor of
one people he may desire the other were destroyed.

Doctor Hammond asserts Passive Obedience as high as any, yet he approves this
passage of Grotius, and of Barclay, in his vindication of Christ's reprehending
S. Peter, from the exceptions of Mr. Marshall (p. 327. of his first Volume)
Grotius, says he, mentions some cases wherein a King may be resisted. As in
case a King shall Abdicate his Kingdom, and manifestly relinquish his Power;
then he turns private man, and may be dealt with as any other such. And some
other the like.

2. And it is observable that generally in all Books and Sermons concerning
Obedience to Governors, where this case is put, suppose a King endeavor to
destroy his people, there are only two answers given to it, one is that his
Officers and Ministers ought not to obey him; if they do the Law will punish
them. The other is, that this case ought not to be put; that we ought not to
suppose that any King will designedly endeavor to destroy his people; nay the
Author of Jovian will not allow us to suppose that any King will attempt in
England to Govern altogether by Arbitrary Power and the Sword. For says he
Chap. 12. p. 272. To suppose this, is plainly to suppose the utmost
impossibility, and p. 273. If a King should shut up the Courts, obstruct or
pervert Justice, he allows that all his good Subjects, and all the bad too that
tendered their own safety would desert him, and Chap. 6. p. 152. He says he
should be tempted to pray for the destruction of such a Prince, as the only
means of delivering the Church. Falkner in his Christian Loyalty, (B. 2. Chap.
5. N. 19, 20) tells us, But if ever any such strange case as is supposed should
really happen, I confess it would have its great difficulties. He brings in
Grotius, De jure. Belli and Pacis, lib. 1. cap. 4. N. 7. And Bishop Bilsons,
Christian Subjection, Part 3. p. 519. edit. 1585. as allowing it, and seems to
allow their judgment in the case: but then tells us that the case
abovementioned ought not at all to be supposed, or taken into consideration.
All which plainly grants that if a King do in earnest design the destruction of
his Subjects, and get Ministers and Officers to concur with him in it, who are
ready to execute his wicked intentions, and against whom the Law yields no
Protection, that in such a case the Subjects may desert their Prince, decline
his Government and Service, and seek Protection where they can find it.

3. And indeed whoever considers the Discourses that have been written
concerning Non-Resistance, will find that the reasons given for it, either from
the nature of the Thing or Scripture, reach only tolerable evils, and prove
that a man ought to be patient under pressures laid on him by his Governor when
the mischief is not Universal; or if it be Universal, where it is yet
tolerable, and not so mischievous in the consequence as a Civil-War; and I am
apt to believe were meant no otherwise by the Authors. Our Homilies press with
great force the inconveniences of such a War, and the Author of Jovian
designed his 11. Chap: to show that Resistance would be a greater mischief than
Passive Obedience; and tells us in the body of the Chapter that the
inconvenience of Resisting the Sovereign would be of ten times worse
consequence than it. Which in the general is true, as it relates to private
injuries or the ordinary Maladministration of Government; but if it be
applied to the case of a Governor who designs the destruction of the Laws,
Lives and Liberties of his People, and has gotten Ministers* to execute his
intention; it is a manifest mistake and is confuted by Examples and Experience
in all Ages. If we look back into History we shall find the best, the happiest
most prosperous People, most jealous of their Liberty; and while they continued
firm in their resolution of maintaining it against the encroachment of their
Governors even with the hazard of their lives, they have continued great and
happy; but no sooner did they degenerate from this Zeal, but they became
contemptible and dwindled into nothing: and at this day let us look into the
whole world, and we shall find every Nation happy and thriving at home, and
easy to their Neighbors abroad, according as they have preserved themselves
from slavery; whereas all Countries under unlimitted Monarchies, decay in their
strength and improvements; and though they may flourish for a little time by
the ruin of their lesser Neighbors, yet they at last unpeople their own
Countries, and seem to be permitted by God to come to that exorbitant power,
for their own ruin, and for a plague to mankind. And indeed the greatest
mischief of a Civil-War is the danger of subjecting the State to the absolute
power of some potent General; as it happened in Rome, Florence, and in England
in the late Civil-War: for to lose even half the Subjects in a War is more
tolerable than the loss of Liberty; since if Liberty and good Laws be
preserved, an Age or two will repair the loss of Subjects and Improvements
though they be ever so great: but if Liberty be lost it is never to be
retrieved but brings certain and infallible destruction; as it did to Rome, and
has brought, in a great measure, to Florence, and will to England, if ever the
Prerogative do swallow up the Liberties and Privileges of the Subjects. So far
it is from truth that the allowing of Resistance in some cases of extremity has
greater inconveniences than absolute Subjection. The Scriptures do indeed
command Obedience without expressing any exception; but cases of extreme
necessity may as reasonably be presumed to be excepted here, as in the command
for observation of the Sabbath; which is as positive as any Command for
Obedience to Governors: Thou shall do no manner of work says the Commandment;
and yet it is acknowledged by all to contain a tacit exception for Works of
necessity and Charity; and whoever will consider the Commands for Obedience to
Governors, will find room in them for as reasonable an exception from that
Obedience, in cases of necessity, as for servile works on the Sabbath day; (of
which our Savior himself approves:) it being as true that Governors were*
made for their Kingdoms, as the Sabbath for Man.

4. If then in some cases the mischiefs of tamely submitting to the tyranny and
usurpation of a Governor, may be worse and have more dangerous and mischievous
consequences to the Commonwealth, than a War; I suppose it ought to be
granted, that where this necessity is certain and apparent, people may lawfully
resist and defend themselves even by a War, as being the lesser evil: and then
there needs no more to justify the Protestants of Ireland, for their deserting
King James and accepting their Majesty's protection, than to show

I. That it is lawful for one Prince or State to interpose between another
Prince and his Subjects who uses them cruelly or endeavors to enslave or
destroy them; and to rescue them from his hands even by a War, if other means
prove ineffectual: and that it is lawful for the Subjects to accept of such
interposition and protection, if they can find no better way to preserve
themselves. II. That King James designed to destroy and utterly ruin the
Protestant Religion, the Liberty and Property of the Subjects in general, the
English Interest in Ireland in particular, and alter the very Frame and
Constitution of the Government. III. That he not only designed but attempted it
with great success, and made a considerable progress in it. IV. That there
remained no other prospect or human possibility of avoiding this slavery and
destruction designed against the Kingdom and Protestants of Ireland, but by
accepting of the Protection and submitting to the Government of their present
Majesty's.
If I make these particulars manifest beyond contradiction, and if the very
Consciences of Roman Catholics cannot but own them to be true, I do not see
how they can condemn us for what we have done; or what else they could have
expected from us; except they would have had us held up our Throats till they
cut them; which no man had reason to expect from a whole body of people, and
they least of all, who designed to be actors in it.

CHAP. I. Showing, that it is lawful for one Prince to interpose between
another Prince and his Subjects when he uses them cruelly, or endeavors to
enslave or destroy them.
1. THIS Assertion has been made so clear in several Discourses of late, that I
shall not need insist much on it. A few Arguments will be sufficient for this
place.

2. First therefore it may be lawful for one Prince to interpose between
another Prince and his Subjects, because he may have an Interest in that People
and Government, to defend which Interest he may lawfully concern himself, and
prevent their Ruin by a War. Such an Interest is Consanguinity, Community of
Religion, but more especially a Prospect of Succession in the Government; for
in that Case, if the People be destroyed or weakened, the Inheritance is the
worse, and he is injured in his hopes which often are very valuable. The
present Possessor, who is only an Usufructuary or Tenant for Life, by
destroying the Inheritance gives a just provocation to him who is in Reversion,
to cross his design by opposing him by all means that are in his power; and
this Argument is the stronger, if there be just reason to suspect that there
are any unlawful means used to defeat him of his Succession; which alone were
sufficient to justify their present Majesty's Interposition between the late
King and his Subjects.

3. But secondly, the same may be lawful, if the Destruction of a People by
their Prince, be only a step and degree to the destruction of a Neighboring
People. In that Case there is all the Reason in the World, that the Prince and
People so threatened, should prevent their own Ruin, by timely interposing in
behalf of their Neighbors, and by forcing their King to desist from his
Injustice and Violence against his own Subjects, tho it cost a War to compass
it, if there appear no other means to do it. And this is not only Charity to
them, but a point of Prudence which every Prince ows to himself. Now if we
consider the State of Europe at that time, the growing Power of France, and how
much the late King was in the French Interests, it will clearly appear, that
the Measures he took with his Subjects must have been fatal to all Europe,
especially to the Protestant Interest, which he almost openly declared that he
designed to destroy: and therefore it concerned all Europe, more especially
Holland, who lay nearer to Destruction, to interpose in time, and nip these
Designs in the beginning; which they and all Europe saw would have ended in
their Destruction, as soon as the Ruin of the Protestants in England and
Ireland was accomplished: and the present Confederacy shows this to be the
general Sense of all the States and Princes in Europe, as well of the Roman
Catholics, as of the Protestants, the Pope himself not excepted: so that this
which has been done to King James, is not to be looked on as the single act of
their present Majesty's, or of the People of England, but of all Europe, as the
only means to oppose the intolerable Encroachments or the French King and his
Faction.

4. Thirdly, the same is lawful by the common Rights of Humanity and Charity
which are due to the distressed: If I see a Man about to kill or destroy
another, tho I have no authority over either, or concern with them, yet
Humanity obliges me to succor and rescue the oppressed; and tho it be a Son
that is thus wronged by his Father, yet while the Father proceeds with Cruelty
and apparent Injustice, it alters not the Case, or makes it any thing more
unlawful for me to afford relief, or for him to desire and accept it, tho the
Father should take it so ill as to engage me in a quarrel to the loss of his
life. Much more is it lawful for Princes to interpose with a Neighbor-Prince,
when they see him cruelly and injustly oppress his Subjects; and there is much
more reason for those Subjects to desire and accept of the kind Offers of such
a Deliverer, than for a Son to accept it against his Father.

5. Fourthly, God seems purposely to have divided the World into several
Principalities and Dominions, and balanced them a mong themselves, that there
might be a Refuge for the oppressed and afflicted; and that if one King should
turn Tyrant, or endeavor to destroy his People, the others might interpose and
stop his Hands; and that the fear of being deserted by his Subjects in such a
Quarrel, might oblige every one to preserve their Love and Affection by Justice
and good Government. I have reason to believe, that the Primitive Church, and
especially S. Cyprian, was of this Idcirco enim, frater carissime, copiosum
corpus est Sacerdotum, concordiae mutuae glutino atque unitatis vinculo
copulatum; ut siquis e^ collegio nostro Haeresim facere and gregem Christi
lacerare and vastare tentaverit, subveniant caeteri, and quasi pastores utiles
and misericordes, qui oves dominicas in gregem colligant Cypri, Ep. 67. Pamelii.
opinion, for they give this Reason why the Church was not trusted to one, but
to many Bishops; Says S. Cyprian, Therefore the Body of Bishops is numerous,
that if one be guilty of Heresy, and dissipate the Flock, the rest may
interpose, and* rescue them out of his Hands. And sure the Argument is as
strong for the number of Temporal as of Spiritual Governors, and the Necessity
and Justice of their interposing with their Neighbor Princes, when they attempt
the Destruction of their People, is as great, as of a Bishops being chastised
and restrained by his Fellow Bishops, when he attempts to introduce Heresy.

6. Fifthly, This is agreeable to the Opinion of Christian Civilians and
Casuists, for which I desire the Reader may consult Grotius de Jure, etc. lib.
2. cap. 25. n. 8. where he tells us, That if it were granted, that Subjects
might not take Arms lawfully, even in the extremest necessity (which yet, says
he, I see is doubted by those who professedly defend the Power of Kings) it
would not follow from thence but others might take Arms in their behalf. This
he proves from Reason and Authority; and answers the Arguments brought against
it. See more to the same purpose, lib. 2. cap. 20. S. 40. where he tells us,
That it is so much more honorable to avenge the Injuries done to another than
to our selves, by how much there is less danger, that the sense of another
pain* should make us exceed in exacting such Revenge, than of our own, or bias
our Judgment.

7. Sixthly, The same appears to be lawful from the Practice of Christian
Princes who are celebrated in Histories for doing it; this was the Case of
Constantine the Great, and the Cause of his Quarrel to Maxentius, whom for his
Tyranny over the Romans, Constantine invaded, and was received as their
Deliverer, when he had slain him. The Cause of his invading Licinius his
Brother in Law, was of the like nature, against whom he commenced a War for his
persecuting the Christians; and after he had overcome him, he was received by
the Christians in Licinius's room, and celebrated by the Church and Historians
of that time, as a most holy and generous Champion in the Cause of Christ. When
the King of Persia persecuted the Christians, the same Prince threatened him
with a War, in case he did not desist; and no doubt but he would have been as
good as his word, if the Persian King had not complied. We may observe the same
to have been done in the Cause of the Orthodox against the Arrians, by
Constantine the Younger, Son of Constantine the Great; who threatened his elder
Brother Constantius with a War, if he did Socrates, lib. 2. c. 22.
not desist from persecuting the Catholic Bishops, and restore Athanasius to
his Bishopric of Alexandria: that great and holy Man accepted of this
Mediation, and was restored by it; which he would not have done, if he had
judged it unlawful. The same was practiced by King Pepin and Charles the Great
against the Lombards; and by all the Princes of Europe in favor of the
Christians oppressed by the Turks in the holy War. Queen Elizabeth did the same
for Holland: King James for the Prince Palatine: and King Charles the First for
Rochel; and Bishop Laud, who certainly understood the Principles of our Church,
encouraged both: and it is one of the greatest Blemishes of the Reign of King
Charles the Second, that he suffered the French King to proceed so far in
destroying his Protestant Subjects, without interposing in their behalf; which
if he had effectually done, he had either prevented it, or got an opportunity
of rendering his Reign glorious, and his Kingdom fa^e, by a War, which would in
all probability have humbled that Monarch to the advantage of all Europe.

8. I know nothing that can be objected against this, except it be the peculiar
Obligation that lies on us from the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance: which
(tho it should be allowed lawful for a Foreign Prince to interpose) would yet
make it necessary for us to fight for our own Prince. But to this I answer; 1.
That those Oaths were made by us to the King, as Supreme Governor of these
Kingdoms, and while he continued such, they did oblige us, but by endeavoring
to destroy us, he (as Grotius observes) in that very Act abdicated the
Government; since an intention of Governing cannot consist with an intention of
Destroying; and therefore in all equity we are absolved from Oaths made to him
as Governor.

That this may not seem a new Doctrine, I would have the Reader observe, that I
only transcribe the Learned Falkner in his Christian Loyalty, l. 1. c. 5. s. 2.
n. 19. Such Attempts, says he, of ruining, do ipso facto include a disclaiming
the governing those Persos as Subjects, and consequently of being their Prince
or King: and then the Expression of our public Declaration and Acknowledgment
would still be secured, that it is not lawful upon any pretense whatsoever to
take Arms against the King.

9. But Secondly, No Oath of Allegiance does oblige any Subject to assist his
Prince in an ill Cause. If therefore a King should, against the Rules of
Justice, attempt to destroy a Neighbor Nation, his Subjects, who were convinced
of this, ought not to fight for him in such a War; and if they ought not to
assist him to oppress Foreigners, much less is it lawful for them to assist him
to destroy themselves, or to fight against a Prince who comes to rescue them
from Destruction intended against them; and if no Protestant Subject could
lawfully fight for King James in his Quarrel against their present Majesty's,
it is manifest that he himself had thereby voided that Branch of the Oath of
Allegiance, of fighting for him, by making the matter of it unlawful; he having
brought the Nation into such a Condition, that at the same time they defended
his Person, they must enable him to accomplish his destructive Designs against
them; which no Casuist will say they were obliged to do: They therefore that
urge us with the Obligation of the Oaths of Allegiance, ought either to make it
appear, that it was lawful for us to fight for him in an ill Cause, or else
that it was not an ill Cause to help him to destroy his People. Or, Thirdly,
That he had no such Design against us: none of which I have yet seen attempted
in any Paper that has appeared in his Defense.

10. But Thirdly, As to us particularly in Ireland, his late Majesty King James
and his Parliament here, by a formal Act, did repeal and make void all former
Acts that required the tendering or taking those Oaths; and left not one legal
standing Oath in force, whereby we or any other Subjects, besides Soldiers,
were obliged to profess Subjection to Acts of the late pretended Irish
Parliament. C. 3.
him; therefore those Oaths being repealed and voided by the King's own express
Act, how could he expect that we should look upon our selves to be bound or
obliged by them? And indeed we must conclude from his Majesty's consenting to
repeal them, either that he designed to release us from the peculiar Obligation
arising from them, as too strict, or else that he did not design to depend on
our Oaths for our Loyalty, and therefore laid them aside, as of no force to
oblige us; either of which must proceed from an intention to destroy the
ancient Government with which he was entrusted; and can signify nothing less
than that he did not intend to rule us, as his Predecessors did, or to depend
on those Obligations of Subjection which they judged proper for the Subjects of
these Kingdoms to give their King; and that as he did not intend to keep his
Coronation Oath to us, so he did not value our Oath of Allegiance to him,
having left none that we know of in this Kingdom which any Law obliges us to
take.

CHAP. II. King James designed to destroy the Protestant Religion, the Liberty
and Property of his Subjects in general, the English Interest in particular,
and so alter the very Frame and Constitution of the Government.
SECT. I. Showing the Possibility of a Kings designing the Destruction of his
Subjects.
1. I Have in the former Chapter showed, that it is lawful for a Prince to
interpose between another Prince and his Subjects, if he attempt to destroy
them; I promised in the second place to show, that the late King designed and
endeavored to destroy, and utterly ruin the Protestant Religion and English
Interest in Ireland, and to alter the very Frame and Constitution of the
Government. This I look on as the most material point of our Apology, and to
need the most clear and full proof: for Jealousies and Fears in such a Case
ought not to pass for Arguments, or be brought into competition with a certain
and plain Duty, that is, with Obedience to lawful Governors. The Arguments
therefore brought by Subjects to prove their Governors Design to destroy them
in those Interests, to preserve which is the only Reason of Men's desiring or
submitting to Government; ought to be so plain and evident, that the Conscience
of Mankind cannot but see and be convinced of their Truth; especially the
generality of the Subjects themselves ought to be fully satisfied and acquiesce
in them.

2. I know it is commonly objected, Who shall be Judge? And for this Reason
alone some conclude it can never be lawful to make any opposition against a
Governor, or to side with a Deliverer that comes only to rescue miserable
Subjects; but I answer, there are some Cases so plain, that they need no Judge
at all: every Man must be left to judge for himself; and for his Integrity he
must be answerable to God and his own Conscience. Matters of Fact are often of
this Nature, and I take this to be one of them; for either the People must be
left to judge of the Designs of their Governor by what they see and feel from
him, or else they must be obliged to a blind and absolute Submission, without
employing their understanding in the case. And I dare appeal to all the World,
whether it be safer to leave it to the Judgments and Consciences of a whole
Kingdom to determine concerning the Designs of their Governor, or to leave it
to the Will and Conscience of the King, whether he will destroy them. One of
these is unavoidable; and I am assured it is less probable, that the Generality
of a Kingdom will concur in a Mistake of this Nature, and less mischievous if
they should mistake, than that a King by Weakness, wicked Counselors, or false
Principles, should design to make his People Slaves, subvert the ancient
Government, or destroy one part of his People, whom he hates, in favor of
another.

3. That a Prince may design to destroy his Subjects (tho the Asserters of
Absolute Passive Obedience would make it an incredible Thing) is so far from
being impossible, that it is very common, of which there are so many Examples,
both ancient and modern, that it is a wonder, that Men, who know any thing of
History, should overlook them. Nero, Caligula, Domitian, Maximinus,
Heliogabalus, Commodus, not only endeavored, but professed it; and some of
them were mightily concerned, that it was not in their power to accomplish it.
No longer ago than the time of Philip the Second of Spain, we have an Example
of a Christian King no better than those Heathens. Whoever reads the Story of
his dealing with the Low Countries, must confess, that he designed the utter
Destruction of the Laws and Liberties of those People; and that in particular
he was resolved, that not one Protestant should be left alive amongst them. The
same* has been designed and effected in a great measure by the present French
King against his Protestant Subjects, and he must have a great share either of
Impudence or Stupidity, that can deny this Prince to have designed and
purposely contrived that destruction; and by the same Rule that a Man can be so
wicked and barbarous as to design the destruction of a third or fourth part of
his People, he may design the destruction of the greatrr part, if they will be
such Fools as to suffer him to effect it.

SECT. II. Showing from the Obligations of his Religion, that King James
designed to destroy us.
IT is easy to demonstrate that every Roman Catholic King, if he thoroughly
understand his Religion, and do in earnest believe the Principles of it, is
obliged, if he be able, to destroy his Protestant Subjects; and that nothing
can excuse him from doing it but want of power. This is Pro defensione fidei
prestant juramentum quod de terris suae jurisdictioni Subjectis, universos
haereticos ab ecclesia denotatos, bona fide pro viribus exterminare studebunt.
Conc. Later. IV. cap. 3. Council. Constantiens. Sess. 45. Bull. Mart. De
erroribus Johan. Wickleff.
plain from the third Chapter of the fourth Lateran Council, and from the
Council of Constance in the Bull that confirms it, read in the 45. Session: if
therefore a Popish King can persuade his Protestant Subjects to submit to him
whilst he does it, he is obliged by his Principles to destroy them, even when
they are the greater part and Body of his Subjects. Now King James was (as is
known to all the World) a most zealous Roman Catholic, and engaged with that
party of them, that most zealously assert and practice this Doctrine of rooting
out Heretics. He gave himself up entirely to the Conduct and guidance of
Jesuits, these were the Governors and Directors of his Conscience, and he
seemed to have no other Sentiments than such as they inspired into him. If then
these have prevailed with the French King (whom some report to be a merciful
Man in his own Nature, and certainly a mighty Zealot for his Honor) to break
his most solemn established Laws, violate his repeated Declarations and Oaths,
and in spite of all these, to persecute and destroy his Protestant Subjects: if
the same have prevailed with the Duke of Savoy to do the like, though as he is
now convinced, manifestly against his Interest, nay almost to his own
Destruction, having lost thereby his best and most resolute and useful
Subjects, who would have served him most Cordially against France, the Enemy he
ought most to dread, and which one day will swallow up his Dukedom, if his
Allies do not prevent it. If, lastly, they have prevailed with the Emperor to
involve himself in a War, that has now lasted about twenty years, and almost
lost him his Empire, rather than suffer a few Protestants to live quietly in
Hungary; Is not our late Kings being of the same Principles, and under the
Government of the same Directors of Conscience; is not his fondness of France,
and his Alliance with it, his affecting to imitate that King in every thing,
and above all his prosecuting the same, if not worse methods toward the
Protestants in Ireland, that the King of France did with the Hugonots in his*
Dominions, a clear and full proof of both Kings being in the same design, to
root out not only the Protestants of these Kingdoms, but likewise of all
Europe? and that we must all have expected the same usage our Brethren met with
in France.

Nor could our Kings Promises and Engagements* be any greater assurances to us
than those of the French King were to his Subjects. It is observable that King
James was more than ordinarily liberal in his Promises and Declarations of
favor toward Protestants. He boasted in a Declaration sent to England, and
dispersed by his Friends there, dated May 8. 1689. at Dublin, That his
Protestant Subjects, their Religion, Privileges and Properties were his
especial care since he came into Ireland. He often professed that he made no
distinction between them and Roman Catholics, and both he here, and his Party
there, did much extol his kind dealings with his Protestants in Ireland. What
those dealings truly were I shall have occasion to show: the representation of
them made in England by him and his Party was no less false than his Promises
were unsincere; it being plain he had a reserve in them all. It is a maxim, as
I take it, in Law, that if the King be deceived in his Grant, though it pass
the Great Seal, yet it is void: much more must all his verbal Promises be void
if he be deceived in them. Now if we consider who were the Directors of the
Kings Conscience, we ought not to wonder that he made no great scruple to evade
them: Doctor Cartwright, one of his Instruments, gives us a right notion of
King James's Promises in his Sermon at Rippon* where in effect he tells us that
the Kings Promises are Donatives, and ought not to be too strictly examined or
urged, and that we must leave his Majesty to explain his own meaning in them;
this Gloss pleased King James so well that he rewarded the Author with the
Bishopric of Chester, though very unfit for that Character; and showed in all
his actions that he meant to proceed accordingly: and the humor run through
the whole party; whenever they were at a pinch, and under a necessity of
serving themselves by the assistance or credulity of Protestants, they promised
them fair, and stuck at no terms with them; but when their turn was served,
they would not allow us to mention their promise, much less to challenge the
performance.

2. It plainly appeared that it was not in King James's power if he had been
disposed himself, to perform his promises to us. The Priests told us that they
would have our Churches, and our Tyths, and that the King had nothing to do
with them, and they were as good as their words; nor could his Majesty upon
trial hinder them* One Mr. Moore preached before the King in Christ's Church in
the beginning of the year 1690. his Sermon gave great offense: he told his
Majesty that he did not do justice to the Church and Churchmen; and amongst
other things said that Kings ought to consult Clergymen in their temporal
affairs, the Clergy having a temporal as well as a spiritual right in the
Kingdom; but Kings had nothing to do with the managing of spiritual affairs,
but were to obey the Orders of the Church. It is true King James highly
resented this, and the Preacher was banished, or voluntarily withdrew from
Court; but in this he spoke the general sense of the Clergy, indeed of the
Roman Church, to which the King had given himself up, and must be forced to
submit to it at last. The Kings Promises therefore or his Laws, could signify
nothing toward the securing us, except he could get the Roman Church to join
in them, and become a party to them; for whilst the Governors of that Church
challenge the whole management of spiritual things, and King James owned their
power so* far that he consented to abolish the Oath of Supremacy that denies
it, for him to promise safety and liberty to Heretics, and make Laws about the
worship of God, and Liberty of Conscience, is clearly according to their
Doctrine, to give away what is not his own, and dispose the rights of another
without consulting the party interessed; and according to all Casuists, such
promises are void; they that speak most favorably of the Council of Constance,
which is supposed to determine that no Faith is to be kept with Heretics, make
this Apology for the Council. The Emperor Sigismond granted, without consulting
the Council, a safe conduct to Jerome of Prague; the Council condemned him for
Heresy, and ordered him to be burnt: the Emperor interposed to justify his
safe conduct, but the Council answered that he was not obliged to make it good
to the Heretic, because it was not in the Emperor to grant a safe conduct to
secure a Man against the Justice of the Council, without consulting it; this is
the most favorable representation I have met with of this matter; and even
thus it is a sufficient caution for all Protestants not to trust Kings or
Princes of the Roman Communion, in matters that relate to the Church or
Religion, without the express consent of that Church or Religion, without the
express consent of that Church; if they do, it is at their own peril, and they
cannot blame those Princes when they fail in their Promises, for they had
sufficient warning not to trust them, since they engage for a thing that
according to their own confession is not in their power, but is avowedly the
right of another.

SECT. III. The same proved from the Professions of that whole party, who were
most privy to King James's Counsels.
THE second Argument whence it appears that the King designed utterly to
destroy and ruin his Protestant Subjects in Ireland, is from the Oaths,
Professions, and Affirmations of those who were his Confidents and Instruments
used by him to bring it to pass. From the very beginning of the French
Persecution, the Papists of Ireland began to show their fondness of that
Monarch, and as their love to him commenced with that Persecution: so it
increased in proportion to his barbarity; and they could never speak of it
without Passion and Transport; but after his late Majesty came to the Crown,
they openly declared that they liked no Government but that of France: that
they would make the King as absolute here as that King was there; they affirmed
both publicly and privately with many Oaths, that they would in a short time
have our Estates and Churches; that if they suffered us to live, they would
make us hewers of wood and drawers of water: that Ireland must be a Catholic
Country whatever it cost, and as for the English, they would make them as poor
devils as when they came first into Ireland: and they assured us that this was
no rash surmise of their own, but that it was premeditated and resolved, and
that we should quickly find it by the effects: of which they were so confident
(though we could not believe them) that some of the most serious amongst them
advised their Protestant Friends in private, with all earnestness to change
their Religion; for said they you will be forced to do it at length, and if you
delay but a little time, it will be too late, and perhaps you may not be
accepted; for no Protestant must expect to enjoy any thing in this Kingdom; and
we resolve to reduce all things to the state they were in under Henry VII.
before Poinings Act.

In answer to this we told them that the Laws were on our side, and the King
had promised to Govern according to Law, and to protect our Church and
Liberties; but they laughed at our Credulity, pisht at the Laws as mere Trifles,
and unanimously declared that the Kings Promises to maintain the Government in
Church and State, were intended only for England; and were not meant to reach
us; and withal intimated, that the same would be done in England, though not so
soon; for the truth of all which I may refer my self to almost as many
Protestants as were then in Ireland, there being few but were Witnesses of such
Discourses: and the Kings Conduct toward us was such as left no room for us to
doubt but that these People knew his mind, and that all his Promises and
Declarations in our favor, were perfectly coppied from the French Kings
Declarations to preserve the Edict of Nants, and of as little Sincerity; and
that notwithstanding these he had as fully determined our ruin as that King had
resolved the voiding the Edict of Nants, when he made his solemn Declarations
to the contrary.

SECT. IV. The same destructive designs against his Subjects, proved from the
qualifications of the Officers employed by King James.
1. THIS destructive design appears in the third place, from the persons he
Employed in all Offices of Trust or Power. It is well known to the World, and
to many thousands yet alive, that in the year 1641. there was a most bloody
Massacre committed in this Kingdom on the Protestants, by their Neighbors the
Papists; in which some hundred thousands perished; and that not one Protestant
whom they spared, escaped without being robbed and plundered of all he had, if
not stripped and turned out naked to the extremities of Cold and a desolate
Country: and to such a degree of madness they proceeded, that they destroyed
the Houses, Buildings, Churches and Improvements of the Kingdom, out of their
malice and inveteracy to the Protestants, the Founders of them: but these
Barbarians at last were by the Protestants subdued, and brought to submit to
mercy: after which Conquest the Conquerors in the year 1660. joined (indeed
were more forward than the People of England) in bringing home King Charles II.
and generously gave up themselves, together with the Kingdom of Ireland without
Articles or Conditions, into his hands. The King in recompense of so signal a
Service, and to reprise the Conquerors for their Blood, Treasure, and Losses,
gave them back a part of what they had given him; but withal restored the
Conquered, under certain qualifications, to another part of the forfeited
Lands; who though restored by the Kings mere bounty, yet retained in them, the
same Principles of Popery that at first stirred them up to Rebellion, and to
Massacre their fellow Subjects: and having besides this, their old hatred to
the English new edged and heated by seeing the Conquerors possessed of the
Estates which they themselves by their Rebellion and Cruelty had lost; they
from time to time let us see their hopes and wishes of Revenge; to which the
favor they found at the English Court under the shelter of the late Queen
Mother, and the prospect of the Duke of Yorks's coming to the Crown, gave
foundation and encouragement. Neither could they hide their resentments so as
to prevent a just fear and jealousy of them in the Protestants who had so
lately, and in so signal a manner, suffered by them in all their dearest
Interests: yet these were the persons whom King James chose for his Ministers
and Officers, with whom he resolved to trust the Employments, the strong Holds,
the Arms, and Justice of the Nation: a thing so extravagant, that we challenge
any one to show a parallel case in any History. No body would ever have taken
the Arms and Courts of Justice out of the Conquerors hands, and put them into
the hands of the Conquered, exasperated by the loss of their Honors, Liberties
and Estates, except he had a mind they should revenge themselves, and recover
all that they had lost before: and they had been manifestly wanting to their
own Interest, if they had slipped this opportunity. If they hated us so much in
1641, that without provocation, and whilst in possession of the^ Estates, they
rose as one Man, and attempted to destroy us; if they were so set on it, that
they ventured to do it without Arms, Discipline, or Authority on their side,
and where the hazard was so great, that it was ten to one if they succeeded,
what could we expect they should do now, when provoked to the height by the
loss of their Estates, when Armed, Disciplined, and entrusted with all the
places of Strength, Power, and Profit in the Kingdom? This alone is a
Demonstration that the King who thus put us in the power of our inveterate and
exasperated Enemies, either was extremely mistaken in his Measures, or designed
our destruction: I am sure we must have been destroyed if God had not prevented
it almost by a Miracle.

2. It is a Maxim in our Law that the King can do no wrong; because he
executes nothing in his own person, but has Officers appointed by Law to
excute his Commands, who are obliged not to obey him if he command any thing
that is illegal: If any Officer obey him in such unlawful Commands it is at his
own peril, and he is accountable for it; the Kings Command being no excuse or
protection to any Man for his doing an illegal thing. Whilst therefore the King
Employs only persons amenable to the Laws, that have a value for their Honor,
for the Liberty of their Country, and the Public Good, and have Estates to
answer for what wrong they do to the Subjects in executing their Offices, there
is no great danger of his doing much harm to his People, though his intentions
were ever so mischievous against them; it being the great security of the
Subjects, and restraint on the Officers of the King, that they cannot do any
wrong, but the injured person has his remedy against them by Law.

3. This I remember is all the Humane security Doctor Hicks in his Jovian
allows us to preserve our Liberties, etc. against a tyrannous King. And he
supposes it so effectual a bar to all attempts of this Nature, that he
pronounces it impossible for our King to turn Tyrant. But the event has
sufficiently confuted his surmise, and shown not only the possibility, but the
actual performance of what he supposes impossible. for King James made it his
business to find out and actually pitched on a Set of Officers and Instruments,
that (as he expresses it in one of his Declarations) would Declaration for
Liberty of Conscience in Scotland.
obey him without reserve: against whom the Current of the Law was stopped, and
who were in no condition to make amends for the mischiefs they did; all which
will appear if I make out, 1. That they were Men of little or no Fortunes. 2.
Unable and unsufficient to discharge the Offices committed to their Trust. 3.
That many of them were Men of such loose Principles and Morals, that they could
not be supposed. to stick at any wickedness which was for their Interest. 4.
That their Inclination and Genius led them to destroy the Laws, Liberty, and
Religion of the Kingdom. 5. That most of them were unqualified by Law for the
Offices into which they were placed, and therefore could not be supposed to
study the preservation of those Laws, in defiance of which they acted* Now if
it appears that these were the qualifications of most of King James's Officers
and Instruments in Ireland, I suppose it will be a further Demonstration of his
Intentions, and of what we were to expect from him.

SECT. V. I. That the Officers employed by King James were Men generally of
little or no Fortune.
1. I Suppose the true Reason why one Man is allowed to possess a greater
Estate in a Commonwealth than another, and to maintain himself by the Labor of
other People, is, that he may be at leisure to attend the public Business of
his Country; and that having such a considerable Stock in the common Bottom, he
may be the more careful to preserve it from sinking. Out of such Men therefore
of Fortune and Interest, every wise and well designing King, will supply
himself with Officers. For their Interest will help to support him, and will
procure his Commands, Obedience; and their Fortunes will secure the Subjects
from being injured by them, their Estates being Pawns to the Public for their
good Behavior, and Reprizals to those they have injured. But for this very
Reason King James generally employed Men of little or no Fortunes, and very
often the Scum and Rascality of the World. This made him so fond of the Irish,
who had lost their Estates, who depended wholly on him, and had no other
possibility of subsisting, but by espousing his Interest, and serving him
without reserve. I cannot blame them for being ready to embrace the Offer, but
it was certainly very impolitickly done, or an indication of an ill Design in
him to employ and espouse Men of such ruined and broken Fortunes. I have put
into the Appendix See Appendix.
a List of the Civil Officers, of the Colonels and Lieutenant-Collonels of his
Regiments, and of the principal persons that he brought along with him from
France, so far as I could gather them up; and it will appear upon view, that
very few of them were Men of clear Estates, and most had no pretense to any at
all. The Sheriffs and Deputy Lieutenants of Counties were generally poor and
mean people: many of them had been* Servants in the meanest condition to
Protestants; who if they injured any Body in their. Employments, had not
substance enough to answer the Charges of a Suit, much less the Damages
expected by way of Reparation.

2. After the Earl of Tyrconnel had named his Sheriffs of this stamp for the
year 1687, it will hardly be found that any Protestant recovered any Debt by
Execution. The main Reason of this was the Poverty of Sheriffs, which made Men
unwilling to trust the Execution of a Bond for twenty pounds into their Hands,
they not being responsible even for such a small Sum; as too many found to
their cost. The Mayors and other Magistrates in their new modelled
Corporations, were generally of the same sort. In Dublin they could not pick up
Men enough that had the face to appear as Burgesses; and some of those that
they named had not Money to buy themselves Gowns. I think their number was never
complete. It was yet worse in the Country Corporations; in many places they
were not able to pay the Attorney General's Fees, which stopped their new
Charters, till the calling a Parliament necessitated him to pass them gratis.
As to the inferior Officers of the Army, such as Captains, Lieutenants and
Ensigns, some hundreds of them had been Cow-herds, Horse-boys or Footmen, and
perhaps these were none of their worst Men; for by reason of their Education
amongst Protestants, they had seen and understood more than those who had lived
wild on the Mountains.

3. It Is observable, that the Men of clear Estates who followed his late
Majesty from England through France, as they were but very few, so they had but
little interest with him: of which Duke Powis was one Instance, and Lord Dover
another. Duke Powis made the Protestants believe, and perhaps he was sincere*
in it, that he was much against the Proceedings of the pretended Parliament;
and used his Interest with the King to put a stop to them, but was not able to
do it: Lord Dover was actually dismissed from all his Employments, and ready to
leave the Kingdom, some time before the Alteration happened by the Victory at
the Boyn. Now King James's Aversion to employ or trust Men of Estates and
Fortunes, and the reason of his Fondness of such Creatures as had no Being but
what he gave them, was obvious enough to us that felt it; and they themselves
did not deny it; nay, boasted of it as a great instance of his Wisdom. He knew
these could never thrive, but by making him absolute; that they would never
demur at any Command, or enquire for any other Law than his Will; that they
were out of all fear of being questioned afterward, or of having their Estates
forfeited, or Families beggared; all which are great Restraints on Men of
Estates and Honor.

4. And surely, there cannot be a fuller Demonstration of a Prince's Design to
lay aside the Laws, and to rule by force without control, than his putting out
Men of Substance, and employing Men of broken and desperate Fortunes in places
of Trust and Honor; who having nothing else to depend upon but the Prince's
pleasure, must be absolute Slaves to it, and yield a blind Obedience to all
that is given them in Commission. This is the Misery of a People when Servants
rule over them. And this was the Reason King James employed rather such than
any others. And it was impossible the Grand Segnior should have fitted himself
better with Instruments for promoting an arbitrary Government than he did.

SECT. VI. II. The Insufficiencies of the Persons employed by King James, was
of mischievous Consequence to the Kingdom.
1. THE Poverty and Meanness of the Men was not their worst Fault. It is
possible that a poor Man may be both honest and able for the greatest Trust.
But the Officers employed by King James were such, that tho they had been very
honest, and willing to do Justice, they yet must have done much Mischief by
their Unskilfulness, and Insufficiency for the Offices with which he entrusted
them. It was both King James's Misfortune, and his Subjects, that he employed
very few of sober Sense and Experience about him; whether it was that he could
not get Men of Sense to go through with him, in all things that he would have
had done, or whether it proceeded from the Servility observable in dull People,
whereby they flatter and gain on Princes. Or lastly from a Humor incident to
great Men, which makes them unwilling to have Servants able to pry into their
Designs. But however it was, it was remarkable in King James, that dull heavy
Men kept his Favor longer, and more steadily, than Men of Sense and Parts; and
he generallly chose out the most unfit and most incapable for Preferments. It
is plain, that even in England he designed the Army should be supplied with
Irish; and this Project went farther than the Army; he was filling the
Buroughs and Corporations with them also; and no Body knew where the humor
would have stopped. Now if there had been nothing else, their being kept out of
all Employments and Trusts by the Laws for many years past, must have
incapacitated them (and all Roman Catholics) for managing the Affairs of the
Kingdom to advantage; they neither had fit Education, nor had they applied
their minds to the Management of such Affairs: they were absolute Strangers to
every thing that concerned the public; and then no wonder that they went
aukwardly and untowardly about Business. How was it conceivable, that they
should escape signal and mischievous Errors in the Discharge of Offices to
which they had never been bred up, and of which they never thought till they
were put to manage them? And yet this they were constrained to do without the
Aid or Assistance of any to help them, and that under the most difficult
Circumstances; for the former Officers looked on their Offices as their
Freeholds, and conceived a great Resentment against such as had turned them out
of them against Law and Justice; and therefore left them as in^^icate, and
their Successors as little Information as they could; who, according to the
Nature of ignorant Men, were too proud to ask assistance from the others, if
those had been willing to afford them instruction.

2. It is not imaginable how many Inconveniences happened on this Account;
nothing was done by any Rule or Method: the Subjects were every day oppressed,
and the Officers made themselves ridiculous by their Blunders and Mistakes;
every Body was petitioning by reason of these Grievances, and no Body knew how
to redress them. None of the new Officers understood his own Business, or how
to distinguish his Province from another Man's. The knavish part of Offices, in
putting Tricks on People, and getting Money, were all the Study of the new
employed Gentlemen. The real and substantial parts of the Offices for which
they were instituted, and designed, were little known, and less minded; nor
could it be expected to be otherwise. Could any imagine, for Example, that
Chancellor Fitton, that had lain in prison many years, and not appeared in any
Court, a Stranger to the Kingdom, to the Laws, and to the Practice and Rules of
Court, and withal a Man of a heavy and slow Understanding, should on a sudden
be able to dispatch the Business of the highest Court in the Kingdom, and
penetrate into the most intricate Causes, which are commonly determined in that
Court? He was so far from this, that he was forced to make many needless
References to the Masters, in Causes that had no difficulty in them. This was
the general way of his dispatching Causes. And then what Report could be
expected from Mr. Stafford, one of these Masters, a Popish Priest, noted and
exposed by his own party for want of Sense; and who perhaps had never been
within the Courts, till he sat down as one of the Masters of the Chancery; or
from the other Masters who were yet more ignorant and unexperienced (if
possible) than he.

3. If we take a view of the Country, we shall find their Case rather worse.
One that a few days before was no other than a Cowherd to his Protestant
Landlord, perhaps was set before him on the Bench as a Justice of the Peace;
and preferred to command as Captain in the Field, or a Deputy Lieutenant in the
County. I am assured, that some were thus preferred, without passing through
any intermediate steps, to prepare or fit themselves for the better Discharge
of those Places. The Consequence of which is easy to be imagined: every one
that is acquainted with Business and Dispatch, knows what a Torment it is to
have to do with raw and unexperienced Officers, who must be taught by him, that
comes to have his Business done, how they should go about it; and, which is
often hardest to do, he must convince them that they are mistaken, or do not
understand their own Offices, which, such Men are most unwillingly brought to
own; and yet no Busisiness can be rightly done, till they are convinced of it.
This was the condition of all the Offices in Ireland, from the King's Privy
Council and Secretaries of State, to the High Constables; which, without any
other Defect, must and did bring many Inconveniences to the Kingdom.

4. But after all, if none but Men of ordinary parts, and tolerable natural
fagacity, had been employed, tho unexperienced and uneducated, time might have
taught them, and made them at least tolerable, if not dexterous at their
Business: But the generality of those who were preferred, had such weak
Understandings, and unimprovable Capacities, that they who were superseded by
them could not reflect on it without the greatest Indignation, to see Men, not
much removed from Idiots, put into their Places and Offices, which they had
bought with their Money, and had taken considerable pains, and spent a good part
of their Lives to qualify themselves to execute; whereas those that succeeded
them, had nothing of Improvement or Education; and withal were so proud, and
lazy, and dull, that they neither would, nor could, make themselves better, by
Application or Industry, who had nothing to recommend them to the King, but
that they were Papists, and such as he believed would never scruple any Command
however illegal or absurd, so it tended to weaken or destroy Protestants, which
was the sole Qualification that recommended them.

SECT. VII. III. King James had gotten a Set of Officers fitted to destroy a
Kingdom, by reason of their loose Principles, and want of Moral Honesty.
1. THE Instruments King James used to carry on his Design, were not only very
poor and insufficient for their Places, but they were likewise Men fit to be
employed in ill Designs; and it is hardly credible how rare it was to find
amongst them a Man that had ordinary Moral Honesty. It is true, they seemed to
make Conscience of hearing Mass, and not eating Flesh on Fridays, but hardly of
any thing else. To have been always reckoned a Knave, was no Exception, or Bar
to any Man's Preferment amongst them: they declared they must make use of such.
Those that were infamous whilst the Government was in the Hands of Protestants,
for Forgeries, Perjuries, Robberies and Burglaries, were all indifferently
employed by them. That some such should be admitted into the Army, is not so
much to be wondered at; but that honest Gentlemen should be turned out to make
room for them, was intolerable; and yet here not only the Army, but even the
Courts of Justice were filled with such. One of the new Examinators of the
Chancery was formerly detected of a Forgery. Several of their Burgesses, nay,
Sheriffs, were notorious Thieves, and some burnt in the Hand. The Speech of one
of their new Justices of the Peace gave some Diversion; it was one Mr.
Stafford, for whom the Master of Chancery, his Son, had procured a Commission
of the Peace: it was soon after the Earl of Tyrconnel came over Governor; and
it fell to the new Justice's turn to give the Charge at the Quarter Sessions;
in which he set forth, as well as he could, the Happiness of the Kingdom under
the new Government; Amongst other Conveniences that we reap by it, said he, it
has rid us of Tories; for all those are taken into the King's Army. And the
Truth was, many of these, that had been indicted, outlawed, nay, condemned, got
Commissions. The famous Tories the Brannans, who had been guilty, not only of
Burglary and Robbery, but of Murder also, who were under Sentence of Death,
and had escaped it, by breaking Goal, were made, amongst the rest, Officers:
and the Earl of Tyrconnel seemed to bear a peculiar favor to these Tories, and
a spite to such as had been diligent to suppress them. There was a famous Tory
in Munster, one Power, who did abundance of Mischief, and disturbed the whole
Country: Mr. Fitz-Simons, a Gentleman of the Army, had rid the Country of him;
by which Piece of Service he deserved very well; but instead of being rewarded,
he was one of the first Protestant Officers that was cashiered. There was
another notable Tory, one Flemming, that was very troublesome and mischievous in
Leinster, some Troopers, by their diligence, surprised him, and cut him off; it
was observed, that the Earl called out those Troopers first, and cashiered
them, some considerable time before he turned out the rest of the Troop; which
every Body interpreted to be a Mark of his Displeasure for that Service* I have
heard it observed, that there were at least twenty noted Tories, Officers in
one Regiment, and very few Regiments were without some.

2. There was another sort of People had mighty favor with them; I mean
Converts to their Religion. A man may, I confess, upon just motives, or such as
seem just to him, change his Opinion and Religion, and cannot justly be
condemned of Dishonesty for so doing; but he is certainly a very dishonest Man
that dissembles or alters his Opinion, without any other visible motive besides
Gain or Preferment. Now this was the Case of many of their Officers. Several of
the Children of the Papists of the Kingdom had formerly been taken up, and bred
by Protestants, some in one station, and some in another; they commonly were
taught to read and write, and many of them by the kindness of their Masters
were preferred; some became Counselors at Law, some Attorneys, some Clerks;
others continued menial Servants and Footmen. Upon the Change of Affairs, most
of these began to despise their Benefactors or Masters, and to count themselves
better than those who had educated and taught them; and in order to get
Preferments, altered their Religion, in which their Masters, with much care,
had instructed them; and declared, that in their Hearts they had been all along
Roman Catholics. Above one hundred Footmen, on these Declarations, were
advanced to be Captains. Whereas their living so long in the profession of the
Protestant Religion, if they did not believe it, was to all honest Men an
Argument of so great Hypocrisy, that the person guilty of it (one would think)
should not have been trusted by any that valued either Truth or Honesty; but if
this Declaration was only feigned, as I am apt to believe it was in many, then
their Conversion was an effect of Covetousness, or Ambition, and an Act of H
pocrisie to be abhorred by all good Men. However, to persuade the World that
they were real, they were very severe and mischievous to Protestants in
general, especially to those that had been kind to them, whilst in an inferior
condition. And it was observable of these Converts, that they immediately on
their Reconcilement, made themselves signal by some eminently wicked Act. Thus
the Earl of Clancarty soon after his being reconciled, murdered a Butcher at
Moyallo, by ^ossing him in a Blanket. Captain Nangle after his, murdered one
Kelly in the Street. Lieutenant Mac Gennis murdered Captain Hamilton. Sir
Maurice Eustace murdered (I think) two upon his Conversion. One Warren
murdered one Wilton. Captain Waller murdered a Player, one Blacbourn. Captain
Maurice murdered a poor Piper, and was made High Sheriff of the Queens County.
Sir Gregory Birn turned, in order to carry a Suit at Law against Captain Fitz
Gerald, which he is supposed to have carried by very indirect means, as most
that heard the Trial believed, it being strongly surmised by them, that he had
suborned Witnesses, and corrupted the Sheriff to pack a Jury* Captain Callahan
was content to introduce his Conversion, by affronting the Judge at Waterford,
breaking open a House, and beating the Crier of the Court to the hazard of his
Life. In short, their Converts, both Men and Women, became infamous, by very
notorious Wickednesses. The Men by Murdering, Forgery, Perjury, Robbery,
Swearing and Cursing: and the Women by Lewdness, and prostituting themselves;
yet those of both Sexes were cherished and encouraged amongst them; and for
being Converts were in special request, and next in the way to preferment.

3. Lastly, It was remarkable amongst them all, Converts and others, that they
were very uncharitable, and void of all compassion. They turned vast numbers of
Protestants out of their Houses, and left them no other way of subsisting but
begging; and yet we rarely found, that any of them gave a Farthing to the most
necessitous Protestant Beggar: they did not look on themselves, at least, did
not act, as if they had owed Faith, Truth, Justice or Civility to any
Protestant. They affronted, abused, betrayed and imprisoned every Body that
would not be as wicked and as irreligious as themselves. They often drank
Damnation and Confusion to all Heretics, especially to the Prince and Princess
of Orange; and not content with this, if any Protestant chanced to be in
company, they would endeavor to force it on him, and abused or imprisoned him
for his refusal.

4. When they came to put in for Possessions of their ancient Estates, it was
frequently observed, that several put in for the same Estate, and pretended to
be the Sons or Descendents of the Proprietors; insomuch that four or five
Affidavits, point blank contrary to one another, have been produced in Chancery
at the same time; the Chancellor was a little at a loss what to do, till a
Protestant Lawyer told him there was a Survey taken of the Kingdom, in which
twelve Men upon their Oaths had returned who was Proprietor of each parcel of
Land in 1641. This he found to be a more certain Rule, than a thousand
Affidavits; so little value had the King's Courts, and his Popish Chancellor
for the Oaths of those persons whom King James chose to employ and cherish
instead of Protestants. The Truth is, they were People that made no distinction
between Right and Wrong, but as they served their Interest, and therefore he
chose them purposely to destroy the Liberties and Laws of the Kingdom in
general, and the Protestants in particular: and no body can deny but they were
well chosen for the Work for which he designed them, and unfit for any else.

SECT. VIII. IV. King James' Officers were of such a Genius and Inclination, as
led them to destroy the Laws, Liberties and Religion of the Kingdom.
1. WHoever will be at the pains to look back on the State of Ireland, before
it was conquered by the English, will find, that the Heads of Septs were
absolute over their Tenants; their Wills passed for Laws,, and all their
Proceedings were merely arbitrary and despotick. This was the ancient
Constitution of Ireland, and the English who came over at first, had, by their
Conversation with the Irish, learned much of their Manners: they made their
Tenants Vassals and Slaves, as much as the Irish had been to their Chiefs;
except in the English Pale (which was a Scope of Ground that reached about
twenty Miles from Dublin) and even in some Places there, the Tenures of the
Country Farmers were exactly that which the Law of England calls Villanage; the
Tenant having nothing he could properly call his own. Whatever the Landlord had
occasion for, he sent to his Tenants House, and caused it to be brought to him
without consideration or allowance; or if he pleased, he went to the Tenant's
House with his Retinue, and there staid as long as he thought fit, eating and
drinking, and using every thing the Tenant had as his own. This Practice was
called Coshering, and several Laws have been made against it.

2. The old Landlords that had not forfeited their Estates in 1641, still kept
up this way of dealing with their Tenants, tho secretly; and were so burthensom
to them by their Exactions and Cosherings, that the Tenants were miserable and
poor, and their Estates unimproved; whereas the English, and those that had
English Education, and took to their manner of Living, were content with their
Rents from their Tenants; who by that means were able to live well, grow rich,
and improve their Farms. The native Irish, who happened to fall under a
Protestant Landlord, would hardly ever after be persuaded to come under one of
his own Religion; a little Experience sufficiently showing unto him the
Difference between a Landlord who required no more than his Due, and the old
petty Tyrants, that claimed not only a Right to all his Tenant's Substance, but
likewise a power over his life.

3. But many of the old Landlords lost their Estates by Outlawries and
Attainders, for their Rebellion in the year 1641, and for their murdering the
Protestants at that time. Many of them had sold their Estates, and some had
mortgaged them for more than their value two or three times to several persons;
a Practice very common in Ireland; but it is observable, that it is the humor
of these People to count an Estate their own still, tho they have sold it on
the most valuable Considerations, or have been turned out of it by the most
regular Proceedings of Justice; so that they reckon every Estate theirs, that
either they or their Ancestors had at any time in their possession, no matter
how many years ago. And by their pretended Title and Gentility, they have such
an influence on the poor Tenants of their own Nation and Religion, who live on
those Lands, that these Tenants look on them still, tho out of possession of
their Estates, as a kind of Landlords; maintain them after a fashion in
Idleness, and entertain them in their Coshering Manner. These Vagabonds
reckoned themselves great Gentlemen, and that it would be a great Disparagement
to them to betake themselves to any Calling, Trade or Way of Industry; and
therefore either supported themselves by stealing and torying, or oppressing
the poor Farmers, and exacting some kind of Maintenance, either from their
Clans and Septs, or from those that lived on the Estates to which they
pretended. And these pretended Gentlemen, together with the numerous Coshering
Popish Clergy that lived much after the same manner, were the two greatest
Grievances of the Kingdom, and more especially hindered its Settlement and
Happiness. The Laws of England were intolerable to them both, nor could they
subsist under them.

4. As to the Popish Landlords, who yet retained their Estates, it put them out
of all patience, to find that the Bodough their Tenant (so as they call the
meaner sort of People) should have equal Justice against them, as well as
against his Fellow Churl, that a Landlord* should be called to an account for
killing or robbing his Tenant, or ravishing his Daughter, seemed to them an
unreasonable Hardship. It was insufferable to Men that had been used to no Law,
but their own Will, to be levelled with the meanest in the Administration of
Justice; and every time they were crossed by a Tenant that would not patiently
bear their Impositions, they cursed in their Hearts the Laws of England, and
called to mind the glorious Days of their Ancestors, who, with a Word of their
Mouths, could hang or ruin which of their Dependents they pleased, and had in
themselves the power of Peace and War.

5. This Humor in the Gentry of Ireland has from time to time been their Ruin,
and engaged them in frequent Rebellions, being impatient of the Restraint the
Laws of England put on their Power, tho they enjoyed their Estates: and they
still watched an opportunity to restore themselves to their petty Tyrannies,
and were ready to buy the Reftitution of them at any rate. The other sort of
Gentlemen I mentioned, as they called themselves, who were outed of their
Estates, as well as of their Power by the same Laws, hated them yet worse; and
their Clergy pushed them on with all the Arguments that ignorant Zeal or
Interest could suggest: insomuch that all sober Men as well as Protestants,
reckoned these the sworn Enemies of the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom; and
were assured, that they would stick at no conditions to destroy them, their
Interest, Inclination and Principles, all concurring to engage them to do it.

6. Now these very Men were the Officers and Instruments King James employed
and trusted, above all others. He espoused their Interest from the time that he
had thoughts of the Crown; they were his Favorites and Confidents; and to
provide for them he turned his English and Protestant Subjects, first out of
the Army, then out of their Civil Trusts and Employments, and lastly out of
their Fortunes and Estates. He knew very well, that the Tempers and Genius of
those Men were at enmity to the Laws, and fitted for that Constitution of
Slavery, under which he designed to bring the Kingdoms. He found that none were
more fawning to their Superiors than they, nor did any flatter with more
Meanness and Servility: and according to the nature of such People none are
more insolent and tyrannous to their Inferiors. And this was the reason that
they were so dear to King James, and that he preferred and trusted them rather
than his Protestant and English Subjects. The Bargain between him and them was
plainly this, restore us to our former Power, Estates and Religion, and we will
serve you as you please, in your own way. An Expression that King James and all
his Creatures often used, and were very fond of.

7. These People found, that the King's Legal Power could never restore them to
the condition at which they aimed; that the Power and Station they desired, was
absolutely contrary to the Laws in being; and that no Legal Parliament would
ever alter the Laws and Constitution of the Kingdom to gratify them. No wonder
therefore if they espoused and promoted an absolute and despotick Power in the
King, and if he and they concurred so heartily to introduce it. To do them
Justice, they made no Secret of it, but professed it publicly; and on all
occasions, and accordingly practiced it in their several Stations. They
reckoned, and called every one a Whig and Rebel, that talked of any other Law
than the King's Pleasure. They were liberal of their Curses and Imprecations on
all occasions; but they exceeded and became outrageous against any one that
durst allege, that their Proceedings were against Law: Damn your Laws, was
frequently their word, it is the Kings pleasure it should be so, we know no
reason why our King should not be as absolute as the King of France; and we
will make him so before we have done. Nay, so extravagant were many of them,
that they would swear with repeated Or ths, that all Protestants were Rebels,
because they would not be of the King's Religion. An Expression, I suppose,
they learned from the French Dragoons.

8. Some would undertake to argue the Case with such as seemed more moderate
amongst them, and put them in mind of the possibility of the Change of the
Government; and that then the Argument would be good against themselves: but
they had not patience to hear any such thing mentioned. And they generally
swore with the most bloody Oaths and bitter Imprecations, that they would never
subject themselves to any King that was not of their own Religion; and that
they would lose the last drop of their Blood, rather than part with the Sword
and Power put into their Hands, on any consideration whatsoever. These were not
the Discourses of one or two hot headed Fellows amongst them, but they
universally talked at this rate. And it was the common and encouraging Speech
of the Earl of Tyrconnel from the very beginning of his Government, and
particularly when he took leave of several Privy Counselors and Officers at
his going to wait on King James at Chester, August, 1687: I have put the Sword
into your Hands. And then in his usual Style, prayed God to damn them all, if
ever they parted with it again.

9. It Is further to be remembered, that their Predecessors were so eager and
earnest to recover this Power over their Vassals, and to establish their
Religion, that they attempted to gain their Designs by that bloody Rebellion
and Massacre in the year 1641. An Attempt no less desperate and unlikely to
succeed than wicked; and when their own Power appeared insufficient to gain
their ends, their supreme Council at Killkenny sent Commissioners with
Instructions to offer up the Kingdom and themselves to the Pope, the King of
Spain, or any other Foreign Popish Prince that would accept the Offer. This was
very well known to King James; he was at the Council Board when the original
Instructions, signed by order of the Supreme Council that then managed the
Affairs of the Roman Catholics of Ireland, were produced before King Charles
II and his Council in England, in the year 1662; empowering their Agents to
this effect: and he might very well conclude that they who were willing to
submit themselves to a Foreign Power, to be rid of the Laws of England, would
heartily join with him to destroy them.

10. Whosoever will consider Circumstances, and lay things together, will be
apt to believe what is averred by some, that King James before he declared his
Religion, had a desire and resolution to destroy the Laws and Liberties of
these Kingdoms, and make himself absolute, if ever he came to the Crown, after
the manner of France; and that the great motive of declaring himself a Roman
Catholic at first, was to make sure of that Party: there are several things
that rightly weighed will make this probable.

1. If we consider that no Party amongst us was likely to be so wicked, as to
have bought his favor by joining with him in such a design, except the Papists.

2. Amongst Papists he chose out those, and preferred them which he thought
would be most Cordial to him, and serve him most effectually in that design.
There can be no other reason given, why he should be fonder of the Irish than
the English Papists, but that he thought the one more likely to go through with
him than the other. The English Papists are as Zealous in their Religion as the
Irish, and generally more honest Men, yet the King rather chose to Cherish and
Employ the latter. The only imaginable Reason of his doing so was because the
English were not so ready to give up the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom to
the Prerogative, as the Irish; and since King James's kindness was distributed
according to the readiness he found in Men to betray their Country, rather than
according to their Zeal for their Religion, have we not reason to conclude the
first to be the true motive of his kindness rather than the latter?

3. Those Protestants, or pretended Protestants, that cordially and heartily
espoused this design, and served him effectually to oppress and ruin their
fellow Subjects, kept his favor pretty well, and were Employed by him,
notwithstanding their being reputed Protestants; a certain sign that the Reason
he discharged Protestants from their Trusts and Offices was chiefly because he
thought they would not serve him as he expressed it without reserve, or
contribute heartily to inslave themselves and their Posterity.

4. He often declared, and more especially in his Act for Liberty of Conscience
made in his Parliament in Ireland, that it was his constant Resolution that
there should be no other Test or distinction amongst his Subjects but that of
Loyalty; by which all knew that he meant an absolute submission in every thing
to his Will; for he accounted every body disloyal that disputed or demurred at
any of his Commands.

5. As soon as the Irish began to dispute his Orders, and stand on the Laws, he
took it heinously from them; and they lost much of his favor; he spoke hardly
of them and wished at any rate to be rid of them: when the House of Commons
crossed some proposal of his, he was very much out of humor and declared that all
Commons were the same, as he found by them; when they quarrelled with the Earl
of Melford, his Secretary of State, he complained that they used him basely and
unkindly, and that he never would have come amongst them if he had thought that
they would not let him choose his own Servants: when they would not suffer him
to Dispense with their Act of Attainder, or Pardon any Attained in it, with a
non obstante, he is said to have fallen into so violent a Passion that his Nose
fell a bleeding. He was very angry with some of his Council when they demurred
at his Levying twenty thousand pounds per month without Act of Parliament, and
said he could do nothing if he could not do that. From whence we see that he
reckoned all his Power nothing except he could impose Taxes as the King of
France does; and that this lay at the bottom of all his Designs. Nay it was
commonly reported by the Roman Catholics, that King James boasted and pleased
himself mightily that he had made himself Absolute, which none of his
Predecessors could do; and had a more numerous Army than any of them, and
consequently was a more glorious King. If then his chiefest design was to
oppress our Laws and Liberties, no body can doubt but he had Instruments whose
Genius and Temper inclined them to assist him, as long as they were like to go
sharers with him in the Purchase.

SECT. IX. V. The Officers employed by King James were most of them unqualified
by Law, and consequently fit Instruments to destroy the Laws.
1. MEN may live very comfortably in a Nation, and yet be excluded from the
Power or Government of it; therefore it is no injustice to exclude a certain
Rank of Men that want such Qualifications as may give the Commonwealth
confidence in them, from intermedling in the Government. Of this Nature we have
had Laws in all Countries in the World, and whatever be pretended they are very
often both just and necessary: nor is it reasonable that the King should have a
power to dispense with such; since they are often made on purpose to secure the
Commonwealth against his encroachments. Of this Nature are our Laws that
disable Papists from all Employments Civil and Military, by an Act of
Parliament made in the Reign of Henry VIII. no Man is to Execute any Employment
till he has taken the 28. Henry 8. cap. 13.
Oath of Supremacy. This is repeated and confirmed by another in the second of
Elizabeth. 2. Elizab* cap. 1.
And here it is observable how they evaded this Statute. It positively requires
that every Officer shall take and receive a Corporal Oath there set down; and
if any refused to take it then he is to forfeit whatever Office he has at the
time of the refusal, and be disabled to retain or Exercise any Office. Now to
elude this Law, the Oath was never tendered to their new Officers, and
consequently, said they, they never refused it, neither are they liable to the
Penalties of this Act. This was plainly against the design of the Statute, a
playing with the Words of it, and showed us that all Laws were insufficient to
secure us against such Jusuitical Prevaricators. By an Act made in the time of
Henry VII. it 10. Henry 7. cap. 13.
is Treason to stir up the Irish Country to War against the English: and by
several other Laws made both in England and Ireland, the Papists, especially
the Irish, are disabled to hold Places of Power or Trust: and particularly
Papists are excluded from Freedom in Corporations, by a Clause in the Act of
Settlement, on which the new Rules for Regulating Corporations, made by the
Earl of Essex, at his first coming to the Government, are founded. Now so great
was King James's Passion for these People, that he was not content to have them
about him to show them Countenance and Favor; but in defiance of so many Laws,
he would needs thrust them into the Government, and set them over Protestants,
who in making those Laws had resolved not to be Governed by them; and the Laws
themselves being designed to exclude them, we must not imagine that King James
made this bold adventure for nothing, or that he would disoblige the Body of
his People, without designing some signal advantage to himself by it: he must
have some peculiar service for these unqualified Persons to do, in which the
rest of the Nation would not assist him; and that could be nothing else but the
destruction of their Laws and Religion, for in every thing else they were
rather too ready to comply with him; but those that came into their Places of
Trust and of Profit, in defiance of the Laws, merely by his Favor, must be
engaged as deeply as he, to support the Power that preferred them, and destroy
the Laws that laid such Bars in their way to Honor and Profit. The Contest is
here between our Laws, Religion and Liberties, on the one side, and the Kings
Power on the other; and the King was sure that those to whom the Laws were
Enemies, would likewise be Enemies to the Laws, and never stick at any thing to
support the Power that made them what they were; if they should, they must
needs sink, having nothing else to support them besides it. Whoever therefore
accepted any Place or Preferment against the Laws, did thereby oblige himself
to a boundless submission to all the Kings Commands, and to Execute them
however illegal: and consequently was become a fit Instrument to Sacrifice the
Laws and Religion of the Kingdom to the will of his Sovereign. If therefore
King James designed the destruction of these, as I suppose is apparent that he
did from what has been said in this Chapter: we have no Reason to imagine that
he would not have been able to compass his design for want of assistants to
Execute it, having so many fitted to his Hand in this Kingdom.

2. And this answers that Objection which we hear from some who will not
understand our Circumstances, but tell us that we ought to have had Patience,
and let King James take his Course; for though he had destructive Designs, yet
he was but one Man, and could not Execute them against us in his own Person,
nor procure others to Execute them for him; since all Men would be afraid to
obey his illegal Commands, as long as they could not but know that they were
accountable to the Laws for every thing done against them: but it appears from
the account I have given of those Persons whom King James employed, that they
neither knew, nor feared, nor cared for the Laws. And that their business and
enmity was as great against them, as against us, being resolved to destroy both
together; which they had effectually done had not God sent us a Deliverer to
prevent it.

CHAP. III. King James not only designed, but attempted, and made a
considerable progress in our Destruction.
SECT. I. The Introduction to the proof of this head, grounded on a short view
of the State of Ireland, at the time of King James's coming to the Crown; and
of the vain assurances Protestants gave themselves of Security from the
consideration of their Merits toward him; the Repute of his good Nature, and
his own true Interest.
1. THE destruction of a People is so horrid a thing, that it is not easy to
persuade a good natured Man that such an unnatural design can enter into any
ones heart: and we our selves though almost ruined, dare hardly relate it to
others lest they should not believe us. It is certain that if the Protestants
of these Kingdoms could have believed that King James would have attempted what
he did, they would never have entered into such Feuds against their fellow
Subjects and Friends to prevent his Exclusion: but their Zeal for the Monarchy
and Succession, made them willing to overlook the danger; and they persuaded
themselves that the absurdity and difculty of the thing, would keep him if he
came to the Crown, from attempting it, notwithstanding they knew that his
Principles inclined him, and his Counselors would prompt him to it. I question
much if any thing but sad Experience would ever have opened the Eyes, or
convinced the generality of these Nations that his designs were such as we
found them in the event: and perhaps it is worth all our Sufferings, though
very heavy, to have learned (as we have done) by this Example, never to trust
Men of King James's Principles and Religion with a Power that may destroy us;
since it appears in him, that no Interest, Difficulties, or Obligations are
sufficient to hinder such from employing that Power to effect it. No Man could
be under deeper Obligations to use his Power with Moderation than King James
was; yet in the short time he possessed it, he employed it with so much
diligence and earnestness to destroy us, that he in a great measure
accomplished it; and we must thank God only, and his present Majesty's
victorious Arms, that saved us from a total and final Destruction, to which we
were so manifestly devoted. To make this appear, it will be necessary to take a
short view of the State of Ireland, at, and since King James's coming to the
Crown, and by the Alteration he introduced, it will plainly appear what he
designed. At his coming to the Crown, Ireland was in a most flourishing
Condition; Lands were every where improved, and Rents advanced to near double
what they had been in a few years before; the Kingdom abounded with Money,
Trade flourished, even to the Envy of our Neighbors; Cities, especially
Dublin, increased exceedingly; Gentlemen's Seats were built, or building, every
where, and Parks, Enclosures, and other Ornaments were carefully promoted;
insomuch that many places of the Kingdom equalled the Improvements of England.
The Papists themselves, where Rancour, Pride or Laziness did not hinder them,
lived happily, and a great many of them got considerable Estates, either by
Traffic, by the Law, or by other Arts and Industry.

2. There was a free Liberty of Conscience by connivence, tho not by the Law;
and the King's Revenue increased proportionably to the Kingdom's Lord
Clarendon's Speech at giving up the Sword to the Earl of Tirconnel, and the
Abstract of the Revenue for 1685. Appendix, N. 5. and 6.
Advance in Wealth, and was every day growing: it amounted to more than three
hundred thousand pounds per annum, a Sum sufficient to defray all the Expense
of the Crown, and to return yearly a considerable Sum into England, to which
this Nation had formerly been a constant Expense. If King James had minded
either his own Interest, or the Kingdoms, he would not have interrupted this
happy Condition. But the Protestants found, that neither this, nor the Services
of any toward him, nor his own good Nature, were Bars sufficient to secure
them from Destruction.

2. It is certainly the Interest of all Kings to govern their Subjects with
Justice and Equity; if therefore they understood or would mind their true
Interest, no King would ruin any of his Subjects: but it often happens, that
either Men are so weak that they do not understand their Interest, or else so
little at their own Command, that some foolish Passion or Humor sways them
more than all the Interest in the World: and from these proceeds all the ill
Government which has ruined so many Kingdoms. Now King James was so bent on
gaining an absolute Power over the Lives and Liberties of his Subjects, and on
introducing his Religion, that he valued no Interest when it came in
competition with those.

3. Every Body that knew King James's Interest, and the true Interest of his
Kingdoms, knew that it concerned him to keep fair with Protestants, especially
with that party who were most devoted to him, and had set the Crown on his
Head; and this had been, in the Opinion of thinking Men the most effectual way
to enlarge his Power, and introduce his Religion; but because it did not suit
with the Methods his bigoted Counselors had proposed, he took a Course
directly contrary to his Interest, and seemed to take a peculiar pleasure in
affronting and oppressing those very Men, whom in Interest he was most
concerned to cherish and support.

His Proceeding thus in England was visibly the Cause of his Ruin; he had left
himself no Friend to stand by him, when he stood in greatest need of them. Upon
his coming to Ireland the Protestants had entertained some favorable Hopes,
that he would have seen, and been convinced of his Error, and would now at last
govern himself by other measures; it was manifestly his Interest to have done
so, and nothing in probability could have allayed the Heats of England and
Scotland so much as his Justice and Kindness to the Protestants of Ireland, nor
could any thing have had so much the Appearance of an Answer to those many and
evident Arguments by which they demonstrated his destructive Designs against
those Kingdoms, as to have had it to say, that in Ireland, where it was in his
Power, he was far from doing what they surmised he intended to do in England,
or if he had ever any such intentions, it was plain he had now altered them.
These things were laid before him by some that wished well to his Affairs, and
had more Prudence than his furious and bigoted Counselors; and sometimes they
seemed to make Impressions on him, but the Priests and needy Courtiers, who had
swallowed in their Imaginations the Spoils and Estates of the Protestants of
England as well as of Ireland, could not endure to hear of this. They seemed
mightily afraid lest he should be restored to his Throne by consent of his
Protestant Subjects: For if so (said they) we know it will be on so strict
Conditions, that we shall gain but little by it, it will not be in his power to
gratify us. And not only they, but the Irish in general likewise endeavored
to make his Restitution by way of Articles or Peace impracticable and
impossible. A Design so extremely foolish, that it is strange any should be
found so sillily wicked as to promote it, or that King James should be so
imposed on as to hearken to it; and yet it is certain he did, at least at some
times, entertain it; and was heard to express himself to one that pressed him
to Moderation to Protestants on this account; that he never expected to get
into England but with Fire and Sword. However his Counselors were not so weak,
but they saw what disadvantage his dealing with the Protestants had on his
Interest in England, and therefore they took care to conceal it as much as
possible; they stopped all Intercourse as far as they could with England; they
had a party to cry up the mildness of King James's Government toward the
Protestants, to applaud the Ease, the Plenty, the Security in which they lived,
and to run down and discredit all Relations to the contrary that came from
Ireland. These endeavored to persuade the World, that there was no such thing
as a Bill of Attainder, or of Repeal; no Act taking away the Preferments or
Maintenance of the Clergy, nor any Imprisonment or Plundering of Protestants;
no taking away of Goods by private Orders of the King, or levying of Moneys by
Proclamations. In short, they did that which on all occasions is the Practice,
and indeed Support of Popery. They endeavored to face down plain matter of
Fact with Forehead and Confidence, and to persuade the World, that all these
were mere Forgeries of King James's Enemies. As many as believed these
Allegations of theirs* and were persuaded by them, that the Protestants of
Ireland were well used by King James, were inclined to favor him; a certain
sign, that if they had been really well used by him, it would have gotten him
many Friends, and perhaps reconciled some of his worst Enemies. But the Design
entertained by him and his Party required the Ruin of Protestants, and of their
Religion; whereas his Interest required, that it should not be believed, that
he designed either; and therefore Care was taken to prosecute the Design with
all eagerness, and deny the Matter of Fact with all impudence; and his Majesty
took care to promote both: for he ruined the Protestants of Ireland by his Acts
of Parliament, and by the other Methods we shall hereafter speak of; and by his
Proclamations sent privately into England to his Partisans there, assured the
World, that the Protestant Religion and Interest were his special care, and
that he had secured them against their Enemies. It was his Interest to have
done, as well as pretended this; but the carrying on his Design was so much in
his Thoughts, that he chose to sacrifice his Interest to it.

4. And no wonder, if it be true, what is reported of him, that he resolved to
die a Martyr, rather than not settle his Religion, and that he had rather die
the next day, that Design being compassed, than live fifty years without
effecting it. All which sufficiently explains that which seemed a Riddle to
many, how King James should be so very hard on his Protestant* Subjects, when
his Interest required, that he should treat them with all imaginable kindness;
especially in the present Circumstances of his Affairs, whilst in Ireland. The
Reasons of his acting contrary to his Interest in so palpable an instance, were
either from the Persuasions of his ill Counselors, who assured him, that they
would so order the Matter, that what he did in Ireland should not be heard of,
or not be believed in England; or else from a settled Resolution not to mind
any Interest which came in competition with his grand Designs of advancing
Popery, and the Slavery of the Nations. To effect which, it is manifest he was
content to be a Vassal to France; for whosoever calls in a potent Neighbor to
his assistance, must reckon that will be the consequence if he get the better
by his Means; of which the Irish themselves were sensible, when they saw the
French Succors landed; and the Protestants could not but conclude, that King
James was so intent upon destroying them, that (so he compassed that Design) he
cared not if he enslaved himself and the Kingdoms.

5. Nor had the Services of any toward him, more influence on him than his own
Interest. Never had any Prince fairer Opportunities to distinguish his Friends
from his Enemies, than King James; the struggle he had to get to the Crown was
so long, and the issue so doubtful, that there was no Temptation for any one to
dissemble his Thoughts toward him; and never had Subjects a fairer opportunity
to serve and merit from a Prince. Now his Carriage to those that then proved
his Friends, who against their own Interest, and against the Endeavors of the
most powerful, and most diffused Faction that ever appeared in a Kingdom, set
the Crown on his Head, is a plain demonstration of what force, Merit or Service
were with him, toward altering his private Designs. No sooner did it appear,
that those who were against the Exclusion, designed to preserve the Kingdom, as
well as the Succession, but he abandoned them, and not only laid them aside,
but further exposed them to the revenge of those very Men that they had
provoked by espousing his Quarrel. It is no news to any how King James cast off
his fastest Friends, when he saw that they would not proceed after his Measures
to destroy the Liberty and Religion of their Country; and took into his Bosom
and Council those that had been his most bitter Enemies, when he perceived,
that they would assist him in that Design. Which is a plain demonstration, that
he had no regard to Services or Merit, further than they tended to enslave the
Nations, and destroy the settled Religion. But no Protestant that had any value
for his God, his Conscience or Country, could pretend to this Merit; and
therefore in the King's Opinion he could do nothing that his Majesty would
count a Service.

King James had no desire to be served by Protestants, as was manifest by his
turning many out, for no other reason, but because they would not change their
Religion. By preferring Papists to all Places of Trust and Profit, tho not so
deserving or well qualified for them as those that possessed them. By his
declaring, that he would have all that did eat his Bread, of his own Religion.
If therefore he employed any, it was for a color, either to cover his
Partiality, or because he could not find a Papist fit for their Places, or
because he believed, that in time he might gain them to be of his Religion, or
lastly, because he had some odious Work to do, which he thought he could the
better excuse, if he could get a Protestant to do it; where these Reasons
ceased, he never employed any. But it is observable, where he did employ them,
tho their places were considerable, yet they never had the Interest with him,
or power proper to their place; but were mere Ciphers in it. Thus he made Sir
Edward Herbert Chancellor of England, and caused a Seal to be cut for him, but
he never allowed him that Interest with him, or had that regard for him in
Councils that his place required. The puny Papist Judges had more influence on
the King, and could make bolder with him than he; he was not admitted to the
Secret of Affairs at all, and at the public Councils he was set below Fitton,
Chancellor of Ireland, and several others; whom I am informed, whilst employed
as Chancellor of England, and in his Masters presence, he ought to have
preceded. But generally Protestants were only admitted to inferior places, and
for the most part with a Companion; and they had only the Name, their
Companions must do all, and they durst not contradict them; and tho they were
entitled to rise according as Vacancies fell, yet some inconsiderable Papist
was sure to get the start of them, and to be put over their Heads; so that it
was never in their power to serve the King considerably, or merit at his Hands.

If they did chance to do any thing signal, yet their Enemies had so much the
advantage of King James's Ear, that they were sure to be misrepresented; and
what those said, having the dead Weight of Religion to help it, did generally
with him, outweigh the Protestants Service. Of this Sir Charles Murry is an
Instance; he followed King James through France to Ireland, and all along
appeared zealous for his Service. Yet because he professed himself a
Protestant, upon his landing at Kinsale, some that had an ill will to him
prevailed with the King to clap him up a Prisoner in the Fort of Kinsale, where
he lay without being able to learn any Reason for his Confinement, from the
twelfth of March 168^ / ^, till toward the end of the following Summer; and
then they had occasion for him to help to order their Camp, and fortify Ardee,
which procured him his Liberty; tho he never could have the satisfaction to
learn either his Crime, or his Accuser.

My Lord Forbess, Son to the Earl of Granard, is another remarkable Instance:
When the pretended Parliament sat in Dublin, both Houses were informed, that
my Lord Forbess adhered to King James's Interest in England, and that he was a
Prisoner in the Tower upon that account, his Friends thought it proper to
improve this occasion with the King, and the Parliament, to save my Lord's
Estate at Mollingar, which he holds under the Act of Settlement. And this
seemed the more feasible because the Lands did, if not all, yet for the most
part, formerly belong not to private persons, but to a Corporation. But all the
Interest could be made, did not prevail; all that could be obtained, was a
Clause implying, that the Commissioners that should be appointed to execute the
Act, should set him out a Reprizal under the same Limitations, under which he
held the Town and Lands of Mollingar; which (as one of the House of Commons
expressed it) was a Mouthful of Moonshine. So little regard was had to the
Services or Merits of Protestants.

6. And they had no reason to expect it should be otherwise; for there was no
regard had to the most considerable Papists* where their Interest interfered
with the general Design. It was resolved to destroy the* Act of Settlement, the
Foundation of the English and Protestant Interest in Ireland. This brought
along with it Destruction to many Papists that held Estates under it, which
they had purchased since the year 1662, as well as to Protestants. Those
Papists were very numerous, and more wealthy than the rest (especially in
Connaught) and they were likewise very zealous for King James, and many of them
in his actual Service, and venturing their Lives for him, at the time of
passing the Act of Repeal; yet this did not hinder him from giving away their
Estates by that Act to the old Proprietors.

In short, if serving King James truly and faithfully, even to their own
prejudice, whilst it was for his Advantage and his Circumstances needed their
Service, could have merited his Favor, most Protestants had supererogated; but
all this passed for nothing with him, he would be served his own way: that is,
he would have Protestants been active to destroy their Properties, Liberty and
Religion, he would have had them lend their Hands to tie the Chains of Slavery
for them and their Posterity, to which they had already contributed too far to
oblige his Humor, both before and after his coming to the Crown, against the
common Interest of the Kingdom. Nothing less than the same blind Obedience,
would serve him in the State, which his Clergy require in the Church, which we
would not by any means pay him; and therefore it was in vain for us to think of
preserving our selves by any Merit or Service we could render him; he did not
think any thing a Protestant could do with a good Conscience, to be a Service.
And if we did all was required, yet there never wanted persons about his
Majesty who had Malice enough toward us, and Interest enough with him, to
misrepresent our most meritorious Actions.

8. Nor was the good Nature and merciful Disposition of King James any greater
Security to the Protestants of Ireland, than their own Merits toward him.
There are, it is true, Kings in the World, that have an absolute Power over the
Lives and Liberties of their Subjects; and yet govern them with such Justice
and Mercy, that they suffer very little inconveniency by it: but the Examples
of this kind are so very rare, that it is ill trusting any one with such a
Power. King James's Partisans made it their Business to represent their Master
as the most merciful and justest Prince in the World; and then they railed at
us that grudged to lay our own and our Posterities Lives and Liberties at his
Feet. Perhaps if he alone had been to have had the Disposal of them, and would
have followed his natural Inclinations, we should not so much have feared to
have trusted him; but whilst he had such Ministers about him, and embraced a
Religion of such Principles as he professed, we had no Reason to depend much on
his natural Clemency or Inclination, for these were sufficient to corrupt the
best natured Man in the World.

9. No doubt but Charles the Fifth of Germany was of as compassionate and
generous a Nature as any Man; yet that did not keep him from making havoc of
his Subjects on account of Religion; besides all his Wars and Bloodshed to
suppress the Reformation, he destroyed by way of legal Process fifty thousand
in the Inquisition, a Barbarity, I believe, hardly equalled by Nero* Francis
the First of France was a Prince equal to any in Generosity and Nobleness of
Nature; and yet he made no less Havoc and Destruction in his Dominions on the
same Account. The present French King is a Demonstration, that neither Love of
Glory, nor of Interest, neither Greatness of Mind, nor Goodness of Nature, are
Antidotes against, the Force of Romish Principles, or can restrain the Prince
that has thoroughly imbibed them, from Blood and Persecution; otherwise he would
never have made himself infamous by such horrid Cruelties as he has committed
on his Protestant Subjects, or brought an indelible Blot on a Reign which he
would fain have represented to be more glorious than any of his Predecessors.

It is not necessary that what has been said should bring in question the good
Nature or merciful Temper of King James, tho we confess we were unwilling to
trust it too far. We had before our Thoughts the Proceedings in the West of
England, where we saw his Clemency did not interpose, but suffered more to be
prosecuted, tried, condemned, and executed for that one Rebellion (and yet it
was not so considerable as many others) than perhaps had suffered in that
manner for many of the Rebellions since the Conquest. We found that he
consented to attaint above two thousand five hundred of the most considerable
persons of this Kingdom; and that his good Nature might not be a Temptation to
pardon them, he put it out of his power to do it by the same Act. After his
coming into Ireland, very few Pardons passed the Great Seal, perhaps not three;
nor had many so much as the promise of a Pardon given them, tho very many
needed and desired it.

Many of the Country People, who were not of the Army, were brought up
Prisoners; they pleaded that they were not concerned in the Wars; that they
lived in their Houses, and on their Farms, and submitted only to the stronger,
without engaging in the Cause; but all to no purpose: they were used worse than
the Soldiers who were Prisoners, and suffered to starve in Jails, if the
Charity of their Fellow Protestants had not relieved them. Many who were
wronged and oppressed, petitioned his Majesty for Redress, but their Petitions
were rejected, at best mislaid, and the Petitioners were so far from obtaining
any Answer, that they often could never hear what became of their Petitions.

10. The chief Counselors of the King were the Popish Clergy, and the
Descendents of such as had shed the Blood of so many Protestants in the year
1641, who then ruined and destroyed the Kingdom, and made it a heap of Rubbish,
and a Slaughterhouse; and whilst he hearkened to the Suggestions and Councils
of such, it was not possible for him to exert his good Nature and Clemency
toward us.

It was the continual Business of these Counselors to incense the King against
us, to represent us as People unworthy of any Favor, Humanity, or Justice;
that we were all Rogues, Villains and Traitors, and not fit to be allowed the
common Offices of Humanity: This Chancellor Fitton declared on the Bench: This
the King's Favorites and Attendants suggested publicly to him at his times of
Eating, at his Couchee and Levee, and upon all occasions.

However it was, it is evident by the effect, that King James in great measure
completed the Ruin of the Protestants and English Interest in this Kingdom;
which will plainly appear, 1. In his dealing with the Army. 2. With the Courts
of Judicature. 3. With the Privy Council and Offices. 4. With Corporations. 5.
With Trade, and the trading People of the Nation. 6. With our Liberties. 7.
With our Fortunes. 8. With the Lives of his Protestant Subjects. And 9. With
their Religion.

SECT. II. I. King James's Dealing with the Army of Ireland, in order to
destroy the Protestants and English Interest.
1. THE Army of Ireland which King James found at his coming to the Crown,
consisted of about seven thousand, as Loyal Men, and as Cordial to the King's
Service as any could be; both Officers and Soldiers had been inured to it for
many years. They looked on him as their Master and Father, entirely depending
on him, and expecting nothing from any Body else. When Monmouth's and Argile's
Rebellion called for their assistance to suppress them, no People in the World
could show more Cheerfulness, or Forwardness, than they did; and it is
observable, that no one Man in Ireland was ever found to be conscious or
consenting to those Rebellions; the Protestants of all sorts showed great
Horror and Detestation of them, and were discernably melancholy till the Rebels
were suppressed. Most of the Officers of this Army had been so zealous to serve
the King, that they had by his permission and encouragement bought their
Employments; many of them had laid out their whole Fortunes, and contracted
Debts to purchase a Command; yet no sooner was King James settled in his
Throne, but he began to turn out some of the Officers, that had been most
zealous for his Service, and had deserved best of him, merely because they had
been counted firm to the Protestant Religion and English Interest. The first
who were made Examples to the rest, were the Lord Shannon, Captain Robert
Fitzgerald, Captain Richard Coote, and Sir Oliver S. George. The three first
were Earls Sons, who either in their own persons, or by their Fathers and
Relations, had been signally active in restoring King Charles the Second, and
the Royal Family, to their just Rights, 1660; so had Sir Oliver S. George: and
they were all of them without any other Exception, but their Zeal for their
Religion, and the English Interest in Ireland. But the common Saying was, that
King James would regard no Man for any Service done to him, his Father or
Brother, but only for future Service that he expected from them: and since he
could fot expect that these Gentlemen should assist him to destroy the
Protestant Religion or the Liberties of his Subjects, which was the Service he
then expected, he took their Troops from them, and gave them to persons of mean
or broken Fortunes, who must do any thing to keep them; some of them
unqualified by Law. It is fit their Names should be known, that the Reader may
the better observe what kind of Change the King began with, when he substituted
Captain Kerney, if I remember right, one of the Ruffians, Captain Anderson, a
person of no Fortune, Captain Sheldon, a professed Papist, and Captain Graham,
in the places of the Lord Shannon, Captain Fitzgerald, Captain Coote, and* Sir
Oliver S. George.

2. But to convince the World, that no Consideration was to be had, of Loyalty
or Merit, except a Man were a Papist: The Duke of Ormond was sent for abruptly,
and divested of the Government, with such Circumstances that did no ways
correspond with the Service he had rendered the Crown in general, and King
James in particular. Immediately the modelling of the Army was put into By what
Interest and for what Design he came to be employed, and at last to be made
Deputy, will appear from the Copy of a Letter* found amongst Bishop Tyrrel's
Papers, his Secretary. It Is in the Appendix. N. 3.
the Hands of Colonel Richard Talbott, a person more hated than any other Man
by the Protestants, and who had been named by Oats in his Narrative for this
very Employment. When therefore the Protestants saw him put into it, many who
believed nothing of a Plot before, gave credit now to his* Narrative, and the
common Saying was, that if Oats was an ill Evidence, he was certainly a good
Prophet. Colonel Talbott, afterward Earl of Tyrconnell, knew the Necessity of
having the Army fitted to his purpose, it being the Engine he depended on for
destroying the Religion, Liberty and Laws of the Kingdom; and therefore set
about it with all expedition, and prosecuted it in such a manner as might be
expected from a Man of his insolent temper. He exercised at the same time* so
much Falsehood and Barbarity, that if the Army had not been the best principled
with Loyalty and Obedience of any in the World, they would have (...), or at
least dispatched him. In the Morning he would take an Officer into his Closet,
and with all the Oaths, Curses and Damnations, that were never wanting to him,
he would profess Friendship and Kindness to him, and promise him the
continuance of his Commission; and yet* in the Afternoon cashier him, with all
the contempt he could heap on him; nay perhaps, while he was thus caressing
him, he had actually given away his Commission. The Officers of Ireland, then
cashiered, and their Acquaintance, can vouch the truth of this in many
instances. As for the Soldiers and Troopers, his way with them was to march
them from their usual Quarters, to some distant place where he thought they
were least known, where they would be put to greatest Hardships, and there he
stripped them; the Foot, of their Clothes, for which they had paid; and the
Troopers of their Horses, Boots, and Furniture, bought with their own Money;
and set them to walk barefooted one hundred, or one hundred and fifty Miles to
their Homes or Friends, if they had any. Sometimes he would promise them
something for their Horses; but then he told them, that they must come to
Dublin for it: if any came to demand the small pittance promised them for their
Horses or Arrears of Pay, he contrived it so, that they should be obliged to
wait till they had spent twice as much as they expected; and most of them after
all got nothing. By this means two or three hundred Protestant Gentlemen, who
had laid out all, or a good part of their Fortunes, and contracted Debts on
Commissions, were not left worth any thing, but were turned out without reason
or any consideration, and sive or six thousand Soldiers sent a begging; a
hardship perhaps never put on any Army before, without any provocation; against
whom there was no other Exception, but that they were English Men and
Protestants, and King James by substituting Irish Men and Papists in their
places contrary to the Laws, and to the very Design of keeping a standing Army
in Ireland, clearly demonstrated, that he had no regard to the Laws, or to the
preservation of the Kingdom, and that he designed to advance the Popish Irish
Interest in Ireland; which every Body knows cannot be done without the utter
ruin of the English Protestants.

3. Yet all this we patiently endured, and exercised our Charity in relieving
the poor cashiered Soldiers, and in putting the ruined Gentlemen into a way of
Subsisting; which was generally by sending them over Seas to Foreign Service,
and perhaps their Clamours and Sufferings did contribute to move the Compassion
of the Prince of Orange, our present Sovereign, and forward his Designs.

4. In the mean time, the new raised Forces and Officers being put into Arms
and Command, to which they were Strangers, into good Clothes, and mounted on
Horses for which others had paid, behaved themselves with all the insolence
common to such sort of Men when unworthily Advanced. They every where insulted
over the English, and had their Mouths continually full of Oaths, Curses and
Imprecations against them; they railed on them, and gave them all the
opprobrious names they could; and if any Chastized them for their Sauciness,
though ever so much provoked, they had the Judges and Juries on their side.
They might kill whom they pleased without fear of Law, as appeared from Captain
Nangles murdering his disbanded Officer in the Streets of Dublin; but if any
killed or hurt them, they were sure to suffer; as Captain Aston found to his
cost, who was hanged for killing a Papist upon his* abusing the Captains Wife
in the Street. They immediately ruined all the Protestant Inns of Ireland,
partly by oppressing them with Quarters, partly by paying nothing for what they
had in their Quarters, and partly by driving away other Guests by their
rudeness.

5. In this insolence they continued and daily increased, till the Prince of
Orange came into England. But then new Commissions were issued out with all
diligence, of one sort or another, sometimes five hundred in a day. All the
Scum and Rascallity of the Kingdom were made Officers; every where the Papists
armed and inlisted themselves, and the Priests suffered no Man to come to Mass
that did not Arm himself with at least a Skean and half Pike. The new
Commissioned Officers were obliged without Pay to subsist their Men, as they
termed it, for three months, a thing impossible for them to do, since most of
them were not able to maintain themselves. The better sort of their Captains
and inferior Officers had been Footmen or Servants to Protestants: One
Gentleman's Cowherd was made a Lieutenant, but he would fain have capitulated
with his Master, to keep his place vacant for him if his Commission did not
hold. Most of them were the Sons or Descendents of Rebels in 1641, who had
murdered so many Protestants. Many were Outlawed and Condemned Persons that
had lived by Torying and Robbing. No less than fourteen notorious Tories were
Officers in Cormuck o Neals Regiment; and when forty or fifty thousand such
were put into Arms, without any Money to pay them, we must leave the World to
judge what apprehensions this must breed in Protestants, and whether they had
not Reason to fear the destruction that immediately fell on them; they saw
their Enemies in Arms, and their own Lives in their power. They saw their Goods
at the mercy of those Thieves and Robbers and Tories, now armed and Authorized,
from whom they could scarce keep them when it was in their power to pursue and
hang them. And they had all the Reason in the World to believe, that a
Government that had armed such Men of desperate Fortunes and Resolutions, was
so far from protecting them, which is the only end of all Government, that on
the contrary it designed to destroy both their Lives and Fortunes. The latter
of which, as will appear by the sequel, they have in a manner entirely lost.

6. I could never hear any thing pretended for these proceedings, except it
were either 1. That the Army were the Kings Servants, and every Man may employ
what Servants he pleases; or 2. That Protestants would not concur with the
Kings intentions, and therefore there was a necessity of dismissing them. And
3. as to the general arming the Papists, and Plundering the Protestants, that
it was necessary in order to raise and encourage an Army, otherwise the King
had had nothing to trust to.

7. As to the first of these, It is not true that every Man may entertain what
Servants he pleases; because one ought not to entertain any that are not
qualified as the Law requires. 2. If it were granted that the Case were the
same between the King and his Army as between a Master and his Servants, and
that a Master might entertain what Servants he pleased (neither of which is
true) yet it is to be considered that where another pays the Servants, the
Master must be obliged to keep such Servants as well answer the design of such
as afford the Wages. Now it was the Kingdoms Money that paid the Soldiers; it
was given the King by a Protestant Parliament, to preserve the Protestant
English Interest, and suppress the conquered Irish Papists, as appears by the
Acts themselves; it was paid by them out of their proper Fortunes and Estates;
and for the King to Employ the Money so given, and paid him, to Arm those whom
it was designed to suppress; and destroy those who gave it, is the greatest
breach of Trust and prevarication of which any can be guilty.

8. As to the second Reason, that Protestants would not concur with the Kings
intentions; I believe it is true, but the Reason was, because the Kings
intentions were to destroy the Laws, Liberty, and Religion Established in his
Kingdom: they had, and would have answered every just intention of the King;
nay such as were Employed by him, had concurred further with him than was
perhaps justifiable. And his laying them aside as unserviceable to his Designs,
is a plain Demonstration that those Designs were irreconcilable to the good of
the Kingdom, and the Protestant English Interest.

9. As to the third Reason that it was necessary, in order to raise an Army for
the King, to Arm all the Rascallity of Ireland; and to let them destroy the
Protestants, to subsist and hearten them. I answer, that this owns a Necessity,
if not a Design of destroying us: and considering that the Papists only by
their wicked Counsels had brought that necessity on the Kingdom, it can never
be imputed to the Protestants by any wise Man as a Crime, that they were
unwilling to comply with the King to their own Destruction, or that they rather
chose to be delivered by his present Majesty than ruined by King James and his
foolish Counselors. Upon the whole, the ordering the Irish Army as it was by
King James, is a plain Demonstration of his Design to destroy us, and a great
step toward it; and he had effectually done it, had not the Providence of God
raised up his present Majesty to Relieve us.

SECT. III. Secondly, King James's ordering the Courts of Judicature in such a
method as tended to destroy the Protestant English Interest of Ireland.
1. THE support and happiness of a Kingdom consists chiefly in the equal and
impartial Administration of Justice; and that depends on the choice of* fit and
duly qualified Persons for filling the Courts, and Executing the Laws; but King
James made choice of such Persons for these Offices as were so far from
answering the intent of their Places, that they made it their business to
destroy the Protestant Interest, and the Laws that preserve the Liberty of the
Subject in general; by those Laws no Man was capable of being a Judge, who had
not taken the Oath of Supremacy. The Judges he found on the Bench, had taken
it; but yet some of them were known to be rather too favorable to Papists; and
considering the influence King James had in his Brothers time in disposing of
Offices, it is not to be imagined that he would suffer any Man to sit as a
Judge, who had not been favorably represented unto him in that Point; though
we must own he was mistaken in some of them; hence it came that Protestants did
frequently complain of the Favor and Countenance their Adversaries found in
the Courts of Justice, even in King Charles II. time. But when King James came
to the Crown, moderate, nay favorable Judges would not do the Work he
designed. He found it necessary to Employ the most Zealous of his Party; those
who both by Interest and Inclination, were most deeply engaged to destroy the
Protestant English Interest; and accordingly such were picked out and set on
all the Benches*

2. The Chancery is the great and highest Court wherein the great Frauds and
other matters belonging to Trusts and Equity are determined; and neither the
Lord Primate Boil, who had managed that Court about twenty years, nor Sir
Charles Porter who succeeded him, could answer the Kings intention: but Sir
Alexander Fitton, of whom I have already Vide Chapter 2. Sect. 6. N. 2.
given some account, a Person detected of Forgery not only at Westminster, and
Chester, but likewise Fined by the House of Lords in Parliament, must be
brought out of Goal, and set on the highest Court of the Kingdom, to keep the
Kings Conscience, though he wanted Law and natural Capacity, as well as Honesty
and Courage, to discharge such a Trust; and had no other quality to recommend
him, besides his being a Convert Papist; that is, a Renegado to his Religion
and his Country; but the mystery of this was easily found out. The Papists of
Ireland had gone a great way to retrieve the Estates they had forfeited by the
Rebellion 1641, by counterfeit Settlements, Forgeries, and Perjuries, and to do
their business in a great measure there needed no more than to find a Judge that
would be favorable to, and countenance such proceedings; and where could they
find a more favorable Judge than one who was notoriously involved in the same
guilt, and who probably in some Cases did not esteem such Arts unlawful; but
besides this, there is requisite to a Chancellor, a peculiar quickness of Parts
and Dexterity, to penetrate into the contrivances of Cheats and Forgeries, for
which Sir Alexander Fittons natural slowness and heaviness incapacitated him,
but this very defect, together with his Zeal for Popery, fitted him to execute
the Kings design as effectually as any that could have been found. He could not
understand the merit of a Cause of any difficulty, and therefore never failed
to give Sentence according to his inclination, having no other Rule to lead
him; and how he was inclined toward Protestants; appeared from his
Declarations on all occations against them; he did not stick, on a Hearing, to
declare that they were all Rogues, and that amongst forty thousand there was
not one who was not a Traitor, a Rebel, and a Villain: for this Reason he would
not allow the Guardianship of a Child to the Protestant Mother; but gave it
against the positive words of the Law, to the Popish Relations: for this Reason
he refused to hear so much as a demurrer in the Popish Dean of Christ's Church,
Mr. Staffords Case. For this Cause he overruled both the common Rules of
Practice of the Courts, and the Laws of the Land, declaring in open Court that
the Chancery was above all Laws, that no Law could bound his Conscience; and he
acted accordingly in many Cases where Protestants were concerned. After hearing
a Cause between one of them and a Papist, he would often declare that he would
consult a Divine before he gave a Decree; that is, he would have the Opinion of
a Popish Priest, his Chaplain, Educated in Spain, and furnished with
Destinctions to satisfy his Conscience how far he should do Justice to
Protestants; many Papists came and made Affidavits of being in Possession when
they never were, and got Injunctions and Orders without any more ado to quiet
their Possessions. But a Protestant, though never so palpably disturbed, could
not procure any Order; but was sent to the Common Law to recover his
Possession, by a Popish Jury, returned by a Popish Sheriff, before a Popish
Judge: that is, he must expect Law from Judges and Officers that Sat and Acted
in defiance of Law. If at any time the Chancellor was forced to grant an
Injunction or Decree, it was with all the difficulties and delays that could
be, and often the thing was lost and destroyed before the Order came for
recovering it.

3. The Administration of Justice and Equity is the great end of Government,
and it is as good, nay better to be without Governors than to have Governors
under whom Men cannot reasonably hope for these. We see from the choice of a
Chancellor, what care King James took for the Administration of Equity to
Protestants. To help the matter he added as Assistants to the Chancellor Mr.
Stafford, a Popish Priest, for one Master of the Chancery; and Felix o Felix o
Neal was removed in 1689. and made a Colonel.
Neal, Son of Turlogh o Neal, the great Rebel in 1641, and Massacrer of the
Protestants, for another. To these generally the Causes between Protestants and
Papists were referred, and upon their Report the Chancellor past his Orders and
Decrees.

4. The Courts of Common Law were put into the same method; and great care
taken to fill them with Judges who might be engaged in a professed enmity to the
Protestant Interest. In Ireland there are only three Judges on a Bench; and it
was thought fit, for a color till things were Riper, to keep one Protestant on
every Bench; but whilst there were two Votes to one, the Protestant Judge could
neither do Right to Protestants, or retard a Sentence to be given in the favor
of a Papist. This mock method, of seeming to trust Protestants, they took
likewise in naming Burgesses and Aldermen for Corporations; they generally put
some few into their New Charters to serve for a pretense of impartiallity, and
yet to signify nothing: this Method of continuing some few Protestants in
Courts and Corporations serving only to silence and exasperate us, to be thus
imposed on, but contributed nothing to relieve us, as we found to our Costs:
and the Protestant Judges and Burgesses, finding that they were made Ciphers
and Properties, of themselves declined at last to Act in their Stations.

5. Next to Chancery, is the Kings Bench, where Subjects are tried for their
Lives and Fortunes: upon this was set Mr. Thomas Nugent (made afterward Baron
of Riverstown) the Son of one who had been Earl of Westmeath, but had lost his
Honor and Estate for being an Actor in the late Rebellion begun in 1641. This
Mr. Nugent who had never been taken notice of at the Bar, but for a more than
ordinary Brogue on his Tongue (as they call it) and ignorance in the Law, was
pitched on by King James, to judge whether the Outlawries against his Father and
his fellow Rebels should be reversed, and whether the Settlement of Ireland
founded on those Outlawries, should stand good. It was a Demonstration to us
what the King intended, when he assigned us such a Chief Justice; and indeed
the Gentleman did not fail to answer the expectation conceived of him. He
reversed the Outlawries as fast as they came before him, notwithstanding a
Statute made in point against it: and in all the Causes that ever came before
him, wherein the Plaintiffs and Defendants were Papist and Protestant, I could
not learn from the most diligent Observer, that ever he gave Sentence for the
latter. Nay it is Shrewdly suspected that he went sharer in some considerable
Causes, and not only appeared for them on the Bench, but also secretly
encouraged and fomented them. Before him a Deed should be judged Forged or not
Forged according as it served a Popish Interest. And a Protestant needed no
more to gain a Cause against another Protestant, than to turn Papist; which
manifestly appeared in Sir Gregory Birns Case, who merely by turning Papist, as
is noted before, in the midst of his Suit against Captain Robert Fitz Gerald,
got a Deed condemned of Forgery, and recovered five or six hundred pounds per
annum; notwithstanding Mr. Daniel Birn his Father, some years before, for
pretending it was Forged, had been Sued in an Action of the Case; and forced to
pay two hundred pound damages: and though there appeared in Court a Bond under
Birns Hand, obliging him to pay two hundred pound to the Witnesses, in case
they should prove Captain Fitz Geralds Deed to be Forged, yet the proof was
accepted. But these were common things in this Court, and the mischief had been
much greater had not a Writ of Error lain from his Court to the Kings Bench in
England. In one thing more he signalized himself; it was by committing and
prosecuting people for feigned Offenses and Treasons, and by countenancing and
encouraging, and after discovery protecting false Witnesses against
Protestants. Many were brought in danger of their Lives by his contrivances;
and when the accused were acquitted on Trial, by a palpable Demonstration that
the Witnesses were Perjured, he declared that they neither could nor should be
Prosecuted, for they only swear for the King, and he believed the accused
persons guilty, though it could not be proved. In short he showed all the venom
and rigor against them he could; he was set up to destroy them, and he went as
far in it as his power could reach; his weakness, not his inclination, hindered
him from carrying it farther. It is not imaginable by any that have not seen
and heard him, how furiously and partially he was bent against Protestants: it
may be guessed how he stood inclined to them by the great Hand he had in
promoting the Bill of Attainder, and the Bill to vest all Absentees Goods in
the King; whereby much the greater part of the Protestants of Ireland lost all
their Estates, Personal and Real, of which we shall speak more hereafter. He
was assisted on the Bench by Sir Bryan o Neal, as puny Judge, a weak Man that
had nothing to recommend him but Venom and Zeal, being otherwise disabled both
in his Reason and Body. Only he had the faculty to do what he was bid,
especially when it suited with his own inveteracy against Englishmen and
Protestants This Character may seem rigid, but as many as knew him will not
think it exceeds.

6. The next Court for business (though not for Precedence) is the Exchequer:
in which all Actions wherein the Kings Revenue or any other Man's Estate is
concerned, may be tried. From this Court no Writ of Error lies in England; so
they were free here from that Check, which was so troublesome to them in other
Courts. Upon this consideration it was that the whole business of the Kingdom,
so far as it concerned them, was brought into this Court, though not so proper
for it. Here were brought all Actions of Trespasses and Ejectments concerning
Estates; all Quo Warranto's against Corporations, and Scire Facias's about
Offices: and they thought themselves concerned to have an able Man, and one
thoroughly Cordial to their Interest for the Chief Judge in it: for if he had
wanted Sense or Law, though willing, as they found by Experience in some of the
other Courts, he might have been unable to serve them in all Cases. They
therefore fixed on Mr. Stephen Rice, afterward Sir Stephen, who had formerly
been noted for a Rook and Gamester at the Inns of Court. He was (to give him
his due) a Man of the best Sense amongst them, well enough versed in the Law,
but most signal for his inveteracy against the Protestant Interest and
Settlement of Ireland; having been often heard to say, before he was a Judge,
that he would drive a Coach and Six Horses through the Act of Settlement, upon
which both depended. And before that Act was Repealed in their pretended
Parliament, he declared on the Bench that it was against Natural Equity, and
could not oblige. This Man did King James choose for Chief Baron, and for the
final determination of all the Suits that lay between Protestants and Papists,
either in Common Law or Equity. And it is no hard matter to conjecture what
success the Protestants met with in their Suits before a Judge that declared, as
he did, that they should have no favor, but Summum jus, that is the utmost
rigor of the Law. Immediately his Court was filled with Popish Plaintiffs:
every one that had a forged Deed or a false Witness, met with Favor and
Countenance from him; and he knowing that they could not bring his Sentences
into England to be re-examined there, acted as a Man that feared no after
Account or Reckoning. It was some considerable time before he would allow a
Writ of Error into the Exchequer Chamber, though that was in effect to
themselves; and when it was allowed, it was to little purpose before such
Judges. It was before him all the Charters of the Kingdom were damned, and that
in a Term or two, in such a manner that proved him a Man of Dispatch though not
of Justice. If he had been left alone, it was really believed that in few years
he would, by some contrivance or other, have given away most of the Protestants
Estates in Ireland, without troubling a Parliament to Attaint them; which was a
more compendious, but not a more certain way to destroy them, than the Methods
he took. It was he that without Hearing, after he had Dissolved the
Corporations by giving Sentence against their Charters, declared void all the
Leases of Lands or of Perquisites made by them, though long before their
Dissolution, and on very good considerations; and thereupon outed several
Protestants of their Leases: but it were endless to mention all the Oppressions
and unjust proceedings of this Court; it were in effect to transcribe the
Records of it. Let me only observe that the Chief Baron was assisted by Sir
Henry Lynch as Second Baron, who came indeed short of him in Parts, but yielded
nothing to him in Malice to the Protestant Religion and Interest.

7. The Court of Common Pleas* had little to do: the business, so far as
concerned the Protestants and Papists, was entirely carried out of it to the
Kings Bench, or Exchequer, and therefore they permitted the Lord Chief Justice
Keating still to sit in it, but Pinioned with two of their own sort, that if
any thing should chance to come before him, he might be out-voted by them. The
truth is they were jealous of this Court, not only because a Protestant was
Chief Justice in it, but likewise because Judge Dally sat as puny Judge, who
though a Roman Catholic yet understood the Common Law so well, and behaved
himself so impartially, that they did not care to bring their Causes before
him: so much did they dread the prospect of Justice, though before Judges that
were of their own Party and Persuasion.

8. The Circuits are an extention of the Courts, whereby Justice is carried
into the Country: these were managed much at the same rate with the Courts, and
where the Sheriff and Judge were both Papists, it is not difficult to guess what
Justice Protestants must expect; what packing of Juries there was amongst them,
and how deeply the Judges themselves were concerned in such Practices, is
evident to all that had any Concerns in the Country at that time.

9. It will be requisite to say something of the Attorney General which King
James made, instead of Sir William Domvile, whom he turned out after near
thirty years supplying the place; but he was a Protestant, and would not
consent to reverse the Popish Outlawries, nor to the other Methods they took to
destroy the Settlement of Ireland; and therefore he was laid aside. In his
place King James substituted Mr. Richard Nagle, whom he afterward Knighted,
and made Secretary of State; he was at first designed for a Clergyman, and
educated amongst the Jesuits; but afterward betook himself to the Study of the
Law, in which he arrived to a good Perfection, and was employed by many
Protestants, so that he knew the weak part of most of their Titles. Every Body
knows how great a part the Attorney General has in the Administration of
Justice, it being his Office to prosecute, and in his power to stop any Suit
wherein the King is concerned. How he used this Power will appear in one
instance, tho many may be given. One Fitz Gerald of Tycrohan, the Heir of a
forfeiting Papist, had a Suit for a great Estate against Sir William Petty; it
was tried in the Exchequer before Chief Baron Rice, and Fitz Gerald carried the
Cause by the Perjury of two Friars, and a Woman, who swore a person to be dead
in Spain, and themselves to be present at his Burial, upon whose Life Sir
William's Title depended. This person soon after appeared to be alive, and is
so still for ought we know; and his being alive was so notorious and manifest,
that the Attorney General could not deny it; Sir William's Counsel and Lawyers
designed to indict the Friars and Woman for their Perjury, but the Grand Jury
refused to find the Bill; and I was credibly informed, that the Attorney
General said, that if they did not desist, he would enter a Noli prosequi. It
is certain he refused to prosecute it, and it was imputed to his Contrivance,
that they escaped. By such means the Course of Justice was stopped to
Protestants; and the like Tenderness the Courts generally showed to Perjurers,
when the Perjury served their Interest. And sure the Protestants were in an ill
case, whose Lives and Fortunes lay at the Mercy of such Judges and Juries; and
they must conclude, that nothing less than Destruction was designed for them,
by a King who put them under such Administrators of Justice. The same Sir
Richard Nagle was the Speaker of the House of Commons in their pretended
Parliament, and had the chief Hand in drawing up their Acts; King James
confided chiefly in him: and the Acts of Repeal and Attainder were looked on as
his Work; in which his Malice and Jesuitical Principles prevailed so far, that
he was not content to out two Thirds of the Protestant Gentlemen of their
Estates by the Act of Repeal, (by which all Estates acquired since 1641, were
taken away) and to attaint most of those that had old Estates by the Bill of
Attainder; But to make sure Work, he put it out of the King's Power to pardon
them; therein betraying the King's Prerogative, as the King himself told him,
when he discovered it to him. Of which and of him we shall have occasion to
give a further account hereafter.

10. Into such Hands as we have been speaking of, the Administration of Justice
and of the Laws was put, which were so far from preventing our Ruin, that they
were made the Means and Instruments thereof, and it had been much better for us
to have had no Laws at all, and been left to our natural Defense, than to be
cheated into a necessity of Submission by Laws that were executed only to
punish, and not to defend us.

11. It was common for some of those that served King James, to come upon the
Exchange, and without any reason or provocation to fall upon Protestant
Gentlemen, if they looked a little more fashionable than other people, and beat
them. One was thus beaten with a Cane severely, before the Gentleman was aware;
he was advised for an Experiment to indict the Ruffian that used him thus, to
see what protection the Law would give us after they had taken away our Swords;
but the Grand Jury did not think it worth while to trouble the Courts with
redressing the Grievances of Protestants, and so would not find the Bill. A
Merchant in Thomas street, Dublin, found a Fellow that had broken into his Ware
house, and was conveying his Goods* out at the Window to his Fellow Soldiers
that stood in the Street to receive them; he seized him and brought an
Indictment against him for Felony, but the Jury acquitted him; and then he
brought his Action against the Merchant for false Imprisonment and Slander, and
it cost a good Sum of Money to compound the Matter. This Trick was very common;
and at last, no Protestant, tho he had ever so good Evidence against a Papist,
durst prosecute him; for he was sure to be acquitted, and then the Prosecutor
was liable to the Revenge of an Action of the Case, and the Damages that a
Popish Jury pleased to give against him.

12. There is an Act of Parliament, 10 Henrici 7. cap. 12. That forbids keeping
Guns or Ordnance without License from the Lord Lieutenant or Deputy. The Design
of it was to prevent the Irish from fortifying themselves in their little
Castles, whereby at that time they created the Government great Trouble, and
raised daily Rebellions. But the Lord Chief Justice Nugent interpreted this to
the disarming of all Protestants; and because there chanced to be a Sword and
Case of Pistols found, September 6* 1689, in some outward by place in Christ's
Church, Dublin, one Wolf the Subverger was committed to Newgate, indicted and
found guilty, and had good luck to escape with his Life, the Chief Justice
declaring it was Treason, tho Wolf was only indicted for a Misdemeanour.

13. But had the Laws been in never so good Hands, it could not have secured us
from Destruction, when the King, who designed that Destruction against us,
pretended to be above all Laws, and made no Scruple Sanders. de oblig.
conscien. praelect. 9. 12. 19. (Ubi tam gravis premit necessitas, ut vir pius
and prudens non possit dubitare legislatorem ipsum, si praesens esset, legit
sibi gratiam and relaxationem concessurum) liceat subditis, communis
utilitatis, (quae suprema lex est, and omnium legum finis) rationem habere
magis, quam legum particula^^^m.
to dispense with them; every Law in these Kingdoms is really a Compact between
the King and People, wherein by mutual consent they agree on a Rule by which he
is to govern, and according to which they oblige themselves to pay him
Obedience. But there is no general Rule but in some Cases it may prove
inconvenient; it is therefore agreed by all, that in Cases of sudden and
unforeseen Necessity, there is no Law but may be dispensed with: but then first
it is observable, that this Necessity must be so visible and apparent, that all
reasonable Men may see and be satisfied that it is not pretended; and where the
Necessity has been thus real, no Man can show that either the People or
Parliament ever quarrelled with a King for using a dispensing Power.

14. Secondly, It must be observed, that this Power of Dispensing, in Cases of
Necessity is mutual, and belongs to the People as well as the King; it being as
lawful for a Subject, in Cases of Necessity, to dispense with his Obedience to
a Law, nay, with his Allegiance to his King; as for a King to dispense with the
Execution of a Law, or the exacting Obedience: and this mutual power of
dispensing with the Laws, which are public Compacts in Cases of Necessity, is
tacitly understood in them as well as in all other Covenants.

Doctor Sanderson proves this Power of Dispensing to belong to the People as
well as to the Prince, in his tenth Praelection, N. 21. and he gives an Example
in N. 22. The Case is thus: The Conspirators, after the Gunpowder Treason was
discovered, fled into Warwickshire, and made an Insurrection: the Sheriff
raises the Posse Comitatus against them, they fled from thence into
Worcestershire, where, by the Law the Sheriffs of Warwick could not follow
them, but the Sheriff dispensed with the Law, Judging (says he) as he ought to
have done, That, if he would perform right the Office of a good Subject, the
Observation of the Law in that Case of Necessity was very unseasonable; and he
ought to obey the Supreme Law, which is the Safety of his Country. The Sheriff
did accordingly, and was highly commended by King James the First for it. There
might be many Examples of this kind given, in which the People are allowed to
dispense even with their Allegiance in case of Necessity. It is against the
Allegiance of a Subject to own the Power of an Usurper, to bear Arms, to judge
of Life and Death, or administer Justice between Man and Man, by his
Commission; and yet Dr. Sanderson determines it to be the Duty of a good Man to
do all these, if required by an Usurper, Praelect. 5. Salus populi suprema Lex:
The Equity of which Maxim, as it leaves in the Lawgiver a power of dispensing
with the Law, as he shall see it expedient to the public Good; so it leaves
in the Subject a Liberty upon just Occasions to do otherwise than the Law
requires. Dr. Sanderson's Judgment concerning Submission to Usurpers, page 17.
Edit. Land. 1678.
N. 19. and accordingly we find Judge Hales acted under the worst of Usurpers,
Oliver Cromwell, and executed the Office of a Judge, as may be seen in his Life.

15. Thirdly, It Is the most wicked as well as hazardous thing, that a King or
People can do, to pretend a necessity for dispensing with those public
Compacts, when the pretense is not real: for the public Faith is hereby
violated, the party unconsulted is abused, a just reason of Distrust raised
between the King and People, and they of the two that assume to themselves this
power of dispensing upon a pretended, not real necessity, in Cases of great
Moment to the Kingdom, are in a fair way to lay a real necessity on the other
party to dispense with their part of the Compact; that is to say, if the King
will pretend a Necessity where there is none, for his not governing by Laws in
Cases that concern the common safety of the Kingdom, he gives a shrewd
Temptation, and a justifiable Color to his People to dispense with their
Submission and Allegiance to him. And it is full as good a Reason for a Peoples
taking Arms to defend themselves against illegal Violence, to allege that they
were necessitated to do so, to prevent the Ruin and Destruction of them and
their Posterity, as it is for a King to allege, that he uses illegal Officers
and Force to preserve himself, and his Kingdoms. And if the Allegation be real,
I do not see why it should not justify the one as well as the other, tho the
one be against the Oath of Allegiance, and the other against the Coronation
Oath; Cases of extreme Necessity being tacitly excepted in both. Kings
therefore that take on themselves to dispense with Laws, without the consent,
either tacit or express of their People, give an ill Precedent against
themselves, and must blame themselves, if their People, taught by them, return
it upon them.

16. It Is plain, the Officers employed by King James in Ireland, both Civil and
Military, were unqualified and incapable by Law, of those Employments. If Lord
Tirconnell (for instance) claimed Subjection of us by the Laws, I do not see
why he should expect the People to be better Observers of the Laws than he was.
Suppose that it was against the Law for them to resist him, it was likewise
against the Laws that he should command them; if he dispensed in one Case, they
only dispensed in the other: and in this Case it was as lawful for the one to
dispense as the other.

I suppose the only Reason in a settled Government, why one Man can claim our
Submission and not another, is, because the known Laws give the one and not
another the power of commanding; but the Laws as well as the Interest of this
Kingdom said positively, that the Earl of Tirconnell, and Men of his Character
and Religion, should not have any Office Civil or Military, and therefore those
Protestants that stood on their Defense against him, did not look on themselves
to have resisted any persons legally commissioned by the King; nor was there
any need of a Judge, or Judgment in the Case: the Question being no other,
than, Whether the Law required, that our Governors and Army should not be
Papists? And, whether the Earl of Tirconnell and those he employed were
Papists? Both which were notorious and confessed by all without the
Determination of a Court or Judges.

17. As to the point of Necessity; it is as plain there was no Necessity on King
James to employ these persons, whom the Law had disabled to serve him;
Protestants were numerous enough, and willing enough to serve him in every
thing that was for the Interest of the Kingdom; but he not only refused to
entertain them, but turned out such as he found employed, without the least
Crime or Accusation; and put in their places persons not only unqualified by
Law for the Employments into which he put them, but also unfit and incapable to
discharge them; which sufficiently showed, that it was Choice, not Necessity,
made him employ them. But he foresaw, that such persons as the Laws designed
for Employments, would not assist to destroy the Laws, Liberties and Religion
of the Kingdom; and therefore he exchanged them for those new Servants, whose
Interest it was to join with him in his ill Designs, and whose Service was
their Crime; who deserved the most severe punishments, not only for accepting
these Employments against the Laws, but likewise using them to the Subversion
of all Law and Justice. If therefore there was any necessity on King James to
employ such Servants, it was a criminal Necessity, and entirely of his own
making; and if he imagined, that such a Necessity would excuse him from his
Coronation Oath, of governing according to the Laws, and justify his
dispensing with all the Laws made for the Security of his Subjects, why should
he not allow the same Liberty to his Subjects, and think that an inevitable
Necessity of avoiding Ruin, should be a sufficient Reason for them to dispense
with their Obedience to him, notwithstanding their Oaths of Allegiance;
especially where the Necessity is not pretended or created by themselves, as
his was, but apparent and forced on them by him? According therefore to his own
Rules, he cannot blame them for refusing to obey him where no Law required
their Obedience; or for resisting him in those unlawful Methods they saw him
engaged in, to their manifest Destruction.

But King James was resolved to venture all, and, as many of his Favorites
expressed it, would not be a Slave to the Laws, and therefore endeavored to be
their Master. In England he granted without any apparent Necessity, nay
(against not only the Interest and Safety of the Kingdom but even) to his own
prejudice, several Dispensations: but these passed in some color or form of
Law, and many of them at least passed the Offices and Seals; but in Ireland
they did not trouble themselves with these Formalities. A verbal Command from
the King was a sufficient Dispensation to all Laws made in favor of a
Protestant; the Officers acted, and the Courts judged, as if there had been no
such Laws in being. Here the Dispensations went much higher than in England,
even to dispensing with the Laws against robbing and taking away property; for
if King James had a mind to any thing, he sent an Officer with a File of
Musketeers, and fetched it away, without considering the Owners; and to show
us, that his Commands were not merely pretended by these Officers (which I
confess often happened) when they did such illegal things, the King himself to
show, I say, that it was his determinate Resolution to act us, did sometimes
send Orders under his Hand to take away many things of great value without
offering any Retribution or Satisfaction to the Owners.

Many Instauces of this kind may be given: I shall only mention one, because it
made some noise. A Grant, in nature of a Lease, with a reserved Rent to the
Crown, was made by King Charles the Second to some of his Courtiers, as a
Gratuity for considerable Services; whereby the sole Liberty to coin
Copper-Money in the Kingdom of Ireland for one and twenty years was given to
them. This Grant was purschased at a dear rate from the Grantees by Sir John
Knox, late Lord Mayor of Dublin, and was renewed not without great Trouble and
Charges to him by King James, after his Accession to the Crown. When he came
into Ireland, he found this Grant in the Hands of Colonel Roger Moor, to whom
it came by way of Legacy from the Purchaser. King James designing to set up a
Brass Mint, sent for this Grant, and had it strictly canvast, to see if any
Flaw could be found in it: none could be found; nor would the Colonel be
persuaded to give it up. The King therefore commanded it to be laid aside, and
his own Mint to be proceeded on, without regard to it. But having occasion for
the coining Tools and Engines belonging to this, without consulting the Owner,
or enquiring whether he was willing to part with them, he sent and seized on
them violently, forcing open the Doors, and taking away to a considerable
Value. Colonel Moore petitioned for Redress, or at least some Consideration
for his Loss, but his Petition was rejected, without being heard. Such
proceedings were common, and shows us plainly what a weak Barrier Laws are
against a person who designs absolute Power, and who believes, according to our
late Act of Recognition, That the Decision in all Cases of a misused Authority
by a Lawful Hereditary King, must be left to the sole Judgment of God.

SECT. IV. III. King James's Progress to destroy his Protestant Subjects, by
his disposing of Civil Offices, and ordering the Privy Council.
1. I Have already taken notice how King James disposed the Military Offices,
in such a Method, as must unavoidably ruin the Protestant Interest in Ireland,
it was not altogether so easy to out Men of their Civil Employment, as of
their Military. 1. Because many had Patents for Life, or Good Behavior. And 2.
Because some of the Offices themselves were so difficult to be managed, that it
was not easy to find Roman Catholics capable of discharging them; yet it
appeared necessary, in order to ruin the Protestants, that they should be
turned out of them; and therefore King James and his Ministers resolved to do
it as fast as they could. As soon as they could find a Papist that would or
durst undertake them, they put him in; and they plainly declared, that no
Protestant after a little while should have any Office of Trust or Profit left
in his Hands. Some Offices they disposed of without more ado, by new Patents,
and put the Patentee in Possession without taking notice that there was another
Patent in being, leaving the former Proprietor to bring his Action at Law if he
pleased. Thus they served Sir Charles Meredith for his Chancellorship of the
Exchequer; and thus they served Sir John Topham, and Sir John Coghill, for
their Masterships of the Chancery. And the Inferior Bodies of Cities learned
this Trick from them; and by it outed their Protestant Recorders, even before
their new Charters. Some Officers that claimed a Title to their Offices by Law,
were not allowed a Legal Trial: but the Chancellor called them before him, and
on a private Hearing, turned them out. Thus he served Mr. Charles Baldwin one
of the Examinators of the Chancery.

2. But to proceed by Retail seemed tedious, and therefore to make short Work,
and rid their Hands of Protestant Civil Officers at once, as they had done of
the Military. They made an Act in their pretended Parliament, to void all
Patents for Offices during Life or Good Behavior, though granted by King James
himself, and though the Protestants had laid out their Fortunes to purchase
them by King James's own Consent, and Permission, as many had done. Now let the
World judge what a step the disposal of these Offices was, to the Destruction of
Protestants, when some of them were of such Consequence, that an unfaithful
Officer in them, might undo many, by destroying their Evidences for their
Estates; in what condition must Protestants be, when the Records by which they
held their Estates, were put into the Hands of those who were their Adversaries
in the claim, and had nothing to bar them, but these Records, of which they
were now made Keepers, who had often before shocked the Protestant Titles, by
setting up counterfeit Deeds, nay and corrupting the Records themselves, even
whilst Protestants had the keeping of them; of which, the Records in the Common
Pleas Office, are yet an unanswerable Evidence, counterfeit Judgments being
entered there, to the sum of some one thousand pound, by the Treachery of
corrupting Papists. I have for the satisfaction of the Reader set down in the
Appendix the Appendix N. 10.
Names of the most considerable Officers belonging to the Courts, that the
Change may be more visible.

3. The next sort of Officers were such as were concerned in the Revenue; these
were, many of them, during Pleasure. The Revenue had for five or six years last
past been managed by Commissioners to very great advantage. They had gotten
under them a set of very sharp and severe Officers; many of which having been
formerly concerned in Trade themselves, knew all the Arts of cheating the King
in his Duties; and were able to discover them, and he who was most acute and
made greatest Advantage for the King, was sure to keep his Place and to be
advanced. It was hard to find a set of Commissioners and Officers that could
serve the King in his Revenue at the Rate these Persons did; and therefore they
were forced to be slow in changing them: yet they did it by degrees, and with
such Circumstances, as plainly discovered that they were resolved, as soon as
was possible, to employ Roman Catholics only. To do them Justice they
generally owned it; and when any of them had a Friend to prefer to an Office in
the Revenue, his Argument to remove the Protestant Possessor usually was, This
Man must be removed, and why not now? As the Popish Bishop of Elphin wrote to
Sir Patrick Trant from Gallway, in order to remove a Protestant Gauger employed
there. In most places they turned out the Protestant Collectors and Officers,
and put in their Popish Friends, though much to the Kings Loss, as it often
proved, and as they themselves knew it would be, and did not scruple to own it.
Their new Collectors, either being so ignorant as not to make the best of their
Places, or so very Corrupt that they run away with the Money when Collected; as
it happened at Clonmell; or so abused their Trust, that they were obliged to
change no less than five or six at a time, King James himself declaring
publicly that they deserved to be hanged. That there remained any Protestants
employed in the Revenue was plainly from their not having time enough to train
up others in their room, and not from their intentions to continue Protestants
in it; to whom they envied even the hated Office of being Publicans.

4. The third sort of Officers in the Kingdom are such, as have Trust or Honor
annexed to them, but little Profit; of this sort I reckon Sheriffs and Justices
of the Peace. It was no easy matter to find Roman Catholics to put into these
Offices, and it was a most provoking sight to Protestants, to see with what
kind of Men they supplied them: they were forced to rake into the very Scum and
Sink of the People, to find a few to set on the Bench, as I showed before; Men
without Freehold, without Sense, and without Honesty, were made Sherifs; and
yet they were forced to continue most of them two years, not being able to find
in some Counties any Roman Catholic that could pretend to be capable of such
an Employment. Thus in the County of Tyrone, Turlogh o Donelly served two years
as Sheriff, who had not one foot of Freehold; and for his Honesty you may guess
at it by this Story, which is notoriously true: His Son had stolen some
Bullocks from his Neighbor Mr. Hamilton of Callidon, and brought them to his
Father the Sheriffs House: some of them were killed and eaten in the House. The
Owner pursued and found the remainder, which were restored; and to Compound the
Matter, a Bond of sixteen pound was entered into by the Sheriff for such as were
eaten; and if I remember right, a Warrant of Attorney for Judgment. When he
came to Dublin to pass his Accounts as Sheriff, he was sued for the Money, but
to avoid the Suit, he listed himself a Foot Soldier in the Lord Maguires
Company, and pretended he was Enlisted in the Company two or three days before
the Arrest; which my Lord likewise vouched, though really he was not Enlisted
till after the Arrest or Execution. Upon which the Attorney that took out the
Action or Execution, I do not remember which, and the Person to whom he owed
Money were brought into great trouble, and forced to abscond for violating the
Privilege of the Army; and obliged for Peace sake to depart from their Claim.
We had many such Sheriffs and Justices of the Peace; and to demonstrate that
they designed to out Protestants of all Power, there was not one Protestant
Sheriff in all Ireland, for the year 1687, as may be seen in the Catalogue
which I I have given of their Names in the Appendix, N. 7.
except Charles Hamilton of Cavan, who was put in by mistake (as was supposed)
instead of John Hamilton of Killeneur, who is a Roman Catholic. Nay it was
designed that not one Protestant should sit on the Bench as Justice of Peace;
and the Design in a great measure effected; not indeed by revoking their
Commissions, but by making it impossible for them to Act. It was now almost a
necessary qualification to preserve a Man in his Place, to change or dissemble
his Religion; and some did worse, that is betrayed it by their Compliance,
whilst yet they professed it. Many who would not be guilty of such servility,
were turned out even from the mean Employments of a High or Petty Constable, of
a Goalour or Turn-Key; of all which it were easy to give Examples; but the
thing being Universal, makes that unnecessary. Even these mean Employments were
now counted too good for Protestants; and all this contrary to the express
Letter of the Law, which admitted none but such as would take the Oath of
Supremacy, to any Office; but they took a peculiar Pleasure to act in contempt
and despite of the Laws; and it seemed to them a kind of Conquest to turn a Man
out of his Employment, Office, or Freehold, contrary to Law. In the mean time
it was a melancholy thing for Protestants to live under such illegal Officers,
and have their Lives, Estates, and Liberties, at the mercy of Sheriffs,
Justices, and Juries; some of whose Fathers or nearest Relations, they had
either hanged for Thieving, Robbery and Murdering, or killed in the very Act
of Torying.

5. I reckon as a fourth sort of Officers in the Kingdom, such as were of the
Privy Council, which in Ireland is a great part of the Constitution, and has
considerable Privileges and Power annexed to it. Regularly no Act of Parliament
can pass in Ireland, till the chief Governor and Privy Council do first
certify the Causes and Reasons of it. It was therefore no less than necessary
that King James should model this to his mind; and he quickly ordered it so,
that the Papists made the majority in it; and whereas before it was a Refuge
and Sanctuary to the oppressed, it now became a most effectual Instrument to
strengthen the Popish Interest, and give Reputation to their Proceedings. We
may guess what kind of Government King James designed, when he was attended
with such a Council; and yet it is certain even some of See the Appendix for
the List of Privy-Counsellors. N. 9.
these, who were Protestants, would have been turned out, if they had not
absented themselves, and declined appearing at the Board; but whether they
appeared or no, was of no consideration, since it is plain they could do
Protestants little service.

SECT. V. Fourthly, King James's ordering Corporations was an effectual means
to destroy his Protestant Subjects, and to alter the very Nature of the
Government.
1. WOever knows the Constitution of England and Ireland, must observe that the
Subjects have no other security for their Liberties, Properties and Lives,
except the Interest they have of choosing their own Representatives in
Parliament. This is the only Barrier they have against the Encroachments of
their Governor. Take it away, and they are as absolute Slaves to the Kings
Will, and as miserable as the Peasants in France. Whoever therefore goes about
to deprive them of this Right, utterly destroys the very Constitution and
Foundation of the Government. Now the Protestants of Ireland finding the
necessity of securing this right in their own Hands, to preserve the Kingdom in
Prosperity and Peace, had procured many Corporations to be Founded, and built
many considerable Corporate Towns at their own Cost and Charges. They thought
it reasonable to keep these in their own Hands, as being the Foundation of the
Legislative power; and therefore secluded Papists as Enemies to the English
Interest in Ireland, from Freedom and Votes in them by the very Foundation and
Rules of planting them. This Caution they extended by a Law, to all other
Corporations in the Kingdom, excluding Papists likewise from them, which they
justly did, if we remember that these Papists had forfeited their Right in
them, by their Rebellion in 1641; and by their having turned those Towns, where
they had Interest, into Nests of Traitors against the King, and into places of
Refuge for the Murderers of the English; insomuch that it cost England some
Millions to reduce them again into Obedience; witness Killkenny, Waterford,
Galway, Lymerick, and every other place where they had power to do it. Add to
this, that generally the trading industrious Men of the Kingdom were
Protestants, who had built most of the Corporate Towns (above thirty at once in
King James the First's time) and a great part of the Freeholds of the Kingdom
did also belong to Men of the same Religion: insomuch that if a fair Election
had been allowed, in probability no Papist could have carried it in any one
County of Ireland. All which considered, it was but reasonable that the
Protestants that had by so much Blood and Treasure, brought the Kingdom into
subjection to the Laws of England, and planted it in such a manner as to render
it worth the Governing by the King, should be secured of their Representatives
in Parliament; especially when out of their great Loyalty, and Confidence in
the Kings kind intention to them, they by some new Rules had condescended, that
none should Officiate as Majors, Portrieves, Magistrates, or Sheriffs in the
chief Towns, till approved by the Kings chief Governor for the time being.
Their yielding this to the King, was a sufficient security, one would have
thought, to the Royal Interest. A great diminution of their Liberties, and such
as never was yielded before to any King; but this would not serve King James to
be Absolute, he must have the entire Disposition of them, and the Power to put
in and turn out whom he pleased, without troubling the Formalities of Law. To
bring them therefore to this, it was resolved to Dissolve them all. Tyrconnel
knew that the Protestants would never give up their Charters, without being
compelled by Law: and therefore he endeavored to prevail with them to admit
Papists to Freedom and Offices in them, that by their means he might have them
surrendered; but the Resolution of Sir John Knox, then Lord Mayor of Dublin, and
of the then Table of Aldermen, spoiled that Design, and forced the King to
bring Quo Warranto's against them, since they would not easily consent to
destroy themselves.

2. The Chief Baron Rice, and the Attorney General Nagle, were employed as the
fittest Instruments to carry on this Work. To prevent Writs of Error into
England, all these Quo Warranto's were brought in the Exchequer; and in about
two Terms, Judgments were entered against most Charters. Whereas if either
Equity or Law had been regarded, longer time ought to have been allowed in
matters of such Consequence for the Defendants to draw up their Plea, than the
Chief Baron took to dispatch the whole Cause, and seize their Franchises.
Attorney General Nagle played all the little Tricks that could be thought of;
and had an ordinary Attorney brought such Demurrers or Pleadings into Court, in
a common Cause, as he did in this most weighty Affair of the Kingdom; he would
have received a public Rebuke, and been struck out of the Roll for his Knavery
or ignorance. After all, there was not one Corporation found to have Forfeited
by a Legal Trial neither was any Crime or Cause of forfeiture objected against
them; yet the Chief Baron gave Judgment against a hundred Charters or
thereabouts, upon such little Exceptions, and pitiful Cavils, that it must be
the greatest affront to the understanding of Mankind, to think to put such on
them for Justice; and the greatest profanation of the name of Law, to endeavor
to pass such Proceedings for Legal. Admit that a Corporation, which is an
invisible Body in Law, could do any thing to destroy its own being; or that it
were reasonable it should be divested of a particular Privilege, which it has
manifestly abused; or when, by alteration of Circumstances, such a Privilegde
becomes a Prejudice to the Public; as it sometimes happens. Yet to Dissolve
all the Corporations in a Kingdom, without the least Reason or Pretense of
abuse of Privilege or Forfeiture, to take advantage from the Ignorance of a
Lawyer, or the mistake of a Clerk, nay to pretend these when really there is no
such thing, is such an abuse of the Kings Prerogative and the Law, that it is
enough to make the People, oppressed by color of them, to hate both, at least
to wish the Administration of them in other Hands; and this was clearly the
Case of the Corporations in Ireland. The City of Dublin was not allowed so much
time to put in their Plea as was really sufficient to transcribe it as it ought
to have been. The Clerk mistakes the Date of one of their Charters; they pray
leave to mend it; this is denied them; and the Chief Baron gives Judgment. The
same Term the Charter of Londonderry, in which the City of London was so deeply
concerned, was condemned on a yet more frivolous Pretense, upon which the Chief
Baron gave Judgment against the Charter. And upon the like wrangling Cavils
were the rest dissolved; except a few which were on Noblemens Estates. Some of
these Noblemen employed, Roman Catholic Agents or Receivers; who so managed
their Estates for them, as chiefly to encourage Papists, and now became the
Instruments to betray their Corporations. Those Agents employed the Power and
Interest they had amongst their Masters Tenants, by Threats and Intrigues, to
procure Surrenders; and by these means, some few were influenced. Thus one
Potter, a Papist, employed as a Receiver by the Earl of Kildare, betrayed his
Lord, and prevailed with Athy and some other Corporations on his Estate to
Surrender.

3. Whether they did not think fit to destroy the Charters upon their usual and
trivial pretense of defective Pleading, there they found out other Expedients,
without Trial, to destroy them. And that was, by granting a New Charter (as in
the Case of Bangor in the County of Down) to such Men as the Attorney General
thought fit; who by the Sheriff should be put in Possession of the Government
of the Town, and then if the former Possessors thought themselves injured, they
might bring their Actions against the Intruders: in the Trial of which, they
had Reason to expect no more fairness, than they found in the Proceedings
against their Charters.

4. This Contrivance, of superseding a former Charter by granting a new one,
served to very good purpose. There were many particular Charters granted to
Corporations in the City of Dublin. Such were the Corporations of Tailors,
Skinners, Feltmakers, etc. where these refused to Surrender, they got a few of
the Trade to take out a new Charter, by which Papists were constituted Masters
and Wardens, and as soon as they had taken it out they committed to Prison such
of the ancient Members as would not submit to them.

5. Every Body dreaded the Effects of these Proceedings, the Gentry considered
that they held their Estates by Patents from the King; and the Title was no
stronger than that of a Charter. And if Men were outed of their Privileges and
Freedoms by such Tricks and Shaddows of Law, they began to fear that one day or
other the like might be found to void their Patents.

6. As soon as the Corporations came to be supplied with new Charters, it
plainly appeared that no English or Protestant Freeman could expect a
comfortable Life in Ireland; for in the first place, the Corporations were made
absolute Slaves to the King's Will, it being one Clause in all the new
Charters, that the King's chief Governor should have power to turn out, or put
in whom he pleased, without giving any Reason, and without any Form of Legal
Proceeding; by which the Corporations were so much in the King's Power, that he
might with as much reason have named his Regiment of Guards, a Free Parliament,
as the Burgesses returned by such Elections. The whole Kingdom had therefore
reason to resent such Proceedings, as being absolutely destructive to their
Liberties; but more especially the English Protestants; for it plainly appeared
in the second place, that all this Regulation was more immediately designed for
their Destruction. The persons every where named for Aldermen and Burgesses in
the new Charters being above two thirds Papists, some few Protestants were kept
in for form sake, that they might not seem absolutely to discountenance them;
and to avoid discovering their Designs of turning them out of all: but yet so
few, in comparison of the Papists, that they were incapable of doing either
good or hurt. And when they saw that they must be insignificant, they generally
declined serving at all. The Papists employed, were commonly the most
inveterate and exasperated persons against Protestants and their Interest, that
could be found. Many of them never saw the Corporations for which they were
named; they were never concerned in Trade or Business; many of them were named
for several Corporations, because they wanted Men qualified as they would have
had them, to make up the number of Aldermen or Burgesses. Most of them were
poor and mean, and such whose very Names spoke Barbarities.

7. The Protestants foresaw very well, what they were to expect from
Corporations thus settled; and a great many of the richest trading Citizens,
removed themselves and their Effects into England. The Gentry likewise
endeavored to make Provisions for themselves there; and such as could compass
Money laid it out in England, and fled after it to avoid the Storm they saw
coming on Ireland. The Truth is* 'twas intolerable to them to live under the
Government of their Footmen and Servants, which many must have done, had they
staid; and they could not but dread a Parliament, that should not only be
Slaves to the King's Will, who they saw was bent to settle Popery at any rate,
but which must consist of Members that they knew to be their inveterate and
hereditary Enemies, who would not stick to sacrifice the Liberties and Laws of
the Kingdom to the King's Will, so they might procure from him Revenge on the
Protestants, and turn them out of their Estates. For what would they stick at,
that were so servile as to accept such precarious Charters? They saw in this
their own Ruin designed; and the Event has shown that they were not mistaken,
perhaps no King in the World, much less a King who had been obliged in so high
a manner as King James had been, by his Protestant Subjects, did ever take so
much pains to ruin his Enemies, or condescend to such mean Acts as he did to
ruin us.

SECT. VI. V. King James's destructive Attempts upon the Trade and Trading Part
of the Nation.
1. TRade is of so great advantage to a Kingdom, and the Profit it brings to
the Exchequer is so considerable, that it is hardly credible that any King
should contrive to destroy it in his own Kingdom; and yet King James has given
us just reason to conclude, that he designed the Ruin of it in all his
Kingdoms, at least was well pleased with it. Many Roman Catholics, who
pretended to know his mind, have confidently affirmed, that he purposely let
the Ships of England decay and rot, that the French might grow great at Sea,
and destroy the Trade of the English. The Reason pretended for doing so, was to
humble his Subjects, and take away their Wealth from them, that made them proud
and surly, so that the King could not have his Will of them; I speak the
Language of these Roman Catholics; and the King himself*could not sometimes
forbear Words to the same purpose. And if we consider the Condition in which
their present Majesty's found the English Fleet, the thing will not want
probability. It was further pretended by many of King James's Officers* that it
was more for the King's Advantage, to have his Subjects poor than rich; For,
said they, you see how willing the poor Irish are to enlist themselves Soldiers
for two pence a day, who know no better way of living: but it were impossible
to bring the rich Churls of England ( so they usually called them) from their
Farms and Shops, on such terms, to serve the King. They further alleged, that
the Poverty of the Generality of France, is the Reason that they are so willing
to be Soldiers, and makes them so easily maintained when they are enrolled.
Upon such destructive Maxims did they found their design of ruining Trade in
these Kingdoms.

2. But whatever be said to the general Design, it is certain King James ruined
the Trade of Ireland, in prosecution of his purpose of destroying the
Protestants there. The Money and Wealth circulated in their Hands, and few
others had either Stock, Understanding or Credit, to carry on a Trade besides
them. They innocently imagined, if there had been no other Reason, that this
alone would have prevailed with the then Government to have permitted them to
live secure, easy and quiet; but they quickly found that King James and his
Ministers would rather have no Trade at all in the Kingdom, than it should be
in the Hands of Protestants. Merchants have generally their Stock in Movables,
so that it is easy for them to transport themselves and their Effects into
another Country, if they find themselves uneasy in their own. And sure the
Protestant Merchants could not be easy in Towns which they had formerly
governed, and in which they were now subjected to mean inconsiderable People;
many of which had formerly been their own menial Servants, but now advanced to
the Honor of being Magistrates, treated their late Masters with such Affronts
and Abuses, as are intolerable to Free Men, and, which Solomon observes, make
even wise Men mad.

3. This, together with the apprehension of danger to their Lives and Fortunes,
from the advancement of such indigent and malicious persons to* Power, did
drive most of the rich Traders out of the Kingdom. The rest contracted their
Stocks, called in their Debts, and resolved to give over Trading, or else
follow their Neighbors into England, as soon as they could clear themselves of
their Business; the effect of this Resolution of theirs was ruinous to all such
as were indebted to them, or in their Books; for it was impossible to raise
Money to answer those Debts, when called for so suddenly, tho they had Stock
enough to answer them if time had been allowed them, as they expected when they
contracted them; by which means Protestants were forced to ruin one another, as
well as some Papists that depended on them; a great many being forced thereby
to shut up Shop, and break for small Debts, that bare no proportion to their
Stocks and Credit, whose payment had been good, if they had not been called on
too suddenly, and if the Circulation of Trade had not been stopped.

4. The next thing that destroyed the Trade of Ireland was the advancing
persons of mean or no Fortunes unto places of Profit. These had no ready Money
to give the Merchants, and yet were necessitated to live high, and appear in
fine Clothes; and either by force or fraud they got into the Shop-Books; and by
refusing to pay, disabled the Merchants to make their usual Returns, and by
that means broke their Credit, which is the Foundation of Trade. The Protestant
Soldiers and Officers, in whose places the indigent Papists were substituted,
were generally so good Husbands as to have some little thing in store; and
hence were enabled to take up at the best hand, and punctualy pay what they had
expended; but these New-Comers gave their Creditors, where they chanced to be
trusted, only Oaths, and Curses, and Abuses, instead of Payment; a general stop
of Trading immediately followed; especially the Manufactures set up in the
Kingdom, which were very considerable to its Trade, came to be neglected; and
every thing upon Tyrconnell's coming to the Government, was at a stand. The
Clothier would not lay out his Money to make Cloth, and pay Workmen, when it
must either lie on his Hands, or he be obliged to trust it to such Debtors that
would only return him Abuses for his Money. The Builder would not go on in his
Building, and part with his ready Money, when he could have no Security of
enjoying it, or receiving Rent for it, if he let it. By these means great
numbers of Tradesmen and Laborers, all generally Protestants, were reduced to
Beggary, and their Families starved. Such sort of People as these, are the Men
that carry on Trade, and enrich a place; but were now forced to leave the
Kingdom, and seek elsewhere for Work: their going away stopped the usual
Consumption of Commodities, and made Trade yet more dead and heavy.

5. There was a third thing that did further discourage the Merchants, and that
was the* Exaction of the Custom Houses. The Officers found, that by the decay
of Trade, the King's Revenue must fall, and that then they would be in hazard
to lose their places; to prevent which, they used all the Rigor and Exactions
imaginable: they had Valuators of their own choosing, which put what Rates on
Goods they pleased; and then the Merchant must pay the Duties accordingly
without Remedy. Frequently the Values set on Goods were double, nay treble to
what they ought to have been, and to the true intrinsic Worth of the
Commodity, or what they could be sold for; the Consequence whereof was, that
the Merchant paid often double or treble Duties to what he ought; and this was
a great Discouragement to Trading. The Complaints of all People in general as
well as of Merchants were great on the account of Exactions of the Officers of
the Revenue, who were grown up to a high degree of Exorbitance; which, with
many other Abuses in the Kingdom, proceeded from the long Disuse of
Parliaments, the inferior Officers being freed from that fear for twenty four
years, did forget that there were any, to whom they were accountable, besides
their own Masters; and therefore not only exacted upon and oppressed the
Subjects, but likewise treated them with insufferable Insolence, while the
Commissioners or Farmers strained and perverted the Laws for their own profit,
or to ingratiate themselves with the Courtiers, on whose Favor they depended.

6. There was a fourth thing that more peculiarly ruined the Protestant Trade,
and 'twas thus; the King's Revenue in Ireland was so considerable a part of
each Man's Estate, that most of the current Coin in the Kingdom came into the
Treasury once in a year, either for Hearth Money, Crown Rents, or some other
Duties. And the King having turned Protestants out of all profitable
Employments, and out of the Army, and put in Papists, his Revenue was paid out
again to them, and ought to have circulated indifferently amongst his Subjects,
as it used to do. But so great was the Malice of these new Officers to
Protestants, that they combined amongst themselves, to let them have as little
of it as was possible; and therefore wherever they could lay it out with one
of their own Religion, they did it. And very few Protestants ever received a
Groat of their Money, as the Citizens of Dublin can universally witness. When
they wanted Money they came to the Protestant Shops, where they abused and
affronted and terrified them, if they refused to trust; calling them Dogs,
Whigs, Rebels and Traitors, swearing with many Oaths, that they would be
revenged on them. But if they had ready Money, tho they had been formerly
Customers to Protestants, and in their Books, they never came near them any
more. This Practice was so universal amongst them, that even the Women learned
it; particularly the Lady Tyrconnel's Daughters: for thus the Lady Ross and her
Sister Dillon treated several Shopkeepers, falling furiously upon them in the
former Terms, because their Servants refused to trust. By the like rudeness the
Exchange was entirely ruined; neither Buyers nor Sellers being able to keep in
it, by reason of the Insolences of the new Popish Officers who walked in it,
affronted and assaulted every Body, or extorted their Goods from them for
nothing, the Shopkeepers not daring to refuse to trust them. By this means the
rich Shopkeepers were driven away, and most of the considerable Shops shut up,
even in the principal Streets of the City, long before we heard any News of the
Prince of Orange. As soon as the Earl of Tyrconnel came to the Government,
there was almost a Desolation in the Town; and there were at least fourteen or
fifteen Trades that had nothing to do; the Government knew very well that this
would be the Effect of their Proceedings, and that the Trade, Manufactures and
Improvements of the Kingdom must cease, if they went on at the Rate they did;
but they were so far from being concerned at it, that they rather seemed well
pleased with it.

7. And to ruin our Trade entirely, they suffered and connived at the
Transportation of our Wool to France; a thing so fatal to England as well as to
Ireland, that the Law has made it Felony to be punished with Death. The new
Mayor of Gallway, Mr. Kyrovan was catched in the very Fact; and the Delivery of
a considerable Cargo sent by him into France, was fully proved; for which he
ought to have been hanged: but the Lord Deputy Tyrconnel, notwithstanding all
his Oaths and pretended Displeasure, when the Mischief of it was laid before
him, quickly showed this to be only a Copy of his Countenance; for he not only
granted him a Pardon, and remitted his Forfeiture of about 10000 l. but as a
further Mark of his Favor, he continued him in his Mayoralty for another year.
Thus the Trade of the Kingdom was ruined, and the Protestants, who with vast
Hazard and Charge carried it on, had it left to their Choice whether they would
stay here and starve, or remove themselves to another Kingdom; and I believe no
Body will wonder if they had no great affection for a Government that
designedly brought this hardship upon them.

8. It must be acknowledged, that King James did not only ruin the Protestant
Trade, but that he went a great way in destroying the Trade of the Roman
Catholics also. It is well known, that the Citizens of Gallway are the most
considerable Roman Catholic Traders in Ireland; many of whom had purchased
Estates under the Acts of Settlement and Explanation, and must therefore fall
together with them. They foresaw their own Ruin in the Repeal of th^se Acts,
and petitioned the Parliament, that Consideration might be had of their
Purchases and Improvements; but this reasonable Request was denied them; those
Acts were repealed, and by their Repeal left the most considerable Roman
Catholic Traders in Ireland, without Estates or Credit to follow their Trade,
or to answer their Correspondents abroad.

I might add here the further steps made by King James toward ruining the
Protestant Trade, by his coining Brass Money, by his lodging it in Protestants
Hands, seizing their Stocks and Commodities, whereby they were utterly disabled
to trade; whilst Papists were not only spared, but had the Protestants Goods
put into their Hand. But these with the other Influences the Brass Money had to
destroy us, will be more proper, when we come to consider the Invasions made on
our Properties.

SECT. VII. VI. King James's destructive Proceedings against the Liberties of
his Protestant Subjects.
1. THere is no worldly thing more valuable to Man than Liberty. Many prefer it
to life; and few can live long without it. It Is the Darling of our Laws, and
there is nothing of which they are more tender. But the Protestants of Ireland
from the very beginning of King James's Reign, had their Liberties invaded, and
at last entirely destroyed. 'Twas observable, that at his coming to the Crown
he made no Proclamation for a general Pardon, as has been usual with Kings;
neither did he pass any Act of Grace in his first* Parliament, which gave a
fair opportunity to the Papists of Ireland to revenge themselves on their
Protestant Neighbors. No sooner had they gotten Judges and Juries that would
believe them, but they began a Trade of Swearing, and ripping up what they
pretended their Neighbors had said of His late Majesty, whilst Duke of York
some years before, especially in time of the Popish Plot. The new Justices of
the Peace were eager to exercise their Offices, and therefore on the slightest
occasion, bound over and committed their Protestant Neighbors, many times
without any reason at all; at least, without any given in their Warrants: it
was time enough to invent some against the next Assizes. There never wanted
Evidence enough to accuse a Man; the very Priests being forward to encourage
such Perjuries, as were to the prejudice of Protestants. Of this there are
several Instances on Record in the Courts of Justice; where we find them
sometimes swearing Falsehoods themselves, and sometimes encouraging others to do
it. Of which the Courts, even in spite of all their partiality, were satisfied.
I gave one Example before in Sir William Petty's Case. There is another of Mr.
Balfours in the County of Fermanagh, where the false Affidavit of one Hultaghan
a Priest, had almost destroyed his Cause, and lost him a considerable Estate.

2. Upon this account Perjuries became so common, that if a Tenant owed his
Protestant Landlord his Rent, he paid him by swearing him into a Plot, or by
fixing on him some Treasonable or Seditious Words. If a Papist had any former
Quarrel with his Protestant Neigbor, or owed him Money, he paid him in the same
Coin. Many were indicted by these Contrivances; many found guilty, and
excessively fined; some were imprisoned for their Fines, not being able to
satisfy the King, who seized both their Bodies and Estates* Hardly any County
in Ireland was free from numerous Indictments of this kind, and very few
Country Gentlemen escaped being accused. Great numbers were indicted and found
guilty in the Counties of Wexford and Wicklow, to the number at least of sixty,
the most considerable Gentlemen in the County of Mead were indicted, but had
better luck; the Perjury of their Accusers being made so manifest, that even a
Popish Bench had not the confidence to countenance it, nor a Popish Jury to
find it. Thus Mr. Meredith, Mr. Parry, Mr. Chetwin a Minister, and several
others, escaped; having discovered the very bottom of a wicked Contrivance to
carry on a Trade of Swearing against all the Gentlemen in the Country; but
though they discovered it, yet they durst not prosecute it, by reason of some
Priests being concerned in it, and of the Discountenance of the Courts; a great
many in the County of Tipperary, were likewise brought into Trouble, but
escaped the first time by a kind of Miracle; one of the Jurors was so
maliciously bent against them, that he swore he would die before he would
acquit them: It happened to him according to his own desire, he fell dead in
the place, whilst they were disputing about returning the Verdict, which saved
the Gentlemen for that time. Yet this did not discourage their Prosecutors,
they caused them to be indicted anew, and upon their second Trial Justin
Macarty (afterward made Lord Mountcashell by King James) came into the Court*
threatened and hectored Sir John Mead, who then sat as Judge for the Duke of
Ormond (it being within his Graces Palatinate) because he would not direct the
Jury to find them guilty; but Sir John stood his Ground, and declared, that
there was no sufficient Evidence against them; upon which they were acquitted.
It vexed them, that they could not bring their Popish Judges and Sheriffs into
that County, as they did into the rest of Ireland, by reason that the
nomination of them was in his Grace, as Lord of the Regalities; and therefore
in their pretended Parliament they not only Attainted him, but likewise, by a
particular Act, dissolved his Principality. Their First Plot against the
Gentlemen of the County having miscarried, they began a second, and got
Depositions against several; but they were as unlucky in this as in the first.
They laid the Scheme of their Affairs so unskilfully, that the Witnesses swore
that the Gentlemen met to carry on their Plot at Nenagh, a place above sixty
Miles from Dublin, on the same day that some of them had been examined before
the Council Board on the first Informations. This appearing to the Council by
an entry made in their own Books, quashed the Design against them, and saved
them a third time. It would make a Volume to enumerate all the Particulars of
this Nature.

3. The new Mayors and Justices of the Peace were no less troublesome to
Protestants in their Employments; they made no scruple to send their Tokens and
Warrants for Persons of the best Quality. And wherever a Papist and Protestant
had any difference, there needed no more but a complaint to procure a
Committal, and to be sure it was done with all the indignity and affronting
Circumstances imaginable. Sir Thomas Hackett, whilst Lord Mayor of Dublin, did
so many brutish and barbarous things of this nature, that it were endless to
recount them; taking example from the Lord Tyrconnel, who made him Mayor, he
treated every body with Oaths, Curses, ill Names, and barbarous Language. The
Lord Primate Boyles Family could not escape his Warrants; he (or his Clerk, as
he afterward pretended) sent one for Mr. Francis Cuff, and Mr. Jephson, who
lived in my Lords Family, being his Son in Law and Nephew: their Crime was,
refusing to Contribute to the maintenance of two begging Friars; one of them
was one Magee, a Debauchee and Renegado, who had the impudence to have demanded
it from my Lord Primate if he had been permitted access. The Friars vexed that
they should be repulsed, procured a Warrant for the two Gentlemen that refused
them, and attempted the Execution of it in my Lord Primates House, with a
Rabble of near two hundred. Sir Thomas was not content to Execute his Authority
within his own Precincts, but extended it where the Mayors Power was never
owned. He sent his Warrant and committed the Officers of Christ's Church,
Dublin, to the Stocks, because he fancied they did not make the Bells ring
merrily enough for the Birth of the Prince of Wales. It was in vain for the
Officers to tell him, that their Church and Persons were not subject to his
Jurisdiction; that if the Bells did not ring merrily enough as he alleged, it
was the Ringers fault, not theirs. That no body, besides his Lordship, could
observe any such thing in their Ringing. His brutish Passion would not give him
leave to hearken to Reason; but upon all occasions he proceeded in the same
method; which made every body, that valued his Liberty, get out of his Power;
and prevailed with a great many to leave their Estates and Concerns, and
Transport themselves, and what Effects they could carry with them into England.
It was unsafe and uneasy living both in the City and in the Country, and he
reckoned himself happy that could get out of them at any rate.

4. But when the Descent was made by his present Majesty into England, things
grew yet more troublesome. The Protestants were every where Robbed and
Plundered. The new Commissioned Officers and their Soldiers, under the new
name of Rapperies, committed many Outrages and Devastations on their Protestant
Neighbors; insomuch that they could not be safe in their Houses. If any
endeavored to keep their Houses, though merely to secure themselves from the
Robbers and Tories, immediately they were Besieged; and though they Surrendered
themselves as soon as Summoned, having no design to resist Authority, and put
themselves into the Hands of King James's Officers, upon promise of Freedom,
nay on Articles, yet afterward they were imprisoned and prosecuted, as Mr.
Price of Wicklow. Some of them Condemned and Executed; which happened to Mr.
Maxwel and one Lewis, in the Queens County. They thought it not safe to Execute
some till the War was over, and therefore only kept them in Prison. So Sir
Laurence Parsons, and many others were served.

5. At last it came to a general Seizure, and almost all the Protestant
Gentlemen, without Reason or pretense of Reason, without so much as a Warrant,
or Form of Law, were put in Goals under the custody of mean and barbarous
Guards. Whose very Captains had had no better Education than that of Footmen or
Cowherds; who exercised what understanding they had, to invent new methods of
vexing their Prisoners. This general Confinement continued with most, from the
middle of Summer 1689, till Winter; and with some, till his Majesty's Victory
at the Boyne set them all at Liberty: during all which time, no Reason or
Ground of their Committal was given; nor were Habeas Corpus's allowed them,
though earnestly solicited. One indeed was allowed to Mr. Thomas King, a
Minister, which being the only one that took place, it may be proper to give
the Reader an account of the Case. The Reason of his Committal was really a
Quarrel picked designedly with him by an Officer of the Guards, because he
refused to admit one Ambrose, the Popish Quartermaster of the City, for a
Godfather to a Protestant Child, whom he Christened: in Revenge whereof, the
Officer intruded into his Company whilst at Meat, as was common with them, and
would needs oblige him to drink Confussion and Damnation to the Prince of
Orange; which he modestly declining, and alleging that it was unfit for a
Christian, much more for a Clergyman, to drink Damnation to any: the Officer
hurried him away to Newgate by his own Authority, and after lying there till
the Term, his Habeas Corpus was allowed him. Upon the Return made by the
Goalour, the Court was so vexed at it, that they fined the Goalour for making
such a Return, but in earnest because he made any, for that was the contrivance
they had to keep People in Goal: and after all he was still kept a Prisoner
notwithstanding his Habeas Corpus, till most were bailed; and then upon Bail of
five thousand pound he was permitted to go out: under which Bail he continued
as all the rest did, under the like sums, till the general Deliverance. After
his; no more Habeas Corpus's were allowed. Most of the Prisoners toward the
depth of Winter were indeed bailed, and continued so from Term to Term, till
the news of his present Majesty's arrival, and then all were confined anew,
notwithstanding their Bail, with some that had not been confined before. At the
hour when the last of King James's Forces were leaving Dublin, they were
ordered to carry away four hundred Prisoners along with them; but the Officers
were too much afraid of a Pursuit, and too busy in carrying off their own
Baggage, to embarrass themselves with Prisoners; and therefore for a little
Gold dismissed them. How the Protestants of Drogheda, who were all made
Prisoners, were used, whilst the Town was surrounded, is not to be forgotten.
They carried them to the Mount where they expected the Canon would play, tied
them together and set them to receive the Shot, if the Town had been Attacked:
but their Hearts failed them who were to Defend it, and so it pleased God to
preserve the poor Protestants, they being delivered, together with the Town, to
his Majesty, upon Summons and Articles. The Protestants of Cork, and other
Towns, were yet worse used; they were carried from their own Homes to some
remote Castles, and there kept without Conveniences till many of them
perished. There were some very barbarous Circumstances in their Sufferings,
which I must leave to the Persons themselves to relate, having not yet had full
Information.

6. During their Confinement, the Prisoners were kept very strictly, their
Servants, Children, and Wives, were often debarred from seeing them; or when
admitted, not suffered to speak to them, but in presence of the Soldiers. In
Dublin, when they had filled the Goals, the Hospitals, the College, and other
places of Confinement, they at last imprisoned the Citizens in Churches. They
were crowded into stinking, nasty, unhealthy Rooms, sometimes twenty, sometimes
forty in a Room. At the College, and at a House called White Friars, where
there were many Prisoners, they put Barrels of Powder under them, threatening to
blow them up if they should be pressed, and not able to keep the Places. Colonel
Luttrell, Governor of Dublin, denied indeed that this was done by his Order;
but* yet when he was informed of it by Sir John Davis, then a Prisoner and
Witness of it, he commended the Discretion of the Officer that did it. This
Confinement did not only fall on Gentlemen, but also on the Clergy, nay on the
meanest Citizens. Whoever pleased, had a power to Commit Protestants; and if at
any time they asked by what Authority they were committed, those that committed
them made no other answer than that they committed them, let them get out as
they could. Some few Gentlemen were indeed committed by C. J. Nugents Warrant,
upon a kind of Affidavit made by one Leak, whom most of them had never seen:
several of these, by express Orders of the Lord Chief Justice, were sent to
Newgate, and committed in the Common Goal, in the same Room with Thieves and
Common Rogues, though Gentlemen of the best Quality in the Kingdom: and so
hasty was his Lordship in it, that he did it before he knew some of their
names; which he was forced afterward to send for, and learn from themselves. A
Bill was prepared against them, and offered to the Grand Jury; but Leak was
unwittingly clapped up, by one of themselves, for a former Robbery, at the time
he should have given Evidence, and so the Gentlemen escaped being tried. The
Confinement was yet more severe and uneasy in the Country; the Gentlemen being
at such distances from their own Homes, that they could hardly be supplied with
Necessaries.

7. It may be thought that these things were unknown to King James, and
therefore are not to be imputed to him: but it is certain, that if he did not
Contrive and and Order them, he yet consented to them; neither did he seem to
have the least resentment or pity for their Sufferings; as appeared from his
Carriage to the Bishop of Lymerick. His Lordship, by his Majesty's Command, on
a particular Service waited often on him; he took one of those Opportunities
that seemed most favorable, to lay before his Majesty the manifold hardships
which were put on the Clergy, and the Protestants in general, of his Diocese.
He represented to him how they were first Robbed of all, and then laid in Goal;
and that they had no way offended his Majesty, or disturbed his Government; and
begged his favor in their behalf. His Majesty heard him, but made him no
answer; instead thereof, he fell into discourse of another Affair, with a
Papist that chanced to be by, and that with an Air more than ordinarily
pleasant and unconcerned. Indeed his Majesty had by one general Order and
Proclamation, dated July 26. 1689, confined all Protestants, without
distinction of Age or Sex, to their Parishes and Cities, though their Occasions
were such that he very well knew that this alone, without any more, was a very
great encroachment on their Liberty, and a mighty inconveniency to their
Affairs; especially when it was continued without Reason or Limitation. No body
knew when this would be relaxed; and it was Executed with great strictness,
till his present Majesty's success put an end to it, and to the Power that
imposed it.

8. But least these hardships and restraints should either be avoided by our
flight, or known in England, where King James had a Party to cry up the
mildness of his Government, and face down the World that the Protestants lived
easily and happily under him in Ireland, a most strict Embargo was laid on all
Ships, and effectual care taken to destroy all Correspondence with our Friends
there: insomuch that to avoid a Goal, great numbers of Gentlemen and other
persons were forced to make their escapes in small Wherries and Fishing-Boats,
which before these times durst never venture out of the sight of the Shore: but
it seemed more tolerable, to every body that could compass it, to cross the
Irish Seas, so famous for their boisterousness and Shipwracks, in that
hazardous manner, than to continue under a Government where they could call
nothing their own; where it was in the power of any that pleased, to deprive
them of their Liberty; where they durst not Travel three Miles for fear of
incurring the severest penalties; where they could not send a Letter to a
Friend, though in the next Town, and about the most necessary Occasions; and
where, tho never so cautious and innocent, they were sure at last to be sent to
a Goal. A Government that thus encroached on our Liberties, could not expect we
should continue under it longer than we needs must; and it had been
unpardonable folly in us not to desire, much more to refuse a deliverance,
especially from England: which if Blood and Treasure, or a Possession of five
hundred years can give a right to a Country, is justly entitled to the
Government of Ireland. And which, if it had no other exception against King
James's Government, but his Carriage toward Ireland, and his attempts to
separate it from its dependence on England, must be justified by all the World,
in their laying him aside, as a Destroyer of his People, and a disinheritor of
the Crown of his Ancestors.

SECT. VIII. 7. The preparations made by the Earl of Tyrconnel to ruin the
Estates and Fortunes of the Protestants, by taking away their Arms.
1. It Is Property that makes Government necessary; and the immediate end of
Government is to preserve Property; where therefore a Government, instead of
preserving, entirely ruins the Property of the Subject, that Government
dissolves it self. Now this was the State of the Protestants in Ireland: the
Government deprived them contrary to Law and Justice (nay, for the most part,
without so much as the pretense of a Crime) of every thing to which persons can
have a Property; even of the necessaries of life, Food and Raiment. To lay this
more fully before the Reader, I will show First, That King James took away the
Arms of Protestants. Secondly, That he took away their personal; and Thirdly,
their real Estates.

2. When his present Majesty made his descent into England, King James had an
Army of Papists in Ireland, consisting of between 7 and 8000, of which, near
4000 were sent over to him into England; there remained then about 4000 behind,
scattered up and down the Kingdom; which were but a handful to the Protestants,
there being Men and Arms enough in Dublin alone, to have dealt with them: When
therefore the News came, that K. J. had sent Commissioners to treat with the
Prince of Orange, it was proposed by some to seize the Castle of Dublin* where
the Stores of Arms and Ammunition lay; the possibility of this was
demonstrated, and the Success extremely probable; insomuch that the persons who
offered to undertake it, made no doubt of effecting it; they considered that
the Papists, besides the 4000 of the Army, were generally without Arms; that
those who were in Arms, were raw and cowardly, and might easily be suppressed;
that to do it effectually* there needed no more but to seize the Deputy
Tyrconnel, who had not then above 600 Men in the City to guard him, and secure
it; that their hearts were generally sunk, and they openly declared themselves
to be desirous to lay down their Arms; proposing to themselves no other
Conditions, but to return to the station in which they were when K. J. came to
the Crown. This was so universally talked of by themselves, that if any one
could have assured them of these terms, there was no doubt but they would
readily have complied, and have left the Lord Tyrconnel to shift for himself;
nay, it is probable, the wiser sort amongst them would have bin glad that the
Protestants had seized him; and he himself See Appendix, No 14.
commanded some Protestants to signify to their Friends in England, that he
was willing to part with the Sword on these terms, so he might have leave to do
it from K. J. But the Protestants had bin educated in such a mighty veneration
to the very name of Authority, and in so deep a sense of Loyalty, that
notwithstanding the many provocations given them, and their fear of being
served as in 1641, the memory of which was still fresh to them, they yet
abhorred any thing that looked like an Insurrection against the Government; and
generally condemned the design of meddling with the Lord Deputy, tho they knew
he was no Legal Governor, and incapable by the Law of that Trust. Especially
the Lord Mountjoy labored for his safety, and prevented the forementioned
proposal of seizing him and the Castle, with as much industry as if he himself
had bin to perish in it.

The truth is, it was an unanimous resolution of all the Protestants of the
Kingdom, that they would not be the Aggressors; and they held steadily to their
resolution. None offered or attempted any thing, till they saw the whole body
of the Papists in Ireland forming themselves into Troops and Companies, and
these new raised Men permitted, nay, put under a necessity to rob and plunder
for their subsistence. They pitied the hard Fortune of K. J. and
notwithstanding they were half ruined themselves when he came into the Kingdom;
yet if he had carried himself with any tolerable moderation toward them, and
his designs to ruin them had not bin so apparent, he might have prevailed on
them in a great measure. But his behavior was such, as shall appear in the
sequel of this discourse, that it left no room for them to expect or hope for
any safety under his Government; of which such Protestants as had followed him
from England were generally so sensible, that many of them repented too late
their having stuck to his interest, and heartily wished themselves at home
again: openly professing, that they could not have believed that he was such a
Man, or his designs such as they found them: nay, several of the English
Papists that came from France with him, abhorred his Proceedings; and used to
allege, that he not only hated the English Protestant, but also the English
Man. The very Ambassador d'Avaux, if he might be believed, was dissatisfied
with K. J's Measures, and condemned them; alleging that he had entirely given
himself up to the conduct of the bigoted Irish Clergy, and of Tyrconnel; who
in earnest was the only Minister he trusted, and would effectually ruin him and
the Kingdom: Whatever the Ambassador thought, it is certain he has discoursed
in this manner, and the event has answered the prediction.

4. But to return to the Lord Tyrconnel's dealing with the Protestants: When he
found himself so very weak, and so much in the power of the Protestants, that
nothing but their own Principles of Loyalty secured him against them, he betook
himself to his usual Arts, that is, of falsehood, of dissimulalation, and of
flattery; which he practiced with the deepest Oaths and Curses; protesting that
he would be rid of the Government very willingly, so it might be with Honor;
that it was easy for him to ruin and destroy the Kingdom, and make it not
worth one groat, but impossible to preserve it for his Master. Every body
wondered to find so great a Truth come so frankly out of the mouth of one they
usually styled Lying Dick Talbot, and who had bin known, not without reason,
many years by that name. Some believed that in earnest he intended to part with
the Sword, and perhaps if it had bin demanded before K. J. went into France, it
had not bin denied; There wanted not several to second the same Truth to him,
with all earnestness and application, both in writing and by word of mouth,
which the Deputy seemed to approve; all that he answered to their persuasions
to surrender and save the Kingdom was, that he could not do it with Honor,
till it was demanded; and sometimes he asked them in Raillery, if they would
have him cast the Sword over the Castle-Walls. What he desired the World should
at that time believe concerning his intentions, may be best collected by the
Letters he procured to be written and sent into England. I have in Appendix, No
14.
the Appendix given the Copy of one written by his Command, and perused by him
before it was sent; it was from a Protestant of good sense and interest in the
Kingdom, to another in London: Several were written by his order to the same
purpose. It Is observable in this Letter in the Appendix, 1st. That the Lord
Deputy owns the Robberies then committed, but would have it believed, that the
members of the Army were not the Robbers; which sufficiently shows the falsehood
of the Allegation whereby the Papists would excuse themselves, as if they had
not begun to Rob till the Protestant Associations were set on foot; whereas
those were some while after this Letter, and occasioned by the Robberies
mentioned in it.

2ly. He would have it believed that the Papists feared a Massacre from the
Protestants, as much as the Protestants from the Papists, which had no ground;
The Arms, Forts, Magazins, etc. being in the Papists hands, and a vast number
of Men every where enlisted by their new Officers; it is true, that the Priests
did by order of their Grandees, endeavor to spread such a Rumor, to make
their own people arm the faster; which if it were at all credited by some few
of them, was looked on as ridiculous by all others.

3ly. He would have the people in England believe, that he and the Roman
Catholics were willing to give up the Sword, and return to the Condition in
which they were before the death of King Charles the Second. This is plainly
the main design of the Letter; and some think he was sincere in it, till the
coming over of Coll. Richard Hamilton altered his Measures; but that is not at
all probable, his actions all along signifying his resolution to destroy the
Kingdom rather than part with his greatness. However he made a shift to
persuade some Protestants that he meant it; their own earnest Desires that it
might be so, helping to impose on them; amongst whom the Writer of this Letter
happened to be one, but was not singular, many of good Sense being deceived as
well as he. Lastly, it appears from the Letter, that the Roman Catholics as
well as the Protestants were of opinion, that the Kingdom must be ruined, if
not yielded up to the Prince of Orange: And if so, had not the Protestants in
the North reason to do that which in the opinion of all could only save the
Kingdom? The case then stood thus with them, if they joined with King James or
sat still, they were certainly undone; if he perished they must perish with
him; if he conquered, he would then be in a capacity to execute his destructive
Intentions against them which he had entertained long before: But if they
joined with their Present Majesty's, they were sure of Safety and Protection as
long as England is able to Master Ireland, which in probability will be for
ever.

But whatever the Lord Tyrconnel professed of his being desirous to give up the
Sword, it is certain he meant nothing less, and the generality of Protestants
believed, that he only designed to gain time and delude them, till he had
gotten something like an Army to Master them; and they had the more reason to
believe it, because whilst he professed the greatest Inclinations to Peace and
Accommodation, he was most intent on providing for War, and gave out about Five
Hundred Commissions of one sort or other in a day; which yet he did in such a
manner, as to make the least Noise, not passing them in the regular forms, or
entering them in the usual Offices, but antedating them, the more to delude and
amuse the Protestants; which put the Muster-Masters Office out of Order ever
after, most of these Commissions being never entered in it: Nor was it ever able
to furnish Appendix No 11.
a perfect List of the very Field Officers, as will appear from the List it
self in the Appendix.

5. These new made Officers were set on Foot, partly on the first noise of the
Prince of Orange's descent, and partly in the beginning of December, 1688, and
were without Money, Estate, or any other visible means, to raise their Troops
and Companies, and to subsist (so they termed maintaining) them for Three
Months, from the First of January; a thing impossible, without allowing them to
Steal and Plunder. It was this struck so much terror into Protestants, and made
them so jealous and apprehensive of Danger, that they fled into England in
great numbers, especially when they found that the New Raised Men, as they
surmised, began to make havoc of all things. It was this gave Credit to a
Letter dated December the Third, 1688, sent See Appendix.
to the Lord Mount Alexander, whether true or counterfeit I cannot determine,
intimating a design to Destroy the Protestants on Sunday the Ninth of the same
Month, which Letter was spread over the whole Kingdom. The People of Derry had
beside this, several Letters and Intimations of Mischief designed against them,
and against the Protestants of Ireland. And though that directed to the Lord
Mount Alexander, may not seem of great weight, yet whoever considers the
circumstances of the Protestants of Ireland at that time, will acknowledge that
it was not to be despised. In the Year 1641, the Seizing of Dublin by the Lord
Mac Guire, was prevented by as improbable a discovery as this Letter; while the
Protestants in the rest of the Kingdom were Massacred through the incredulity
of some who could not be persuaded to give ear to such intimations of the
Design, as were brought before them. In England the Gunpowder Treason was
revealed, and the destruction of the Three Kingdoms prevented by a Letter as
insignificant as that directed to the Lord Mount Alexander. About the very time
intimated in the Letter for the Massacre, a new raised Regiment belonging to
the Earl of Antrim, appeared before the Town without the King's Livery, without
any Officers of Note, or the least warning given by the Earl of their coming;
lastly, without any Arms besides Skeans, Clubs, and such other Weapons as
Kearnes and Tories used.

6. The People of the Town were frightened at the Sight, and refused them
entrance into the City; this was the First rub or provocation the Lord Deputy
met with; it was a mere accident, and proceeded from his own Ignorance or
Negligence, who had left that Garrison, the only one of any considerable
strength in Ulster, where most Protestants lived, without one Soldier to Guard
it; and then sent such a pack of Ruffians to take Possession of it, many of
whose Captains and Officers were well known to the Citizens, having lain long
in their Jails for Thefts and Robberies. When therefore such a Body of Men came
to demand entrance at the very time that they expected a Massacre, what could
they imagine but that these Men came to execute it; and who could blame them for
shutting their Gates? They were well assured that these were Men fit for such
an Execution and that they were ready on command to do it; and perhaps would
not stay for an Order. The Lord Deputy bethought himself too late of his Error,
but could never retrieve it; though by means of the Lord Mountjoy he did all in
it that was possible, having brought the City to accept of a Pardon, and
receive a Garrison of Soldiers; but then it was such a Garrison as they were
able to Master, and no more by the Articles were to be admitted into it before
the ensuing March.

7. We ought to remember the reason of Building Londonderry, and it is plain
from its Charter granted by King James the First, that it was Founded to be a
Shelter and Refuge for Protestants against the Insurrections and Massacres of
the Natives, who were known always to design and be ready to execute their
malice on their Conquerors: To keep them therefore in awe, and secure the
Plantation, was the Design of Building the City; it was upon this condition,
and by these Covenants the Proprietors of the City held their Estates; and the
Inhabitants had been false to the very design and end of their Foundation, if
they had given up the City, with the keeping of which they were entrusted, into
the Hands of those very men against whom by the Charter it was designed to be a
Security and Bulwark. At this rate the Lord Deputy might give away any man's
Estate, and have bestowed it on his greatest Enemy, and that with much less
injury to the Public.

The People therefore of Londonderry had good reason to refuse to deliver their
City to the Kearnes and Tories of Ulster, though inlisted under the Earl of
Antrim, by a Commission from a pretended Lord Deputy; these were excluded by
their very Charter, and by the design of Building the Place from possessing it:
much less had they reason to deliver it to a parcel of men of whose Commission
they knew nothing, and whose Errand they had reason to believe was to cut their
Throats.

8. It Is to be considered, that Londonderry was under a further provocation to
lay hold on the first opportunity to do themselves Justice, and that was the
wicked* and illegal Invasion made on their Charter, Liberties, Privileges and
Estates by a most unjust and oppressive Sentence given by an unqualified Lord
Chief Baron, on a Quo Warranto, for which there was not the least pretense in
the World, as may appear to any one that will be at the pains to view the
Proceedings in Court: By this Sentence grounded on a foolish nicety objected to
the Plea, the whole English Interest and Plantations in that County were
ruined, and the whole Designs of them destroyed and perverted; and therefore it
was not to be wondered if they took the first opportunity to save themselves
from imminent Destruction. They concluded that a Government, who on a nicety
could take away their Charter, their Privileges, their Estates, and subvert
the design of Building their City, might as easily and unavoidably find another
nicety to take away what remained, together with their Lives; and therefore
they cannot be much blamed, if they had been under no other Temptation but
this, that they were willing to withdraw themselves from a Government whom they
durst not trust, and which took all advantages against them to destroy them.

9. The shutting up of Derry against the Earl of Antrim's Regiment, was all
that was done by any Protestant in Ireland in opposition to the Government,
till King James deserted* England; except what was done at Enniskillin, where
the People were under the same circumstances with those of Derry, having about
the same time refused to quarter two Companies sent to them by the Lord Deputy.
They were not so much as summoned by him, nor did they enter into any Act of
Hostility or Association, or offend any till assaulted, being content to stand
on their Guard against such as they knew to be Mortal Enemies to the English
Interest; to subdue whom, they were planted in that wild and fast Country. But
as soon as the News of King James's deserting the Government came into Ireland,
all Protestants looked on themselves as obliged to take care of their own
Preservation; and finding that continual Robberies and Plunderings were
committed by such as the Lord Deputy, against the Laws of the Kingdom and the
Interest of the Nation, had entrusted with Arms and Employments, and that no
Care was taken by him to prevent those Mischiefs, (but on the contrary the
Robbers were secretly cherished and encouraged,) the Gentlemen in the North to
prevent their own Ruin, and the Ruin of all the Protestants of Ireland, which
they saw unavoidable, entered into Associations to defend themselves from these
Robbers; their Associations did really reach no farther than this, nor did they
attempt any thing upon the Armed Robbers, except in their own Defense, when
invaded and assaulted by them: Insomuch that I could never hear of one act of
Hostility committed, wherein they were not on the Defensive. Their crime then
if any, was only this; they were not willing to suffer themselves to be robbed
and plundered as their Neighbors were, without opposition, but disarmed some
of those who under color of being King James's Soldiers, destroyed the
Country: This was all the reason the Lord Deputy and Council had to call them
Rebels, and to charge them in their Proclamation dated March the 7th, 1688,
with actual Rebellion, and with Killing and Murdering several of his Majesty's
Subjects, and with Pillaging and Plundering the Country; whereas it was
notorious they never killed any whom they did not find actually Robbing, to
kill whom, the Laws of the Kingdom not only indemnified them, but likewise
assigned them a Reward; and for Plundering, it is no less notorious that they
preserved the whole Country within their Associations from being Pillaged, when
all the rest of Ireland was destroyed: And their great care of themselves and
their Country was the Crime which truly provoked the Lord Deputy, and made him
except from Pardon Twelve of the principal Estated Men in the North, when he
sent down Lieutenant General Hamilton, with an Army which he tells us in the
same Proclamation would inevitably occasion the total ruin and destruction of
the North.

10. And lest there should be any Terms proposed or accepted by the People in
the North, and so that Country escape being Plundered and Undone, he made all
the haste he could to involve the Kingdom in Blood: King James was every day
expected from France, and landed at Kinsale, March the 12th, but no Persuasions
would prevail with the Lord Deputy to defer sending the Army to the North, till
the King came, though he had good assurance given him by several who knew their
Minds and Tempers, that in all probability if King James himself appeared
amongst them and offered them Terms, they would have complied with him, at
least so far as to submit quietly to his Government: But it was the Lord
Deputy's design to destroy the Protestants there as well as in the rest of the
Kingdom; and therefore he hasted to make the Parties irreconcilable, by
engaging them in Blood, and by letting loose the Army to Spoil and Plunder. The
War therefore was entirely imputable to him, and the Protestants were forced
into it, having no other choice than either to be undone without offering to
make any Defense for themselves, or else with their Arms in their Hands, to try
what they could do in their own Preservation.

11. But it must be considered that Ireland is a Kingdom dependent on the Crown
of England, and part of the Inheritance thereof, and therefore must follow its
fate, which it cannot decline without most apparent ruin to the English
Interest in it. Now King James having abdicated the Government of England, and
others being actually possessed of the Throne, it was the business of the
Protestants of Ireland to preserve themselves rather than dispute the Titles of
Princes; they were sure it was their Interest and their Duty to be subject to
the Crown of England, but whether King James was rightly entitled to that
Crown, is not so easily determinable by the common People: No wonder therefore
they declared for King William and his Queen, whom they found actually in the
Throne of England, and owned as rightful Possessors by those who had best
reason to know, rather than for King James who indeed pretended to it, but with
this disadvantage amongst many others, that he was out of Possession; and he
had not used the Power when he was in possession so well, that they should be
desirous to restore him to it, with the danger of their own ruin.

12. They considered further, that their defending themselves and those Places
of which they were possessed would in all probability very much contribute to
save not only themselves, but likewise the Three Kingdoms, and the Protestant
Interest in Europe; to which it did certainly in some Measure contribute. King
James and his Party believed it, and declared themselves to this effect; and
some of them were very liberal of their Curses on the Rebels in the North, as
they called them, for this reason; had (said they) the Rebels in the North
joined with King James, he had such a Party in England and Scotland, which
(together with the Succors he might then have sent from Ireland, and the
assistance of the French King,) would in all probability have shaken the
Government of England before it had been settled; but the opposition of
Enniskillin and Derry lost the opportunity, that will not easily be retrieved.
How far this Conjecture of theirs was probable, I leave it to the Reader; what
has happened since, shows that it was not altogether groundless; if the Design
had taken, the condition of Europe, especially of the Protestants, had been
most deplorable; but it pleased God to spoil all their Measures by the
opposition made by a small Town, Manned with People before that time of^ no
extraordinary Reputation in the World, for Arms, Valor or Estates, and who
perhaps had never before seen an Enemy in Arms: King James was pleased to call
them a Rabble, but it must be remembered to their Honor, that they outdid in
Conduct, Courage and Resolution all his Experienced Generals. To a Man that
seriously reflects on it, the thing must almost seem miraculous, all
Circumstances considered; the rest of the Kingdom, except Enniskillin, had
yielded without a Blow; most of the chief Officers, Gentlemen and Persons of
Note, Courage or Interest in the North, had deserted their new raised Troops
without Fighting; the Succors designed for them from England came at the very
time when the Town was ready to be invested, and the Officers that came with
those Succors, as well as their own Officers, were of opinion that the Place
was not to be defended; that they had neither Provision nor Necessaries to hold
out a Siege: The Officers therefore privately took a resolution to return for
England, and carried along with them most of the Gentlemen and Leaders of the
Town, without leaving any Governor or Instructions for the People what they
were to do, and without offering to make any conditions for them; but neither
this nor their extreme want of Provision, to which they were at last reduced,
nor the consideration of their Friends whom their Enemies treated barbarously
in their sight, could prevail with them to give up themselves or their cause;
but by patience and resolution they wearied out their Enemies, and instead of
letting them make approaches to their Walls, they enlarged their Outworks upon
them, and made them confess after a Siege of Fifteen Weeks, that if the Walls
of Derry had been made of Canvas, they could not have taken it.

The same may be said of the People of Enniskillin, who lived in a wild
Country, and untenable place, surrounded with Enemies on every side, and
removed from almost all possibility of Succor, being in the heart of Ireland;
yet they chose to run all Hazards and Extremities, rather than trust their
Faithless Enemies, or contribute to the ruin of the Protestant Interest by
yielding. After almost all their Gentry of Estates or Note had left them, or
refused to join heartily with them, they formed themselves into Parties, and
though in a manner without Arms and Ammunition, yet by mere Resolution and
Courage, they worsted several Parties of the Enemy, and almost naked, recovered
Arms and Ammunition out of their Hands, and signalized themselves in many
Engagements, by which they not only saved themselves, but likewise did
considerable Service to the Protestants that were under the Power of King
James; for this Handful of Men, by their frequent Incursions and carrying off
Prisoners in every Engagement, terrified even the Papists of Dublin into better
Humor, and more moderate Proceedings, as to the Lives of Protestants that
lived amongst them, than perhaps they would otherwise have been inclined to:
They saw from this, that their Game was not so sure as they imagined, and the
Prisoners taken by those of Enniskillin, were Hostages for their Friends that
lived in Dublin; and the Humanity with which the Prisoners were used there, was
a Reproach on the Barbarity exercised by the other Party. In short, it appeared
that it was neither Malice nor Factiousness that engaged them in Arms, but mere
Self-preservation and the Obligation of their Tenures and Plantations, by which
they were bound to keep Arms, and Defend themselves and their Country from the
power of the Popish Natives which were then Armed against them.

13. But to return to the Lord Deputy's Proceedings in his new Levies, in order
to gain time and delude the Protestants, he sent for the Lord Mountjoy out of
the North, after he had compounded the business of Derry, and persuaded him to
go with Chief Baron Rice to King James into France, to represent to him the
weakness of the Kingdom, and the necessity to yield to the Time, and wait a
better opportunity to serve himself of his Irish Subjects. The Lord Tyrconnel
swore most solemnly that he was in earnest in this Message, and that he knew
the Court of France would oppose it with all their Power; for said he, that
Court minds nothing but their own Interest, and they would not care if Ireland
were sunk to the Pit of Hell, (they are his own Words*) so they could give the
Prince of Orange but Three Months diversion; but he added, if the King be
persuaded to ruin his fastest Friends to do himself no Service, only to gratify
France, he is neither so Merciful nor so Wise as I believe him to be. If he
recover England, Ireland will fall to him in course, but he can never expect to
Conquer England by Ireland; if he attempts it, he ruins Ireland to do himself
no kindness, but rather to exasperate England the more against him, and make
his Restoration impossible; and he intimated, that if the King would not do it,
he would look on his Refusal to be forced on him* by those in whose power he
was, and that he would think himself obliged to do it without his Consent.

14. Every body told the Lord Mountjoy, that this was all sham and trick, and
that the design was only to amuse the Protestants, and get him, who was the
likeliest Man to head them, out of the way: But his Answer was, that his going
into France could have no influence on the Councils of England, who were
neither privy nor Parties to it; and if they had a mind to reduce the Kingdom,
it was easy to do it without his Assistance; that he must either go on this
Message, now the Deputy had put him upon it, or enter into an actual War
against him, and against such as adhered to King James' Interest; that he did
not think it safe to do the latter, having no order or encouragement from
England; but on the contrary all the Advice he received from thence, was to be
quiet and not to meddle; that he was obliged to King James, and neither Honor,
Conscience, nor Gratitude would permit him in his present Circumstances to make
a War on his own Authority against him, whilst there was any possibility of
doing the business without one. Upon these considerations, against the general
Opinion of all the Protestants in Ireland, he undertook the business, and went
away from Dublin about the Tenth of January, 1688, having first had these
general Concessions made him in behalf of the Protestants: 1. That no more
Commissions should be given out, or new Men raised: 2. That no more of the Army
should be sent into the North 3. That none should be questioned for what was
passed. And 4. That no Private House should be garrisoned or disturbed with
Soldiers; these he sent about with a Letter which will be found in the
Appendix. But he was Appendix.
no sooner gone, but the Lord Deputy, according to his usual Method of
Falsehood, denied these Concessions, seemed mighty angry at the dispersing the
Letter, and refused to observe any of them. The first News we heard from
France, was that the Lord Mountjoy was put into the Bastile, which further
exasperated the Protestants against King James, and made them look on him as a
Violater of Public Faith to his Subjects. As for the Lord Deputy, this clearly
ruined his Credit (if ever he had any) amongst them, and they could never after
be brought to give the least belief to what he said; on the contrary they
looked on it as a sure sign that a thing was false if he earnestly affirmed it.

15. But it was not yet in his power to master them; he had not sufficiently
Trained and Exercised his Men; but as soon as he found that nothing was to be
feared from England before the End of Summer, and that he was assured King
James would be with him soon, he laid aside his Vizour, and fell upon disarming
them: It was no difficult matter to do this, for in the very beginning of King
James's Reign, the Protestant Militia had been dissolved, and though they had
bought their own Arms, yet they were required to bring them into the Stores,
and they punctually obeyed the Order: Such of the Protestant Army as remained
in the Kingdom after their Cashiering, were likewise without Arms, being as I
showed before, both disarmed and stripped upon their being turned out. It was
therefore a wonder that the Protestants had any Arms at all, especially when it
is to be remembered, that during King James's Reign, they durst not be seen to
buy or import them, being under the jealousy and suspicion of the Government:
However some they had, enough to make the Papists afraid, and to Beat them too,
if they had had a little Assistance and Encouragement of Authority to attempt
it. The Lord Deputy was therefore resolved to have their Arms, and in order to
get them, he drew Nine or Ten Regiments to Dublin, and a proportional Party to
every place where the number of Protestants was considerable; and without the
least Notice or Declaration premised, on the 24th of February, 1688, he took
away their* Arms and Horses throughout the whole Kingdom, except in the North
where he durst not yet attempt it. The method of doing it in Dublin was this,
he filled all the Streets and Lanes with Foot and Horse; and then for so much
of the City as lies within the Walls, he sent the City Officers to signify to
every House, that if they did not send in every Sword and Bayonet, as well as
Firearms in their possession into the Churches, (which were generally seized
for this use and filled with Soldiers,) they should be left to the Mercy and
Discretion of the Soldiers, both as to their Lives and Goods: This was perfect
Dragooning to the Protestants; nor is it easy to express what a Consternation
it caused amongst them; the preparation at first looked like a design to put in
execution (what they long feared,) a general Massacre, and which had never been
out of their Minds since the Lord Mount Alexander's Letter was dispersed. While
they had their Arms in their Hands, it gave them some Heart, resolving to sell
their Lives dear; but when they saw these now taken from them, this support
failed, and they had no prospect of Defense, but generally imagined that their
Arms were taken away in order to the more easy execution of the designed
Massacre. They knew themselves to be the only Persons qualified by Law to keep
or carry Arms; they knew the malicious designs of the Irish against them; they
considered how necessary their Arms were at this time, not only to preserve
their Goods, which were every day robbed, and their Houses that were every
night broken open, but likewise to secure their Persons, that were daily
assaulted; and yet to avoid this terrible Dragooning, they were forced to part
with them, and immediately delivered in near 3000 Firearms, besides Swords,
Bayonets and Pikes in Dublin only. At the same time some Hundreds of Horses
were likewise taken, without any other reason than that they belonged to
Protestants. Without the Walls it was much worse than in the City; the
Inhabitants there were not so much as required to bring in their Arms, but
generally the Soldiers came and searched for them, on pretense of which, Five
or Six Parties after one another, without method or order, rifled the Houses:
In many Places they pulled up the Boards of the Floors, brake down the
Wainscots, Stealing and Plundering whatever they could lay their Hands on, and
sometimes torturing the poor People to make them confess their Arms.

16. The next day after this disorderly Dragooning, came out a Proclamation
dated February 25, 1688, signifying that this disarming and taking away Horses,
was done by order of the Government, throughout all Ireland, there being only a
Verbal Order for it before, of which the Protestants knew nothing, and which
the Proclamation contradicted; for wearing Swords were excepted in it, whereas
the Verbal Order is said to have mentioned them, and they were delivered with
great exactness before the Proclamation came out; for no body could hope to
conceal them, it being known that every Gentleman had a wearing Sword, yet none
were redelivered to them though demanded; and a second Proclamation published
by King James himself, dated July 20, 1689, did expressly forbid all
Protestants to wear or keep any Swords, under the penalty of being counted
Rebels and Triators, and used as such; and lest some should wear them and not
be discovered, they beset all the Church Doors on Sunday Morning, February the
23d, 1689, whilst the Protestants were at their Devotion, to their great
terror, being ignorant of the Design; and the Soldiers searched every one
whether he had a Sword or no.

17. But to return to the general disarming, though the Protestants lost in it
their Horses and Arms, the Kings Stores gained little by them; (...) the
Soldiers who received the Arms, imbezel'd all that were better than ordinary
amongst them, conveying them away privately, and converting them to their own
use. The Arms of the Citizens were generally fine, and the Gentlemen's Swords
were Silver, and the Soldiers that got them were wiser than to return such to
the Stores. The Lord Deputy seemed angry that so few Arms were returned,
imputed it to the Citizens as an effect of their Obstinacy; and an Order was
ready drawn for him to sign, wherein it was declared, that all Protestants with
whom any Arms were found, should be given up to the Mercy of the Soldiers; so
that there needed only some ill Fellows to come into a House and drop a Bayonet
or Sword in a Corner, and pretend to find it there, for the Soldiers to have
rifled whom they pleased; besides which, all Protestants were to be require^
upon Oath to discover their Arms. This Order had been signed and put into
Execution, if the Bishop of Mead had not come in seasonably to the Lord
Deputy, and by discoursing him calmly, prevailed to have it laid aside: The
Reasons and Proposals that he made use of to divert this inconveniency from the
City, may be seen in the Appendix; by them he got leave to enquire See
Appendix, No 15.
into the number of Arms taken away; and found upon examination, that more had
been taken from one Parish, than had been returned into the Store from the
whole City. The talk of putting the Citizens to their Oaths on this occasion,
did mightily alarm them; they knew not where it would end, if once the
Government got into the Method of imposing Oaths on them; and therefore the
Bishop took care to caution them against it, and they unanimously determined to
take no Oaths at all, whatever hardships they suffered; and it is certain, they
might have eased themselves of many, if they would have engaged themselves by
Oaths; but the remedy was counted worse than the Disease; and in many Places of
the Kingdom they chose to lie in Jail, rather than take some new invented Oath
that was put to them without any Law to enjoin it.

18. The management of taking up Horses was yet more disorderly; whoever
pleased took (...), and was not so much as obliged to tell his Name; the
Proclamation mentioned only serviceable Horses, but the Verbal Order that went
before, and on which they were taken, made no distinction; so all were taken
that could be found: At the best, it was left to the discretion of a Dragoon,
what he would count a Serviceable Horse, and what he would do with them when he
had taken them; so that of 10000 Horses at least that were taken from the
Protestants at that time, the King received not 100, nor had he one Troop
raised out of them, but whoever could get a Horse, whether he were Officer or
Soldier, from a Protestant, went away with it, and converted it to his private
use; of which the Lord Deputy complains in a Proclamation, dated March the 1st,
1688; but this Proclamation though dated the 1st of March, was not published
till the 12th; the reason of the delay was this, the Proclamation ordered
Horses that were not fit for Service to be restored, and if it had come out
according to the date thereof, many Protestants that knew in whose Hands their
Horses were, would have claimed them: To defeat them therefore, some that had
interest with the Deputy, got the Proclamation delayed till those that took
them might have time to convey them far enough from being found. And this was
their usual Method, they first did the mischief they intended to the
Protestants, and then they published some antedated Proclamation, forbidding it
to be done; and sometimes when a Proclamation came out, before they had gone
through with what they intended, they denied to be concluded by it, alleging
it came out surreptitiously; as it happened in this very case of Searching for
Arms.

19. Now Arms are the Hedges that secure and preserve our Goods and Lives,
especially in a Conquered Country, such as Ireland is; and it was but reason
that the Law did allow none but Protestants to have them; though they never
hindered any Man from arming himself so far as was necessary for his own
Defense: When therefore they saw the keeping of Arms was made penal to them in
the highest degree, (King James's Proclamation having made it Treason and
Rebellion, as I showed before,) and some would needs persuade them it was
really so, to which opinion the Lord Chief Justice inclined, when he gave
charge to the Jury concerning one Wolf, who was indicted for keeping some Arms,
and fined for it as a Misdemeanor,) when I say, they saw that which the Law
required them to do, made so highly criminal, (for the Law requires every
Freeman of Dublin to keep Arms,) and those Arms put into the Hands of Tories
and Ruffians, who had already robbed them of a great part of their Substance,
had they not reason to believe that they were disarmed purposely, that they
might be the more easily Robbed or Massacred? and that it was as easy for a
Government, that in one day disarmed them through the whole Kingdom, against
Reason, Law and Justice, to find a pretense at another time to take away their
Lives? they could neither doubt their inclinations, nor question their ability
to do it. If one should tie a Man's Hands, and turn him naked amongst Wild
Beasts, all the World would believe he designed they should devour him; and
sure we had reason to suppose the same of our Governors; and they that treated
us thus without provocation, and against the Laws, could not expect that we
should be unwilling to change our Masters if a fair opportunity offered. By the
Law we have as much property in our Arms and Horses that we buy with our Money,
and in a conquered Country such as Ireland is, where every Forty Years we
constantly have had a Rebellion, they are as necessary for us as our Clothes
or Estates, which indeed can signify nothing without them. And the King might
as justly pretend that he had occasion for them, and take them from us without
consideration, as our Horses and Arms; the oppression to us in our
circumstances was really equal.

20. It may perhaps be imagined by those who are Strangers to our Affairs, that
we had abused our Arms to oppress and wrong our Neighbors, or to oppose the
King, and therefore deserved to lose them; but it is observable, that it does
not appear that any one Protestant in Ireland before this Disarming, had used
his Arms to injure any R. C. nor did they hurt any that was not either actually
robbing them of their Goods, or assaulting their Persons, no not in the North,
where they refused to give up their Arms; they kept even there on the
defensive, and offended no Man but when first Assaulted: So that there was not
the least reason or color to disarm us, except that we might be Plundered and
Robbed, without being able to make resistance. Our crime for which we lost our
Arms, for which we were exposed naked to our Enemies, and for which the best
Gentlemen in the Kingdom were obliged to walk without a Sword, was because they
suspected that we would not otherwise tamely part with our Goods, or suffer our
selves to be abused and affronted in the Streets by every Ruffian, which was
the condition of the best amongst us.

21. It Is true King James could not carry on a War for the advancement of
Popery, without our Goods, and he could not be secure of them whilst we had
Arms; but I hope all the World is convinced, that it was not our Counsels nor
Actings that brought him to these Straits; nor was it to be expected that we
should be content to be undone, to repair the errors and faults of those Wicked
Counselors, who put him on those desperate courses which lost him his Crown.
All our crime is, then, that we could not be content to be undone with him and
by him, and rather chose to desire Protection, Liberty and the restitution of
our Privileges and Arms from their present Majesty's than to be in the
condition of the Vilest of Slaves under King James; a crime for which I am
confident no Papist condemns us in his Conscience, however he may rail at us
and call us disloyal.

SECT. IX. The attempts made on the Personal Estates of Protestants, before the
Revolution in England.
1. THe Earl of Tyrconnel when made Deputy of Ireland, found the Riches of the
Kingdom in the Hands of Protestants; the Flocks, the Herds, the rich
Household Stuff and Plate, Beneficial Leases, improved Rents, Trade and Money
were almost entirely theirs; whereas the Papists by their Idleness, Ignorance,
and numerous Begging Clergy, were so low in their Fortunes, that they were in
no condition to raise or maintain such an Army, as was necessary to carry on
his Designs in this Kingdom; and he was sure the Protestants that had the
Riches, would not contribute to support them: He therefore applied himself with
all art and industry to impoverish them. He did what he could, as I have
already showed, to destroy their Trade; he put all the hardships imaginable on
Protestant Tenants, that they might not be able to pay their Rents, and he
encouraged the Popish Tenants to oppose their Landlords: It was whispered
amongst them, that they need not pay their Rents, for the Land in a little time
would be their own; they were taught to answer when their Rents were demanded,
that they had spent what they designed for their Landlords, to fit themselves
or their Sons for the King's Service; and he was sure to be represented as
disaffected, that did not sit down with this Answer. If any Landlord was so
hardy as to Sue them, they either got themselves inlisted in the Army, or got a
particular Protection against Arrests. If any distrained, they let their Cattle
be taken to the Pound, and then by Night they either stole or forced them from
thence; and when they had thus secretly recovered and conveyed them away, they
brought Actions against the Landlord that distrained, as if he had imbezelled
them; in which case they were sure to meet with favor and countenance in the
Courts. Sometimes they avoided paying Rents, by Swearing their Protestant
Landlords into a Plot, or by affixing Treasonable Words on them; insomuch that
hardly any Protestant durst distrain, or even demand his Rent: And for Two
Years before the Revolution in England, very few received any profit out of
their Estates. This stop of Receipts for so long time, obliged Gentlemen to live
upon the main Stock, and for want of their growing Rents, which should have
answered their Expenses, they were as low as possible in ready Money, when the
late. Troubles fell upon them; and this made many of them on their Flight to
England, need Charity for their Subsistence.

2. This hardship was the more heavy upon them, by the necessity they lay under
of leaving their Farms and settled manner of Living in the Country, and of
either repairing to Dublin, or removing into England, where nothing could be
useful to them but ready Money; yet this was unavoidable, for there was no
living for them amongst a People that made no Conscience to pilfer or rob them
of their Goods, or to lay Snares for their Lives by false Oaths and suborned
Evidence: Neither did their repairing to Cities and Towns protect them, but the
same Persons that drove them from their Country Houses by their Robberies and
Oppressions, did afterward indict and imprison them for leaving Appendix, No
18.
them, of which I have given an Example in the Appendix. Some indeed
notwithstanding all the hard usage they met with, ventured to stay on their
concerns in the Country; but were at last burnt out of their Houses, and forced
to follow their Neighbors. A House within Four Miles of Dublin was Burnt, and
several Women and Children Murdered in it at the very beginning of Modelling
the Army. Thus Mr. Thomas Corker's House in the County of Mead by Navan was
Burnt, as supposed, by the Popish Parish Priest; who after he had done this
injury to the Gentleman, gave out See the First Proclamation by the Earl of
Tyrconnel, Feb. 21. 1686.
that Mr. Corker had burnt his own House, to make the Roman Catholics odious.
Mr. Henry WHereas a late Proclamation issued forth by the Lord Lieutenant and
Council of this Kingdom in December last for the Suppressing of Tories,
Robbers, and their Harbourers in these Words following, Whereas there have been
of late many Burglaries and Robberies committed in several parts of this
Kingdom, to the ruin of some of his Majesty's good Subjects, and to the great
disquiet of many others; and it is found by experience, that his Majesty's
Mercy that has been heretofore extended to some Persons that have been
attainted of such Crimes, has been an encouragement to others to commit the
like, etc. Which Proclamation has not yet met with the full effect, etc.
Gonnes, a Ministers House in Connaught, was likewise Burnt, because they could
not otherwise prevait with him to leave the Country: And many others were
served in the same way, and their Families Murdered; or else were put to a
vast Charge to guard their Houses against these Cutthroats and Robbers. Even
about Dublin hardly any Gentleman's House escaped without being Robbed, or at
least several times attempted; and if any were caught in the Fact, they easily
got a Pardon for it.

3. Add to this in the Third Place, that though of a good while the Protestants
got nothing out of their Estates, yet they were put to vast Charges to defend
them; for the Papists having gotten Judges, Juries and Sheriffs of their own,
brought in their Counterfeit Deeds and false Claims in great numbers, and
either in forma Pauperum, or by the favor of the Courts, carried on their
Suits with little Expenses; and when worsted in them, as sometimes in spite of
the most manifest partiality, they were, there was nothing to be recovered of
them; whereas the Protestants were forced to row against the Stream, and to
struggle with all the expensive delays and tricks the Courts could put on them.
If at any time they were found tardy in the least circumstance or form of Law,
though no advantage used formerly to be made of such Mistakes, yet they were
sure to pay severely for it; every body who has been concerned in Law business,
knows the difference of these cases as to expenses; and the consequence was,
that Protestants were forced to part with a considerable share of their ready
Money, to recover or defend their Estates, which when in their Possession
yielded them nothing.

4. They met with the same measure from the Treasury, as from their Tenants;
where any Salary, Pension or Payment was due to any of them from the King, they
either did not get it at all, or if by importunity and interest they did get
any thing, it was with such Expenses, Bribes to Courtiers, and Delays, that
they lost the benefit of it. But where any thing was due from them, it was
exacted with all the rigor imaginable, and the most strict punctilio's
observed to bring them under Fines and Forfeitures. The Chief Baron Rice could
not contain himself on the Bench; but on occasion of a Protestant Lawyers
pressing somewhat importunately for his Client that he might have Justice, he
answered he should have Justice, but as I said before, that it should be Summum
Jus. Nay such discouragement and discountenance was given to the Protestant
Lawyers, that many of the most celebrated Counselors forsook their Practice
and the Kingdom; and such as staid could hardly come in for a share of the Fees
expended by their former Protestant Clients; for it was enough to destroy a
Cause, to have them appear at the Bar for it. The consequence of which was,
that the Protestants were forced to employ their Enemies for Counsel, and give
them their Money too often to betray their Cause; at least they could not expect
Lawyers that wished so ill to it and them in their Hearts, would be earnest to
carry it for them.

5. In Cities and Corporate Towns, the Townsmen were put to great Charges to
defend their Charters; and when Judgment was given against them, they were put
to another Charge to take them out anew, and to purchase their Freedoms. It is
true, some few Papists generally joined to take out the new Charter; but when
it was taken out, they forced the Protestants to pay for it at what rate they
pleased, or obliged them to leave the Town. The Attorney General got some
Thousands for his share, and every petty Officer and Head of a Country
Borrough, enriched himself with some part of the Protestants spoil on this
account.

6. The next means used to impoverish them was that of Free Quarters, by which
they extorted from the Innkeepers vast Sums of Money: It was a hardship in time
of Peace to be obliged to entertain such rude nasty Guests as the private
Soldiers generally were, and to endure the insolences of their Officers, who
practiced several Arts with a design to destroy their Quarters. Sometimes they
would quarter a whole Troop of Horse on Two or Three Protestant Inns for some
Months together, till they wearied them out of their Trade, drove away their
Guests, and broke them: Sometimes they would compound for a Sum of Money to be
gone, and then immediately send another Party as bad as themselves, to succeed
them; by which means they ruined all the little Towns about Dublin, and broke
the Inhabitants. The very first thing they did after they had gotten into the
Army, was to set a rate on Diet, on hay and on Oats, not above* of what it cost
the Innkeeper; a thing to which they had been Strangers before; but it seemed
tolerable, in respect of the Free Quarters to which they pretended afterward,
though in effect it came to the same thing, for they went away and never paid a
Farthing for Meat or Drink, or any other conveniences allowed them in their
Quarters; only some gave Bills which were never paid; nay they were not content
to have their Meat and Drink and Quarters free, but they so ordered the matter,
that their Quarters were generally better to them than their Pay: They commonly
had Billets on. Three or Four Houses apiece, every one of which paid them a
certain rate per Week; one private Soldier bragged that he had Fifteen
Quarters; the rate paid out of them was according to the quality of the House,
and the Person that had the Billet; the very least was 18 d. or 12 d. per Week,
and the allowance to the Officers was proportional: The truth of this is
notorious to all in Dublin, and is demonstrable from the number of Public
Houses which were obliged to quarter Men, compared with the number of Men
quartered in them. The Houses were double in number to the Soldiers, and yet
every House had one or Two Soldiers at the least, some Three some Four
quartered on them, for which they paid Weekly; and yet so unreasonable were
these Creatures, that this would not satisfy them, but they would go up and
down the Country Stealing and Plundering Meat and Drink, and forcing the poor
Protestants to bring forth their whole Stock of Provisions, of which they used
to eat what they pleased, and then destroy the rest, that the Damned Whigs,
(that is, in their constant Dialect, the Protestants,) might not have the
benefit of it: It was in vain to grumble or complain; instead of remedy they
were sure to have the injury redoubled upon them. If any ventured to prosecute
a notorious Robbery committed by a Soldier, their Officers appeared in the
Court for them, and openly threatened the Jury if they found them Guilty. Thus
Colonel Luttrel, afterward Governor of Dublin, appeared at Killmainham, and
brought off his Soldiers who were guilty of a Robbery, by threatening the Jury,
and telling them that it should be worse for them if they found his Men guilty;
that the King's Soldiers must not be discouraged, and must be allowed, when in
want, to take from those that had, meaning the Protestants; and by his
Authority he saved them, being not only an Officer, but one of the Justices of
the Sessions. And in the very Council, Allbaville publicly owned that the
Protestants durst not complain, except they had a mind to be Massacred: I use
his Words.

7. The Priests and Friars were no less oppressive than the Soldiers; they
Multiplied in Dublin to Three or Four Hundred at the least; they were well Fed
and well Clothed; there were not more Lusty Plump Fellows in the Town than
they, insomuch that they were remarkable for it; and reckoning that they
consumed but Twenty Pound apiece one with another, which was the least, they
cost the Town Eight Thousand Pound per Annum; which is near Four times more
than all the Protestant Clergy in Town received; they built about Fourteen
Chapels and Convents in Dublin, and set up Two Nunneries, all which came to a
great Sum; and a great part of it came out of the Protestants Pockets, for they
were such experienced Beggars, that none escaped them, and so importunate that
none durst refuse them; if any did, they must expect to be the next who were
Robbed: They must be content to be Accused and Committed either on some secret
Whisper, or false Accusation. The Insolency of the Friars may be guessed at by
their Carriage to the Lord Primate Boil; Two of them, as I had before occasion
to remark, came to demand Money of him; and because he refused them, they
procured a Warrant from Sir Thomas Hacket, to commit his Son in Law and Nephew;
but others were forced to buy their Peace by large Contributions to them.

SECT. X. The Progress King James made in destroying the Personal Estates of
Protestants after the Revolution in England.
1. THus the case stood with the Protestants of Ireland, long before the
Revolution happened in England; Their Rents and Receipts were stopped, their
Expenses multiplied, and many were driven from their Houses and Farms; their
Trade decayed, and their Towns and Villages destroyed by Robberies and Free
Quarters; but as soon as the new Levies upon pretense of resisting the Prince
of Orange, were made, the mischief became much more universal and intolerable;
whereas before, only Inns and Public Houses, together with Brewers, Bakers,
Butchers and Chandlers, were obliged to quarter Soldiers, this Burden was now
extended to all Gentlemen of the best quality, if Protestants, none being
exempted; this happened soon after the Lord Mountjoys going to France, though
the Lord Deputy, as I noted before did possitively engage to him to the
contrary in his Articles; these new Guests committed all manner of rudeness and
insolences in their Quarters, and drove away as many of the Gentry and
Citizens as could steal a Passage, or procure a License to be gone by bribing
the Secretary. Sir William Domvile a Gentlemen of about 80 Years of Age, who
had been Attorney General near Thirty Years, as has been said, had his House
filled with them; they treated the Old Gentleman so rudely and barbarously,
that all concluded it hastened his Death. Some Roman Catholics, that were not
known to belong to the Army, would come to the Houses of Protestants, and agree
with them for their best Rooms and suitable Attendance, and when they were to
go away, and should have paid, instead of Money they would present a Billet, and
then triumph in the trick they had put on their Landlords. There are in Dublin
about Seven Thousand Houses, and it was very rare that King James had Four
Thousand of the Army in Town, and yet they ordered it so, that every House had
more or less quartered upon it: Some Gentlemen had Ten, some Twenty, nay some
Thirty quartered on them; if there was no other Room they turned the Master or
Mistress of the Family out of their own Beds, and sent both them and their
Lodgers to provide for themselves; not only Soldiers were thus quartered, but
likewise all Gentlemen, Priests, Friars and some Noblemen that came with King
James from France, together with their Servants and Retinue. All the Houses in
Town were taken up with such Guests, who were often treacherous Spies on their
Hosts, and reckoned themselves very kind, if they did not procure them to be
clapped up by a false Information. The Story of one Gentleman is remarkable,
related to a good Family in England of his Name, as he pretended, which was
Brown; he lodged at one Mr. Brocks, from whom he stole several things of value,
and sold them: Mr. Brock found him out, but he thought to have prevented the
discovery by Swearing Treason against him, which he did before Chief Justice
Nugent; but the Justice of the Peace who took the Examinations of the Theft,
having gotten some of the things into his custody, traced them so clearly to
the Thief, that there was no denying it. The Gentleman upon this, to prevent
further Prosecution, was forced to certify under his Hand that he was prejured
in what he had Sworn before the Lord Chief Justice. How heavy these things fell
on the Citizens, may be conjectured from this; the Rents of the City were
considerable, and many Gentlemen's Estates consisted in them: But now they
thought themselves happy, if their Tennants would stay in their Houses, and
keep them in Repair, though they paid no Rents at all. In the best inhabited
Places of the Town, where Houses about Two Years before yielded Sixty Pound
apiece, they were well contented if they got Ten Pound, or the Ground-Rent; but
it was a chance if they got so much.

2. Thus Estates both in City and Country were rendered Fruitless to
Protestants; but yet whilst the Cattle and the great Manufactories and Staple
Commodities of the Kingdom were in their Hands; whilst they had the Wool, the
Hides, the Tallow and Butter, which bring in all the Money that is in the
Kingdom, all the former Arts would not have undone them, and therefore some
means must be used to get their Stocks from them; it seemed not decent for the
Government to Seize on them, as they Seized on our Horses and Arms; it was not
thought fit to give a positive Order for doing it; the truth is, there was no
need of it; it was sufficient to connive at the new raised Men, to have it
effectually done; the Priests had made every Man that came to Mass, to get a
Skean, and half Pike at least, and they whispered to the People, that it was
not for nothing that they were thus Armed. They assured them, that whatever
Injury they did their Protestant Neighbors, would be forgiven them, only they
advised them not to shed Blood. Sometimes they went along to see it effectually
done; and sometimes they imposed it as a Penance on such as came to them for
Absolution, to rob some of their Protestant Neighbors: This may seem
improbable, but we have had credible Informations of it, and it will not seem
so unlikely, if we consider that the Priests often led them out to these
Plunders, and stood by whilst they committed them; that all these Robbers are
absolved by them, without restoring one Sheep; which could not be, if the
Priests reckoned the taking and keeping them a Sin. And lastly, that some of
the greatest of these Robberies were committed in Lent, when they do their
Pennances, and eat no Flesh; and therefore they could not be tempted at that
time to Steal and Kill in order to eat: For in some places they killed whole
Flocks and left them dead on the Place* These Robberies began in November,
1688, and by the end of March next after, they left hardly one Protestant in
Ireland a Cow or Sheep. Ireland has always been famous for its Pastures, and
the Riches of it has always consisted in Cattle, of which many Gentlemen had
vast Stocks; for a Man to have Six, Eight, or Ten Thousand Sheep was very
common; some had more, even to Twenty Thousand: All these were gone in Three
Months, to the value of at least a Million of Money, which if rightly managed,
would with the Cows and Bullocks, of which there were likewise great Herds,
have furnished an Army of an Hundred Thousand Men with Flesh enough for Three
Years. Those who took them from the Protestants, destroyed them without
consideration, they killed them by Fifties and Sixties, and threw them into
Bog-pits; they took off their Skins, and left their Carcases to rot, and made
all the hovo^k of them imaginable.

3. Nor was the Government at all displeased at this, but on the contrary, did
plainly encourage them; no Complaints made against them were minded; none of
them were punished or called to account for it; and there happened two or three
remarkable things that plainly discovered it to be their design that the
Protestants should lose all: For First, when these Robberies began, some
Protestants got together, overtook the Robbers, rescued the Prey from them, and
killed some of them; this being done in two or three places, they were
frightened and quiet for some time, but the Lord Deputy saw that if this were
suffered, his design would not take, and therefore ordered our Arms to be
Seized; this was the true motive of his taking away so suddenly the Arms of the
Protestants. These Arms he put into the Hands of those very Robbers, whom the
Protestants in the defense of their Cattle, had beaten and wounded, and whose
Relations they had killed; who now knowing that their Adversaries could make no
further Resistance, vowed Revenge, and perfected what they had begun, not
leaving them a Beast, and forcing them to flee for their Lives; and then they
plundered their Houses as well as their Cattle, and left them nothing that
could be found with them: Nay so far did the Government Countenance them, that
they had suffered those Men, who had thus defended their Cattle, to be
indicted, and Bills were found against them, who had killed some of those
Robbers in the actual fact of Robbing; to do which they are empowered, and
ought to have been rewarded by a particular Statute of Ireland.

4. But Secondly, it appears that the Robbing of the Protestants was designed
by the Government, from the Confession of Chief Justice Nugent, who boasted of
it as a piece of Policy, and owned that they could not have done their work
without it; and at the Assizes at Cork, publicly called such Robbers necessary
Evils, and from the beginning he took care not to discourage them. The
forementioned Proclamation February 21, 1686, acknowledges that the Robberies
were occasioned by the carelessness and neglect of the Civil Magistrate.

And Thirdly, That it was a mere design to ruin the Protestants, is manifest
from this, that as soon as their Stocks were gone, and those who took them
began to rob their Papist Neighbors, the Government put a stop to it, and
issued out a Commission to hang them; which accordingly was executed at
Wicklow, and the Naas, and several other Places; and that it might be
effectually executed, they joined some Protestants in it, which might as well
have been done before; and there is no reason that it was not done, but because
it would have prevented the ruin of the Protestants, as well as it now
preserved the Papists. It is manifest what the Government designed, when by a
few Robberies committed on Papists, it was alarmed, and issued out Commissions
to hang the Robbers yet could not be prevailed with to take notice of the many
Thousand Robberies committed on the Protestants. For the Proof of this, see
Albavill's Instructions to the forementioned See Appendix. No. 25.
Commissioners in the Appendix.

SECT. XI. The Methods by which Kings James completed the ruin of the
Protestants Personal Fortunes.
1. THE Protestants by the Deputies taking away their Horses, and the Army
their Cattle, were put out of a possibility of Living in the Country, or of
making any thing of their Farms by Plowing or Grazing, and had saved nothing
but their Household Stuff and Money; only some of them, when they saw the Irish
taking away their Cattle, slaughtered part of them, Barrelled them up, and sent
them to Dublin, and other Towns; they preserved likewise their Hides and Tallow
of the Year 1688, not having any vent for them; and the Merchants upon the same
account were stored with such Commodities as used to be sent Yearly into
England or Foreign Parts; and many of these went out of the Kingdom for their
own Safety, and left their Goods in the Hands of their Servants or Friends.
Their going away, though they had License for it, and those Licenses not
expired, was made a pretense to Seize their Goods; and in March 1688, the
Officers of the Army throughout the Kingdom, without any Law or Legal
Authority, by order from the Lord Deputy, Seized all Goods, Houses, Lands, etc.
belonging to any who were out of the Kingdom; there was no other reason given
for this, but that it was the Deputies Pleasure it should be so; in May, the
Commissioners of the Revenue took it out of the Soldiers Hands; and that they
might be the better able to go through with it, endeavored to procure from
their pretended Parliament, an Act to confirm all they had done till that time,
and further to empower them to examine Witnesses upon Oath concerning concealed
Goods of Absentees: The Bill as it was drawn by the Commons, added a power to
oblige every body to discover upon Oath what they concealed, belonging to their
absent Friends, and to Commit whom they pleased without Bail or Mainprize
during pleasure, not excepting the Peers of the Realm; which made the House of
Lords correct these Clauses, and several others in the Bill, upon the Motion
and earnest Struggling of the Bishop of Mead; though the Commissioners did in
a great Measure put the Act in Execution, as the Commons intended it* for
wherever they expected any good of Absentees to be, they sent and seized all
that was in the place, and then refused to restore any thing to the Owners, but
upon Oath that it was their own proper Goods; the rest they supposed to belong
to some Absentee, and made it lawful Prize; all such being by the Act vested in
the King, though the Owners who were absent without any Fault of their own
should have come back and claimed, by which Act all Protestants that had fled
for their Refuge into England, or any other place, or were gone upon their
lawful Occasions, to the number of many Thousands, were absolutely divested of
all their Personal Fortunes, and cut off from all Claim to their Goods and
Chattels whatever.

The Condition of those who staid behind, was very little better, so many
Contrivances were set on foot to ruin them, and take away the little Goods that
were yet left them, that they were as effectually destroyed as their Neighbors
that went for England; they knew that besides Goods, the Protestants had some
ready Money and Plate; their chief aim was to come by them, and several ways
were thought of to effect it; sometimes they were for setting up a Mint, and
for forcing every Body to bring in on Oath to be coined, whatever Plate was in
their Possession; sometimes they were for searching Houses, and seizing all
they found, but these Methods were looked on as too Violent, and not likely to
succeed if they should put them in Practice; they therefore deferred these for
the present, and applied themselves to the following Courses, by which they got
from us a great part of our Money, Plate and Goods; and if our Deliverance had
not been speedy, would ^^fallibly have got the rest.

1. They would pretend for a Sum of Money to procure License for a Ship to go
off, and when they had gotten the Money, and the People had Shipped themselves
and their Effects, they then ordered the Ship to be unloaded again, and seized
all the Money and Plate they found, which had been privately conveyed on
Shipboard, though not forfeited by any Law.

2. They would take off the Embargo which was generally laid on Ships, and
pretend that they would suffer the Merchants to Trade: and as soon as they had
got the Custom-houses full of Goods, and received vast Rates for Custom,
besides Bribes to the Officers that attended the Ships, they would put on the
Embargo again, stop the Goods, and not return one Farthing.

3. They promised Licenses for England to all who would pay for them; and when
they had gotten vast Sums from the Crowd that pressed to get away, they would
then stop the Ships, and make their Licenses useless: There was nothing to be
done without a Bribe, at what Rate may be imagined from this, that an ordinary
Tide-waiter, one White at Rings-End, was accounted to have gotten in Bribes for
conniving at Peoples going off, at least 1000 l. in a few Months.

4. All Protestants that lived in the Country, were forced to take out
Protections; these were sold at great Rates, and it was not sufficient to buy
them once, they were often voided, either by new Orders, or the Change of
Governors; and then they were obliged to take them out a new; some had
Protections not only for their Goods, but likewise for some Arms and Horses,
and renewed them five or six times, paying a good Rate for them every time, and
yet at last they lost all their Horses, Arms and Goods, as well as their
Neighbors who had no Protections.

5. Where they learnt any Man had Money, they seized him, on some Pretense or
other; and if they found the Money, it was sufficient Evidence of his Guilt;
they sent him to Goal, and converted the Money to their own use; at the worst,
they knew it was only restoring it in Brass: Thus they served Mr. Heuston in
Bridgstreet, and Mr. Gabriel King in the County of Roscommon, who could never
get any satisfaction for his Silver and Plate thus taken from him; and the case
was the same with many others.

6. In several places the Governors went into Men's Houses and Shops, and seized
wh^^ they found, without the Formality of a Pretense, and took it away: Cork
was used at this rate; their Governor Mounsieur Boiselot, not failing in any
Punctilio of his Country Dragooning; and he is supposed to have sent off for
Frame to the value of 30000 l. in Money, Leather, and other Commodities; the
Spoils of the Protestants in that Rich Town.

7. The Parliament granted the King a Tax of 20000 l. per Month for thirteen
Months, which the Kingdom could hardly have paid if it had been in its most
Flourishing Condition; but they knew it would fall most heavy on the
Protestants, who must be forced to pay it out of their ready Money, having lost
their Stocks generally by Plundering, and deprived of their Rents and Incomes.

2. Because the Protestants in and about Dublin had saved some Hides, Tallow,
Wool, etc. King James, by* pretense of his Prerogative Royal, laid a Tax of
20000 l. per. Month, for three Months, on Chattels, because the 20000 l. per
Month granted by the Parliament was only on Lands.

This way of levying Money did startle every Body; the pretended Parliament was
then in being, and was adjourned till January 12. 1689. which happened to be
about the very time when the King and his Council were upon this Project. Some
in the Council opposed it, and pleaded the no necessity of using extraordinary
ways of levying Money, when the King might have it in the ordinary way; and
further, that it would give advantage to his Enemies, and be an Argument of his
affecting an Arbitrary Power; but he was very angry with those that opposed it,
and told them, That they had made him believe it was a Branch of his
Prerogative to Levy Money, and If he could not do it, he could do nothing.
Chancellor Fitton appeared Zealously for it, and 'twas carried, that the Money
should be raised; but it being a new thing, they were at a loss how to go about
it; at last they issued out a Proclamation, dated February 4. 1689. wherein
it is ordered and declared, That a Contribution of 20000 l. per Month, for the
space of three Months, ending the last day of January last past, shall be
forthwith applotted, laid in and levied upon the Personal Estates of all Sorts.
And the Applotment is ordered to be made by Commissioners to be named by the
King, Who were to proceed according to Instructions forthwith to be published
by him: Albaville, the Secretary of State, thought it sufficient to send
Letters, signed only by himself; in which he named and instructed the
Commissioners; but the Persons so named for Dublin, judged this Authority
insufficient, and demur'd on the Execution till they had their Nomination and
Instructions according to the Proclamation, from the King himself, under the
Great Seal. The King was heartily angry at them for this Demur, and was hardly
prevailed on to Issue a Commission under the Seal in the usual Forms, as
judging his Secretaries Letter a sufficient Warrant: But at last the Commission
was issued, in which the Commissioners were named, and empowered to nominate
Sub-Commissioners for every Barony in their respective Counties, to make the
Applotment; of which Sub-Commissioners the High-Constable was to be one. The
Commissioners of Dublin, and other Cities, were not yet satisfied; for their
Counties had neither Baronies nor High-Constables; and therefore the Commission
could not be duly executed in them; they therefore applied a new to the Lords
of the Treasury, for a more ample Commission, which put the Lords and
Attorney General in as great a Passion as the King was in before; and all the
answer returned to the Commissioners was, That they should go about their
Business without such frivolous Scruples, or they should take a course with
them: The Commissioners being thus appointed, were most of them Papists; and
the few Protestants that were named, declined acting as much as they durst; by
which means the Papists had the applotting entirely in their own Hands, and
never failed to lay the greatest Burden on their Protestant Neighbors, who, in
effect, paid all Taxes that King James ever received in Ireland.

3. The Papists raised a Militia, and inasmuch as Protestants were not
qualified to serve in it, by the Proclamation, which did not allow them to bear
Arms, they were assess'd at a certain Rate for the Maintenance of the Militia,
and sent to Prison if they refused to pay it. The Tax was as great as either of
the former, amounting, in the small Parish of St. W^rburghs Dublin* in which
not above one half of the Protestant-dwellers were left, to 900 l. per Annum.

4. They pretended to make some small Ditches at the several Avenues of the
Town, and for these likewise the Protestants must pay; and they taxed them at
what Rate they pleased, Distraining or committing them to Goal, if they refused
to pay what was exacted, or wanted Money: Before they formed this Militia
business into a Tax, the Officers of the Militia went about Weekly for several
Weeks, and demanded and took what they pleased from every House with great
Rigor, committing those who disputed their Demands, which was, for the time it
lasted, a Heavy Burden, and a Prodigious Tax.

5. Toward the middle of Winter 1689. their Forces were dispersed into their
Winter Quarters; very few being left in Dublin, it was most convenient to have
such as remained in it, quartered together; at least it was judged unsafe to
have them dispersed in Protestant Houses; therefore they seized on wast Houses,
and filled them with the Soldiers; the rest they quartered in the College.
Nevertheless, that the Protestants might not escape Free, they obliged them to
send in Beds to the Soldiers; but instead of Beds they took a Composition in
Money, the Rate was from 24 s. to 5 l. for every House: This fell entirely on
the Protestants, the Papists being connived at, and the Conditions were not
generally made good to them after they paid, for within two or three Months
some had Soldiers quartered on them again; tho while it lasted it must be
confessed it was a great Convenience and Ease, to be rid of such Guests at any
rate.

6. All these Contrivances to get Money from Protestants, did indeed Impoverish
them; but by their Industry 'Twas an ancient Law of England, some say, as Old
as King Alfred, That no King should change his Money, nor impair, nor inhanse,
nor make any Money, but of Silver, without the Assent of the Lords and all the
Commons. See Power of Parliaments asserted by Sir Robert Atkins, p. 17. And
Lord Cook Exposition of Stat. Artic* super Chart. Cap. 2^* 2 I^st* 577.
and Charity to one another, they made a shift to subsist, and to keep
something in reserve; but the Contrivance of making Brass Money pass instead of
Silver, and at an equal Value with it, was an utter and unavoidable Ruin to
them: It is true, the Coining of Money is a Prerogative of the Crown, and the
reason of its being so, is to prevent its being adulterated, the King's Honor
and Interest being the Engagement and Security for the Coin that bears his
Impression: But sure the meaning was not, that he should give a Value to what
has no Value in it self; otherwise the Cautiousness of our Forefathers was
ridiculous, who would not allow the King by his Prerogative to raise Money
either by Loan or Subsidy from the Subject; since if it be allowed, that he may
set what value he pleases upon Brass, he may have what he thinks fit from the
Kingdom without troubling a Parliament; but King James's Council used not to
stick at the Formalities of Law or Reason, and therefore vast Quantities of
Brass Money were coined, and made Current by a Proclamation dated June 18. 1689.
under severe Penalties. The Metal of which this Money was made was the worst
kind of Brass; old Guns, and the refuse of Metals were melted down to make it;
Workmen rated it at Threepence or a Groat a Pound, which being coined into
Six-pence's, Shillings or Half-crowns, one Pound weight made about 5 l. and by
another Proclamation dated 1690. the Half-crowns were called in, and being
Stamped anew, were made to pass for Crowns; so that then 3 d. or 4 d. worth of
Metal made 10 l. There was coined in all, from the first setting up of the
Mint, to the Rout at the Boyne, being about twelve Months, 965375 l. In this
Coin King James paid all his Appointments, and all that received the King's Pay
being generally Papists, they forced the Protestants to part with their Goods
out of their Shops for this Money, and to receive their Debts in it* but the
Protestants having only good Silver or Gold, and Goods bought with these, when
they wanted any thing from Papists, they were forced to part with their Gold
and Silver, having no means of coming by the Brass Money out of the King's
Hands; so that the Loss by the Brass Money did in a manner entirely fall on the
Protestants, being defrauded (for I can call it no better) of about 60000 l.
per Month by this Stratagem, which must in a few Months utterly exhaust them,
when the Papists had gotten most of their Saleable Goods from their Protestant
Neighbors, and yet great Quantities of Brass Money remained in their Hands,
they began to consider how many of them who had Estates, had engaged them to
Protestants by Judgments, Statute Staples and Mortgages; this was all the
reserve of their Fortunes left the Protestants: And to take this likewise from
them, they procured a Proclamation dated February 4. 1689. to make the Brass
Money Current in all Payments whatsoever, whereas at first Judgments, etc. were
excepted: Thus they rid themselves of their Brass Money, and put it on
Protestants. The Chancellor Fitton compelling the Trustees for Orphans and
Widows, to receive their Mortgages, etc. in this Coin, as well as others, tho
they pleaded that they knew not how to dispose of it, nor if they did know,
could they legally receive it, or make use of it, being only Trustees.
Sometimes it was pleaded, that by the Original Covenants they were to have a
certain time of warning, before they should be obliged to receive their Money,
tho offered them in Silver; but all signified nothing, the Chancellor
overruled all their Pleas, and placed the Brass Money on them, not so much as
allowing it to remain in the Court.

7. The Governor of Dublin, the Provost-Marshal, and their Deputies, assumed
the same Power, and threatened to hang all that refused the Brass Money; of which
we had many Instances one Mr. Bennet a Tanner owed Money to one Alderman Smith,
and to Mr. Hugh Leeson a Clergyman; Bennet having some Goods taken from him
for which he was paid in Brass Money, tendered it to them, but upon a Civil
refusal he complained to Governor Luttrell, who gave him two Warrants to the
Provost-Martial to take them; he showed them to Alderman Smith, who immediately
complied and received his Money; but Luttrell being informed of it, was angry
that Bennet had compounded the business, and therefore directed the Provost to
take him; by whom he was kept a Fortnight, and not released till he paid 20 l.
Fees. Leeson was likewise taken and committed with him.

One Chapman a Widow was used yet worse by the Provost-Martial's Deputy one
Kerney; a Petition was preferred against her, by the Solicitor of one who owed
her 150 l. by Bond, alleging falsely that she had refused to receive it in
Brass: Kerney sent his Troopers for her at Ten a Clock at Night; he told her,
with many Oaths and Execrations, that he would have her Burnt next Morning;
that he had Power to put to what Death he pleased, any that should refuse or
undervalue the Brass Money, and would exercise it on her. Her Debtor was
present, and acknowledged that the Allegation in the Petition was false, that
he had never tendered the Money, only sent to her House, and received answer
that she was not at home, and that his Solicitor had wronged her in the
Petition; yet the Deputy-Provost abated nothing of his Rigor, but made her be
thrust into a dark Closet for that Night, without Bed or Candle: Her Solicitor
offered any Security for her till next Morning, but he threatened to Tie him
Neck and Heels, send him to Newgate, and Hang him next day at his own Door, for
interceding for her. At Nine next Morning he sent a Messenger to her to prepare
for Death, for he would have her Burnt immediately. She had often, whilst in
Custody, proffered to receive her Money, and never before refused it, which some
represented to him so effectually, that he at last consented to release her,
she paying 4 l. Fees, and 10 s. to her Adversary's Solicitor that preferred the
False Petition against her, and signing an Acknowledgment to be entered on
Record, and a General Release: She demurred a little at the General Release,
but the Provost renewing his Threats of Burning her, and Hanging her
Solicitor, obliged her to perfect it.

But where Papists were Creditors, and Protestants Debtors, the Case was
otherwise; of which Mr. Rose a Merchant is an Instance; he had received 500 l.
from some Roman Catholics, for which he drew a Bill of Exchange into England
on his Correspondent; the Seas being shut up, they sued for the Money, tho it
was supposed on all hands to be paid in England: Whilst they went on with the
Suit, the Brass Money came into Play, and then they would have withdrawn it, but
Mr. Rose having great quantities of this Money put on him for Goods taken away
from him, persisted in it; the Declaration against him being filed; however the
Judge kept him three Terms, taking occasion from the Sickness of the Attorney,
or any other little matter, to adjourn the Cause. At last Mr. Rose brought the
Money and deposited it in Court, which the Judge called an Affront, and the
receiving it was demurred to, and there the Cause remained till the Change of
the Government, without any Determination.

8. By these means vast Quantities of Brass Money were lodged in the Hands of
Protestants; and not knowing what else to do with it, they laid it out on the
Staple Commodities of the Kingdom, such as Hides, Tallow, Wool, Corn, etc.
these they bought up at any Rate, as supposing they might sometimes turn to
account, whereas the Brass Money could signify nothing. The Papists were aware
of it, and therefore put the King upon taking these again out of their Hands,
which they contrived thus, They put out a Proclamation, by which they set a
Rate upon Commodities, dated February 28. 1689. then the King declared he
wanted certain Quantities of these Goods, and that he would have them at the
Proclamation Rates. The Lord Mayor first, then the Commissioners of the
Revenue, and afterward Sir Thomas Hackett, and others, were employed to search
for them and seize them. They first sent out Officers to take an Inventory of
all they could find in the Hands of Protestants; some few escaped by giving
good Bribes: The Searchers returned an account of the following Quantities in
Dublin, viz. 61105 Stones of Wool, 7780 hundred Weight of Tallow, 14687 Raw
Hides, 18771 Tan'd Hides; what return was made from other places we could not
learn; but we find when they came to Seize, that the following Parcels were
actually taken up, viz.

Wool Stone Tallow C Raw Hides Tan'd Hides C q In Dublin 10948 4230 3237 900-2
In the rest of the Kingdom 121339 12619 19100 1832-2 Total 132287 16849 22337
2732-2

Computing 35 Stones to a Bag of Wool, 600 Weight to a Cask of Tallow, and
four Tan'd Hides to an hundred Weight; which appears to be the Proportions in
Dublin, where both the Number and Weight is returned.

Some Gentlemen had saved their Wool of the Year 1688. and had placed it in
Dublin and the Port-Towns, designing to send it off as soon as the Seas were
open; and it was all they had to begin the World with, their Estates being
taken from them by Act of Parliament, and their Stocks and Household Goods by
Robbers; but now this remainder of their Fortunes was taken from them by the
King himself, and when they pressed the Commissioners of the Revenue to know
the reason why they were thus used, it was answered them by Sir Patrick Trant,
that he would not give any reason to Such Rogues; but at last, when urged, he
told them, It was because they were Protestants: Some, particularly Mr. Piercy
the Merchant, being asked by Sir Thomas Hacket, whether he was willing to part
with his Goods; answered very calmly, That he was not willing if he could help
it. His saying so was reckoned a High Crime, and he was brought before Colonel
Luttrell Governor of Dublin, who put the same question to him, and upon his
making the same answer, condemned him, in his Passion, to be Hanged, for
opposing the King's Will: He sent up and down for the Provo's to execute the
Sentence, and Swore many Oaths that he would have it done immediately. Mr.
Piercy continued under this Sentence for two Hours, during which time the
Provo's could not be found, though diligent Search was made for them* at last
the Governor, wearied with waiting, and not able to find any to execute his
Sentence, was, by some Intercession made to him, content to dismiss Mr. Piercy
for that time. Some Protestants offered to Transport their Goods themselves
into France, and bring back such things as the King needed; but this was
refused them; and the design being to ruin them, such Goods as came to them
from France were seized on, and put into the hands of Papists, to be disposed
of by them, and the right Owners not suffered so much as to oblige a Friend
with a little Salt or a Rundlet of Brandy Thus Mr. Bell, a Protestant Merchant,
was served, with a Ship that came to him from France; and without any Crime
alleged against him, that he might think no more of Trading, he was confined
in close Prison, and no body allowed to speak to him. As to the Goods thus
taken up, King James disposed of them to Mr. Labady and other Papists; so that
this appeared to be a mere Contrivance to get the Goods out of the Protestants
hands, and enrich the Papists; and not, as was pretended, to supply the King's
Necessity.

9. Some Protestants had laid out their Brass Money in Corn and Malt; of this
Commodity Brewers, Maltsters and Bakers had good Quantities, and some private
Persons laid in enough for themselves and Families, and perhaps a little to
spare. Some likewise had Provisions of Biscuit, Barrelled Beef and Bacon, not
knowing how the Market might be furnished, after such Destruction of
Provisions: There was a general Search made for all these, and they were, for
the most part, taken away, or seized, for the King's use; it was Criminal to
have Barrelled Beef or Biscuit in a House, and Alderman Giles Meigh was clapped
up in Prison for the Treason of having some hundred of Biscuit: The like
happened to several others, they alleging that such as had them, designed them
for Schonberg's Army; we were at a loss what the meaning of taking away Corn
from Protestant Farmers, Housekeepers and Bakers should be, when there was no
Scarcity in the Kingdom, and the Markets, if left open, were sufficient to
furnish all; but Sir Robert Parker, and some others, blab'd it out in the
Coffee-house, That they designed to starve one half of the Protestants, and
hang the other, and that it would never be well till this were done. We were
very sensible that they were in earnest, by the event; for no Protestant could
get a bit of Bread, and hardly a drop of Drink in the whole City; Twenty or
Thirty Soldiers stood constantly about every Bake-house, and would not suffer a
Protestant to come nigh them; if they sent into the Country, and by Interest
and a great Price, got a Barrel of Wheat from a Popish Farmer, it was seized as
it came to Town; and though there was Plenty of all things, yet several
Protestant Families could not get one Loa^ of Bread, sometimes in a Week,
sometimes in a Fortnight; there was a general Cry for Bread, and the
Protestants could find no way to come by it, but by buying it from the
Soldiers, who sold their Two-penny Loaves for a Shilling or eighteen Pence; it
was confidently reported, that the Popish Store-keepers designed to get all the
Corn in the Kingdom into the King's Stores, and then to let the Protestants
have none out but for Silver and Gold; which they did in good measure effect;
and it is certain before Harvest, they would have starved many, and drained all.

10. Some few Protestants had, under shelter of a good natured Popish Landlord
or Neighbor, preserved a few Sheep; as soon as these were Shorn, the
Commissioners immediately seized the Wool, and it was resolved to seize their
Corn likewise, where they had any, as soon as it was cut and made up.

They found it a hard matter to get Copper or Brass to serve the Mint, there
were on this account several Searches made in Town; and first the Braziers
Shops were pillaged, and then the Citizens Kitchens of their Brass Pots,
Skellets, Boylers; and their Houses of other Brass Utensils, even to the
Knockers of Doors; hardly one such was left in the whole City: Under the
pretense of this they ordered their Emissaries to take a private Inventory of
whatever they saw in the Possession of Protestants, of which they made their
uses as they had occasion, and intended more if their Power had continued.

11. The Deputy-Mayor of Dublin, Edmund Reily, issued out an Order, dated Sept.
27. 1689. for regulating the Rates of Provisions, Country Goods, and
Manufactories, to be sold in the City of Dublin; in which he took care to set a
very low Rate on such Goods as were then most in the hands of Protestants, the
Rate at which he ordered them to be sold, was not one half of what they
generally yielded. When therefore any Papist had a mind to put off his Brass
Money, he went to some Protestant Neighbor, whom he knew to have a quantity of
these Goods, offered him the Mayor's Rate in Brass, and carried away the Goods
by Force. This was practiced even by the Lady Tyrconnel, and several of their
Grandees: But the case was otherwise with Papists, they sold at what Rate they
pleased, not minding the Proclamation; of which Alderman Reily, who issued it,
was an Instance; He had a quantity of Salt in his hands, and sold it at
excessive Rates, above what he compelled Protestants to part with theirs;
Complaint was made against him, and he was indicted at the Tholsel, which is
the City Court, that very Term in which the Proclamation came out; upon the
Traverse the Petty-Jury found him guilty, and the Court Fined him in an 100 l.
but all this was only a Blind, for the Sheriffs set him at Liberty on his
Parole after he was committed to them: He brought his Writ of Error returnable
into the King's Bench, but the Record was never removed nor the Fine levied.
And the Consequence was, that neither he nor any Papist took notice of the
Order, and yet kept it in its full Force against Protestants.

12. They saw therefore that it was resolved to leave them nothing that was
easily to be found; for Sir Thomas Hacket had made a Proposal to Seize
Feather-Beds, and other Furniture of Houses; alleging that they would be good
Commodities in France; upon which the Protestants thought it the best way to
exchange what Brass Money they had, into Silver and Gold, and gave 2 l. 10 s. 3
l. 4 l. and at last 5 l. for a Guiney; but even so 'twas thought too beneficial
for them, and to stop it, they procured a Proclamation, dated June 15. 1690.
whereby it is made Death to give above 1 l. 18 s. for a Guiney, or for a Louis
d'Or above 1 l. 10 s. etc. The Papists needed not fear a Proclamation, or the
Penalty of it; they had Interest enough to avoid it, and therefore still bought
up Gold at what rate they pleased; but if any Protestant had been found
Transgressing, he must have expected the utmost Severity.

13. And thus the case stood when His Majesty's Victory at the Boyn delivered
us; and let any one judge whether we had reason to be pleased with the Success,
and gratefully receive him, that came to restore to us, not only our Goods and
Fortunes, but the very Necessaries of Life; and what Obligations we could have
of Fidelity or Allegiance to King James, who treated us plainly as Prisoners of
War, and as Enemies not Subjects, and by designing and endeavoring our Ruin,
declared, in effect, he would govern us no longer; but more expressly at his
going away, freely allowed us to shift for our selves; and advised those about
him, both at the Boyn when he quitted the Field, and the next Morning in
Council at the Castle of Dublin, to make the best Terms they could, and quietly
submit to the Conqueror, who, he said, was a Merciful Prince.

SECT. XII. King James destroyed the Real, as well as the Personal, Estates of
his Protestant Subjects in Ireland.
1. THere remains yet to be spoken of, a third part of the Property belonging
to Protestants; I mean, their Real Estates, and care was effectually taken to
divest them of these, as well as of their Personal Fortunes: Their Estates of
Inheritance were either acquired before the Year 1641. and were called Old
Interest, or else since that time, and passed by the name of New Interest. The
greater part of Estates belonging to Protestants were of this last sort, and
they stood on this ground: The Papists of Ireland (as I have noted before)
Chap. II. Sect. 4.
had raised a most Horrid Rebellion against the King, and Barbarously Murdered
some Hundred Thousands of Protestants in Cold Blood in 1641. for which most of
their Gentry were indicted and outlawed by due course of Law, and consequently
their Estates forfeited. The English, after a War of twelve Years, reduced them
with vast Expense of Blood and Treasure; and according to an Act of Parliament
past 17 Car. I. at Westminster, the forfeited Estates were to be disposed of.
When King Charles II. was restored, he restored many of the Papists, and after
two years Deliberation, and the full hearing of all Parties before himself and
Council in England, he passed an Act in a Parliament held at Dublin, commonly
called, The Act of Settlement, whereby a general Settlement was made of the
Kingdom, and Commissioners appointed to hear and determine every Man's Claim.
After this, upon some Doubts that arose, another Act passed 17 Car. II.
commonly called, The Act of Explanation; which made a further and final
Settlement: Every Protestant made his Claim before the Commissioners of Claims,
and was forced to prosecute it at vast Expenses: After this, he got a
Certificate from those Commissioners, of what appeared to belong to him for
Arrears or Debentures; and having retrenched a third of what was actually set
out to him, and in his Possession, and paid one Years full improved value of
what remained, every Man passed a Patent for it, a certain considerable yearly
Rent, called Quit-rent, being reserved to the King out of every Acre; these two
Acts of Parliament at Dublin, with that and other Acts at Westminster, together
with a Certificate from the Court of Claims, and Letters Patents from the King,
pursuant to the Certificate from the Commissioners, made up the Title which two
thirds of the Protestants in Ireland had to their Estates. Those Papists that
had forfeited in 1641. were commonly known by the Name of Old Proprietors, who
notwithstanding their Outlawries and Forfeitures, and the Acts of Parliament
that were against them, still kept up a kind of Claim to their forfeited
Estates; they were still suggesting new Scruples and Doubts; and either
disturbing the Protestant Possessors with Suits, in which by Letters from Court
they obtained Favor from some of the Judges or else threatening them with an
after-reckoning. The Protestants earnestly desired a New Parliament, which
might settle things beyond any Doubt, and cut the Papists off from their Hopes
and Expectations; but King James, when Duke of York, had so great Interest with
his Brother King Charles II. that he kept off a Parliament against all the
Solicitations that could be made for it for Twenty four Years, to the no small
Damage of the Kingdom, on other accounts as well as this; and he so encouraged
those forfeiting Proprietors, and so kept them in Heart by countenancing them,
that they did not doubt some time or other to recover their Estates; and they
often told the English, when heated by Drink or Passion, that the time was
drawing near, when they would out them of their Estates and Improvements, and
send them to Dig or Beg. This Hope kept the Irish Idle, and hindered them from
applying themselves to any thing else; and they were so sure of regaining their
forfeited Estates, that they disposed of them by Wills and Settlements, as if
in Possession; which Wills and Settlements made by them whilst out of
Possession, are confirmed by a particular Act made in their late pretended
Parliament.

2. When King James came to the Crown, they reckoned they had gained their
Point, and did not fail to labor it with all possible Industry; and no doubt
but his Majesty designed to gratify them in it, but he did not think fit to
let the Protestants know his Intentions; on the contrary, he industriously
concealed them: He sent over the Lord Clarendon Lord Lieutenant in the Year
1685. who arrived here January 10. he gave him in Charge to declare, That he
would preserve the Acts of Settlement and Explanation inviolable: And
accordingly the Lord Clarendon made this Declaration in Council, and further
gave it in Charge to all the Judges, who solemnly declared on the Bench in
their respective Circuits, the Kings firm Intentions to preserve those Acts,
and in them the Protestant English Interest of Ireland. At the same time Sir
Charles Porter was sent over Chancellor of Ireland; and he likewise had a
Command from the King, to assure all his Subjects, that he would preserve these
Acts as the Magna Charta of Ireland; and Sir Charles, at his entrance on his
Office, declared this solemnly on the Bench, (as Chancellor Fitton also after
did; and used withal, to term it, The Darling of the Nation) and that it was
the King's Pleasure to give his Subjects this Assurance: These kind of
Declarations were often repeated, and gained Belief from the credulous
Protestants, especially that made by Sir Charles, who behaving himself with
Courage and Integrity in his Office, went a great way to persuade them: But the
Papists were nothing daunted at it, they knew that this was only a piece of
Policy to ^ull us asleep, till the Army was modelled, and things fitted for
repealing these Acts, and then all the Protestations to the contrary would
signify nothing. The new Attorney General Nagle, was the first that durst
openly propose the Repealing of them, in his Letter from Coventry, dated
October 26. 1686. in which he endeavors to show some Nullities and
Invalidities in the Acts; but mainly insists on the Inconveniency it would
bring to the Popish Interest, to have those Acts continued. When the Earl of
Tyrconnel came to the Government things were Riper, and so King James ventured
to discover his Intentions a little further; and therefore in the first
Proclamation issued out by the Lord-Deputy Tyrconnel, and dated Feb. 21. 1686.
he promised to defend the Laws, Liberties and established Religion; but upon
debate at the Council Board, leaves out the Preservation of the Acts of
Settlement and Explanation. In Spring 1688. he sends over to England Chief
Justice Nugent and Baron Rice, to concert the Methods of repealing it. That
this was their Errand was publicly known, and is confessed by my Lord
Sunderland in his Letter to his Friend in London, dated March 23. 1689. and if
we believe him, they bid 40000 l. to gain his Lordship to assist them; but
whatever his Lordship did with them, it is certain they succeeded in their
Design (though perhaps a little delayed in point of time) and agreed on the
several Steps, by which they were to bring it to pass; they knew it was
generally discoursed that they went on this Errand, and it would have alarmed
the whole Kingdom if they had owned their Success; they therefore dissembled
it, and contrived to have it given out, that the King had rejected their
Proposals, but granted others that were very Beneficial to the Kingdom, the
Heads of which they took care to have published. In the mean while they fell on
prosecuting their Design according to the Secret Resolutions agreed on, and
began immediately to put things in order to have a Parliament that would be
sure to answer their Intentions; they proceeded to finish the Regulations of
Corporations, against which Quo Warranto's had before been issued, as we have
already showed; and that things might not stick in the House of Lords, by
reason of the Numerousness of the Protestant Peers and Bishops, a List was
drawn up of such Papists as the King might by Writ call into the House to
Out-vote them: The Sons of such Lords as had been Indicted and Outlawed for
the Rebellion in 1641. had brought Writs of Error to reverse their Father's
Outlawries, which made them incapable of Sitting; which was in effect to
destroy the Act of Settlement that was founded on those Out-lawries. The
Protestants saw the Consequence of the Reversing them, and therefore earnestly
opposed it; but Lord Chief Justice Nugent, and his Fellow-Judges overruled all
Oppositions that could be made, and reversed as many as desired it: Some of
them, when they had reversed the Outlawries, asked the Attorney General whether
they might not now Sue* for their Estates: He answered, that they should have a
little Patience, perhaps they would come more easily; meaning, that when a
Parliament sat, it would (by repealing the Act of Settlement) give them their
Estates without a Suit.

3. But many had not Patience to wait the General Restitution; and therefore as
soon as they had Judges and Sheriffs to their mind, they set up Counterfeit
Deeds, and easily obtained Verdicts; if the Protestants brought a Writ of
Error, yet that did not benefit them, nor stop their being outed of Possession;
for the Sheriffs, on their own Heads, gave the Old Proprietors Possession, and
left the Protestants to recover it, by Injunction out of Chancery, or by
Common Law. Thus Doctor Gorge was outed by Mr. Barnwell of a great Estate, and
many others, notwithstanding their Writs of Error. Some Old Proprietors had
gotten some Conditional Orders from the Commissioners of the Court of Claims,
for Estates; many of which only enabled them to bring their Actions at
Common Law. These had la^^ dormant since the sitting of the Court of Claims,
which was above Twenty Years; but now instead of bringing their Actions into
the Court, they carried their old Injunctions which they had procured from the
Court of Claims, and which they thought not fit in all this time to execute, as
knowing legally they could not; yet, I say, so long after the Dissolution of
the Court which granted them, they carried them to the Sheriffs, and they,
without any more ado, put them into Possession; whereby they deprived the
Subject of the Benefit of those Laws that make Fines, levied with Nonclaim, a
perpetual Bar; and also dispossessed and put by, all intermediate Purchases and
Settlements. This was the Bishop of Meath's Case, whose Father purchased an
Estate in 1636. and both he and the Bishop had continued in Peaceable
Possession of it ever since; yet he was now outed of it, by an old Injunction
from the Court of Claims, granted on a pretended Deed of Settlement, made for
Portions to the Daughters of the Man that had sold it to the Bishop's Father:
This Deed ought to have been proved at Common Law, before he should have been
disturbed; but the Popish Sheriff of the County of Mead, one Nangle executed
the Injunction on the Bishop, and two other Protestants, without any such
Formality; some Papists were as deeply concerned as they, as holding part of
the same Estate, but the Sheriff durst not, or would not execute the Injunction
on their part, though he did it on that part which was in the Hands of
Protestants; at this rate many Protestants were outed of their Estates, and the
old Proprietors having gotten Possession, put the Suit and Proof on Protestants
to recover them; near a hundred English Gentlemen lost considerable Estates in
less than a Year, and the Papists were in hopes to do their work by their False
Oaths, Forged Deeds, Corrupt Judges, and Partial Juries: No one Suit that I
could learn, having been determined against them in either the King's Bench or
Exchequer.

4. But this was not the way designed by the Grandees; they saw it was like to
be Tedious, Expensive, and must have been in many cases, Insuccessful; and
therefore See the Copy of a Letter to King James, and Malony's Letter in the
Appendix. N. 4. and 17.
they were intent on a Parliament; and they had in less than nine Months fitted
all things for it: So that we should infallibly have had one next Winter, if
the Closeted Parliament, designed to sit at Westminster in November 1688. had
succeeded, and the News of the Prince of Orange's intended Descent into
England, had not diverted them; but it was not judged convenient to proceed
farther in Ireland till the Penal Laws and Test were removed in England.

5. After King James's deserting England, and getting into France, which
mightily rejoiced them, their great Care was to get him into their own Hands;
and they easily prevailed on him to come into Ireland, where he landed at
Kinsale, March 12. 1688. and made his entry into Dublin on Palm Sunday, March
24. Upon his coming into Dublin, every Body was intent to see what he would do,
in relation to the Affairs of Ireland; it was manifestly against his Interest
to call a Parliament, and much more unseasonable to pass such Acts in it, as he
knew the Papists expected.

For First, The Kingdom was not entirely in Obedience to him, Londonderry,
Enniskillin, and a great part of the North being then unreduced; which gave
occasion to many, even of his own Party, to ridicule him and his Councils, who,
so contrary to his Interest, had called a Parliament to spend their time in
wrangling about Settling the Kingdom, and disposing Estates, before they had
reduced it. But had they, instead of Passing such Acts as made them Odious to
all Good Men, applied themselves to the Siege of Derry, it is like it had been
reduced before the Succors came, and then all Ireland had been their own, and
no Body can tell what might have been the Consequence of it.

6. Secondly, It a little reflected on King James's Sincerity, who in his
Answer to the Petition of the Lords for a Parliament in England, presented Nov.
17. 1688. How is it possible a Parliament should be Free in all its
Circumstances, whilst an Enemy is in the Kingdom.
gave it as one Reason why he could not comply, because it was impossible,
whilst part of the Kingdom was in the Enemies Hands, to have a Free Parliament*
The same Impossibility lay on him against holding a Parliament in Ireland, at
his coming to Dublin, if that had been the True Reason; and his not acting
uniformly to it, plainly discovered, That the True Reason why he would not hold
a Parliament in England, and yet held one in Ireland, under the same
Circumstances, was not the pretended Impossibility, but because the English
Parliament would have secured the Liberties and Religion of the Kingdom,
whereas he was sure the Irish Parliament would Subvert them.

7. Thirdly, His Compliance with all the most Extravagant Proposals of the
Papists in Ireland, was unavoidable if he called a Parliament; and to comply
with them, was to do so palpable and inexcusable Injustice, to the Protestants
and English Interest of Ireland, that he could not expect but that he should
lose the Hearts of those Protestants in England and Scotland who were
indifferent or well affected to him before, as soon as they were fully informed
of what he had done in Ireland; and to lose their Assistance, was to lose the
fairest Hopes he could have of recovering his Crown.

8. Fourthly, By holding a Parliament, he manifesty weakened his Forces in
Ireland; for the Papists, whom he was to restore to their Estates, were most of
them poor insignificant People, not able or capable to do him Service; for the
Richer sort of Papists were either disobliged by it (being losers as well as
the Protestants) or else under a necessity to neglect the King's Service, and
spend their time to make Interest to secure themselves of Reprizals, for what
they lost by the Parliament.

9. Fifthly, He strengthened and united his Enemies, by rendering all the
Protestants, that were not under his Power, Desperate; and by convincing the
rest of the Necessity of joining with them as fast as they could; since no
other Choice was left them, but either to do this or to be ruined.

10. All these Reasons lay before the King against calling a Parliament; and
made it manifestly unseasonable to do it now, however bent to comply with the
long and earnest Solicitations of the Irish, as we see in Nagles Coventry
Letter, and the two Papers in the Appendix. But contrary to all the Rules of
Interest and true Policy, he was resolved to gratify them; for which we were
able to give no other reason, but the Resolution ascribed to him in the Liege
Letter, either to dye a Martyr, or to establish Popery; and therefore he issued
out a Proclamation for a Parliament, to sit May 7. 1688. at Dublin. The
Proclamation was dated March 25. the next day after he came to Dublin, but was
not published till April 2. it was said to be antedated four days, but of that
I can say nothing.

11. Every Body foresaw what a kind of Parliament this would be, and what was
like to be done in it. Our Constitution lodges the Legislative Power in the
King, Lords and Commons, and each of these is a Check on the other, that if any
one of them attempt a thing prejudicial to the Kingdom, the other may oppose
and stop it; but our Enemies had made all these for their purpose, and
therefore no Law could signify any thing to oppose them, it being in their
power to remove any Law when they pleased by repealing it. The King was their
own, both inclined of himself, and easy to be prevailed on by them, to do what
they would have him: So that we could promise our selves no help from his
Negative Vote.

13. The House of Lords, if regularly assembled, had consisted for the most
part of Protestants, and might have been a Check to the King's Intentions of
taking away our Laws in a legal Method, there being, if we reckon the Bishops,
about Ninety Protestant Lords to Forty five Papists, taking in the new
Creations and attainted Lords. But first, to remove this Obstacle, care had
been taken to reverse the Outlawries of the Popish Lords, in order to
capacitate them to sit in the House. 2. New Creations were made, Sir Alexander
Fitton, the Chancellor, was made Baron of Gosworth; Thomas Nugent, the Chief
Justice, Baron of Riverston; Justin M'Carty Viscount Mountcashell; Sir
Valentine Brown Viscount Kenmare: A List was made of more to be called into the
House, if there were occasion. 3. They had several Popish Titular Bishops in
the Kingdom, and it was not doubted, but if necessity required, those would be
called by Writs into the House. 4. It was easy to call the eldest Sons of
Noblemen into the Parliament by Writ, which would not augment the Nobility,
and yet fill the House. But there were already sufficient to over-vote the
Protestants, for there remained of about Sixty nine Protestant Temporal Lords,
only four or five in Ireland to sit in the House; and of Twenty two Spiritual
Lords, only seven left in the Kingdom, of which Dr. Michael Boil, Archbishop
of Ardmah, Dr. Hugh Gore Bishop of Waterford, Dr. Roan Bishop of Killal^o, were
excused, on the account of Age and Sickness. The other four were Dr. Anthony
Dopping, Bishop of Mead; Dr. Thomas Otway, Bishop of Ossory; Dr. Simon Digby,
Bishop of Lymerick; and Dr. Edward Wettenhall, Bishop of Cork and Ross; these
were obliged to appear upon their Writs directed to them, and King James was
forced sometimes to make use of them to moderate* by way of Counterpoise, the
Madness of his own Party, when their Votes displeased him: But in the general,
they protested against most of the Acts* and entered their Dissent. It is
observable, that all these Acts of this pretended Parliament, are said to be by
the Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, whereas not one
Spiritual Lord consented to many of them, but on the contrary, unanimously
protested against them; and at passing the Act of Attainder, of which more
hereafter, they were not so much as present. They complained of this, but were
refused redress, and the express mention of their consent continued: Of Thirty
seven Papist Lords, there appeared, besides the new created Lords, Twenty four
at times; of which Fifteen were under Attainders by Indictments and Outlawries;
two or three were under Age* and there remained only Six or Seven capable of
Sitting and Acting. Chancellor Fitton, now Baron of Gosworth, was Speaker of
the House of Lords. King James was present constantly in the House, and
directed them not only in their Debates, but likewise in their Forms and
Ceremonies; hardly one in either House having ever sat in a Parliament before.

14. The House of Commons makes the Third Estate in Parliament, and it is by
them that the People have a more immediate Interest in the Legislative Power;
the Members of this House being such as are returned by the Peoples Free
Election; which is looked on as the Fundamental Security of the Lives,
Liberties and Properties of the Subject. These Members of the House of Commons
are elected either by the Freeholders of Counties, or the Freemen of
Corporations: And I have already showed, how King James wrested these out of
the Hands of Protestants, and put them into Popish Hands, in the new
Constitution of Corporations, by which the Freemen and Freeholders of Cities
or Boroughs, to whom the Election of Burgesses originally belongs, are
excluded, and the Election put into the Hands of a small number of Men named by
the King, and removable at his pleasure. The Protestant Freeholders, if they
had been in the Kingdom, were much more than the Papist Freeholders, but now
being gone, tho many Counties could not make a Jury, as appeared at the
intended Trial of Mr. Price, and other Protestants at Wicklow, who could not be
tried for want of Freeholders yet notwithstanding the Paucity of these, they
made a shift to return Knights of the Shire. The common way of Election was
thus, The Earl of Tyrconnel, together with the Writ for Election, commonly sent
a Letter, recommending the Persons he designed should be chosen; the Sheriff or
Mayor being his Creature, on receipt of this, called so many of the
Freeholders of a County, or Burgesses of a Corporation, together, as he
thought fit, and, without any noise, made the return: It was easy to do this
in Boroughs, because, by their new Charters, the Electors were not above Twelve
or Thirteen, and in the greatest Cities but 24; and commonly not half of these
on the place. The Method of the Sheriffs proceeding was the same; the number of
Popish Freeholders being very small, sometimes not a Dozen in a County, it was
easy to give notice to them to appear, so that the Protestants either did not
know of the Election, or durst not appear at it. By these means the pretended
Parliament consisted of the most Bigoted Papists, and of such as were most
deeply Interested to destroy the Protestant Religion and Protestants of
Ireland. One Gerrard Dillon Sergeant at Law, a most furious Papist, was
Recorder of Dublin, and he stood to be chosen one of the Burgesses for the
City, but could not prevail, because he had purchased a considerable Estate
under the Act of Settlement, and they feared lest this might engage him to
defend it. Several Corporations had no Representatives, either because they
were in the Enemies hands, or else because the Persons, named by the Charter
for Electors, were so far remote, that they could not come in such Numbers, as
to secure the Elections for Papists, against the few Protestants that were left
still in the Charters, and who lived generally on the place. I have marked the
Boroughs and Counties that had no Representatives, in Append. N. 21.
number about Twenty nine, few Protestants could be prevailed with to stand,
tho they might have been chosen, because they foresaw no possibility of doing
good, and thought it unsafe to sit in a Parliament, which they judged in their
Conscience Illegal, and purposely designed for Mischief to them and their
Religion; however it was thought convenient that some should be in it, to
observe how things went; and with much persuasion and Entreaty, Sir John Mead
and Mr. Joseph Coghlan Counselors at Law, were prevailed on to stand for the
University of Dublin; the University must choose, and it could not stand with
their Honor to choose Papists, and therefore they pitched on these two
Gentlemen, who were hardly brought to accept of it, as thinking it Scandalous
to be in so ill Company; and they could not prevail with themselves to sit out
the whole Session, but withdrew before the Act of Attainder came to be
concluded, not enduring to be present at the passing of that and some other
Barbarous Acts, against which they found their Votes signified nothing while
they staid. There were four more Protestants returned, of whose Behavior I can
give no account, or how they came to be returned: The generality of the Houses
consisted of the Sons and Descendents of the Forfeiting Persons in 1641. Men
that had no Freeholds or Estates in the Kingdom, but were purposely elected to
make themselves Estates by taking them away from Protestants.

15. Now whilst the power of making and repealing Laws was in such hands, what
Security could Protestants promise themselves from any Laws, or what
probability was there that any Laws already made in their Favor would be
continued?

Especially if we consider further, that this Parliament openly professed it
self a Slave to the King's Will, and he was looked on as Factiously and
Rebelliously inclined, that would dare to move any thing after any Favorite in
the House had affirmed that it was contrary to the King's pleasure. Several
Bills were begun in the House of Commons; one for erecting an Inns of Court;
another for repealing an Act commonly called Poinings Act; which requires that
all Acts should be perused by the King and Council of England before they be
offered to be passed by the Parliament in Ireland; but King James signified his
Dissatisfaction to these Bills, and for that reason they and several others
were let fall; tho the Irish had talked much, and earnestly desired the Repeal
of Poinings Act, it being the greatest Sign and means of their Subjection to
England: There was a doubt made in the House, concerning the Earl of Strafford,
whether he should be attainted for Estate and Life; several moved in his
behalf, but it was carried against him upon this Evidence; Colonel Simon
Lutterell affirmed in the House, That he had heard the King say some hard
things of him: The King's pleasure therefore was the Law, to which we were to
trust for our Lives and Fortunes, our Enemies having entirely engrossed the
power of making and repealing Laws, and devolved it on the King's pleasure; the
very Protestant Lords and Bishops being denied their Privilege of entering
their Protestations against such Votes as they conceived Destructive to the
Kingdom: The King told them, That Protestations against Votes were only used in
Rebellious times, and with much ado they were allowed to enter their Dissent;
tho after that was allowed them, the Clerk of the Parliament, one Polewheele, a
Nephew of Chancellor Fitton's, shifted them off and did not enter their Dissent
to some Votes* tho often solicited and pressed to do it, according to the
Orders of the House.

16. When King James had labored as much as in him lay, to get a Parliament
that would repeal the Penal Laws and Test in England, and open the Houses to
Papists, he found at last that the great Obstacle that rendered the Kingdom so
averse to this, was the general Fear and Apprehension, that the Legislative
Authority would be engrossed by them, and turned against Protestants; this was
so obvious and reasonable a Surmise, that he knew there was no hopes that the
People would side with him against their present Majesty's, if something were
not done to satisfy them; and therefore to remove this fear, he published his
Proclamation dated Sept. 20. 1688. wherein he declares himself willing that
Roman Catholics should remain incapable to be Members of the House of Commons;
if the Protestants of England had reason to apprehend, that Papists would
engross the Legislative Authority in England, and from the Example of Queen
Mary's House of Commons, to dread such Law givers, how much more reason had the
Protestants of Ireland to dread that power, when entirely engrossed by their
most inveterate Popish Enemies, whose Interest, as well as Religion, obliged
them to divest all those that professed the Reformed Religion, not only of the
Favor, but likewise of the Benefits of Law?

17. They sat from the Seventh of May, till the Twentieth of July following,
and in that short time entirely destroyed the Settlement of Ireland, and outed
both the Protestant Clergy and Laity of their Freeholds and Inheritances. It is
not to be exspected I should give an account of all their Acts; that which
concerns this present Section, is to show how they destroyed the Protestants
real Estates.

1. And that was first by an Act of Repeal, whereby they took away the Acts of
Settlement and Explanation; by virtue of which (as I have already showed) two
thirds of the Protestants of the Kingdom held their Estates, that is, all that
which is called New Interest, was lost by this Repeal; there is no
consideration had in it, how any Man came to his Estate; but tho he purchased
it at ever so dear a rate, he must lose it, and it is to be restored (without
Exception) to the Proprietor or his Descendent that had it before, October 22.
1641. upon what account soever he lost it; tho they themselves did not deny but
many deserved to lose their Estates; even Sir Phelim O Neal's Son, the great
Murderer and Rebel, was restored.

2. In order to make a final Extirpation of Protestants, they contrive and pass
an Act of Attainder, by which all Protestants, whose Names they could find, of
all Ages, Sexes and Degrees, are attainted of High Treason, and their Estates
vested in the King; the pretense of this Attainder, was their being out of the
Kingdom at the time of passing the Act, as shall be shown in the next Section.

3. Least some should be forgotten of those that were absent, and not put into
the Bill of Attainder, they contrived a general Clause in the Act of Repeal,
whereby the real Estates of all who Dwelt or staid in any place of the three
Kingdoms, which did not own King James' Power, or corresponded with any such as
they term Rebels, or were any ways aiding, abetting or assisting to them from
the First day of August 1688. are declared to be forfeited and vested in his
Majesty, and that without any Office or Inquisition found thereof: By which
Clause almost every Protestant that could Write in the Kingdom, had forfeited
his Estate; for the Packets went from London to Dublin, and back again,
constantly from August to March 1688. and few had Friends in England, or in the
North, but corresponded with them by Letters, and every such Letter is made by
this clause a Forfeiture of Estate. They had intercepted and searched every
Packet that went or came, the later part of this time, and kept vast Heaps of
Letters, which were of no Consequence at all to the Government; we wondered
what the meaning of their doing so should be, but by this Parliament we came to
understand it, for now these Letters were produced as Evidences in the House of
Commons, against those that appeared in behalf of their absent Friends, or
opposed the attainting of such Protestants as they had some kindness for; and
they were further reserved to prove a Correspondence against the few Estated
Men that were in the Kingdom. Lastly, It was the end of Sept. 1688. before we
heard any thing of the Prince of Orange's design to make a Descent into
England, and yet to have been in England or Scotland any time in the Month
before, or to have corresponded with any there, is made Forfeiture of Estate by
the Letter of this Statute.

4. Least the Children and Descendents of the Protestants thus attainted, who
had Estates before 1641. should come in and claim them after the Death of the
attainted Persons, by virtue of Settlements made on valuable Considerations,
and upon Marriages, all such Remainders and Reversions are cut off; for there
is an express Exception to all Remainders on such as are commonly called
Plantation-lands, and likewise to such Lands, etc. as are held by Grants from
the Crown, or upon Grants by Commissioners upon defective Titles: It were too
tedious to explain these several kinds of Tenures; it is sufficient to let the
Reader know, that they comprehend all those Estates which were acquired by
Protestants before the year 1641. Thus then the case stood with the
Protestants; if they purchased or acquired their Estates since the year 1641.
out of any of the Lands then forfeited, they were to lose them, whether Guilty
or Innocent, by the Act of Repeal; if their Estates were such as belonged to
Protestants before 1641. and consequently were what we call Old Interest, then
to have been in England or Scotland, or to have corresponded with any of their
Friends there, or in the North since August 1. 1688. was a Forfeiture of
Estate, and a Bar for their Remainders for ever, tho the Heirs had done nothing
to divest themselves of the Estates derived to them by legal Settlements on
valuable Considerations. And here the Partiality of this Parliament is visible,
for there is a saving in the Act for all such Remainders as they thought might
relate to any Papist; whereas all the Remainders in which they did imagine
Protestants could be concerned, are barred.

5. There is indeed a promise of reprizing Purchasers in the Act of Repeal,
which was put in to qualify the manifest Injustice of it, and to satisfy the
Clamors of several amongst themselves, who were to lose their Estates by it, as
having purchased new interested Land: But least any Protestant, who staid in
the Kingdom, should hope for Benefit by this Clause, or be repriz'd for the
Lands he had purchased, perhaps from a Papist, they contrive a Clause in the
latter end of the Act -- Whereby the King is enabled to gratify Meriting
Persons, and to order the Commissioners to set forth Reprizals, and likewise to
appoint and ascertain where and what Lands should be set out to them: By which
the Protestants were excluded from all hopes of Reprizals; for to be sure where
any of them put in for a piece of Land, there would never want a Meriting
Papist to put in for the same; and when it was left entirely to K. James, which
he would prefer of those two, let the World judge what hope any Protestant
could have of a Reprizal. Thus when Sir Thomas Newcomen put in Proposals for a
Custodiam in order to a Reprizal, Mr. Robert Longfield a Convert, and Clerk of
the Quit-rents and Absentees Goods, is said to have put his own Name to Sir
Thomas's Proposal, and to have got the Custodiam for himself.

6. Lastly, Some might think, that tho near 3000 Protestants were attainted,
and the Estates of all the rest in a manner vested in the King, yet this was
only done in terrorem, and that K. James never meant to take the Forfeiture. To
this I answer, That it was not left in his power to pardon any that was
attainted, or whose Estate was vested in him by this Act; this was (if we
believe his Majesty) more than he knew when he passed it, and was one reason
why the Act of Attainder was made so great a Secret, that no Copy could be
gotten of it by any Protestant, till the Easter after it was passed, and then
it was gotten by a mere accident. We had from the beginning labored to get it,
and offered largely for a Copy, but could not by any means prevail; Chancellor
Fitton keeping the Rolls locked up in his Closet, till at last a Gentleman
procured it by a Stratagem, which was thus, Sir Thomas Southwell had been
condemned for High Treason against King James, amongst other Gentlemen at
Gallway, in March 1688. and attainted in the Act of Attainder also, he
continued a Prisoner till my Lord Seaforth became acquainted with him; my Lord
undertook to reconcile him to the King, and to get his Pardon; K. James
promised it on the Earl's Application, and order was given to draw up a Warrant
for it. The Gentleman I mentioned being a Lawyer, and an Acquaintance of Sir
Thomas's, was employed to draw it up; he immediately apprehended this to be a
good opportunity to get a Copy of the Act of Attainder, which he had labored
for in vain before, and which was kept from us by so much Injustice: He told
the Earl therefore, and Sir Thomas (what was the real Truth) that he could not
draw up an effectual Pardon, except he saw the Act that attainted him. Hereupon
the Earl obtained an express order from the King, to have a Copy delivered to
him. Thus I believe was the only Copy taken of it after it was enrolled; it was
taken for the use of a Papist, and was lent to the Earl, who was permitted to
show it to his Lawyer; and accordingly left it with him only for one day, who
immediately employed several Persons to Copy it, and the Copy was sent by the
first Opportunity into England. The List of the Names of those that were
attainted, had been obtained the January before, with difficulty; the
Commissioners in the Custom-house, who seized Absentees Goods, and set their
Estates, could not do their Work without such a List; and that which was
Printed in England, with some of the Acts of our Irish Parliament, was coppied
from thence, but the Act it self could not then be procured, and therefore was
not Printed with them. When the Lawyer had drawn up the Warrant for Sir
Thomas's Pardon, with a full Non obstante to the Act of Attainder, the Earl
brought it to the Attorney General, Sir Richard Nagle, to have a Fiant drawn;
the Attorney read it, and with Indignation threw it aside; the Earl began to
expostulate with him for using the King's Warrant at that rate. The Attorney
told him, That the King did not know what he had done, that he had attempted to
do a thing that was not in his power to do, that if the Earl understood our
Laws, or had seen the Act of Attainder, he would be satisfied that the King
could not dispense with it: My Lord answered, That he understood Sense and
Reason, and that he was not a Stranger to the Act of Attainder. Sir Richard
would not believe him till he showed the Copy, which much surpised Sir
Richard; he began to enquire how his Lordship came by it, and intimated that
the Keepers of the Rolls were Treacherous, in letting any one see it, much more
in letting a Copy of it go abroad. His Lordship, with good reason, expressed
his Admiration, that an Act of Parliament should be made a Secret; and the
Laws, upon the Observation of which, the Lives and Fortunes of so many Men
depended, should be concealed with so much care from them: At last the Attorney
told him, That he himself would draw up a Warrant for Sir Thomas Southwell's
Pardon, that should do his Business, and get the King to Sign it: But the Earl
refused to accept his offer, unless his Lawyer might first peruse it; which
being granted, the Lawyer, upon perusal, found it to be such as would not hold
in Law, and intended only to delude him. The Earl made new Application to King
James, and Sir Richard being sent for, the King asked him why he did not
prepare a Fiant for Sir Thomas Southwell's Pardon, according to the Warrant
sent to him: He answered, That his Majesty could not grant such a Pardon; That
his Majesty was only a Trustee for Forfeited Estates, and could not Dispense
with the Act; that by an express Clause in it, all Pardons that should be
granted were declared void. The King in some Passion told him, That he hoped
they did not intend to retrench his Prerogative: Sir Richard replied, That his
Majesty had read the Act before he passed it: The King answered, He had
betrayed him; that he depended on him for drawing the Act, and if he had drawn
it so that there was no room for Dispensing and Pardoning, he had been false to
him, or words to that effect. Thus the Matter ended, and Sir Thomas went into
Scotland with my Lord Seaforth, without being able to obtain his Pardon for
Estate or Life, the Act voiding any Pardon granted to any attainted by it after
Nov. 1. 1689. or not enrolled before the last day of that Month.

18. And now I doubt not but the Reader, from this Story which is literally
true, will observe first the Juggling of the Popish Lawyers with King James,
and will pity a Prince who gave himself up to such False and Double-dealing
Counselors, when an Act of Parliament is made against a Papist, then it is no
less than Treason to question the King's Pardoning and Dispensing Power; but
when an Act bears hard on a Protestant, and the King has a mind to ease him,
then the King has no power to Dispense, he cannot grant a Pardon tho he
earnestly desire it: From whence we may see, that the Dispensing Power was only
set up to shelter Papists from the Law, and ruin Protestants; and that Papists,
in their Hearts, are as much against it as Protestants.

2. We may observe what fair Justice was designed for Protestants; a Law was
made to turn near 3000 out of their Estates, and to take away their Lives if
they did not come in against a certain day; and yet the Law that subjected them
to this Penalty was made a Secret, and they not suffered to know one word of
it, till the time allowed them to come in was past at least three Months; but
there was an Intrigue in this, they knew they had a Party in England, who were
to face down the World, that there were no such Acts made; a Party that were to
represent it as a Sham and Contrivance of King James's Enemies to make him
Odious; and the great Argument they were to urge to prove it, must be to
allege, Where is the Act? Why does it not appear? If there were any such Act,
would not the People that came so often from Ireland, and tell such Frightful
Stories, have brought it with them? This is the part the Favorers of King
James were to act in England and Scotland, and this is the reason the Act was
so long kept Secret.

3. We may observe the Folly of those Men who were attainted in this Act
themselves, and yet Flatter themselves with the hopes of living Happily and
enjoying their Estates, nay, and getting Preferment under K. James when
restored to his Kingdoms: these Men do not consider that this Act would be
restored, together with him, and that then it is not in his power to do this
for them; that if they expect any such thing, they must be obliged to an Irish
Popish Parliament for it; and he is much a Stranger to Ireland, that knows not
what Mercy an Englishman and a Protestant is to exspect from them, especially
when they can give him nothing but what is taken from one of themselves. Till
therefore the Papists of Ireland become so good natured as to give away, by
their own voluntary act, their Estates (of which they were in actual
Possession) to Protestants, it is the greatest Folly in the World, for any
Protestant to think of enjoying any Estate in Ireland.

4. For it is observable that the Protestants Estates were not only given away
by this Act of Attainder, but the Papists were likewise in Possession of them
by the following means; The Act of Repeal was to be executed by Commissioners
appointed by the King, who were to determine the Claims of the Proprietors, or
Heirs to the Proprietors of the respective Estates, October 22. 1641. and give
Injunctions to the Sheriff to put them in Possession. In the mean time the
Protestants were to keep their Possessions till the First of May 1690. and to
pay Rent to the Popish Proprietors. The same Commissioners were to set out
Reprizals to reprizable Persons: But notwithstanding this, no such
Commissioners ever sat; the Protestants were generally outed, and the Papists
possessed both of their old Estates, and likewise of the Estates of
Protestants; they compassed this by several Stratagems.

19. Wherever the Protestants had set their Lands to Papist Tenants, those
Tenants forsook their Protestant Landlords, and became Tenants to the pretended
Popish Proprietors: Several Protestants complained in Chancery of this, as
contrary to the Act, which allowed them to keep Possession till May 1690. which
not being yet come, nor any Commissioners being yet appointed to execute the
Act, they moved for an Injunction to quite their Possessions; but the
Chancellor answered, That this did not concern Landlords, that set their Lands,
but only such as occupied Farms themselves; and that the Parliament had granted
that indulgence to them, only that they might have time to dispose of their
Stocks, which not being their Case who had Tenants, they must go to Common Law,
and try their Titles; by this means most of the old Popish Proprietors got into
their Estates. Nay, they not only outed the Landlords of their Estates, but
even the Protestant Tenants of their Leases, made in consideration of a
valuable reserved Rent, though this was positively against the intent of the
Act, which confirmed such Leases, and only gave the reserved Rent to the
restored Proprietor. 2. But they found a way to elude this by another Clause in
the same Act, which orders the Mansion House and Demeasnes of the Proprietor or
his Assignee in 1641. to be restored, and the Leases made of such to be void.
Now they never wanted an Affidavit to prove any beneficial Farm or good House,
they found in the Hands of a Protestant, to have been Demeasnes, and a Mansion
House; and then the Leiutenants of the Counties put them in Possession. 3. The
same Lieutenants had an Order from Albiville, Secretary of State, to turn all
Protestants out of their Houses, if they judged them to be Houses of any
strength, and to garrison them with Papists: We could never procure any Copy of
this Order from the Office, though they owned there was such an Order, and we
found the Effects of it; the Reasons of concealing it I suppose were the same
with concealing the Act of Attainder. The design of the Order was to turn out
the few Protestant Gentlemen that lived on their ancient Estates, and had
neither forfeited them by the Act of Attainder, nor lost them by the Act of
Repeal; it was left to the discretion of the Lieutenant of the County whom they
would turn out; and they acted according to their Inclinations, and turned out
almost every body; and 'twas with great difficulty and interest, that any
procured to be eased of this trouble. I have Appendix N. 24.
given a Copy of some of their Orders in the Appendix. In short, the Soldiers
or Militia took Possessions of such Gentlemen's Houses as durst venture to live
in the Country, and they themselves were sent to Jail; and had K. James got the
better, they must never have expected to have gotten possession of their
Houses, or been released of their confinement, till they had gone to execution;
for though they had been very cautious how they conversed, yet there would not
have wanted Witnesses to prove they had corresponded with some body in England
or Scotland, since the First of August, 1688. and then their Estates were
forfeited. The Gentlemen thus used were very sensible of one inconveniency that
befell them on this Account; it troubled them, more than their confinement, to
see their Houses and Improvements destroyed: for when the Soldiers got into the
Houses, under pretense of garrisoning them, they sometimes burnt them, and
always spoiled the Improvements.

As for the Estates of Absentees, the Commissioners of the Revenue disposed of
them, and hardly one Estate in Ireland but was already promised to some
Favorite Papist or other, who by Leases from the Commissioners were in actual
possession of them through the whole Kingdoms, as far as King James's Authority
was owned.

20. It may be imagined by some, that King James did not know that the
Repealing the Acts of Settlement and Explanation was of such mischievous
Consequence to Protestants, and that the Protestants were wanting to themselves
and him in not giving him due Information. But these Persons will find
themselves mistaken in their surmises, if they consider.

1. That King James, when Duke of York, was present at all the Debates
concerning the Settlement of Ireland at the Council Board in England, and was
one of the Council, when those Acts of Settlement and Explanation past it; he
had heard every Clause in them debated for near Two years; and from time to
time he had perfect information, and was continually solicited about them,
having a fair Estate in Ireland settled on him by them, containing by
estimation 108000 Acres, to the value of 10m. Pounds per Annum; and perhaps
there was not any thing he understood better relating to the Affairs of his
Kingdoms, then the Consequence of these Acts. We have seen before, how many
Promises and Assurances King James had given for maintaining them; as well
knowing the importance of them to this Kingdom. But notwithstanding this, he of
his own accord was the first that motioned the Repealing of them, in his Speech
at the opening the Parliament in Dublin.

2. The Protestants pressed, and earnestly solicited to be heard at the Bar of
the Lords House upon the Subject of those Acts, that they might show the
reasonableness of them, and demonstrate the injustice and mischief of repealing
them, but were denied to be heard; and an Order made, that nothing should be
offered in their favor. If therefore King James wanted information, it was
because he would not receive it.

3. The Bishop of Mead, so far as was allowed him, See Appendix N. 23.
laid open the Consequences of repealing these Acts so fully, in his Speech
which he made in the House of Lords, when he voted against the Act of Repeal,
that no Man who heard him, as his Majesty did, could pretend to want
information.

4. The Protestants were so far from being silent, or letting things pass
without opposition, that they labored every Point with all imaginable
industry, and used all the industry they could with King James, to inform and
persuade him; and when they could not gain one Point, they stuck at the next,
and endeavored to gain it, till he had deliberately overruled all their
Reasons and Pleas from Point to Point; and this they did to make his Designs
against them the more undeniably plain; not out of any hope of success, or
expectation to prevail with him; for they knew their appearing for a thing in
the Parliament was enough to damn it, of which they had many Experiments. One
was so remarkable, that I shall mention it* Mr. Coghlan had a mind to procure a
favor for a Friend from the House of Commons, whereof he was a Member; he knew
if he mentioned it, it would miscarry, and therefore he got a Papist to propose
it; the House seemed averse to it, and he, for Experiments sake, rose up, and
with some seeming warmness opposed it; immediately the House took the Alarm,
and, in opposition to him, voted it. They knew likewise, that it was determined
to destroy them, and gratify their Enemies; and that the reason why they were
not allowed to debate the main Point, the justice and reasonableness of the
Acts of Settlement and Explanation, was because that could not be done, without
showing what Traitors and Murderers the Papists had been, whom King James was
then about to gratify; a thing which he would by no means endure to hear.

5. The Reason therefore why the Protestants made so vigorous an opposition,
and plied the King and his pretended Parliament with so many Petitions,
Representations and Intercessions, was to stop the Mouths of those that they
foresaw would be apt to impute their Misfortunes to their sullenness or
negligence, that would not be at the pains of an Application to save
themselves, and to demonstrate to the World* that the Destruction brought on
them was not a thing of chance, but that it proceeded from a formed and
unalterable design of their Enemies to destroy them, insomuch that they never
could have expected to enjoy one Foot of Estate or quiet hour in the Kingdom,
if King James had continued his Government over them.

6. The Case of the Purchasers and Improvers in Ireland seemed the hardest: the
Land forfeited by the Rebellion in 1641. was set out to those that had been
Adventurers and Soldiers in that War; and many of these had sold them at Twelve
or Fifteen years Purchase; the Purchasers had built fair Houses and Villages on
them, enclosed Deer-Parks, planted Orchards and Gardens, and laid out vast Sums
in these and other Improvements; it seemed hard to turn them out without
consideration; to try therefore whether any thing would make King James relent,
they endeavored to see what he would do for these poor Men: how their Case was
pressed and represented to King James, may be judged by a Paper given him by the
Lord Granard, and drawn up by the Chief Justice Keating, with the Approbation
Appendix, N. 22.
of other Protestants; it is in the Appendix. King James read it, and made no
other answer to it, but, That he would not do evil that good might come of it;
the meaning of which Words, as then applied, is not easily understood.

It has been a common Question put to the Gentlemen of Ireland, by some that
neither know them nor their Affairs, What have you lost? But sure whosoever
knows the extent of Ireland, and the value of Land in it, will see that the
Interest of the English Protestants ruined by King James, since he came to the
Crown, is of greater value than the Estates of all that favor his Cause in
England and Scotland; and I suppose it would put them out of conceit with him,
or any other King, that should take away but one half of their Estates from
them.

SECT. XIII. Eighthly, King James brought the Lives of his Protestant Subjects
in Ireland into imminent danger.
1. I Suppose from the former Sections, it is sufficiently apparent, what
Invasions King James made on the Liberties and Fortunes of his Protestant
Subjects; there remained to them only their Lives, and these, as will appear
from this Section, were put in imminent danger by him; many were lost, and the
rest escaped with the greatest hazard. When King James came into Ireland, it
was certainly his Interest to exercise his Clemency toward his Protestant
Subjects; and he knew it to be so; and therefore in his Declaration which he
sent privately into England, he made large Professions of his tenderness
toward them, and boasted how much their safety had been his care; every body
expected a Proclamation for a General Pardon and Indemnity should have been
sent before him; and that ^e would have put an effectual stop to the illegal
Prosecutions against their Lives, and to the Robberies of their Fortunes, that
every where were going on at his coming; but on the contrary, he rather pusht
on both; and not content with the Laws that already were in force, which
Partial Judges and Juries wr^sted to destroy them, he made new snares for them
by Acts of his pretended Parliament, and by several private declarations;
whereby not only he, but his inferior Officers, took on them to dispose of the
Lives of Protestants.

2. It is not reasonable to charge his Majesty with the private Murder
committed on Men in their Houses, which were many up and down the Kingdom;
several even in the City of Dublin. Only thus far in some degree he may be
thought responsible for them: he knew very well with what barbarous Murders
the Papists of Ireland had been charged in the Rebellion of 1641; he knew what
inveterate hatred they carried toward the Protestants, and how many Tories and
Robbers constantly disturbed the Peace of the Kingdom; and yet without any
necessity at all, he threw himself upon these People, he encouraged them, he
Armed them, he gave Commissions even to those that had been Tories, and guilty
of Murders, and therefore cannot altogether be excused from the Irregularities
committed by them; especially when there was no search made after, or
Prosecution of the Murders; as it happened in the case of Colonel Murry of
Westmeath, Brother in law to my Lord Granard, an old Gentleman who had served
King Charles the first and second, and suffered considerably for his Loyalty;
he was waylaid and shot dead as he rode to his own House under King James's
Protection, and with some marks as he imagined of his Favor. Yet no enquiry
was made after it. There were many such private Murders but I do not think it
necessary to insist on them: I shall confine my self to such as are of a more
public Nature, which gave us just reasons to fear that the Government had a
design upon our Lives.

3. Such were first encouraging Witnesses to swear us into feigned Plots and
Conspiracies; of these there were many set up in the Kingdom; almost every
County had one set up in it, and many were put into Prison and indicted for
high Treason, as Captain Phillips, and Mr. Bowen in the County o^ Westmeath,
and several others in other places, some of which I have before mentioned; and
when the perjuries of the Witnesses came to be plainly discovered, they yet
were encouraged and protected from any Legal prosecution. Of this nature a
Conspiracy was framing against one Mr. William Spike, and if it had taken
effect it would have reached to a great many more. The contrivance was thus;
one Dennis Connor had a mind to a small Employment which Mr Spike held in the
Castle; he had petitioned for it, but Spike, by the Interest of my Lord Powis,
tho a Protestant, kept his place, being found diligent in it. Connor resolved
to try another experiment to get him removed: he framed a Letter as from one in
Inniskilling, directed to Spike, in which the writer thanks him for his
Intelligence, and refers to a method agreed on for seizing the Castle of Dublin
on a certain Day. The Letter (to make the thing more credible) abuses* King
James in very ill terms: Connor drops this Letter in the Castle, where Spike
came every Day, knowing that as soon as it was found, Spike would be seized,
and then he might manage the Plot as he pleased; but his Contrivance was
spoiled, for the Sentinel saw him drop the Paper, and procured him immediately
to be seized: he was examined before the Chief Justice, and I think before King
James also, why he wrote such a wicked Letter: he said it was for the Kings
service to remove Spike, whom he believed to be a Rogue, and who being a
Protestant would betray the King. Spike Prosecuted him in the King's Bench; but
after all that could be done, the Jury brought Connor in not Guilty, pretending
that it did not appear that this was the very Letter dropped by Connor, tho he
had confessed it before the King and the Lord Chief Justice, and tho it was
proved and owned to be his hand, and a rough draft of it found with him, and
the Sentinel swore he dropped a Letter, which he delivered to the Officer; and
the Officer swore that was the Letter, delivered by the Sentinel to him, tho he
did not see it dropped.

About the same time a Friar was brought up to Town, who pretended to be dumb
and maimed; the Popish Clergy gave out that Duke Schomberg had cut out his
Tongue and thus maimed him, and declared that he would serve all the Priests
and Friars after the same manner, and they made proposals to revenge it on the
Protestant Clergy. King James caused the Friar to be examined, and discovered
the deceit; which falling immediately on Mr Spikes business, made the King say
in great Anger, that for ought he saw the Protestants were wronged, and
misrepresented unto him, and that there were some as great Rogues among the
Roman Catholics, as amongst them. The Friars to acquit themselves of the
Cheat, got their Brother Friar severely lasht; pretending that he was a Spy and
none of their Fraternity; upon which he was carried naked through the Town on a
Cart in a Savage manner, to execution as was supposed, but was brought back and
put into Prison, from which after sometime he was dismissed and his Habit
restored him. Many such contrivances there were against the Lives of
Protestants, and they could not look on themselves as safe while such wicked
Men were unpunished; the Courts also declaring that the Witnesses, though
perjured, could not be punished, because they Swore for the King.

2 No Protestant was secure of his Life, because the Courts wrested such facts
to Treason as were not declared so by any Law. Thus Chief Justice Nugent
declared it was Treason for any Protestant to keep Arms, or wear a Sword after
the King had forbidden it by his Proclamation, and declared them Rebels that
did so; several Gentlemen in the Country had kept their Horses and Armed their
Servants, to watch them against the Robbers, commonly called Rapparies that
plundered them; this was construed a Levying War against the King; and the
pretended Parliament Attainted them of High Treason. In the County of Cork, one
Mr Brown had appeared in a company of Men who endeavored to make their escape
from those that came to plunder them of their Arms and Horses; but misliking
the design, went home to his own Houfe: He was brought before Judge Dally for
this at Limerick, who upon examination of the matter, dismissed him, judging him
innocent of any crime that would bear an Indictment; but he was taken up again
for the same Fact at Cork, and brought before Judge Nugent, at the time when
King James came first thither: Judge Nugent seemed at first to be of the same
opinion with Judge Dally; but after he had discoursed his Majesty, he proceeded
vigourously against the Gentleman, and procured him to be found guilty by a
partial Jury. Every body looked on this only as an occasion sought for the King
to show his Clemency; Mrs. Brown the convicted Gentleman's Wife with five or six
Children, presented him a Petition begging her Husbands Life at his Feet, as
the first Act of Grace on his coming into the Kingdom; but he rejected her
Petition; and notwithstanding she reinforc't it with all the Friends and
interest she could make, the Gentleman was hanged, drawn and quartered. This
awakened all the Protestants in Ireland; it made them remember the bloody
Executions in the West of England on the account of Monmouth's Rebellion, and
how small a matter served to take away Men's Lives there; they suspected that
Judge Nugent would act the same part in Ireland, that Chief Justice Jeffreys had
done in England; and they knew that if the King did not interpose, neither
Juryes nor Witnesses would be wanting to destroy them; in short they became
very sensible that their Lives were in imminent danger, when they saw a
Gentleman of some Estate and Credit in his Country, hanged for being but in the
Company for a little time (without acting any thing) of some others who
endeavored to make their escape from a Crew of Robbers that without Order or
Commission came to Plunder them of their Horses and Arms; they had the more
reason to be Apprehensive of their Lives, when they found that no Advantage was
let slip against them, nor any Articles or Promises, however solemnly made to
them for their safety and indemnity, were regarded: of which there were many
Examples.

3. At the time of the disarming, February 24. the Town of Bandon near Cork,
being frightened and surpised with such an unjust and sudden thing, and not
knowing where it would end, shut up their Gates, and turned out some Dragoons
who were appointed to disarm them. General Mac Carty went to reduce them, and
they believing him to be a Man of Honor, yielded to him upon Articles, for
which they paid him 1000 l. ster. by the Articles they were to be indemnified
for what was past, and a Pardon to be granted them. Notwithstanding which
Articles the Grand Jury at Cork, by direction of Chief Justice Nugent, found
Bills against them, resolving to serve them as he had served Mr. Brown: and it
was supposed that he was encouraged to do it by King James himself. The time
allowed him for the Assizes would not permit him to try them then; and for this
reason and on the Importunity and Menaces of General Mac Carty; who being on
the place thought himself obliged to make good his Articles, he put off their
Trial till the next Assizes. These Bills lay over their Heads, no pardon was
granted them, and some of them were condemned in the Act of Attainder.

The Earl of Inchiquin and Captain Henry Boil had put themselves under General
Mac Carty's Protection, and he engaged to secure them and their Houses, but he
did not perform his Promise; for Castle-martyr, belonging to Captain Henry
Boil, with all the Improvements and Furniture, to the value of some Thousands
of Pounds, were destroyed and plundered by his Soldiers, assisted with the
Rabble, and he with the Earl were glad to provide for their safety by leaving
all and flying into England. In Connaught some Protestants got into Headford
Castle, belonging to Sir Oliver St. George, to avoid the violence of the
Rabble: They were besieged by the Lord Gallway, and surrendered on Articles of
Pardon and Safety. But at the next Assizes a Bill was prepared against them,
and presented the Grand Jury at Gallway: the Jury, tho Papists, considered, as
they said, that it might be their own Case another day, and some stickled so
earnestly against the Bill, that there were not enough to find it. However no
body knew whether every Jury would be of that humor; and no care was taken to
discountenance such Proceedings. Sir Thomas Southwell, with some Gentlemen of
Munster, were unwilling to part with their Horses and Arms, many of them having
been robbed and plundered of their Stocks before, and justly suspecting that as
soon as their Arms were gone, neither their Lives, nor the remainder of their
Substance could be safe. They got together therefore with their Servants, to
the number of near Two hundred, and resolved to march to Sligoe to join the
Lord Kingston, for their common defense, but were met in the way by a small
Party of King James his Dragoons, to whom See the Articles in the Appendix. n.
1^.
they surrendered themselves on Articles of Safety and Liberty. Notwithstanding
which they were robbed and made Prisoners; and tho many of them had plentiful
Estates, yet these were seized by King James's Commissioners, and nothing
allowed them to preserve their Lives, except the charitable Contributions of
their fellow Protestants from several parts of the Kingdom: They were brought
to Trial before Judge Martin, who persuaded them to plead guilty, assuring them
of the Kings Mercy, who was just then landed. They were over persuaded by him,
tho they had not been guilty of any overt Act that could be construed Treason,
or proved against them, as their Lawyers informed them. The Judge as soon as he
had prevailed with them to confess themselves guilty, past Sentence of Death on
them; and with much ado, and a Sum of Money, they procured a Reprieve; which
they were forced to renew from time to time. They continued under the Sentence
of death in close Imprisonment, being removed from Jail to Jail, till the
general Deliverance by his Majesty's Victory: all which time they were not only
in a starving condition, but likewise had once a Summons sent them, either in
jest or earnest, to prepare for Execution by the Earl of Clanrickard; who came
to Gallway about the beginning of November 1689. and sent them word that they
must prepare for death on the sixth of the same Month; for it was his Majesty's
pleasure that they should then be executed: and accordingly the Sheriff
appeared with all necessary Preparation for their Execution on the day
appointed. There was indeed no such Order; but his Lordship being a new
Convert, thought it allowable to put this Jest on them, as a Testimony of his
Zeal against Heretics: and there was no other reason but this given why he put
so many Gentlemen into that terrible fright. But all Protestants who heard it
were very ill pleased, that the Lives of so many of them should be thought a
proper Subject for a Jest, and no notice taken of those who made it; and
considering the Solemnity and Circumstances with which he carried on this Jest,
the very Roman Catholics judged it unseasonable.

4. The Protestants had reason to fear their Lives, when they saw that they
were in the Hands of such, as not only broke all Articles and Conditions with
them, but likewise violated the Kings Protections granted to poor innocent
People that had no ways offended him. This was the case of many in the County
of Down, tho they had Protections granted them, and lived quietly; yet not only
their Goods were taken from them, but likewise their Wives and Daughters were
ravished by the Soldiers. They were most sensible and impatient of this Injury,
and yet proceeded no further than to complain of it to the chief Officers, and
to demand redress from them. The Answer they had was, That these Robbers and
Ravishers had no Authority from the King for what they did; and therefore they
advised the Complainants to fall on them and oppose them if they made any
further attempts on the Country. The poor People were satisfied with the
answer, and resolved to do as they were directed; and accordingly fell upon the
next Party of Soldiers they found plundering and committing Outrages on the
Country People, and they killed some of them. This instead of being approved,
as they were made to believe it would be, was counted a Rebellion: and
immediately Major Genesis Bohan was sent among them with a Party, who massacred
about Five or six hundred of them in cold Blood for several days together. Many
of those who were killed were poor, old, impotent People; many were killed at
their Work, and while they were busy about their own Affairs and suspected no
such matter. King James was so far from resenting the barbarous usage of these
poor People, that he railed on this occasion against Protestants in general,
representing them as false and perfidious; for, said he, many were killed with
my Protestions in their Pockets; not considering the Reflection was on his own
Party, against whom his Protection, as appeared by his own Confession, was no
Security. And when Men were thus slaughtered with his Approbation,
notwithstanding his Protections in their Pockets, it was but reasonable for
such as survived to think of some other way of protecting their Lives. If he
had designed in earnest to have secured his Subjects Lives, or to prevent their
destruction, he would have made Examples of those who robbed or killed such as
had been at the Charges of taking out Four or Five Protections, and yet were
never the safer or securer of their Fortunes or Lives.

The violation of Protections in the County of Derry and Donnegall was yet more
barbarous, and satisfied all Protestants, that they ought not to expect any
Security of their Lives, whilst under the power of such Men. The noise of the
Siege of Derry has filled the World, and such an Account is given of it as
supersedes my insisting on it. The City is neither well situated, nor well
fortified; it has no More about it, nor Counterscarp, and the Bastions are so
small, that they are not capable of so many men as are requisite to defend the
Curtains against a vigorous Attack, and so ill placed that their Guns do hardly
clear it. Yet the whole strength of King James's Army, assisted with his French
Engineers, could never come so near it as to dismount one Cannon on the Walls,
or make a Breach in them: this proceeded from the Cowardice of the Besiegers;
who, according to the nature of Cowards, stuck at no Cruelty to gain their
purpose. They considered that the besieged had many Relations in the
neighboring Country, and that they had a general kindness for all the
Inhabitants thereabout, being, if not their Relations and Acquaintance, at
least their Countrymen, and Protestants. The Besiegers therefore hoped to take
advantage of this tenderness and good Nature of the besieged to reduce the
Town; and in order to it made use of this Stratagem, which I think was of their
own Invention; for I do not remember to have met any thing like it in History;
nor do I believe it was ever practiced by any Nation, unless the French have
used it in their late Wars. Thus it was; General Rosen issued out Orders to
bring together all the Protestants, Men, See Appendix, n. 28.
Women and Children, protected, and not protected, and to set th^^ before the
Walls, there to receive the shot of the Besieged, whilst the Besiegers made
their Approaches under their Covert, and in the mean time to starve and famish
them, if their Friends in the Town would not, out of compassion to them, yield
up themselves and City into the Hands of these Murderers. The Dragoons and
Soldiers executed this Order with the utmost rigor; they first stripped, and
then drove the whole Country for Thirty Miles about before them, not sparing
Nurses with their sucking Children, Women big with Child, nor old decrepit
Creatures; some Women in Labor, some that were just brought to Bed, were
driven amongst the rest; the very Papist Officers that executed the thing,
confessed that it was the most dismal sight they had ever seen, and that the
cries of the poor People seemed to be still in their Ears: They owned that they
gathered above 4000. others say 7000. and that they kept many of them without
Meat or Drink for a whole Week; that several hundreds dyed in the Place before
they were dismissed, and many more on the way as they went home again to their
Houses; nor were they better when they came there, for the straggling Soldiers,
Raparies and Pilferers that followed the Army, had left them neither Meat,
Drink, Household Stuff nor Cattle, but had taken away all in their absence; so
that the generality of them afterward perished for want, and many were knocked
on the head by the Soldiers. I need not trouble the Reader with the success of
this cruel See Dr. Walkers Siege of Derry.
and foolish Stratagem; it was the same which any thinking Man would have
expected; it confirmed the besieged in their Resolutions, never to yield to
such barbarous People, and it made them set up Gallows, and threaten to hang
all the Prisoners they had in their hands, if their Friends were not
immediately dismissed; with which the Besiegers being startled (and finding that
it did not answer their design to keep them still under the Walls) did at last
comply, after they had kept them there three days without Meat; this was the
security Men had of their Lives by King James's Protections; the news of this
Order came to Dublin before it was executed, and the Bishop of Mead went
immediately to King James to see if he could prevail with him to prevent such a
barbarous proceeding: His Majesty very calmly told the Bishop, That he had
heard of it before, and that he had sent Orders to stop it; that General Rosen
was a Forreigner, and used to such Proceedings as were strange to us, though
common in other places; and that if he had been his own Subject he would have
called him to account for it: Yet he continued him still in his Employment.
'Twas he burnt the Country about Derry, when he was forced to raise the Siege,
and l^^t, after the French Custom, the Gentlemen's Houses and Villages, that lay
in his way toward Dublin, in Ashes. It was commonly said, that he and Mammo,
who was killed before Derry, were the Persons employed to Dragoon the
Protestants of Languedock, and that committed so many Barbarities on those poor
People: If so, it is not strange that they should commit the like on the
Protestants of Ireland: but it is strange that King James should employ such
Men, and not at all punish such monstrous violation of Faith, as well as of
Humanity, and yet expect that we should depend on him for our Protection.

His Protections were in every Place alike insignificant; many Protestants lost
the value of Three, many of Four, and some of 10m. Pounds Sterling,
notwithstanding their repeated Protections, and their approved and peaceable
demeaning themselves; of which Captain Barton, in the County of Monaghan, was a
signal Example; he had a Protection for his House, at Carrick Mac Ross, and
Arms, and had left his Servants in his House, to preserve it and his Goods, he
himself staying in Dublin, as a Hostage to the Government, that they might not
suspect him to have any design to withdraw to the North, or join with such
Protestants as were in Arms there; yet in his absence, a Party of Colonel Mac
Mahon's Regiment, about February 1688. came and demanded the House; the
Servants showed their Protection, and told him who commanded the Soldiers, that
they had Orders from the Government to keep the House; the Commander assured
them that he would not disturb them, and that he only designed to lodge some of
his Men in it, to secure it more effectually for the King and the Owner; upon
which promise the Servants let him and his Soldiers into the House; they no
sooner had obtained entrance, but they fell a plundring, destroying and
defacing; and in a few hours, by ruining his Improvements, and robbing his
Goods, Stock and Furniture, they damnified him to near the value of 10m.
Pounds: He complained of this false and injurious dealing to the Government,
but could never obtain any redress, or procure the Actors of it to be brought
to any Account or Punishment; instead of obtaining any thing of that nature,
they added new Injuries to their former, and at last burnt his House to the
Ground.

And here it will not be amiss, by the way, to give some further Instances of
their violation of Articles, as well as of Protections. About Thirty Soldiers,
January 1688. deserted from Dublin, and endeavored to make their escape to
Inniskilling: they were pursued by one Captain Nugent with a Party of Horse,
and overtaken near Navan, within Twenty Miles of Dublin; they put themselves in
a posture to fight, and were ready to fire at him; but he by fair Promises and
good Words* persuaded them to Capitulate, and at last upon Articles to yield:
He Covenanted with them that they should be safe and free, and should suffer no
other injury but the loss of their Arms; notwithstanding which, as soon as they
gave up their Arms, he stripped and pinioned them, and with much interest they
escaped* present death; this Mercy was due to the circumstances of the time,
which obliged the Government to reserve them in Jail till a more proper season,
though in a condition more grievous than if they had been hanged immediately.

The Fort of Culmore near Derry yielded on Articles to King James, by which the
Gentlemen that surrendered it were to be indemnified, and liberty allowed them
either to live secure and quietly in the Kingdom, or else go to any other place
where they thought fit; but notwithstanding these Articles, they were were
disarmed and stripped, and several of them seized and put into Prison, nay
attainted in their pretended Act of Parliament.

The Garrison of Londonderry, after the Forces which came under Colonel
Cuningham and Colonel Richards to succor it, had resolved to return for
England, sent one Captain White to King James, to receive Proposals from him,
it being the Opinion of many of those that remained in the Town that they must
surrender it; the Conditions were not difficult to concert; in the mean time it
was agreed, as a Preliminary Article; that the Army should not march within
Four Miles of the Town; but before the Terms could be adjusted, or any answer
be returned from the City, the King himself marched his Army toward it, and
was in view almost as soon as the Commissioners that came with the Proposals:
This being against his Engagement, and an absolute breach of the Preliminary
Article already agreed on, put a stop to the Treaty, and contributed to the
Resolution of the Besieged; who durst never trust any Articles after this, but
rather than depend on the Faith of King James or his Party, chose to suffer the
utmost Extremity.

The Breach of Articles by my Lord Galmoy to Mr. Dixey a Young Gentleman, (Son
to the Dean of Kilmore) and Mr. Charlton was yet more barbarous; the Lord
Galmoy went down in March 168* to the County of Cavan and surpised these two
Gentlemen; he had a Party of the Army with him, and took up his Quarters at
Belturbet. His two Prisoners were to be exchanged for one Captain Mac Gwire,
then Prisoner at Crum, a small Castle, and the only place that stood out
against King James in that County; the owner of the Castle was one Captain
Creighton, who permitted Captain Mac Gwire to go to Belturbet on his parol to
be a true Prisoner; Mac Gwire so negotiated the matter, that he returned with a
Summons and proposals as well for Inniskilling as the Castle of Crum; and he
supposed them not averse to a Surrender on good terms; but the Lord Galmoy
immagined that these Proposals would make the People of Crum secure, and
therefore that very Night, without waiting for any answer, he marched to the
Castle before they were aware, and had almost surpised them; but the
resolution of those within prevented the success of his perfidious design, and
forced him back without being able to do any other mischief than the venting
his Anger on his two Prisoners, whom after his return to Belturbet, he,
contrary to his Faith and Engagement, hanged on a Sign-Post, and suffered their
Bodies to lie unburied, and be barbarously abused. This was Captain Mac Gwires
own account of the matter; the consequence of which falsehood was, that those
People would never hear of any terms afterward; and upon trial found much more
safety in their Arms, than in the Promises of King James, or of any of his
Party; having baffled and cut off several considerable Bodies of his Forces
sent against them, and taken many and considerable prisoners, whom yet they
used with all Humanity, as it were to reproach the barbarous and perfidious
usage which their Prisoners met with; but it was avowed and professed by the
generality of King James's Men, that they did not look on themselves to be
obliged to treat the Rebels of the North, as they called them* as fair Enemies,
but as Traitors and infamous Persons, whom they might destroy at any rate.

In the County of Longford some Protestants got into the Castle of Kenaught,
belonging to Sir Thomas Newcomen; his Lady, and those with her, surrendered it
on Articles January 13. 1689, to Brigadier Nugent, (slain afterward by the
Inniskillin Men at Cavan) one of the Articles was for the Goods belonging to
those in the House, and their Friends; notwithstanding which, Nugent seized and
took away several parcels of Goods; and several that were in the House, as soon
as they came out, were plundered and stripped naked. Another Article was, that
the House of Kenaught should not be Burnt nor Injured, notwithstanding which it
was burnt to the Ground by Colonel Cohannaught Mac Gwire. In short it was
observed that amongst all the Articles into which King James, or his Officers
entered, they never kept any to Protestants.

5 A fifth Invasion on our Lives was, that both King James and his inferior
Officers, took on them to dispose of them by private Orders and Proclamations,
the penalty of violating which was often present Death: thus the Proclamation
that required us to bring in our Arms, was on the Penalty of being left to the
discretion of the Soldiers; which was to expose our Lives and Fortunes to the
Mercy of our greatest Enemies. By a Proclamation dated July 20th 1689, all
Protestants are required to bring in their Swords and other Arms, on penalty of
being dealt with as Rebels and Traitors. The Proclamation dated June 15. 1690,
forbad any to change a Guiney etc. for more than 36 s. in Brass, under pain of
death; and Colonel Lutterel published a Declaration, forbidding more than five
Protestants to assemble together, or to be out of their Lodgings after Ten of
the Clock at Night, on the same Penalty; the Declaration was of his own
Penning, and to gratify the Curious, I have put it in the Appendix; the Sea
Appendix N. 31.
order to the Ministers to number the Protestants, was likewise Penned by him;
and in it he declared that every one who did not enter in their Names by a
certain Day, should be treated as a Spy or Enemy; nay sometimes he took on him
to make Death the penalty of his verbal orders, without a Declaration
published: Thus he commanded the Fellows and Scholars of the College of
Dublin, upon pain of Death, not to meet together, or converse above Two or
Three at a time; and he would needs hang Mr. Piercy the Merchant, as I showed
before, without any notice given, for saying that he was unwilling to part with
his Goods.

In April 1690. The Quarter Sessions for the County of Dublin were held at
Kilmainham, near Dublin; Colonel Lutterel Governor of Dublin, was on the
Bench, and in a Speech declared that King James wanted Wheat and other Grain
for his Horses, and that he had given the Country Farmers Three Weeks to bring
in their Corn, and had waited for their compliance during that time; that he
resolved to wait further til the Saturday after, and if they did not bring it
in by that time he would compel them; that it was the King's will they should
do it, and he the King's Servant, who would see his Masters Commands Executed;
and with a grear Oath swore, he would hang that Man before his own Door that
did not obey and bring in his Corn according to order. Of this Speech the whole
Bench and Country were Witnesses.

May the 7. 1690. the Lord Mayor thought fit to reinforce a former Proclamation
about the rate of Goods in the Market, but Colonel Lutterell did not think the
Mayors Order sufficient, and therefore published an Order of his own by beat of
Drum, declaring that whoever transgrest the Lord Mayors Order either by buying
or selling, should be hanged before their own doors.

About the same time Brigadier Sarsfield Published an Order requiring all
Protestants on the borders, to leave their Houses, and retire Ten Miles from
the Frontiers on pain of Death.

These were the Laws King James's Council and Ministers prescribed us by their
Proclamations and Orders; and these were the Acts of his Generals and
Governors, whom he made Guardians of the Lives and Fortunes of Protestants,
and yet they all came short of the inhumanity of his Parliament.

6. It has been usual in Parliaments to attaint notorious Rebels and Traitors,
who were too strong for the Law, or who being killed in their Rebellion, could
not be tried or condemned by the ordinary course of it; and when one or two in
a King's Reign were thus attainted upon the most evident Proof, and notoriety
of the Fact, it was counted a great matter; even in the late Irish Rebellion,
none were attainted but by the legal course of Juries. But King James and his
Parliament intended to do the work of Protestants speedily and effectually, and
not to wait the slow methods of proceeding at the Common Law: They resolved
therefore on a Bill of Attainder; and in order to it, every Member of the House
of Commons returned the Names of such Protestant Gentlemen as lived near him,
or in the County or Borough for which he served; and if he was a stranger to
it, he sent into the County or Place for information; they were in great haste,
and many escaped them; on the other hand, some that were actually in King
James's Service, and fighting for him at Derry, (of which Cornet Edmund
Keating, Nephew to my Lord Chief Justice Keating, was one,) were returned as
absent, and attainted in the Act. When they had made a Collection of Names,
they cast them into several Forms, and attainted them under several
Qualifications, and accordingly allowed them time to come in, and put
themselves on Trial; the Qualifications and Numbers were as follow.

1. Persons Attainted of Rebellion, who had time given them till till the Tenth
of August to surrender themselves and be tried, provided they were in the
Kingdom and amenable to the Law at the time of making the Act, otherwise were
absolutely Attainted.

One Archbishop. One Duke. Fourteen Earls. Seventeen Viscounts, and one
Viscountess. Two Bishops. Twelve Barons. Twenty six Baronets. Twenty two
Knights. Fifty six Clergymen. Eleven hundred fifty three Esquires, Gentlemen,
etc.
2. Persons who were absentees before the Fifth of Novem. 1688* not returning
according to the Proclamation of the Twenty fifth of March, attainted if they
do not appear by the First of September, 1689.

One Lord. Seven Knights. Eight Clergymen. Sixty five Esquires, Gentlemen, etc.
3. Persons who were Absentees before the Fifth of November 1688. not returning
according to the Proclamation of the Twenty fifth of March, attainted if they
do not appear by the First day of October 1689.

One Archbishop. One Earl. One Viscount. Five Bishops. Seven Baronets. Eight
Knights. Nineteen Clergymen. Four hundred thirteen Esquires, Gentlemen, etc.
4. Persons usually resident in England, who are to signify their Loyalty, in
case the King goes there the First of October 1689. and on His Majesty's
Certificate to the Chief Governor here, they to be discharged, otherwise to
stand attainted.

One Earl. Fifteen Viscounts and Lords. Fourteen Knights. Four hundred ninety
two Esquires, Gentlemen, etc.
5. Absentees by reason of sickness and noneage, on proving their Loyalty
before the last day of the first Term after their return, to be acquitted and
restored; in the mean time their Estates Real and Personal are vested in His
Majesty.

One Earl. Seven Countesses. One Viscountess. Thirteen Ladies. One Baronet.
Fifty nine Gentlemen and Gentlewomen.
6. They vest all Lands, etc. belonging to Minors, Ladies, Gentlewomen, in the
King till they return; and then upon Proof of their Loyalty and Faithfulness to
King James, they are allowed to sue for their Estates before the Commissioners
for executing the Acts of Repeal and Attainder, if sitting, or in the High
Court of Chancery, or Court of Exchequer; and upon a Decree obtained for them
there, the Sheriffs are to put them in possession of so much, as by the Decree
of one of those Courts shall be adjudged them. The Clauses in the Act are so
many and so considerable that it never having been printed entire, I thought it
convenient to put it into the Appendix. See Appendix.
Perhaps it was never equaled in any Nation since the time of the Proscription
in Rome; and not then neither, for here is more than half as many Condemned in
the small Kingdom of Ireland, as was at that time proscribed in the greatest
part of the then known World; yet that was esteemed an unparalled Cruelty.
When Sir Richard Nagle, Speaker of the House of Commons, presented the Bill to
King James for his Royal Assent, he told him that many were attainted in that
Act by the House of Commons, upon such Evidence as fully satisfied the House;
the rest of them were attainted, he said, upon common Fame. A Speech so very
brutish, that I can hardly persuade my self that I shall gain credit to the
Relation; but it is certainly true, the Houses of Lords and Commons, of their
pretended Parliament, are Witnesses of it; and let the World judge what
security Protestants could have of their Lives, when so considerable a Lawyer
as Sir Richard Nagle declares in so solemn an occasion, and King James with his
Parliament approves, that common Fame is a sufficient Evidence to deprive,
without hearing, so many of the Gentry, Nobility and Clergy, of their Lives and
Fortunes, without possibility of pardon; and not not only cut off them, but
their Children and Posterity likewise. By a particular Clause from advantages,
of which the former Laws of the Kingdom would not have deprived them, though
their Fathers had been found guilty of the worst of Treasons in particular
Trials.

7. I shall only add a few Observations on this Act, and leave the Reader to
make others, as he shall find occasion.

1. Then this Act leaves no room for the King to pardon after the last day of
November 1689. if the Pardon be not Enrolled before that time, the Act declares
it absolutely void and null.

2. The Act was concealed, and no Protestant for any Money permitted to see it,
much less take a Copy of it, till the time limited for Pardons was past at
least Four Months: So that the State of the Persons here attainted is desperate
and irrecoverable, except an Irish Popish Parliament will relieve them; for
King James took care to put it out of the power of any English Parliament (as
well as out of his own Power) to help them, by consenting to another Act of
this pretended Parliament, Entitled, An Act declaring that the Parliaments of
England cannot bind Ireland, and against Writs of Errors and Repeals out of
Ireland into England.

3. It is observable, with what have and confusion this Act was drawn up and
past; perhaps no man ever heard of such a crude imperfect thing, so ill
digested and composed* past on the World for a Law. We find the same Person
brought in under different Qualifications; in one Place he is expressly allowed
till the First of October to come and submit to Tryal^; and yet in another
Place he is attainted if he do not come in by the First of September; many are
attainted by wrong Names; many have their Christian Names left out; and many
whose Names and Sirnames are both put in, are not distinguished by any
Character, whereby they may be known from others of the same Names.

4. Many considerable Persons are left out, which certainly had been put in, if
they could have gotten their Names; which is a further proof of their have and
confusion in passing the Bill. It is observable, the Provost, Fellow^, and
Scholars of the College by Dublin, are all omitted; the Reason was this, Mr.
Coghlan served as one of the Burgesses for the College; the House of Commons
required him to come into the House (for he had withdrawn himself from it, as
we observed before, at the passing this Act) and to give in the Names of the
absent Members of the College, that they might be put into the Bill: he
demurred at first, but was overruled; then upon Consultation with Doctor
Acton, the Vice Provost, he moved the House to send for the College Buttler,
alleging that he had the Buttery Book, wherein the Names of the Collegians
were in order, and without this he could not get them: the House hereupon
ordered a Sergeant at Arms to be sent for the Butler, but he on Mr. Coghlans
intimation absconded for some days. The House was in haste to pass the Bill,
and by this means the Collegians escaped an Attainder.

5. It was observable that any Application made in behalf of Absentees by their
Friends who staid, or were in the House, constantly made their Condition worse:
The Application of Mr. Henry Temple, in behalf of his Brother Sir John Temple,
removed him upwards into the first Rank of Attainted Persons; the like Petition
had the same effect as as to Mr. Richard Warburton, and so upon several others.
The Papists did this to rid themselves of trouble and importunity, and to let
the Protestants know that all their endeavors for themselves and Friends
should do them no Service, and that their ruin was absolutely resolved on.

6. That their allowing Persons a certain time to come in and submit to Trial
to prove their Innocence, was a mere nothing: for they very well knew, that it
was impossible any body should certainly know, what time was given each man to
come in; and it had been a foolish venture for such as were absent, to come
into a Place where, for ought they knew, they were already condemned, and
should be immediately hanged without a Trial. 2. No body knew what they could
call Innocence; perhaps writing to, or petitioning any one that had King
William's Commission, nay, conversing with such, might be reckoned
corresponding with Rebels, and sufficient Evidence of their Guilt; and indeed
Judge Nugent had in a manner determined this Case: for he interpreted one Mr.
Desminiers answering a Bill of Exchange for Sir Thomas Southwell, who was
Prisoner at Galloway, a corresponding with Rebels, and committed him to Jail
for it: he likewise put one Mr. Ginnery in Jail for High Treason, because being
Agent for the Prisoners at Galloway, to procure them a Reprieve and other
Affairs, he received Letters from them, though Mr. Ginnery's Father and Brother
were amongst them. 3. When this pretended Parliament past this Act, they were
very well aware that the Embargo here was so exceedingly strict, that from the
time of passing the Act, till the First of October, nay of November following,
which was the longest time allowed any one to come in, not one Ship or Boat was
suffered to pass from hence into England; so that it was absolutely impossible
the Persons concerned in this Law, should have had any knowledge of it before
they were Condemned by it, to the loss of Life and Estate, beyond the power of
the King to Pardon them. 4. King James and his Parliament knew perfectly well,
that the Embargo was so strict on the other side, that if the Gentlemen could
have had Information, yet it was impossible for them to have gotten out of
England, to tender themselves to Justice, within the time wherein the Act
required they should do it, on no less Penalty than the irrecoverable
Forfeiture of Life and Estate: which is a plain demonstration that the allowing
time for the Attainted Persons to come in, and prove their Innocence, was a
mere color and had nothing of sincerity in it, since they themselves that made
the Law were fully informed and satisfied that this was an impossible
condition. 5. Suppose it had been possible, yet it had been a very unwise part
for such Protestants as were safe in England, to have left it, and to have come
into Ireland, a ruinous Kingdom, the actual seat of a War, where all the goods
and movables they had left behind them, were Imbezell'd by Robbers, or by
those that had seized them for King James; and their real Estates given away to
such as were Descendents of their Fathers Murderers, or at least had been in
that Rebellion; where they must abide a Trial before Judges and Juryes of
professed Enemies; whether their Lives should be their own; and after all, if
acquitted, could have no other prospect of supporting themselves, but Begging
amongst a People that had reduced them to this condition. These considerations
were of such weight with all People, that they who were absent, were so far
from thinking of a return, that on the contrary, Men of the best Estates, who
had stayed here, wished themselves away, and many were content to leave all,
and venture their Lives in little Boats to the Mercy of the Seas, in the depth
of Winter; reckoning any thing safer and easier, than to stay under a
Government, which had effectually destroyed all the Measures of right and
wrong, and Condemned so many Gentlemen to the loss of all, without allowing
them either the favor of being Tried, or so much as Heard.

4. I know it will be objected that very few Protestants lost their Lives in
Ireland under King James, notwithstanding all the severe Proclamations and
Laws, and the apprehensions under which they lay of danger. But to this I
answer; First, that when a full enquiry comes to be made concerning those that
were Killed by the Soldiers, Murdered in their Houses, Executed by Martial
Law, Starved and Famished in Jails, and that Perished by other Violences, the
number will not be so small as is imagined. 2. It is to be considered that the
Irish Papists lay under the strictest obligations not to begin Acts of Cruelty;
for the Murders they had committed in the last Rebellion, were chiefly
objected against them; they were sensible they had gained nothing by them, and
that the Cruelty exercised in them, was the thing that especially rendered them
Odious, and lost them their Estates; and therefore they thought it the best way
not to be too forward in the like practices, till they were sure not to be
called to an after-reckoning. They further considered that many of their own
Friends were Prisoners in the North, and that if they began with Examples of
Cruelty on the Protestants who were in their Power, their Friends must expect
the like from the Enemy in whose Hands they were. 'Twas this made them dismiss
the Poor People they had resolved to starve before Derry. And they were made
believe that not only the Prisoners would Suffer, but that the Cruelties they
exercised on the Protestants, would be Revenged on all the Roman Catholics in
England. This was given out by some who understood King James's true interest,
and that he depended on some Protestants in England for succor and assistance,
rather more than on the Roman Catholics; now they knew very well that Murder
is so hateful a thing, that if they once fell a Massacring, it would shock many
of their Friends in England and Scotland, from whom they expected great
matters; and therefore they thought it their interest to be as tender of Lives
as they could; and even the Priests, when they encouraged them to Rob their
Protestant Neighbors, charged them not to kill them, assuring them that every
thing else would be forgiven them. 3. The Protestants were extremely cautious
not to give the least offense; they walked so warily and prudently, that it was
hardly possible to find any occasion against them; and they were so true to one
another, and conversed so little with any of King James's Party, that it was as
difficult to fix any thing on them, or to get any Information against them,
though several designs were laid against them, and several false Witnesses
produced, as has been shown; yet their Stories still destroyed themselves by
their Improbabilities, inconsistency, and the notorious infamy of the
Witnesses. 4. We had no experiment of what would have been done with the
attainted Absentees; for none of them run the hazard of a Trial, but we are
sure no good could have been done them, for they could neither have been
pardoned for Estate nor Life; and the best they could have expected, was to
have been sent to some other Kingdom, as Sir Thomas Southwell was sent to
Scotland, for there could have been no living for them in Ireland. 5. When any
Protestant found himself obnoxious to the Government, or but fancyed they had
any thing to object against him, he got out of the Kingdom, or made his escape
to the North as well as he could, and in the mean time absconded; many escaped
hanging by these means, which otherwise in all probability had been executed.

Lastly, It was so much the Interest of King James in his Circumstances, to
have been kind to the Protestan^s of Ireland, that we might rather have
expected to have been courted than ill used by him; the whole support and
maintenance of his Army in Ireland depended on them; they clothed, fed, armed,
and quartered them, (which they could not avoid doing with any safety to
themselves, or indeed possibility of living,) and the Officers of the Army were
so sensible of this, that when it was proposed to turn all the Protestants out
of the City of Dublin, one of them answered, that whenever they were turned
out, the Army must go with them; for they could not be furnished with what they
wanted, by others. And as it was King James's Interest to use them well upon
the account of their being necessary to him in Ireland, so his Affairs in
England and Scotland did more particularly require it; and he was forced to
employ his Emissaries there to give it out that he did so. Sir Daniel Mac
Daniel, who came out of the Isles of Scotland to Dublin in Winter 1689. and
several Gentlemen of the Highlands with him, declared that their Ministers in
the Pulpit had assured them, that the Protestants in Ireland lived under King
James in the greatest freedom, quiet, and security, both as to their Properties
and Religion; and that if their Countrymen knew the truth of the matter, as
they then found it here, they would never fight one stroke for him: and they
seemed to stand amazed at what they saw, and could hardly believe their own
Eyes. It is certain that King James had the like Instruments in England, as I
have noted before, who forced down the World in Coffee-Houses and public
places, that the Protestants in Ireland lived easy and happy under his
Government; however this shows how much it was really his Interest to have
given his Protestant Subjects here no just cause of complaint; and that it must
proceed from a strange eagerness to destroy them, that King James and his Party
ventured in their Circumstances to go so far in it as they did: their own
imminent danger dissuaded them from severity, and their Interest manifestly
obliged them to mildness: and if notwithstanding these, they condemned near
Three thousand of the most Eminent Gentlemen, Citizens, Clergymen, and Nobility
of the Kingdom to death, and loss of Estates; we may easily guess what they
would have done when their fear and interest were removed, and they left to the
swing of their own natural Inclinations, and the tendency of their Principles.
Whosoever considers all Circumstances, will conclude, that no less was designed
by them, than the execution of the third Chapter of the Lateran Council, the
utter extirpation of the Heretics of these Kingdoms.

SECT. XIV. Ninthly, Showing King James's Methods for destroying the Protestant
Religion.
1. THE design against the Lives and Fortunes of the Protestants is so apparent
from the execution thereof, especially by the Acts of the late pretended
Parliament, that they themselves can hardly deny it; nay some were apt to glory
in it: and to let us know that it was not a late design, taken up since the
revolt of England (as they call it) from King James, they thought fit to settle
on the Duke of Tirconnel above 20m. Pounds per Annum in value, out of the
Estates of some Protestant Gentlemen attainted by them, as aforesaid, in
consideration of his signal Service of See Appendix, N. 3, 4. and 17.
Twenty Years, which he spent in contriving this Work, and bringing it to pass,
as one of their most eminent Members expressed it in his Speech in Parliament,
and the particular Act which vests this Estate in him shows.

2. But it may be thought that King James was more tender in the matter of
Religion; and that he who gloried so much in his resolution to settle Liberty
of Conscience wherever he had Power, as he told his pretended Parliament, and
set forth almost in every Proclamation, would never have made any open Invasion
on the Consciences of his Protestant Subjects. But they found by experience
that a Papist, whatever he professes, is but an ill Guardian of Liberty of
Conscience: and that the same Religion that obliged the King of Spain to set up
an Inquisition, could not long endure the King of England to maintain Liberty.
If indeed King James had prevailed with Italy or Spain to have tolerated the
open exercise of the Protestant Religion, it had been, I believe, a convincing
Argument to England to have granted Roman Catholics Liberty in these
Dominions; but whilst the Inquisition is kept up to the height in those
Countries, and worse than an Inquisition in France, against the public Edicts
and Laws of the Kingdom, and against the solemn Oath and Faith of the King, it
is too gross to go about to persuade us, that we might expect a free exercise
of our Religion, any other way than the Protestants enjoy it in France, (that
is under the Discipline of Dragoons,) after the Papists had gotten the Arms,
the Offices, the Estates, and Courts of Judicature into their Hands.

3. The Protestant Religion and Clergy were established in Ireland by as firm
Laws as the Properties of the Laity: The King by his Coronation Oath was
obliged to maintain them: Their Tithes and Benefices were their Free-holds; and
their Privileges and Jurisdiction were settled and confirmed to them by the
known and current Laws of the Kingdom; according to which the King was obliged
to govern them, and whereof he was the Guardian. The Clergy had beside all
this, peculiar Obligations on him, and a Title to his Protection; for they had
espoused his Interest most cordially. Whilst Duke of York, they used their
utmost diligence to persuade the People to submit to Gods Providence, and be
content with his Succession to the Crown, in case his Brother dyed before him:
and they pressed that point so far, that many of their People were dissatisfied
with them, and told them often with heat and concern, what reward they must
expect for their pains if ever he came to the Throne: they saw their danger,
but could not imagine any man would be so unpolitick and ungrateful as to
destroy such as had brought him to the Throne, and could only keep him safe in
it; and therefore they ventured all to serve him; and many of them by their
Zeal for him, lost the Affections of their People, and their Interest with
them. It was chiefly due to their diligence and care, that his Title, from the
beginning, met not the least opposition in Ireland, tho the Army in it were
entirely Protestant. Had they and the rest of the Protestants in this Kingdom
been in any measure disloyally principled in the time of Monmouth and Argile's
Rebellion, they might easily have made an Insurrection more dangerous than both
those; and the least Mutiny or revolt amongst them, could hardly have failed to
have ruined King James's Affairs at that critical time: but they were so far
from attempting any such thing, that they were as ready and as zealous to
assist him, as his very Guards at Whitehall; which he himself could not but
acknowledge: how he rewarded them I have already shown; and how grateful he was
to the Clergy that thus principled them, will appear by the Sequel.

4. First therefore when his Majesty came to the Crown he declared that he
would protect the Church of England in her Government and Privileges; under
which we supposed the Church of Ireland to be concluded: And accordingly the
Clergy and People of this Kingdom returned his Majesty their Address of Thanks;
though they very well knew that this was no more than was due to them by the
Laws, and by the King's Coronation Oath in particular: But they were soon told
by the Roman Catholics, that his Majesty did not intend to include Ireland in
that Declaration; and that it must be a Catholic Kingdom, as they termed it.
Every discerning Protestant soon found by the method they saw his Majesty take,
that he in earnest intended to settle Popery in England, as well as Ireland;
but he thought himself so sure of effecting it suddenly in Ireland, that his
Instruments made no scruple to declare their intentions; nay, they were so
hasty to ruin our Religion, that they did not so much as consult their own
Safety; but even before it was either seasonable or safe, in the opinion of the
wiser sort amongst themselves; they began openly to apply all their Arts and
Engines to effect it. 1. By hindering the Succession and Supplies of Clergymen.
2. By taking away their maintenance. 3. By weakening, and then invading their
Jurisdiction. 4. By seizing on their Churches, and hindering their Religious
Assemblies. 5. By violence against their Persons. And 6. By slandering and
misrepresenting them and their Principles.

SECT. XV. 1. King James, in order to destroy the Protestant Religion, hindered
the Education and Succession of Clergymen.
1. THE Good and Support of Religion does very much depend on the educating and
principling Youth in Schools and Universities; and the Law had taken special
care, that these should be in the hands of English men and Protestants; and the
better to secure them, the Nomination of the Schoolmasters in every Diocese,
except four, is by a 12 Eliz. Chap. 1st.
particular Act of Parliament lodged in the Lord Lieutenant, or Chief Governor
for the time being. The Clergy of each Diocese, by the Act, are obliged to
maintain a Schoolmaster; and his Qualifications are described in the Act. But
when the Earl of Tyrconnel came to the Government, he took no notice of those
Laws; but when any School became void, he either left it unsupplyed, or put a
Papist into it. And in the mean time great care was taken to discourage such
Protestant Schoolmasters as remained, and to set up Popish Schools in
opposition to them. Thus they dealt with the School of Killkenny, founded and
endowed by the charitable Piety of the late Duke of Ormond; they set up a
Jesuits School in the Town, and procured them a Charter for a College there;
they drove away the Protestant Schoolmaster, Doctor Hinton, who had officiated
in it with great industry and success, and seized on the School-house, commonly
called the College, and converted it to an Hospital for their Soldiers. Thus
in a few years they would not have left one public School in the hands of a
Protestant for the Education of their Youth.

2. There is but one University in Ireland, and there is a Clause in the
Statutes thereof that gives the King Power to dispense with the said Statutes;
it was founded by Queen Elizabeth; and certainly never designed by her, or her
Successors, to be converted against the fundamental Design of its Institution,
into a Seminary of Popery: yet advantage was taken of this Clause (though we
had reason to believe it would have been done if there had been no such Clause)
to put in Popish Fellows, as soon as the Fellowships became vacant; one Doyle a
Convert was the first who was named; a Person of so exceedingly lewd and
vicious a Conversation, (as was fully proved before the Lord Tyrconnell) and of
so little Sense or Learning, that it seemed impossible that any Government
should have countenanced such a Man; yet this did not much weigh with his
Excellency; and therefore the College insisted upon another Point; the
Dispensation that Doyle had gotten, through his ignorance, was not for his
purpose; for it required in express Terms, that he should take the Oath of a
Fellow, and that Oath includes in it the Oath of Supremacy; the Provost
tendered it to him, but he durst not take it, for fear of disobliging his own
Party; upon this they refused to admit him; he insists on his Claim, and
complains to the Lord Deputy: upon a hearing, Justice Nugent, Baron Rice, and
the Attorney General, supplied the Place of Advocates for him; but the Case was
so plain, that even Justice Nugent had not the confidence to deny the
insufficiency of his Dispensation; and therefore they ordered him to get
another. But to be even with the College for demurring on the King's Mandate,
they stopped the Money due to it out of the Exchequer.

3. The Foundation consists of a Provost, Seven Senior, and Nine Junior
Fellows, and Seventy two Scholars; these are partly maintained by a Pension out
of the Exchequer of 388. l. per Annum; this Pension the Earl of Tyrconnel stopped
from Easter 1688. and could not be prevailed with by any intercession or
entreaties to grant his Warrant after that time for it; by which means he in
effect dissolved the Foundation, and stopped the Fountains of Learning and of
Religion; this appeared to have been his design more plainly afterward; for
King James and his Party not content to take their maintenance from them,
proceeded and turned out the Vice Provost, Fellows and Scholars; seized upon
the Furniture, Books, and public Library, together with the Chapel, Communion
Plate, and all things belonging to the College, or to the private Fellows or
Scholars; notwithstanding that when they waited on him upon his first arrival
in Dublin, he promised, That he would preserve them in their Liberties and
Properties, and rather augment than diminish the Privileges and Immunities
granted to them by his Predecessors. In the House they placed a Popish
Garrison, turned the Chapel into a Magazin, and many of the Chambers into
Prisons for Protestants; the Garrison destroyed the Doors, Wainscots, Closets
and Floors, and damnified it in the Building and Furniture of private Rooms, to
at least the value of 2000. l. One Doctor Moore, a Popish Priest, was nominated
Provost; one Macarty Library Keeper, and the whole designed for them and others
of their Fraternity.

4. It is observable, that there was not the least Color or Pretense of Law
for this violence, nor could they give the least Reason in Law or Equity for
their proceeding, except the necessity of destroying of the Protestant
Seminaries of Learning, in order to destroy their Religion: This made them so
eager against the Collegians, that they were not content to turn them, without
Process or Color of Law, out of their Free-holds, but they sent a Guard after
them to sieze and apprehend their Persons; and it cost the Bishop of Mead,
their Vice Chancellor, all his Cunning and Interest, with the Governor
Lutterell, to prevent their Imprisonment. With much ado he was prevailed on to
let them enjoy their Liberties; but with this Condition, that on pain of Death
no Three of them should meet together. So sollicitous were they to prevent the
Education of Protestants under Persons of the same Profession, and that there
might be none to succeed the present Clergy.

5. With the same design they hindered the succession, of Bishops and inferior
Clergymen, into the room of those that dyed or were removed; the Support of
Religion (as is well known) depends very much on the choice and settling of
able and fit Persons in Vacancies; and it so happened, that partly by the
uncertainty of Estates, partly by frequent Forfeitures to the King, partly by
the grasping of the Prerogative and other Accidents, most of the considerable
Preferments and Benefices of the Church were in the disposal of the Crown;
there are very few Livings in Ireland in the Presentation of Lay Patrons, but
they either belong to the King, or the Bishops. The Bishoprics are all in the
King; and all the Livings in the Bishops Patronage, are in the Vacancy of the
Bishopric, likewise the Kings. This is a great Trust, and the King is bound to
dispose of it for the good of the Church: But King James plainly designed, by
the means of his Trust, to destroy the Church that had entrusted him: for
instead of giving the Preferments, as they fell, to good and able men, who
might preserve and maintain the Interest of their Religion, he seized them into
his own hand, had the Profits of them returned into the Exchequer, and let the
Cures lie neglected. The Archbishopric of Cashell, the Bishoprics of Clogher,
of Elphin, and of Clonfert, were thus seized, with many Inferior Livings, and
the Money received out of them disposed to the maintenance of Popish Bishops
and Priests, directly against the Laws and Constitution of the Kingdom.

6. At this rate in a few years all the Preferments and Livings of the Kingdom
of any value must have fallen into the King's hands, and we must have expected
to have seen them thus disposed of; for as many as fell after King James's
time, were put to this use; and we were assured by the Popish Priests, that all
the rest as they became vacant See the Appendix, Molony's Scheme in his Letter,
N. 17.
were designed to the same Purpose; and they were so unreasonable, that though
both Law and Justice allow a competency for serving the Cure, whilst a Living
upon any Account whatsoever is in the King's Hand, yet the Commissioners of the
Revenue, and Barons of the Exchequer, would allow nothing; the Bishop of Mead
made an Experiment of this: Some Livings in his Diocese, upon the Death of one
Mr. Duddle the Incumbent, were seized by the Commissioners of the Revenue,
being in the King's Presentation; the Bishop did what was in his Power toward
supplying the Cure, and, according to his Duty, appointed a Curate, assigning
him a Salary according to the Canons, but the Commissioners would not allow him
any thing; and though the Bishop endeavored it, and petitioned both* the
Commissioners and Barons of the Exchequer, yet he could never get any thing for
the Curate. This was a Precedent, and the same was practiced in all other
Cases: all the Absentees Cures were in the same Condition, and though they
yielded plentifully to King James, yet the Curates had no other maintenance,
than the voluntary Contributions of the poor plundered Protestant Parishioners,
who were forced to pay their Tithes either to King James's Commissioners, or to
Popish Priests, who had Grants of them.

7. This was an effectual, though a slow way, of putting an end to the
Ministry; at least to deprive them of all legal Title to Preferments; for the
Bishops being most of them old, would soon have dropped off; and King James was
resolved to have named no more, and so the legal Successions of Bishops must in
a short time have ceased, and all the Livings depending on them, must likewise
have gone in course to maintain Popish Priests; that is all the Deanries,
Dignitaries, and most other Benefices.

8. The Papists upbraided us with out want of Power, and seemed to laugh at the
Snare into which we were fallen by means of our Popish King; not considering
that this proceeded from a manifest Breach of Trust and Faith in him; and that
the Case is the same in all Trusts, if the Trustees prove faithless; and even
in all Popish Countries the Kings have the nomination of Bishops, as well as in
England, and that the Succession of Bishops had almost lately failed in
Portugal, upon some difference between the King and Pope; and the Advocate
General of France, Mr. Dennis Tallon, tells us in 1688. that Thirty five
Bishoprics (being about a third part of the whole Number) were vacant in that
Kingdom on the same account: See the Proceedings of the Parliament of Paris,
upon the Pope's Bull, Printed at London, 1688. P. 5.
and it is like more are vacant since. It is true, the Church has power to
nominate Bishops, without the consent of the Civil Magistrate; but then they
must not expect the Temporalities, which are the Gifts or Grants of Kings, and
such Bishops and Clergy must entirely depend on the voluntary Contributions of
their People for their maintenance, and on their voluntary submission for their
Juisdiction: And here the Protestant Clergy had the greatest reason in the
world to complain of King James; to set him on the Throne, the Clergy
disobliged many of their People, and he in requital deprived them of all other
Worldly Support or Power, besides what must depend on the free choice of those
very People, whom for his sake they had not only disobliged, but likewise
helped to bring under many Inconveniences.

SECT. XVI. 2. King James took away the maintenance of the present Protestant
Clergy.
1. BUT King James did not only endeavor to hinder the Education and
Succession of the Protestant Clergy, but he likewise took away all their
present maintenance. Immediately upon his coming to the Crown, their Popish
Parishioners began to deny the payment of Book-moneies, which is a considerable
part of the Ecclesiastical Revenue of Ireland? a great part of the Tithes of
Ireland are impropriate; in some Places the whole Tithes, in many Two third
Parts, and in most the one half; and there is little left for the Vicar that
serves the Cure, except it be the Third part of the Tithes, or the small Fees
due out of Burials, Marriages, or Easter Offerings; these Dues are called
commonly Book-moneys; and though very inconsiderable in themselves, yet make a
great part, and in some Places the whole of what falls to the Vicar's portion;
against these the Popish Judges declared in their Circuits; and by their
encouragement most People, and the Papists universally denied to pay them.

2. The Priests began to declare that the Tithes belonged to them, and forbad
their People to pay them to the Protestant Clergy; with this the People
complied willingly; and for Two years before the late Revolution in England,
hardly any Tithes were recovered by the Clergy; or if any were recovered, it
was with so much difficulty and cost, that they turned to very little account.

3. They past an Act in their pretended Parliament, whereby they took away all
Tithes that were payable by Papists; and gave them to their own Popish Priests;
and allowed them to bring an Action for them at the Common Law, to make the
recovery of them more easy; and yet denied this to the Protestant Clergy;
alleging that they allowed them still their old means of recovering their
Tithes; and therefore did them no injury. But this was as good as nothing; for
they had so weakened the Ecclesiastical Power and Jurisdiction, that it was
incapable of compelling the People to obedience; and it being necessary to sue
out a Writ de excommunicato capiendo, in order to force such as were
refractory, the Popish Chancellor either directly refused to grant the Writ, or
else laid so many impediments and delays in the way, that it cost double the
Value of the Tithes sued for, to take it out.

4. Though they rendered the Protestant Clergy incapable of enjoying the Tithes
of Roman Catholics, yet the Popish Clergy were made capable of enjoying the
Protestant Tithes: The Case then was thus; if a Protestant had a Bishopric,
Dignity, or other Living, by the new Act, he must not demand any Tithes or
Ecclesiastical Dues from any Roman Catholic; and as soon as his Preferment
became void by his death, cession, or absence, a Popish Bishop, etc. was put
into the Place; and by their Act, there needed no more to oblige all Men, To
repute, take, and deem, a Man to be a Roman Catholic Bishop or Dean of any
Place, than the King's signifying him to be so, under his Privy Signet and Sign
Manual; a Power that the Protestants, how much soever they magnified the King's
Authority, never trusted any King with, nor other Mortal man whatsoever. But as
soon as any one became thus Entitled to a Bishopric, etc. immediately all the
Tithes, as well of Protestants as of Papists, became due to him, with all the
Glebes and Ecclesiastical Dues; and for the recovery of them he had an Action
at Common Law.

5. Notwithstanding the Glebes and Protestants Tithes were not given to the
Popish Clergy, during the incumbency of the present Protestant Incumbents, yet
the Popish Priests by violence entered on the Glebes where there were any,
pretending that the King had nothing to do with them, and that neither he or
his Parliament could hinder the Church of her Rights; and this Pretense was so
far countenanced, that no endeavors whatsoever could get any of these Priests
out, when once he had gotten possession. The Truth is, hardly one Parish in ten
in the Provinces of Leinster, Munster, or Connaught, have any Glebe left them;
for either they were never endowed, or if they had been at any time endowed
with Glebes, the many Confusions and new Dispositions of Lands have made them
to be forgotten, or swallowed up in the Hands of some powerful Parishoners. The
pretense therefore of the Parliament, that they had been kind to the Protestant
Clergy, in leaving them the Glebes, was a mere piece of Hypocrisy: since they
knew that generally Parishes had no Glebes; and that where they had Glebes, the
Priests would make a shift to get into possession of them, without being given
to them by the Parliament.

6. The same may be said of their leaving some of the Tithes belonging to
Protestants, for the present, to their own Clergy. They had so robbed and
plundered the Protestants of the Country, that few lived or had any thing
Tithable in it; being forced for their own safety to flee to the Towns, and
leave their Farms wast; if any had Tithes, they might pay them if they pleased,
or let it alone, for they had left the Protestant Clergy, as I showed before,
no way of recovering their Dues. Many times the Priests came with a Company of
the next quartered Dragoons, and took the Tithes away by force; and this past
for a Possession of the Livings; and the Protestant Ministers must bring their
Leases of Ejectment, if they would recover their Possessions, or pretend any
more to Tithes in those Livings. There is a Custom in Ireland whereby some
Farmers do agree with their Neighbors to plow their Lands for them, on
Condition that they afford them a certain quantity of Corn, suppose an Half,
one Third, or one Fourth, after it is reaped. Now Protestants that had Farms in
the Country, being in no capacity to plow them after their Horses were taken
away, and their Houses robbed, agreed with their Popish Neighbors to plow
their Lands for them, according to the Custom of the Country; this was enough
to Entitle Priests to the Tithes of Lands so plowed; and accordingly they
seized upon them by force; though both the Land and Corn belonged to
Protestants; by these and other such Contrivances, from the year 1686. till
King James's Power was put to an end by the Victory at the Boyn, hardly any
Protestant enjoyed any Tithes in the Country; all which was represented to the
Government, but to no purpose.

7. In Corporate Towns and Cities, there was a peculiar Provision made for
Ministers by Act of Parliament, in King Charles the Second's time; by which
Act, the Houses in those Places were to be valued by Commissioners at a
moderate value; and the Lord Lieutenant or chief Governor, for the time being,
did assign a certain Proportion for the Ministers maintenance, not greater than
the Twentieth part of the yearly value, returned by the Commissioners. That
therefore the City Protestant Clergy might not be in a better condition than
those in the Country, an Act was past in their pretended Parliament, to take
away this altogether; the Clergy of Dublin desired to be heard concerning this
Act at the Bar of the House of Lords before it past, and their Council were
admitted to speak to it, who showed the unreasonableness and unjustice of it so
evidently, and insisted so boldly on King James's Promise to the Protestant
Clergy, at his first arrival in this Kingdom, when he gave them the greatest
assurances of maintaining them in their Rights and Privileges; and further,
bid them, if aggrieved in any thing, to make their Complaints immediately to
him, and engaged to see them redrest, that he seemed to be satisfied, and the
House of Lords with him; yet the design to ruin them, was so fixed, that without
offering any thing by way of Answer to the Reasons urged against it, the Act
past; and thereby left the Clergy of the Cities and Corporate Towns, without
any pretense to a maintenance, except they could get it from the voluntary
Contributions of their People; nay, so malicious were they against the
Protestant Clergy, that they cut off the Arrears due to them, as well as the
growing Rent; having left no means to recover them, as appeared upon Trial at
the Council Board afterward, when some of the Clergy petitioned for relief
therein.

8. Upon the Plantation of Ulster 1625. there was a Table of Tithes agreed on
by the King and Council; and the Planters, to whom the Grants were made by the
King, obliged to pay Tithes according to that Table; the pretended Parliament
took away this Table also; for no other Reason that we could learn, but because
most of the Inhabitants of Ulster were Protestants, and consequently the
Protestant Clergy would pretend to them.

9. The Livings of Ireland were valued by Commissions in Henry the Eight and
Queen Elizabeth's time; and paid First Fruits and Twentieth Parts, according to
that valuation; other Livings were held in Farm from the Crown, and paid yearly
a considerable reserved Rent, commonly called Crown Rents; others appertained
to the Lord Lieutenant, and other Officers of State, and paid a certain rate of
Corn for their use, commonly called Port Corn. Now all these Payments were
exacted from the Protestant Clergy, notwithstanding the greatest part of their
Tithes were taken from them: The remaining part, (where any remained) was
seized in many Places, by the Commissioners of the Revenue, and a Custodiam
granted of it for the King's use, for the payment of the Duties which accru'd
out of the whole, and not one Farthing allowed for the Incumbent, or the
Curate: nay, in some Places, they seized the Incumbents Person, and laid him in
Jail till he paid these Duties, though at the same time they had seized his
Livings, and found that they were not sufficient to answer what they exacted;
and because the Clerk of the First Fruits, Leiutenant Colonel Roger Moore,
being a Protestant himself, would not be severe with the Clergy, and seize
their Livings and Persons, to force them to pay what he knew they were not in a
capacity to do, they found pretense to seize his Person, and sent him with
Three Files of Musketeers Prisoner to the Castle of Dublin, where he and two
Gentlemen more lay in a cold nasty Garret for some Months. By these
Contrivances, the few Benefices yet in the hands of the Protestants, instead of
a support, became a burden to them; and they were forced to cast themselves
for a maintenance on the kindness of their People, who were themselves undone
and beggared.

SECT. XVII. 3. King James took away the Jurisdiction of the Church from
Protestants.
1. IT is impossible any society should subsist without a power of rewarding
and punishing its Members; now Christ left no other power to his Church, but
what is purely Spiritual; nor can the Governors of the Church any other way
punish their Refractory Subjects, but by refusing them the Benefits of their
society, the Administration of the Word and Sacraments, and the other Spiritual
Offices annexed by Christ to the Ministerial Function. But Kings and Estates
have become Nursing Fathers to the Church, and lent their Temporal power to
second her Spiritual Censures. The Jurisdiction therefore of the Clergy, so far
as it has any Temporal effect on the Bodies or Estates of Men, is entirely
derived from the Favor of States and Princes, and acknowledged to be so in the
Oath of Supremacy. However this is now become a right of the Clergy, by ancient
Laws through all Christendom; and to take it away, after so long continuance,
must needs be a great blow to Religion, and of worse Consequence than if the
Church had never possessed it; yet this was actually done by King James to the
Protestant Clergy; and is a plain sign that he intended to destroy their
Religion, when he deprived them of their support.

2. For first he past an Act of Parliament, whereby he exempted all that
dissented from our Chruch, from the Jurisdiction thereof: and a Man needed no
more to free him from all punishment for his Misdemeanors, though only
cognizable and punishable in the Ecclesiastical Courts, than to profess himself
a Dissenter, or that it was against his Conscience to submit to the
Jurisdiction of our Church: nay, at the first, the Act was so drawn, and past
the House of Commons, that no Protestant Bishop could pretend to any
Jurisdiction even over his own Clergy; but that, and several other passages in
the Commons Bills, were so little pleasing to some who understood the King's
Interest, that Sir Edward Herbert was employed by King James to amend the Act
for the House of Lords; which he did in the form it is now in; nothing of the
Commons Bill being left in it, but the word, Whereas; tho after all it
effectually destroyed the Jurisdiction of the Church.

3. But second, in most places there was no Protestant Bishop left; and
consequently the Popish Bishop was to succeed to the Jurisdiction; they being
by another Act invested in Bishoprics, as soon as they could procure King
James' Certificate under his privy Signet, that they were Archbishops or
Bishops; all incapacities, by reason of their religion, by any Statute or Law
whatsoever, being taken off. There were already vacant in Ireland, one
Archbishopric and three Bishoprics; they had Attainted Two of the surviving
Archbishops, and Seven Bishops, so that they had already the Jurisdiction of of
the Kingdom by a Law of their own making, secured into the Hands of Papists;
and the rest were quickly to follow.

4. But Third, where any shadow of Jurisdiction remained with the Protestant
Clergy, they rendered it insignificant, by encouraging the most Obstinate and
Perverse Sectaries, and by showing them Favor according as they were most
opposite and refractory to all Ecclesiastical Discipline, and paying their Dues
to the Clergy: this may be supposed one reason of their peculiar Fondness of
Quakers; and that it was upon this account chiefly they made them Burgesses or
Aldermen in their new Corporations, and reckoned them as most useful Tools to
pull down the Discipline of the Church; tho their Tithes were not given away to
the Popish Priests, yet there was no way left for the Protestant Clergy to
recover them; they being exempted from their Jurisdiction; and from the very
beginning of King James's Reign, they so ordered the matter, that Quakers were
generally exempted from paying Tithes; which at last became a more sensible
loss to the Protestant Clergy, because these were the only People that called
themselves Protestants, who had any thing left them out of which Tithes were
due.

5. 'Twas on the same account that lewd and debauched Converts were encouraged
amongst them; and a Man needed no more to escape the Censures and punishments
due to his Crimes, but to profess himself reconciled; upon which all
proceedings against him must immediately cease. Thus many lewd* Women turned
Converts, and continued their Wickedness without fear of the Ecclesiastical
Judge.

6. If at any time a Bishop went about to correct a Scandalous Clergyman, the
Kings Courts immediately interposed and granted prohibitions, tho the matter
did not bear one. They knew it must put the Bishop to much pains and costs to
have it removed, and they were in hopes to weary him out before he could get a
Consultation: and so zealous were the, Popish Lawyers to protect a Scandalous
Minister against his Bishop, that they would of their own accord, gratis, plead
his Cause; they thought it Fee enough to weaken the Jurisdiction of a
Protestant Bishop, and to do a mischief to our Religion, by keeping in a wicked
scandalous Clergyman to be a reproach to it. One Mr. Ross was prosecuted by
his Bishop for very lewd and notorious Crimes; but the King's Judges
interposed, and Sergeant Dillon, then Prime Sergeant* pleaded his Cause gratis
against the Bishop of Kilmore, who prosecuted him. If any Clergyman turned
Papist, as we have reason to thank God that very few did, whatever his Motives
of Conversion were, he was sure to keep his Livings by a Dispensation, and to
be exempted from the Power of his Bishop.

7. King James, by an order under his Privy Signet, took on him to appoint
Chancellors to exercise jurisdiction over Protestants. Thus he appointed one
Gordon, who called himself Bishop of Galloway in Scotland, to be Chancellor in
the Diocese of Dublin; this Gordon was a very ignorant lewd Man, and a professed
Papist; yet he took on him by Virtue of King James's Mandate, to exercise
Ecelesiastical Jurisdiction over the Protestants of the Diocese, to grant
Licenses for Marriages, Administrations of Wills, and to Cite and Excommunicate
whom he pleased. But the Clergy refused to submit to him, or to denounce his
Excommunications; which obliged him to let that part of his Jurisdiction fall;
but as to the other part that concerned Wills, he made his advantage of it, he
cited the Widow or Relation of any deceased Person; and if they refused to
appear, he granted Administrations to some of his own Creatures, and they came
by force and took away the Goods of the Defunct. It is incredible what wicked
brutish things, he, with a parcel of ill Men he got to act with him, did on
this pretense; and how he oppressed and squeezed the Widows and Orphans, the
poor People not being strong enough to oppose him and the Crew he employed; for
force was all the Right he could pretend; it being notorious that in the
vacancy of the Archbishopric, or in his absence, when he cannot have
intercourse with his Diocese, the Jurisdiction devolveth to the Dean and
Chapter, as Guardians of the Spiritualities; and they, notwithstanding the
difficulty of the times, and danger they were in, chose the Right Reverend the
Bishop of Mead to administer the Jurisdiction; which he did with all the
meekness, modesty, and diligence that is peculiar to him; though he could not
hinder the forementioned Gordons Encroachments, as to Administrations of Wills
and Testaments. In short, King James, by Virtue of his Supremacy, claimed a
despotick Power over the Church, and pretended that he might do what he pleased
as to matter of Jurisdiction; tho his Ecclesiastical Supremacy no more entitled
him to encroach on the Liberties and Privileges of the Church, than his Civil
entitled him to dispose of the Civil Rights of the Subjects of his Kingdoms. He
had indeed taken away the Oath of Supremacy by an Act of his pretended
Parliament; but yet he would not disown the Power vested in him by it; tho the
Papists would have had him renounce it expressly; but he answered, that he did
not claim any Ecclesiastical Authority over his Roman Catholic Subjects, nor
pretended to be Supreme in their Church in his Dominions, but only over the
Protestants; the Mystery of which was plainly this; he foresaw that the
Ecclesiastical Authority, which is settled by the Laws, and trusted in the
Crown, as he could abuse it, might be a means to destroy the Protestant
Religion, and to hinder the exercise of Ecclesiastical Discipline* and
therefore was resolved not to part with it; not considering that such a
manifest and designed abuse of a Trust, in direct opposition to, and
destruction of the end for which it was granted to him, was a provoking
Temptation to his People, on the first opportunity that offered, to think of
transferring it to some other Person, that would administer it with more
faithfulness, according to the design for which it was granted.

8. I might add as a Fifth means of destroying the Protestant Religion, and
slackening Discipline; the universal Corruption of Manners that was encouraged
at Court; I do not charge King James with this in his own Person, nor will I
insinuate that he designed it, though he took no care to redress it; but it
looked like a design in some; and whether designed or no, it served the Ends of
Popery more than easily can be imagined, and opened a wide Door for it: That
Kingdom that is very corrupt in Morals and debaucht, is in a very fair way to
embrace that Persuasion; and generally their Proselites were such as had
renounced Christianity in their Practice, before they renounced the Principles
thereof as taught in the Reformed Churches; and many Roman Catholics declared,
that they would rather have had us profess no Religion at all than the
Protestant. In short, whether it was from the looseness of the Principles of
their Religion, or from a design to gain on Protestants, Impiety, Profaneness
and Libertinism were highly encouraged and favored; and it was observable,
that very few came with King James into Ireland, that were remarkable for any
strictness or severity of Life; but rather on the other hand, they were
generally signal for their viciousness and looseness of their Morals: Sir
Thomas Hacket confessed, that in the whole year 1688. wherein he was Mayor of
Dublin, there was not one Protestant brought before him for The^^, and hardly
one for any other immorality; whereas he was crowded with Popish Criminals of
all sorts: The Perjuries in the Courts, the Robberies in the Country; the lewd
Practices in the Stews; the Oaths, Blasphemies, and Curses in the Armies and
Streets; the drinking of Confusions and Damnations in the Taverns, were all of
them generally the acts of Papists, or of those who owned themselves ready to
become such, if that Party continued uppermost. But more peculiarly they were
remarkable for their Swearing and Blaspheming and Profanation of the Lord's
Day; if they had any signal Ball or Entertainment to make, any Journey or
weighty Business to begin, they commonly chose that day for it, and looked on it
as a kind of conquest over a Protestant, and a step to his Conversion, if they
could engage him to profane it with them. This universal viciousness made
Discipline impossible* and whatever Protestants were infected with it, were
entirely lost to the Church and their Religion; for the stress of Salvation,
according to the Principles of the Reformed Religion, depends on Virtue and
Holiness of Life, without which neither sorrow for Sin nor Devotion will do a
Man any Service; whereas he that hears Mass daily in the Roman Church, kneels
often before a Crucifix, and believes firmly that the Roman Church is the
Catholic, and that all out of her Communion are damned, makes not the least
doubt of Salvation, though he be guilty of habitual Swearing Drunkenness, and
many other Vices; and the observation of this Indulgence gained them most of
those Proselites that went over to them, of the Lewd Women and Corrupted
Gentry; and many amongst themselves had so great a sense of this advantage,
that it made them very favorable to debauchery, and openly profess, that they
had a much better opinion of the lewdest Persons that dyed in their own
Communion, than of the strictest and most devout Protestant; and they would
often laugh at our scrupling a Sin, and our constancy at Prayers, since, as
they would assure us with many Oaths, we must only be damned the deeper for our
diligence; and they could not endure to find us go about to punish Vice in our
own Members, since, said they, it is to no purpose to trouble your selves about
Vice or Virtue, that are out of the Church, and will all be damned.

SECT. XVIII. 4. King James and his Party, in order to destroy the Protestant
Religion, took away the Protestants Churches, and hindered their Religious
Assemblies.
1. Toward the beginning of these Troubles the Papists boasted much of their
kindness to the Protestant Clergy, in leaving them their Churches. They thought
us very unreasonable, to complain of our being robbed or plundered, or of the
loss of our Estates, whilst our Churches were left us; and they would not own
that they had done any injury to our Ministers, whilst they had not turned them
out of those. This was urged upon all Occasions, as an unanswerable Argument
that King James intended in earnest to preserve inviolably that Liberty of
Conscience he had promised; but this was, as all their other Promises, a mere
pretense; the Priests told us from the beginning, that they would have our
Churches, and that they would have Mass in Christ Church, the chief Cathedral
in Dublin, in a very little time; we knew well enough that this was intended,
whatever King James and his Ministers averred to the contrary; for the same Act
of Parliament that they had past to make their Priests and Bishops capable of
Preferments, and Benefices, did also give them a Legal Title to the Churches
belonging to those Preferments; as they who drew the Act very well knew: in the
mean time their Affairs were not in such a forward Posture, as to encourage
them to seize on those Churches to which they could pretend no right, tho some
had been seized before the Act passed.

2. But immediately upon the passing of the Act, Duke Schonberg's landing
alarmed them; and they were in so great fear of him, that they rather thought
of running into Munster, or leaving the Kingdom, than of possessing Churches.
And therefore they contented themselves with their former Methods for some
time, which was to let the Rabble break into them and deface them, with
barbarous and contumelious Circumstances, breaking the Windows; pulling up the
Seats, and throwing down the Pulpit, Communion Table, and Rails, and stealing
what was portable out of them: An instance of this sort, and a remarkable
Accident upon it, of undoubted credit, I have put in the Appendix. In Appendix.
N. 27.
some Churches in the Diocese of Dublin they hung up a black Sheep in the
Pulpit, and put some part of the Bible before it. In some places the Creaghs, a
sort of wild Irish, that chose to fly out of the North at Duke Schonberg's
landing, rather than stay to give an account of the Robberies and Insolences
that they had committed there, turned the Protestants Churches into lodging
places; defacing and burning whatever was combustible in them.

3. And in Dublin the Government ordered the Churches several times to be
seized. First the Earl of Tyrconnel filled them with Soldiers, February 24.
1688. in order to receive the Arms of Protestants; and they were kept, some for
a longer, some for a shorter time upon this pretense: Then they ordered them to
be seized anew, September 6. 1689. pretending that the Protestants had hid
their Arms in them; and I doubt not but that they had Affidavits, as they
pretended, to this purpose, sufficient to induce them to search, but not to
justify their committing such rudeness and barbarity as they did in them; for
the Soldiers not only broke open the Monuments and Graves, but likewise the
Coffins of the dead, and tumbled out the dead Bodies, and so left them exposed,
till they were pleased to let the Protestants come into the Churche^ again to
bury them; though after all they found no Arms, nor indeed were there any hid.
Thus far they proceeded whilst their fear was upon them; resolving, since they
could not hopo to* enjoy them themselves, that they would make them. as useless
as they could to Protestants: But when they found that Duke Schonberg stopped at
Dundalk, and they understood the State of his Army, the Priests took Courage
and in the Months of October and November, they seized on most of the Churches
in the Kingdom.

4. The manner of their doing it was thus: The Mayor, or Governor in the
Towns, with the Priests, went to the Churches, sent for the Keys to the
Sextons, and if they were found, forced them from them; if not, they broke open
the Doors, pulled up the Seats and Reading Desk, and having said Mass in them
looked upon them as their own, and said the King himself had then nothing to do
with them, being consecrated places; and to alienate them, or give them back to
Heretics, was Sacrilege. In the Country, the Militia Captains, or Officers of
the Army that chanced to be quartered in the several places, performed the same
part that the Mayors or Governors did in Corporations; thus Christ's Church in
Dublin was seized by Luttrel the Governor, and about Twenty six Churches and
Chapels in the Diocese of Dublin.

5. Of this, Protestants complained to King James as a great violation of his
own Act for Liberty of Conscience, in which it is expressly provided, that they
should have Liberty to meet in such Churches, Chapels, and other places as
they shall have for that purpose: they further represented to him, That all the
Churches of Ireland were in a manner ruined in the late War in 1641. That it
was with great difficulty and cost that the Protestants had new built or
repaired them; That many were built by private Persons on their own Costs; and
that the Roman Catholics had no Pretense or Title to them: but his Majesty
answered, That they were seized in his absence at the Camp, without his
knowledge or consent; That nevertheless he was so much obliged to his Roman
Catholic Clergy, that he must not dispossess them; that they alleged a Title
to the Churches that they had seized; and if the Protestants thought their
Title was better, they must bring their Action and endeavor to recover their
Possessions by Law.

6. This Answer was what the Attorney General had suggested to him; and the
Reader will perceive that the whole was a piece of deceit; that the pretense of
the Churches being seized whilst his Majesty was absent, was a mere Collusion,
and that there could not be a more false Suggestion, than that the Papists had
any Right to the Churches, or a more unjust thing, than to put the Protestants
on recovering a Possession, by a Suit at Law, which was gotten from them by so
open violence; but this was the Justice we looked for, and constantly met with
from him; and therefore there being no Remedy to be expected, we were forced to
acquiesce.

7. Only to color the matter a little, and lest this should make too great a
noise in England and Scotland, where King James at this time had very
encouraging hopes, he issued out a Proclamation, December 13. 1689. in which he
acknowledges, that the seizing of Churches was a violation of the Act for
Liberty of Conscience, yet does not order any restitution, only forbids them to
seize any more. They had in many places notice of this Proclamation before it
came out, and therefore were more diligent to get into the remaining Churches;
for they looked on the Proclamation as a confirmation of their Possessions
which they had before the publishing of it; and in some places the Popish
Officers kept it from being published till they had done their Work; the
Protestants not being allowed to go out of their Parishes, could not come by
it, till it pleased their Popish Neighbors to produce it; and so it proved,
like other Proclamations of his Majesty in favor of his Protestant Subjects,
it was not published till the inconveniency it pretended to prevent was brought
upon them, and the mischief actually executed; and it made their Enemies more
hasty and diligent to do it, than otherwise they would have been, lest they
should slip the time; and lose the opportunity.

8. But after all, some were too late, and the Protestants got sight of the
Proclamation before their Churches were seized; but here the Priests put off
their Vizors, and acted barefaced; they told the People, the King had nothing
to do with them or their Churches; that they were immediately under the Pope,
and that they would neither regard him nor his Proclamations or Laws made to
the damage of Holy Church.

9. The Protestants had a mind to make an Experiment how far this would go, and
whether the Priests or King would get the better; in order therefore to make
the Trial, they chose out some Instances, in which the violence and injustice
of turning them out of their Churches were most undeniable, and laid their Case
before His Majesty and his Council by their Petitions; and that the Petitions
might not be laid aside or lost, as was the common Custom to deal with
Petitions and Affidavits, to which they were ashamed to return a flat denial,
they engaged some of the Privy Council to espouse their Cause; and had the luck
to gain several of the Popish Nobility to favor their Suits, especially of
such as had Estates in England, and knew King James's true Interest and their
own.

10. The Petitions of Waterford and Wexford were the most favorably received,
and in spite of all the opposition that the Attorney General Nagle, or the
Solicitor General, one Butler, who concerned himself with singular impudence
against the Petitions, could make, they obtained an Order for restitution of
these two Churches; the Wexford Petition sets forth the Loyalty of the
Minister, the Sea the Petition in the Appendix, N. 26.
peaceableness of the People; their having contributed to the building of
several Popish Chapels within and without the Walls of that Town, and that the
Roman Catholics had no occasion for the Church; the reasonableness of this
Petition was so manifest, that King James and his Council made an Order for the
restitution of the Church: but he now found how precariously he reigned in
Ireland (notwithstanding their mighty professions of Loyalty and absolute
Subjection upon all occasions, and more particularly in their Act of
Recognition) for the Mayors and Officers refused to obey his Order.

11. Upon which he was importuned by the Protestants with new Complaints; but
being ashamed to own his want of power to make good his former Order, he
referred the Waterford Petition to the then Governor of that place, the Earl
of Tyrone, who reported that the Church of Waterford was a Place of strength,
and consequently not fit to be trusted into the Hands of Protestants; and so
all they obtained by their Petition, Attendance and Charges, was to have their
Church turned into a Garrison, instead of a Mass-house: this pretense could not
be made for the Church of Wexford, it having no appearance of strength; and
therefore the Order for restoring it was renewed, and the disobedient Mayor
sent for and turned out, for which the Popish Clergy made him ample
satisfaction: but notwithstanding that King James appeared most zealous to have
the Church restored, and expressed himself with more passion than was usual,
that he would be obeyed; and though the Protestants concerned solicited it
with the utmost eagerness and diligence, even to the hazard of their Lives, yet
they could never procure the King and Councils Order, for the restitution of
their Church, to be executed or obeyed; and so they continued out of it till
His present Majesty's success restored them and their fellow Protestants to
their Churches, as well as to their other just Rights.

12. Now here we had a full demonstration, what the Liberty of Conscience would
come to, with which King James thought to have amused Protestants, and of which
he boasted so unmeasurably, if once Popery had gotten the upper hand. He and
his Parliament might have made Acts for it, if they pleased, but we see here,
that the Clergy would have told them, that they meddled with what did not
concern them, and that they had no power to make Acts about Religious Matters,
or dispose of the Rights of Holy Church; and we see from this Experiment who
would have been obeyed. We found here upon trial, that when King James would
have kept his word to us, it was not in his power to do it; and that his
frequently repeated Promises, and his Act of Parliament for Liberty of
Conscience, could not prevent the demolishing, defacing, or seizing Nine
Churches in Ten through the Kingdom; and discovered to us, That the Act for
Liberty of Conscience was only designed to destroy the Established Church, and
not that Protestants should have the Benefit of it.

13. Having taken away our Churches and public Places of meeting, the next
thing was to hinder our Religious Assemblies. It is observable, that the Act of
their pretended Parliament for Liberty of Conscience promises full and free
exercise of their respective Religions, to all that profess Christianity within
the Kingdom, without any molestation, loss, or penalty whatsoever; but assigns
no punishment to such as shall disturb any in their Religious Exercises; and
there was good reason for that omission; for by this means they had left their
Officers and Soldiers at liberty to disturb the Religious Assemblies of
Protestants, without fear of being called to any account.

14. By the Act, an open, free, and uninterrupted access was to be left into
every Assembly; and they commonly had their Emissaries in every Church, to see
if they could find any thing to object against the Preacher: But the Ministers
did not fear any thing could be objected even by malice on this Account; and
therefore when they found they were not like to make much of this, they let it
fall; and the Officers and Soldiers came into the Churches in time of Divine
Service, or in time of Sermons, and made a noise; sometimes threatening the
Ministers; sometimes cursing, sometimes swearing, and sometimes affronting or
assaulting Women, and picking occasions of quarrels with the Men, and comitting
many disorders; it vexed and grieved them to see the Churches full, contrary to
their expectation; that neither their Liberty of Conscience, nor multiplying
their Mass-houses, nor their driving away several thousands of Protestants into
England, had in the least emptied them; that their Liberty of Conscience,
instead of dividing, had rather united Protestants; and that the zeal and
frequency of Devotion, amongst those that remained, supplied the absence of
those that were gone, and crowded the Churches rather more than formerly; it
grieved them much to see those things; and they on all occasions vented their
spleen against the Assemblies of Protestants.

15. In the Country, where Churches were taken from the Protestants, they met
in private Houses; and where their Ministers were gone, and their maintenance
seized; others undertook the Cures either gratis, or were maintained by the
voluntary Contributions of the People: So that there appeared no probability,
that Protestantism would be destroyed without violence. The Papists saw this,
and therefore watched an opportunity to begin it. On the Sixth of Septem. 1689.
upon pretense of a Case of Pistols and a Sword found in some out part of Christ
Church in Dublin, they locked it up for a Fortnight, and suffered no Service to
be in it. On the Twenty seventh of October they took it to themselves, and
hindered Protestants to officiate any more in it. On the Thirteenth of
September, on pretense of some Ships seen in the Bay of Dublin, they forbad all
Protestants to go to Church, or assemble in any Place for Divine Service. July
13. 1689. there issued out a Proclamation, forbidding Protestants to go out of
their Parishes; one design of this was to hinder their Assemblies at Religious
Duties; for in Ireland generally Two or Three Parishes have but one Church, and
consequently by this, one half were confined from the Service of God through
the Kingdom: June 1690. Colonel Lutterel, Governor of Dublin, issued his
Order, forbidding more See Appendix N. 31.
than Five Protestants to meet together on pain of Death: he was asked whether
this was designed to hinder meeting at Churches; it was answered, that it was
designed to hinder their meeting there as well as in other places; and in
execution of this, all the Churches were shut up, and all Religious Assemblies
through the Kingdom forbidden under pain of Death; and we were assured, that if
King James had returned Victorious from the Boyn, it was resolved that they
should never have been opened any more for us; and the same excuse would have
served for his permitting this that served him the former year, for not
restoring the Churches taken away in his absence at the former Camp, even that
he must not disoblige his Roman Catholic Clergy. Thus God gave them
opportunity to show what they intended against our Religion, even to take away
all our Churches, and hinder all our Religious Assemblies; and when they had
brought their Liberty of Conscience to this, and we had been obliged upon pain
of Death to forbear all public Worship for a Fortnight, then he sent us
deliveranc^, by means of his present Majesty's Victory at the Boyn, which
restored us the Liberty of worshipping God together, as well as the use of our
Churches.

SECT. XIX. 5. The violences used by King James's Party to make Converts, and
to discourage the Protestant Ministers.
1. BUT all these methods of ruining the Protestant Religion seemed tedious to
the Priests; and therefore they could not be prevailed with to abstain from
violence; wherever they had a fair opportunity to use it they applied it with
all diligence. Several Protestant Women were married to Papists; many of these
used unmerciful Severities to their Wives, and endeavored by hardships and
unkindness to weary the poor Women out of their Religion; some stripped them of
their Clothes, kept them some days without Meat or Drink, beat them grievously,
and at last, when they could not prevail, turned them out of their Houses, and
refused to let them live with them: Some sold off all that they had, turned it
into Money, and left their Wives and Children to beg, for no other Reason, but
because they would not forsake their Religion: And this carriage was encouraged
by the Priests, which came to be discovered on this occasion: Some Women that
were thus used, were advised by their Friends to make their Application to
their Husbands Confessors, and they imagined the Confessors would lay their
Commands on the Men to be more civil, and to do the Duty of Husbands to their
Wives. But the Priests told the Women that it was their own faults that their
Husbands used them ill, that they deserved it, and must expect no better whilst
they continued disobedient to them, and refused to comply in the matter of
Religion; and when the poor Women replied that in Conscience they could not
change their Religion, being persuaded of the truth of it, the Priests railed
at them and abused them almost as much as their own Husbands. Servants were
used the same way by their Popish Masters, and Tenants by their Landlords;
every Office, or Profit, or Trust was made a Temptation; and a Man, whatever
his circumstances were, must either part with it or his Religion. We were told
that the King would have all that did eat his Bread, of his own Religion; the
meaning of which was, that he expected that all who were employed by him should
turn Papists.

2. I reckon all the Robberies and Plunderings committed on the Country
Gentlemen, to be on the same account; a Man might have saved his Horses, his
Cows, his Sheep, and Household Goods, if he would have changed his Religion; if
not, he must expect to be ruined by Thieves and Robbers, set on by the Priests,
and encouraged by his Popish Neighbors; which was no way to be prevented but
by going to Mass: some few were so weak as to do it, and escaped; tho the
generality rather chose to beg, than to save their Fortunes by so base a
Compliance.

3. When it fared thus with the Laity, we may imagine the Clergy were in ill
Circumstances: whoever escaped, they were sure to be Robbed and Plundered; they
were often affronted and assaulted. The very Protestant Bishops could not
escape Violence: The Bishop of Laughlin's House was broke open and Plundered
before he left the Kingdom: The Bishop of Waterford's House was rifled, and the
Bishop, an old Man about Fourscore years of Age, desperately wounded in his
Bed. Several of the Inferior Clergy were beaten and abused, waylaid as they
traveled the Highway, shot at and wounded, and with difficulty escaped with
their Lives; some were so beaten that they died upon it; some had their Houses
set on fire; and in general the Protestant Parishioners were so apprehensive of
the danger in which may of their Ministers were, that they besought them to
withdraw themselves out of it; they had threatening Messages often sent to them;
the Robbers of the Country would send them word that at such a time or such a
Night, they would be with them, and sometime they would be very punctual to
their assignation, and strip the Poor Men and their Families of their very
Clothes.

4. Those that staid amongst their Parishioners in the Country, were forced to
walk from House to House to perform their Offices; their Horses being all taken
from them: at last they were generally put into Prison with the other Gentlemen
of the Country, and some kept in for Twelve or Thirteen Months, not being
released till the General deliverance; some were Tried for their Lives, and
some condemned to death, even in the City of Dublin under the Eye of the
Government; hardly one escaped affronts and abuses, or could walk the Street
with quiet; the Soldiers, especially the French, railed at them, calling them,
Diables desministres Heretics, un Protestant, un Diable, with many other
contumelious expressions.

5. It were infinite to reckon up all the Violences they suffered; Doctor King,
Doctor Foy, Mr. Bunbury, Mr. King, Mr. Delany, Mr. Fitz Simons, Mr. Read, Mr
Carolane, Mr. Rosselle, Mr. Tucker, Mr. Buckhurst, and many others were
Imprisoned: Dr. Foy, and Mr. More were assaulted by Soldiers whilst performing
their Office at a Burial in the Churchyard; the same Dr. Foy was hindered from
Preaching several Sundays, by the Menaces of some of King James's Guard; who
surrounded the Church with their Fusees, and swore they would shoot him if he
went into the Pulpit; and this only because he had taken notice the Sunday
before* that one Hall in a Sermon preached before King James in Christ-Church,
and Printed afterward, had corrupted his Text, Acts 17. 30. by rendering it
instead of Repent, Repent and do Penance. Dr. King was assaulted in the
Street, and a Musket with a light Match levelled at him; the public Service
in his Church was disturbed several times, particularly on Candlemas Day 1689,
by seven Officers, who swore aloud they would cut his Throat; Dean Glendy was
knocked down, and wounded in the Street; Mr. Delany assaulted and pusht at with
a naked Sword several times, and carried, after they had sufficiently abused
him, to Jail; Mr. Knight was abused in his Church yard by commonly known by the
name of the Mayor of Scarborough, who threatened to beat him; Mr. Sergeant was
cudgeled through the Street and carried to Prison; Mr. Price had a Musket
twice snapt at him, and with great difficulty got to his House: Mr. Burridge
was assaulted by Three or Four on the Highway, and wounded in Four places:
These were but a few of their sufferings; they went every Moment in hazard of
their Lives; and had it not been that King James flattered himself, that a
strong Party of the Clergy in England espoused his interest, it had been
impossible for the Clergy of Ireland to have subsisted.

6. Nevertheless great hardships were daily put upon them, and new Arts
invented to defame and vex them: in some places a new invented Oath was offered
to them, for which there was no pretense or Law: They answered that they had
taken the Oath of Supremacy and Allegiance at their Institution, and that they
were not obliged to take any other Oath; but that excuse would not serve, and
on their refusal they were sent to Jail; the Priests were very busy about sick
Protestants; they with great impudence thrust into their Rooms, and if they
were past speaking, they gave out that they were Converts: if the infirm person
had any Popish Relations, they besieged the House, and hindered* the Protestant
Clergy from coming to their Parishioners; the Priests pretended that they had
King James's command to visit the Sick and attempt their Conversion, and
therefore would not be hindered nor be persuaded to withdraw, tho frequently
desired by the sick Men: the Protestant Clergy were often affronted and
threatened on this account, and the ill will they procured on particular
occasions of this nature, was the ground of some of their Confinement
afterward; for the Priest that lost his Prey (as they reckoned every sick Man)
by the vigorous opposition and diligence of a Minister, was sure to contrive a
Revenge one way or other: As Dr. Foy found for his having received one Smith
(who had for some Years lived a Papist) again into our communion at his death;
and that with such remarkable circumstances of repentance and sorrow, that King
James heard of it, and blamed his Physician Dr. Constable for his neglect in
not giving notice to the Priest.

7. They endeavored to bring the Ministers of Dublin under all the Contempt
they could; and at last put on them the drudgery that belonged to the Office of
Constables and Deputy Aldermen; it belonged to those Officers on all occasions
to return the names of the several Inhabitants and Inmates of their Wards: the
Government desired to know the names of Protestants in each Parish and their
numbers, and they took them several times; but Colonel See Appendix N. 30.
Lutterel the Governor of Dublin, would not be satisfied till the Ministers
went about in Person and returned every Man his respective. Parishioners names:
it was in vain for them to plead the unreasonableness of this imposition; they
aleadged the pains, the charges, and the meanness of the thing, which was done
more effectually already than could be done by them by the proper Officers; but
all in vain, they must comply or go to Jail. This return made by the Ministers
was of no real use to the Government, for they had an exact account given about
a Fortnight before, by their own Officers, and took another about a Week after;
the design therefore was either to lay a Snare for the Ministers, or else to
render them contemptible to their People; but instead of doing that, it only
incensed the People against their unreasonable Governors who thus affronted
their Clergy.

SECT. XX. 6. King James and his Party endeavored to destroy the Protestant
Religion, by misrepresenting the Persons and Principles of Protestants.
1. THe violences used to out us of our Churches, and to discourage our Clergy,
had no great success in making Converts; but there was another way set on foot,
which did seduce some; and it was by making a Monster of the Protestant
Religion and Protestants; insomuch that young People who lived remote from
Conversation, and had not opportunity to inform themselves of the Truth,
conceived strange Ideas of both, by the insinuation of the Priests.

2. It was one of the first steps of the Reformation to renounce the usurped
power of the Pope, and to restore to the Crown the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction,
which originally belongs to the Civil Magistrate; that is, the power of
punishing Offenders with the Temporal Sword, whatever their Crime be, whether
Ecclesiastical or Civil: Now the Priests represented this Doctrine after a
strange manner; they persuaded those that would lend them their attention, that
the Protestants believed all Spiritual power to be in the King; that he could
Consecrate whom he pleased Bishops; set up what Religion he had a mind to, and
oblige all his Subjects to be of his Faith; and they railed most grievously at
the Protestants for not turning Papists, in compliance to their King; calling
them Traitors and perjured Persons from their own Principles.

3. 'Twas another Principle amongst Protestants, that private Men should not
take up the Sword, or resist the King upon any pretense, such resistance being
against Law; by which no more was understood, than that Subjects should,
according to the Laws and Gospel, behave themselves peaceably and submissively
toward their Superiors, and not upon any pretense of private injury or wrong
done to them in particular, enter into Conspiracy and Combinations against
their Governors; but by it was never intended to give up the Constitution of
the Government, or to part with the Liberties and Privileges of the Kingdom;
yet the Priests would needs persuade the World that by this Principle, the
Protestants were obliged to part with all at the King's command; that he might
use them if he pleased, as the Grand Signior or the French King use their
Subjects, and their Lives, their Liberties, and Estates, were all at his Mercy,
and they Devils, and Traitors, and Perjured Villains (I use their words) if
they demur'd at his Command: There was hardly any Principle peculiar to the
reformed Religion, but they thus misrepresented it.

4. Nor did the persons of Protestants escape better than their Principles.
They loaded them with the most odious Calumnies and Misrepresentations; they
aleadged that the Protestants had no Religion at all; that they only pretended
to it, but were Atheists and Traitors in their Hearts; they were more
especially malicious against the Clergy; King James himself contributing to it,
as appeared on this occasion; two young Gentlemen, Brothers to the Earl of
Salisbury, followed King James out of France; they professed themselves
Protestants and associated with such; the Bishops of Mead and Limerick had an
Eye on the Gentlemen, and endeavored to secure them against any attempts which
might be made to pervert them; but King James called the young Men to him,
forbad them the company of Protestants; nay even of one Mr. Cham a Gentleman
that came over with them; but above all he forbad them conversing with the
Bishops and Clergymen; for said he, they are all false to me, and will pervert
you to disloyalty and Treason; this was the common saying of them all, even of
the Chancellor on the Bench; and tho they would on occasion magnify the
loyalty of some of the Protestant Clergy in England and Scotland, yet at other
times they would profess that they believed them all treacherous, and would
never trust any of them.

5. In order to abuse the Protestants, and especially the Clergy, they set up
one Yalden a Convert, Councellor at Law, to write a weekly Paper, which he
called an Abhorrence, in which he endeavored to rake together all the little
Stories that might reflect on Protestants, and all the arguments his Wit could
furnish him with for his Cause; he made it his business to invent false stories
and lies concerning the Clergy, and began with Dr. King and Dr. Foy. He had
published a Collection of passages out of the Bishop of Ely's Sermon, and some
Sixteen others for Passive Obedience; whether this was his own work, or only,
as I have been informed, a Piece composed by some others which he assumed to
himself, I cannot say, but it met with very slender reception in Ireland, and
lay on the Booksellers hand. To vent it therefore, as some thought, or rather
to abuse the Clergy, he published an Advertisement in his Abhorrence, declaring
that Dr. King and Dr. Foy had approved this Book, by their Certificate under
their hand; by this he thought to entrap them: for either they (as he imagined)
See Appendix N. 29.
must have let this pass; and then the Protestants must think them, if not ill,
at least very imprudent Men; or else they must disown it; and then he knew how
to improve their refuting his calumny so as to render them odious to the
Government: and the Papists did a little please themselves with the
contrivance; But Dr. Foy and Dr. King found means without concerning themselves
much in the matter, to let all Dublin know that they never read Mr. Yalden's
Collection; that no body ever asked their opinion of it, much less had they
given any certificate concerning it, and that they could give no censure of it,
having neither read it, or the Sermons out of which it is pretended to be
taken. This discovery would have da^ht any other out of Countenance; but Mr.
Yalden went on his way, and became every Day more and more abusive till he and
his Abhorrences were routed together. His work was to magnify the Party that
adhered to King James in England, to represent their present* Majesty's
interest as sinking, to black^n and abuse all Protestants, and to vent his
Spite in a more peculiar manner against the Clergy, whom he endeavored to
redicule and make odious to the Government, and if possible, to sow dissension
between them and their People. We have reason to thank God that he had no
success; but yet the Countenance he and his Papers met with from the
Government, his Abhorrences being Licensed either by Sir Richard Nagle or
Alb^ville, Setretaries of State, plainly discover what inclinations they had
toward the Protestant Religion and Clergy.

6. And now upon the whole I suppose it is manifest, by what has been said in
this and the former Section, that King James not only designed to destroy us,
but also made a considerable progress in it, and 'twould have been inexcusable
ingratitude to God and to their present Majesty's if we should have refused to
close heartily with a Government that rescued us from so great misery and
apparent danger; nor can any reasonable Man blame those amongst us that desired
or assisted in this deliverance, and to their utmost power labored to procure
it.

7. If a Christian Army should go at this time into Greece to redeem the
Christians there from the slavery of the Turks, I would enquire of any
indifferent Casuist, whether it were lawful for the oppressed Grecians to
accept of that deliverance, and to join heartily with and recognize their
Redeemers; and I am well assured there is not one argument could be produced to
justify such a defection in them, but it may be urged with greater force in
our vindication. The usage we have met with being full as inhumane as any thing
they suffer, and with this aggravation, that every Act of violence exercised
against us, is likewise against the Laws, and against the nature and
Constitution of our Government; whereas their Laws vest their Emperor with an
absolute power, and they have no other title to any thing but his will; every
Act therefore of oppression from our King, was so much more intolerable and
provoking to us, than the like from the Grand Signior* is to his Subjects, as
an illegal violence is more insupportable than a legal

CHAP. IV. That there remained no other Prospect, or human Possibility, of
avoiding this Slavery and Destruction designed against the Kingdom and
Protestants of Ireland, but by accepting of the Protection, and submitting to
the Government of their present Majesty's.
1. BY the foregoing part of this Discourse it appears, that we had nothing
left us to oppose to the Invasions made on our Liberties, Properties, Lives and
Religion; That neither the Laws, nor the King's Protections and Articles, or
Declarations in our favor; That neither particular Services and Merits toward
the Royal Interest, nor King James's natural Compassion and merciful
Disposition; nor lastly, his own Interest in protecting and preserving us,
could secure us; but that notwithstanding all these, we were brought to the
very brink of Destruction. There remained therefore no other prospect or
possibility for us to avoid this Destruction, but his present Majesty's
interposing on our behalf, as he had done for England: A Providence of which we
so little dreamt, and which was so strange, so unexpected, and so effectual,
that we cannot but believe something extraordinary in it; and that he was
raised up by God to be a Deliverer to us and the Protestant Cause.

2. An unreasonable request it had been now to the Protestants of this Nation,
in this condition to which they were brought, to have desired them to have sat
still, and not made use of that opportunity which God put into their Hands, to
rescue themselves and their Country from Slavery and Ruin. And yet this is it
our Adversaries would have had us declined, been contented with what they had
brought upon us, and expected some new Miracle in our Deliverance.

3. For when the Protestants here complained of the Pressures under which they
lay, their Popish Acquaintance used to tell them, that they ought to be
patient; that Christ had endured more whilst on Earth, and that they ought not
to trouble themselves about their Sufferings or Deliverance, but leave all to
Providence, and see what God would do for them; and took it very ill, that
they, or those whom they had driven from hence, should endeavor to do any
thing for themselves. It is true, Sermons of Patience and Submission to the
Will of God, were very proper and necessary in our Circumstances; but then they
were most improper in the Mouths of our Enemies, who brought and continued
those Injuries and Sufferings on us, contrary to Law and Justice, under which
they endeavored to persuade us to be patient, and from which they would not
allow us to seek relief; and whilst they continued their Oppressions, their
advising us to depend solely on a new Providence for our Deliverance, was the
same reproach and scoff that the Apostate Julian put on the Primitive
Christians, whose Petitions for Justice he put off, by telling them, Their
Master advised them to be patient, and pronounced them blessed when persecuted.
And yet we did exactly follow this advice, though given in railery, and did not
make the least step to right our selves by force, till God's Providence
appeared signally for these Kingdoms, in raising them up a Deliverer, and
putting the Crown on their Majesty's Heads.

4. And now what Reason have we thankfully to embrace, and to bless God for the
kind Offers of a Prince, who out of a public Spirit, generously ventured
himself and all that he had, to save the Protestant Religion, the Interest of
Europe, and these Kingdoms in particular, from the united Designs of France and
King James, to enslave and ruin them. It is true God could have wrought a
Miracle for us, when nothing else would have saved us, but we should have had
little reason to expect it, if we had rejected this contrivance of Providence
that seemed next to miraculous. I am sure some things are recorded in History
as Miracles, which were not accompanied with such extraordinary Circumstances
as our Delivery. We neither had nor have in our utmost view another chance,
besides this, to preserve us from Slavery, Misery and Ruin; and our Enemies
would have had more reason to applaud their Wit than the World allows them, if
they could have persuaded us to reject this, and to trust to a new Miracle. We
had only in our prospect this one thing, to save our Lives, to take us out of
Jail, to restore our Laws, our Employments, the free exercise of our Religion,
our Fortunes and Estates, when we were unjustly deprived of them, and 'twas a
very modest expectation in them, and answerable to their other measures of
Politics, to think a People harrass'd and stripped, and plundered and condemned
by them, to lose their Lives and Estates, which was the Case of all those who
fled from hence to England, and in great measure, of most of those that staid
here, should in the height of their smart and sufferings, reject the kind
offers of a Deliverer, to depend on a Miracle; yet they pretend, this is what
we ought to have done, and because we did it not, they rail at us in the most
bitter Terms; they call us Rebels and Traitors, Villains and Atheists, and load
us with all the approbrious Names their Malice and Revenge can suggest.

But we cannot blame them to be angry, the hungry Wolf, if he could speak,
would curse and rail as heartily at the Shepherd, that rescues the Lamb out of
his Paws, as they do at us or our Deliverer; they had devoured us in their
Imaginations; they had got the Civil and Military Sword into their Hands, and
engrost all Places of Trust and Profit: these, with the Legislative Power in
the hands of our ancient and most malicious Enemies, were more than enough to
have destroyed us; but just when they should have divided the Spoil and
concluded the fatal Tragedy, the Prince of Orange, his present Majesty,
interposeth, and rescueth us; this disappointment mads them beyond all bounds
of patience, and casts them into strange fits of railing and cursing; Hell,
Damnation, Confusion to him and his Royal Consort, were continually in the
Mouths of their Men, Women, and Children; with these they used to entertain one
another at their Tables and Debauches, and endeavored to force them by way of
Healths on Protestants. In short, they spare no ill Name or Execration, that
impotent Rage could vent, or envenomed Rancour could suggest; but when all is
done, in their quiet Intervals, their Consciences cannot but acquit us, and
many of them made no scruple to confess, That there was no medium, but that
either we or they must be undone, and when that was the unavoidable choice,
that they, according to their own confession, had put on us, I assure my self
the World will not only excuse us, but will think it was our Duty to have done
what we did, since they had left us no other visible way but this, to avoid
certain and apparent Destruction.

CHAP. V. A short Account of those Protestants who left the Kingdom, and of
those that staid and submitted to King James.
SECT. I. Concerning those who went away.
1. THE former Discourse, I suppose, is sufficient to justify the Protestants
of Ireland, as to their submission to the Government of their present
Majesty's; and to show the Reasons for their earnest desiring, and thankfully
accepting of that Deliverance, which Providence offered us, by their means. It
remains only to speak a few words in particular of those that left the Kingdom,
and of those that staid and submitted to King James, that they may understand
the truth of each others Circumstances, and not either of them unjustly censure
the other.

2. As to those that absented themselves out of the Kingdom, it is certain that
they offended against no Law in doing so; it being lawful for any Subject to
transport himself out of one part of the Dominions of England into another; it
is true, that there is a Law or Custom, that requires such as hold Offices from
the King, to take a License from the Chief Governor; but the Penalty of this
is no more than the forfeiture of their Offices; and I find it disputed among
the Lawyers whether it reach so far: now few of those that went away, compared
with the whole number of them, were Officers; those that were, generally took
Licenses of absence; and at worst, it was at their own Peril, and it had been a
great severity to have taken the forfeiture; which was the sense of the whole
Parliament of England in making an Act to exempt such from incurring any loss.

3. But Secondly, they had great reason to go out of the Kingdom, because they
foresaw that it would be the seat of War; they saw 40 or 50m Men put into Arms
without any fund to maintain them; they knew these to be their bitter and sworn
Enemies; they saw the course of Justice stopped against them, and their Stocks
and Cattle taken away before their faces; several Gentlemen of the Country lost
to the value of some 1000 l. before they stirred; and to what purpose should
they stay in a place where they certainly knew that all they had would be taken
from them, and their Lives exposed to the fury of their Enemies.

Thirdly, They had no reason to stay because they could not expect to do any
good by their staying, or to save the Kingdom; the Papists had all the Forts
and Magazins of the Kingdom in their hands; they had all the Arms and public
Revenues; they were in number Four or Five to one Protestant; and they had the
face of Authority on their side; and then what could a scattered Multitude
without Arms, without Leaders, and without Authority, hope to do in their own
defense; by going into England they reckoned themselves not only safe, but
likewise in a way of serving their Country: 'Twas from thence they expected
Arms, Ammunition, and Commissions, by the help of which they might put
themselves in some capacity of rescuing their Estates and Friends they left
behind, which they looked on as much better Service than to stay and perish with
them.

4. Fourthly, the memory of the cruel usage and difficult times those met with
who staid in Ireland in 1641. did frighten and terrify all that reflected on
them; the number of those that were then massacred and starved was incredible,
and those that escaped got away with such circumstances, that the memory of
what they had suffered was as ill as death: if any will be but at the pains of
reading over Sir John Temples account of the first half Year of the War, or
rather Massacre, he will be satisfied that it was no unreasonable fear made so
many Protestants withdraw out of the reach of such barbarities; the same Men or
their Sons that committed all those bloody murders and inhumanities were again
armed in a much more formidable manner than they ever had been before; and yet
at that time they were able to maintain a War for Twelve Years, and live by
spoil and robbery; and then what were the Children of those, whose Parents had
been murdered by them, to expect but the same fate, or at best a miserable
Life in a desolate and spoild Country, in which no wise Man would* choose to
live if he could help it; indeed they could not expect to live long after all
was taken from them, but must in a little time have unavoidably starved: a
Tradesman might expect to live by his Industry, a Gentleman on his Credit in a
peaceable Country, or in War, by listing themselves in any Army. But in
Ireland where Men neither were suffered to use their Industry, nor batake
themselves to Arms, where they could neither enjoy the means of gaining a
livelihood in Peace or War, to what purpose should they stay, to live at the
best, in Poverty, Contempt, and Slavery.

5. As to the Clergy that left the Kingdom, it is to be considered, that most
of those in the Country were robbed and plundered, and nothing left them to
support themselves and families, before they went away: many were deserted by
their People, their Parishioners leaving them and getting to England or
Scotland before them: some Parishioners were so kind to their Ministers that
they begged and entreated them to be gone; which they were moved to do, because
they saw the spite and malice of their Enemies was more peculiarly bent against
the Clergy, and they imagined that their removing would a little allay the heat
of those spiteful Men, and that the Robbers would not so often visit the
neighborhood when the Minister was gone; which in many places had the effect
intended; for the Robbers would come a great way to rob a Gentleman or
Clergyman, and would be sure to visit the poor peoples houses in their
passages: But when these were removed the obscurity of the meaner People did
protect them from many violences. Lastly, many Clergymen were forced to remove,
because they had nothing left to live on, their Parishioners were as poor as
themselves, and utterly unable to help them; I do consess that there was no
reason to complain of the Peoples backwardness to maintain the Clergy; on the
contrary they contributed to the utmost of their power, and beyond it, and made
no distinction of Sects; many Dissenters of all sorts (except Quakers)
contributing liberally to this good end, which ought to be remembered to their
honor: but after all, in many places, a whole Parish, what with the ruin and
desolation brought on the Kingdom, and what with the removal of the Protestant
Parishioners, was not able to contribute 20 s. to maintain their Minister; and
mere necessity forced away these Ministers. Against some others the Government
had peculiar piques and exceptions; those were in manifest hazard of their
Lives and in fear every day of being seized and brought to a Trial, on some
feigned Crime: And several both of the Clergy and Laity were forced to fly on
this account for their safety. All these I look on to be justifiable reasons of
Men's withdrawing. If any went away on any other principles, who were not in
these or the like circumstances, I shall leave them to the censure of the
World; but I believe very few will be found for whom either their public or
private circumstances may not justly apologize.

6. It is not to be supposed that Men would have left their plentiful Estates
and Settlements, their well furnished Houses and comfortable ways of living, as
most of these who went away did, had they not been under the greatest fears and
pressures. Wives would not have left their Husbands, nor Parents their
Children, Men of Estates and Fortunes would not have ventured their Lives in
little Wherries and Boats to pass Seas famous for their Ship wracks, if they
could with any comfort or safety have stayed at home. I know King James took
care to have it suggested in England, that all these left Ireland not out of
any real fear or necessity, but only with a disign to make him and his
Government odious; but sure they must think the Protestants of Ireland were
very fond of a Collection in England, that can imagine so many thousand people
of all sorts and sexes should conspire together to ruin themselves, and throw
away all that they had in the World, out of malice, and only to bring an Odium
on a Party that had done them no harm.

7. Neither was it, as some suggest, a vain and pannick fear that possessed
them that went away; for that could not continue for a Year or Two; but those
that had lived under King James a Year and half, were as earnest to get away as
those that went at first; and the longer they lived under him, their fear and
apprehensions increased the more on them; being already ruined in their
Fortunes, and their Lives in daily and apparent hazard, from military and
illegal proceedings. They lived amongst a People that daily robbed, plundered,
and affronted them, that assaulted their Persons and threatened their Lives, and
wanted only the word to cut their Throats; and sure 'twas then time to withdraw
from the danger at any rate; and I am confident I speak the sense of the
generality of those that stayed, that if the Seas had been left open some few
Months before his Majesty appeared in the Field in Ireland, far the greatest
part (I may venture to say almost all) of those that had stayed till then,
would have gone away with their Lives only, rather than have continued here
longer. Whoever knows the cruelty and malice of those with whom we had to deal,
will own these fears to be reasonable. Yet for this we were condemned to death
and forfeiture; and the very Children barred of their rights, against the known
Laws and Customs of the Kingdom.

SECT. II. A justification of those Protestants who staid in Ireland, and lived
in submission to King James's Government.
1. NOt withstanding the great number of Protestants that fled to England, yet
many stayed behind; perhaps some may accuse their Prudence in venturing to stay
under such circumstances, but otherwise I think little can be objected against
them; however lest any should entertain any sinister thoughts of them, 'twill
be necessary to say something in their behalf. They were of Four sorts. 1. the
meaner People. 2. Gentry of Estates. 3. Such as had employments, and 4. the
Clergy.

2. First, as to the meaner People, it is to be considered that it was no easy
thing to get away; the freight of Ships and Lycences were at very high rates;
and sometimes not to be purchased at all. Many of the Country People could not
get to the Sea Ports; they had little Money; their riches were in their Stocks;
and these being plundered, they were not able to raise so much money as would
transport them and their Families; and they generally came too late to the
Ports. A strict Embargo being laid on all Ships before they could get to the
Sea side; many of the Citizens of Dublin and other Sea Ports got off, but were
forced to leave their Shops and Concerns behind in the hands of their Relations
and Dependents, who were obliged to stay to take care of them. Others thought
it unreasonable to leave all they had to go to beg in a strange Country; and
having no body to trust with their Concerns, resolved to hazard themselves
together with them. If these things be considered, 'twill rather seem a wonder
that so many got off, than that some staid behind.

3. Secondly, as to the Gentlemen; though some of them had plentiful estates
and fortunes, yet they had but little ready money; it is not thought prudent in
Ireland, where money is at 10 per Cent. for any one to keep much Cash by him;
and perhaps he that has 1000 l. per annum clear, has often not 100 l. in
Cash. Now some Gentlemen that had considerable families and little money,
thought it unreasonable for them to leave their plentiful Estates and go into
England to beg or starve; and the very thoughts of either was more terrible to
them than death: And therefore they chose rather to venture all with their
Estates. Others were tied by such particular obligations, that it was
impossible for them to stir without the greatest damage to their Concerns, and
inhumanity to their Relations.

4. Others thought it necessary to stay merely for a Trial, that they might not
be said to have thrown themselves out of all, before they were forced; and that
they might see how far King James would proceed in his design of ruining
Protestants and settling Popery.

5. Others had either Relations by Kindred or some private interest or
obligation on some leading Papists; and fancied by their staying they might be
able to save something for themselves and Tenants; others tho they had no such
interest or particular obligations, yet their Families and influence in their
Countries, had made them respected, even by their Enemies; and they hoped by
their prudence and management to obtain better quarters for their poor People
that depended on them; whom they could not find in their hearts to leave
destitute of all shelter and conduct, and it must be acknowledged that though
these could not do as much good as they might reasonably have expected, yet
they did a great deal; and it must be owned as a singular providence of God
that some such Gentlemen staid; for they used all their authority, interest,
and credit to serve the poor, and notwithstanding the malice and power of their
enemies they did them many good offices: They directed them what to do and how
to behave themselves in their applications for relief, when oppressed; they
managed and solicited their Petitions; they took all opportunities to
remonstrate to King James the grievances and oppressions of the poor people;
they took the most favorable instances, and managed them in the best manner,
to make him sensible; they took advantage of the little feuds that were between
the Courtiers, and made their Piques useful to procure redress to such
Protestants as had been signally injured by the opposite Party; and sometimes
by address, and other times by mere importunities and bold representations of
the barbarousness and inhumanity of the Proceedings against Protestants, they
shamed the Government into a better Temper; sometimes procuring some
moderation; sometimes redress of exorbitant Grievances; and at other times did
prevent most signal Mischief designed against us, at least by gaining time,
which was a great convenience to us.

6. These Gentlemen that staid were useful, not only by employing their Credit,
their Friends and Interest with the Government, but they farther did contribute
to the preserving and supporting of a great many poor and imprisoned People,
that otherwise would have starved: near Five hundred Prisoners were supported
by the Charity of Dublin, and every thing put into such a method, that amongst
the numerous poor ruined Protestants, not one was lost or starved for want of
Meat or Clothes, that we could hear of; which we must look on as an
extraordinary Providence, and renders all those inexcusable who changed their
Religion, on pretense that otherwise they must have starved; an excuse they did
not offer then, and which being false, ought not to be pretended, much less
allowed now.

7. We found our selves in many straits how to behave our selves under some
difficulties that fell on us about Fees for Imprisonment, concealing of Arms or
Absentees Goods, and matters of Oaths, either to the Government or on private
Occasions; the Gentlemen and Persons of Credit that staid, advised the poor
People in all these Cases, and kept them in such a steady, unanimous and
regular Course, that no advantage could be taken against them, and yet they
avoided all swearing or betraying themselves or Friends; and whereas there are
several Dissenters in Dublin, the Matter was carried with so much Prudence,
that we lived in perfect Amity, Peace and Charity together, and all contributed
and assisted one another toward their common safety. Dr. Dopping, Bishop of
Mead, and several other Persons of note, signalized themselves upon these
occasions, and behaved themselves with so much Prudence, Industry, Resolution
and Tenderness to the Afflicted, that they always will be looked on by those who
staid in Dublin, as peculiar Instruments of their preservation.

8. Thirdly, As to those Protestants who had Employments, and staid on account
of them, it was considered and debated by the most Prudent and Judicious
Protestants of Dublin, whether they should continue to act in them; and they
universally judged it advisable, that every Protestant who could either get or
keep any Civil Employment by fair and honest Means, should do it; most of the
Civil Offices were held by Patent, and either the Patentees or their Deputies
were on the Place, and executed them: Now for these to have gone away, was to
have given them up voluntarily into the Hands of Papists, and to entitle King
James to the disposal of them, without any imputation of Injustice: We
therefore thought all such as had any Employment or Civil Office, obliged to
stay in their Employments, till removed by force; and when they were removed by
Act of Parliament, that voided their Offices, and new Officers were appointed,
it was still judged convenient that the former Deputies should act in them; and
if the new Patentees should refuse to employ them as Deputies, they should
nevertheless endeavor to stay in them as Clerks. 1. Because we were in hopes
of recovering them in a short time, by the assistance of Their present
Majesty's, and in the mean time we knew not what havoc and spoil might be made
of Records and Books by Popish Deputies, whereas if the Protestants kept in the
Offices they might preserve them, or at least be Witnesses of the injury that
should be done them; and this Contrivance had the effect designed; the Papists
were so much strangers to the Offices, that they were forced to depend on
Protestant Clerks or Deputies, and these kept their Masters in all the
ignorance they could; and either put out of the way, or would not find such
Records or Papers, that they supposed were designed to be destroyed; insomuch
that very little injury was done to the Offices; the very Outlawryes of the
Rebels and Murderers in 1641. being preserved, though ordered by their
pretended Parliament to be destroyed, and 500 l. Fine imposed on any Officer
that should conceal any of them.

9. Secondly, It was not safe for any Officer, that was not forcibly turned
out, to refuse to act; if he had either voluntarily resigned his Place, or
refused to officiate in it, he must have expected to be treated with more
severe usage than other People, as one peculiarly disaffected. Some therefore
were forced to keep even in the Army in their own defense; but these were so
few, that there need not much be said for them: I do not remember above three
that had Commissions in the Army, who were desirous to leave it; and those were
kept in only for a pretense of Impartiality; and for such as acted as Justices
of Peace, they were often serviceable to Protestants, in freeing them from
Oppressions and Injuries. Those few Protestants that took Commissions of Oyer
and Terminer, did it on a Public Account, and always acted for the Benefit of
Protestants.

3. Protestants by keeping in Employments, though never so insignificant, found
means and opportunities of serving their distressed and oppressed Friends; and
they seldom failed to improve these means to the best advantage: the poor
People that stayed in Ireland were sensible of this, and often wished that more
had stayed, on this account; and truly if they had, by the advantage of their
Address and Understanding above the Papists, who generally were ignorant of
business, they might probably have done much good, and have gained farther time
for the poor People from their destruction.

10. However I do not intend to justify all that was done by Protestant
Officers; if any of them advanced, abetted, or concurred in an ill thing, let
them suffer for it; but I humbly conceive the Protestants of Ireland that staid
here, and saw and observed every Man's behavior, and were the only sufferers
by the ill management of any Officer, whatever his Station was, may be safely
trusted to give a Character of each; I own that it is not reasonable that a
Certificate under a few hands should be accepted, as a Vindication of any Man;
for an Officer might have served and obliged a few, who cannot in gratitude
refuse to certify for him, and yet have done mischief enough to others; but on
the other hand, is it reasonable, that secret whispers or surmises, especially
of such as were absent and strangers to their behavior, should undo or
misrepresent any Man? and therefore I think, if any dispute should arise
concerning such Matters, a fair and legal hearing in public were the most
equal way, and is all the favor that generally any Protestant Gentleman, who
staid and officiated under King James, needs desire: They are so few, that this
would not be any great trouble, and their Honesty and Prudence generally so
notorious, that it would not be any blemish to them; nor were they guilty of
any servile or mean Compliances, or paid any other deference than what was due
to a Government, under whose Power God's Providence had placed them, and which
by unseasonable opposition, they would only have exasperated to their own
destruction.

11. Fourthly, As to the Clergy that staid, it were an injustice to them to
make any Apology for them, they staid in pure sense and conscience of their
Duty, and minded it so effectually, that their Labors were acceptable and
useful to their People in many respects, and I doubt not but will be approved
by all good Men; they foresaw what use Papists would make of empty Churches and
deserted Congregations, and that the Priests would not be wanting to persuade
the People, that they were no true. Pastors that deserted them in time of
danger; they were acquainted with the Artifices used to draw Protestants from
their Religion, and that the present juncture would afford new Temptations,
which the Seducers would not fail to press with all possible advantage: it
required therefore all their Skill and Industry, to arm their People against
these Instruments of Seduction, and keep them steady to their Principles under
such mighty Temptations; and we owe it to the Prudence, Industry and Courage of
the Clergy that remained, next to God's goodness, that so few were prevailed
with to change their Religion, notwithstanding that they saw they must be
ruined if they stood firm; whereas if they complied, they would not be only
safe, but sharers likewise in the Booty: It Is true many of them suffered by
their staying, and lay under great difficulties, but it pleased God to support
and deliver them; and if they had perished, it had been with this comfort, that
it was in their Office, and in their Masters Work.

The Conclusion.
1. AND here I do solemnly protest, that no private disatisfaction, that no ill
will to King James's Person, nor prejudice against any Body, has moved me to
say what I have said; but that I might vindicate our selves by speaking truth
in a matter that so nearly concerned us both in our Temporal and Eternal
Interest. And I must likewise protest before God, who will judge between us and
our Enemies in this Point, that I have not aggravated the Calamities we have
suffered, nor misrepresented the Proceedings against us, out of favor or
affection to a Party, but have rather told things nakedly and in general, than
insisted on such Particulars as might seem to serve no other purpose, but to
make our Adversaries odious.

2. It were much to be wished, and in due time it is hoped, that Commissions
may be issued by the proper Authority, into the several Counties, to enquire of
the treatment the Protestants underwent, and the damages they suffered; and I
am well assured, that if this be done, and an Account be taken on Oath from the
Eye Witnesses and Sufferers, the matter will appear with a much worse Face than
it is here represented; and where one Story may happen undesignedly to be
aggravated, twenty worse will be to be added to supply it: There is not a more
necessary or effectual Means can be taken, for clearing the Protestants in this
Kingdom, or justifying the State in their proceeding against the Irish; and we
are ready and willing to stand or fall in the Censure of the World by this
Plea, according as on proof of Particulars by sufficient Evidence the Truth
shall appear.

3. Upon the whole, the Irish may justly blame themselves and their Idol, the
Earl of Tirconnel, as King James may them both; for whatever they have, or
shall suffer in the issue of this Matter, since it is apparent that the
necessity was brought about by them, that either they or we must be ruined.
King James (if the Earl of Tirconnel may be believed) changed his Religion on
His Solicitations, (for he often bragged that he was the King's Converter.) He
preferred the gratifying this Favorites Ambition, to the affections of his
Protestant Subjects in England and Ireland. He left England and came into
Ireland on his invitation; and he brought ruin and desolation on the Kingdom,
especially on his Protestant Subjects, in prosecution of the measures laid down
by him; yet so far was he in love with this Minister, that he frequently, both
in his Proclamations and Acts of Parliament, ascribes the saving of Ireland to
him; and assigned him above the value of 20m. Pounds per Annum, to support his
new Title of Duke, out of the forfeited Estates of Protestants, most of them
Condemned unheard, on public Fame only. This Person therefore was the true
Enemy of King James; he drove his Master out of his Kingdoms, he destroyed him
by his pernicious Councils, and the Kingdom of Ireland by his exorbitant and
illegal Management; and therefore he and such other wicked Counselors and
Ministers, are only answerable for all the Mischiefs that have sollow'd; and it
is much more reasonable the destruction should fall on them who were the
Authors, than on the Protestants against whom they designed it.

APPENDIX.
AN ACT For the Attainder of diverse Rebels*, and for preserving the Interest of
Loyal Subjects.
HUMBLY beseech your Majesty, the Commons in this present Parliament assembled,
That whereas a most horrid Invasion was made by your unnatural Enemy the Prince
of Orange, invited thereunto, and assisted by many of your Majesty's rebellious
and traiterous Subjects of your Majesty's Dominions; and such their inviting
and assisting, made manifest by their perfidious deserting your Majesty's
Service, in which, by your many Princely Obligations, besides their natural
Duties, they were bounden; and having likewise to obtain their wicked ends,
raised and levied open Rebellion and War in several places in this Kingdom, and
entered into Associations, and met in Conventions in order to call in and set
up the said Prince of Orange, as well in Ulster and Connaught, as in the other
Provinces of Munster and Lienster: To quell which, your Sacred Majesty's late
Deputy in this Kingdom, Richard, then Earl, and now Duke of Tyrconnel, before
your Majesty's happy Arrival in this Kingdom; and your Sacred Majesty since
your Arrival here, have been necessitated to raise an Army to your Majesty's
great Charge and Expense. And though the said Rebels and Traitors, after their
having the impudence to declare for the Prince and Princess of Orange against
your Sacred Majesty, were with all mildness and humanity called in to their
Allegiance, by Proclamations, and Promises of Pardon for their past Offenses,
and Protection for the future: And though some of the said Proclamations
assured Pardon to all such as should submit themselves; and that no Persons
were excepted in the last Proclamation besides very few, not exceeding* Ten in
number, and few or none of any note came in, in obedience thereto; and that
very many of the Persons who came in upon Protections, and took the Oath of
Allegiance to your Majesty, were afterward found amongst the Rebels in open
Arms and Hostility, when taken Prisoners or killed, such Protections being
found with them. (So villainous were they by adding Perjury to their former
Crimes, That it may be Enacted, and be it Enacted by your most Excellent
Majesty, by, and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, and by Authority of
the same, that the Persons hereafter named, being Persons who have notoriously
joined in the said Rebellion and Invasion, and some of which are upon
Indictments condemned, some executed for High Treason, and the rest ran away,
or abscond, or are now in the actual Service of the Prince of Orange against
your Majesty, and others killed in open Rebellion ( viz.) Francis Marsh Lord
Archbishop of Dublin, James Butler Duke of Ormond, Richard Boil Earl of Cork,
Carry Dillon Earl of Roscomon, William Earl of Strafford, Edward Brabazon Earl
of Mead, John Earl of Mulgrave, Vaughan Earl of Carberry, William O Bryan Earl
of Inchiquin, Charles Coote Earl of Mountrath, Henry Moor Earl of Drogheda,
Charles Talbot Earl of Waterford and Wexford, Hugh Montgomery Earl of
Mountalexander, Richard Earl of Ranelagh

Sidney Earl of Leicester Villers Viscount Grandison, James Annesly Viscount
Valentia, and Earl of Anglesey, George Viscount Castleton, S^udamore Viscount
S^udamore of Sligoe, Lu^bly Viscount Lu^bly of Waterford, Wenman Viscount
Wenman of Tuam Buckley Viscount Buckley of Cashel, Francis Boil Viscount
Shannon, John Skevington Viscount M^ssareene Cholmundy Viscount Cholmundy of
Kells, Richard Boil Viscount Dungarv^n, alias Lord Clifford, Maurice Berkeley
Viscount Fitz-Harding of ^eerehaven, William Caulfield Viscount Charlemont,
Morrough Boil Viscount Blessington, James Lane Viscount Lanesborough, Da^ney
Viscount Down, William Stewart Viscount Mount*joy, Adam Loftus Lord Lisburn,
Ezekiel Hopkins Lord Bishop of Derry, William Sheridan Lord Bishop of Killmore,
William Digby Lord Digby of Geashell, Henry Lord Blany of Monoghan, Henry Lord
Herbert of Castle-Island Sherrard Lord Sherrard of Leytrim Lord W^rton, Robert
King Lord Baron of Kingston, Richard Coote Lord Baron of Coloony, Charles Petty
Lord Shelburne, Henry O Bryan commonly called Lord Ibrickan, Robert Dillon
commonly called Lord Kilkenny-West, William O Bryan commonly called Lord O
Bryan, Son to the Earl of Inchiquin, Robert Lord Lucas, Sir Arthur Royden of
Moyra Baronet, Sir Arthur Cole of Newland Baronet, Sir Robert Reading of
Brareil Baronet, Sir William Temple Baronet, late Master of the Rolls, Sir
Francis Blundell of Edenderry Baronet, Sir Laurence Parsons of Bir Baronet, Sir
Richard Reynells of Dublin Baronet, Sir Christopher Wandesford of Castle*
Comber Baronet, Sir Thomas Southwell of Castlematres Baronet, Sir Simon Eaton
of Dunmoylen Baronet, Sir Emanuel Moore of Ross Baronet, Sir Robert Southwell
of Kinsale Baronet, Sir John Osborne of

Baronet, Sir Robert Staples of Lissane Baronet, Sir James Caldwell of Bellick
Baronet, Sir John Humes, of Castle-Humes Baronet, Sir Francis Hamilton of
Castle-Hamilton Baronet, Sir Arthur Longford of Summer-Hill Baronet, Sir
William Francklin of Belfast Baronet, Sir Oliver St. George of Headford
Baronet, Sir Robert King of Rockingham Baronet, Sir William G^re of
Mann^r-Hamilton Baronet, Sir William Courtney of New Castle Baronet, Sir
William Tichburn of Bewly Baronet, Sir Samuel Barnadiston Baronet, Sir Robert
Cottrill of New-town Knight, Sir Joshua Allen of Dublin Knight, Sir Matthew
Bridges of the same Knight, Sir Phillips Coote of Killester Knight, Sir John
Temple of Palmerstown Knight, Sir Charles Meredith of Green-Hills Knight, Sir
Richard Ryves of Dublin Knight, Sir Richard Stevens late of Dublin Knight, Sir
John Edgeworth of Lissane Knight, Sir Robert Clayton Knight, Sir Richard
Buckley of Dunlavan Baronet, Sir Henry Fane of Loghgurr Knight, Sir Robert
Holmes of Ardagh Knight, Sir Richard Hull of Leamcon Knight, Sir Matthew Dean
of Cork Knight, Sir Henry Ingoldesby of Dangen Knight, Sir John Topham Knight,
Sir Francis Brewster of Brewsterfield Knight, Sir Albert Cunningham of
Mount-Charles Knight, Sir Tristrum Beresford of Ballykelly Baronet, Sir John
Magill of Gill-Hall Knight, Sir Nicholas Atcheson of Mullaghbrack Knight, Sir
George St. George of Dummore Knight, Thomas Coote of the City of Dublin Esquire
Richard Foster Esquire William Worth Esquire lately one of the Barons of the Exchequer,
John Eaton Esquire Counselor at Law, Lieutenant Joseph Stopford, Ensign Thomas
Stanly, Captain Oliver Long, Captain Thomas Flower, Lieutenant Buckridge,
Lieutenant Robert Pointz, Lieutenant John Povey, John Guest Gent. Henry Briscoe
Gent. Samuel Morison Gent. Ensign George Withers, William Connelly Gent. Robert
Lowry Gent. Hugh Hamilton Gent. Samuel Walton Merchant, James Barloe Tailor,
Richard Mills Bricklayer. Matthew French Sen. Merchant, Josias Patterson
Chyrurgeon, Lieutenant Edward Wolf, William Knox Gent. Captain David Parry,
John Desboroe Wire-Drawer, William Knox Gent. Brother to Sir John Knox, William
Crow Esquire John Warburton Esquire Robert Doyne Esquire William Keating Gent. John Lyndon
Senior Esquire Lieutenant William Berry, Phillip Savage Esquire William Moore Esquire Denny
Mushchamp Esquire Luke King Gent. late Deputy Muster-master: All late of the City
and County of the City of Dublin. Robert Ware of Dublin Esquire Robert Mouldsworth
of Breckingstown Esquire Joseph Wilkinson of Palmerstown Clerk, John Weave Junior
of Gl^ssnervan Gent. John Finglass of Barnenagiragh Gent. Francis Marsh of St.
Patrick's Close Gent. Jeremy Marsh of the same Gent: All in the County of
Dublin. Henry Warren of Grangebegg in the County of Kildare Gent. George Mervin
of Toberegane Gent. John Sankey of Reban Gent. Wentworth Harman of Castleroe
Gent. Dean Theophilus Harrison of Osberstowne, John Margettson of Bishops-Court
Esquire Edward Bailey of Corbally Gent. and William Franshaw of Lucan Esquire All in the
County of Kildare. John Dunbarr of Catherlogh in the County of Catherlogh Gent.
and Captain Chidley Coote of Shierwood-Park in the said County, Francis Flood
of Kill-Clonfert in the Kings County Gent. John Baldwin Junior of Currughlouty
Esquire Samuel Moss of Eglish Gent. William Adare of Littur Gent. Jonathan Darby of
Leap Gent. John Gray of Castletown Gent. George Lowther of Killogally Clerk,
Captain Newcomen Atkinson of Lieutenant James Hamilton of Bark, Andrew Hamilton
of the same Gent. Phillip Armstrong of Stonestown Gent. Charles Armstrong of
the same Gent. Edmond Armstrong of the same Clerk, John Armstrong of Endrim
Gent. William Parsons Esquire Son to Sir Laurence Parsons, Lieut. William Parsons
Brother to Sir Laurence Parsons, Will. Parsons of Ballintemple Gent. Evan Lloyd
of Tumagh Gent. and Richard Warburton of Garrinch Esquire All late of the Kings
County. Colonel John Fitz Patrick of Castletown in the Queen's County, Samuel
Matthews of Ballykeally Esquire Thomas Piggot of Bannagherry Gent. Thomas Owens of
Rathmoyle Esquire William Beard of Colt Gent. Captain Tobias Caulfield, Thomas
Piggott of Grangebegg Esquire Hapton Harris of Mountmellick Gent. Colonel Thomas
Coote, John Deacon of Dromeene Gent. Henry Wect of Corballis Gent. Thomas
Kitchen Junior of Slaty Gent. Isaic Haslam of Marryborrow Gent. St. Ledger
Gilbert of the same Gent. Adam Kidder of Aghbo Gent. John Baly of Corbally
Gent. and Thomas Starkey of Mountrath: All late of the Queen's County. *Captain
Robert Choppin of Newcastle in the County of Longford, Anthony Sheppard of the
same Gent. Captain Francis Edgeworth of Cranelogh, Ambrose Edgeworth of Lissard
Gent. Arthur Bush of Longford Esquire John Wallis of the same Esquire John Dean of the
same Gent. Samuel Forth of the same Gent. Archibald Hamilton of the same Gent.
Robert Hamilton of the same Gent. John Green of the same Gent. Robert Dunbarr
of the same Gent. Robert Smith of Aghatuappagh Gent. Thomas West of Cranalagh
Gent. John Lesly of Tully Gent. George Trimble, Walter Trimble, John Trimble
Gentlemen, Quartermaster John Aghumly of Newton Carson Clerk. John Stern Gent.
Hugh Morgan of Newcastle Esquire Captain Henry Crofton of Moyhill, and Catharin
Vice-Countess-Dowager of Ranelagh: All late of the County of Longford. Thomas
Blyth of Rathmore in the County of Mead Esquire Samuel Bull of Greenanstowne Esquire
James Tandy of Druestowne Gent. John Owens of Ballynedru^ney Gent. Joseph Deane
Junior of Kingstowne Esquire Stafford Lightburne of Newhagga^d Gent. Charles
Meredith of Newtowne Esquire Arthur Meredith of Dollardstowne Esquire John Ford of
Ardsallagh Esquire William Williams of Knockglass Gent. John Woods Junior of
Garclony Gent. Joseph Woodward of Drumbarragh Gent. Simon Roe of Warringstowne
Gent. and Ezekiel Webb of Dunsaghlin Clerk, Robert Thornhill Junior of Little
Blackhall Gent. Captain Matthew Aylmer of Balrath, Captain George Aylmer of the
same, James Napper, alias Tandy Napper of Drinstowne Esquire John Osborne of
Stackallen Esquire Joseph Stophard Esquire and Robert Thornhill Senior of Little
Blackhall Gent. All late of the County of Mead. Robert Smith Vicar of
Ballyloghloe in the County of West*Meath, Benjamin Fletcher of Lowbaskin Gent.
Richard Meares of Carpenters-town Gent. William Cambel of Tubber-Cormuck Gent,
George Jones of Rathconrath Gent. Lewis Barloe of Balnaferagh Gent. John
Tipping of Dromore, Robert Rochford Esquire Alexander Murry of Ballynafide Gent.
John Forbes of Boardstowne Clerk, Captain Thomas Whittney of Derrydowne, Dillon
Pollard of Castle-Pollard Gent. Francis Leigh Son to Sir James Leigh, Captain
John Phillips of Killpatrick, Robert Pa^kenham of Bracklin Esquire Hugh Bowen of
Ledwitstowne *Gent. Lewis Meares Junior of Meares Court Gent. and Thomas
Tipping of Dromore Gent. All late of the County of West-Meath. Anthony Horsy of
Kilcrony in the County of Killkenny, Captain Richard Coote of* Tullymaine,
Captain James Hamilton of Three Castles, Captain Thomas Newburgh of
Killbreckane, Lieutenant Edward Woods of Loghnyes, George Villers of Dunamangan
Gent. Henry Johnson of Upper Claragh Gent. Joseph Fennel late of Windehouse
Gent. Captain Samuel Matthews of Bonestowne, Captain Thomas Flower of Dorrow,
John Tubman of Bunchestown Gent. Jonathan Dann of Killkenny Gent. William Jones
of Mullin-Brohy Gent. Lieutenant Hugh Deane late of Outrath, William Baxter
late of Killkenny, Lieutenant James Butler of Bramblestown, and Isaac Mukins of
Killkenny Merchant: All late of the County of Killkenny. Colonel Solomon
Richards of Wexford in the County of Wexford, Bartholomew Vicars of Wexford
Clerk, John Chichester of Prospect Esquire Samuel Barrington of Colnehorny Gent.
Barrakias Wallis of Dunganstowne Gent. John Radford Esquire eldest Son of Captain
Radford, Charles O Hara, alias Harroe of Killdoody Gent. and Henry Wallop of
Enescorthy Esquire All late of the County of Wexford. Thomas Burrows of Mounthuske
in the County of Wickloww Gent. Hugh Magill of Baltrasney Gent, and James Moore
of Glaneily Gent. in the County of Wicklow, Edward Perkinson of Atherdee in the
County of Lowth Clerk, John Banks of the same Gent. Timothy Banks of the same
Gent. John Ruxton Junior of the same Gent. Henry Allen of the same Merchant,
Matthew Ruxton of the same Gent. Charles Ruxton of the same Clerk, James
Sallary of the same Gent. Daniel Poe of Drumsgoolestowne Gent. Henry Baker of
Dumaghan Esquire John Smith of Dundalke Gent. Jerome Smith of the same Gent. Edward
Snell of the same Merchant, William Shuel of the same Merchant, Christopher
Dalton of the same Gent. Phillip Dalton of the same Merchant, Joseph Toomes of
the same Gent. Thomas Lambert of the same Gent. Henry Ponsonby of Pepperstowne,
James Brabazon of Carrstowne Gent. William Young of Atherdee Gent. William
Disney Junior of Stabannon Gent. Cornelius Devlin of Main Gent. Hugh Mitchel
of Atherdee Gent. Christopher Fortesque of Dromiskin Esquire Edward Edwards of
Phillipstowne Esquire John Win of Rahesker Gent. Simon Gooding of Breganstowne
Gent. James*Herne of S^carmore Gent. Henry Warren of Atherdee Gent. Richard
Sandome of the same Gent. Gregory Bolton of Dundalke Gent. James Greaton Junior
of the same Gent. Robert Blackwell of Atherdee Gent. Quatermaster Thomas Parkes
of the same, Ardel Coultrane of Dundalke Gent. David Glaizer of the same Gent.
Thomas Hudson of the same. Gent. Richard Dawson of the same Esquire Walter Smith of
the same Gent. William Mason of the same Gent. Sergeant Booth of Carlingford:
All late of the County of Lowth. Thomas Greenoge of the Town of Drogheda Gent.
John Heeny of the same Innkeeper, Nehemiah Elwood of the same* Lieutenant John
Newton of the same: All of the Town of Dragheda. Bartholomew Gibbons of
Covinger Gent. Stephen Palms of Corgraige Gent. Jonathan Bowls of Newcastle
Gent. William Ralph of the same Gent. John Chinnery of Craggan Gent. Richard
Chinnery of the same Gent. Nicholas Chinnery of the same Gent, Thomas Ponsonby
of Bally-Cullenbegg Gent. John Ponsonby of Fanstowne Gent. Thomas Creed of
Garrynaderkey Gent. Oliver Walsh of Ballymullane Gent. James Howard of Limerick
Gent. William Southwell of Castlematres Gent. Thomas Moore of the same Gent.
George Bryan of Shanagolden, John Flinn of Castlematres, Ralph Emerson of the
same, Robert Moore of Limerick, John Swayne of Cloghomswhey, John VVhitacre of
Lisseenesheely, Robert Pheaby of Rathkeale, Robert Pope of the same, Robert
Robinson of the same, John Treth of the same, John Crow of the same, John Green
of Cloghnarral, William Clarke of the same, James Huggin of the same, William
Walker of the same, Michael Daly of Clasbane, Henry Berry of Limerick Yeoman,
Richard Cooper Son to Cooper of Knocklong, William Palms of Corgraige Gent.
Francis Courtney Esquire James Courtney Esquire and Richard Courtney Esquire Sons to Sir
William Courtney, John Ormsby, and Arthur Ormsby Sons to Captain Arthur
Ormsby, Chidley Coote, Fitz Charles of Ballyshane Esquire John Dowdall, of Cappagh
Gent. Henry Palms of Corgraige Gent. Henry Holmes of Killmallock Gent. John
Southwell of Castlematres Gent. William Jephson Prebend of Donaghmore, Captain
Chichester Phillips, Richard Ingoldesby of Ballybrickeene Esquire Charles Odle of
Castlemackeniry Gent. Miles Jackson of Ballyvulloge Gent. Nicholas Monuckton of
Ballynefranky Gent. Samuel Cox of Ballyne Gent. Charles Oliver of Cloghanotuhey
Esquire Richard Coote of Esquire George Crofts Junior of Cloghill Gent. Samuel Foxon
Junior of Limerick Esquire Thomas Trenchard of Corgraige* Esquire Henry Trenchard of
the same Esquire and Hugh Massey Junior of Dooutreyleig Gent. All late of the
County of Limerick. Henry Tent of Ballycrenane in the County of Cork Esquire Thomas
Aderly of Inishonane Esquire Edward Boil of Shannon Park Esquire Randall Roberts of
Mountlong Gent. Charles Fenwick of Glancreeni Gent. Cuthbert Wilkinson of
Killpatrick Gent. Francis Strange of Shangraige Gent. John Hodder of Ballyea
Gent. Edward Phillips of the same Gent. Richard Cox of Clognakilly Esquire Richard
Pyne of Water Park Esquire Allen Broderick Esquire Robert White of Brynee Gent. Captain
Henry Boil of Ballymartir, Arthur St. Ledger of Donerayle Esquire James Low of
Court Gent. Henry Low of the same Gent. John Courthrop of Little Island Esquire
John Walton of Kinure Gent. Henry Daly of Ballydahin Gent. Captain Boil
Aldworth of Newmarket, Lawrence Clayton of Moyallow Esquire Willam Hodder of
Ballyea Gent. Samuel Hodder of the same Gent. Richard Covett of Ballygarran
Gent. Anthony Butler of Barnahulla Gent. Joshua Mitchell of Cork Merchant,
John Watkins Senior of Ballymee Gent. Arthur Dillon of Qr town Esquire William
Jephson of Mallow Esquire Thomas Purdon of Ballyclogh Esquire Bartholomew Purdon of the
same Esquire Adam Purdon of Moyallolodge Esquire Richard Coudran of Westtown Gent.
Thomas Badham of Ballymakie Gent. Francis Roberts of Britfield'stown Esquire Thomas
Knowles of Killehey Gent. John Roberts of Britfield'stown Gent. Barry Love of
Rynerone Clerk, William Dyer Senior of Robertstown Gent. William Dyer Junior of
Labacon Gent. Sweeteing Walton of Kinure Gent. Anosepherus Houghton of
Ballyngarry Gent. Robert Littler of Ballindesigg Gent. Gabriel Low of
Gortagrenane Gent. Samuel Whistler of Island Funchin Gent. John Napper Gent.
Edward Riggs of Island Funchin Gent. Bryan Townesend of Castletown Gent.
Francis Townesend of the same Gent. Kingston Townesend of the same Gent. Robert
Cookin of Killcoleman Gent. Thomas Ware of Newcestown Gentleman, William Ware
of the same Gentleman, Henry Jones of Bandon Gentleman, John Sullevan of the
same Gentleman, Ralph Charters of the same Gentleman, Alexander Barrington of
Castletown Gentleman, Vincent Barrington of the same Gentleman, Ralph Clear of
the same Gentleman, Arnold Gookin of Killnutane Gentleman, Doctor John Harding
of Garranachoonig, Thomas Dennis of Bandon Gentleman, Phillip White of Brenny
Gentleman, Lieutenant Robert Blackney of Castlemartre, Thomas Coackly of the
same Clerk, Rowland Davys of Burdinstown Dean of Ross, James Spencer of
Castlemarter Clerk, John Jephson of Moyallow Esquire Richard Farmer of Ardragh
Gentleman, Edmond Bately Gentleman, Edmond Bishop of Ladies-bridge Gentleman,
William Reason Senior of the same Gentleman, William Reason Junior of the same
Gentleman, John Reason of the same Gentleman, John Field Gentleman, Richard
Field Gentleman, Richard Bettisford of Middleton Gentleman, Richard Crook of
Inchyrahilly Gentleman, Francis Bernard Junior of Castlemahon Esquire Francis
Harvey of Cork Gentleman, Arthur Bernard of Castlemahon Gentleman, Herbert
Baldwin Junior of Cloghinah Gentleman, Hayes Cross of Ballygillane Gentleman,
Henry Rice of Kinsale George Herick of Polenelong Gentleman, Robert Faulkes
Junior of Curraghueheusy Gentleman* Thomas Lane of Ballynfeunator* Gentleman,
John Borne of Cloucallagh Gentleman, Thomas Adderly of Castletown Gentleman,
Sampson Twogood of Bandon Esquire John Evans of Ballyphillips Esquire Piercy Freak of
Rathbarry Esquire Thomas Broderick of Ballyannon Esquire Richard Newman Junior of
Ballymagnolly. Esquire Anthony Raymond of Mitchellstown Esquire George Widenham of
Castletown Gentleman, Thomas Cook of Cork Merchant: All late of the County of
Cork. Charles Boil Esquire Son to the Lord Dungarvan alias Clifford in the County
of Waterford, Colonel Edward Fitzgerald alias Villers of Drumana, Captain
Stepen Stanly of Curtiswood, Cornelius Bolton of Fatleck, Son to Captain
Bolton; Richard Francklin of Temple Mitchell Gentleman, John Spencer of
Youghall Gentleman, John Napper of the same Gentleman, John Stanly of
Curtiswood Gentleman, Captain Francis Foulkes, and Samuel Maynard, Son and Heir
apparent of Sir Boil Maynard: All late of the County of Waterford. Henry
Hickman of Dunagurroge in the County of Clare Gentleman, Thomas Hawkins of
Killallow Gentleman, Connor O Bryen of* Drumore Gentleman, James Hamilton Esquire
Son to William Hamilton, and Francis Burton of Buncraggii Esquire All late of the
County of Clare. Robert Blenerhassett of Killorglain alias Castle-Conway
Gentleman, John Blenerhassett and Robert Blenerhasset, Sons to the said Robert;
John Blenerhasset of Ballysidy Gentleman, Samuel Morris Junior of Ballybeggan
Gentleman, Jasper Morris of Ballyengowne Gentleman, William Gun of Rathoe Esquire
Richard Gun Son and Heir to the said William, Richard Orpin of Gortkinlinny
Gentleman, Robert* Tophin of Gortaglass Gentleman, Josaph Tailor of Killowen
Gentleman, John Ponsonby of Stackstown Gentleman, Thomas Ponsonby of the same
Gentleman, Thomas Collis of Tanlagh Gentleman, Thomas Palmer of Gortaglass
Clerk, Arthur Dillon of Ardtully Gentleman, Theophilus Morris of Ballybeggan
Gentleman, Samuel Raymond of Ballyloghrane Esquire William Nicholson of Tralee
Innkeeper, Barry Denny of Barro Gentleman, Pierce Crosby, Son and Heir apparent
of Patrick Crosby; William Stanton of Ratoath Gentleman, Walter Thomas of
Killeene Gentleman, and Samuel Wilson* Clerk: All late of the County of Kerry.
Captain Henry Fox of Lackymore in the County of Tipperary, Stephen Moore of
Hoare Abbey Esquire Captain Chidley Coote of Ardmayle, Andrew Co^lter of Clonmell
Gentleman, Michael Parker of Killosalla Gentleman, Edward Leg of Ballinderry
Gentleman, Theophilus Leg of the same Gentleman, Arthur Tailor of Noane
Gentleman, Robert Foulkes of Baptists Grange Gentleman, Lieutenant Bradston of
James Harrison of Clogh Jordan Esquire and George Lehunt of Ballymore Esquire All late
of the County of Cipperary. Henry Cunningham of Mount Charles Gentleman,
William Wray of Castlerea Esquire Michael Sampson of Fan^e Esquire John Hamilton of
Murragh Esquire George Vaughan of Buncranagh Esquire John Forward of Coolemackirtane
Esquire Henry Heart of Muffe Esquire Francis Carry of Redcastle Esquire George Heart of Muffe
Esquire Hugh Hamill of Lifford Esquire John Mountgomery of Croghane Esquire John Nisbitt of
Tully Idonnell Esquire James Nisbitt of the same Esquire William Groves of Castle
Shannaghan Esquire Kilmer Braizier of Rath Esquire Matthew Cockaines of Raphoe Esquire
Samuel Norman of Londonderry Esquire Major Gustavus Hamilton of Rusgoile, Andrew
Knox Junior of Carheuenacannanagh Gentleman* Matthew Babington of Castledoe
Gentleman, Ralph Mansfield of Killigordan Gentleman, James Greham Senior of
Ballarhule Gentleman, James Greham Junior of the same Gentleman, James Young of
the same, Matthew Scot of Kinvre Gentleman, William Knox of Raphoe Gentleman,
John Knox of the same Gentleman, John Wigton of the same Gentleman, Robert
Cowen of St. Johnstown Gentleman, John Cowen of the same Gentleman, John
Stewart of Dunduffe Gentleman, Stewart of Ballyleane Gentleman, Patrick
Connelly of Belashannon Gentleman, Patrick Spence of Donnegall Gentleman,
Robert Spence of the same Gentleman, Matthew Spence of the same Gentleman,
George Spence of the same Gentleman, Charles Calhoone of Letterkenny Gentleman,
William Cunningham of Ballydavys Gentleman, Alexander Nisbitt of Tully Idonnell
Gentleman, Andrew Lindsey of Castlemurry Gentleman, Charles Lessley of
Termonmagrath Clerk, Tristrum Sweetenam of Bartt* Gentleman, George Sweetnam of
the same Gentleman, William Carry of Redcastle Gentleman, George Buyers of
Loghlycarrylan Gentleman, John Orr of Letterkenny Gentleman, James Orr of the
same Gentleman, William Brice of the same Gentleman, Alexander Hogg of
Logheaske Gentleman, James Sinkler of Ramalan Gentleman, Henry Paton of the
same Gentleman, William Farrald of Baugherbegg Gentleman, Hugh Caldwell of
Donnegall Gentleman, John Crafford of the same Gentleman, Matthew Strong of
Clou^ee Gentleman, James Strong of the same Gentleman, George Everis of
Donnegall Gentleman, Andrew Hamilton of Gentleman, Thomas Folliot of
Bellashannon Gentleman, Francis Earls of the same Gentleman, Francis Jennings
of the same Gentleman, William Walker of Donnegall Gentleman, Ralph Gore of
Magharabegg Esquire Bazill Benson of Stravorlan Gentleman, James Fisher of Derry
Gentleman, John Folliot of Bellashannon Esquire Charles Hamilton of Cavan Esquire and
Captain Jervis Squire of Donaghmore: All late of the County of Donnegall and
Londonderry. Lieutenant Colonel Joseph Gordan of the County of Tyrone, Robert
Kerr of Omagh Gentleman, Thomas Kerr of the same Gentleman, John Hamilton of
Callidon Esquire Robert Huston of Castlestewart Esquire Alexander Sanderson of
Tullylagan Esquire Francis White of Ballymagrane Gentleman, William Goodlett of
Derry Gally Gentleman, William Cunningham of Cuagh Esquire John Cornwall of
Mullaghmargaret Gentleman, James Moore of Garvy Esquire Son to William Moore; James
Moore of Tully Gentleman, James Moore of Derryoretty Gentleman, Thomas * Kerr
Senior of Dunnaghmore Gentleman, John Morris of Gortnaglagh Clerk, Henry
Maxwell of Glenarb Gentleman, James Maxwell of the same Gentleman, Alexander
Woods of Kinard Gentleman, John Lowry of Aghiennis Gentleman, Robert Lowry of
the same Gentleman, John Lowry Junior of the same Gentleman, Thomas Leech* of
Belloragh Gentleman, William Leech of the same Gentleman, William Moore of
Anaghloghan Gentleman, David Kearnes of Askragh Esquire Charles Eccles of Fentonagh
Gentleman, Samuel Eccles of the same Gentleman, John Graron of Aghir Gentleman,
James Nisbitt of Killegreene Gentleman, Adam Tate of Ballygally Gentleman,
Charles Hamilton of the same Gentleman, Captain Archibald Hamilton of
Stantowny, Henry Mervyn of Omagh Esquire Audley Mervyn of Trelick Gentleman,
William Garvan of Derry Gentleman, Francis Delapp of Moylagh Gentleman; Andrew
Mac Causland of Claraghmore Gentleman, George Hamilton of May Gentleman, James
Hamilton of Downlong Esquire Robert Hamilton of Killiloony Gentleman, James
Hamilton of Ardnoblisg Merchant, William Hamilton of Ballyfattane Gentleman,
Matthew Babington of Urney Gentleman, George Walker of Dunaghmore Clerk, John
Lesley Junior of Tirkernaghane Gentleman, William Stewart of Killemoon
Gentleman, and Oliver Mac Causland of Rash Esquire: All late of the County of
Cyrone. Charles Calwell of Bellick in the County of Fermannagh Esquire Son and Heir
apparent of Sir James Caldwell, Captain Abraham Creighton of Crum, David Rynd
of Dervoland Esquire William Wisshart of Clounteffrin Esquire Gustavus Hamilton of
Moynea Esquire William Erwyn of Ballydullagh Esquire Christopher Erwyn of the same Esquire
his Son, Walter Johnston of Millick Esquire George Bochanon of Enniskilling Esquire
Francis Johnston of Derrycholaght Gentleman, William Barton of Ro^ Island
Gentleman, Robert Johnston of Aghanuce Esquire Lieutenant Colonel Hugh Montgomery
of Corrard, Robert Montgomery of Derrybroske Gentleman, James Creighton of Crum
Gentleman, James Aghineleck of Bellaghinleck Gentleman, Andrew Forster of
Drumgoone Gentleman, Hugh Rosse of Rossdagagh Gentleman, Christopher Carleton
of Bohne Gentleman, John Moffett of Letterboy Gentleman, Adam Betty of Carne
Gentleman, Rowland Betty of Ardverny Gentleman, John Betty of the same
Gentleman, John Croizier of Cavan Gentleman, Lawrence Crafford of Cavancarragh
Gentleman, Jason Hassart Senior of Mullyvesker Gentleman, Jason Hassart Junior
of Killnemaddue Gentleman, Lieutenant William Ellet of Staraghan, Robert
Catcarth of Creaghmore Gentleman, Archibald Hamilton of Drummarry Gentleman,
Gabriel Shore of Magheryboy Gentleman, Edward Morton of Mullenegough Gentleman,
Lieutenant William Smith of Greenish, Thomas Winslow of Derryvore Gentleman,
John Folliot of Fillenn Gentleman, William Green of Killeter Clerk, John
Leonard of Magwyersbridge Gent. Patrick Breadan of* Derryboy Gent. Thomas Ellet
of Galoone Gent. Doctor John Lesley of Derryvoland Parish, Allen Cathcart of
Enniskilling Gent. William Cottington of the same Gent. Thomas Dunbarr of the
same Gent. William Smith of Clounish Clerk, John Andrews of Kinobir Clerk, John
Forster of Carnemackasker Gent. Thomas Bird of ^issanaskea Gent. William
Browning of Beallanamallagh Gent. George Cashell of Dromine Gent. Robert Clarke
of Enniskilling Merchant, James Delapp Senior of the same Gent. James Delapp
Junior of the same Gent. Alexander Forker of the same Gent. Thomas Shore of the
same Gent. Matthew Webster of the same Gent. William Frith of the same Gent.
William Mac Cormock of the same Gent. John Hall of the same Gent. William Cole
of Colehill Gent. Bartholomew Drope of Carrowrasky Gent. James Johnston of
Magheryboy Gent. Richard Evett of Magherestephenagh Gent. Merick of the same
Gent. Thomas Humphery of Aughvenuhue Gent. William Humphry of Drumard Gent.
John Croizier of Crockneale Gent. Jamis Callhowne of Crevenish Gent. Charles
Bingham of the same Gent. Alexander Johnston of Mullaghsillogagh Gent. Hugh
Mountgomery of Carhue Esquire Thomas Rosgrave of Gorldonochoe Gent. Ezekiell Webb
of Enniskilling Clerk, George Humes of Cullenecrunaht Clerk, Cornet John
Maddison of Cloonygally, John Means of Stramreagh Gent. John Humphery of
Mounterfadaghane Gent. Edward Pockridge of Gortuadrige Gent. Henry Walton of
Laghnagalgreene Gent. William Walton of the same Gent. John Booreman of
Coolebegg Gent. John Abercromby of Drumcroe Gent. Robert Galbraith of
Drumadoone Gent. George Ellet of Tully Gent. Alexander Wyre of Mumaghan Gent.
Thomas Chittoge of Cash Gent. William Little of Drumenagh Gent. John Humes of
Aghrim Gent. William Little of Ardumsin Gent. James Dundas Gent. Hugh Cathcart
of Tullyshanlan Gent. Alexander Cathcart of Ennisway Gent. James Cathcart of
the same Gent. Andrew Johnston of Drumbeggan Gent. James Hamilton of
Tullycreevy Gent. John Keer of Drumsillagh Gent. Robert Johnson of Ginnivan
Gent. Thomas Hinston of Killerny Gent. Henry Robinson of Rosserolbane Gent.
James Elliot of Storchin Gent. Robert Elliot of the same Gent. Thomas Elliot of
Gallune Gent. Daniel Armstrong of Chive Gent. Robert Armstrong of the same
Gent. Captain James Corry of Castlecoole, John Creighton of Aughaloane Esquire
Charles Belfore of Lisneskea Esquire William Belfore of the same Esquire Captain Hugh
Magill, Captain Edward Davys of Knockballimore, and James Humes, Son and Heir
apparent of Sir John Humes: All late of the County of Fermanagh. William Brody
of Cavan Andrew Bell of Aghucrive Gent. John Bell of the same Gent. Ambrose
Bedell of Carudallan Gent. Robert Booth of Drumcorbane Yeoman, William
Cunningham of Killesandra Clerk, Thomas Coach of Cabragh Esquire Alexander Charter
of Aughucony Gent. Arnold Cosby of Drumury Gent. Thomas Coote of Coote-Hall Esquire
Doctor Cook of Clerk, James Coulding of Bealaheafe Clerk, David Campbell of
Bonnough Yeoman, Arthur Culme of Lissnemeane Esquire Edward Dixie Dean of Killmore,
Charles Mac Fadden Junior of Quilcagh Gent. Edward Mac Fadden of the same Gent.
William Gun of Drummury Gent. Captain Meredith Gwyllin of Belaconnell, Henry
Hamilton of Ballyborea Esquire Thomas Heny of Aghcrive Yeoman, Richard Heny of the
same Yeoman, Thomas Heart of Cumlin Gent. Daniel Hudson of the Manner of Skeogh
Gent. Michael Leeds of Clunigunily Gent. Richard Lewis of Lismore Gent. Patrick
Laughy of Aughkillmore Yeoman. John Laughy of the same Yeoman, James Moore of
Tullivin Gent. John Maxwell of Farename Gent. Robert Maxwell of the same Gent.
Thomas Newborogh of Belahayes Esquire Broghell Newborogh of the same Gent. Joseph
Robinson of Barcony Gent. Mark Robinson of the same Gent. Robert Sanderson of
Castlesanderson Esquire William Steevens of Courteusangan Gent. John Strong of
Tanlagh Yeoman, James Strong of the same Yeoman, Oliver Steevens Senior of
Gorteuesangan Gentleman, Oliver Steevens of the same Gentleman, Thomas Steevens
of the same Gentleman, Samuel Townely of Moynehall Esquire Francis White of Redhill
Esquire William Ward of Torroburt Gent. James Young of Coolebane Gent. Joseph
Tate late of Killcanan Yeoman, James Hill of Killitter Gent. John Me of
Botler's-Bridge Gent. Matthew French Senior of Belturbett Merchant, Daniel
French of the same Merchant, Thomas Netters of the same Yeoman, William
Chaplein of the same Yeoman, William Cunningham Minister of Carrickallin, Conn
Parett of Bealaheas Gent. Christopher Harmon of Belanacarrig Gentleman, Henry
VValdrom of Cavan Esquire James Anderson of Killesandra Gentleman, Thomas Mac Vice
of Coolebane Gentleman, John Ballard of Cavan Innkeeper, John Price of the
same, yeom. John Holland of the same, yeom. Robert Cregg of Anghubane, yeom.
Thomas White of Redhill, gent. George Russel of Belturbett, Inkeeper* John
Richard of the same, yeom. Abraham* Kottnan of the same, yeoman: William
Wardell of the same, yeom. Bryan Vosse of the same, yeom. William Coplin Sen.
of the same, yeoman: William Coplin Jun. of the same, yeom. Richard Keep of
the same, yeoman: Peter Eakuby of the same, yeom. Thomas Bagnall of the same,
yeom. John Termand of the same, yeom. Henry Gwyllims of Dublin, gent. Thomas
Humes of Killesandra, gent. Henry Edgeworth Esquire and Thomas Newborough Jun. of
Bow Island, gent. All late of the County of Cavan. Hugh Mountgomery of Carrow
in the County of Monoghan, Esquire Blany Owens of Monoghan-Duffe, Esquire Thomas Cole
of Ballyleck, Esquire Richard Pockridge of Aghanamallagh, Esquire William Smith of
Corhallin, Esquire John Forster of Toton, Clerk: Henry Richardson of Ballyclyan,
gent. John Wildman of Skea, gent. Thomas Wildman of the same, gent. Henry James
of Skearvan, gent. John Fisher of Cornbarran, gent. John West of the same,
gent. John Scoutes of Dromick, gent. Sergeant John Oysher of Gortmore, Roger
Smith of Knock, Francis Rosse of Anaghine, gent. John Forster of Dromreske,
gent. David Farguson of Raconnel, gent. John Mountgomery of Rafinane, gent.
James Mountgomery of the same, gent. John Ginn of Tidamit, gent.* Robert
Mountgomery of Mullaghtimore, gent. William Robinson of Cappock, gent. Sergeant
John Wright of Clunt* John Lachkin of Cugullagh, yeom. James Write of Scardoan,
gent. Abraham Dancy of Aghaboy, gent. John Mac Nab of Glaslogh, gent. Andrew
Mac Nab of the same, gent. Thomas Johnston of the same, gent. Oliver Ancktell
of Ancktell's-Grove, gent. Richard Ancktell of the same, gent. Matthew Ancktell
of the same, gent. Roger Holland of Drumbanchor, gent. James Holland of the
same, gent. Captain Richard Dawson of Killcroe: William Dawson of the same,
gent. Lancelot Dawson of the same, gent. James Wright of Anaghagh, gent. John
Slack of Tyranerii, gent. Richard Wright of Tolcham, gent. George Scott of
Bogh, gent. John Breedy of Forvas, gent. Robert Thomas of Aghaboy, gent. John
Forster of Clunvely, gent. James Moore of Bartry, Gentleman: Captain Samuel
Eccles of Cartuedarragh: George Robinson of Kilcoran, gent. George Robinson
Jun. of the same, gent. John Nelson of Mahiry, gent. John Knox of Glaslogh,
gent. Captain Joseph Johnston of Cranvale: Lieutenant Colen Johnston of the
same: James Mac-Gerhey of Roscorvan, gent. William Brown of Ballounhengty,
gent. Lieutenant Henry Owens of Monaghduffe, Edward Owens of the same, gent.
John Sparks of Corvechessa, gent. John Dawson of Kilcroe, gent. Isaac Dawson
of Dromany, gent. David Karnaghan of Ballanageeragh, gent. Joseph Walsh of
Dromrinagh, gent. Thomas Pardy of Killeneck, gent. Fulke Flinton of
Skrunageeragh, gent. Lieutenant John Graham of Glascogh: Henry Walton of
Loghmagulgreene, gent. Henry Robinson, of the same, gent. William Robinson of
the same, gent. Cornet John Maddison of Amy: Ensign Edward Maddison of the
same: James Christy of Monoghan, Clerk: William Willock of Dromhillagh, gent.
Capt. John Ryder of Ballamure: Sergeant Thomas Walsh of Lesly: James Cooper of
Drumbarragh, gent. Alexander Cooper of the same, gent. Capt. Thomas Coote of
Kilgrewy: John Cossens of Corrivelly, gent. John Cossens Jun. of the same,
gent. Walter Curry of Clan, gent. John Atkinson of Dromore, gent. Thomas Portys
of Clundenory, gent. Francis Johnston of Crosbane, gent. Dacre Barret of
Clownish, gent. Capt. William Wishard of Clantewrin, Capt. Walter Dawson of
Rash: William Smith of Clownish, Clerk: William Warren of Monaghan, Clerk: John
Knox of Glaslogh, Clerk: Thomas Fitz-Symons of Tullycorbot, Clerk: Michael
Gipson of Monaghan, Clerk: William Maxwel of Farkland, gent. John Bradshaw of
Lys^llinch, gent. Charles Corson of Clovanle, gent. Ensign Christopher Crow of
the same: George Frizel of Cumer, gent. William Johnston of Clownish: George
Gibb of the same, gent. George Hamersly of the same, gent. Capt. Francis
Forster of Castle-Caulfield: William Johnston of Tyhallon, gent. John Gilmore
of Monoghan, gent. Hugh Gilmore of the same, gent. Thomas Ellis of the same,
gent. Thomas Burgis of the same, gent. Thomas Young of the same, gent. William
Keiran of the same, gent. David Meads of the same, gent. John Sharp of the
same, gent. John Togher of Castle* shane, gent. George Knight of the same,
gent. Abraham Knight of the same, gent. John Mills of the same, gent. William
Torre^ of the same, gent. James Burdin of the same, gent. Robert Scott of the
same, gent. William Scott of the same, gent. Robert Scott of Anaghanle, gent.
Capt. Bazil Brook of Tullaghgallan, John Dobb of Carick, gent. Capt. Bernard
Ward of the same: Bryan Ward of Ballynure, gent. Capt. Arthur Bashford of the
same: Edward Clarke of the same, gent. Sergeant William Fox of the same: Andrew
Mountgomery of the same* Clerk: Sergeant John Oysler of Enniskillin: John
Webster of Monaghan, gent. James Parr of the same, gent. Richard Parr of the
same, gent. William Smith of Kilmore, gent. Thomas Clugston* of Monaghan, gent.
Thomas Holmes of the same; gent. Col. Richard Cole of Ballyleck: Lieutenant
Francis Cole of the same: Ralph Barlow of Anaghmallagh, Clerk: Capt. James
Corry of Bally Clanard: Lieutenant Edward Dixie of Ballyrush: William Robinson
of the same, gent. Joseph Thornton of Coragore, gent. George Thornton of the
same, gent. William Thornton of the same, gent. Thomas Thornton of the same,
gent. Samuel Corry of Glaan, gent. Nathaniel Corry of the same, gent. And
Isaiah Corry of the same, gent. All late of the County of Monoghan. Pophan
Conway, alias Seymor, Esquire Clothworthy Skeffington of Antrim, in the County of
Antrim, Esquire Col. Robert Adaire of Ballymenagh: Capt. Edward Harrison of
Killulagh: Capt. Archibald Edmonson of Ballygarry: Arthur Upton of
Temple-Patrick, Esquire Capt. Richard Dobb Jun. of Ballynure: Lieutenant Col
William Shaw of Gemeway: Lieutenant Col. Charles Stewart of Ballintoy: Capt.
William Stewart of Grigary: Andrew Rowan of Oldstowne, Clerk: Capt. William
Rowan of the same: Capt. William Shaw of Bash: Capt. Patrick Shaw of
Ballygally: Capt. James Shaw of Belfast: Henry Shaw of Ballyvoy, gent: Capt.
George Mac Cartney of Belfast: Capt. Hugh Mac Neale of Clare: Lieutenant Col.
Robert Hueston of Cregg: Francis Hueston of the same, gent. Capt. William Adare
of Ballymenagh: Capt. Michael Galland of Vows: Benjamin Galland of the same,
gent. Capt. John Hamilton of Cloghmits: James Hamilton of the same, gent.
William Hamilton of the same, gent. Capt. William Eaton of Dunfane: Capt. John
Biggarstaffe of Rossegifte: Capt. John Lyndon. Jun. of Carrickfergus: Capt.
John Harper of Ballymenagh: James Mac Clure of Kilmackevet, gent. Joseph
Cunningham of the same, gent. Forrist Shortrix of Antrim, gent. John Mac Cay of
Mults, gent. George Buttle of Glenarme, gent. John Donelson of the same, gent.
Patrick Agnew of Killanter; gent. William Cragg of Glenarme, gent. George
Johnston of Glins, gent. John Crumy of Ballymony, gent* James Stweart of
Ballyluske, gent. William Mac Fetrisk of Carneglass, gent. Robert Clugston of
Belfast, gent. John Mac Neale of Billy, gent..... Harvyes of Ballymuny, Clerk:
Alexander Boyde of Carranmore, gent. John Fullerton of Ballagh, gent. Capt.
Ralph Smith Junior, Capt. Hercules Davys: John Davys Esquire Son to Hercules Davys;
and Clothworthy Upton Esquire All late of the County of Antrim. John Hawkins of
Rathfryland in the County of Down, Esquire James Hamilton of Tullimore, Esquire James
Hamilton of Bangor, Esquire James Hamilton of Carricknasire, Esquire Charles Ward of
Killaugh, Esquire Bernard Ward of Castleward, Esquire George Maxwell of Killaleugh, Esquire
Son to Sir Robert Maxwell: John Mac Neale Dean of Down: Daniel Mac Neale of
Dundrum, gent. William Breete of Nappers-Town, Esquire John Hamilton of Errenagh,
Esquire Jasper Brent of Nappers-Town, Gent. Bernard Brent of the same, Gent.
Richard Turk late of Down, Gent. Hugh Brown of the same, Gent. Rowland
Brown of the same, Gent. William Palmer of Castleskrine, Gent. Marks Hodges
late of Down, Gent. George Johnston of Kilcleefe, Gent. Anthony Lock of Down,
Gent. John Haddock of Cornebane, Gent. William Redmond of Clontough, Gent.
Robert Ecclin late of Killough, Gent. John Ward of Castleward, Esquire John Smart
of Cookes-Town, Gent. John Blackwood Jun. of Bangor, Gent. Henry West of
Ballydugane, Esquire William Pringle of Laghnebaper, Gent. David White of Reliagh*
Gent. John Ringland of Kilmore, Gent. George Maxwell of Derryboy, Gent. James
Erwyne of Killeleagh, Gent. Leutenant James Butler of Rincady: Alexander
Stewart of Ringduffrant, Gent. James Pattent of Magherknock, Gent. Hugh Wallace
of Ravera, Gent. Patrick Hamilton of Gransagh, Gent. Arthur Maxwel of
Drumbridge, Gent. James Mac Gill Jun. Son to Captain James* Mac* Gill: John Mac
Gill of Munallon, Gent. Matthew Beats of Ballyvinchan, Gent. Edward Jackson of
the same, Gent. John Ealine of Erquine, Esquire William Mac Cormuck of the same,
Gent. William Mountgomery of Rosmond, Esquire Hugh Maxwel of Ballyquinline: James
Mountgomery, Son to the aforesaid William: James Bailey of Eninsorkey, Esquire Hugh
Mac Gill late of Kirstown, Esquire Archibald Mac Neale, Clerk: Hugh Mountgomery of
Ballymagowne, Esquire John Mountgomery of Carrickboy, Gent. James Rosse of
Portefore, Esquire William Hogg of Barrady, Gent. John Stenson near Bangor, Gent.
John Blackwood of Bangor, Gent. James Berkeley of Ballysallagh, Gent. John
Sanders of Newtown, Gent. David Campbel of Cumber, Esquire Hugh Mountgomery of
Ballymalady, Gent. Gowin Hamilton of Lisswine, Gent. William Hamilton his
Brother: James Moore Sen. of Ballybregagh, Gent. James Moore Jun. of
Corrukmainu, Gent. John Wallas of Ravera, Gent. Hugh Fairly of Boordmil, Gent.
Francis Annesly of Cloghmaghericat, Gent. Hugh Johnston of Reademon, Gent.
Lenmel Matthews Archdeacon of Down: Alexander Bally of Reindefferant, Gent.
Thomas Wardlow late of Mourn, Gent. William Shaw of Rafindy, Gent. Robert
Gibson of Dromeragh Parish, Gent. Alexander Stewart late of Ardmullin, Gent.
Roger Hall of Lagan, Esquire John Norris of Newcastle, Esquire John Robinson of
Tullimore, Gent. Henry Monrow of Drominskagh, Esquire James Waddel of Ishan Derry,
Gent. Hugh Waddle of the same, Gent. Alexander Waddle of the same, Gent.
William Haltridge of Dromore, Gent. Robert Swift of Lissnereward, Gent. Robert
Campbel of Laghans, Gent. William Campbel of Tollyeare, Gent. Jeremy Mussindine
of Hilsborough, Gent. Thomas Johnston late of Gilhall, Gent. Willian Manson of
Ballynaleary, Gent. Charles Casslet of Laghinlan, Gent. John Boil of
Dromnovady, Gent. Nicholas Bagnal of Newry, Esquire Nicholas Price, Esquire John Law of
Mangerlin, Gent. James Slone of Dublin, Esquire Cornet William Mountgomery of
Gransagh: Richard Warren of Clonconnel, Gent. Thomas Warring of the same; and
Robert Rosse of Rathfryland, Gent. All late of the County of Down. Downeham
Cope of Dromely, Esquire James Maxwel Jun. of Mullaghiteny, Esquire James Gillapsy of
Anaghrope, Gent. John Erwin of Tynan, Gent. William Heardman of Dartan: Francis
Hamilton of Tullybrock, Gent. Hugh Rowley of Tubbermore, Esquire Francis Obery of
Clantylne, Gent. William Richardson of Legecurry, Esquire George Blacker Jun. of
Knockbridge, Gent. Henry Hunter of Ballymeally Gent. Jonathan. Powel of
Ballybroly, Gent. Daniel Maddin of Toneregge, Gent. William Denny of
Clonbrazile, gent. John Dawson of Ardmagh, gent. Walter Dawson Sen. of the
same, gent. Walter Dawson Jun. of the same, gent. Ralph Trueman Sen. of
Braccagh, gent. Meredith Workman of Meagh, gent. Captain John Johnston of
Dromconnel: Robert Fenly of Hamilton's-Bawne, gent. Thomas Ball of Glassedromi,
Esquire Charles Pointz of the same, gent. Major Joseph Strowde of Lisburne; and
Joseph Strowde, Gentlem. All late in the County of Ardmagh. Alexander Stewart,
Esquire, Son to the Lord Mountjoy: Warham Jemett, Collector: Captain Alexander
Lacky: Captain Samuel Norman: Captain Matthew Cockins: Captain Alexander
Tompkins: Captain John Tompkins: Captain Thomas Moncreiffe: Captain James
Lenox: Captain Horan Kenedy: Lieutenant William Crookeshankes: Lieutenant James
Boyde: Lieutenant James Spicke: Lieutenant Daniel Sherrard: Lieuten. Edward
Brooks: Lieutenant William Wallace: Lieutenant Henry Long: Lieutenant William
Macky: Lieutenant Robert Morrison: Lieutenant William Newton: Lieutenant Henry
Campsy: Lieutenant Henry Thompson: Col. George Philips of Newtownlemevaddy:
Captain William Smith: Captain Andrew Alexander: Captain Thomas Philips Junior*
Lieutenant Col. Edward Carry of Dungiven: Captain Alexander Skipton: Captain
Stephen H^ard: Captain James Strong: Captain Thomas Ash: Captain James Howey of
Muffe: Captain Samuel Hobson: Captain George Skipton of Foughanveale: Captain
John Gage of Moygillan: Capt.... Hallneare of Ballycastle: Captain Abraham
Hilhouse of the same: Colonel George Canning of Garvagly: Captain Nicholas
Edwards of Kilreah: Captain William Church: Capt.... Miller: Capt. Adam Downing
of Ballaghy: Captain Matthew Mac Loran of Dawsonsbridge: Captain Hugh Reamy:
Lieutenant Col. William Cunningham of Ballydrum: Capt. James Rea: Captain
Samuel Wright: Lieutenant Col. Robert Lundy; and David Rosse of Londonderry.
Gent. All late of the County of Londonderry. Captain John Forward of
Coolemackeiltrean: Capt. John Cowan of S. Johnston: Capt. Francis Carry of
Redcastle: Capt. George Vaughan of Buncrannagh: Capt. Henry Heart of Muffe in
Enishone: Captain Robert Carry of Whitecastle: Captain William Latham of
Ballymagrorty: Lieutenant William Carry of Ballyeany, alias Bridestown: Thomas
Blaire of Aghadny, gent. Henry Gorge of Somerset, Son of Col. Gorge; and
Patrick Jordan of Castleroe, Gent. All late of the Counties of Donnegal or
Detty. Oliver St. George Jun. of Headford, Esquire second Son to Sir Oliver St.
George: Richard St. George of Dunmore, Esquire George* St. George of the same, Esquire
John Blackny of Gallagh, Esquire: Robert Corlewes of Dunmore, gent. John Eyres
of Eyres Court, Esquire and Samuel Eyres of the same. All late of the County of
Galway* Daniel Hutson of St. John's, Esquire Capt. Chidley Coote of Voughterhire:
John Drury of Callow, gent* Edward Nickleson of Castlereagh, Clerk: Edward
Hawks of Roscommon, Clerk: Thomas Floyd of Croghane, Esquire Toby Mulloy of
Knocvic^ar, gent. Edward Sandford of Castlereagh, gent. John Teadon of Boil
yeom. George Crofton of Kilbridge, gent. John Nickleson of Castlereagh, Clerk:
Henry Irwing of Boyanagh, yeom. William Lambert of Moyheiden, gent. Richard
Glass of Clooneawne, gent. Jacob Jaques of Athlone, Innkeeper: Anthony Cope
Dean of Elphin: Henry Yeadon of Boil, Clerk: Gilbert Ormsby of Tobervaddy, Esquire
and John Crofton of Kilbride, gent. All late of the County of Roscommon. Arthur
Cooper of Marker, Gent. Richard Cooper of the same, gent. William Ormsby of
Court, gent. Francis King. of Ballindune, gent. Charles Dodd of Tyrillel, gent.
Robert Foliot of Dromdony, gent. Henry Hughs and Thomas Hughs of Crahane
Barony, gent. William Harlow of Rathmullin.... Thomas Heart of Ballinspor:
George Cooper of Tyrillel, gent. Morgan Heart of Ballinspor, gent. Robart Heart
of the same, gent. James Nipper of Tobberaghoirne, gent. Richard Brooks of
Tullybegg, gent. Doctor John Lesly of Ballitogher, Clerk: Stephen Ormsby of
Castleloghdaregin, gent. Roger Smith of Knocknasamer, gent. Henry Nickleson of
Bellanagargine, gent. Roger Nickleson of the same, gent. Adam Ormsby of Comine*
gent. Francis Ormsby of Carene^row, gent. Richard Smith of Coolany, gent.
Francis Gore and William Gore of Sligoe, gent. Coote Ormsby of Sligoe, Clerk:
Pierce Geathing of the same, Esquire Philip Cox of the same, gent. Humphry Booth of
the same, Esquire Humphry Booth Jun. of the same, gent. Anthony Colly of Moyhgara,
gent. Richard Phillips of Sligoe, gent. James Soden of Grange, gent. Jeremy
Jones of Arduaglass, Esquire: Lewis Jones of the same, Esquire John Urwing of
Tonregoe, gent. Alexander Urwing of the same, gent. Thomas Griffith of
Ballingchara, Esquire Thomas Griffith, Jun. of the same, gent. William Griffith of
Sligoe, gent. Richard Nesson of Grange, gent. Ensign William Story of Rosse:
Thomas Osborne near Sligoe, gent. Henry Osborne of the same, gent. Henry
Grissin of Sligoe, gent. William Nicleson of Ardtairmane, gent. Charles
Nicleson of Larrass, gent. Edward Hunter of Ballyelly, gent. Richard Wood of
Laccan, Esquire Edward Wood of Court, Esquire Stephen Wagget of Cooluny, yeom. Thomas
Crocar of the same, yeom. Samuel Nicleson of Castle Canure, gent. Roger Walton
of the same, Tanner: Michael Jones of Legbane, Clerk: William Mortimer of
Tyrellel, gent. William Mortimer Jun. of the same, gent. Thomas Cashoe of
Ballysadara, gent. Thomas Burn of Castle Canure, Tanner: Arthur Gore of
Sligoe, gent. John Palmer of Knockmullin, gent. and Thomas Ormsby of Comin,
gent. All late of the County of Sligoe. Arthur Gore of the County of Mayo,
Gent. Son and Heir to Sir Arthur Gore: Major Owen Vaughan of Carrowmore:
Charles Bingham of Foxford, gent. Captain Thomas Brent of Ballinrobe: James
Moore of Killala, gent. Cl^ud Watts of Tyrally, gent. John Robinson of
Rathreagh, gent. Lawrence Mackin of Rathduffe, gent. Benjamin Long of Main,
gent. Lewis Winn of Ballyvighan, Esquire John Bingham Sen. of Foxford, Esquire All late
of the County of Mayo. William Lowther, Esquire: James Nisbitt, Esquire Robert
Galbraith, Gent. Robert Collys: William Nichols: Gustavus Nichols: William
Parsons: Lieutenant Robert Elliot:..... Waagh: Thomas Floyd, Esquire Captain Hugh
Mountgomery: Capt. Edward Nicholson: Robert Craige: William Charleton: Capt....
Mansley: Lancelot Lowther: William Elliot:... Graham: John Anderson: Thomas
Vernloe: Francis Gore: James Maxwel, Clerk: William Cunningham, Clerk: Robert
Rosse, Clerk: Henry Palmer, Clerk; and James Wynn of Lorgan Boy, Esquire All late
of the County of Lietrim: Whether Dead or Alive, or Killed in Open Rebellion,
or now in Arms against your Majesty, or otherwise: And every of them shall be
deemed, taken and reputed, and are hereby declared and adjudged Traitors,
convicted and attainted of High Treason, and shall suffer such Pains of Death,
Penalties and Forfeitures respectively, as in Cases of High Treason are
accustomed. Provided, that in case it happen that any of the Persons hereby
Attainted, or to be Attainted, do now abide or dwell in this Kingdom, and are
amenable to the Law, that then and in such case, if such Person and Persons do
by the Tenth day of August, One thousand Six hundred Eighty nine, without
compulsion, of his own accord come in and deliver himself to the Lord Chief
Justice of your Majesty's Court of King's Bench in Ireland, or to any other of
the Judges of the said Court, or of any other of your Majesty's Four Courts in
Dublin, or to any Judge of Assize in their Circuits, to be charged with any
Treason, to be charged or imputed to him or them, that then and in such case,
such Person and Persons (if after acquitted by the Laws of this Land, or
discharged by Proclamation) shall be freed, dlscharged, and acquitted from all
Peins, Punishments, and Forfeitures by this Act incurred, laid or imposed; any
thing in this Act to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding. And whereas the
several Persons hereafter named ( viz.) John Veazy, Lord Archbishop of Tuam:
Arthur Chichester, Earl of Donnegal: Folliot Wingfield, Viscount Powers-Court:
William Morton, Lord Bishop of Kildare: William Smith, Lord Bishop of Raphoe:
Narcissus Marsh, Lord Bishop of Fernes and Laughlin: Edward Jones, Lord Bishop
of Cloyne: Capel Wiseman, Lord Bishop of Dromore: Sir John Peyton, Baronet: Sir
Thomas Domvile of Temple*oge, Baronet: Sir Arthur Jones of Osberstown, Baronet:
Sir John Morgan, Baronet: Sir Edward Crofton of Mose, Baronet: Sir Henry
Bingham of Castlebarr, Baronet: Sir William Evans, Baronet: Sir Abel Ram,
Knight: Sir John Coghil of Drumconragh, Knight: Sir William Wentworth of
Dublin, Knight: Sir Henry Ponsonby, Knight: Sir William Lemon of Knockanelewer,
Knight: Sir John Dillon of Lismullin, Knight: Sir Robert Cole of Ballymackey,
Knight: Sir Toby Poynes of Brecknock, Knight: Bartholomew Vanhumrigh of the
City of Dublin, Merchant: Philip Crofts, Gent. Stephen Ludlow, Esquire Anderson
Sanders, Esquire Robert Pooley, Gent. Luke Lowther late Alderman: Abraham Tarner,
Esquire Edward Harris, gent. Robert Bridges, Esquire William Swift, gent. Dr. Ralph
Howard: John Linegar late of Dunbree: Henry Ashton, Glover* Edward Reyly, gent.
Adam Swift, gent. Thomas Putland, Merch. John Carr, gent. Matthew French Jun.
Samuel Jackson, gent. Henry Salmon, Merch. Charles Carter, Sadler: Henry
Ecclin, Esquire late one of his Majesty's Sergeants at Law: Nehemiah Donneland, Esquire
Counselor at Law: Peter Westenra, Esquire Henry Monk, Esquire William Manle, Esquire
Murtagh Dowling, Esquire Isaac Dobson, Esquire Robert Stopford, Esquire Robert Peppard, Esquire
John Gowrney, Esquire Thomas Tilson, Esquire Joseph Deane, Esquire late Seneschal of St.
Pulchers Liberties: James Grace, Esquire late Seneschal of Christ-Church Liberties:
Robert Sanders, Esquire Robert Alloway, Esquire, late one of the Officers of the
Ordnance: Doctor.... Miller: John Thompson, late Agent for the Commissioners:
Thomas Spranger, late Examinator of the High Court of Chancery: Captain James
Gardner of Pimlicoe: Capt. Thomas Cook of St. James's Street: Capt. John
Rawlins of Strand Street: William Ralphson, Gent. William Scott, gent. Temple
Briscoe, gent. William Ormsby, gent. Anthony Nixon, gent. John Bate, gent.
Richard Thompson, gent. Benjamin Chitwood: Thomas Osborne, gent. John Gardner,
gent. John Theacker, gent. Giles Spencer, gent. Jacob Peppard, gent. Michael
Harborne, gent. Andrew Lloyd, gent. Isaac Ambrose, gent. Jeremiah Roscoe,
gent. Philip Harris, gent. Richard Flemming, gent. William Tisdall, gent.
Christopher Caldwell, gent. Thomas Carter, gent. Charles Grolier, gent.
Faustine Cuppage, gent. Richard Hacket, gent. Charles King, gent. John Rotten,
gent. Henry Reeves, gent. Zachary Foxal, gent. Thomas Fisher, gent. Gilbert
Holmes, gent, Thomas Sisson, Scrivener: John Gay the younger: Charles Campbel,
gent. Thomas Twigg, gent. Daniel Cook, gent. Edmond Reynel, gent. Samuel
Frith, gent. George Osborne, gent. John Edge, gent. John Hill, gent. Robert
Curtis, gent. John Curtis, gent. Henry Whitfield, and.... Whitfield, Sons to
Counselor Whitfield: Mordecay Abbot, gent. Tobyas Creamer of St. Thomas
Street, gent. Charles Wallis of the same, gent. William Berry, gent. William
Wybrants, gent. Benjamin Burton, Banker: Edward Lloyd, Merchant: John Abbot,
late Steward of the Inns: John Cuthbert of Skinnerow, Goldsmith: John Pierson
of St. Thomas Street, Brewer: Samuel Bell of the same, gent. Abraham Maw of
Castle Street, Merchant: John Ashhurst of St. Nicholas Street, Merchant: Henry
Steevens of High Street, Merchant: Charles Batty of Corn-Market, Upholsterer:
Robert Briddock of Skinner-Row, Merchant; Edward Brooks of St.
Warburgh-Street, Merchant: John Lovet of the Bli^d^ey, Merchant: William Stowel
of Highstreet, Ironmonger: Simon Sherlock of Backlane, Brazier: William Covett
of Cornmarket, Hozier: Henry Smith of Skinner-Row, Haberdasher* Henry Rogers of
Highstreet, Merchant-Taylor: Arthur Fisher of the same, Plate-maker: Vincent
Bradston of St. Patrick-street, Pewterer: Walter Harris of Smithfield,
Merchant: Samuel Price of Pottle, Ironmonger: John Hudson, Maulster: Francis
Prichard, gent. Jonathan Tailor, Chandler: Samuel Care of Highstreet, Merchant:
Thomas Doran of the Glib, Vintner: Philip Green of the same, Chandler: Dennis
Cash of Highstreet, Merchant: Thomas Bodily of the same, Merchant: Caleb Thomas
of the same, Merchant: John Boosby of the same, Tailor: Thomas Mason of the
same, Merchant: Robert Teats of St. James-Street, Skinner: Henry Salmon of
Meath-Street, Clothier* Richard Boose of the same, Clothier: Joseph James of
Highstreet, Merch. Robert Roper of the Comb, Clothier: Barnet Wells of the
same, Clothier: William Lemon of St. Francis-Street, Baker: Josias Smith of
Cavan-Street, Brewer: George Duxberry of the Comb, Clothier: Patrick Campbel,
Stationer: Eliphel Dobson of Castle-Street, Stationer: William Norman of
Damas-Street, Stationer: Charles Carter of Skinner-Row, Merchant: Francis Stoyt
of Copper-Ally, Merchant: Richard Tygh of Smithfield, Merchant: John Green of
Ormonds-key, Carpenter: James Cottingham of Skinner-Row, Goldsmith: Charles
Thompson of Corkehill, Chyrurgeon: Samuel Trevers of St. Marys Abbey, Merch.
John Shelly of Skinner-Row, Goldsmith: Thomas Elliot of the same, Cook: John
Quin, Son to Alderman Quin: William Hill of St. Patrick-Street, Merch....
Eastwood of Colledge-Green, Clothier: James Hartly of Church-Street, Merch.
Walter Hitchcock, Querister: Dean John Pooly: John Allen, Esquire Son to Sir Joshua
Allen: William Clerk of Highstreet, Merchant-Taylor: John Hetherington,
Perrywig-maker: Henry Rowlandson of Skinner-Row, Merch. William Founds of
Temple Bar, Merch. Thomas Tailor, gent. Samuel Care of Highstreet,
Merchant-Taylor: John Haslack, Tanner: Doctor John Maddin: Francis Roberts* and
Kender Roberts, Brothers to the Earl of Radnor: John Wallis of St.
Thomas-Street, Gent. and William Flood of Colledge-green, gent. All late of the
City of Dublin. John Beatham of Killeck in the County of Dublin, Esquire Edward
Dean of Tyrenure, Esquire Samuel Folio, Chancellor of St. Patricks: Robert Meade of
Foblestown, gent. Martin Basil of Drumcarny, gent. Francis Spring of
Colledruth, gent. William Wybrants of Grange: Bally Boil, gent. Isaac Dobson
of Dundrum, gent. Josias Smith of St. Patricks Close, gent. John Rawlins of
Newstreet, gent. Thomas Baily of St. Patricks Close, gent. John Way^lock of
Newry, Tanner: Thomas Shaw of Crookedstaff, Tanner: Philip Parker of St.
Patricks Street, Tanner: John Ridgeway of Oldbawne, gent. John Williamson of
Clondalcan, gent. James Roberts of Newmarket, gent. William Lemon of
Kevanstreet, gent. William Nuans of Dunlavan, Tanner: Ralph Rule, Prebend of
Kilmatalway: Edward Hind of Tallow: Thomas Theacker of Rathcoole, Clerk:...
Williamson of Newcastle, Clerk: Henry Ryder, Prebend of Malehedurt: Archdeacon
William Williamson: William Fownes: Edward Swan of Kilriske, Esquire Edward Riley
the Attorney: John Stearne of Ballagh, gent. Thomas Springham of Finglas, gent.
and Peter Westenra of Blanchers-Town, Esquire. All late of the County, or City
of Dublin. Gilbert Holmes of Ovidstown in the County of Kildare, gent. Thomas
Twigg of Blackrath, gent. Duke Gifford of Castle Jordan, Esquire John Davys of
Littleburton, Esquire Joseph Damer of Filberry, gent. William Warren of Grangebeg,
gent. and George Mervin of Tipperogan, gent. All late of the County of Bildare.
John Tench of Staplestown in the County of Catherlogh, Esquire Richard Warren, Esquire
Francis Bradstown of Morterstown, gent. Thomas Bernard of Cloghuae, gent. John
Lucas of Rathdaniel, yeoman: Edmond* Jones of Tullagh, Esquire Cadwallader Wyn of
Killelongford, gent. Roger Piers, gent. Joseph Ivy of Grangeford, gent. Urban
Vigor of Old Leighlin, gent.... Cocks of Ballydartane, Clerk: Robert Stopford
of Ballybrack, Esquire Charles Wilcocks of Shierwood Park, gent. and... Elliot of
Staplestown, Clerk. All late of the County of Catherlagh. John Baldwyn Sen. of
Curraghlanty in the Kings County, Esquire Edward Crofton of Redwood, gent. Anthony
Dobson of Polekeiry, gent. Meadhope Lloyd of Tumagh, gent. John Jerome of the
same, gent. Brigoe Henry of Ballynecrot, gent. William Gun of Ballynrackin,
gent.... Winter of Castletown:... George Blundel of Kileluncorkery, gent. John
Woods of Ballymorane, gent. Thomas Green of Ballyengallagh, gent.... Wilkinson
of Fyntre, gent.... Parker of... All late of the Kings County. Edward Stubbers
of Clarane in the Queens County, Esquire Maurice Cuffe of Ballygehy, gent. Samuel
Preston of Junnoe, Esquire John Baily of Corballis, gent. Nathaniel Keirin of
Esker, gent. Capt. Thomas Howard of Clankelly: John Starkey of Lysseene, gent.
Daniel Green of Abbey Leix, gent. Jonathan Alland of Tobberboe, Esquire Capt. Thomas
Denny of Clonruske: Samuel Gale of Crottentegle, gent. Nathaniel Nicholas of
Marybarrogh, gent. Francis Wheeler of Garronconly, gent. John Ashurt of ^ooly,
gent. Robert Maxwel of Stradbally, Esquire Robert Pigot eldest Son to Thomas Pigot
of Disert: Robert Sanders of Ballynegar, Esquire Lancelot Sands of Killevan. All
late of the Queens County. Henry Ellis of Clanmillan in the County of Longford,
gent. Alexander Dyer, gent. John Sankey of Tenelick, Esquire John Sankey of
Killinbore, gent. Capt. Anthony Morley of Clogh: Daniel Mullinex of
Ballyemully, Esquire William Moxon of Rathsallagh, gent. Robert Newcomen of
Rosstown, Esquire John Adkins, gent. William Smith, gent. William Siffers, gent.
John Kennedy of Mullagh, Esquire George Flawne of Tonelagh, gent. Capt. George
Newcomen: Ensign Beverly Newcomen: Alexander Forbesse of Glenmore, gent. John
Scot, gent. and James Balzel. All late of ^he County of Longford. Henry Osborne
of Dardistown in the County of Mead, Esquire George Peppard of Ballygart, Esquire
Stafford Lightburne of Adamstown, Esquire Lancelot Dowdal of Monktown, Esquire Peter
Westenrae of Rathmore, Esquire Joseph Prat of Garradice, Esquire Hugh Morgan of
Rathcoran, gent. Benjamin Prat of Agherpallis, gent. Thomas Ash of St. John's,
Esquire Richard Barker of Corroboy, gent. William Smither, gent. John Lynegar of
Baskenagh, gent. John Percival of Collierstown, Esquire John Bolton of Ratoath,
Clerk: Walter Bruffe of Ballytrasny, Esquire John Maxwel of Oldcastel, Clerk:
Joseph Prat, Jun. of Garradice, gent. Arthur Shane of Dublin, Esquire Robert
Stopford of Newhal, Esquire Capt. John Foord of Ardsallagh: Thomas Tailor of Kells,
Esquire Charles Wade of Clonebrany, gent. All late of the County of Mead. William
Needham of Ballaghloe in the County of West-Meath, gent. John Carleton of
Ballyduffe, gent. Matthew Handcock and Stephen Handcock, Clerks: Ebenezer Low
of Newtown, gent. John Huston Jun. of Knockasty, gent. John Roe of Ballinbar,
gent. Capt. Edward Knight of Ballaharny: John Percival, Son of Capt. Robert
Percival: Stephen Markham of Tuitstown, gent. Henry Monk of Hiltown, Esquire John
Edge late of Dublin, gent. Edward Price of the Moate, gent. Edward Massey of
Athlone, Merch. Theodorus Barlow, and Ralph Barlow of Balnaferagh, gent. All
late of the County of West-Meath. Agmundeshion Cuffe of Burn Church in the
County of Kilkenny, Esquire Thomas Cuffe of the same, Esquire Hector Harris of Grenane,
gent. Francis Wheeler of Leyrath, Esquire Joseph Deane Jun. of Ballyduffe, Esquire
Balthazer Cremer of Ballyfoyle, Esquire Edward Mayo of Rogerstown, gent. Jonathan
Widby of Kilcregane, yeom. Bernard Annely of Ballymunty, gent. William Tosier
of Kilkenny, gent. Capt. James Gardener of Ballyreddy: William Gardener of the
same, gent. Ebenezer Warren of the Lodge, Esquire Ebenezer Watson of Rosbercon,
gent. Anthony Maude of Glasheiore, Esquire William Smith of Foulkesrath, gent.
Capt. Arthur Web of Ballinraick: Thomas Cuffe of Smithstown* gent. Richard
Mukins of Kilkenny, Merch. John Wareing of the same, gent. Joseph Gale of the
same, gent. John Desborough of the same, gent. Stephen Vaughan of the same,
Clerk: Martin Baxter of Freshford, Clerk: John Johnston of Claragh, gent.
Lieutenant Henry St. George of Kilrush: John Burden of Garanamanagh, yeom.
Thomas Barnes of Grange, gent.... Kingston of Knocktogher, gent. Richard Sankey
of Kilkrony, gent. Joseph Osborne of Ballynemarnagh, gent. Edward Briscoe of
Jamestown, gent. Lawrence Dower of Knocktogher, Clerk. All late of the County
or City of Kilkenny. Joshua Nun of St. Margaret in the County of Wexford, Gent.
John Smith Sen. of Wexford, Merch. John Smith Jun. of the same, Merchant: John
Rigby of the same, Merch. Lawrence Davys of Eniscorthy, Merch Benjamin Neal of
Wexford, Clerk: John Mihel of Little-Kilclean, Esquire Henry Archer of Enniscorthy,
Merch. Richard Mihel of Ballyshop, gent. John Elmes of Ballykyrogebeg, gent.
John Glascot of Ballyfarnoge, gent. Henry Gifford of Polemoge, gent. William
Hamond of Pressagard, gent. Samuel Bats of Ross, Merchant: Samuel Pitts of the
same Merchant: Thomas Tongue of the same, gent. John Fountain of Middleton,
gent. Sherington Grasvenor of Ardestown, gent. Henry Nappard of Ross* Sadler.
James Glascot of Bailyfarnoge, gent. Benjamin Glascot of the same, gent. John
Dodd of Great Island, Farmer: William Dodd of the same, Farmer: Samuel Tench of
Mullenderry, gent. Caleb Barnes of Ross, gent. Thomas Barnes of the same, gent.
George Butler of Grange, gent. Richard Parot of Ross, gent. Christopher Namon
of Camolin, Tanner; and William Parsons of St. John's. All in the County of
Wexford. Abraham Tarner of Clonmayne in the County of Wicklow, Esquire Richard
Edward Jun. of Rathdown, gent. William Matthews of Templelyon, gent. Richard
Lamb of Carra^agower, gent. John Hacket of Wickloe, gent. Evan Price of the
same, gent. John Stockdyn of Rossyduffe, gent. John Whitehead of Cooleboy,
gent. Walter Hitchcock of Glancap, gent. Christopher Caldwel of Ballyhobbock,
gent. Roger Price of Coolebane, gent. Thomas Kernes of... Clerk: Bethel Vaughan
of Aghavany, gen*. John Hacket Jun. of Wicklow, gent. Samuel Hacket of the
same, gent. James Luckins of Rathdrume, gent. Thomas Stanford* of the Iron
works: Paul Craddock of Ballyarthur, gent. John Craddock of the same, gent.
Jonathan Rogers of Wicklow, gent. William Berry of Colboy, gent. George Brass
of Bolycoug, gent. John Clark of Glantoige, gent. John Lethbetter of the same,
gent. Matthew Grange of Ballymoyle, gent. Meredith Williams of Templereny,
gent. Robert Anthony of Rathdrume, gent. John Symons of Wicklow, gent. John
Richinson of the same, gent. Richard Hoy of the same, gent. George Frost of the
same, gent. John Nicholson of Glanteige, gent. John Eastwick of Newtown, Clerk:
John Boswel of Ballycurry, gent. and Roger Pierce of Tubberbunnagh, gent. All
in the County of Wicklow. Randal Moore of Atherdee in the County of Lowth, Esquire
John Pepper of Pepperstown, Esquire Anthony Nixon of Ardee, gent. John Rawlins of
Dungooley, Esquire John Holt of Dromcar, Esquire William Blaney of Warrenstown, Esquire
Thomas Ashton of Richardstown, gent. Ralph Low of Dromcar, gent. Thomas Atkins
of Dundalk, gent. Dillon Pollard of Rossmack, gent. and Jonathan Ball of
Atherdee, Clerk: All in the County of Lowth. Joseph Dunbar of the Town of
Drogheda, gent. Dean Tobias Pullen: William Graves, Vintner. Capt. Hugh
Mountgomery: Jonas Elwood, gent. Edward Singleton, gent. Robert Foord: Thomas
Newton, Sen. Thomas Newton, Jun. Thomas Meade: William Newton, Chandler: Robert
Hardman, Merchant: John Leigh, gent. Joseph Tomlinson, gent. and... Kirton,
gent. All late of the said Town of Drogheda. Joseph Stepney of Abbyowny in the
County of Limerick, Esquire Thomas Butler of Kilnemony, gent. Richard Bury of
Ballynearigy, gent. Thomas Mansel of Ballynemony, Esquire Thomas Ross of Morgans,
gent. William Gribble Jun. of Limerick, gent. John Do^ney of Caerconreffy,
gent. Thomas Warren of Newtown, gent. Daniel Webb Sen. of Rathconan, gent.
Timothy Webb of Ballygubby, gent. Thomas Oldfield of Gorneskeigh, gent. Richard
Peacock of Graiges, gent. Abraham Jackson of Duntrileig, gent. Chidley Coote
Fitz Chidley of Coote, Esquire; Thomas Spire Jun. of Rathanny, gent. Giles
Spencer of Limerick, gent. Henry Widdenham Junior of Corra, gent. Standish
Harstongue Junior of Broffe, Esquire: Richard Newport of Longford, gent. and
James Webb of Ballynehensy, gent. All in the County of Limerick. John Baily
Junior of Dunkittle in the County of Cork, gent. Noblet Dunscombe of Cork,
gent. Alderman George Rogers of Cork: Robert Rogers of the same, gent.
Alderman William Ballard of the same: John Folliot of Barnehealy, Esquire William
Dunscomb of Cork, Esquire: Thomas Farrin of the same, Esquire William Hull of the
same, gent. Robert Dalicourt of Ballinrea, gent. Richard Mallyburne of Cork,
Vinter: Richard Brown of Mocroompe, Clerk: John Baily of Farrenashessery,
gent. Alderman Edward Hoar Jun. of Cork: Henry Tonson of Carbery, gent.
Richard Newport of Longford, gent. John Spread Jun. of Coolnetubrid, gent. John
Raymond of Rathenesky, gent. Robert Deane of Dromore, gent. Thomas Pigot of
Ballygullane, Esquire Stephen Sweet of Cork, gent. Samuel Sweet of Bandon, gent.
Richard Travers Jun. of the Barony of Ibann, gent. Ephimetus Cross of Cork,
Esquire Christopher Crofts of Cork, Alderm. William Howel of the same, Purg.
William Fitzgerald Deane of Cloyne: Apollo Morres of Baneduff, gent. John
Newneham Sen. of Cork, Alderm. William Babrington of Ballyhindon, Esquire Edward
House of Cork, gent. Abraham Morris of the same, Merchant: Thomas Finch of the
same, gent. Thomas Wallis of Carriglass, gent. Thomas Walker of Cork, Merch.
John Watson of Moyallow, Esquire Francis Fookes of Campire, gent. George Widdenham
of Castletown Gent. Anthony Raymond of Mitchelstown Esquire Thomas Warner of the
same, Gent. William Hedges of Youghall; John Atkins of the same; Robert Bale of
the same; Robert Atkins, Francis Baker, John Hayman, Jasper Lucas, Daniel
Woods, Samuel Farmer, James Moore, William Veus, Uriah Babbington, Richard
Tailor, James Elliot, Vincent Godwin, John Radin, William Causabon, all late of
the Town of Youghall; Richard Hayes jun. of Kinallea; John Hawkins of Cork,
Merchant; Timothy Tucky of Cork, Merchant; John Harmor. jun. of Dunmahone,
Gent. Robert Fitzgerald of Lissquinlane, Esquire William Corbet of... Gent. Edward
Gwilliams of Ross, Gent. John Addis of the same, Gent. Thomas Addis of the
same, Gent. Walter Bruise of the same, Clerk; James Devereux of the same, Gent.
William Devereux of the same, G^n^* John West of the same, Gent. Francis West
of the same, Gent. James Dennis of the same, Gent. John Clements of the same,
Gent. Henry Caple of Ballybury, Gent. Robert Collins of the same, Gent. William
Humphery of.... Gent. Thomas Foord of.... George Foord of..... Isaac Gippsy
of.... Isaac Gippsy jun. of.... Jacob Gippsy of.... William Warters of Bautry,
Gent. Nathaniel Evans of Ardigolegan; Nathaniel Evans* jun. of the same, Gent.
Richard Evans of the same, Gent. Thomas Cripps of Cashell, Gent. Andrew Cripps
of the same, Gent. William Woodman of.... Gent. William White of Castletown,
Gent. Nathaniel Sutton of Bungor, Gent; Samuel Rolls of Ballyfreen, Gent.
Samuel Farmer of.... Gent. John Brelsford of Garanjames, Gent. Peter Wallis of
Aguistown, Gent. William Clark of Killh^duett, Gent. William Peacock of
Killimagh, Gent. George Sing of Killmountain, Gent. Thomas Wallis of
Ballyshane, Gent. Edward Ellord of Killbree, Gent. John Love of Torbehy, Gent.
William Walkam of Little-Island, Gent. John Shelly of Middletown, Gent.
Alexander Groves of Ballyhinat, Gent. Thomas Beecher of Aghadoon, Esquire William
Warner of the same, Esquire John Ware of Killeneen, Gent. John Ware of Nucestown,
Gent. Michael Boil of Castlemartyre, Gent. all late of the County of Cork.
Edmond Greatrix of Affane in the County of Waterford, Esquire Thomas Christmas of
Waterford, Esquire John Nettles of Toreen, Gent. William Bagg of Kilberee; Robert
Cook of Cappaquin; Edward Crocker of Ballygagin; Roger Poor of Ballygillane,
Gent. Peter Cook of Cappaquin; John Walkinton of Lissmore, Clerk; Edward May of
Waterford, Esquire Joseph Osborne of the same, Merchant; John Steevens of
Ballyloghbegg, Gent. William Bucknor of Grange, Gent. Gregory Lemery of
Killcopp, Gent. Lewis Alsock of Waterford, Clerk; Joseph Ivy of Waterford,
Alderman; Richard Ryves of Rosseduffe; Stephen Woodwell of Newtown, Gent. John
Silver of Youghall, Gent. Walter Atkins of Killbegg, Gent. John Hoganals Bagg
of Rossgrelly; William Wrag of Newaffan; William Baker of Killbegg, Gent.
Francis Baker of Youghal, Merchant; Thomas Mansell of Newcollupp, Richard
Bolton of Fattleg, Jonathan Alland of Ballimanna, Michael Burdge of Ballydavid,
Charles Baker of Crowebally, Robert Hardan of Killakin, John Christmas of
Adamstown, Gent. all in the County of Waterford. Francis Gore of Mountshannon,
in the County of Clare, Gent. Samuel Lucas of Corofin, Gent. John Drew of
Ballyvanine, Gent. all in the County of Clare. Frederic Mullius sen. of
Ballyngooleen in the County of Kerry, Esquire William Sands Carriganfoyle, Gent.
William Collins jun. of Lissadick, Gent..... Turner, Minister of Killarney;
James Connor jun. of Tralee;... Ball of Memutainae, Gent. Richard Johnston of
Killarney, Gent. all in the County of Kerry. John Mead of Clonmel, in the
County of Tipperary, Merchant; Clarles Alcock of Powerstown, Gent. John Green
of Clonmel, Gent. William Vaughan of the same, Merchant; John Sadler of
Ballintemple, Gent. Richard Saddler of Ardfinan, Gent. Hercules Beer of
Clonmel, Gent.... Beer* of the same, Gent. Christopher Gwyn of Graige, Gent.
John Perry of Killmologe, Gent. John White of Ardfinan, Gent. Thomas Moody of
Killkaroony, Gent. Joseph Biggs of Castlecoyn, Gent. William Godfery of
Cnockgraffane, Gent. Samuel Hughs of Cashell, Gent. John Pike of Widdingstown,
Gent. Sankey Godfery of Knocknafallinny, Gent. Joseph Damer of Tipperary, Gent.
Molineux Robinson of Cashel; Gent. Samuel Green of Ballyno^ty, Esquire John Ladyman
of Clonmel, Gent. Isaac Haynes of Knockauroe, Gent. Richard Farmer of
Aghlevallane, Gent. James Jones of Tipperary, Gent. Richard Ballard of the
same, Gent. Francis Foulkes of Ballycarren, Esquire James Dawson of Tuam, Gent.
Henry Pretty of Killboy, Esquire Joshua Hoyle of Glanahelly, Gent. John Hoyle of
the same, Gent. Henry Charnely of Clonmel, Merchant; Nicholas Towler of
Ballintotty, Gent. Phineas Royal of Clonmel, Merchant; John Seed of Tullogh,
Gent. Thomas Meredish of Ballycahill, Gent. John Hill of Borres, Gent. John
Dassey of Cashell, Clerk; John Lehunt of the same, Clerk; John Leake of
Knockgraffan, Clerk; John Dogherty of Cashel, Clerk; Anthony Erby of the same,
Clerk; Gregory Row of Killeheen, Gent. and John Lunnar of Killosty, Gent. all
of the County of Tipperary. Thomas Glasgow of Lifford, in the County of
Donnegal, Esquire William Godfrey of Castledoe, Esquire Andrew Knox sen. of Ramullin,
Esquire Francis Folliott of Ballymacward, Gent* John Scott of Kinnre, Gent. Thomas
Atkinson sen. of Ballyshannon, Gent. Thomas Atkinson jun. of the same, Gent.
Michael Hueson of Coolebegg, Gent. John Hueson of the same, Gent. Henry Brooks
of Letterkenny, Gent. Robert Delapp of Ballyshannon, Gent. Edward Clifford of
Donnegal, Gent. Nicholas Parmiter of Killigordan, Gent. John Forcker of
Donnegal, Clerk; John Cunningham of Tully, Gent. William Fisher of.... Gent.
and Thomas Coach of... Gent. all late of the County of Donnegal. George
Hamilton of Callidon in the County of Tyrone, Gent. Alexander Richardson of
Drom, Gent. William Richardson of Tullyreave, Gent. William Swan of Farlagh,
Gent. John Ayerly of Manor Rod, Esquire John Williams of the same, Esquire Alexander
Creighton of Lissanean, Gent. Robert Lindsey of Manor Lindsey, Esquire Hugh
Stewart of Gortgil, Gent. Robert Hamilton of Killeman, Gent. Simon Hassinton of
Borean, Gent. Captain William Moore of Garvey; John Speere of Mullaghmossagh;
John Burby of Mack^agh, Gent. Andrew Darragh of Dro^ard, Gent. James Stemart of
Killeman, Gent. John Wilson of Ballue, Gent. Capt. Thomas Collson of Drumket;
John Wilson of Dromconnor, Gent. John Speer of Kinard; Robert Hamilton of
Carrowbegg; Archibald Richardson of Springtown; James M^tray of Favour-Royal;
John Kearnes of Agharonan; John Kearnes of Claremore; William Lee of Killing,
Esquire James Gladsteanes of Hordross, Gent. John Byrny of Gortmore; Henry Grason
of Agher; John Hamilton of Cornamucklagh, Gent. Adam Morrison of Coolegar^y;
James Moor of Lissaleen; John Wallow of Clanblogh, Gent. Robert Reery of
Corckrive; John Hinderson of Ballyvedan; Archibald Irwing of Timpain; John
Crystal of Ballynegoragh; John Neely of Ballynesagart, Gent. John Harvey of
Tullyglish; William Bratton of Aghar; Hugh Wilson of Ballymatown, Gent. Thomas
Moor of Ballin^logh; John Moor of the same, Gent. John Erwing of Mullenboy,
Gent. John Moor of Anaghaloghan, Gent. Patrick Stewart of Dromskeeny, Gent.
Joseph Mounteeth of Creevangare, Gent. Randall Charletyn of Rathkeeragh, Gent.
John Robinson of Dugrey, Gent. Thomas Edy of Dius, Gent. George Mervin of
Mullaghbane, Gent. Mongoe Walkinshaw of Mullingaugh, Clerk; Robert Echlin Dean
of Tuam; Michael Moss of Enniskillin, Clerk; William Campbell of Newtown
Stewart, Gent. John Hair of the same, Gent. Robert Carson of the same, Gent.
Samuel Law of Carrighee, Gent. John White of Skarriffeckeerine, Gent. Thomas
Maxwell of Strabane, Gent. Adam Evans of the same, Gent* Thomas Edy of
Killeaghgoge; Patrick Hamilton of Dergal, Gent. James Young of Clady, Gent.
David Matleneghan of Upperclady, Gent. John Caldwell of Maghernekeeragh; Andrew
Mac-Lenaghan of Keele, Gent. and James Hair of Siscable, Gent. all late of the
County of Cyrone. John Dunbar of Killcoe, in the County of Fermannagh, Esquire
William Arsdall of Bummiminver, Esquire Francis Butler of Newtown, Esquire Andrew
Hamilton of Magherycrosse, Clerk; George Hamilton of Balin; Gent. Alexander
Atchison of Tonihe^ge, Gent. Bernard Ward of Knookhallimore, Gent. and Capt.
Thomas Brooks of Maghere stephenagh, Gent. all late of the County of
Fermannagh. Thomas Ash of Ashfeild in the County of Cavan, Esquire Francis Butler
of Belturbet, Gent. Robert Clements of Rak^^y, Gent. Richard Gibson of Cavan,
Gent. James Mortimer* of Mullhusey, Gent. Charles Mortimer of the same, Gent.
Joseph Pratt of Killuecrott, Gent. and Benjamin Pratt of Killitter, Gent. all
late of the County of Cavan. William Springland* of.... in the County of
Monoghan, Gent. Patrick Legate of Ballinure, Gent. William Leffey of the same,
Gent. Alexander Lunsdell of the same, Gent. John Dunbarr of the same, Gent.
Patrick Daucy of Iniskine, Gent. Thomas Ostler of Gortmore Gent. Edward Beaghan
of Bealabeagh Gent. Peter Beaghan of the same Gent. James Johnston of Ballyrush
Gent. William Moorecraft of the same Gent. John Corns sen. of the same Gent.
John Corns jun. of the same Gent. Richard Fith of Ballamackny Gent. all late
of the County of Monnoghan. Dr. Roger Warren of Belfast in the County of
antrim, Peter Beaghan of..... Gent. Henry Gardner of Newry Innkeeper, Robert
Harper of Ballymeauagh Gent. Henry Chades of Belfast Gent. William Crafford of
the same Gent. Qr. Mr. Thomas Crafford of the same, Capt. David Smith of the
fame, John Black of the same Gent. Arthur Mac-Carney of the same Gent. James
Stuart of the same Gent. all late of the County of Antrim. Thomas Herrington of
Cumber in the County of Down Gent. William Herrington jun. of the same Gent.
John Griffith of the same Gent. John Magill of Tullycarne Gent. William Magill
Son and Heir to Capt. James Magill, Francis Annesly jun. of Cloghmagherycatt
Gent. Alexander Brown of Magannon Gent. Hugh Mountgomery of Ballymaledy Esquire
Charles Campell of the Parish of Donaghadee Gent. Capt. John Farrell of
Dromone, and Henry Gardner of Newry Innkeeper* all in the County of Down.
James Maxwell of Crerum in the County of Armagh Esquire Hamlett Obings* of
Porteduowne Esquire Anthony Abings of the same Gent. George Hamilton of Kinard
Gent. John Gaskin of Viccars Choralls Gent. John Gills of Lorgin Gent. John
Mac-Caule of Lurgan Gent. Henry Genny of Segoe Clerk, Thomas Assington of
Loughgall Clerk, Christopher Genny of Mullaghbrack Clerk, Thomas Chapling of
Ballyrusse Gent. Archbold Woods of Markethill Gent. and John Ball of Glasdroman
Gent. all in the County of Armagh. Capt. Thomas Smith of Tuam in the County of
Galloway, William Causfield of Dunamon Gent. Edward Air of Galloway Gent. Col.
Theodore Russell, Robert Mason of Ballineguokane Gent. Samuel Hudson of Dunamon
Clerk, and Robert Ecchlin Dean of Tuam, all in the County of Galloway. Henry
Dowdall of Grange in the County of Roscomon Esquire William Dodwell of the same
Gent. John French of Dangar Esquire Edward Gardner of Tulsk Esquire Richard Gardner of
the same Gent. Lieut. Henry St. George of Athlone, and John Gardner of Tulsk
Gent. all in the County of Roscomon. Thomas Jones of Armurry in the County of
Mayo Gent. Hunry Gun of.... Clerk, Francis Cuffe of Ballinrobe Esquire Henry
Nicholson of Dromneene Gent. William Pullen of Ballinrobe Clerk, and all in the
County of Mayo. Thomas Osborne of...... in the County of Leytrim Gent. Thomas
Buckridge of....... Gent. Thomas Coote of....... Esquire Charles Campell of......
Esquire Benjamin Fletcher of James-town Esquire and Dr. John Lessley, all late of the
County of Leytrim. Have absented themselves from this Kingdom* and have gone
into England, or some other Places beyond the Seas, since the Fifth day of
November last, or in some short Time before, and did not return, although
called Home by your Majesty's gracious Proclamation. Which absenting, and not
returning, cannot be construed otherwise than to a wicked and traitorous
Purpose, and may thereby justly forfeit All their Right and Pretentions to all
and every the Lands, Tenements, and Hereditamentsto them belonging in this
Kingdom. Be it therefore enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That in case the
said Person and Persons do not by the First day of September, One thousand six
hundred eighty and nine, of his or their own accord, without Compulsion, return
into this Kingdom, and tender him and themselves to the Chief Justice of his
Majesty's Court of King's Bench, or to some other Judge of the said Court, or
Judge of Assize in the Circuit, or any of the Lords of your Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council, to be charged with any Crimes to him or them to be
imputed, that then, or in case he or they, upon such his or their Return, shall
be Convicted by Verdict of twelve Men, or by his or their own Confession, upon
his or their Arraignment for Treason; or upon his or their Arraignment stand
Mute, such Person and Persons so Absent, and not returning as aforesaid, (or
after his or their Return, being Convict of High Treason as aforesaid) shall,
from and after the First day of September, One thousand six hundred eighty
nine, be deemed, reputed, and taken as Traitors, convict and attainted of
High Treason; and shall suffer such Pains of Death, and other Forfeitures and
Penalties as in Cases of High Treason are accustomed. But in case such Person
and Persons so returning, be upon such his or their Trial acquitted or
discharged by Proclamation, then such Person and Persons respectively shall
from thenceforth be freed, discharged, and acquitted from all Pains,
Punishments, and Forfeitures by this Act incurred, laid or imposed, any thing
in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding. And whereas the several Persons
hereafter named, (viz.) Robert Ridgway Earl of Londonderry, Arthur Loftus
Viscount Loftus of Ely,.... Beamount Viscount Beamount of Swords,..... Chaworth
Viscount Chaworth of Armagh,.... Fairfax Viscount Fairfax of Emly,..... Tracy
Viscount Tracy of Rathcoole,..... Ogle Viscount Ogle of Catherlogh, Lewis
Trevor Viscount Dungannon, Folliott Lord Folliott of Ballyshannon, George Lord
George of Dundalk,..... Fitz-Williams Lord Fitz-Williams of Lifford,.... Hare
Lord Colerain, Richard Lord Baron of Santery, Antham Annesly Lord Baron of
Altham, Lawrence Barry commonly called Lord Battevant, John Power commonly
called Lord Deces, Sir Standish Hartstonge of Broffe Knight. Sir Walter Plunket of
Rathbeale Knight. Sir William Meredith of Kilriske Knight. Sir John Parker of Farmyle
Knight. Sir Richard Stephens of Rosse Knight. Sir Maurice Eustace of Baltinglass Knight.
Sir St. John Broderick of Ballyannon Knight. Sir Michael Cole of Enniskilling Knight.
Sir Charles Chiney Knight. Sir Charles Lloyd Knight. Sir Algernon Mayo of Rogers-town
Knight. Sir Richard May Knight. Sir Joseph Williamson Knight. Sir William Barker of
Abbeykillcooly Knight. Christopher Usher of the City of Dublin Esquire, Richard Leeds
Merchant, Maurice Kealing Esquire Dr..... Dominick, Dr..... Dunne, Capt. John
Quelsh of St. Stephens Green, William Bazil Esquire Thomas Howard Clerk to the
Yeield, Richard Nuttall Merchant, Gideon Delane Gent. William Robinson Esquire
Richard Barry Gent. Capt. William Shaw, and Philip Harris Esquire all late of the
City of Dublin. John Bulkely of Old-Bawne in the County of Dublin Gent. Robert
Boridges of Finglass Esquire Alexander Frazier of Meagstown Esquire Edward Bolton of
Brazille Gent. Humphrey Booth of Ballyhack Gent. Edmond Keating of Corballis
Esquire Chamber Brabazon of Thomas-Court Esquire, Dacre Barrett of Cripple-stown Esquire
Archdeacon John Fitz-Gerrald, Richard Bolton Esquire William Barry of Sautery
Gent. and Martin Bazill of Donicarney Gent. all late of the County of Dublin.
James Barry of Kelleystown in the County of Kildare Gent. Thomas Holmes of
Castledermott Gent. Cornet Richard Wybrants of Bunchestown, Maurice Keating of
Norraghmore Esquire Garrett Wesly of Old-Connel Esquire Richard Mereeith of Shrewland
Esquire Samuel Sing Dean of Kildare, and Christopher Lovett of Nourny Gent. all
late of the County of Kildare. Richard Boil of Old-Leighlin in the County of
Caterlogh Esquire John Hollam of Island in the King's-County Gent. Joseph Hawkins
Gent. Samuel Hawkins Gent. Arthur Shane Esquire Son to Sir James Shane, Henry
Westenray Esquire Martin Baldwin of Geshell Esquire all late of the King's County.
George Bridges of Burrows in the Queen's County Esquire Richard Pryor of Rathdowny
Gent. Francis Barrington of Cullenagh,.... Daniel of Ironworks Gent. Brook
Bridges of Kilmensy Gent. Charles Vaughan of Derringvarnoge Gent. Hugh Merrick
Gent. Nathaniel Huett Gent. Robert Hedges of Borres Esquire and Richard Warburton
of Garryhinch Esquire all late of the Queen's County. Capt. Nicholas Sankey of
Caldraghmore in the County of Longford, Robert Viner of Killmure in the County
of Mead Esquire John Humpheries of Hollywood Gent. Dr. Robert Gorge late of
Killbrew, William Napper of Loghcrew Esquire and Anthony Nixon of O^chestone Gent.
all late of the County of Mead. James Stopford of Castletown in the County of
West-Meath Gent. John Adams of Ledwitchtown Gent. Thomas Cooper late of
Conmistown Gent. Richard Stephens of Athlone Gent. George Farmer of
Rathnemodagh Gent. and John Meares of Mearescourt Gent. all late of the County
of West-Meath. Moses Bush of Kilfane in the County of Kilkenny Gent. John Bush
of the same Gent. William Harrison of Grenane Gent. Zachary Cornick of Kilkenny
Merchant, Edward Stubbers of Callan Esquire Hierom Hawkins of Killmuskulloge Gent.
Joseph Bradshaw of Foulkesrath Gent. and Henry Ryder Prebendary of Main, all
of the County of Kilkenny. Richard Rooth of.... in the County of Wexford Gent.
Husband to the Countess Dowager of Donnegall, John Bulkeley of Ballymorroghroe
in the County of Wicklow Gent. John Humphery of Dunard Gent. Christopher Usher
of Grange Esquire Henry Whitfield of Portballintagart Esquire William Robinson of
Wicklow Gent. John Vice of the same Gent. Robert Peppard of the same Esquire and
Lawrence Hutson of. Coolekennagh Gent. all late of the County of Wicklow.
Timothy Armitage of Atherdee in the County of Lowth, Gent. Major John Read of
Ballorgan; Robert Smith of Dromcashel, Gent. Brabazon Moore of Atherdee* Gent.
and Thomas Bellingham of Garnanstown, Esquire all late of the County of Lowth.
Thomas Willis of Drogheda, Gent. and John Sandisford of the same, Gent. Henry
Westenra of Athlacca in the County of Limerick, Esquire John Piggot of Kilfenny,
Esquire Richard Stephens of Newcastle, Gent. William Trenchard of Mountrenchard,
Esquire... Trenchard his eldest Son; Eramus Smith of Carrigogonnagh, Esquire....
Harrison of Ballyvorneene, Gent. Hugh Massey sen. of Doontrilige, Esquire Randall
Clayton of Williamstown, Gent. Henry Hartstonge Archdeacon of the Diocese of
Limerick; and William Harrison of Tuoreen, Gent. all late of the County of
Limerick. Elnathan L^m, Merchant; Vincent Gookin of Court-Mac-Shiry, Esquire Jonas
Stowell of Killbritten, Esquire Philip Dimond of Cork, Merchant; Thomas Mitchell of
the same, Merchant; Richard Boil of Shannon-Parke Esquire Achilles Daunt of
Dortigrenau, Gent. Nicholas Lysaght of Ardohnoge, Gent. and William Harman of
Carrigdownam, Esquire all late of the County of Cork. William Gibbs of... in the
County of Waterford, Gent. Loftus Brightwell Gent. Robert Beard Gent. Barzilla
Jones Dean of Lismore; Matthias Aldington of Tircuillinmore, Gent. William
Aldlington of the same, Gent. and Richard Silver of Youghall, Gent. all late of
the Counties of Waterford and Cork. Henry Brady of Tomgreny in the County of
Clare, Gent. Richard Picket of Clonmel in the County of Tipperary, Esquire John
Lovet Esquire John Castle of Richard's-Town, Gent. Joseph Ruttorne of Poolekerry,
Gent. Thomas Vallentine of Killoman, Gent. George Clarke of Ballytarsney, Gent.
John Bright of Shanrehin, Gent. George Clarke of the same, Gent. Thomas
Climmuck of Tullamacyne, Gent. William Warmsby, Gent. Richard Clutterbuck of
Derryluskane, Gent. Erasmus Smith of Tipperary Esquire William Watts of Drangan,
Gent. John Evelin of the same, Gent..... Shapcoate of Loghkent, Gent..... Page
of the same, Gent. Thomas Moor of Carrageenes^iragh, Gent. Humphery Wray of
Ballyculline, Gent. Edward Crafton of Luorhane, Gent. Alderman... Clarke of....
John Clarke Gent. Arthur Annesloe Gent. William Warwick and Purefoy Warwick of
Ballysidii, Gent. Capt..... Cope; Robert Boil of Killgraunt, Gent. Hugh
Radcliffe of Clonmel, Gent. Edward Nelthrop Gent. Robert Dixon; Samuel Clarke
Gent. John Jones Gent. Henry Pain Gent. George Clarke of Tobberheny Gent.
Edward Huchinson of Knocklosty, Gent. Richard Aldworth late chief Remembrancer;
John Baiggs of Castletowd, Gent. and John Buckworth of Shanballyduffe, Esquire all
late of the County of Cipperary. John Kingsmell of Castlesin in the County of
Donnegall, Esquire James Hamilton of Dunmanagh, in the County of Tyrone, Gent. John
Aungier Minister of the Vicarage of Lurgen, in the County of Cavan; William
Allen of Kilmore, in the County of Monaghan, Gent. James Davys of Carrickfergus
in the County of Antrim, Gent. Samuel Warring of Warringstown in the County of
Down, Gent. Henry Cope of Loghall in the County of Ardmagh, Gent. Gilbert
Thacker of Cluttan, Esquire Archibald Johnson of Loghelly, Clerk; Oliver St. John
of Toneregee, Esquire and William Brooks of Droincree, Clerk; all late of the
County of Ardmagh. Capt. Thomas Caulfeild of Dunamon, in the County of
Galloway; Josepb Stuart of Turrock, in the County of Roscomon, Gent. and Henry
Dodwell of Leytrin, in the same County, Gent. Paul Gore of Newton in the County
of Mayo, Esquire Have before the said fifth Day of November last, absented
themselves from this Kingdom, and live in England, Scotland, or the
Isle-of-Man, and there now abide; and by their not coming or returning into
this Kingdom upon your Majesty's Proclamation, to assist in Defense of this
Realm, according to their Allegiance, must be presumed to adhere to the said
Prince of Orange, in case they return not within the time by this Act
prescribed, and thereby may justly forfeit all the Lands, Tenements, the
Hereditaments which they or any of them are entitled unto, within this
Kingdom. Be it therefore enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, that in case the
said Person and Persons last mentioned, do not by the first Day of October, one
thousand six hundred eighty nine, of his and their own Accord, without
Compulsion, return into this Kingdom, and tender him and themselves to the
chief Justice of your Majesty's Court of King's Bench, o^ to some other Judge of
the said Court, or Judge of Assize in his Circuit, or to any of the Lords of
your Majesty's most honorable Privy Council, to be charged with any Crime or
Crimes to him or them, to be charged or imputed, that then, or in case he or
they, upon such, his or their Return, shall be convict by Verdict of twelve
Men, or by his or their own Confession, upon his or their Arraignment, for
Treason, or upon his or their Arraignment, stand mute; such Person and Persons
so absent, and not returning as aforesaid, or after his or their Return being
convict of Treason as aforesaid, shall from and after the said first Day of
October, one thousand six hundred eighty nine, be deemed, reputed and taken as
Traitors, convict and attainted of High Treason, and shall suffer such Pains of
Death, and other Forfeitures and Penalties, as in Cases of High Treason is
accustomed: But in case such Person and Persons so returning, upon such, his or
their Trial, be acquitted or discharged by Proclamation, then such Person and
Persons respectively shall from thence-forth be freed, discharged and acquitted
from all Pains, Punishments and Forfeitures by this Act incurred, laid or
imposed, any thing in this Act to the contrary, notwithstanding;

Provided always that in case your Majesty shall happen to go into the Kingdom
of England or Scotland before the first Day of October, one thousand six
hundred eighty nine: Then if the said Sir William Meredith, Sir Charles Chiney,
Sir Charles Lloyd, Sir Algernon Mayo, Sir Richard May, Sir Joseph Williamson,
Sir William Barker, Alexander Fraizer Esquire John Hollam,.... Daniel of the
Iron-Works, Brook Bridges, Charles Vaughan, Hugh Merrick, Nathaniel Huett,
Hierom Hawkins, Major John Read, William Trenchard,.... Trenchard his eldest
Son, Erasmus Smith,.... Harrison of Ballyverneen, Achilles Daunt, John Power
Lord Decies, William Gibbs, Loftus Brightwell, Robert Beard, Matthias
Aldington, William Aldington, John Lovett, John Castle, Joseph Rittorne, Thomas
Vallentine, George Clarke of Ballytrasiny, John Bright, George Clarke of
Shaurelin, Thomas Chinnucks, William Warmsby, Richard Clutturbruck, Erasmus
Smith, William Watts, John Evellin,.... Shapcoate of Loghkent,.... Page of the
same, Thomas Moore, Humphery Wray, Edward Crofton, Alderman Clarke, John
Clarke, Arthur Anslow, William Warwick, Purefoy Warwick, Capt.... Coapes,
Robert Boil of Killgrant, Hugh Radcliffe, Edward Nelthrop, Robert Dixon,
Samuel Clarke, John Jones, Henry Pain, George Clarke, and Gilbert Thacker,
whose Dwelling and Residence always has been in England, shall give your
Majesty such Testimony of their Loyalty and Fidelity, as that your Majesty will
be pleased on or before the said first Day of October, one thousand six hundred
eighty nine, to certify under your Privy Signet or Sign manual unto your chief
Governor or Governors of this Kingdom; That your Majesty is satisfied or
assured of the Loyalty and Fidelity of the Persons last before-named, or of any
of them; That then if such Certificate shall on or before the first Day of
November, one thousand six hundred eighty nine, be produced to your chief
Governor or Governors of this Kingdom, and enrolled in your Majesty's High
Court of Chancery; the same shall be a sufficient Discharge and Acquittal to
such of the Persons last before-named, and every of them respectively* whose
Loyalty and Fidelity your Majesty will be pleased to certify in manner as
aforesaid. And be it further enacted, That in the mean time, and until such
Return and Acquittal, all the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments within this
Kingdom, belonging to all and every Absentee and Absentees, or other Person, to
be attainted as aforesaid, shall be and are hereby vested in your Majesty's,
your Heirs and Successors, as from the first Day of August last past. And be it
further enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, that all and every such Person and
Persons, as by any the foregoing Clauses, is, are or shall be respectively
attainted, shall as from the first Day of August, one thousand six hundred
eighty eight, forfeit unto your Majesty, your Heirs and Successors, all such
Manors, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, and all Right, Title-Service,
Chiefery, Use, Trust, Condition, Fee, Rentcharge, Right of Redemption of
Mortgages, Right of Entries, Right of Action, or any other Interest of what
nature or kind soever, either in Law or Equity, of, in, or unto any Lands,
Tenements or Hereditaments within this Kingdom, belonging or appertaining to
such Person or Persons, so as aforesaid attainted, or to be attainted, in his
or their own Right, or to any other in Trust for him or them, on the said first
Day of August, one thousand six hundred eighty eight, or at any time since; and
all* the said Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, so as aforesaid, forfeited
unto and vested in your Majesty, your Heirs and Successors, hereby are and
shall be vested in your Majesty, your Heirs and Successors, whether such Person
or Persons were seized thereof in Fee absolute or conditional, or in Tail, or
for Life or Lives, and that freed and freely discharged off and from all
Estates, Tail, and for Life, and from all Reversions and Remainders for Life,
for Years, or in Fee absolute or conditional, or in Tail, or to any Person or
Persons whatsoever, such Remainder as by one Act or Statute of this present
Parliament, entitled, An Act for repealing the Acts of Settlement; an
Explanation, Resolution of Doubts, and all Grants, Patents and Certificates
pursuant to them or any of them, or by this present Act are saved and preserved
always, excepted and fore-prized.

Provided always that the Nocency or Forfeiture of any Tenant in Dower, Tenant
by the Courtesy, Jointress for Life, or other Tenant for Life or Lives in
actual Possession, shall not extend to bar, forfeit, make void or discharge any
Reversion or Reversions vested in any Person or Persons, not engaged in the
Usurpation or Rebellion aforesaid, such Reversion and Reversions being
immediately depending or expectant upon the particular Estate of such Tenant in
Dower, Tenant by the Courtesy, Joyntress for Life, or other Tenant for Life or
Lives, any thing in the said Act of Repeal, or in this present Act to the
contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always, and be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that
nothing in this present Act contained, shall any way extend, or be construed to
extend, to forfeit or vest in your Majesty's, your Heirs or Successors, any
Remainder or Remainders for valuable Considerations, limited or settled by any
Settlement or Conveyance made for such valuable Considerations, either of
Marriage or Marriage-Portion, or other valuable Consideration whatsoever, upon
any Estate for Life or Lives, to any Person or Persons not concerned in the
Usurpation or Rebellion aforesaid; such Remainder or Remainders as are limited
or settled by any Conveyance, wherein there is any Power for revoking and
altering all or any the Use or Uses therein limited, and also such Remainder
and Remainders as are limited upon any Settlement or Conveyance of any Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments, commonly called Plantation-Lands; and all Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments held or enjoyed under such Grants from the Crown,
or Grants upon the Commission or Commissions of Grace for Remedy of defective
Titles, either in the Reign of King James the first, or King Charles the first;
in which several Grants respectively there are Provisoes or Covenants for
raising or keeping any number of Men or Arms for the King's Majesty against
Rebels and Enemies, or for raising of Men for his Majesty's Service, for
Expedition of War, always excepted and foreprized. All which Remainders limited
by such Conveyances wherein there is a Power of Revocation for so much of the
Lands, Uses and Estates therein limited, as the said Power does or shall extend
unto; and all such Remainders as are derived or limited for or under such
Interest made of Plantation-Lands, or other Lands held as aforesaid, under such
Grants from the Crown; and all and every other Remainder and Remainders,
Reversion and Reversions not herein mentioned, to be saved and preserved, shall
by the Authority of this present Parliament, be deemed, construed and adjudged
void, debarred and discharged to all Intents and Purposes whatsoever, against
your Majesty, your Heirs and Successors, and your and their Grantees or
Assignees; and the said Lands, Tenements and Hereditamens, belonging to such
Rebels* as aforesaid, shall be vested in your Majesty, your Heirs and
Successors, freed and discharged of the said Remainder and Remainders, and
every of them. And to the end the Reversions and Remainders saved and preserved
by this Act, may appear with all convenient Speed;

Be it further enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That the respective
Persons, entitled to such Remainders and Reversions, do within sixty Days next
after the first sitting of the Commissioners, for executing the said Act of
Repeal, and this present Act, exhibit their Claims before the said
Commissioners, and make out their Titles to such Remainder or Remainders, so as
to procure their Adjudication and Certificate for the same, or the Adjudication
and Certificate of some three or more of them: And further, That all
Remainders, for which such Adjucations and Certificates shall not be procured,
at or before One hundred and twenty Days after the first sitting of the said
Commissioners, shall be void, and for ever barred and excluded any thing in
this Act, or other Matter to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding. All
which Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments mentioned as aforesaid, to be
forfeited unto, and vested in your Majesty, by any the Clauses aforesaid, are
hereby declared to be so forfeited unto, and vested in your Majesty, without
any Office or Inquisition thereof, found or to be found; and the same to be to
the Uses, Intents and Purposes in the said Act of Repeal, and in this present
Act mentioned and expressed.

And whereas several Persons hereafter named, ( viz.)

Lyonel Earl of Orrery, Mrs...... Trapps, Ann Vicecountess Dowager of
Dungannon, Robert Boil Esquire Catherine Woodcock, Alice Countess Dowager of
Drogheda, Alice Countess Dowager of Mountroth, Isabella Countess Dowager of
Roscomon, Margaret Countess Dowager of Orrery, Mary Countess Dowager of Orrery,
Katherine Countess Dowager of Ardglass, Sir Edward Percivall of Burton,
Baronet, Dame Hanna Knox of the City of Dublin Widow, Richard Tygh Gent.
Elizabeth Lloyd Widow,..... Newcomen, Widow; Cassandra Palmer, Widow; Jane
Grelier of Damastreet, Widow;.... Wilson, Wife to Mr. Wilson;..... Stopford;
Widow; Jane Lady Best, Elias Best her Son;..... Eccles of Highstreet, Widow;
Ann Ormsby, Widow; Susanna Torcana of Esse^cstreet, Spinster;..... Lady
Hay;..... Hay her Son; Fridayswed Lady Stephens; Agnetia Hitchcock, alias
Stephens;..... Mossom, Widow of Dr. Mossom the Minister; Elizabeth Lady
Cole;..... Lady Buekely;..... Whitfeild, Widow of Mr. Whitfield; John Johnson
Esquire Heir to William Williams; Lady Isabella Graham, Relict of Sir James Graham;
Lady Donnellan of Oxmantown; James Knight, Gent. and Isabella Stephens of the
City of Dublin; Margaret Bencham, alias Bolton of Tobberbony in the County of
Dublin, Widow;..... Griffin of Newstreet;..... Margettson of Corballis, Widow;
and Christopher Burr of Ballyaly Esquire William Tygh of Brownestowne in the County
of Kildare, Gent. and Mary Barry of Kellystown, Widow; Edmond Pleydell of
Tankardstown in the County of Catherlogh Esquire.... Boat of Ballerchy in the
King's County, Gent. Jane Pettit of Tenlagh in the County of Longford, Widow;
Frances Stopford of..... in the County of Westmeath, Widow; Grace Cooper late
of Dromore, Widow; and John Dodson of Coulanstown, Gent. both in the County of
Westmeath; Ann Warden of Burne-Church in the County of Kilkenny; Elizabeth
Kealy of Ballymaclanghny, Widow; Mary Cremer of Cautwells Garrans* Widow;
Elizabeth Lady Coulthroppe of Kilcolkeene;..... Vice, Countess Dowager of
Lansborough; Frances Stopford of Claragh, Widow; and Martha Cuffe of
Castlenich, Widow; all in the County of Kilkenny.

Lady Tabitha Totty of Prospect in the County of Wexford; Elizabeth Lady
Ponsonby; and Agnes Masterson of Prospect, Widow, both in the County of
Wexford; Ann Carter, alias Hopkins of..... in the County of Wicklow, Widow;
Katherine Carthy, alias Newport of..... in the County of Cork, Widow; Katherine
Lady Percivall; George Rye of Cork, Gent. and Elizabeth Carty, Daughter of
Jeremy Carty; all of the County of Cork.

..... Lady Armstrong of Waterford; Sarah Ledwich; alias Shadwell, Widow; Sarah
Aland of Ballinka, both in the County of Waterford; Elizabeth Lady Petty
of..... in the County of Kerry; Ann Parnell of Kilosty in the County of
Tipperary, Widow;..... Parnel her Son;.... Hunter of..... Widow;..... Hunter
her Son; Elizabeth Frost; Frances Biggs of Keadragh, Widow; Elizabeth Ward of
Keile; Jane Frost of..... Margaret Walken of Ardmaile, Widow; Mary Hamilton
Relict of Archdeacon William Hamilton of Emly; Ann Hamilton, Elizabeth
Hamilton her Daughters; Mary Davys, and Jonathan Ash of Killoquirke Gent. all
in the County of Tipperary.

Margaret Hamilton of Callidon in the County of Tyrone, Widow; Jane Davys
of..... in the County of Fermanagh, Widow; and Anna Catherina Lady Hamilton of
Tullykeltyre in the County of Fermanagh; Lettice Heart of Conlin in the County
of Cavan, Widow; and Grace Kemson of Drumury in the County of Cavan, Widow;
William Hill of Hillsborough in the County of Down, Gent. are, and for some
time past have been absent out of this Kingdom; and by reason of Sickness,
Nonage, Infirmities, or other Disabilities, may for some time further be
obliged so to stay out of this Kingdom, or be disabled to return thereunto.
Nevertheless, it being much to the weakening and impoverishing of this Realm,
that any of the Rents or Profits of the Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments
therein, should be sent into, or spent in any other Place beyond the Seas, but
that the same should be kept and employed within the Realm for the better
Support and Defense thereof,

Be it therefore Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That all the Lands,
Tenements, and Hereditaments, Use, Trust, Possession, Reversion, Remainder, and
all and every other Estate, Title and Interest whatsoever, belonging or
appertaining to all and every of the Persons herein before last mentioned,
within this Kingdom, be and are hereby vested in your Majesty, your Heirs and
Successors, to the Use of your Majesty, your Heirs and Successors.

Provided always, That if any Person or Persons, in the next foregoing Clause
mentioned, have hitherto behaved themselves Loyally and Faithfully to your
Majesty; that then if they, or any of them, their or any of their Heirs, do
hereafter return into this Kingdom, and behave him or themselves as becomes
Loyal Subjects; and do, on or before the last day of the first Term next
ensuing, after such their Return, exhibit his or their Petition or Claim,
before the Commissioners for execution of the said Acts, if then sitting; or in
his Majesty's High Court of Chancery, or in his Majesty's Court of Exchequer,
for any such Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, and make out his or their
Title thereunto, and obtain the Adjudication and Decree of any of the said
Courts, of and for such his or their Title, That then, and in such Case, such
Adjudication and Decree shall be sufficient to all such Person and Persons, for
devesting and restoring such Estate, and no other as shall be therein and
thereby to him or them adjudged and decreed; and that the Order of any of the
said Courts shall be a sufficient Warrant to all Sheriffs, or other proper
Officers to whom the same shall be directed, to put such Person or Persons in
the actual Seizin and Possession of the said Lands, any thing in this Act
contained, or any other Statute, Law, or Custom whatsoever to the contrary in
any wise notwithstanding.

Provided always, and be it further enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That
neither the said Act of Repeal, or this Present, or any thing in them, or in
either of them contained, shall extend to, or be construed to Forfeit or Vest
in your Majesty, your Heirs or Successors; or otherwise to bar, extinguish, or
weaken any Right of Entry, Right of Action, Use, Trust, Lease, Condition or
Equity of Redemption of any Mortgage or Mortgages, which on the said first Day
of August, One thousand six hundred eighty eight, belonged or appertained to
any Persons, not being forfeiting Persons, within the true intent and meaning
of the said Act of Repeal, or of this present Act; and which ever since the
said first Day of August, One thousand six hundred eighty eight, continued or
remained in such Persons, not being forfeiting Persons, or devolved, descended,
or come from them, or any of them, to any of their Heirs, Executors or
Administrators, not being forfeiting Persons as aforesaid, any thing in this
Act, or the said Act of Repeal to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always, That the said Person or Persons, claiming such Right of
Entry, Right of Action, Use, Trust, Lease, Condition, or Equity of Redemption
of Mortgage, do, and shall exhibit his and their Claim for the same, before the
Commissioners for execution of the said Act of Repeal, or of this present Act,
within sixty Days after the first sitting of the said Commissioners, and
procure the Adjucation of them, or any three or more of them thereupon, within
One hundred and twenty Days after the said first sitting of the said
Commissioners.

And whereas by one or more Office or Offices, in the Time of the Earl of
Strafford's Government in this Kingdom, in the Reign of King Charles the First,
of ever blessed Memory, All, or a great part of the Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments in the Province of Conaught, and Counties of Clare, Limerick and
Tipperary, were vested in his Majesty: And by the Acts of Settlement and
Explanation, the said Office and Offices are declared to be Null and Void,
since which time the said Acts have been by the said Act of Repeal, repealed,
and thereby some Prejudice might arise or accrue to the Proprietors concerned
in them Lands, if not prevented.

Be it therefore Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Office and
Offices, and every of them, commonly called the Grand Office, and the Title
thereby found, or endeavored to be made out or set up, from the time of the
finding or taking thereof, was and is hereby declared to be Null and Void, to
all Intents and Purposes whatsoever. Provided that nothing therein contained
shall any way extend, or be construed to extend to charge any Person or Persons
who has, bona Fide, paid any Rents or Arrears of Rent, that have been due and
payable out of any Lands hereby vested in your Majesty; or to charge any
Steward or Receiver, that received any such Rents, or Arrears of Rents, if he,
bona Fide, paid the same; but that he and they shall be hereby discharged, for
so much as he or they so, bona Fide paid, against your Majesty, your Heirs and
Successors. Provided always, and it is hereby Enacted, That every Person not
being a forfeiting Person, within the true intent and meaning of the said
former Act, or of this present Act; and who before the seventh Day of May, One
thousand six hundred eighty nine, had any Statute, Staple, or Recognizance for
payment of Money; or any Mortgage, Rentcharge, Portion, Trust, or other
Encumbrance, either in Law or Equity, or any Judgment, before the Two and
twentieth Day of May, One thousand six hundred eighty nine, for payment of
Money, which might charge any of the Estates, Lands, Tenements, or
Hereditaments, so as aforesaid forfeited unto, and vested in your Majesty,
shall and may have the benefit of the said Statutes Staples, Judgments,
Recognizances, Mortgages, Rentcharge, Portions, Trust, and other Encumbrances,
out of the Estate or Estates which should be liable thereunto, in case the said
former Act, or this present Act had never been made. Provided always, that the
Person and Persons who had such Statutes Staples, Judgments, Recognizances, or
other Trusts or Incumberances, do claim the same before the Commissioners, for
the Execution of the said former Act, within two months after the first sitting
of the said Commissioners, and procure their Adjucation thereof, within such
reasonable Time as the said Commissioners shall appoint for determining the
same. And to the end that such Person and Persons as shall have any of the said
Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, granted unto him as aforesaid, may know the
clear Value of the said Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments so to be granted
unto him above all Encumbrances, and may enjoy the same against all
Statute-Staples, Judgments, Recognizances, Mortgages, Rent-Charges* and other
Encumbrances not claimed-and adjudged as aforesaid;

Be it therefore further enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That all such
Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, as shall be forfeited unto and vested in
your Majesty, and granted by Letters Pattents pursuant to the said former Act,
or this present Act, shall be and are hereby freed, acquitted and discharged of
and from all Estates, Charges and Encumbrances whatsoever, other than what
shall be claimed and adjudged as aforesaid.

And whereas by one private Act of Parliament, entitled, An Act for securing
of several Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments to George Duke of Albemarle,
which Act was passed in the Reign of King Charles the Second; some Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments in this Kingdom, which on the two and twentieth Day
of October, one thousand six hundred forty one, belonged to some ancient
Proprietor or Proprietors, who were dispossessed thereof by the late usurped
Powers, were secured and assured unto the said George Duke of Albemarle, by
means whereof the ancient Proprietors of the said Lands may be barred and
deprived of their ancient Estates, unless the said Act be repealed, though such
ancient Proprietor or Proprietors be as justly entitled to Restitution, as
other ancient Proprietors who were dispossessed by the said Usurper, and barred
by the late Acts of Settlement and Explanation.

Be it therefore enacted, That the said Act for securing of several Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments to George Duke of Albemarle, be and is hereby
repealed to all Intents and Purposes whatsoever: And that the Proprietors of
the said Lands, and their Heirs and Assigns be restored to their said ancient
Estates in the same manner with the said other ancient Proprietors, their Heirs
and Assigns. And whereas several ancient Proprietors, whose Estates were
seized and vested in Persons, deriving a Title under the said Acts of
Settlement or Explanation, have in some time after the passing of the said
Acts, purchased their own ancient Estates, or part thereof, from the Persons
who held the same under the said Acts as aforesaid* which old Proprietors would
now be restored to their said ancient Estates, if they had not purchased the
same. And for as much as the said ancient Proprietors or their Heirs should
receive no Benefit of the said Act of Repeal, should they not be reprized for
the Money paid by them for their said ancient Estates,

Be it therefore enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every the
ancient Proprietor or Proprietors, or their Heirs who have laid out any Sum or
Sums of Money, for the Purchase of their own ancient Estates, or any part
thereof, as aforesaid, shall receive out of the common Stock of Reprizals a
sufficient Recompense and Satisfaction for the Money laid out or paid by him or
them for the Purchase of their said ancient Estate at the Rate of ten Years
Purchase, any Clause, Act or Statute to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

And for the Prevention of all unnecessary Delays and unjust Charges* which can
or may happen to the Subjects of this Realm before their full and final
Settlement, Be it further enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That where the
Commissioners for Execution of the said Act of Repeal, or any three or more of
them, shall give any Certificate under his and their Hands and Seals to any
Person or Persons, Bodies Politic or Corporate, in order to the passing of any
Letters Patents, according to the said Act, and shall likewise return a
Duplicate of such Certificate into his Majesty's Court of Exchequer at Dublin,
to be there enrolled, and the Person and Persons, Bodies Politic or Corporate,
to whom such Certificate shall be given, shall during the Space of six Months
next ensuing the Date thereof, diligently prosecute the having and obtaining
Letters Patents accordingly, but shall thereof be delayed and hindered by the
Neglect of any Officer or Officers; that then and in such Case the several and
respective Persons, Bodies Politic and Corporate, to whom and in whose behalf
such Certificate shall be given or granted, shall hold and enjoy the several
Mes^uages, Manors, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, in the several and
respective Certificates mentioned and allotted, according to such Estate, and
under such Rent as are therein mentioned, as fully and amply to all Intents and
Purposes, as if Letters Patents thereof had been granted and perfected
according to the Directions in the said former Act, any thing in this, or the
said former Act, or any other Law, Statute or Usage to the contrary
notwithstanding.

And whereas, by the Hardships and Oppressions introduced by the said Acts of
Settlement and Explanation, some ancient Proprietors who would have been
restorable by the said Act of Repeal, have been necessitated to accept of
Leases for Life, Lives or Years, or Gifts in Tail, or other Conveyances of
their own respective Estates, and have contracted to pay some Rents, Duties, or
other Reservations out of such their ancient Estates, by which Acceptance of
Leases or Gifts beforementioned, and by the said Agreements to pay Rents,
Duties or Reservations for the same; the said ancient Proprietors may be barred
or stopped, and concluded from the Benefit of Restitution, intended for ancient
Proprietors by the said Act of Repeal.

Be it therefore enacted, That the Acceptance of any such Lease or Leases, Gift
or Gifts in Tail, or any Agreement or Agreements upon any such Account for
Payment of Rents, Duties or any other Reservation for such their respective
ancient Estate or Estates, shall be no way prejudicial or binding, or
conclusive to any such ancient Proprietor, or to his or their Heirs, Executors,
or Administrators, who have not actually by some legal ways or means, released
his or their Right to his or their said ancient Estates, unto their said
Leassors or Donors, any thing herein, or in the said Act of Repeal to the
contrary notwithstanding.

Whereas some or most of the Lands to be given in Reprizals, have not been
surveyed by the Surveys, commonly called the Down-Survey, or Strafford-Survey;
and that a certain way is necessary to be prescribed for ascertaining the
Quit-Rents now made payable thereout:

Be it therefore enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That the Commissioners
for the Execution of the said Act of Repeal, or any three of them, shall and
may be empowered to ascertain such Quantities payable out of such Lands so to
be given in Reprize, and* to that Purpose to issue Commissions for Valuations
or Surve^s, as they shall think fit; and that such Surveys shall be made
according to the Rules and Methods used for the Down-Survey, wherein the
unprofitable is to be thrown in with the profitable; and where the Lands appear
barren, or the Quit-Rents by the said Act of Repeal, proper or fit to be
reduced, it shall and may be lawful for them to reduce the same; in which Case
such reduced or reserved Quit-Rents, shall be and is hereby the only Quit-Rent
payable out of the said Lands, if such Quit-Rents be more than the Crown-Rents,
before this Act payable out of the said Lands: But in case the ancient
Crown-Rent be more, the greater Rent shall be the Rent reserved thereout.

Provided yet likewise, that the Commissioners for the Execution of the said
Act of Repeal, or in Default of them, the Barons of their Majesty's Court of
Exchequer, within five Years after the first sitting of the Commissioners, for
the Execution of the said Act, shall be and are hereby empowered to reduce the
Quit-Rents by the said Act due and payable out of Lands, by the said Act of
Repeal to be restored, or formerly restored to the former Proprietors thereof,
where the Lands are barren, or of so small Value that the Quit-Rent does amount
to the fourth part of the Value of the Lands, and may be Discouragement to the
Plantation of the said Lands, and that such ascertaining or abating of
Quit-Rents, under the Hands and Seals of the said Commissioners or Barons
respectively, shall be as good and effectual, as if the same had been enacted
by these Presents, any thing herein, or in the said Acts of Repeal contained to
the contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further enacted, That the Commissioners to be appointed for settling
forth Reprizals pursuant to the said Act of Repeal, or any three of them, shall
out of the Stock of Reprizals therein, and in this present Act, or in either of
them mentioned, set forth and allot Reprizals to such Person and Persons, as by
Virtue of this present Act are appointed to be reprized, and shall and may also
execute such other parts of this Act as are to be executed by Commissioners.

And whereas diverse Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments forfeited unto and
vested in your Majesty, are or may be found to be liable to diverse Debts or
other entire Payments saved by this Act: and for levying and receiving the
same, the Person or Persons entitled thereunto, might charge any part of the
Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments originally liable to the said Debts or
Payments, with more than a just Proportion thereof, whereby some of the Persons
to whom part of the said Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments shall be allotted or
granted in Reprizal, may be overcharged in such Part or Proportion of the said
Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments, as shall be so to him or them granted or
allotted, which may occasion great Prejudice and Loss to some of the said
reprizable Persons, if due Course be not taken for apportioning the said Debts
and Payments: For Remedy whereof, Be it enacted, by the Authority aforesaid,
That the Commissioners for Execution of the said Act of Repeal, and this
present Act, or any three or more of them, be and are hereby empowered and
required equally to apportion such Debts and Payments as shall appear to them
to be chargeable upon, or levyable out of any Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments, to be set forth for Reprizals as aforesaid; and to ascertain
what Proportion of such Debts or Payments each and every Proportion of the
Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, which were originally liable thereunto, and
which shall be separately set forth for Reprizals as aforesaid, shall remain
liable to pay or discharge; and the respective Grantees, and every of them, and
their respective Proportions of the said Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments to
them allotted for Reprizals, shall not be liable to any more of the said Debts
or Payments, than by the said Apportionment shall be appointed and directed,
which Proportion of the said Debts or Payments is to be inserted in the
Certificate, to be granted of the Lands liable thereunto* if the Person or
Persons obtaining such Certificate, shall desire the same; any thing in this,
or the said Act of Repeal to the contrary notwithstanding.

And it is further enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That all Letters
Patents hereafter to be granted of any Offices or Lands whatsoever, shall
contain in the same Letters Patents, a Clause requiring and compelling the said
Patentees, to cause the said Letters Patents to be enrolled in the Chancery of
Ireland, within a time therein to be limited; and all Letters Patents wherein
such Clause shall be omitted, are hereby declared to be utterly void and of
none effect.

Provided always, that if your sacred Majesty at any time before the first Day
of November next, by Letters Patents under the Broad Seal of England, if
re^^ding there; or by Letters Patents under the Great Seal of Ireland, during
your Majesty's abode here, shall grant your gracious Pardon or Pardons to any
one or more of the Persons herein before mentioned or intended to be attainted,
who shall return to their Duty and Loyalty; that then and in such case, such
Person and Persons so pardoned, shall be and is hereby excepted out of this
present Act, as if they had never been therein named, or thereby intended to be
attainted, and shall be and are hereby acquitted and discharged from all
Attainders, Penalties and Forfeitures created or inflicted by this Act, or the
said Act of Repeal, excepting such Share or Proportion of their real or
personal Estate, as your Majesty shall think fit to except or reserve from
them, any thing in this present Act, or in the said Act of Repeal, contained to
the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always, that every such Pardon and Pardons be pursuant to a Warrant
under your Majesty's Privy Signet and Sign manual, and that no one Letters
Patents of Pardon shall contain above one Person; and that all and every such
Letters Patents of Pardon and Pardons, shall be enrolled in the Rolls Office of
your Majesty's High Court of Chancery in this Kingdom, at or before the last
Day of the said Month of November; or, in Default thereof, to be absolutely
void and of none Effect, any thing herein contained to the contrary
notwithstanding.

Provided likewise, that if any Person or Persons so pardoned, shall at any
time after the Date of the said Pardon, join with, or aid or assist any of your
Majesty's Enemies, or with any Rebels in any of your Majesty's Dominions, and
be thereof convict or attainted by any due Course of Law, that then and in such
Case they shall forfeit all the Benefit and Advantage of such Pardon, and shall
be again subject and liable to all the Penalties and Forfeitures inflicted on
them and every of them, by this or the said Act of Repeal, as if such Pardon or
Pardons had never been granted.

Provided always, that nothing in this Act contained, shall extend, or be
construed to extend to, or vest in your Majesty any Lands, Tenements or
Hereditaments, or other Interest of any ancient Proprietor, who by the said Act
of Repeal, is to be restored to his ancient Estate; but that all such Person
and Persons, and all their Right, Title and Interest, are and shall be saved
and preserved according to the true Intent and Meaning of the said Act, any
thing in these Presents to the contrary notwithstanding.

Copia vera. Richard Darling,
Cleric. in Offic. Mri. Rot.
The Persuasions and Suggestions the Irish Catholics make to his Majesty;
Supposed to be drawn up by Talbot, titular Archbishop of Dublin, and found in
Col. Talbot's House, July 1. 1671.
1. THAT the Rebellion in Anno 1641. was the Act of a few, and out of fear of
what was doing in England. That they were provoked and driven to it by the
English to get their Forfeitures. That they were often willing to submit to the
King, and did it effectually Anno 1648; and held up his Interest against the
Usurper, who had murdered his Father, till 1653. After which time they served
his Majesty in Foreign Parts till his Restoration. 2. That they acquiesce in
his Majesty's Declaration of November. 30. 1660. And are willing that the
Adventurers and Soldiers, should have what is therein promised them; but what
they and others have more, may be resumed and disposed of as by the
Declaration. 3. They desire for what Lands intended to be restored them, shall
be continued to the Adventurers and Soldiers, that they may have a
Compensation in Money out of his Majesty's new Revenues of Quit-Rents, payable
by the Adventurers and Soldiers. The Hearth*Money and Excise being such
Branches as were not in 1641; and hope that the one will balance the other. 4.
They say, That his Majesty has now no more need of an Army than before 1641;
That the remainder of his Revenue will maintain now, as well as then, what
Forces are necessary. 5. They desire to be restored to Habitations and Freedom
within Corporations. 1. That the General Trade may advance. 2. That Garrisons
and Cittadels may become useless. 3. That they may serve his Majesty in
Parliament, for bettering his Revenue, and crushing and securing the Seditious
in all Places. 6. They desire to be Sheriffs and Justices of the Peace, etc.
for the Ends and Purposes aforesaid; and to have the Power of the Civil and
Ordinary Militia. 7. They also desire to be formed into a Militia, and to be
admitted to be of the standing Army. 8. That their Religion is consonant to
Monarchy and implicit Obedience. That they themselves have actually served his
Majesty in Difficulties. That they have no other way to advantage themselves,
than by a strict adherence to the King. That they have no other Refuge; whereas
many of his Majesty's Subjects do lean hard another way. 9. That the Roman
Catholics are six to one of all others; that of the said one to six, some are
Atheists and Neuters, who will profess the Roman Catholic Religion; others
devoutly given, will affect the same course, that the rest may have their
Liberty of Conscience, and may be corrected in case they abuse it. 10. That the
Roman Catholics having the full Power of the Nation, they can at all times
spare his Majesty an Army of Sixty thousand Men, there being Twelve hundred
thousand Souls in Ireland; and so consequently an Hundred and fifty thousand
between sixteen and sixty Years old: Which Forces, if allowed to Trade, shall
have Shipping to transport themselves when his Majesty pleases. 11. That they
have a good Correspondence abroad, for that great numbers of their Nation are
Soldiers, Priests, and Merchants, in esteem with several great Princes and
their Ministers. 12. That the Toleration of the Roman Catholics in England
being granted, and the Insolence of the Hollanders taken down, a Confederacy
with France which can influence England, as Scotland can also, will together,
by God's Blessing, make his Majesty's Monarchy Absolute and Real. 13. That if
any of the Irish cannot have their Lands in specie, but Money in lieu as
aforesaid, some of them may transport themselves into America, possibly near
New England, to check the growing Independents of that Country. 14. That the
next Parliament being formed as aforesaid, great Sums of Money will be given
his Majesty. Query, Whether the Roman Catholic Clergy may not be admitted into
the House of Peers this next Parliament, or stay a little? 15. That for
effecting the Premises, it is better his Majesty should govern Ireland by a
Committee of such of his Privy Council as approved the Conjunction with France,
and as are not concerned in Ireland, rather than by the Council of Ireland. 16.
Let such a Lord Lieutenant be in Ireland, who in Inclination, and for fear of
being displaced, will begin this Work of laying the Foundation of his Majesty's
Monarchy, and hazard his Concernments upon that account. 17. That the Army be
gradually reformed, and opportunity taken to displace Men not affected to this
Settlement; and to put into the Army or Garrisons in Ireland, some fit Persons
to begin this Work; and likewise Judges upon the Benches. 18. Query, What
Precedents may be found to break the several Farms, and to be Master of the
Exchequer, and pole the Gains of the Bankers, Brewers, and Farmers?
1. Whether the paying of a Fine or Income upon all Grants of Charters,
Officers and Commanders, may not bind and fasten the Grant, Duty, and
Allegiance, as with Silver Chains, more firmly to the King's Government? 2.
Whether any Grants may be presumed to be new obtained, without paying a great
Value, at least to some great Officer or Courtier for procuring the same? 3.
Whether it be not ^^^sonable, a Year's Value be paid as a grateful
Acknowledgment to the Prince's Bounty upon Temporal Grants, as First Fruits
from Spiritual? 4. Whether to reserve such Grants to the immediate dispose of
the King, be not the Interest of the Crown, and a Means to create a closer
adherence to the Person of the Prince, and so make Monarchy more Absolute and
Real, instead of factious Dependences on great Men, who are often acted more by
Self-interest than the Advantage of their Master? 5. Whether a considerable
Revenue may not be raised to the Crown, that if such Courtiers received it upon
procuring Grants, it were paid to the Private or Privy-Purse? 6. Whether the
Subject would not more cheerfully pay a Years Value or two to the Prince upon
passing Grants, than to be liable to the unreasonable Exaction of hungry
Courtiers, who sometimes make a Prey, both of the Subject and the Prince's
Favor? 7. Whether many worthy and deserving Men have not been put by and
denied the benefit of his Majesty's Grant by false Insinuation, for not
gratifying some such viperous Officers? 8. Whether his Majesty might not expect
to have a fitter Person recommended, when there is no Advantage to be made by
their Recommendations, than when Offices are canted by Courtiers, and such only
recommended as will give most, but the least fit? 9. Whether if by the Silver
Key Men chance to get admittance into Offices, the Prince may not make
Advantage by their Misbehaviour, since by losing both their Money and
Employment, the King will not only get a Fine, and better Servants, but also
gratify the People by displacing an ill One.
A Copy of a Letter of the Irish Clergy to King James, in favor of the Earl of
Tyrconnel. Found amongst Bishop Tyrrell's Papers in Dublin.
SIR,
SInce it has pleased the Almighty Providence, by placing your Majesty in the
Throne of your Ancestors, to give you both Authority and Occasion of exercising
those Royal Virtues which alone do merit, and would acquire you the Crown to
which you were born; We, though comprehended in the general Clemency and
Indulgence which you extend to the rest of our fellow Subjects, are
nevertheless so remote from your Majesty's Presence, that our Prayers can have
no access to you but by a Mediator. And since of all others the Earl of
Tyrconnel did first espouse, and chiefly maintain, these Twenty five Years last
past, the Cause of your poor oppressed Roman Catholic Clergy, against our many
and powerful Adversaries; and is now the only Subject of your Majesty, under
whose Fortitude and Popularity in this Kingdom, we dare cheerfully and with
assurance own our Loyalty, and assert your Majesty's Interest: Do make it our
humble Suit to your Majesty, that you will be pleased to lodge your Authority
over us in his Hands, to the Terror of the Factious, and Encouragement of your
faithful Subjects here; since his Dependence on your Majesty is so great, that
we doubt not but that they will receive him with such Acclamations, as the long
captivated Israelites did their Redeemer Mordecai. And since your Majesty in
Glory and Power does equal the mighty Ahashuerus; and the Virtue and Beauty of
your Queen is as true a Parallel to his adored Hester; We humbly beseech she
may be heard as our great Patroness, against that Haman, whose Pride and
Ambition of being honored as his Master, may have hitherto kept us in Slavery.
And tho we wish none the fate of so dreadful an Example, but rather a timely
Penitence and Conversion; we yet humbly crave your Majesty's Protection against
all such, if it may consist with your Royal Wisdom and Pleasure, to which we
with all humility submit, in the establishing of the ^a^d Earl of Tyrconnel in
such Authority here, as may secure us in the exercise of our Function, to the
Honor of God, and offering up our Prayers and Sacrifice for the continuation
of your Majesty's long and prosperous Reign over us.

Dublin, the of July, 1685. Your Majesty's most dutiful and obedient Subjects.

The Copy of a Letter sent the King, August 14. 1686. Found in Bishop Tirrel's
Papers, but imperfect.
May it please your Majesty:
I Humbly beg of you, for God's sake and your own, to read what I here presume
to write; not but that I know it may well be thought an inexcusable piece of
Presumption in any Subject to say or write any thing that may look like
prescribing to a King, especially a King that from his own knowledge, and the
best Mother of it, long Experience, must with universal consent be allowed the
most competent Judge in his Dominions of what ought or ought not to be done. Yet
inasmuch as your present Counselors are for the most part divided from you by
the unhappy difference in Religion, I hope your Majesty will pardon a loyal
Plain-dealer, for presuming to offer his well-meaning Opinion of the present
Posture of Affairs.

Sir, As I am one that makes it my Business to study your Interest, I took the
liberty of telling you in former Letters, That in order to replant Religion in
your Dominions, you ought to begin with Ireland, where the Work is more than
half done to your Hand, and where your Prerogative allows you to do with that
Kingdom as you please; for it was not to be expected that England and Scotland,
so irreconcilable to Popery, would consent to take off the Penal Laws by a
Parliament, if not awed by a more faithful Army than you have at present. And
now that a needful Alteration is begun in Ireland, it should be carried on
speedily for your own and Catholic Subjects security; for all the Sectaries in
your Dominions are so galled at some of the Phanaticks being discarded in
Ireland, that they join Heads, concert Councils, swear and contrive Vengeance
against all Papists, who must expect no Quarters but during your Majesty's
Reign: But all good Men have reason to hope, that that God who delivered you
from the manifold Dangers of your Life, and made your Enemies your Footstool,
will spare your precious Life till you accomplish the glorious Work reserved
for you, by that Providence that is your best Lifeguard. And it is the comfort
of all good Subjects, that besides your being of all sides descended from
healthy Parents, you have (I thank God) at present all the Symptoms of a
vigorous long-lived Man: Nay, that your having been suckled by a very healthy
long-lived Woman, must in reason contribute much to the length of your Life;
therefore put your Trust in that God that never failed any good Man that placed
his Hopes with considence in him; and consider the Proverb, That he that begins
well, has in a manner half done his Work; which cannot be more aptly applied,
than to the auspicious beginning of your Reign: for God has so dashed the
Enterprises and Hopes of your Enemies, that the terror of your Name, and their
experience of your good Fortune, is, with the help of the Army they gave* you
way to raise, sufficient, if not to change their Hearts, at least to curb their
Insolence: Therefore listen not to trimming Counselors, whose aversion to your
Religion, and cunning Design of spinning out your Life with their pian piano,
may put them upon urging to you; that great Alterations are dangerous, when
carried on otherwise than by slow and imperceptible Degrees: Which is true,
where Matters are not so ordered in point of Power, as not to need fear a
Perturbation in the State; but otherwise, Celerity and Resolution adds Life and
Vigor to all Actions, especially such as relate to Change, which is often
prevented by tedious Deliberations; for the Party fearing an Alteration, is
always (as having more reason) more jealous and vigilant than he from whom it
is feared; and therefore leaves no Stone unturned to hinder the accomplishment
of Designs, that might take Effect if not marred, for not being vigorously
pushed on as soon as resolved upon: And as Precipitation is an Error, so is
Irresolution, which is never to be practiced by any, especially a known wise
and resolute Prince; but when the Issue of Enterprises depends more upon Chance
than a prudent management of Causes, and rational foresight of Events. But
nothing causes Irresolution more, than a medly of Counselors of a different
Religion with their Prince, who will be on all Occasions as industrious to
prevent, as he can be to carry on any Design for re-establishing Religion. And
inasmuch as Authority, Courage, and Prudence, are the three most necessary
Qualifications in a Prince, that conduce most of all ordinary Means to the
replantation of a Religion; and that all three meet to the highest pitch in
your Majesty, no protestant Counselor will advise you to any alteration in the
Government, that may directly or indirectly tend to a Change in Religion: Nay,
they lie under such Jealousy and Prejudice, as may induce them to magnify
Danger where there is none at all, and take no notice where it really is: A
Device much practiced in England of late Years. Hence in the late King's time,
No Danger threatened his Majesty but from the Catholic Quarters, whilst the
greatest of Dangers hovered over his and your Sacred Heads* warpt up in the
dark Cloud of Fanatic Treachery and Dissimulation.

Sir, It is plain, that the reality of the Danger lies in your Delay of making
your Catholic Subjects considerable. For God's sake consider, that yours and
their sworn Enemies threaten aboveboard, that Popery or Protestantism must and
shall be for ever extirpated in these Kingdoms, and that all Papists must
inevitably split upon a Rock in that Haven where they had reason to hope for
Safety, if not secured against the threatening Storm during your Majesty's Life,
whereof the Days and Hours are precious, considering the important Game you
have to play, and the indispensable Obligation you lie under (before that
God..... and contribute as much from the Helm to the conversion of Souls, as
the best of Preachers from Pulpits; for Words do but move, but Examples, and
especially those of great Men, have more resistless Charms, and a more than
ordinary Ascendent over the Minds of the common People: Which Consideration
should prevail with your Majesty to prefer, without delay* courageous wise and
zealous Catholics, to the most eminent and profitable Station^* especially in
your Household, where you are King by a two-^old Title; by which means you would
in a short time be stocked with faithful Counselors all of a piece, that would
join Heads, Hearts and Hands, and would contribute unanimously to the effectual
carrying on so good a Design..... distinction 'twixt his politic and natural
Capacity, fighting against the one in defense of the other, it is to be feared
the Protestants of your English Army would, in case of a Rebellion, be too
inclinable to fight for the King, Parliament, and Protestant Religion, against
the King as Papist, his Popish Cabals and Popery. To prevent which (as Matters
now stand) there is but one sure and safe Expedient, that is, to purge without
delay the rest of your Irish Army, increase and make it wholly Catholic; raise
and train a Catholick-Militia there; place Catholics at the He^^ of that
Kingdom; issue out Quo-warranto's against all the Corporations in it; put all
Employs, Civil as well as Military, into Catholic Hands. This done, call a
Parliament of Loyal..... present Revenues of that Kingdom cannot answer other
State-Contingencies, and maintain a greater Army than is already on foot,
especially when the Revenues rather fall than rise there. The Solution to this
Objection is to be expected also from your Majesty, in whose Breast it lies to
take off by a Law, the Restraint that Country is under, as to Trade and
Traffic, for which it lies much more convenient than any of your Kingdoms.
When this is done, the Irish Merchants will, like the Soldiers, flock home
from all parts of the World; but with this difference, that as the Soldiers
come to get your Money, the Merchants will bring all their..... that there are
few or none Protestants in that Country, but such as are joined with the Whigs
against the Common Enemy. And as to your Revenues, you are cheated of them by
the mismanagement and sinistrous Practices of your Commissioners, whereof the
major part are in their Hearts rank Whigs, and of a whiggish Race; and hence it
is that they employ no Officers but Men of their own Kidney, that swallow the
Oaths and your Revenue to boot. And tho no King can well avoid being imposed on
by his Servants, I believe it in my Conscience, that the present Managers of
your Revenues in Ireland, think it no Sin to rob a Popish King of his Due.
Hence it is that there is an universal Agreement and Combination betwixt
the..... Merchants..... we will, by way of Retaliation, take care that no
Catholic be admitted into the Civil. This Combination makes your Letters for
Civil Places, the Reversion of Outlawries, and for Catholics being admitted
free of Corporations, so little regarded in Ireland by those that past for
Tories here, etc. yet publicly espouse the whiggish Quarrel the other side the
Water. I beseech you, Sir, consider, that however your Kingly Prudence may
prevail with You to dissemble Your Resentments of the Noncompliance and
Disobedience of Your stiff-neck'd English Protestant Subjects, You ought to
exert Your Regal Authority in Ireland, a Kingdom more peculiarly Your own,
where..... month before, or at least not outlive Your Majesty a month) for if
that poor Nation be not made considerable during Your Reign, his Lordship must
not hope for the Favor my Lord Stafford had, of being legally Murdered by a
formal Trial, but may well expect, (all Formality laid aside) to be sacrificed
to the unbridled Fury of the lawless Rabble, and dissected into little Morsels,
as the De-Wits were in Holland. And truly the Fanatics threaten no less; and
it were to be wished they cried out upon more of Your Ministers than they do at
present; for You may take it for granted, they will never speak well of Your
real Friends..... other will endeavor to mar, and the Work will go on like
that of Babel, confusedly, for want of good Intelligence among the Workmen.

Sir, You are under God the great Architect, that will, with the Blessing of
Jesus, live to see the glorious Structure fully finished: In order to which
it is requisite, You lose no time in making Ireland entirely Your own, that
England and Scotland may follow. You are gone too far, if You do not go
farther; not to advance, is to lose Ground; Delays are dangerous, and all the
World allow Expedition and Resolution to..... if this were once compassed,
France could no more hope upon a falling out with England, to take advantage of
the diversity of our Sects, and what may spring thence, Domestic Jars and
Divisions.

Sir, Notwithstanding the Doubts and Fears of Trimming Courtiers, and some
Cow-hearted Catholics* You may live long enough to undertake and crown this
great Work, with the Grace and Assistance of the same Almighty God that
defeated the Rebels in the West, and made them instrumental in settling You in
Your Throne, and that permitted this Country to be lately sprinkled with the
Blood of Martyrs, which must infallibly contribute to the Conversion of Souls
in this Kingdom; for the Blood of Martyrs is and ever was the fruitful Seed of
the Church: The Seed is sown in many parts of England, and the Harvest will
without doubt be great and plentiful, but the Workmen too too few, if You do
not provide your self with Catholic Privy-Counsellors, Ministers, Judges,
Officers Civil and Military, and Servants: As to the Choice of which, I will
mind Your Majesty of the Advice given Moses by Jethro his Father-in-Law, in the
following words; Provide out of all the People, able Men, such as fear God, Men
of Truth, hating Covetousness. When Your Counselors and Ministers are thus
qualified, and not till then, You may hope to do what becomes a James the
Second. And to furnish Your self with able Men, You must follow Your Royal
Father's Advice to the Prince of Wales; that is, With an equal Eye, and
impartial Hand, distribute Favors and Rewards to all Men, as You find them for
their real Goodness, both in Ability and Fidelity worthy and capable of them.
Such as fear God, as the truly Wisest will advise You to the best Measure for
promoting God's Glory; Men of Truth will, like Tyrconnel, serve You faithfully,
without trimming, tho with never so apparent Hazard to their Fortunes and
Lives. And Men hating Covetousness, will not betray Your Interest, be
corrupted, nor sell Places to such Undermanagers of Your Revenue, as buying
them for a Spill in gross, will be sure to retail them at Your Cost, a Practice
much in use here, and in Ireland at present, where few or no Places can be had
without Bribes; by which means You are cheated in both Kingdoms of an Hundred
thousand Pounds a Year, in the opinion of understanding, honest and indifferent
Judges; for no Man will give a Shilling surreptitiously for an Office, but with
a design to cheat You of Twenty: To prevent which, there is no Remedy, but that
of employing smart Men of known Integrity, to be chosen without Favor or
Affection, that will be content with their respective Salleries, and employ
their utmost Industry to improve, not imbezel Your Revenues the Ornaments of
Peace and Sinews of War.

SIR,
These Kingdoms are of Opinion, Popery will break in upon them, and it were a
pity to disappoint them; and when You take effectual Measures, Your trimming
Courtiers will unmask and come over; nay, half the Kingdom will be converted of
it self. What I have here presumed to write, is the effect of my unfeigned Zeal
for the Good of Religion, and Your Majesty's Interest, which I hope will induce
You to pardon a plain-dealing and loving Subject, that daily beseeches God to
bless Your Majesty and these Kingdoms with a long and prosperous Reign, and
with numerous long-lived Male Issues; and to inspire You with wholesome Thoughts,
that may direct You to the performance of such Heroic Actions as may gain You
immortal Fame in this World, and eternal Glory in the next.

Lord Clarendon's Speech in Council, on his leaving the Government of Ireland.
My Lords,
IT has been sometimes used to make Speeches upon these Occasions, but I know
my insufficiency for that Task, and therefore shall trouble your Lordships with
very few words. In the first place, my Lords, I give your Lordships many thanks
for the Civilities I have received from every one of you, and for the great
Assistance I have had from you in the discharge of my Duty here. I know your
Lordships can witness for me, that I never desired your concurrence in any
thing that was not for the King's Service. I do again beg your Lordships to
accept of my Thanks, with this assurance, that I shall give the King an account
(when I have the honor to kiss his Hand) of your Lordships great readiness and
diligence to advance his Service.

My Lord Deputy, I shall not long detain your Lordship; The King has placed
your Excellency in a very great Station; has committed to your Care, the
Government of a great and flourishing Kingdom, of a Dutiful, Loyal, and
Obedient People: It is extremely to be lamented, that there are such Feuds and
Animosities among them, which I hope your Excellency's Prudence, with the
assistance of so wise a Council, will disperse* I must needs say, both from my
own Observation, and the Information I have had from my Lords the Judges, who
often visit the whole Kingdom, that there is a great readiness and willingness
in all People to serve and obey the King. I must here a little enlarge to your
Excellency, because I reckon my self bound to give the King an account of his
Subjects, and I would not willingly say any thing when I am at such a distance,
which I have not mentioned here. The English in this Country have been aspersed
with the Character of being generally Fanatics, which is a great Injury to
them; I must do them the justice to say, that they are of the Church of
England, as appears by their Actions as well as Professions. The Churches here
are as much frequented, and the Discipline of the Church as well observed, as
in England it self; which is to be attributed to the Piety and Labor of my
Lords the Bishops. We of the Church of England can brag, that when Rebellion
overspread the three Kingdoms, not one Orthodox Member of our Church was
engaged against the Crown: And in our late Disorders, we can boast we were
Opposers of the Bills of Exclusion; and the Sense his Majesty has been
graciously pleased to express of our Loyalty, will never be forgotten by us. I
had the happiness to be born a Member of the Church of England, and I hope God
will give me the Grace to die one. One thing the English of this Country have
to glory in, That of all his Majesty's Subjects, they made the earliest
Advances toward his Majesty's Restoration, when the three Kingdoms were
governed by Usurpers. And after all the Endeavors of his Loyal Subjects in
England seemed to be disappointed, and there appeared no Hopes, by the total
defeating of Sir G. Booth, the English then in this Kingdom, offered to submit
to his Majesty's Authority. I do not say this, my Lord, to detract from his
Majesty's R. C. Loyal Subjects, many of whom I my self knew served and suffered
with him abroad; but I speak it in justice to the others who did their Duty.
There is but one thing more I shall trouble your Excellency with; I am sorry
that I cannot say that I leave a full Treasure, but I can say that I leave no
Debts. The Revenue is in good Order, which must be owned to be due to the
unwearied Industry and Diligence of the Commissioners. The Army is entirely
paid to Christmas day last; and I have advanced a Month's Subsistence-money
for January. The Civil and Pensionary Lists are likewise cleared to Christmas:
I doubt not but your Excellency's Care will carry all things on in the same
Method. God Almighty bless the King, and grant him long Life; and I beseech God
to prosper this excellent Country. I received this Sword in Peace, and I thank
God, by the King's Command, I deliver it in Peace to your Excellency; and I
heartily wish you Joy of the Honor the King has done you.

A General Abstract of the Gross Produce of his Majesty's Revenue in Ireland,
in the three first Years of the Management, beginning at Christmas 1682.
ending Christmas 1685.
1683, 1684, 1685. Customs Inwards and Impt. Excise 85844 17 2 91424 8 8^ / ^
91117 13 65 / ^ Customs Outward -- 32092 11 4 33425 15 2 29428 8 11 Seizures
and Fines -- 965 2 3 615 1* 5^ / ^ 460 11 5 Prizage -- 1452 1693 1882 Inland
Excise -- 68344 1 3 77580 3 7 79169 4 4 Ale Licenses -- 8283 14 11^ / 4 9538 4
46/8 99^5 14 11^ / ^ Wine, etc. Licenses -- 2736 12 3114 10 2^ / 2 3467 11 3
Quit Crown and Custodiam Rents -- 68699 9 7 68385 8 0 68922 4 5^ / 2
Hearth-Money -- 31041 31646 32953 12 00 Casual Revenue -- 820 3 3 1745 16 2
1564 16 11 Totals, l. 300297 11 11^ / 4 319168 7 9 318961 18 0^ / 8 Arrears of
each of the above-Years remaining uncollected at Christmas 1685. -- 7659 1 6
9799 9 8 34971 9 3

Net Cash paid into the Treasury in the three Years abovementioned, over and
besides the Charges of Management, and Sallaries to the Officers of the Revenue
in the said time -- 712972 17 2 Cash remaining in the Collectors Hands at
Christmas, 1685, ready to be paid in -- 55655 10 3 The Solvent Part of the
abovementioned Arrears which was actually levied and paid into the Treasury
before Christmas, 1688. -- 30000 00 00 Total Cash, l. 798628 07 5 Which at a
Medium for three Years, amounts for each Year to the Sum of -- 266209 00 00
Sheriffs for the Year 1687. Febr. 16. 1686.
Counties. Sheriffs. Ardmagh -- Marcus Clarke. Antrim -- Cormuck O. Neil. Cavan
-- Lucas Reily. Clare -- John Mac. Nemara of Cratelag^. Cork -- Nicholas Brown
of Bantrey. Catherlogh -- Sir Lawrence Esmond. Dublin -- Thomas Warren. Down
-- Valentine Russell. Donnegall -- Charles Hamilton. Fermanagh -- Cohonnagh
Mac-Gwire. Galway -- John Ke^^ Esquire Kildare -- John Wogan. King's County --
Hewar Oxburgh. Kilkenny -- John Grace Esquire Kerry -- Donogh Mac-Gellicuddy.
Leitrim -- Alexander Mac-Donnel. Lowth -- Patrick Bellew. Limerick -- Edward
Rice of Ballynitty. Longford -- James Nugent Esquire Mead -- Walter Nangle Esquire
Monoghan -- Sir John Flemming. Mayo -- Dominick Brown. Queen's County --
Edmond Morris Esquire Roscomon -- John Dillon Esquire Sligoe -- Henry Crafton of
Longford. Tyrone -- Terence Donelly. Wexford -- Patrick Colclough. Westmeath --
Thomas Nugent. Wicklow -- Francis Meara. Waterford -- John Nugent. Londonderry
-- Elected by the Charter. Cipperary -- Appointed by the Duke of Ormond.

John Plunkett Lessee of Christ. Lord Baron of Dunsany, Plantiff. Philip Tuite
and John Rawlins, Defendants.
Sir Edward Tyrrell's Affidavit about packing of Juries.
WHereas there issued two several Venire Faciases, at the Plantiff's Suit,
returnable to his Majesty's Court of Exchequer, directed to Edward Tyrrell Esquire
then High Sheriff of the County of Mead, the first Year of his now Majesty's
Reign. Now Sir Edward Tyrrell Baronet came this day before me, and made Oath,
That one Mr. Plunket, Brother to the said Lord of Dunsany, came to Longwood to
this Deponent's House; and desired this Deponent to stand the Lord Dunsany's
Friend, and to give him a Jury that would do him Right; and withal said, this
Deponent should have (after the said Lord of Dunsany should be restored to the
Possession of his Estate) the sum of three or four hundred Pounds. To which
this Deponent answered, He would do him Justice. The said Mr. Plunket desired
this Deponent to meet him at Mr. Nugent his Counsel's House, where he would
further discourse the Matter. This Deponent did accordingly meet the said
Thomas Plunket, where several Proposals and Overtures were made all to no
purpose. This Deponent further deposes, That in some short time after, the
said Lord of Dunsany came to this Deponent's said House, and after some
Discourse, he the said Dunsany desired this Deponent to befriend him against
those that wronged him, and kept him out of his Estate. Whereupon this Deponent
told the said Lord of Dunsany what offer his Brother made him. The said Lord of
Dunsany replying, said, His Brothers were all on the catch, and that he would
do his own Business, and not trouble them, or any of them, or words to that
purpose; and desired this Deponent to return him a good Jury, and that he, the
said Dunsany, would give this Deponent twenty Guinnies in hand, and three or
four hundred Pounds when he should be restored to the Possession of his Estate.
To which this Deponent made answer, That he would impose nothing on his
Lordship* and that he would do him Right. Then the said Lord Dunsany swore,
that this Deponent should not repent what Kindness this Deponent would show him
in that Affair, and said, he would not fail paying the twenty Guinnies upon the
return of the said Venires. This Deponent desired the said Lord of Dunsany to
employ his Brother Thomas Plunket in the prosecution of that Concern; which he
promised he would do, and thereupon began to name such as he would have of the
Jury: Which this Deponent desired he should forbear, telling him, if this
Deponent should be examined to that, the Array would be quashed. The said
Dunsany then said, he would put the Venires into this Deponent's Hands, and do
what he thought fit, and said, this Deponent should hear from him within some
short time, which he performed. And this Deponent deposes, that he did receive
the said two Venires, either from the said Lord Dunsany's Messenger, or from
himself or one of his Servants. But this Deponent having recollected his
Memory, is more apt to believe that it was the said Lord of Dunsany's Messenger
or Servant, whom this Deponent has seen before in the said Lord's Company,
that came according to his the said Lord Dunsany's Promise, that delivered the
said Venires to this Deponent; for he desired to know at his departure from
this Deponent, where and when the said Mr. Thomas Plunket should meet this
Deponent in order to return the said Writs, or words to that effect. That this
Deponent appointed him to give the said Thomas Plunket notice to meet him at
Trim, at one Mr. Eveys House, on such a day as this Deponent cannot tax his
Memory now with. That this Deponent having several Occasions to this City,
waited on Mr. Daley this Deponent's Counsel, now Mr. Justice Daley, and advised
with him about the Proposals, and said Overtures betwixt him this Deponent, and
the said Lord of Dunsany; and thereupon resolved to serve the said Lord Dunsany
gratis, and not to take or accept of any manner of Consideration from the said
Lord of Dunsany, and that he this Deponent would be very just to him; which
Resolution was approved of by the said Mr. Justice Daley. This Deponent further
deposes, That according to appointment, being met with punctually, had some
Discourse with the said Thomas Plunket, who said, The said Lord of Dunsany his
Brother was not prepared for a Trial, and that he would go on soon with all his
Estate at once; and that them two Parcels were inconsiderable in respect of the
Bulk of his Estate; and desired this Deponent to reserve the best Men, in order
to return them on the Juries, when he should put other Venires for that purpose
in this Deponent's hands, or words to that purpose. This Deponent desired him
to consider what he had to do, and he should not blame him this Deponent
hereafter. He the said Thomas Plunket then replied, That he would be satisfied
with what Returns this Deponent should make on the said two Venires, and
desired that the best Men might be reserved as aforesaid. Whereupon this
Deponent soon after returned the aforesaid Venires, with Pannels to them
severally annexed. This Deponent further deposes, That he having notice from
the Lord Bp of Clogher, that he heard that the said Lord of Dunsany should
reflect on this Deponent, saying, He would not return him a good Jury without a
Consideration: and having met the said Thomas Plunket in the said Lord Bishop's
Lodgings, in Michaelmass or Hillary Term last, he desired the said Lord Bishop
to acquaint the said Thomas Plunket with the Expressions he heard of the said
Lord of Dunsany. Which he having done, the said Thomas Plunket said, That this
Deponent desired no Consideration, and that the Lord Dunsany aforesaid was much
obliged to him this Deponent; and that he was mighty kind to him, and would
justify the same. This Deponent further deposes, That the said Thomas Plunket
having met this Deponent at Longwood, after some Discourse he had with this
Deponent, the seventeenth day of March last past, showed him a List of the
Juries, and asked this Deponent if he returned them? To which this Deponent
answered, That he had (as he believed): He the said Thomas Plunket thereupon
said, most of them were Phanaticks, and that they would hang the said Lord of
Dunsany if they could. This Deponent made answer then, That if they proved
inconvenient, that it was the said Thomas Plunket's fault, for that he had
desired this Deponent to return what he this Deponent pleased, and to reserve
the best Men for the Bulk of the said Lord Dunsany's Estate, or words to that
effect. The said Thomas Plunket said, He would never consent to the return of
such Juries; and passionately said, If he had the twenty Guinnies to give this
Deponent, that he would have better Juries. This Deponent asked the said Thomas
Plunket, if this Deponent desired any such Sum, or any Sum of him when he met
at Trim? he then replied, that he did not, but that the said Lord Dunsany did
promise it. After a while he likewise said, That he told the said Lord of
Dunsany, that this Deponent could not be supposed to have made that Return for
Ill Will or Gain, for that none would give any Sum of Money where the Party
could Nonsuit himself; as also that this Deponent had returned good Juries for
several of his Country, naming Mr. Evers and others, and that it was his ill
Luck that hindered him, or words to that effect. This Deponent further deposes,
That neither of the Defendants, directly or indirectly, desired this Deponent
for to return the said Juries. Neither did this Deponent give them notice that
he had any Venires; neither did he know that there were any Venires ordered to
be granted by this Court, until he received the said Venires, either from the
said Lord, or Tenants, or Messengers as aforesaid, and further says not.

Mr. Burridge's Affidavit about Robbers, Sept. 27. 1690.
THen came before me Ezekiel Burridge Clerk, and says, That about the
beginning of the late Earl of Tyrconnel's Government, he was set upon by three
Men near Glasneven, within a mile of Dublin, who gave this Deponent four Wounds
with their Swords, and tore his Gown, so that he could never afterward wear
it: They likewise attempted to rob him, had they not been prevented by the
coming in of Company. Two or three days after, he heard that a Fellow was seen
on the same Ground who looked suspiciously; and being pursued, was taken in the
Suburbs: Whereupon the said Deponent went to him in a Disguise to Newgate, and
took him into a private Place, and made large Promises to him, if he would
discover any of the Robberies, and be an Instrument of bringing in the Rogues
who infested the Roads about the Town, and robbed almost every Night. To effect
this, he spoke Irish, and wore the ^arb of a considerable Irish Officer, and
called himself Mac-Carty. The first time he could do but little good with him,
but he bid him come to him the next day; and after he had seen a Friend, he
would do something. Accordingly he went to him the next Morning, and renewing
and enlarging his Promises to him; after some time he told him, if he would
make my Lord Chief Justice Nugent his Friend, and persuade him to remit his
Punishment, which was to be burnt in the Hand, and stand his Friend in other
things, he would do more Service than any Man in Ireland was able to do. He
thereupon ventured upon large Promises to him, and used all the Rhetoric he
could to bring him to an ingenuous and full Confession. Whereupon he told the
Deponent, that he knew all the Robberies that were committed the three Years
last past in the Counties of Dublin, Mead, Kildare, Longford and Louth: That
he would engage to clear all those Counties of Rogues; that he knew all those
that robbed in the Roads about Dublin; that there were four several Companies of
them; that the great Company were at that time robbing about Kilkenny, and that
they would be at Dublin within a Week, for they were withdrawn thither only to
be out of the way here in the Term time; that there were 26 of them in all
besides Soldiers (whom, he said, he durst not discover); but all the rest, he
said, he would engage to take in Alehouses, where he would appoint them to
meet him, if my Lord Chief Justice would allow him Men to assist him: This he
told the Deponent he would do, and showed him what Methods he would use; and he
said, he would willingly be hanged if he did not succeed: Besides, he knew (he
said) where Rogues might be found in Dublin, who were proclaimed, and had Money
offered for their Heads. He knew likewise where two Men were who murdered a
Broguemaker at Kil^ock a little before, but was loath to hang one of them, he
said, because he thought he then lived honestly in his own House. He knew
likewise, he said, a House that was to be robbed at Stephens-green, by some
Acquaintance of his, within a Week; and told the Deponent what Method they
designed to use in robbing it. He knew likewise who robbed a House at
Killmainham that very Week whilst be was in Prison. He knew where a
Silver-hilted Sword was, which was taken from a Gentleman a little before; and
could go directly to abundance of Goods taken by Robbery. He knew where several
pieces of the Gold which was taken from Mr. Starling the Minister in the County
of Longford, then lay; and said, that he himself had changed one of the Pieces
since his Committal: All this he said he would prove, and would give his Head
if he miscarried in any Particular. And when the Deponent told him, that
perhaps he only pretended those things, that he might have an opportunity to
escape; he thereupon said, that they might, to prevent that, set Guards over
him; and besides, he would procure my Lord Gormanstowne, and several Gentlemen,
to be bound for him. The Deponent having received this Encouragement from the
Prisoner, (whose Name was Patrick Launan) he went to my Lord Chief Justice
Nugent; told him what he had suffered himself, and what the Country suffered
daily; and gave him an account of his conferring with the Prisoner, and showed
him in writing the abovenamed Particulars, which he wrote from his Mouth in
Prison; which my Lord presently was pleased to call, Extraordinary great
Service, and said, that the Government ought to take notice of it. My Lord was
likewise pleased to promise the Deponent he would pardon the Fellow, and make
the best use he could of him to bring in the Rogues. Afterward my Lord sent
for him, and had him private two hours; and when the Deponent afterward waited
upon him, my Lord told him, he had found out an extraordinary useful Man, and
that he was well satisfied all he said was true, and he believed he could do
more service than the Account he gave the Deponent; and withal, my Lord showed
the Deponent a List of the Rogues he had from Launan the Prisoner: But either
my Lord did not read the List fairly to the Deponent, or Launan made some
omission; for the Deponent remembers there was one Naugle, or one or two
Nugents in his List, which my Lord omitted in reading. After the Deponent had
managed the Fellow thus far, he asked him concerning particular Robberies, and
he gave him a very satisfactory Answer to all. He asked whether he heard of a
Gownman that was assaulted between Dublin and Glassneven? he thereupon turned
his Head aside and blushed, and said, that he knew of it, but could not be
persuaded to discover the Men: What he said upon this Head, made the Deponent
suspect that my Lord Chief Justice had discovered him to the Prisoner, for he
found not that freeness of discourse with him, after he had been with my Lord,
that he had before: Neither after all his Pains, could he do any good with my
Lord; but he deposes, that after he was importunate with him, three or four
times, to bring in the Rogues, yet nothing was done, and the Prisoner was
afterward sent away to Trim Goal, which this Deponent verily believes was to
avoid his importunity. He believes, my Lord thought those Rogues might be
afterward serviceable, and therefore had no mind to bring them to Justice.

Jurat coram me 27 Septembris 1690. Dud. Loftus.

Account of Mr. Thomas Corker's House, Burnt by the Irish the 5th of May, 1689.
AS One of the Thousand Instances that may be given of the Natural Antipathy
the Irish have to the English, and Protestants in general, (let the Obligations
of Neighborhood, Conversation, and other endearments be never so great) Mr
Thomas Corker's Usage by them is remarkable. He lived at Donoghmore, within a
Mile of Navan in the County of Mead; and observing about All Saints, 1688,
that the English and Protestants began to remove and fly; he freely asked the
Irish Gentlemen in his Neighborhood, What Advice they would give him as to his
Remove, having a great Family: Who Answered, O dear, Sir, do not stir; for if
the World were on Fire, you have no reason to fear: For you have been so
obliging to us your Neighbors, and to all sorts, that none will harm you, but
rather protect you. Yet immediately they fell upon his Stock without doors, and
took part of it away. He then removed with his Family to Dublin, leaving his
Haggard and most of his Household Goods behind him; and sometimes (or about once
a Month) went down to Thresh part of his Corn for his own use: During which
time they took away all his Stock of Sheep, Black Cattle, and Horses; and the
Soldiers from Navan (Commanded by one Captain Farrel) fetched away all his Corn
and Hay. Some of his Irish-Servants telling him, It was not safe for him to
come down, or lie in his own House, He lay in a Neighbors House: This was on a
Friday-Night; and the next Day he went to Dublin. On Sunday Night (the 5th of
May, 1689.) they came and set Fire to his House in several places, and burnt it
down and all his Goods, believing he was in the House. Afterward giving out,
That he had ordered his own Servants to Burn it. And soon after came up one
William Carton his Shepherd, who told him* That the Friar and Priests at Navan
were very angry with him, and Threatened him, because he did not countenance
that Report, and also own that his Servants had Burnt his House by his Order.

All this was done by the Neighborhood, within 3 or 4 Miles about him.

A Brief of the Case of the Charter of Londonderry, upon which Judgment was
given against it.
Quo Warranto against the Corporation of Londonderry; to show, why they Claimed
to be a Body Politic, and to have and use certain other Privileges.

THE Corporation pleaded their CHARTER, whereby those Privileges were granted
to them, and eo Warranto they claim to have and use those Privileges.

Tho King's Attorney Replies, and says, That since their Charter; the Act of
Settlement impowers the Lord Lieutenant and Council, to make Rules and Orders
for the Regulating Corporations: That accordingly such Rules were made for this
Corporation; among which, One was, That they were to Elect at a time different
from that in the Charter, and Return the Names of the Persons the Corporation
should elect yearly to be Mayor and Sheriffs, to the Lord Lieutenant; and to be
approved of, and unde ex quo, that they did not so elect, and send the Names of
such elected, to be so Approved, they forfeited their Privileges.

The Corporation in their Rejoinder gave a full Answer to this New Matter,
raised in Replication on these New Rules; and set forth, That they did all
along yearly elect, and send up the Names elected according to the Rules, and
that they were Approved, etc.

But further insisted at the Bar, That they needed not to have any further
Rejoinder to the said Replication, or given any Answer as to the Matter in the
said Replication alleged; because, admitting the Allegations in the said
Replication to be true, yet the Replication assigns no breach by the
Corporation: For all that comes after the Unde ex quo, is but a Conclusion, and
solely a Conclusion without any Premises; for though the New Rules be set forth,
yet it is not said in all the Replication, That the Corporation did not act
pursuant thereto; but only says, Unde ex quo, they did not, etc.

1. The Court said, The Answer given to the New Rules, was a Departure from the
Matter pleaded; viz. They Justify in the Plea by the Charter; and in their
Rejoinder they say, They choose according to the New Rules, which is another
Warrant to choose, and so the Plea vicious. To which the Corporation Replied,
That a Departure is, when a Party in a Rejoinder sets up a New Title to a
thing, or a New Justification not set up in the Plea: But here they still
Justify by their Charter, and the New Rules made subsequent, is only to the
Modus of Choosing, in respect of Time, etc. but the Power of Choosing is still by
the Charter.

2. The Plea was not only a Plain Answer to a short Question demanded by the
Quo Warranto, viz by what Warrant they claimed their Privileges; and the
Matter of the New Rules was set up by the King in his Replication, to which
they had no opportunity of Answering, till they Rejoined.

3. If it had been material to be set forth in the Plea; yet it being a
Condition subsequent (if any thing) and going in destruction of the Corporation
Privileges, they ought not first by the Rules of Law to set it forth; but it
ought first to come on the Adversaries part.

4. The Corporation urged, That the New Rules did not in Law work any
Forfeiture of Privileges, in case they were not observed; for they were in the
Affirmative only, and the Rule of Law is, That Acts in the Affirmative take not
away a former Power of doing a thing, but the same may be done either the first
way, or the second. Notwithstanding all which, on the said pretended defect in
Pleading, the Merits of the Cause never coming in question, the Court gave
Judgment against the Corporation.

(No 8.) Lord Lieutenants, and Deputy Lieutenants of Counties.
LEINSTER.
Counties. Lord Lieutenants. Deputy Lieutenants. COunty Dublin, Col. Simon
Lutterel. Thomas Warren. Bartholomew Russel. City Dublin -- Lord Mayor. Sir
Thomas Hackett. Terence Dermot. Mead -- Lord Gormanstown. Thomas Bellew. Trim
-- Walter Nangle. Westmeath -- Earl of Westmeath. Edmund Nugent of Carlinston.
Mullingar -- James Nugent of Welshtown. Longford -- Col. William Nugent. Fergus
Farrel. Longford -- Laurence Nugent. Catherlogh -- Dudley Bagnal. -- Marcus
Baggott. Carlow -- William Cook. Kilkenny -- Lord Galmoy. -- John Grace.
Kilkenny -- Coesar Colclough. Wexford -- Col. Walter Butler. Patrick Colclough.
Walter Talbot. Wexford -- Edward Masterson. Wicklow -- John Talbot of Belgard.
Hugh Roe Byrne. Wicklow -- Thady Byrne. King's County Col. Garret Moore.
Terence Coghlan. Birr -- Owen Carrol. Queens County Lord Clanmalyra. Edward
Morris. Maryburrow Thady Fit^-Patrick. Lowth -- Lord of Lowth. Roger Bellew.
Drogheda -- John Babe. Kildare -- Earl of Lymrick. Capt. Charles Whyla. Francis
Leigh. Naas -- Wm Fitzgerald of Cookstown. MUNSTER.
Counties. Lord Lieutenants. Deputy Lieutenants. Cork -- Lord Mountcashel.
Pierce Nagle. Daniel Mac Carty Reagh. Sulivan Bear. Cork -- Charles Mac Carty,
alias Mac Donnogh. Waterford -- Earl of Tyrone. -- John Nugent. Waterford --
Thomas Sherlock. Clare -- Lord Clare. -- Donogh o Brien of Duogh. Ennis --
Florence Mac Nemara. Counties. Lord Lieutenants. Deputy Lieutenants. Kerry --
Lord Kilmore. Donogh Mac Gillicuddy. Tralee -- Joseph Brown. Limerick -- Lord
Brittas. Morice Fitzgerald. Limerick -- Dom. Roche. Tipperary -- Walter
Butler, Esquire James Butler of Killas^ahan. Garret Gough. Clonmel -- John
Clantwal. Daniel Mac Carty. CONNAUGHT.
Counties. Lord Lieutenants. Deputy Lieutenants. Galway -- Earl of Clanrickard.
John Donnelan. Miles Bourke. Galway -- Nicholas French. Roscomon -- Lord
Dillon. -- Patrick Plunkett. Roscomon -- John Fallon* Mayo -- Lord Athenry.
John Brown. Ballinrobe -- John Hoar. Sligoe -- Col. Henry Dillon. Edward
Crofton. Sligoe -- James French. Leitrim -- Col. Alexander Mac Donnel. Henry
Mac Tool o Neile. Hugh o Rourke^. ULSTER.
Counties. Lord Lieutenants. Deputy Lieutenants. Cavan -- Col. Edmond Reyley.
Philip Oge o Reyley. Cavan -- Miles Reyley, Junior. Monoghan -- Col. Arthur Oge
Mac Mahon. Capt. Hugh Mac Mahon. Col. Brian Mac Mahon. Tyrone -- Col. Gordon o
Neile. Capt. Terence Donnelly. Shane o Donnelly. Ardmagh -- Sir Neil o Neil.
Walter Hovendon. Con. o Neil. Derry -- Col. Cormuck o Neil. Capt. Roger o
Cahan. Capt. Fran. o Cahan. Donegal -- Conel o Donnel. Manus o Donnel. Tyrlagh
Oge o Boil. Daniel o Donnel. Down -- Lord Iveagh. Shilling Magennis. Arthur
Magennis. Antrim -- Earl of Antrim. Shane o Neil, Sheriff. Col. Thady o Hara.
Fermanagh -- Lord of Eniskillen. -- Cuconaght Mac Gwyre.

A List of the Principal Officers employed in the Revenue 24 Jun. 1690.
Dublin Port; Chief Commissioners and Officers established by Patent.

Commissioners of the Revenue.
SIR Patrick Trant, Knight. Francis Plowden, Esquires. John Trinder, Esquires.
Prot. Richard Collins, Esquires. Prot. Sir William Ellis, Knight.
Charles Playdel, Secretary. Nicholas Fitzgerald, Solicitor. Prot. James
Bonnel, Accomptant General.
Collectors and Officers appointed by the Commissioners, Viz.
Doctor James Fitz Gerald, Collector. Prot. Nathaniel Evans, Clerk to the
Commissioners. Prot. William Alcock, Examiner of the Port-Accounts and
Warrants, and Casheer. Prot. Sinolphus Bellasis, Clerk of the Coast. Prot. John
Kent, Land Surveyor, and Comptroller of the Store. Prot. Edward Prescott,
Land-Surveyor. Land-Waiters.
Prot. John Robinson. Prot. Dennis Boil. Prot. Francis Isaackson. Henry Fitz
Gerald.
Prot. Bartholomew Wybrantz, Store Keeper. Robert Longfield, Chief Clerk of the
Quit and Crown-Rents. Surveyors of Ringsend.
William Briscoe. Phelim Dempsy.
Francis Creagh, Surveyor at Dunlary.
Dublin Excise; Viz.
Prot. Francis Babe, Collector. Prot. Bernard Weight, Surveyor General of
Excise. (...) Carol, Examiner of Excise Accounts. Surveyors of Excise.
Prot. Benjamin Powning, Examiner of Diaries. Prot. Henry Davis, Prot. Jacob
Walton, Philip Clayton,

Ports and Districts.
Athlone, Christopher Nicholson, -- Collector. Peter Duffe, -- Survveyor.
Baltimore, Dominick Nagle, -- Collector. Clonmel, Terence Magrath, --
Collector. Edward Morris, -- Surveyor. Cork Port, Sir James Cotter, --
Collector. Edward Trant, -- Surveyor. Florence Mac Carty, -- Surveyor at Cove.
Cork Excise, Francis Garvan, -- Collector. James Griffith, -- Surveyor. Dingle,
-- Ambrose Moore, -- Collector. Drogheda, Bernard Byrne, -- Collector. Walter
Babe, -- Surveyor of Excise. Morris Morierty, -- Survey. at New-key. Dungarvan,
Thomas Mead, -- Collector. Ennis, John Mac Nemara, -- Collector. James Dalton,
-- Surveyor. Foxford, Valentine Kirwan, -- Collector. Nicholas Toppin, [Prot.]
Surveyor. Galway Port, Arthur Nagle, -- Collector. Galway Excise, James Brown
Fitz Jeffrey, Collector. Kilkenny, Caesar Colclough, -- Collector. Samuel
Pigeon, [Prot] Surveyor. Kinsale, Dominick Rice, -- Collector, Dominick
Murrogh, -- Surveyor. Limerick, John Rice, -- Collector. Nicholas Skiddy, --
Surveyor. Loughrea, Stephen Dean, -- Collector. Maryburrow, Garret Trant, --
Collector. William Bourne, -- Surveyor. Moyallow, John Longfield, -- Collector.
Richard Aylward, -- Surveyor. Naas, Edmond Fitzgerald, -- Collector. Robert
Dowdal, -- Surveyor. Rosse, James Butler, -- Collector. Mark Whitty, --
Surveyor of Excise. Sligoe, -- Owen Dermot, -- Collector. Trim, Richard
Barnwal, -- Collector. Hugh Mac Donogh, Surveyors. Richard Barton, Waterford,
Councellor Butler, -- Collector. James Heas, -- Surveyor. Wexford, -- Anthony
Talbot, -- Collector. Wicklow, -- Barnaby Hacket, -- Collector. Youghal,
Patrick Fitzgerald, -- Collector. David Fitzgerald, -- Surveyor.

A List of the Names of the New Burgesses of Strabane and Londonderry; Viz.
STRABANE.
Commonly called, Sovereign JOhn o Neile, Shane Mac Con Backagh o Neile.
Burgesses,
Gordon o Neile, Son of Sir Phelim o Neile the Great Rebel, who was Hanged,
Drawn, and Quartered. He burnt Strabane in 1641. John o Neile, -- Shane Mac
Neile, Rammar O Neile. William Roe Hamilton. Constantine o Neile. James
Cunningham. Robert Adams. Cloud Hamilton. Brian o Neil, Mac Brian, Mac Cormuc,
Mac Rory Grana o Neil. John Brown. Robert Gamble. Patrick Bellew. James Mac
Gee. Art o Neile, -- Art Mac o Neile, Ramar o Neile* John Donnelly, -- Shane
fadda o Donnelly. James Mac Enally. John Mac Rory Shane groom Mac Philip Mac
Rory* Burnt in the Hand. Terence Donnelly, -- Turlogh o Donnelly. Henry o
Neile, Henry Mac Phelmy Duff, Mac Art Mac Rory o Neile. His Father hanged.
Roger Mac Cony, Rory Mac Brian, Mac Con modura Mac Conway: His Father hanged.
Dominick Mac Hugh, Dominick Mac Rory Ballagh Mac Hugh. Charles o Cahan --
Cormuck Mac Manus Keiogh o Cahan. Charles o Conway, Cormuck Mac Owen oge Mac
Owen Modera Mac Conway.
LONDONDERRY.
COrmuck o Neile, Mayor.

Sheriffs.
Horace Kennedy, and Edward Brooks,
Aldermen.
Cohanagh Mac Gwire, Gordon o Neile, Constantine o Neile, Constance o Neile,
Manus o Donnel, Peter Manby, Peter Dobbin, Antho. Dobbin, John Campsie, Daniel
o Dogherty, William Hamilton, Roger o Cahan. Daniel o Donnel, Nicho. ^urside,
Alexander Lacky, Constance o Dogherty. Daniel o Sheile, Roger o Dogherty, Brian
o Neile, and John Buchanan,
Daniel o Sheile, Chamberlain,
Burgesses.
Francis o Cahan, Robert Butler, Cornelius Callaghan, Thomas Moncriefe, Hugh o
Hogan, John Mackenny, John Campsie, Henry Campsie, James Lenox, John o Hogan,
William Stanly, James Connor, Hugh Eady, John Donnogh, Alexander Gourdon, John
Crookshanks, Phel. Mac Shaghlin, John o Linshane, Art. o Hogan, Charles o
Sheile, Johnlius o Mullan, John Sheridan. James Sheridan, Constance o Rorke,
Dom. Boy Mac Loghlin, John Nugent, William o Boy, John o Boy, William o
Sullivan, Dionysius Mac Loghlin. Manus o Cahan, Hugh Mac Loghlin, Hugh More o
Dogherty Ulick o Hogurty, Henry Ash, Tho. Broom, Pet. Mac Peake, Hen.
Dogherty, Robert Shenan, Cornelius Magreth, Art. o Hogan.
(No. 9.) Privy Councellers appointed by Letters from King James, Dated the
28th of February, 1684; and such as are Sworn since by particular Letters.
for the Time being.
LOrd Primate. Lord Chancellor. Lord Archbishop Dublin. Lord High Treasurer.
Secretary of State. Chancellor of the Exchequer Master of the Ordnance. Lord
Chief Justice of the King's Bench. Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas. Lord
Chief Baron of the Exchequer. Lieut. General of the Army. Colonel of the
Regiment of Guards.
James Duke of Ormond, not sworn. Henry Earl of Thomond. Carry Earl of
Roscomon.... Earl of Ardglass. Henry Earl of Drogheda. Hugh Earl of
Mount-Alexander. Richard Earl of Ranelagh, not sworn. Francis Earl of Longford.
Maurice Viscount Fitzharding. Murrogh Viscount Blesinton. Robert Fitzgerald,
Esquire not sworn. Sir Charles Fielding, not sworn. Sir Richard Reynel, not sworn.
Sir Thomas Newcomen. Sir Robert Hamilton. Esquires; not sworn.
Adam Loftus, Lemuel Kingdon,
Sworn afterward by particular Letters. Sir Paul Rycaut. Thomas Heitley, Esquire
Earl of Tyrconnel. Earl of Lymerick. Lord Viscount Ikerin. Lord Viscount
Galmoy. Esquires.
Thomas Nugent, Dennis Daly, Stephen Rice, Rich. Hamilton,
Sir William Wentworth. Earl of Ballymore. Nicholas Purcel, Esquire Earl of
Clanrickard. Earl of Antrim. Justin Mac Carty, Esquire Lord Viscount Gormanst own
Lord Viscount Rosse. Earl of Tyrone. Lord Viscount Netterville Lord Lowth. Sir
William Talbot. Esquires
Anth. Hamilton, Thomas Sheridan, Simon Luttrel.
Fitzgerald Villers, Esquire Colonel Garret Moore. Lord Bellew. Charles White, Esquire
Col. Cormusk o Neil. Francis Plowden, Esquire
Privy Consellors Sworn before King James, after his coming to Ireland.
DUke of Powis. Duke of Berwick. Earl of Abercorne. Lord Thomas Howard. Earl of
Melfort. Lord Chief Justice Herbert. Lord Dover. Colonel William P* Colonel
Dorrington. Marquis D'Albeville. Lord Kilmallock. Colonel Sarsfield. Lord
Merryon. Earl of Carlingford. Earl of Clanrickard. Lord Kenmare. Lord Clare.
(No 10) The Civil List of Officers, and the Times of their Entering on their
Offices.
CHANCERY.
SIR Alexander Fitton Knight, Created Lord Fitton and Baron of Gosworth in the
County of Lymrick, Lord High Chancellor of Ireland. 23 April, 1689. Sir William
Talbot Baronet, made Master of the Rolls. Dennis Fitzgerald his Deputy. Masters.
Dr. Alexius Stafford Popish Dean of Christ-church, 2d May. Ignatius Berford,
Esquire Dr. of the Laws, 6th May. Dr. Matthew Kennedy, 10 May. Dr. Michael Plunket,
a Romish-Priest.
23 July. Thomas Arthur Soldier, Clerk of the Crown and Hanaper: This is in
Trust for Robert Arthur's Wife, Niece to Lord Tyrconnel. 1st Aug. William
Dorrington, Register. James Nagle, Cursitor and Ingrosser of all Original
Writs. Henry Temple, Esquire and Owen Coil (who was Indicted and Outlawed of
Forgery) Examinators. Six Clerks.
John Newel, John Maynard,.... Power, Thady Meagher, John Herny, and..
Geoghegan,
Baskervile Polewheel, Pursuivant: KINGS BENCH.
Thomas Lord Nugent Baron of Riverston, L. Chief Justice. 2d Justice Vacant,
not being worth Fees of passing Patent. Sir Brian O Neil, Baronet, Third
Justic. 6th July, 1689. Randal Mac Donnel, Esquire Clerk of the Crown, and
Prothonorary. Francis Nugent, Deputy Prothonotary. Brian Kerny, Deputy Clerk of
the Crown.
COMMON PLEAS.
John Keating, Esquire Lord Chief Justice. 2. Justice Dennis Daly, Esquire 3. Justice
Peter Martin, Esquire 23 Jan. 1689. Edmond Fitzgerald, Esquire Chief and only
Prothonotary. Richard Fenner, his Deputy. 16 Jan. 1689. Robert Barnwel, Esquire
Custos Brevium and Chirographer. James Nagle, Clerk of the Outlawries.
EXCHEQUER.
Buno Talbot, Esquire Chancellor. Treasurer Vacant. Sir Stephen Rice, Lord Chief
Baron. Sir John Barnwel, Knight, Second Baron. Sir Henry Lynch, Baronet, Puny
Baron. 1st Aug. 1689. Oliver Grace, Esquire Chief Remembrancer. Second Remembrancer
not disposed of; formerly an Office of great Perquisites, but now* not worth
Fees of passing Patent. 8 Aug. Walter Lord Dungan, Clerk of the Common Pleas.
Murtagh Griffin, his Deputy. Philip Dwyer his Sub-Deputy. 6 Jul. 89. Richard
Talbot of Malahide, Esquire Auditor General. 23 Jul. 89. Chr. Malone, Sergeant
Dillon's Clerk, Surveyor General; This in Trust for Lady Tyrconnel and her
Daughter, married to Col* Dillon. 3 Oct. 1689. James Nagle, Clerk of the
Estreats and Summonister. 24 October, Richard Morgan, Pursuivant. 28 Nov. 89.
Francis Stafford, Esquire Clerk of the Pipe. 20 Dec. 89. Charles White, Esquire Clerk
of the First Fruits and 20th Parts. Marcus Baggot, First Sergeant at Arms. 7
Jan. 1689. Thomas Haughton, Second Sergeant at Arms. 16th Jan. Brian Mac
Dermot, Esquire Clerk of the Pels and Tallies, and Clerk of the Treasury. 13 Feb.
89. Patrick Kennedy, Gent. Comptroller of the Pipe. 18 Feb. 89. Thady Meagher,
Clerk of the Errors. This is on the Statute for Writs of Error, from the
King's Bench to the Exchequer Chamber. 27 February, John Barry Gent. Chief
Chamberlain. Simon Carrick, Second Chamberlain. 6 March, Oliver Grace, Esquire
Transcriptor and Foreign Opposer.
Lords Commissioners of the Treasury.
9th July 89. Duke Tyrconnel, Henry Lord Dover, Lord Riverston Chief Justice,
Sir Stephen Rice Lord Chief Baron, Buno Talbot Chancellor of the Exchequer, and
Mr. Adam Colclough, Secretary. 27 August, Hugh Reilly Esquire Clerk of the Privy
Council.
Commissioners of the Mint in Dublin.
26 Aug. 1689. John Trinder, William Talbot, Thomas Goddars Esquire William
Bromfield, Francis Rice, Edward Fox, and Walter Plunket Gent. 31 Jan. 1689.
Grant to Alderman James Malone, and Rich. Malone, of the Office of Printer
General.
Commissioners of the Revenue.
Sir Patrick Trant, Sir William Ellis* John Trinder, Richard Collins, Fr.
Plowden Esquire Sir Theobald Butler, Charles Playdel Secretary. Receivers General.
Sir Henry Bond, Lewis Do, Esquire
Nicholas Fitzgerald, Solicitor. Robert Longfield, Clerk of the Quit-Rents and
of Forfeited Estates, etc.

(No 11.) 2d. June 1690. An Account of the General and Field Officers of King
James's Army, out of the Muster Rolls.
DUKE of Tyrconnel, Captain General. Lieutenants-General.
Duke of Berwick Richard Hamilton
Count Lozune, General of the French. Monsieur Leary alias Geraldine, Lieut.
General. Dom. Sheldon, Lieut. General of the Horse. Major-Generals.
Patrick Sarsfield, Monsieur Boisteau, Antho. Hamilton,
-- Wahup. Brigadeers.
Tho. Maxwell, John Hamilton, Will. Dorrington,
Solomon Slater, Muster-master-General. Robert Fitzgerald, Comptroller of the
Musters. Sir Rich. Nagle, Secretary at War. Receivers General.
Sir Henry Bond, Louis Do,
Sir Michael Creagh, Pay-master-General. Felix O Neile, Advocate-General. Dr.
Archbold, Physician to the State. Patrick Archbold, Chirurgeon-General.
HORSE.
Duke of Tyrconnel Colonel. Dom. Sheldon Lieut. Coll. Fra. Meara Major. Lord
Galmoy Coll. Laur. Dempsy 1st. Lieu. Coll. Char. Carrole 2d. Lieu. Coll. Robert
Arthur Major. Patrick Sarsfield Coll. Lord Kinsale Lieut. Coll. Roger
Magilligan Major. Hugh Sutherland Coll. Edm. Pendergast 1st. L. Coll. Talbot
Lassells 2d. L. Coll. Will. Cox. Major. Lord Abercorne Coll. Lieu. Coll. Major
Henry Luttrell Coll. Sir James Moclare Lieu. Coll. Major. John Parker Coll.
Tho. Gifford Lieu. Coll. John Metham Major. Nicholas Pursel Coll. Lieu. Coll.
Major.
DRAGOONS.
Lord Dimgan Coll. Lieut. Coll. Major. Sir Neile O Neile Coll. Lieut. Coll.
Major. Lord Clare Coll. John Mac Nemara 1st. L. Coll. James Philips 2d. L.
Coll. Francis Brown Major. Simon Luttrell Coll: Lieut. Coll. Edmund Moclare
Major. Robert Clifford Coll. Alex. Mackenzie Lieut. Coll. Major. Fran. Carroll.
Coll. Tarens Carroll 1st. L. Coll. Fran. Boismoroll 2d. L. Coll. Major. Tho.
Maxwell Coll. Daniel Magennis Lieu. Coll. Callaghane. Major.
FOOT.
Will. Dorrington* Colonel of the Guards. Will. Mansel Barker Lieu. Coll. Tho.
Arthur Major. John Hamilton Coll. James Nugent Lieu. Coll. Majors.
John Talbot 1st. James Gibbons 2d.
Lord Fitz-James Coll. Edw. Nugent 1st. Lieu. Coll. Porter 2d. Lieu. Coll.
Dodsby Major. Earl of Clancarty Coll. John Skeleton Lieu. Coll. Philip Rycaut
Major. Earl of Clanrickard Coll. Edmund Madden Lieu. Coll. Major. Earl of
Antrim Coll. Mark Talbot Lieu. Coll. James Woogan Major. Earl of Tyrone Coll.
Tho. Nugent Lieu. Coll. Richard Nagle Major. Richard Nugent Coll. Lieu. Coll.
Major. Lord Gormanstowne Coll. Richard Eustace Lieu. Coll. Major. Henry Dillon
Coll. Walter Bourk Lieu. Coll. John Morgan Major. Lord Galway Coll. John Power
Lieu. Coll. Major. Lord Bellew Coll. Nich. Fitzgerald 1st. L. Coll. Le Sir
Doge 2d. L. Coll. John Dowdale Major. Lord Kinmare Coll. Lieu. Coll. Major.
Lord Slane Coll. Maurice Connell Lieu. Coll. Major. Cormuck O Neile Coll. Lieu.
Coll. Major. Charles Cavenagh Coll. James Lacy Lieu. Coll. Gros. Pordevarande
Major. Tho. Butler Coll. D' Busby Lieut. Coll. Major. Lord Kilmallock Coll.
John Power Lieu. Coll. John Chapel Major. Sir Maur. Eustace Coll. John Woogan
Lieu. Coll. Major. Sir John Fitzgerald Coll. Lieu. Coll. Major. Lord Lowth.
Coll. Lieu. Coll. Major. Earl of Westmeath Coll. Mich. Delahoyde Lieu. Coll.
Gowen Talbot Major. Major General Boisteau Coll. Monsieur Beaupre Lieu. Coll.
Hurly Major. Lord Bofine Coll. Will. Connock Lieu. Coll. John Bodkin Major.
Oliver O Gara Coll. Tady Connor Lieu. Coll. Major. John Grace Coll. Robert
Grace Lieu. Coll. Cha. Moore Major. Edward Butler Coll. John Innis Lieu. Coll.
Garret Geoghegan Major. Art. Mac Mahon Coll. Philip Reyley Lieu. Coll. H^gh
Magennis. Major. Charles Moore Coll. Ulick Bourk Lieu. Coll........ Major.
Dudley Bagnall Coll. James Power Lieu. Coll..... Corbet Major. Gordon O Neile
Coll. Conn O Neile Lieu. Coll. Henry O Neile Major. Nicholas Brown Coll. George
Traps Lieu. Coll. Dermot Mac Auliffe Major. Sir Michael Creagh Coll. John Power
Lieu. Coll. Theobald Bourk Major. H^yward Oxbrough Coll. Edward Scot Lieu.
Coll. Laurence Delahunty Major. Dom. Brown Coll........ Lieu. Coll. Le Sir
Mountyouge Major. Owen Mac Carty Coll. James Dupuy Lieu. Coll. Terence O Brien
Major. John Barret Coll. Donogh Mac Callaghane L. Coll........ Major. Charles O
Brien Coll......... Lieu. Coll. William Saxby Major. Daniel O Donnovane Coll.
Fran. Napper Lieu. Coll. Sir Alphon. Mottit.Major. Lord Ireagh Coll. Brien
Magennis 1st. L. Coll. Francis Wahup 2d. L. Coll......... Major. Roger Mac
Elligot Coll. Maurice Hussy Lieu. Coll. Edmund Fitzgerald Major. Edmund Reyley
Coll.......... Lieu. Coll......... Major. Cuconnogh. Mac Gwyre Coll. Alex. Mac
Gwyre Lieu. Coll. Cornelius Mac Gwyre Major. Walter Bourk Coll.............
Lieu. Coll............. Major. Felix O Neile Coll...... O Neile Lieu
Coll............ Major. Hugh Mac Mahon Coll. Owen Mac Mahon Lieu. Coll.
Christopher Plunket Major. Lord Inniskillin Coll.............. Lieu.
Coll............. Major. Dennis Mac Gillicuddy Coll............. Lieu.
Coll............ Major. James Purcell Coll............ Lieu. Coll............
Major. Lord Hunsdon Coll. Rob. Ingram 1st. Lieu. Coll. John Gifford 2d. Lieu.
Coll. Francis Gyles Major. Regiments sent to France, viz. Colonels.
Lord Mounteashell Daniel O Bryen Richard Butler Robert Fielding

(No 12.) A Copy of the Letter dispersed about the Massacre, said to be
designed on the 9th. of December, 1688.
Good my Lord, December 3d. 1688.
I Have written to let you know, That all our Irishmen through Ireland are
sworn, that on the 9th. Day of this Month, being Sunday next, they are to fall
on, to kill and murder Man, Wife and Child, and to spare none; and I do desire
your Lordship to take care of your self, and all others that are adjudged by
our Men to be Heads; for whoever of them can kill any of you, is to have a
Captain's Place* So my Desire to your Honor is to look to your self, and to
give other Noblemen warning, and go not out at Night or Day without a good
Guard with you; and let no Irishman come near you, whatever he be. This is all
from him, who is your Friend and Father's Friend, and will be, though I dare
not be known as yet, for fear of my Life.

Direct this with Care and Haste to my Lord Mountgomery.
(No 13.) Lord Mountjoy's Circular Letter, on his going to France.
Gentlemen, Dublin, 10th. January 1688.
YOU had an Account how long I staid on the Way, after I left you, and the
Reasons which made me since go forwards: And whatever any Jealousies were at my
first Arrival, I am now satisfied at my coming; and, with God's Blessing, I
hope it will come to good to us all. As soon as I saw my Lord Deputy, he told
me, he designed to send me to the King jointly with my Lord Chief Baron Rice,
to lay before him the State of the Kingdom; and to tell him, That if he pleased
he could Ruin it for him, and make it a heap of Rubbish; but it was impossible
to preserve it, and make it of use to him; and therefore to desire leave to
treat for it. The Objections I made to this, were Two; My being not so well
qualified, as a Northern Roman Catholic, whom in all likelihood the King would
sooner give Credit to: And the improbability of being able to persuade the
King, who is now in the French Hands, to a Thing so plainly against their
Interest. To the First of these, I was answered what is not fit for me to
repeat; and the other is so well answered, that all the most knowing Englishmen
are satisfied with me, and have desired me to undertake this Matter, which I
have done this Afternoon; my Lord Deputy having first promised me, on his Word
and Honor, to perform the Four Particulars in the within Paper. Now because a
Thing of this Nature cannot be done without being Censured by some, who perhaps
would be sorry to have their Wishes in quiet means; and by others, who think
all that Statesmen do are Tricks, and that there is no Sincerity amongst them.
I would have such to consider, That it is more probable I and the most
intelligent in this Place, without whose Advice I do nothing, should judge
right of this, than they who are at greater Distance; and as it is not likely
we should be Fooled, so I hope they will not believe we design to betray them,
our selves, and the Nation. I am morally assured, this must do our Work without
Blood, or the Misery of the Kingdom. I am sure it is the Way proposed in
England, who depend so on it, that no Forces are appointed to come hither; and,
I am sure, what I do, is not only what will be approved of in England, but what
had its beginning from thence. I do therefore conjure you, to give your Friends
and mine this Account, and, for the Love of God, keep them from any Disorder or
Mischief (if any had such Design, which I hope they had not;) and I am fully
satisfied, every Man will have his own Heart's Desire. I will write to this
Effect to some other Places, and I desire you will let such in the Country, as
you think fit, see this. Let the People fall to their Labor, and think
themselves in less Danger than they believed, etc.

(No 14.) Judge Keating's Letter to Sir John Temple, December 29th. 1688.
SIR,
I Had ere this acknowledged the Favor of your last, and returned you my
Thanks for your kind Advice, relating to the small Concerns I had in England,
which I have now disposed of here; but, to deal freely with you, the
Distractions arising from the Great and Sudden Alterations in England, and the
pannick (but I believe groundless) Fears which has possessed the Minds, not
only of the Weaker Sex and Sort, but even of Men who would pass for Sober and
Judicious, has rendered Matters with Us so uncertain, that I profess
seriously, I know not what to write; nor dare I yet give you any Account,
relating either to particular Persons or Places of the Kingdom, scarcely of
what I hear from the Remote Parts of this City; since what we have at Night for
certain Truth, from those who pretend to be Eye or Ear Witnesses of what they
relate, we find before the next Days Exchange is over, to be altogether False
and Groundless. The fear of a Massacre has been mutual; the Protestants
remembering past Times, and being alarmed by a Letter, neither directed to, nor
subscribed by any Person, but dropped at Cumber (of which, Copies were dispersed
throughout all Parts of the Kingdom) were frighted to that degree, that very
many of them betook themselves to the Ards, and other Places of Security in the
North: Some into Scotland; and very many Families Embarked from this Part for
Chester, Leverpoole, Beaumaris, and the next Adjacent Ports of England and
Wales, who, you may easily conclude, carried with them all the ready Money and
Plate which they were Masters of. Nor was it a difficult Matter for them so to
do, the Consternation being so great and so sudden, that even the Officers of
the Port, either out of Commiseration to the departing Crowd of Women and
Children; or, being amazed at the suddainness of the Fright, neglected to do
their Duty, whereby this City, and the Adjacent Parts, are almost drained dry,
as to Cash and Plate; which is manifest from Guineas being sold at 12 d. per
piece, over and above the usual Rate. On the other Hand, the Roman Catholics
were very many of them under equal Fears; and indeed, all of them, except the
Army, who by their Calling are exempt from, or at least from owning it, pretend
equal Dread from the Protestants, who (as they alleged) far exceeded them in
the Northern Parts, and were extraordinarily well Armed and Horsed; but, their
greatest Apprehensions arise from a constant and uncontradicted Assurance,
which Private Letters by every Packet, brought hither, that the Duke of
Ormond, with a considerable Army, and many experienced Officers, was to Land
forthwith in Munster. And in this Condition now stands this poor Kingdom; the
Contending Parties being equally afraid, or at least pretending to be so of
each other; which cannot but beget great Anxiety and Sorrow in the Mind of
every good Man, who has the least Concern for his King or his Country. In the
interim the Lord Deputy, entrusted by his Majesty with the Government of this
Kingdom, and keeping it entire in its Obedience to all his Commands, does daily
grant Commissions to raise and procure Arms and Ammunition for great Numbers of
Men: In doing whereof (considering the great Trust reposed in him) no Man of
Honor, or moral Honesty can truly blame him: But, at the same time, he takes
all Opportunities, both Private and Public, to declare, That whenever his
Majesty shall signify his Royal Will and Pleasure, for disbanding the Army
that now is, or hereafter shall be raised upon the Commissions now issuing; or
shall give direction for any other Alteration in the Government, he will,
without one Day's hesitation, himself, and those of his Relations, and other
Dependents in the Army, whom you know to be very Numerous, give an exact
Obedience. And if any should be so Foolhardy, as to scruple or make the least
delay of doing so, they shall in a few Days be taught and compelled to do their
Duty.

I must likewise tell you, That in this Conjuncture of Affairs, the Thieves and
Robbers are not only become more Numerous, but likewise much more Insolent; and
instead of small Thefts, do now drive away by Force whole Herds, and sometimes,
when overtaken, deny to restore the Prey. This in many Places, and especially
in the North-west, is done by the Cottiers and Idlers in the Country, but
fathered generally on the Army; of which I have now an Instance before me from
Ballenglass.

All this, I know, you have had repeated to you from diverse Hands; however, I
thought my self obliged in the Station which I hold, to give you this summary
Account of our present Condition, which God knows is very bad, and in all
humane probability, if we take not up more Charity than as yet we have for each
other, will receive sharp Corrosives, and bitter Potions, to bring us even to
the hopes of living, though in great Penury and Want. Nor can we expect, in
Case that any Resistance shall be made by the Roman Catholics here, that we
shall see any End thereof, until the Buildings, Plantations, and other
Improvements of Thirty Years Expense and Industry be utterly wasted, and the
Kingdom brought to the last degree of Poverty and Confusion, and from the most
improved and improving Spot of Ground in Europe, as you saw it Six Years since,
become a mere Acheldama, and upon the matter totally desert. For Armies when
once raised, must be maintained by the Public, or will maintain themselves:
Nor can Military Discipline be expected, where the Soldier has not his Wages;
and whether that can be had out of the public Treasury here, I referr to you,
who have weighed the Revenue of the Kingdom, when at the best, even to a
Dram. But after all this, I am confident and assured, That the Government of
England will and must at length take place here, against all Opposition
whatsoever. It has cost England too much Blood and Treasure to be parted with;
but, if it should come to a Contest of that kind, the Victors (I fear) will
have little to bragg of, and will find in the Conclusion, nothing but Ruins and
Rubbish, not to be repaired in another Age. Nor will the People thereafter
reckon of any Security or Stability in this Kingdom, so as to apply themselves
to the repair of them, but expecting such periodical Earthquakes here, will
provide themselves of Retreats in England and Scotland, as many have of late,
and daily do.

Your Patience is, I fear, by this at an End; when you begin to enquire with
your self, To what purpose it is that I have given you all this Trouble. I must
confess, your Enquiry is not without Reason; but however to you, whose
Friendship I have always found, and valued my self much on it, I do without
difficulty declare what has induced me hereunto.

The wonderful Alterations which a Month's Time has produced in England, in
regard to the Protestant Religion, and the Universality of it; the little Blood
that has been spilt in so great a Change; the few Acts of Hostility, and
little disquiet which has as yet appeared, has almost persuaded me, That this
Unfortunate Kingdom may, by the Interposition of moderate Men, be restored to
the same Estate of Religion and Property, that it rejoiced in Seven Years
since, with an addition of further Security for the preservation of both, if
more be requisite, considering the many Acts of Parliament still in Force in
this Kingdom.

It cannot be imagined (Sir) but there are very many who having either lost
their Estates upon the Forfeitures of 1641. or by their Profuseness and
Prodigality, spent what they were restored to, would willingly see the Kingdom
once more in Confusion and Blood; designing by Licentiousness and Rapine, to
supply their Extravagancies. There want not on the other Hand, some who
conceive, That the Court of Claims has contrary to the Settlement, taken from
them their Possessions, without Reprisals; and very many, who being put by
their Employments and Commands, wish for a Time to expostulate with those who
are possessed of them. But all these, in my humble Opinion, ought to give way
to the public Quiet and Settlement of a whole Nation, ready to fall into Ruin.

I am verily persuaded, That with a little good Management, the generality of
the Roman Catholics, and indeed of the whole Kingdom, would be very glad to be
put into the same Condition in all respects, as they were Six Years since; and
desire no more than an Assurance, it should not be made worse. And if there be
Faith to be found in Man, the Lord Deputy and Roman Catholic Nobility and
Gentry of the Kingdom, who are universally concerned in the present Army, and
in that which is to be raised, will, upon the first signification of his
Majesty's Pleasure to that purpose, unanimously Disband, retire* to their
several Dwellings, and apply themselves to advance the Quiet and Wealth of the
Kingdom. Nor can I ever doubt his Majesty's Condescension and Care for the
Preservation of this His Kingdom, and preventing the Effusion of Christian
Blood. For most assuredly, if War should happen here, which God of his Infinite
Mercy prevent, His Majesty would be the only great Sufferer, in the Loss of so
many Subjects Lives; wherein consists the Wealth and Strength of the greatest
Monarchs.

There are very many now at London who know the State and Condition of this
Kingdom much better than I pretend to; what I now write, I design not as a
Secret, but if you think it worth Consideration, I leave it to you, to
Communicate it to such as you shall think fit: And, if there be any thing in it
worthy their Thoughts, I must declare that there is nothing within the reach of
my Industry, that I will not endeavor in the method of my Profession, for the
maintenance of Religion and Property, as established by the Laws of this
Kingdom; and should die with the greatest satisfaction, and reckon it a Nobler
Posterity than any Man can pride himself in, if I could be in the least
Instrumental in the settling Peace and Quiet, without more hazard or Loss to
this my Native Country, which I make no doubt the Almighty will in his good
Time effect, by his own Means and Instruments, more deserving of so great a
Blessing from him than I am. If this find any Room with your self, other
thinking Men, or such who have great Stakes here, let me know your Thoughts,
with what convenient speed you can; it being a matter in which a moment is not
to be lost; and the first Step to be made there; since it cannot be expected
that the Lord Deputy will do any thing in a matter of so great Moment, without
His Majesty's Directions.

(No 15.) Proposals humbly offered to the Earl of Tyrconnell, Lord Deputy, by
the Bishop of Mead, about the intended Search for Arms.
WHEREAS Your Excellency has ordered by Your Declaration, That a Search shall
be made in every House in Dublin, for Arms and Ammunition; and that, in Case
any shall be found upon Search, that the Persons with whom they are found,
shall be left to the Mercy of the Soldiers: This Penalty is thought
unreasonable on these following Accounts.

First, Because it is not determined by the Declaration, who shall be the
Searchers; for if the matter be managed as hitherto it has been, that every
one who pretends to be a Soldier must have liberty to search, and in such
Numbers, and as often as they please, no House can be safe; for that some have
been already searched, by Six Companies after one another, and that in the same
Day. And if any of these should pretend to find a Pistol, or Bagonet, or Horn
of Powder, though he brought it out of his Pocket, with a design to draw an
inconvenience on the House; yet, by the Declaration, the House and all that is
in it, must be left to the Mercy of the Soldiers; and, by this means, the
Innocent may suffer as well as the Guilty.

Secondly, That if the Soldiers be permitted to search, there will be so much
Damage by it to this City, that an Age cannot Repair it: For, by this means,
every Place that is capable of concealing Arms, must be left to their
Discretion; the Boards will be ripped up, partition Walls broken down, Wainscot
taken down, Cellars dug up, the Foundations of Houses endangered, Barrels of
Beer opened, Provocations offered and received, the Safety of the People in
apparent hazard, many things taken away without hopes of Restitution; the Looms
of Tradesmen, and the Instruments of Artificers destroyed, and his Majesty's
Interest dis-served after all by the Soldiers, endeavoring rather to serve
their own Ends than his Majesty's true Interest.

Thirdly, In many Houses there are several Families, Lodgers and Servants of
several Sorts; and if any of these, either out of Malice or Folly, or good Will
to their Masters, conceal any Arms, though never so inconsiderable, all the
rest, though Innocent, must suffer for it; which is against Equity and Justice,
that requires every Man to suffer only for his own Fault, and not for the Fault
of others.

Fourthly, Many have had Lodgers in their Houses for several Years, whose
Truncks and Papers are still there, and possibly Arms may be in them, which the
Housekeeper knows nothing of. It is therefore Unreasonable, That either the
Owners of such Goods being absent, or the Masters of the House that know
nothing of it, should suffer for what they cannot help. By this means, Papers
may miscarry, and the Estates of Men be ruined and undone.

Fifthly, Many Landlords, Owners of Houses, are either gone for England, or
absent elsewhere about their lawful Occasions, and their Servants may either
not know where their Arms are, or foolishly endeavor to conceal them, and so
expose their innocent Masters to Ruin.

Sixthly, The leaving Persons to the Mercy of the Soldiers, is a Punishment so
unknown to our Laws, and so strange to these Kingdoms, that the Execution of it
will be agreat prejudice to his Majesty's Affairs, and alienate the Hearts of
his Subjects more from him, and do him (whose Presence they expect.) more
mischief than the Arms can do him good. It is an ill President, and may in time
destroy the whole Kingdom, and subvert the Law.

It is therefore humbly proposed, That in case your Excellency be not satisfied
with the Returns already made, and to be made; but you will still go on with
the Search, that your Excellency would graciously condescend to these following
Expedients, for the better Ease and Quiet of his Majesty's Subjects.

First, That whereas each Parish is divided into its several Wards, that your
Excellency would order the Search to be made by the Deputy Alderman of each
Ward, with the Assistance of One or more Military Officers, as your Excellency
shall think fit, and not by the Soldiers; for by this means, what Arms are
found, will be secured for his Majesty's Use, and the Subject freed from the
fears of Plunder and Ruin.

The Search intended is so provided for, to be by an Alderman and an Officer.

Secondly, That no Man be responsible for more than his own Goods, nor the
Punishment inflicted on any but the Guilty.

His Excellency consents to this.

Thirdly, That regard be had to the Goods and Papers of all Persons that be
absent, and who by reason of their Absence before the Declaration was
published, cannot be presumed to be Violaters of it.

His Excellency consents to this.

Fourthly, That a Declaration be published to this purpose for informing the
People of your Excellency's Intentions, which will contribute much to the
allaying of their Fears, and the Quiet of their Minds.

His Excellency allows the Bishop of Mead, to declare this to all Persons.

Fifthly, That whereas your Excellency did by your Declaration, order all Arms
to be returned into the Parish-Churches; and yet in some Parish-Churches there
were no Officers appointted to receive them; that your Excellency would by a
new Proclamation, order such Arms as have not yet been delivered for want of
such Officers to receive them; be received by such as your Excellency shall
think fit to appoint.

An Account of this to be given to the People, by themselves or Churchwardens,
or Clerks; as also public Notice in the Church to Morrow Morning.

The Return to be made to the Clergy by the Inhabitants, and by the Clergy to
the Bishop of Mead.

That his Excellency does not intend to bind himself from searching for Arms in
the City of Dublin by the late Declaration, because it was published before its
Time, and without his Order, in Case a more due Return of Arms be not made,
then he has hitherto received.

(No 16.) An Account of the Conditions made in the Field, between the
High Sheriff of Galway, and the Prisoners after condemned.
WHEREAS James Power, Esquire, High Sheriff of the County of Galway, Captain
Thomas Burk, Commander in Chief of his Majesty's Forces quartered in the Town
of Loughreagh, having Intelligence, That several Gentlemen and others, on the
First Day of March instant, traveled the Road leading from Irris in the County
of Clare, toward the Town of Loughreagh, being the Road they intended to go,
met them there, and demanded their Horses and Arms for his Majesty's Use;
which, upon Capitulations made between the said James Power, Esquire, and
Captain Thomas Burk of the one Part, and Sir. Thomas Southwell, Baronet,
Bartholomew Purdon, Esquire, and Thomas Miller, Esquire, on the other Part, in
behalf of themselves, and of all as well Gentlemen and others that were with
them, and of their Company, were freely and peaceably delivered and given up by
them to us for his Majesty's Service, on these following Conditions. The
Capitulation which we the said James Power Esquire, and Captain Thomas Bourk
promised them in behalf of the Government, should be honorably and punctually
performed and kept.

Imprimis,

That they and every of them should have their Lives preserved, and that
whatsoever they had acted in that Affair (they affirming, that their coming in
that posture was for preservation of their Lives) should be forgiven and
forgotten; and Passes given them, or any of them, to go where they pleased
(provided they did not go to the North or Sligo) without being rifled, or any
thing taken from them, except such Horses and Arms as were fit for his
Majesty's Service.

Secondly, That every Gentleman of them should have their own Pistols and
Swords, and one Nagg or Horse given them to ride on, in Case his own (being
musterable) should be taken from him.

Thirdly, That if they desired it, they should have a Party of Horse or Foot to
protect them, for their greater Safety in Traveling where they or any of them
had a desire to go, except to the North or Sligo as aforesaid. Given under our
Hands and Seals, the First Day of March, 1688. and in the First Year of his
Majesty's Reign, James the Second, by the Grace of God King of England,
Scotland, France and Ireland, etc.

Note, That it happened near Night when they met, so that the Agreement
beforementioned, could not be reduced into Writing in the Field; but several
times since being tendered to the said High Sheriff and Captain to Sign; they
still declined it, but nevertheless acknowledged the Truth thereof before the
Lord Galway, Father Dolphin the Friar, and others in Loughreagh. And about
Eight or Nine Days after, the said Captain Bourk Signed a Certificate in
Presence of Captain Arthur French; and the said High Sheriff writ a Letter to
the Lord-Deputy, containing the principal Part of the said Articles, as by the
following Copy may appear.

Captain Bourk's Certificate, delivered by Captain.... to Captain French, Good
Friday, 1688.
WHereas on the First Day of this Instant March, Sir Thomas Southwell, with a
considerable party of Horse, were Traveling from the County of Clare, through
the County of Galway, near Loughreagh; an account whereof being brought to
Captain Thomas Bourk, whose Troop Quartered at Loughreagh, and on Notice
immediately with his Troop repaired to meet the said Thomas Southwell and his
Party, and having drawn up within Shot each of other, the said Thomas sent one
to give an account of his and his friend's Design to ride, without Offense,
through the County, and prayed not to be molested: Whereupon the said Captain
Thomas Bourk made answer, That without the Governments Pass so considerable a
Party should not ride where he had power to hinder them. Then the said Sir
Thomas desired to be permitted to return whence he came. To which he was
answered; That by a late Order from the Government, Captain Bourk was to seize
all Arms and Horse fit for his Majesty's Service in the County of Galway, and
that he would not permit them to go on, nor return till he had their Horse and
Arms; and persisting firm therein, the said Sir Thomas and his Party submitted,
and declared their Obedience to the Governments Order; he the said Captain
Thomas Bourk assuring them that he would secure them their Lives, and offered
them such small Naggs as he thought fit to carry the said Sir Thomas and Chief
Gentlemen back to their respective Homes. This I the said Captain Thomas Bourk
having promised on my word, do now Certify for Truth, as Witness my hand this
9th Day of March, 1688/9.

THO. BOURK.

A Copy of the High-Sheriff's Letter, delivered to Mr. French on Good Friday,
1688. per Captain Jourdon.
May it please your Excellency, Loughreagh, March 9th. 1688/9.
IT happened on Friday last, the first Day of this Instant, I had Intelligence,
that a Party of Horse with Sir Thomas Southwell and others, were making their
way through this Country to Sligo or the North, being routed out of Munster;
whereupon the Horse and Foot in this Town being commanded by Captain Thomas
Bourk and Captain Charles Dawly, made ready to intercept the said Sir Thomas
and his Party, who met upon a Pass and faced one another; but a Treaty being
proposed, they came to Capitulation, wherein it was agreed, that the said
Thomas and his Party should lay down such Horse and Arms as was fit for the
King's Service; and after so doing, that they and every of their Lives should
be secured them, and dismissed with such Passes and Convoys as may bring them
safe to their several Habitations without any Harm to their Persons or Goods.
All which with Submission at their requests I humbly offer to your Excellency,
and subscribe,

Your Excellency's Most Humble, and Most Obedient Servant, JAMES POWER.

(No 17) A Copy of a Letter from Bishop Maloony to Bishop Tyrrel; the Original
found amongst Bishop Tyrrel's Papers.
March 8th. 1689.
I Have yours* (my D. L.) of the 29th of January last, your Style by Mr.
Despont. It Is large and plain enough, and another before more Concise and in
Merchants Style, both tending to the same end, and of which I made use to the
same purpose, notwithstanding all the Discomposure of my Health this Month
past, as you shall I hope find by the Effects ever this comes to your hands;
for the King upon your earnest Invitation in both your said Letters, and by
other strong Considerations, took of a sudden the Resolution to go unto you,
and parted hence this day Sennight being the last of February, and I hope in
God is by this time landed somewhere in Ireland, for the Wind serves fair ever
since he parted; and he did expect to be on Friday Night (this being Monday
following) at Breast, where all things, and most part of the Officers were in a
Readiness staying for his Majesty's Arrival, for to part with the first Wind. I
wrote unto you in that Convenience by Sir Neal O Neal, and another by Post at
the same time. This will go flower, and by the second Voyage of the same Ships
when they come back for more Men and Commodities. It goes by a Friend I dare
trust with all the Secrets of it; and so I will be full, plain, and overboard.

The Bearer is Doctor Butler, a good Gentleman's Son, of a good Estate when
People enjoyed their own Birthright, to which he is become himself Heir, if he
can recover it; In which I shall beg your Favor and Protection for him when
occasion does require. He has made all his Studies and took his Degrees here; I
have sufficiently instructed him of all the Contents of this Letter by word of
Mouth for fear of any Miscarriage; and although I ought to presume that all and
every of you there (and especially so clear sighted and foreseeing Persons as
you, and others like you) need no Advertisement, or Spurr; Yet my Zeal pro
Fide, Rege, and Patria, could not dispense with me to be silent from writing,
when I am not upon the Place to speak my Sense as others.

Now, my Lord, you have the King so much wished and longed for, of whom we may
say without Offense, as of our Savior, hic positus est in Ruinam and
Resurrectionem multorum: If you make good use of him, you may get a
Resurrection of many by him; but if you make a bad use, you may get their
Ruin; so all depends, under God, of the good or bad use you make of his
Presence amongst you; it is but a special Providence of God that he is so
unexpectedly gone thither: But when God's Providence is either slighted or
neglected by People not helping themselves, and not making use of the Occasions
offered them by Providence, God can and does usually withdraw his special
Providence; Conantes adjuvat, exauditque deprecantes, says St. Augustine. My
Lord, the Game you have now to play is very nice and ticklesome. The Religion,
King, and Countries Ruin or Resurrection depends on it; If you play it well,
you will carry all and save all; but if you play it ill, you will lose all and
for ever: All consists in resolving well how to dispose of Ireland, in the
present Conjuncture, being the only Country that appears now for the King;
wherein you have two Parties to manage; The one, to wit the
Protestant-Newcomers and Usurpers, under the Rebellion of Cromwell are
suspected, or rather certain can nor will ever be Loyal or Faithful, whatever
Outward Show or Promises they make: Which is manifest by their several
Instances in our Days both in England and Ireland. The other Party, to wit, the
Catholics of Ireland proved still faithful and Loyal to the King at Home and
Abroad, though very ill recompensed. Now the great question to be decided will
be, whether (setting aside the manifest and incontestable Injustice of that
most barbarous and inhumane Act, they wrongfully call THE SETTLEMENT OF
IRELAND.) Whether I say it is more politic and prudent to trim and temporize
now with those Usurpers, promising really or seemingly not to disturb them in
their unjust Possessions, than to restore the true ancient Proprietors; turn
off, or rather secure the Usurper, and make up a strong and potent Army, all of
True, Loyal, Faithful and Incorruptible Men, without any mixture of Trimmers or
Traitors! I would think the Question thus Stated, is soon resolved by natural
Reason, diverse Instances and sad Experiences. What Man of Sense or Reason can
imagine, that those who by their Rebellion cut off their King's Head like a
Scelerate on a Scaffold, banished his Queen and Children into Foreign Countries
to beg their Bread for so many Years together; and after the Heir's
Restoration to his Crown, not only put so many hard and unjust Conditions upon
him; namely that of excluding the Irish Catholics from the Amnestly General,
but also used so many foul Means and Contrivances to murder and massacre him
and his Brother together; and seeing the King Issueless, to use all their
Endeavors to exclude the Brother from his lawful Birthright and Succession to
the Crown; and when they could not by a Legal and Parliamentary way perform it,
at last draw Foreign Power into the Kingdom, with whom by a most horrid
Rebellion, and most traitorous Defection, they all join, and turn him from his
Throne, and banish him with his Queen and Son, the only lawful Heir of the
Crown, into Foreign Countries; again placed a Foreigner upon the Throne in a
Month's time, after declaring the Crown vacant, though he and his Son still
alive. All these barbarous and traitorous Transactions done within Forty Years
time in the Face of the World; By all which experiences, the present King in
his own Person passed; but how can it be possible (say you) that the King
having tried in his own Person all these Instances and Experiences, with
several others, he could be thus imposed upon and deluded: I tell you, by the
same Reason, that you may be now deceived, if you are not cautious; that is, by
want of Capacity and Sincerity in his Advisers; telling him still, he must do
nothing that may irritate or provoke the Anger of the Protestants of England,
who are very dangerous; That he must get them by fair means, granting them all
they desire; nay preventing their desires by all good Offices and Marks of
Kindness, even to the Prejudice of his Crown and Dignity. By this fair
Politic, they hindered him from drawing Succor out of Ireland sooner, from
making up a Catholic Army that would stick to him, instead of a Protestant one
that betrayed him; hindered him also from having any Succor from France
offered him: Obliged him to declare that he had no Alliance with France; and
never to believe that the Dutch had any Design upon him or his Country, till
they were in the very Bowels of it. Let any Man of Sense see if such rotten
Principles and Politics, that produced such Fatal Effects, ought to be
insisted upon or embraced. If the King of France had not been too generous and
too Christian a Prince; were it not a sufficient Motive for him to reject the
King in his Disgrace, that upon those rotten Principles rejected his Alliance;
yet those, and only those Principles, will be made use of to persuade you
there, that you must not think of your own Restoration and Assurance at Home
first, but go into England to restore the Catholics: And if there be any other
Adherents of the King's there, and that it will be time enough to think of your
own Restoration after: Which, is the same as to say, at Doomsday: For never a
Catholic or other English, will ever think or make a step, nor suffer the King
to make a step for your Restoration, but leave you as you were hitherto, and
leave your Enemies over your Heads to crush you any time they please, and cut
you off Root and Branch, as they now publicly declare: And blame themselves
they have not taken away your Lives along with your Estates long ago; nor is
there any Englishman, Catholic or other, of what Quality or Degree soever
alive, that will stick to sacrifice all Ireland for to save the least Interest
of his own in England, and would as willingly see all Ireland over, inhabited
by English, of whatsoever Religion as by the Irish: and yet by their fine
Politics, they would persuade the Irish to come and save their Houses from
burning, whilst they leave their own on fire: Which is no better than to look
upon People as so many Fools, when every body knows that Charity begins at
Home: that one's Charity for himself, is the Rule and Measure of that he ought
to have for his Neighbor; diliges proximum tuum sicut teipsum. Is it not a
better and more Christian Politic for the King, and all that are faithful unto
him, to restore first a whole Kingdom that stands out for him when all the rest
failed, to their Birthright which they have been out of these Thirty Six
Years, only for being obstinately Loyal to his Father, Brother and himself,
than to displease those who have been and are still Loyal, (and who can get any
Condition they please from the Enemy to join with them) by thus pleasing or
trimming with those who never were, or ever will be True or Faithful; and when
they are thus restored, and no Enemies left in their Bowels that can do his
Majesty or them any Harm, then to go in a strong Body together with his Majesty
into England, join with all such that will prove Faithful and Loyal, and so
restore his Majesty to his Throne, and each one to his right. I would fain know
from these trimming Politics, whether it be not securer and more honorable
for the King to offer all fair Means, and show his Clemency to his People when
he is in Condition to force them to what he pleases to exact of them, than to
be daily undervaluing himself by offering them all the fair Means imaginable,
which they slight and scorn, because they seeing he has no Means, to force them
or do them Harm, think he does all only out of fear, and not by any sincere or
true Affection; And I would fain further know, if it be not better and greater
Policy for him to put the Kingdom of Ireland (still so Loyal unto him) upon the
best and highest Foot both Ecclesiastical and Temporal he can contrive, and yet
granting it nothing but its natural Right and Due, that it may be a Check upon
the People of England, who are ready every New Mood to Rebel, then to keep it
still in a continual Slavery and full dependence on such perfidious and
inconstant People, and himself deprived of the support he can still have from
thence against their Revolt: I dare averr, if Ireland were put upon such a foot
by the King, he shall never fear any Rebellion in England, especially if
Scotland be faithful to him, and France a Friend; all which can now be well
contrived and concerted. But when all is done, I would fain yet know from those
Politic Trimmers, by what Law of God or Man, Ecclesiastical or Politic, they
think Ireland is bound to be the Sacrifice and Victim of the Rebellion of
England, either for to hinder those turbulent People from Rebelling, or for to
Reconcile them to their Duty, by giving them, forsooth, as Recompense, the
Estates of those unfortunate Catholics, and send themselves a begging; I dare
say, no Catholic in England, much less a Protestant, (who would so easily give
his consent and advice, that the Estates of the Irish Catholics may serve as a
Recompense for the English Rebels) would willingly give a Plow-Land of his own
Estate to Reconcile all the Rebels of England to their Duty, if he were not
afraid to lose his own whole Estate by the Rebellion, and yet would advise to
do to others what he would not have to be done to himself, contrary to the
great Rule and Maxim of Nature and Christianity, Quod tibi fieri non vis,
alteri ne feceris.

I would fain further know from this Politic Trimmer, so large of other
Peoples Goods, and so sparing of his own, if one Province in England had
revolted against their King, as the whole Kingdom does now; and that the rest
of the Provinces continued faithful, would they think fit or prudent to give
their Lands and Estates to those Rebels for laying down their Arms, and go beg
themselves? Or would the King expect or desire it from them? No sure; but
rather that they should take up Arms, and join with His Majesty to reduce and
punish such Rebels in lieu of recompencing them with the Loyal's Estates: And
is not that the case of the Irish? Why do you not then judge alike? Or if you
do not look upon an Irish man as a Fool, why will you have him do what you say
is not fit for your self or other Fellow Subjects to do in like case? And sure
you must think him a Fool* and after-wit, as you use, to say, if he will be
persuaded, by your Trimming Politic, to leave his own Estate to his Enemy, and
come to save yours; who would but laugh at him the next day at the best for his
folly: If their great and long Vexations have not given the Irish better
understanding, and know how little regard all the English whatsoever have for
them, they deserve to be dealt with like Fools.

But who would think it were Prudent or Politic for the King to bring a great
Body of Men out of Ireland into England or Scotland, leaving behind him in
Ireland a considerable strong Party of Phanaticks, all Enemies, whatever
outward show they make to the contrary, to rise in Arms as soon as they see the
King turn his Back to them, and they get a supply from their fellow Rebels out
of England, which will not be wanting at any time, and so cut the Throats of
all His Majesty's true Subjects in Ireland, and shut himself up between two
Potent Enemies in England, and Ireland; whereas by setting the Irish on a sure
foot, he always has for a Refuge that Country, which he will find to be far
better than nothing, and may be with time, a means to come into England: But
Trimmers will tell him, That it is no matter for His Majesty, if he can gain
the English Rebels by sacrificing Ireland to them who will inhabit it, whether
English or Irish; nay, I believe rather English, and so make it an English
Interest all along; and he will be apt to believe it: but it imports the Irish
to look about them* and consider if that be their Interest.

Add to all these considerations, with many more and better you can think of,
an essential and indispensible one, which is to please this King and Court, of
whom his Majesty now, and you all depend solely and wholly, by saving their
Interest along with that of his Majesty and your own, which cannot be done but
by settling of Ireland upon the best and most advantageous foot that can be
contrived with Reason and Justice, (...) it may be a Check upon England, as
Scotland formerly, to keep it from Rebellion against their own Prince: From
trouble and Invasion upon France, and a Tie upon the Kings of England hereafter
to keep good Correspondence with France, and keep Ireland in a flourishing
happy condition, and not to be Slaves to all the People, and Scums of England.
If 48, or other, were loath to press any such Conditions or Proposals on the
King, they may make use of the French Minister Count D'Avaux, who is with him
as a good Adviser, and for to manage his Masters Interest. I think it may be
well and rationally proposed, if by the King of France's means such an
advantageous settlement may be procured for the Nation; and that he would be as
a Guarranty or Protection of it, to give him as well for his assurance or
Guarranty, as for the payment of what he advances for the King and Country,
some Seaports in Ireland, as you have hinted in your last.

This is what now comes into my head upon this Subject, which M. B. does not
neglect to insinuate and imprint as much as he can, (though not well in his
health) into the Heads and Hearts of the Ministers and People about Court.
Though 27 gave no Power or Credit to any body here to speak of Business, but to
his Son-in-Law L. W. (in Cipher 110.) but M. B. does it privately upon his own
account and acquaintance with the People, without thwarting him in any of his
Ways. But you know what one says, tanquam potestatem habe^s, carries more
weight than what he says as a private man; And therefore I think it were not
amiss that 48. from himself, or by the said French Ministers means may get
order from 27 that 92 may be heard and Credited at Court as to the Concerns of
78, which to prevent and hinder some that would not have it put into 27's head
(as it is thought) to desire 92 to follow him as soon as he were well in his
health along with 23, and before he saw himself to tell him so; knowing he was
sick, gave orders to 18's fellow traveller (whom I added to the Cipher thus
112) to tell him so, which he has performed only by another, Master Barry,
belonging to 34, for he never came himself to see him, which I think was not
prudently done of him, (setting civility aside) for they may communicate one to
another what may be best to do with 86 for the service of 78, and certainly
without any vanity 92* knew better how to manage that interest with 86 than he
or any of his profession there; But I find some do suspect the sincerity of
that Man for the Public Interest. I know not if they wrong him; but one thing
I know, he does not like to see any of 64 or 65 have any hand in Business: Of
which I think I gave you once already a hint from 87, when he and 98 were
there; and I cannot tell but it may be he that might have given 27 that advice
of drawing 92 from hence, who desires not to be but where he may be most useful
to his Religion, King and Country; and if any necessity may be of his Vote
there, he can send you a Procuration in blank if he be thought more useful or
necessary here.

It Is now high time I suppose you should ask me what is this great and solid
settlement I would have for Ireland; To which I answer; That you and others
there likely know best; But that I may speak my own little sense on the matter:
I say, I would have two or three of the Irish Nation to be still of the Kings
Council, and one of them Secretary of State for the Affairs of Ireland, as
Scotland has. I would have some of their Nobility to be of the Bedchamber, by
reason both of Honor and Interest. I would have all the Employments, Civil and
Military, given to the Natives of the Country: Unless the Country thought ^it
to introduce some Strangers for better advantage and improvements.

I would have them restored to their Estates both Spiritual and Temporal,
usurped by the Cromwellians, or, under the Title of being Protestants; yet with
that Proviso for the Spiritual, that a Competent Pension should be allowed to
the Protestant Possessor during his Life: for he can pretend no longer Lease of
it; or that he should give the Catholic Bishop or Incumben^* a competent
Pension, if it were thought fitter to let him enjoy his Possession during Life.

I would have the Commerce and Traffic settled, with all the Advantage due to
a (...) Nation and Subjects, (of which the Merchants (...) inform best) without
any other dependence on, or relation to England, but what Subjects ought to the
King and Crown* of which I would not derogate in the least, but nothing to do
with the Merchants and People of England, no more than with those of France,
Spain and Holland.

But my Politic Trimmer will say, this is of a dangerous consequence for
England, and for the King, in relation to it: for they will say the King
intends to establish the same Government amongst them, both in Spirituals and
Temporals that he has in Ireland* To which I answer in the first place; That we
are not here to manage or speak for the Interest of England, which would not
fail to speak and stand for it self. Secondly, I say, That the Consequence from
Ireland's Case to England's does not follow; For in Ireland the Catholic Party
is much more numerous and strong than the Protestant: So that it is for the
King's Interest there to favor them, or at least do them Justice: But in
England, where the number of Protestants and other Sectaries is by much the
greater, he can order things otherwise, without any Contradiction: for ^^om the
one to the other the Consequence does not hold, for the Reasons aforesaid.
Thirdly, There is no such thing as Restitution of Temporal Estates in England:
for they were wiser there than to lose their Estates, though they would be free
to consent or advise that others may; so it is very free for the King to make
any Settlement of any Spiritual or Temporal Estates there as he shall think
fit, notwithstanding any Settlement he makes in Ireland.

Now remains, I think, one Objection to solve, which may give some Obstruction
to this intended Settlement, which is that of the Gown-men, or others, who made
Purchases of some New Interests, bona fide: Must they lose (...) Purchase and
Money? To which I answer; That although it may be replied, Caveat emptor,
especially to the Gown-men, who knew best of all that horrid Act of Settlement,
or so called, was most unjust, and could by no true Law hold; yet because they
are Persons useful for the Commonwealth, and acted bona fide (seeing the Estate
out of the Ancient Proprietors Hands by so many Public Acts, as it was not
like ever to come to him again) there ought an Expedient to be found for the
like, that they be not losers: and that either they or the Ancient Proprietors
may be recompensed one way or other, rather than it should be an Obstacle to
the common Good.

And so I have done with this matter, which I leave and recommend to God and
you.

This is all the advice I can now give upon this matter: and the Observations I
make by my Conversation and Acquaintance with the People this year past: and I
am sure I am not deceived in my Opinion of them in relatition to 78, nor in the
reasons they will make use of to persuade you to neglect your own Interest to
save theirs; and I am no less certain 27 is all inclined that way; So you are
to look to your selves, and whilst Sun shines, to make your Hay. Nune tempus
acceptabile, Nunc dies Salutis; Dum ergo tempus habemus operemur bonum, maxim
ad domesticos fidei. 92, if authorized, will make all this Court go in your
way, by showing them it is their Interest, of which he has laid some
Foundations already.

There remains another Observation; which is, That a Benedictine English Monk
called Price is gone thither with the King, who pretends to play that we call
here premier a^mosnier, in England they call it Clerk of the Closet to the
King: which Father Peter's had there: And here it is always a Bishop; Now the
Bishop of Orleans, whose Office is to assist the King at Mass, and all other
Ecclesiastical Functions as Chief, when the Lord High Almoner is not present,
gives the orders and spiritual directions, cum privilegio exceptionis, in the
King's Palace, and Liberties of it: Why should we in our Country have any in
that place but one of our selves: Let them take place in England; and so why
would not you have this place for your self there, or get it for M. B. and
exercise the Functions in his absence, rather than a Stranger should have it
before our face and laugh at us.

Now to other business, you are to know, your business in Rome is concluded
upon and past all difficulties; only remains the Expedition of the Bulls, which
you may ever move as you please: The Expenses whereof, by Dr. Sleyn's great
care and Solicitation, with the help of Cardinal Howard, and means of Monsieur
Casone, Favorite to his Holiness, are reduced to a hundred Roman Crowns; though
it cost Dr. Fuller for worse 170. notwithstanding all the Favors and
Solicitations, which were many, he could employ. Dr. Sleyn, this Seignior
Cousin should be thanked by a Civil Letter, to which I wrote one, of which I
here send you a Draught; you

No. 19. A List of all the Men of Note that came with King James out of France,
or that followed him after; so far as could be Collected.
THe Duke of Berwick. Mr. Fitz-James, Grand Prior. Duke Powis. Count D' Avaux
Ambassador from France. Earl of Dover. Lord Henry Howard. Lord Thomas Howard.
Lord Drummond. Marquess D' Estrades. Earl Melfort. Lord Seaforth. Bishop of
Chester who died here, and is buried in Christ Church. -- Gourdon Bishop of
Galway. -- Hamilton Dean of Glasgow. Sir Edward Herbert. Sir John Sparrow.
Colonel Porter. Mr. Pedle. Monsieur Pontee Engineer. Captain Stafford. Captain
Trevanyon Sea Capt. Sir Roger Strickland ditto. Captain Arundel ditto. Colonel
Sarsfield. Coll. Anthony Hamilton. Coll. John Hamilton. Coll. Simon Lutterel.
Coll. Henry Lutterel. Coll. Ramsey killed at Derry. Lord Abercorne. Coll.
Dorrington. Major Thomas Arthur. Lord Dungan. Capt. Mac Donnel Sea Capt. Sir
William Jennings. Coll. Sotherland. Sir Hen. Bond Receiver Genesis Mr. Collins
Com. of the Reven. Coll* Clifford. Coll. Parker. Marshal de Rosene. Lieutenant
General Mamve, killed at Derry. Lieu. Genesis Pusignan, killed there also. Major
General Leary. Lord Trendraught. Lord Buchan. Major John Gourdon. Lieutenant
Coll. John Skeleton. Major John Ennis. Major William Douglas. Lieut. Coll.
Hungate. Major William Connock. Sir Charles Carney. Lieut. Coll. Alex.
Mackenzy. Major James Fountain. Major Teig Regan. Lieut. Coll. Edward Scott.
Major Robert Frayne. Major Simon O Hogherne. Lieut. Coll. Bynns. Coll. James
Purcel. Lieut. Coll. George Traps. Major Robert Ingram. Major Edmond
Pendergast. Major John Gifford. Lord Hunsdon, Coll. Lieutenant Colonel Francis
Leonard. Coll. Alexander Cannon, went for Scotland. Major Edmond Bourk. Major
James Dempsy. Major Frederick Cunningham. Coll. Robert Fielding. Major Richard
Hillersden. Major Boepry. Monsieur Bois^ean, made Governor of Cork. His
Brother St. Martin, Commissary of the Artillery, killed at Cromp-Castle. Sir
Edward Vaudrey. Sir Charles Murray. Sir Robert Parker.
Chaplains, viz.
FAther Nich. Dunbar. Father Dan. Mac Ayliffe. Anthony Mac Gwyre. Nicholas
Trapps. John Madden. Austin Mathews. Laurence Moore. Father Edmond Reyly. John
de Gravel. John Hologhan. Father Richard Pierce. Patr. Aghy. Darby Daley.
Thady Croley. Danniel Mac Carthy.
Surgeons, viz.
JOhn Brunton. Thady Regan. Jo. Baptista Monlebeck* Charles Stapleton. John
James Aremore* John Cassel. Edmond Tully. Nicholas Reynard.
Captains.
WIlliam Charters. William Oliphant. Robert Charters. Peter Blare. Thomas
Brown. Francis Creighton. James Buchan. Alexander Gourdon. George Lattin. Sir
Alphonso Moiclo. John Baptista du Moll. John Mollins. John Wynnel. John
Fortescue. Robert London. George Roberts. Thomas Scott. James Fitz Symons.
William Gibbons. William Delaval. Mau. Flynn. Richard Scott. Connor O Toghil.
Anthony Ryan. Rupert Napier. Terence O Brian. Edmund Kendelan. Henry Crofton.
Richard Anthony. Edmund Nugent. John Plunkett. John Dungan. Rowland Smyth.
Gowen Talbot. Simon Barnwell. John Brother. John Cavenagh. Edmund Stack. Walter
Hastings? Edward Widdrington. Samuel Arnold. Robert Welsh. David Rock. Charles
Booth. -- -- Jornoe. Robert Fielding. Francis Gyles. John Barnardy. Anthony
Power. John Chaple. Rowland Watson. Thomas Arundel. Robert Hacket. Sir William
Wallis. Richard Burton. Cornelius Mac Mahon. Talbot Lassels. Richard Bucker.
Charles Fox. Anthony Vane. Strickland Tyrwhit. John Manback. Francis Cullange.
John Lumendato. Fran. Lappanse. Bernardo Buskett. Jos. Pamnett. Captain Millio.
George Coney. Chevalier Devalory. Sir Samuel Foxon. John Power. John Banner.
Henry Nugent. William Mackentosh. Charles O Danniel. Arthur Dillon. Lord
Brittas. Allen Bellingham. John Brown. Thomas Carleton. Robert Nugent. Captain
Pagez. Captain Durass. Nicholas Kemish.
No. 20. A List of the Lords that sat in the pretended Parliament at Dublin.
held the 7th of May 1689.
The Nobility of Ireland, May 7th. 1689.
Sir Alex. Fitton, Knight. Baron of Gausworth, Lord Chancellor. Dr. Mich. Boil,
Lord Archbishop of Armagh, Primate of all Ireland. Rich. Talbot, Duke of
Tyrconnel.
Earls.
Nugent Earl of Westmeath. Mac Donel Earl of Antrim. Barry Earl of Barrymore.
Lambert Earl of Cavan. Mac Carty Earl of Clancarty. Power Earl of Tyrone.
Aungier Earl of Longford. Forbese Earl of Granard. Dungan Earl of Lymerick.
Viscounts.
Preston Viscount Gormanstown. Butler Viscount Montgarret. Dillon Visc.
Costello and Gallen. Nettervill Viscount Dowth. Magennis Viscount Iveagh.
Sarsfield Viscount Kilmallock. Bourk Viscount Mayo. Butler Viscount Ikerin.
Dempsy Viscount Glanmalier. Butler Viscount Galmoy. Barnwell Viscount
Kingsland. Brian Viscount Clare. Parsons Viscount Rosse. Bourk Viscount Galway.
Brown Viscount Kenmare. Mac Carty Viscount Montcashel. Cheevers Visc. Mount
Leinstor.
Bishops.
Anth. Dopping Bish. of Mead. Tho. Otway Bishop of Ossory and Kilkenny. Edw.
Wetenhall Bishop of Cork and Rosse. Simon Digby* Bishop of Lymerick and
Ardfart.
Barons.
Bermingham Baron of Athenry. Courcy Baron of Kinsale. Fitz Morris Bar. of
Kerry and Lixnare. Fleming Baron of Slane. St. Laurence Baron of Howth.
Barnwall Bar. of Tremblestown. Plunket Baron of Dunsany. Butler Baron of
Dunboyne. Fitz Patrick Ba. of Upper Ossory Plunket Baron of Lowth. Bourk Baron
of Castle-connel. Butler Baron of Cohair. Bourk Baron of Brittas. Blaney Baron
of Monoghan. Malone Baron of Glenmalun and Courchey. Mac Gwyre Baron of
Eniskillin. Hamilton Baron of Strabane. Bellew Baron of Duleek. Bourk Baron of
Bophine. Nugent Baron of Rivers-own.
No. 21. The Names of the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses returned to the
Parliament beginning the 7th of May 1689.
Com. Ardmagh.
Arthur Brownloe Esquires. Walter Hovendon Esquires.
Bur. Ardmagh.
Francis Stophard Esquire. Constantine O Neile Esquire 16th of May 89.
Bur. Charlemont. Com. Antrim.
Carmick O Neile Esquires. Randal Mac Donel Esquires.
Bur. Carrickfergus. Borough Belfast. Mark Talbot Esquire Bur. Lisbourn. Daniel O
Neile Esquire 20th May 89. Bur. Antrim. Com. Catherlogh.
Dudley Bagnal Esquires Henry Lutterel Esquires
Bur. Catherlogh.
Mark Baggot Esquires. John Warren Esquires.
Bur. old Laughlin,
Darby Long Esquires. Daniel Doran Esquires.
Com. Cork.
Justin Mac Carty Esquire Sir Richard Nagle Knight.
Town of Youghall.
Thomas Uniack Aldermen. Edward Gough Aldermen.
Town of Kinsale.
Andrew Murrogh Esquires. Miles de Courcey Esquires.
Bur. Baltimore.
Daniel O Donavan Esquires. Jeremiah O Donavan Esquires.
Bur. Bandonbridge.
Charles Mac Carty of Balloa Esquires. Daniel Mac Carty Reagh Esquires.
Bur. Cloghnerkilty.
Lieut. Coll. Owen Mac Carty. Daniel Fyn Mac Carty Esquire
Bur. Middletowne.
Dermot Long Esquires. John Longan Esquires.
Bur. Moyallow.
John Barret of Castlemore Esquires. David Nagle of Carrigoone Esquires.
Manor and Borough of Rathcormuck.
James Barry Esquires. Edward Powell Esquires.
Manor of Donerail
Donello Donovan Esquire John Baggot Jun. of Baggotstown Esquire
Bur. Charleville.
John Baggot of Baggotstown sen. Esquire John Power of Killbelone Esquire
City of Cork.
Sir James Cotter Knight. John Galway Esquire.
Com. Cavan.
Phil. Reyly of Aghnicrery Esquires. John Reyly of Garryrobock Esquires.
Bur. Cavan.
Phil. Oge O Reyly Esquires. Hugh Royly of Larha Esquires.
Bur. Belturbet.
Sir Edward Tyrrel Baronet. -- -- Tuit of Newcastle Esquire
Com. Clare.
David O Brian Esquires. John Mac Nemara of Crattelagh Esquires.
Bur. Ennis.
Florence Mac Carty of Dromad Esquires. 10. Ma. 89. Theob. Butler of
Szathnogalloon Esquires. 10. Ma. 89.
Com. Down.
Murtagh Magennis of Greencastle Esquires. Ever Magennis of Castleweian
Esquires.
Bur. Hilsburrow. Bur. Newry.
Rowland Wite Esquires. Rowland Savage Esquires.
Bur. Bangor. Bur. Keleleagh.
Bernard Magennis of Balligorionbeg Esquire Tool O Neile of Dromankelly Gent.
Bur. Down. New-town. Com. Dublin.
Simon Lutterel of Luttrels town Esquires. Patr. Sarsfield Jun. of Lucan
Esquires.
Bur. Swords.
Fra. Barnwell of Woodpark Co. Mead Esquire Robert Russel of Drynham Esquire
Bur. Newcastle.
Tho. Arthur of Colgans town Esquires. John Talbot of Belgard Esquires.
City of Dublin.
Sir Michael Creagh Knight. Terence Dermot sen. Alderman.
College of Dublin.
Sir John Mead Knight. Joseph Coghlan Esquire
Town of Drogheda.
Henry Dowdal Esquire Recorder. Alderm. Christopher Peppard Fitz George.
Com. Donnegall. Lifford. Ballyshannon. Killebeggs. Donnegall. St. Johns-town.
Sir William Ellis Knight. Lieut. Coll. James Nugent.
Com. Galway.
Sir Ulick Bourk Baronets. Sir Walter Blake Baronets.
Bur. Athenree.
James Talbot of Mount Talbot Esquires. Charles Daly of Dunsandale Esquires.
Bur. Tuam.
James Lally of Tullendaly Esquires. William Burk of Carrowfrila Esquires.
Town of Galway.
Oliver Martin Esquires. John Kirwan Esquires.
Com. Kilkenny.
John Grace of Courts-town Esquires. Robert Welsh of Cloonesby Esquires.
Bur. Callaim.
Walter Butler Esquires. Thady Meagher Esquires.
Bur. Thomas-town.
Robert Grace senior Esquires. Robert Grace junior Esquires.
Bur. Gowran.
Richard Butler Esquires. Walter Keily Dr. of Physic Esquires. Coll. Robert
Fielding by a new Election.
Bur. Inishoge.
Edward Fitzgerald Esquires. James Bolger Esquires.
Bur. Knocktopher.
Harvy Morris Esquires. Henry Meagh Esquires.
City of Kilkenny.
John Rooth Esquire Mayor. James Bryan Alderman, 4th May 1689.
Bur. Kells.
Patrick Everard Esquires. John Delamare Esquires.
Bur. St. Canice. Com. Kildare.
John Wogan Esquires. George Aylmer Esquires.
Bur. Naas.
Walter Lord Dungan. Charles White Esquire
Bur. Athy.
William Fitzgerald Esquires. William Archbold Esquires.
Bur. Harristown.
James Nighell Esquires. Edmund Fizgerald Esquires.
Bur. Kildare.
Fracis Leigh Esquires. Robert Porter Esquires.
Kings County.
Heward Oxbourgh Esquires. Owen Kerrall Esquires.
Bur. Philips-town.
John Conner Esquires. Heward Oxbourgh Esquires.
Bur. Banagher.
Terence Coghlan Esquire Terence Coghlan Gent.
Bur. Birr. Com. Kerry.
Nicholas Brown Esquire Sir Thomas Crosby Knight.
Bur. Tralee.
Morris Hussy of Kerties Esquires. John Brown of Ardagh Esquires.
Bur. Dingle Icouch.
Edw. Rice Fitz James of Ballinleggin Esquire John Hussy of Cuhullin (Com. Lym Esquire
Burr. Ardsart.
Coll. Roger Mac Elligott Esquires. Cornelius Mac Gillicuddy Esquires.
Com. Longford.
Roger Farrell Esquires. Robert Farrell Esquires.
Bur. Lanesborough.
Oliver Fitzgerald Esquires. Roger Farrell Esquires.
Town of Longford. Com. Lowth.
Thomas Bellew Esquires. William Talbot Esquires.
Bur. Atherdee.
Huh Gernon Esquires. John Rabe Esquires.
Bur. Dundalk.
Robert Dermott Esquires. John Dowdall Esquires.
Bur. Carlingford.
Christoph. Peppard Fitz Ignatius Esquires. Bryan Dermod Esquires.
Dunlier. Com. Lymerick.
Sir John Fitzgerald Baronet. Gerald Fitzgerald Esquire, commonly called Knight
of the Glynn.
Bur. Kilmallock.
Sir William Harley Baronet. John Lacy Esquire.
Bur. Askeaton.
John Bourk of Carrickinohill Esquires. Edward Rice. Esquires.
City of Lymerick.
Nicholas Arthur Aldermen. Thomas Harrold Aldermen.
Com. Leitrim.
Edmond Reynolds Esquires. Irrel Farrell Esquires.
Bur. James-town.
Alexander Mac Donnel Esquires. 15th May 1689. William Shanley Esquires. 15th
May 1689.
Carrickdrumrusk. Com. Mayo.
Garret Moor Esquires. Walter Bourk Esquires.
Cartlebar.
John Bermingham Portreeve Thomas Bourk Esquire.
Com. Mead.
Sir William Talbot Baronets. Sir. Patr. Barnwall Baronets.
Bur. Ratoath.
John Hussy Esquires. James Fitzgerald Esquires.
Bur. Trim.
Captain Nicholas Cusack Walter Nangle Esquire.
Bur. of Navan.
Christoph. Cusack of Corballis Esquires. Christ. Cusack of Ratholdran
Esquires.
Bur. Athboy*
John Trinder Esquires. Robert Longfield Esquires.
Duleek. Kells. Com. Monoghan.
Bryan Mac Mahon Esquires. 9th July 1689* Hugh Mac Mahon Esquires. 9th July
1689*
Town of Monoghan. Com. Fermanagh. Enniskillen. Queens County.
Sir Patrick Trant Knight. Edmond Morris Esquire
Bur. Maryborough.
Pierce Bryan Esquires. Thady Fitz Patrick Esquires.
Bur. Ballinkill.
Sir Gregory Bourne Baronet. Oliver Grace Esquire.
Port Arlington.
Sir Henry Bond Baronet. Sir Thomas Hacket Knight.
Com. Roscommon.
Charles Kelly Esquire. John Bourk.
Bur. Roscommon.
John Dilton Esquires. John Kelly Esquires.
Bur. Boil.
John King Captain. Terence Mac Dermot Alder. 6th. May 1689.
Tulske Com. Sligoe.
Henry Crofton Esquires. Oliver O Gara Esquires.
Bur. Sligoe.
Terence Mac Donogh Esquires. 8th. May 1689. James French Esquires. 8th. May
1689.
Com. Tipperary.
Nicholas Purcell of Loghmore Esquires. James Butler of Grangebeg Esquires.
City of Cashell.
Dennis Kearney Aldermen. James Hacket Aldermen.
Bur. Clonmell.
Nicholas White Aldermen. John Bray Aldermen.
Bur. Fethard.
Sir John Everard Baronet. James Tobin of Fethard Esquire
Bur. Thurles. Bur. Tipperary. Com. Tyrone.
Coll. Gordon O Neile Esquires. Lewis Do of Dungannon Esquires.
Bur. Dungannon.
Arthur O Neil of Ballygawly Esquires. Patr. Donenlly of Dungannon Esquires.
Bur. Strabane.
Christopher Nugent of Dublin Esquire. Dan. O Donelly of the same, Gent. 8th
May 89.
Clogher. Augher. Com. Waterford.
John Power Esquires. Math. Hoar Esquires.
Bur. Dungarvan.
John Hoar Esquires. 7th. May 89. Martin Hoar Esquires. 7th. May 89.
City of Waterford.
John Porter Esquires. Nicholas Fitzgerald Esquires.
Bur. Lismore. Tallow. Com. Wexford.
Walter Butler of Munfine. Patrick Colclogh of Moulnirry.
Bur. Wexford.
William Talbot Esquire. Francis Rooth Merchant.
Bur. New Rosse.
Luke Dormer Esquires. Richard Butler Esquires.
Bur. Bannow.
Francis Plowden Esquire Commis. of the Revenue. Dr. Alexius Stafford.
Bur. Newborough.
Abraham Strange of Tobberduff Esquire Richard Daley of Kilcorky Gent.
Bur. Eniscorthy.
James Devereux of Carrigmenan Esquires. Dudley Colclough of Moug^ery Esquires.
Arther Waddington Esquire by a new Election.
Bur. Taghmon.
George Hoar of Polhore Esquires. Walter Hoar of Harpers-town Esquires.
Bur. Cloghmyne.
Edward Sherlock of Dublin Esquire. Nicholas White of New Rosse Merchant.
Bur. Arklow. Fytherd.
Coll. James Porter. Capt. Nicholas Stafford.
Com. Wicklow.
Richard Butler Esquires. William Talbot Esquires.
Bur. Caryesfort.
Hugh Byrne Esquire. Piece Archbold Esquire Upon whose default of Appearance --
Barth. Polewheele.
Bur. Wicklow.
Francis Tool Esquires. Thomas Byrne Esquires.
Bur. Blesington.
James Eustace Esquire Maurice Eustace Gent.
Baltinglass. Com. Westmeath.
The Honorable Coll. William Nugent. The Honorable Coll. Henry Dillon.
Bur. and Manor of Mullingar.
Garret Dillon Esquire Prime Sergeant. Edmond Nugent of Garlans-town Esquire
Bur. Athlone.
Edmond Malone of Ballynehown Esquire Edmond Malone Esquire Councellor at Law.
Bur. Kilbeggan.
Bryan Geoghegan of Donore Esquires. Charles Geoghenan of Syenan Esquires.
Bur. Fore.
John Nugent of Donore Esquire Christoph. Nugent of Dardis town Esquire
Com. Londonderry. City Londonderry. Bur. Colerane. Bur. Lamavudy.
No. 22. An Address to King James in Behalf of the Purchasers under the Act of
Settlement by Judge Keating.
THis humble Representation made unto your Sacred Majesty is in the Behalf of
many Thousands of your Majesty's dutiful and obedient Subjects of all Degrees,
Sexes, and Ages. The Design and Intention of it, is to prevent the Ruin and
Desolation, which a Bill now under Consideration, in order to be made a Law,
will bring upon them and their Families, in case your Majesty does not
interpose; and by your Moderation and Justice protect them so far as the known
Laws of the Kingdom, and Equity and good Conscience will warrant and require.

It is in the Behalf of Purchasers, who for great and valuable Considerations,
have acquired Lands and Tenements in this Kingdon; by laying out not only their
Portions and Provisions made for them by their Parents, but also the whole
Product of all their own Industry, and the Labor of their Youth; together with
what could be saved by a frugal Management, in order to make some certain
Provision for Old Age and their Families, in Purchasing Lands and Tenements
under the Security of diverse Acts of Parliament Public Declarations from the
late King: And all these accompanied with a Possession of Twenty five Years.

Divine Providence has appointed us our Dwelling in an Island; and
consequently, we must Trade or live in Penury, and at the mercy of our
Neighbors. This necessitates a Transmutation of Possessions, by Purchase from
one hand to another, of Mortgaging and Pledging Lands for great and
Considerable Sums of Money, by charging them with Judgments; and indeed, gives
Name to one of the greatest Securities made use of in this Kingdom, Statutes
Merchant, and of the Staple; and very many, especially Widows and Orphans, have
their whose Estates and Portions secured by Mortgages, Bond of the Staple and
Judgments.

Where or when shall a Man Purchase in this Kingdom; Under what Title or on
what Security shall he lay out his Money, or secure the Portions he designs for
his Children: If he may not do it under diverse Acts of Parliament, the solemn
and reiterated Declarations of his Prince, and a quiet and uncontroverted
Possession of Twenty Years together, And this is the Case of thousands of
Families who are Purchasers under the Acts of Settlement and Explanation.

It were a hard task to justify those Acts in every Particular contained in
them; I will not undertake it; but if it be considered, that from 23. October
1641. until 29. May 1660. the time of his Majesty's Restoration, the Kingdom
was upon the matter in one continued Storm; That the alterations of Possessions
was so universal, and Properties so blended and mixed by Allotments and
Dispositions made by the then Usurping Powers: It may be well concluded, that
they must be somewhat more then Men, that could or can frame a Law to take in
every particular Case, though it should have swollen to many Volumes, and Laws,
which are to be of such universal Consequence as this was, are to have a Regard
to the Generality of a Kingdom or People, though possibly some particular
Person may have some hardship in his private Concern.

But if we may judge by general Laws; by the produce and effect of them, and at
the same time have a Prospect to the Estate and Condition of this Kingdom from
1640. and as far backwards as you please, until the time of his late Majesty's
happy Restoration; and at the same time take into Consideration what the
Kingdom became in few years after the Commission for the Execution of those
Acts were at an end; the Buildings, and other Improvements; the Trade and
Commerce; the vast Heads of Cattle and Flocks of Sheep, equal to those of
England; together with great Sums of money brought over by our Fellow Subjects
of England, who came to Purchase and Plant in this Kingdom: The Manufactures
set on foot in diverse parts; whereby the meanest Inhabitants were at once
enriched and civilized, it would hardly be believed it were the same Spot of
Earth: Nay, Over-flown and Moorish Grounds were reduced to the bettering of the
Soil and Air. The Purchasers who brought the Kingdom to this flourishing
Condition, fly to your Majesty for Succor, offering not only their Estates and
Fortunes, but even their Lives to any Legal Trial within this your Majesty's
Kingdom, being ready to submit their Persons and Estates to any established
Judicature; where, if it shall be found, that they enjoy any thing without
Legal Title, or done any thing that may forfeit what they have Purchased, they
will sit down, and most willingly acquiesce in the Judgments: But to have their
Purchases made void; their Lands and Improvements taken from them; their
Securities and Assurances for Money Lent, declared Null and Void by a Law made
ex post facto, is what was never practiced in any Kingdom or Country.

If the Bill now designed to be made a Law, had been attempted within two,
three, four or five years after the Court for the execution of these Acts was
ended, the Purchasers would not have laid out their Estates in acquiring of
Lands, or in Building or Improving on them: Thousands who had sold small
Estates and Free-holds in England, and brought the Price of them to Purchase or
Plant here, would have stayed at home: And your Majesty's Revenue, with that of
the Nobility and Gentry, had never come to the Height it did; If your Majesty
please to consider upon what Grounds and Assurances the Purchasers of Lands and
Tenements in this Kingdom proceed, you will soon conclude, that never any
proceeded upon securer Grounds: The Acts of xvij. and xviij. of King Charles
your Father of blessed Memory, the First, takes notice, that there was a
Rebellion begun in this Kingdom on the 23d. of October 1641: And so does a Bill
once read in the House of Lords; whoever looks into the Royal Martyrs Discourse
upon that Occasion, will see with what an abhorrence he laments it: and that he
had once thoughts of coming over in Person to suppress it.

Those Acts promise Satisfaction out of Forfeited Lands to such as would
advance Money for reducing these disturbers of the public Peace, unto their
Duty. The Invitation was his late Majesty's your Royal Brothers Letters from
Breda some few weeks before his Restoration, which happened the 29th of May
1660: And within six Months after, came forth his Majesty's most Gracious
Declaration for the Settlement of this Kingdom. This, may it please your
Majesty, is the Basis and Foundation of the Settlement, and was some years
after Enacted and made a Law by two several Acts of Parliament.

It is true, that the Usurping Powers in the Year 1653. (having by the
permission of the Almighty, as a just Judgment on us for our Sins, prevailed
here) did dispose and set out the Estates of Catholics unto Adventurers and
Soldiers; and in a year or two after, transplanted out Catholic Freeholders
for no other Reason, but their being so in Connought, where Lands were set out
unto them under diverse Qualifications, which they and their Heirs, or those
deriving under them as Purchasers enjoyed, and still do enjoy under the
Security of the before mentioned Acts of Parliament and Declaration.

His Majesty's gracious Declaration of the 30th. of November 1660. which I call
the Foundation of the Settlement, was, before it was concluded on, under the
Consideration of that great Prince, and the Lords of his Council of England,
where all Persons concerned for the Proprietors, as well old as new, were
heard; whoever reads, will find the many Difficulties which he and his Council
met with from the different and several Pretenders; what Consideration was had,
and Care taken, to reconcile the jarring Interests; and to accommodate and
settle, as well as was possible, the Mass and Body of Subjects here.

It was some years after, before the Act for the Execution of his Majesty's
most Gracious Declaration became a Law; It was near two years upon the Anvil;
It was not a Law that past in few days, or sub silentio. It was first,
according to the then Course of passing Laws, here framed by the Chief
Governor and Council of this Kingdom, by the Advice and with the Assistance of
all the Judges, and of his Majesty's Council Learned in the Law, and then
transmitted into England to be further considered of by his Majesty and Lords
of his Council there, where the Counsel at Law and Agents of all Pretenders to
the Propriety of Lands in this Kingdom were heard, and that Act* commonly
called the Act of Settlement, approved of and retransmitted under the Seal of
England to receive the Royal Assent, which it did, after having passed both
Houses of Parliament.

The Innocent Proprietors being restored pursuant to thi^ Act; and some
Difficulties appearing as to the further execution of it; Another Act passed,
commonly called the Act of Explanation, which went the same Course, and under
the same Scrutiny.

It is confessed, that though they are two Acts, it was by the same Parliament,
who were chosen according to the ancient Course of Choosing Parliaments.

But if any miscarriage were in bringing that Parliament together, or the
procuring the aforesaid Acts of Parliament to pass, which we can in no wise
admit; and the less, for that your Majesty's Revenue was granted and settled by
the same Parliament, and many good and wholesome Laws therein Enacted: Yet it is
manifest, that nothing of that kind ought to affect the Plain and honest
Purchaser, who for great and valuable Considerations, acquired Lands under the
Security aforesaid, and expended the remainder of his Means in Building,
Improving, and Planting on them, and that for the following Reasons.

First, The Purchaser advising with his Counsel, how to lay out or secure his
Money, that it may not lie dead, not only to his, but the public detriment,
tells him that he is offered a Purchase of Lands in Fee, or desired by his
Neighbors to accommodate him with Money upon the Security of Judgment or
Statute Staple; and upon the enquiry into the Title, he finds a good and Secure
Estate, as firm in Law, as two Acts of Parliament in force in this Kingdom can
make it; and in many Cases, Letters Patents upon a Commission of Grace for
remedying of defective Titles, he finds Possession both of many years gone
along with this Title several descents past, and possibly that the Lands have
been purchased and passed through the hands of diverse Purchasers: He resorts to
the Records, where he meets with Fines and Common Recoveries, the great
Assurance known to the Laws of England: Under which (by the Blessing of God) we
live; and tells him there is no scruple, nor difficulty of Purchasing under
this Title; since he has Security under two Acts of Parliament, Certificates
and Letters Patents, Fines and Recoveries; and that no Law of force in this
Kingdom can stir, much less shake this Title.

How is it possible to imagine, that the Legislative Power should be made use
of to void this Man's Estate, who perhaps was never in this Kingdom, until after
these Acts were Enacted and became Laws; it will be the like Case with all
Persons* who upon the Marriage of their Children, and considerable Marriage
Portions paid and received, have procured Settlements for Jointured Portions,
and Remainders for their Children and Grand Children: And all these are to be
laid aside, without any Consideration of Law or Equity in the Case of the
Purchasers, or any misdemeanor or offense committed by them: Whereby vast
Numbers of your Majesty's dutiful Subjects the present Proprietors and their
Lessees; and in very many Cases, Widows, Orphans, Merchants and Traders, will
be at one stroke outed and removed from the possessions of their Lands and
Improvements, which in many places are more in value than the Township whereon
they are made: This, with submission, without some fraud, decelt, or default of
the Purchaser never was, and it is hoped never will be done by a People or
Nation professing Christianity: Nor is it for the Honor, Welfare, or Advantage
of the King or Kingdom to have it so done; What will strangers and our
fellow subjects of England and Scotland say? -- We sold our Estates in England;
transported us and our Families into Ireland, to purchase, improve and plant
there: We acquired Lands under as secure Titles as Acts of Parliament, (the
greatest known Security) could make them. Our Conveyances both by Deeds and
matters of Record are allowed good, firm, and unquestionable by any Law in
force at the time of the Purchase. We have had the possession 10, 12, or 15
years, and are grown old upon them. We have clearly drawn our Effects from
England and settled here, not doubting but our Posterity may be so likewise. We
have purchased Annuities and Rent Charges out of Lands under the same
Securities: And now the Old Proprietors (though many of them had Satisfaction
in Connaught) would fain have a new Law to dispossess us of our Estates and
Improvements made as aforesaid. It will not be believed, that the chief of
those who drew on this Design, should in Parliament and elsewhere, which ought
to consist of the gravest, wisest, and wealthiest Freeholders of the Kingdom,
(for such the Law presumes them) make a noise with that good and wholesome
advice -- Caveat emptor in this Case; or can think that Caveat is proper here.

The Purchaser ought to be wary of any Flaw in the Title at the time of the
Purchase made, and purchases at his peril, if any such there be; But who is
that Purchaser that must beware of a Law to be made 20, 30, or 40 years after
his Purchase, or to destroy his Security for Money lent, or Settlement upon
Marriage? this is not a desect in the Title, but (under favor) is a President
which no humane foresight can prevent, and if once introduced, no Purchaser
could ever be safe: the worst of Lotteries affording a securer way of dealing
than Ireland would.

Can it be your Majesty's Honor or Advantage to have thousands of Families
ruined by such a Proceeding as this is? What will become of our Credit, and
consequently of our Trade abroad? Where will be the Reputation, and public
Faith and Security of the Kingdom, when Foreign Merchants shall know from their
Correspondents here, that they cannot comply with their Engagements to them,
their Estates, Houses, and Improvements both in Country and City which they
had acquired for great and valuable Consideration, and within the Securities of
the Laws, are taken from them by a Law made yesterday, in case this Bill should
pass: So that in Effect, we are not only contriving to break and ruin our own
Trades and Merchants at home, but even those in Foreign parts, which will
infallibly destroy your Majesty's Revenue, and sink that of every Subject.

Surely these Particulars, and the Consequences of them, are worth more then
two or three days consideration: which is as much as this Bill could have,
since the Parliament was not opened till the 7th. of this Month:

The very Report of what is designed by this Bill, has already from the most
improved and improving Spot of Earth in Europe; From stately Herds and Flocks;
From plenty of Money at 7 or 8 per Cent. whereby Trade and Industry were
encouraged; and all upon the Security of those Acts of Parliament; From great
and convenient Buildings newly erected in Cities and other Corporations, to
that degree, that even the City of Dublin is ruined. The passing of these Acts,
and the securities and quiet promised from them, enlarged double what it was;
That the Shipping in diverse Ports were 5 or 6 times more than ever was known
before, to the vast increase of your Majesty's Revenue, reduced to the saddest
and most disconsolate condition of any Kingdom or Country in Europe: Infinite
numbers of the Inhabitants having transported themselves and Families with what
remained unfixed in Purchases and Improvements, and was portable of their
Estates into other Kingdoms, that very many of the Buildings both new and old
in this City, and in the very Heart and Trading Part of it, are uninhabited and
waste.

It is grievous to see, as you pass through the City, the Houses and Shops shut
up; The Herds and Flocks in the Country are utterly destroyed; So that of
necessity the Tenant must break; throw up his Lease; leave the Key under the
Door, and the Lands become waste; and from hence will necessarily follow, that
the Farm-houses and Improvements must go to decay, and Beef, Tallow, Hides,
Wool and Butter, (from whence arise the Wealth of the Country) will fail us.

What is become of the frequent Declarations made by the Earl of Clarendon, and
the Earl (now Duke) of Tyrconnel, of your Majesty's fixed Resolutions, never to
lay aside the Acts of Settlement and Explanation? Why did the Judges in their
several Circuits, declare in all places where they sat, unto the Countries
there assembled, that your Majesty was resolved to preserve the Acts of
Settlement and Explanation, and that they were appointed by the then Chief
Governor here, to declare the same unto them; from whence they took confidence
to proceed in their Purchases and Improvements; and (with submission be it
spoken) if this Bill pass, are deluded. Shall Patents on the Commission of
Grace signify nothing? The Great Seal of England tells them they may proceed
upon the public Faith; and here again they become Purchasers, paying
considerable Fines to the King, to whom Rents were reserved where none were due
before, and many places the Rent increased; as in case of Fairs and Markets
granted, together with the Lands on them, Patents of Liberties of Free Warren,
and to enclose and empale for Park; surely some consideration ought to be had
of those whose money was paid on this account.

It would be farther considered, That your Majesty before your access to the
Crown, had passed several Lands and Tenements in this Kingdom in Certificate
and Patent pursuant to these Acts of Settlement; and that you made Leases of
them, on which many and great Improvements have been made. It is likewise true
that your Majesty sold and exchanged some small proportions of the same Lands,
and received in Money Twelve Years Purchase; some of which your Majesty
conveyed by Fines and other assurances in Law; and though your Majesty may, if
it seem meet unto you, part with all that Estate, yet it is humbly conceived,
it ought to be with reservation to the Lessees and those few Purchasers, as it
was done by Mary Queen of England, who though zealous in the highest degree to
the Religion she professed; and that she restored such part of Lands belonging
unto Monasteries as remained in her hands undisposed, did nevertheless permit
the Grantees and Purchasers quietly and peaceably to retain such part of them
as they were possessed of by Grant or Purchase, and which (for ought appearing)
is enjoyed by them, and those deriving under them to this day, though she came
to the Crown within few years after Passing the Act for Dissolving Monasteries:
For if no consideration be had of them, your Majesty gives away the Term of
Years and Improvements from your Lessees, and the Land from him to whom your
Majesty sold it, without restoring the Purchase money, than which no case can be
harder; and without your Roy-Assent neither of these can be done.

For the Objections commonly made against the Acts of Settlement and
Explanation, which are usually, that many Innocents were never heard, and that
there was not time sufficient for hearing of them; but how this should affect
those who purchased after the Acts passed, and Certificates and Letters Patents
passed on them is not demonstrable from any Rule of Law or Equity.

The person designing to Purchase, inquires whether the Title of the Land or
Tenement to be Sold be good in Law and Equity; and being assured in that he
forbears further Inquiry, being assured that never any Purchaser in Possession
having Law and Equity on his side, was dispossessed by any person* whatsoever
upon ground of Equity; and the Purchaser here has the Law with him by the Acts
of Settlement, and the Equity by the payment of his Money.

It is to be wished, that if Widows, Orphans, or any other persons have fallen
under hardship by the general settlement of the Kingdom, that some way may be
devised to make them reparation; but the way prescribed by this Bill, is to Rob
the Innocent Purchasers, Creditors and Orphans of their Estates, to do it
contrary to the Public Faith, Laws of the Land, and Precept of Holy Writ,
which forbids doing of Evil, that good may come thereof.

Its manifest by what has been said, that if this Bill proceed as is now
contrived, that all the Protestants in the Kingdom are undoubtedly and without
reserve ruined; since the Rapparees (that is, the Armed multitude) have taken
away all their moveable Estates; and this Design is to take away all the Lands
and Tenements purchased by them.

The thriving Catholics who were Purchasers (as most of the Province of
Connaught are) are likewise to be turned out of their Estates and Possessions,
and their own and the improvements of those who hold under them utterly lost.

As to the Politic part which these great Statesmen who drive on this Bill
make mention of, that will be worthy of consideration: Its said, that this will
unite your Majesty's Subjects in this Kingdom, That is too gross to pass: since
the first mentioning thereof, has it not made a division and a breach betwixt
them? nay, where there was none before? and does it not grow daily wider? It
was never heard that Accommodation between parties that were all in contest
could stand, unless the terms were continued; for if what was given to one of
the Parties be taken away, it makes the whole Award void and of none effect;
and admitting the Old Proprietor had right, it is not enough except he have it
against the Purchaser: And if the Design be what is pretended, to restore this
Kingdom to the Peace and Plenty which it flourished in some years since, to
unite your Majesty's Subjects, whereby they may be enabled according to their
Duty and Allegiance, to restore your Majesty to the exercise of your Royal
Dignity in all your Kingdoms; this can never be effected, except all pretenders
recede in some degree from the full of their pretensions for the accommodation
of the whole, and the public quiet and safety.

Would it not be an unreasonable thing in a Cargo where diverse Merchants are
concerned and have Goods and Merchandises in a Storm, to throw out by consent
the Goods of any one Merchant, though in the bottom of the Hold and hardest to
come by, for the safety of all concerned, without satisfaction given him, by a
contribution from those who had the advantage of it; or if it could be done, or
had time for it, were it not much more just that the loss should be equally
divided amongst them, by throwing out a just proportion from all concerned,
than to single out one part of the people, and by their ruin to advance the
other; This is not in my judgment the readiest way of uniting them.

Sufferance to make one step more, and Quaere, Whether the Catholic Purchasers
now to be turned out of Possession, will join heartily with those that enter
upon them? Farewell Trade and Commerce where Acts of Parliament shall be made to
destroy securities that were good when made, Farewell all Improvements in
Ireland, where no man shall ever know what Estate he has, if the foundation of
the general settlement should now be overturned.

I cannot foresee what the consequences may be of having it published and made
known in your Majesty's other Kingdoms and Dominions and elsewhere where the
Protestant Religion is professed, that such a Proposal as this (in relation to
such of your Protestant Subjects as have made no defection) has been prepared
for your Majesty's Consideration in order to be passed into a Law, and this,
when they were secure of the Laws of the Land; not so much as Common Equity to
question the Title by which they held: That nevertheless use should be made of
the Legislative power to Enact a new Law, after so many assurances given them
to the contrary; and after so many years quiet possession to turn them out of
their Estates altogether.

It is much to be feared that those who first advised this method of
Proceedings, have considered their own particular advantage, and that of their
Friends and Relations, without the least thoughts of your Majesty's Service;
for surely this can never be thought so, nor the way to settle this Kingdom
whereby it may be serviceable to your Majesty; nor can it be imagined, but that
men thus despoiled, will as often as Parliaments shall be called, make
application for Redress and Repeal, as in the Case of the Spencers to Repeal a
Repeal, and they and their Posterity will be always soliciting your Majesty
and your Successors to give them relief in a Case of so great moment and
general concern as this is.

As for the general Reprizal* mentioned to be made them out of the Rebels
Estate (which must not be conceived to give any color to this manner of
proceeding, and ought to be equal to the Estate which the Proprietors shall be
outed of) that will be very uncertain, for it must be known who the Rebels are,
and what their Lands amount to, since it may be probably concluded, that there
are many of your Subjects now in England no way concerned in the Rebellion, and
would have ere this attended your Majesty here, if they had not been hindered
from coming by duress and Imbargo, and many other legal and justifiable
excuses, too long for this present Paper; and withal, that where any of them
are seized of any new Estates, so much must be restored to the old Proprietors,
and what is also subject to their Settlements and other Encumbrances.

After all this, it is in the power of your Majesty to prevent the total ruin
of so many of your Subjects as have been Purchasers and Improvers in this
Kingdom, by prescribing more moderate ways than depriving them of the whole of
what they have legally and industriously acquired; and that Committees of both
Houses may hear and enquire whether any medium may be found out betwixt the
Extremes for the accommodating as near as may be the Purchaser and the old
Proprietor, so that if there because of Complaint, it may not arise from a
total disappointment of either Party: This is a little of what may be said on
this occasion, but the have of those who drew on this Bill will allow no
further time at present.

It is proposed that his Majesty will hear Council on this occasion.
No. 23. The Lord Bishop of Meath's Speech in Parliament, June the 4th. 1689.
Spoken on the Bill of Repeal of the Act of Settlement.
My Lords,
YOur Lordships have now under yo^^ Consideration a Bill of great Weight and
Importance, for the future Prosperity or Ruin of the King and Kingdom depends
upon it; A Bill that unsettles a former Foundation (upon which this Kingdom's
Peace and Flourishing was superstructed) and Designs to erect another in its
stead, the Success whereof is dubious and uncertain; I shall therefore humbly
crave your Leave to represent my Thoughts heartily and impartially upon it; And
that so much the rather, because I am here summoned by the Kings Writ to give
his Majesty my best Advice for his own Service, and the good of the Nation.

My Lords, In every Law, two things are to be considered; First, that it be
just, and does no 1. It is unjust.
Man wrong. Secondly, and that it be pro bono publico; And I am humbly of
Opinion, that this Bill is faulty in both these Respects: and therefore ought
not to pass this House. It is unjust to turn men out of their Possessions and
Estates without any Fault or Demerit; To deprive Widows of their Jointures, and
Children of their Portions, when they have done nothing to forfeit them. But
the Injustice will rise much higher, if we consider it with a respect to
Purchasers, who have laid out all their Substance upon Estates derived under
the Acts that are now designed to be Repealed. What have they done to make them
Delinquents, except it be the laying out their Money on the Public Faith of
the Nation, declared in two Acts of Parliament, and on the Public Faith of his
Majesty's Royal Brother expressed in his Letters Patents. Their Case is yet
harder, If we consider the great Improvements they have made upon their
Purchases, which by this Bill they are like to lose, without any Reprizal for
them; And if it be reasonable to restore the Old Proprietors to their Estates,
it is enough for them to enjoy them in the same plight and condition that they
left them: But I see no Reason why they should have them in a better Condition,
or enjoy the Benefit of other men's Labors and Expenses, to the utter ruin of
them and their Families; Here, Mercy should take place as well as Justice, for
the Purchasers are the Objects of them both.

Two things I am sensible, may be replied to this: and I am willing to consider
them both. First, That if it be unjust to turn them out; It is as unjust not to
restore the Old Proprietor, who has been so long kept out of his Estate.
Secondly, That there is no injury done to the present Possessor, because he is
to be repriz'd for his Losses.

As to the first of these, I shall not at present meddle with the Reasons why
they lost their Estates* nor touch upon the Grounds and Occasions of their
forfeiting their Interests in them: being sensible that neither the time nor
the place will admit a Discourse of this nature; I shall therefore take it for
granted, that they were unjustly put out: that it is just and reasonable that
they should be restored: but then it must be granted, that it is unjust to turn
out the present Purchaser and Possessor. What then is to be done in this Case,
where the Justice or the Injury is alike on both sides: If we restore the Old
Proprietor, we injure the present Possessor; if we do do not, we injure the Old
Proprietor.

My Lords, It is my humble Opinion (which I submit to your Lordships better
Judgments) that we are to consider in this Case, who has most Justice on his
side, and incline the Balance that way; If it lies on the Old Proprietors
side, let him have it; If not, let the present Possessor enjoy it. Now it
appears to me, that the Purchaser has more Justice on his side than the Old
Proprietor: For he has both Law and Equity on his side; he has the Law on his
side by two Acts of Parliament, and the Kings Letters Patents; and he has the
Equity by his Purchase Money; whereas the Proprietor has the Law against him,
and nothing but Equity to pretend to; And I hope your Lordships will never
think it reasonable to relieve a bare Equitable Right against a Purchaser that
has both Law and Equity: If you do, I am confident it is the first President
of this kind.

As for the Reprizals, I hear the Name of them in the Bill, but I find nothing
agreeable to Reprizals.
the nature of them. There are certain Conditions agreed on all hands, to make
up the Nature of a Reprizal: None of which are like to be observed or kept
here. I shall name some of them, and leave it to your Lordships Consideration,
how far they are like to be performed with the present Purchasers.

It is necessary to a Reprizal, that it be as good at least, if not in some
respects better than the thing I am to part with: That I my self be Judge,
whether it be better or worse; That I keep what I have, till I am reprized. If
my Neighbor comes to me, and tells me, that he has a mind to my Horse* or to
a Field of mine that lies convenient for him: I tell him, that I have no mind
to part with them: He offers me Money for them: I tell him, that I will not
sell them; He tires me out with Importunities, and at length, I consent to part
with them in exchange for some other things as good as they: But I tell him
withal, that I my self will be Judge, whether they are so or not, since it is
at his importunity and to please him, that I part with them: And besides that,
I am resolved to be possessed of the Equivolent at the same time that I part
with my own, there being no reason why I should dance attendance after him, and
wait his leisure for my Reprizal.

My Lords, If these be the true Conditions of Reprizals, as I presume they are,
I am confident that not one of them is like to be observed in the intended
Reprizals, not the first of them: For by the Petitions that have been before
your Lordships; and by an additional Clause in your Lordships Alterations,
wherein you have saved all Remainders expectant, on Estates for Lives, most of
the Reprizable Persons must Part with an Inheritance to them and their Heirs,
and get only in Lieu of it an Estate for Life, which will determine with the
Life of the forfeiting Persons: So here is not Equal Value, Worth, and Purchase.

Not the Second: For, the Parties themselves are not made the Judges, but the
Commissioners: And I dare say, that if they were made the Judges, there is not
one of them that are to be turned out, that will part with their present
Possessions, or that judge the Reprizal to bear any proportion with the Estates
they are to quit.

Not the Third: For, by the Commons Bill they are to be turned out immediately,
and wait for a Reprizal afterward: and all the Favor they can obtain from
your Lordships, is only to have a competent time for their removal, (which may
be long or short as the Commissioners please) but out they must go at the
discretion of the Commissioners, and wait their leisure for a Reprizal.

This is the first Objection against this It is not for the public good.
Bill. The next is, that it is not for the Public Good, either for the King or
the Kingdom, or the People in it; It is not for the good of the King, who is
the Vital Head of this great Body, and that whether we respect his Majesty's
Honor or his Profit.

It is not for his Majesty's Honor to consent Not for the King's good.
to the Ruining of so many Innocent Loyal Persons as must unavoidably perish,
if this Bill does pass: It is not for his Honor to rescind those just Acts of
his Royal Father and Brother, the Act for Adventurers passed in England, and
the Declaration and Acts of Settlement and Explanation, which* if I am not
misinformed, were five years upon the Anvil, and at last not passed, till all
Parties were fully heard. It is not for his Majesty's Honor to break his word
with his People, nor violate so many repeated Promises as he has made, that he
would not Consent to the Repeal of them.

And as it is not for his Honor, so it is not for his Profit or Advantage; it
will neither preserve him in the Kingdom that he enjoys, nor restore him to
those that he has unhappily lost. His Profit in this Kingdom must arise out of
a Constant Payment of his Revenue both Ordinary and Extraordinary: And who is
able to pay His Revenue or support the Dignity of his Crown* if this Bill
passes into a Law? The Protestants are not able, the Rapparees have Plundered
them of all their Substance* and here is a Bill to take away their Estates; and
consequently they will have nothing left to pay the Public Taxes of the
Nation: And as for the Romanists, they will be in as ill a Condition as the
Protestants; The Old Proprietor comes Poor and Hungry into his Estate, and can
pay nothing till his Tenants raise it; and the present Possessor loses the
Benefit of his Purchases and Improvements; and who then is able to supply the
Necessities of His Majesty? Besides this, in many parts of the Kingdom, the
Land is hardly able to pay the Kings Quit-Rent, by reason of the Universal
Depredations that Reign every where; and can it be imagined but that things
will grow far worse when the ablest Catholic Merchants, and the most Wealthy
Purchasers of that Communion are ruined and undone?

And as it is not for the Kings Profit in this Kingdom, so it is to the utter
Ruin of his Interest in the Kingdoms that he has lost: Will the Protestants in
England and Scotland join heartily in restoring him to his Crown, when they
understand how their Brethren here are used? No, My Lords, They will rather
bend and unite all their Forces to hinder his Restitution, when they consider
that the mischief is like to come home to their own Doors, and that what is a
doing here, is but a Model of what they must suffer if he be restored. Will
they trust his Word in England, when he breaks it in Ireland, or rely on his
Promises to them, when he does not keep them to his Subjects here; This, my
Lords, will abate their Affections for him, and gain him more Enemies there
than he can have Friends here.

It is not for the good of the Kingdom, and that if we consider it in reference
to Trade, Wealth, Improvements, It ruins the Kingdom.
Husbandry.

It will ruin the Kingdom in point of Trade; Divine Providence has placed us
in an Island, where we must Trade or want many conveniences of Life; and can we
expect that the Trade of this Nation will increase in our hands, when we find
it sunk so low by the removal of the Protestant Merchants effects out of the
Kingdom, and for those Catholic Merchants that carry it on in some measure,
can we believe that they will be able to carry it on, when we are ruining their
Stocks by taking away their Estates and Improvements from them; Nay, we shall
not only ruin our own Traders at home, but break their Correspondents abroad
whose effects are in their hands. We have passed a Bill in this House for the
Inviting Strangers to Settle and Trade among us; but it is worth considering,
whether the Course we are now taking, will not hinder the Nation of the
intended benefit of that Bill; for if Foreign Merchants come among us, what
Security have they but the Public Faith of the Nation, and it is not probable
that Strangers will rely upon it, when they observe that it is so ill kept
toward our own people.

If Trade decays, the Wealth of the Nation must perish with it; for they live
and die together. Wealth cannot subsist without Trade, or without security for
Debt: And who will ever lend Money, or Purchase, or Improve in this Kingdom
after this? when the Money that has been lent, and the Purchases made from
Persons deriving their Estates under two Acts of Parliament, many years
Possession, and Letters Patents on Record, are all blown off at once, and
nothing left sure or firm in the Kingdom? For my part, I cannot understand that
any Man will Purchase an Acre of Land hereafter, when former Purchasers that
thought themselves secure are so much discouraged. Improvements must perish
likewise, for by the Petitions that have been preferred to this House, your
Lordships may perceive that some Proprietors have but small Estates, 20, 40, or
100 Acres, on which Sumptuous Houses and large Gardens and Orchards have been
erected, and the Income of their Estates is not able to repair the Glass
Windows, or defray the Wages of the Gardener: And as for Husbandry, what
between the Old Proprietor that is to be restored, and cannot Manure the Ground
till he is possessed of it, and the present Possessor that knows not how long
his Term will hold, and therefore will be at no Charges upon a Term that
depends on the Will of the Commissioners; We shall have the Plow neglected, and
must feed on one another instead of Corn.

My Lords, This is not all the inconvenience in it, but it is likewise to the
prejudice of the People in It ruins the People in it.
the Kingdom both Protestants and Catholics: The Protestants are already
ruined by the Rapparees, and if their Estates are taken from them, I know
nothing wanting to make them completely miserable. The rich Catholics have as
yet escaped the Depredations of their Neighbors, but they will be almost as
miserable as the Protestants, when their Estates and Improvements are taken
from them.

My Lords, This Bill does likewise destroy the Public Faith and Credit of the
Nation; it destroys It destroys the Public Faith.
the Credit of England by Repealing the Act Passed there for the Satisfaction
of Adventurers; it destroys the Public Faith of Ireland by Repealing the Acts
of Settlement and Explanation; it violates the Faith of his late Majesty which
has been passed to his Subjects in his Gracious Declaration for the Settlement
of this Kingdom, and in his Letters Patents pursuant to it.

It subverts the Credit of his present Majesty in his Letters Patents that he
has Passed since his coming to the Crown on the Commission of Grace, for he
has received the Composition money; and if these Grants must be vacated, I
cannot forbear to speak it plainly, that the Subject is deluded; it commits a
Rape upon the Common Law, by making all Fines and Recoveries useless and
ineffectual; and it invades the Property of every private Subject, by
destroying all Settlements on valuable Considerations.

My Lords, This Bill is Inconvenient in point of Time. Is it now a time for men
to seek for Vineyards Inconvenient in point of time.
and Olive yards, when a Civil War is rageing in the Nation, and we are under
Apprehensions (I will not say fears, for it is below Men of Courage to be
afraid) of Invasions from abroad; is it not better to wait for more peaceable
times, and Postpone our own Concerns to the Concerns of his Majesty and the
public Peace of the Nation; To do otherwise is to divide the Spoil before we
get it, to dispose of the Skin before we catch the Beast. We cannot in this
case set a better President before Us than the Case of the Israelites in the
Book of Joshua; they had the Land of Canaan given them by God, but yet Joshua
did not go about to make a Distribution of it to the Tribes, till they had
subdued their Enemies, and the Lord had given them peace: Nay, My Lords, I am
confident that it will prejudice His Majesty's Service, because every Man's eye
and heart will be more on his own Concerns than His Majesty's Business; it is
possible that their affections may be more set upon the gaining of their
Estates than the Fighting for the King; and then all their Endeavors will be
drowned in the Consideration of their own profit: Moses was Jealous of this
when the Two* Tribes and an half desired to have their Possessions on this side
Jordan, before the Land was entirely subdued; and there may be the same motives
to the like suspicions now.

My Lords:

Either there was a REBELLION in this Kingdom, or there was not. If there was
none, then we have been very unjust all this while, in ^^eping so many
Innocents out of their Estates: And God forbid that I should open my Mouth in
the Defense of so gross an Injustice; but then what shall we say to His
Majesty's Royal Fathers Declaration in his (...), who there owns that there was
a Rebellion; and in pursuance of that Opinion, passed an Act to secure such as
should adventure Money for the suppressing of it* Nay, What shall we say to the
Two Bills that have been brought into this House: the one by an Honorable
Lord, which owns it fully; the latter from the Commoners, which owns a
Rebellion, but extenuates it? I take it then for granted that there was a
Rebellion; and if so, it was either a total, or a partial one: If it was a
general one, then all were guilty of it, and none can pretend to be restored to
his Estate, farther than the King in his Mercy shall think fit to grant it him:
If it was a partial one, then some Discrimination ought to be made between the
Innocent and the Guilty. The Innocent should be restored, and the Guilty
excluded from their Estates; but here is a Bill that makes no distinction
between them, but Innocent and Nocent are all to fare alike: The one is to be
put in as good a Condition as the other; and can your Lordships imagine that it
is reasonable to do this, when we all know that there has been a Court of
Claims erected for the Trial of Innocents; that several have put themselves
upon the Proof of their Innocence, and after a full Hearing of all that they
could offer for themselves, have been adjudged Nocent.

My Lords:

I have Ventured Heartily and Impartially to lay my Thoughts before you; and I
have no other design in it, than honestly to acquit my Conscience toward my
KING and Country. If my Freedom has given your Lordships any Offense, I do
here submissively beg your Pardon for it; but it is the Concern of the Nation
in general, that has made me so warm in this Affair. I have but one thing more
to add, That God would so direct and instruct your hearts, that you may pitch
upon those Courses, that may be for the Honor of the King, and the Benefit of
the Kingdom.

Objections against the Particulars of the Bill, made by the Lord Bishop of
Mead.
I. No Penalty on such as shall enter without Injunctions. II. No Consideration
for Improvements. III. No Saving for Remainders. IV. No Time given to Tenants
and Possessors to Remove their Stock and Corn. V. No Provision for Protestant
Widows. VI. It allows only Reprisals for Original Purchase-Money, which is hard
to make out, and is an Injury to the Second or Third Purchaser.
No. 24. Copies of the ORDERS for giving Possessions, etc.
Com. Kildare. By the Lord Lieutenant of the County of Kildare, and one of His
MAJESTY'S most Honorable Privy Council.

[ Note, The Copy of the First Order for Garrisoning the House of Ballisannan
could not be gotten.]

WHereas I have been informed, That Ballysannan, now belonging to Mr. Annesley,
was a House of Strength, and therefore fit to have a Garrison; and now being
convinced of the contrary: These are therefore in His Majesty's Name, to
require you forthwith to remove your Men to their former Garrison, out of the
said House. Given under my Hand this First day of April 1690.

Charles White.
For Captain Patrick Nugent, or the Officer in Chief, Commanding the Troop at
Kildare.
SIR,
THIS is to let you understand, that I am Authorized to give the Proprietor
possession of the Lands of Ballysannan, etc. according to the Act of
Parliament; and that you may not be surpised therein, I give you this Notice,
from Sir,

Your Loving Friend and Servant, Charles White,
Naas the 8th. of April, 1690. For John Annesly Esquire, or in his Absence, to
Francis Annesly, Esquire These.
Second Order for Ballysannan.
WHereas Luke Fitzgerald Esquire, has proved himself before me, to be the
Ancient Proprietor of the Town and Lands of Ballysannan, and that his Ancestors
were Possessed of their Mansion House there, in the Year 1641. I do therefore,
in pursuance of His Majesty's Orders unto me, appoint the under-named Persons
to give possession of the Mansion House there, to Luke Fitzgerald Esquire: And
for so doing, this shall be your Warrant. Given under my Hand and Seal this
6th. day of May, 1690.

Charles White.

I do hereby appoint Captain Walter Archbold, or Captain John Dillon of Athy,
to give possession of the Mansion House of Ballysannan, to Luke Fitzgerald
Esquire.

An Account of Absentees Goods, and how they were imbezelled.
THE beginning of March 1688. or before, several Persons, Officers of the Army,
who were empowered, or pretended to be empowered by my Lord Deputy, seized on
the Goods of Absentees, in most Counties of the Kingdom, except the City of
Dublin.

May 7th. 1689. A Warrant comes to the Commissioners of His Majesty's Revenue,
under His Majesty's Privy Signet and Sign Manual, dated April 29th. 1689. to
empower the Commissioners of the Revenue, to call all such Persons to Account,
that had seized any Goods or Chattels of Absentees.

May 9th. 1689. The Commissioners of the Revenue issued out Instructions to
several Persons, in the respective Counties, pursuant to His Majesty's said
Warrant.

As to the Country, it must be observed, That betwixt the 1st. of March, 1688.
(being the Time of seizing by the Officers of the Army) and 9th. of May 1689.
when the Commissioners were empowered, a great part of the Goods of Absentees
were stolen or disposed: The Officers that seized, were at the Camp at Denry;
and if any Accounts were returned by them to the Lord Deputy, the same never
came to the Commissioners, though they often endeavored with the Secretary to
find any such Accounts.

The Commissioners of the Revenue thereupon solicited a Bill to pass in
Parliament, to vest the Goods of all Absentees, in the King, with some fitting
Power to the Commissioners of the Revenue, for the more easy and expeditious
bringing all Persons to Account, that had formerly seized: But this met with
much delay and alterations. At last the Bill passed the 18th. of July, 1689.
and the Scope of it amounts to no more, than to vest in His Majesty, the Goods
of such Persons only, as are declared Forfeiting Persons by the Act of
Attainder, or Persons absent, who abet or assist the Prince of Orange, (with
exception of Minors, and some Proviso's by the Act of Attainder) most had time
to return till the First of September; and the general Clause of all Persons
that have aided or abetted the Prince of Orange, does not entitle the King
without an Office found, that such Persons did aid or abet; and this requiring
Proof, and a Great Charge, there did not appear sufficient profit to arise to
answer the Charge. Upon the whole Matter, this Bill seemed rather to lessen the
Zeal of those employed to seize Absentees Goods, than otherwise, when they
considered, that upon debate in Parliament, it was denied to pass a Law that
should indemnifie them for more than half their Seizures, even in the City of
Dublin, half the Persons, whose Goods were there seized, not being named in the
Bill of Attainder. However,

Aug. 9th. 1689. The Commissioners of the Revenue having appointed four
Provincial Surveyors, gave them Instructions, that the Surveyor General and the
Collectors, should dispose of the Stocks of Absentees; whereby it appears, that
instead of neglecting that Matter of the Goods of Absentees, they seemed rather
to have given Order for the disposal of them before they were forfeited.

September. 14th. 1689. The Commissioners finding no satisfactory Returns, from
the Commissioners employed by them, most of the Commissioners being in the
Army, or neglecting the Matter, or applying the Goods to their own Use, they
superseded those Commissioners, and lest the whole Matter to their Collectors;
which if done at first, some profit might have redounded to His Majesty.

2. The Goods of Absentees in the City of Dublin, were not ordered by the Lord
Deputy to be seized; but the people observing what was done in the Country, and
there being free Transportation for England in March, the Customhouse-Key
became like a Fair, and the most of Absentees Goods were then sent for England;
scarce any thing valuable was then left, unless by the Carelessness of the
persons employed by the Absentees.

The said 9th. of August, 1689. the Commissioners empowered several persons to
seize the Goods of Absentees in the City of Dublin, with like directions as the
Lord Deputy gave formerly in other Counties, viz. To inventory and take
security for the forthcoming of these Goods, and not to strip the Houses, or
hinder Trade; for many Brewers, Ale-sellers, and other Handy-Crafts and
Traders, though absent, yet had left behind them Servants, Friends, and
sometimes their Wives to manage their Trade; and to have stripped those Houses,
had but added to the Number of Wast Houses, and lessened His Majesty's Revenue;
some Alehouses not having the Value of Forty Shillings of Absentees Goods,
draw three or four Barrels of Drink per Week, besides their Quartering of
Soldiers, which has cost the Inhabitants more generally by far, than the Goods
could be sold for these Times.

And this Matter ought at present to be well considered; for, though now the
Goods are vested in the King by Law, and the best of them is to be made for the
King's advantage; yet Rotten Hangings will sell only to those that have the
House.

No. 25. Albavilles Instructions to the Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer.
Gentlemen,
THE many Robberies, Oppressions, and Outrages committed through all parts of
the Kingdom, to the utter Ruin thereof, and to the great Scandal of the
Government, as well is of Christianity, forces his Majesty to a great
resentment against those that prove Encouragers and Abettors of them, by an
unpardonable neglect in the Execution of his Royal Orders. And whereas the
Issuing out Commissions of Oyer and Terminer in all the Counties of the
Kingdom, which was done some Months ago, was judged by his Majesty, with the
Advice of his Privy Council, the most Efficacious means to prevent and quash
such horrid Disorders.

I. You are Ordered by his Majesty, on sight hereof, to let Me his Principal
Secretary of State know what you can allege, to justify your selves from the
Imputation of having strangely Neglected (all this time) the Execution of your
Commission, which proves the chiefest Cause of this general Desolation of the
Country. II. You are Commanded by his Majesty, to proceed without the least
delay to the Execution of your Commission, and send to me (for his Majesty's
information) a Weekly Account of your Proceedings. III. That you Adjourn from
one Week to another; and at farthest, not above a Fortnight. IV. That you
proceed with all Just Severity, against such of the Justices of the Peace, as
have Bayled (contrary to Law) Malefactors: And against all such as favor (in
any manner) Robbers and Thieves. V. That you proceed against all persons
whatsoever, who have given, or will give, any Obstruction to the Execution of
your Commission: And if they prove Officers of the Army, or Absent, so as you
do not think fit to proceed against them, that you forthwith send me an Account
thereof. VI. That you proceed with all Rigor, against all persons found Guilty
of Counterfeiting the Kings Coin. VII. And lastly, That you Order all men to
fall upon public Robbers, who have no regard of their Duty toward GOD, their
King or Country, destitute of all sense of humanity; and consider them but as
wild beasts, who live upon Prey and Rapine.
This is Gentlemen, what I have at present in Command from his Majesty to send
to you; to which I will add this Advertisement, That you cannot light upon
better Measures to Allay the KINGS just Resentment of your former Neglects,
(the occasion of a world of Mischief) then by a speedy and vigorous Execution
of your Commission.

Let the present general cries of the people for Justice, and the present
general Oppression under which the Country groans, move you to have a
Compassion of it; and to raise in you such a public spirit, as may Save it
from this inundation of Miseries that break in upon it, by a Neglect of his
Majesty's Orders, and by a general relaxation of all Civil and Military Laws.

Consider that our Enemies leaving us to our selves as they do, conclude we
shall prove greater Enemies to one another than they can be to us; and that we
will destroy the Country, and enslave our selves more than they are able to do:
What Inhumanities are daily committed against one another, gives but too much
ground to the truth of what our Enemies conclude of us.

I had almost forgot a special Command of his Majesty; that is, That you will
consider the Liberty of Conscience granted by Act of Parliament, and to punish
the Infringers of that Law, who by an indiscreet and inconsiderable Zeal usurp
his Majesty's Prerogative; not reflecting how much his Majesty's and the
Nations interest; and not only the Religion of the Nation, but the Catholic
Religion in all the parts of Christendom is involved in a Religious Execution
of that Liberty of Conscience.

Dublin-Castle, Jan. 2. 1689. I am, Gentlemen, Your most humble Servant,
Marquis D Albaville.
To the Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer for the County of Dublin, or to any
or either of them, to be Communicated to the rest. To the Lord Chief Justice
Nugent.
No. 26. A Copy of a Petition of the Minister of Wexford, for his Church, and
the Order thereupon.
To the KING's most Excellent Majesty. The humble Petition of Alexr. Allen of
Wexford, Clerk.

Most humbly Shows,
THAT your Petitioner being Minister of the Parish Church of St. Iberius, in
the Town of Wexford; has therein for several Years past, daily celebrated
Divine Service; and exercised all other Offices of his Function with Piety to
GOD, and constant Loyalty to your Majesty: Yet Your Petitioner on the 25th. of
October last, was Dispossessed of his said Church, (contrary to the late Act of
Liberty of Conscience) by Edward Wiseman Esquire Mayor of Wexford; who a few days
after, did not only, by the Rabble, introduced by him, brake down and demolish,
all the Pewes and Altar of the said Church, but did seize, and unjustly deny
your Petitioners Vestmonts, Church - Book, and other Ornaments thereof, to the
great prejudice of your Petitioner and his Parishoners; although your Majesty's
Roman Catholic Subjects have several Chapels fit for the free Exercise of
their Religion, both within and without the Walls of the said Town, and
whereunto several Protestant Inhabitants have given liberal Contribution. Your
Petitioner further shows, That he the said Edward Wiseman, as Magistrate of
the Town of Wexford, is obliged (as usually it has been by Act of Vestry) to
encourage and provide for the relief of distressed Orphans, and other poor of
the said Town of Wexford; yet uncharitably refuses to interpose his Authority
in the behalf of such poor, whereby they must inevitably perish, if not
speedily Relieved.

May it therefore please Your Majesty, to Restore your Petitioner to his Parish
Church, which was never Forfeited by Absence, or otherwise: And that the said
Edward Wiseman may be obliged to Repair it, and leave it in the same condition
he found it* and that such care may be taken for Relief of distressed Orphans,
and other Poor from Famine, as is usual.

And Your Petitioner shall ever pray, etc.

At the Court in Dublin-Castle, Jan. 28th. 1690.
Present the KING's most Excellent Majesty in Council. Loco Sigill'


WHEREAS His Majesty is Informed upon Oath, That Edw. Wiseman late Mayor of the
Town of Wexford, did Illegally seize upon the Parish Church of St. Iberius in
the said Town of Wexford, broke down the Pews and Altar of the said Church, and
detained the Vestmonts, Church-Books, and other Ornaments thereunto belonging:
His Majesty was Graciously pleased, to Order Mr. Nicholas Stafford, present
Mayor of the said Town of Wexford, forthwith to cause the said Church and Goods
to be Restored to Alexr. Allen, Minister of the said Parish, in the same
condition they were in when Seized upon by the said Edward Wiseman.

Hugh Reily.

No. 27. Mr. Proud Minister of Trim, his Account of the Remarkable Accident
that happened upon Plundring the Church of Trim.
SIR,
THIS will give you an Account of an eminent Instance of Gods Vengeance shown
on one John Keating, a Church- Rapparee, who in the very act of Plundring and
Breaking of our Church, was struck with a sudden Madness, in which he continued
for the space of Three Weeks; and that day three weeks he was struck Mad, dyed
in a sad and miserable Condition. The manner of it was thus: This Keating was a
Soldier in the Lord of Kinmares Regiment; he with other his Associates, having
often before plundered, broken and despoyled the Seats of our Church, without
interruption or disturbance, resolved on Christmas Day at night, to brake and
plunder our Altar, (on which we had that day celebrated the Holy Communion):
and to that end, he with two more, about midnight, entered the Church. This
Keating immediately attempted to brake one of the folding doors leading to the
Communion Table, and endeavoring with all his force to wrest the door from the
hinges, immediately (as he thought) saw several glorious and amazing Sights;
But one ugly Black Thing (as he called it) gave him a great Souse upon the
Poll, which drive him immediately into so great disorder, that he tore all the
Clothes off his Back, and ran Naked about the Streets, and used all mad Bedlam
pranks whatever. He was put into the Dungeon, where he remained for the space
of 14. days without either Meat, Drink, Clothes, or any thing necessary for
the support of nature; would not take as much as a drop of cold water;
continually Raved of the Spoils of the Church, and saying, That he took the
most pains in breaking and taking off the Hinges, and yet got the least share
for his pains. From the Dungeon he was removed to one Thomas Kelly's house in
the Town, where he behaved himself as in the prison, neither eating bit, nor
drinking drop, or admitting a ragg to cover his Nakedness; and about eight
days after, he removed from the Dungeon, dyed in a sad and deplorable manner.
I was so curious as to enquire of those that knew him very well, whether ever
he was Mad before, or liable to any such disorders; they all assured me, that
they never knew any thing of that nature by him in the whole course of his
life; so that I think we may very well look upon it as the immediate Hand of
GOD.

SIR, I dare assure you, that this is a great Truth, and so evident and
manifest, that it has challenged and extorted an Acknowledgment from all
parties whatever: Neither the Romish Clergy, nor any of the Officers of the
Regiment (who are all Papists) do in the least disown it: And it had this
influence and effect upon all Soldiers and Papists, that from that time forth,
never any of them were known to enter, plunder, or disturb our Church.

We have an account, that another of Keatings companions at the very same time
was struk Mad in the very act of breaking the Communion Table; and that within
very few hours after, he dyed; but they politickly concealed it, and buried him
privately soon after, for fear it should be known; but the certainty of this I
dare not Affirm, but am sure some of their most sober and serious Clergy did
freely own it.

George Proud.
Trim 1st. March 1689.
No. 28. General Rosens ORDER, to bring the Protestants Before Derry.
Conrade de Rosen Marshall General of all his Majesty's FORCES.

DEclares by these Presents, To the Commanders, Officers, Soldiers, and
Inhabitants of the City of Londonderry, That in case they do not, betwixt this
and Monday next, at Six a Clock in the afternoon, being the 1st. of July, 1689.
Agree to Surrender the said place of Londonderry unto the KING, upon such
Conditions as may be Granted them, according to the instructions and power
Leiutenant General Hamilton formerly received from the KING: That he will
forthwith issue out his ORDERS from the Barony of Inishone, and the Seacoasts
round about, as far as Charlemont, for the gathering together of those of their
Faction, whether Protected, or Not, and cause them immediately to be brought to
the Walls of Londonderry, where it shall be Lawful for those that are in the
Town (in case they have any pity for them) to open the Gates, and receive them
into the Town; otherwise they will be forced to see their Friends and nearest
Relalations all starved for want of Food; he having resolved not to leave one
of them at home, nor any thing to maintain them: And that all hope of succor
may be taken away by the Landing of any Troops in these parts from England; He
further Declares, That in case they refuse to submit, he will forthwith cause
all the said Country to be immediately Destroyed; that if any Succor should be
hereafter sent from England, they may perish with them for want of Food:
Besides which, he has a very considerable Army, as well for the Opposing of
them in all places that shall be judged necessary, as for the Protecting all
the rest of his Majesty's dutiful Subjects, whose Goods and Chattels he
promises to Secure, destroying all the rest that cannot be brought conveniently
into such places as he shall judge necessary to be preserved, and burning the
Houses and Mills, not only of those that are in actual Rebellion, but also of
their Friends and Adherents, that no hopes of escaping may be left for any man:
Beginning this very day to send his necessary Orders to all Governors, and
other Commanders of his Majesty's Forces of Colerane, Antrim, Carrickfergus,
Belfast, Dungannon, Charlemont, Belturbet, Sligo; and to Col. Sarsfield
commanding a flying Army beyond Ballyshany, Col. Sutherland commanding another
toward Iniskillen, and the Duke of Berwick another on the Fin-water, to cause
all the Men, Women, and Children, who are any ways related to those in
Londonderry, or any where else in open Rebellion, to be forthwith brought to
this place, without hopes of withdrawing further into the Kingdom; that in case
before this said Monday the 1st. of July, in the Year of our Lord, 1689. be
expired, ^hey do not send Us Hostages, and other Deputies, with a full
sufficient power to Treat with Us for the Surrender of the said City of
Londonderry on reasonable Conditions, that they shall not after this time be
admitted to any Treaty whatsoever: And the Army which shall continue the Siege,
and will (with the assistance of God) soon reduce them, shall have Orders to
give no Quarter, or spare either Age or Sex, in case they are taken by Force:
But if they return to their Obedience, due to their Natural Prince, he Promises
them, that the Conditions granted them in his Majesty's Name, shall be
Inviolably observed by all his Majesty's Subjects; and that He himself will
have a care to Protect them on all occasions, even to take their parts, if any
Injury (contrary to the Agreement) should be done them; making Himself
responsible for the performance of the Conditions on which they Agree to
Surrender the said place of Londonderry to the KING.

Given under my Hand, this 30th. day of June, in the Year of our LORD, 1689. Le
Marshall Rosen.

No. 35. The Indictment of Dennis Connor, in which the Counterfeit Letter to
Mr. Will. Spike is inserted.
Term' Hillar' quinto and sexto Jacobi Regis.
COm' Dublin'. Scilicet Juratores pro Domino Rege Sacrament' suum dicunt and
proesent', quod Dionisius Connor nuper de Dublin' in Com' Civit' Dublin'
Yeoman, e^o malitiosus pernitiosus and nequissimus, machinansque and ^ns pacem
and commune tranquilit' hujus Regni Hibernioe perturbare, and discord' inter
Dominum Regem and subditos suos incitare and movere, and dict' Dom' Regem and
gubernationem suam in odium contempt' and vilipendentiam inducer' and in
Insurrectionem and Rebellionem in hoc Regno Hibernioe suscitar' mover' and
inferr' vicessimo die Januar' Anno Regni Domini nostri Jacobi secundi De^ gra'
Angl' Scot' Franc' and Hiberniae, Regis Fidei Defensor' etc. quinto, apud
Castrum de Dublin' in Com' Dublin' proedict' seditiosam, malitiosam, and
illicit' scripsit' vel scribi fecit quandam seditiosam and malitiosam Epistolam
sive Chartam cujus quidem seditiosam and malitiosam Epistoloe tenor sequitur in
hoec verba, scilicet.

Eniskillin the 10th. of January 1689.
Cousin Spike,
YOurs I'receiv'd January the 1st. it being the greatest satisfaction I could
expect to hear of your good Health and Welfare, and the rest of your good
Family; getting the convenience of the honest Bearer, makes me acknowledge your
often kindnesses to me. Yesterday we received Letters from Londonderry, they
all agree with our Proposals, as in carrying on our Design in Dublin: The day
appointed is the 4th. of February at Supper-time in the Castle; and for some of
our men intended for that purpose, to go in a little before, as many as can
well, not being suspected; others to stay in the Street and Houses thereabout
till the Word is given [GOD be with Us]. Then all to Force in, Killing the
Guards, after giving the Tinker and the rest of his Function their last Supper.
Mr. Drury, he is intended to Fire the Suburbs with others of his assistance as
might be thought fit, it being a means to force the Soldiers out of the City.
We question not but our People is in number enough to do the Work, as well in
the City as Castle: One night does all. We have here in these parts, 14000
Horse and Foot in readiness to be with you in Dublin in five or six days at
farthest. I hope God will inspire into our peoples hearts to persevere with
Undaunted Hearts, to pull down that Yoke of Popery which we are likely to lie
under, unless by God prevented. We are in the Truth, and I hope God is with Us;
although our Expectations being Failed hereto, we might think it rather
Punishment for our Sins, than in any wise hindrance of our Victory. Last Week
we had an Account from Derry, that there Landed two Ships laden with Ammunition
and Provision, and to the number of Fifty-Six Volunteers, the most of them now
being here with Us: They giving us an Account of our English Resolution, That
they will every man Die, rather than be yiedling to Popery; likewise, that
great Preparations are made for our English to come over this Spring* to the
value of Two and Twenty Thousand Soldiers and Inhabitants to settle the
Country. Cousin, I desire you will direct the Bearer to Mr. Pains, with a Letter he
has for him: And likewise I desire you to go to my Cousin, and give my kind Love
to him, and the rest of his good Family. I suppose the Packet of Letters, as
touching this Matter, wholly is directed to Mr. Smith, which meeting with him,
will give you the full at large. My kind Love to my Cousin George, and your
Wife. This being all at present. Your loving Cousin to command during Life.

These, For Mr. Will. Spike, Living at Colledg-Green in the old
Parliament House, Dublin.

Mary Smith.

Et ulterius Jurator' proedict' super Sacrament' suum proedict' dicunt and
proesent', quod idem Dionisius Connor sciens eandem Epistolam sive Chartam fore
falsam, malitiosam, and seditiosam, postea scilicet eodem vicessimo die
Januarii Anno Regni dict' Domini Regis quint' supradict' apud Castrum Dublin'
in Com' Dublin' proedict', seditiosam and malitiosam Epistolam sive Chartam
proedict' publicavit and publicari fecit contra debit' ligeantiam suam in malum
exemplum aliorum in tali casu delinquentium, and contra pacem dicti Domini
Regis nunc, coronam and dignitatem suam, etc.

Copia vera, Examnat per F. Nugent.

No. 36. Capt. Browns Acknowledgment, That he Perjured himself.
Whereas I John Brown, Gent. Did on, or about the last day of December last,
come before the Right Honorable, the Lord Chief Justice Riverstown, Ld Chapter
Justice of all Ireland; and did in an Examination taken before him upon Oath,
accuse Edward Brock of the City of Dublin, for speaking and uttering several
Seditious Words reflecting on His Majesty and the Government. Now I the said
John Brown, do hereby Acknowledge and Declare, That I did very much Wrong and
Abuse the said Edward Brock in the said matter; he never having uttered or
spoke any such or the like Words wherewith I accused him before the said Lord
Chief Justice. As Witness my Hand this Third day of February, 1689.

Witness present, The Words (upon Oath) being first Interlined.

John Brown.
Fra. Rica.
Ja. Somervill.

No. 29. Advertisement, as it was published by Mr. Yalden in his Weekly
Abhorrence, concerning Dr. King, and Dr. Foy.
THERE was lately published by John Yalden Esquire the substance of Fifteen
Sermons, Entitled, An Abhorrence from the Bishop of Ely, etc. of the
proceedings of the Prince of Orange, and the Lords, etc. that Invited Him. But
some Protestants believing the said Book to be a Popish contrivance; and that
such Doctrines as were therein, were never Preached by the Divines there named:
Upon which, a Gentleman of Quality (to satisfy these Doubts) applied himself
to two Reverend Divines of this City, viz. Dr. King and Dr. Foy, who both
certified under their hands, that the Doctrines contained in the said Book,
were honest, and true Christian Divinity, and obliging to all Christians to put
immediately in practice, upon the peril of their Salvation. Which Certificate
satisfied several Protestants here, and confirmed them in an unchangeable
Loyalty.

March 8th. 1689.
Reverend Sir,
I Intended to have waited on you this Afternoon, but found my self so
Indisposed, that I durst not venture abroad. I have been made sensible, That
the Publisher of the Weekly Abhorrence, has made use of your Name, and Mine:
And Affirms, That WE have Certified under our Hands, That the Doctrines
contained in a Book published by one John Yalden Esquire containing a Collection of
the Substance of Fifteen Sermons, were honest and true Christian Divinity, and
Obliging to all Christians to put immediately in Practice, upon the Peril of
their Salvation: And he intimates, that this Certificate has been shown to
several Protestants here. Sir, For my own part, I do profess, that I never Read
the aforesaid Book; nor did any Gentleman of Quality (as he affirms) ever apply
himself to me to satisfy him in any doubts concerning it, that I remember. I
am sure never any body demanded a Certificate from me concerning it: Nor did I
ever Sign any such Certificate as he pretends, or any thing like it: And
therefore that whole Advertisement (as far as it concerns me) is absolutely
False and Groundless. If any one had Asked me concerning that Collection, I
could have given him no other Answer, than that I had neither read it, nor the
Sermons out of which it is said to be taken: Perhaps the Collection may be just,
and no harm in Certifying it to be so; but I am sure, there is a great deal of
harm in forging a Certificate under a man's Hand, what ever the matter be that
is Certified: And if there be no such Certificate forged or real, it is no less
criminal, to publish to the world (as in this Abhorrence) that there is one. I
cannot imagine to what purpose the Publisher should have inserted such an
easily detected Falsehood, which he could not expect should escape being
discovered; except he had a mind to destroy both his own Credit, and likewise
that of the Collection. Pray (Sir) if you know any thing of this matter,
Communicate to

To the Reverend

Dr. Nath. Foy.

These.

Your most humble Servant, Will. King

Reverend Sir,
WHat you were pleased to Acquaint me with, several Gentlemen who were
Concerned for me, gave me Notice of some few Hours before: Upon which I
immediately repaired to the Coffee - House - (the likeliest place, as I judged,
to find a Lie, if it were stirring) where I saw my self in Print; of which,
though I could not imagine what should be the ground; yet since it was resolved
it should be so, I was glad to be found with so good Company as your self. Had
the Gentleman, amongst other things in his Abhorrence, but Abhorred Untruth,
I Am sure my Name had never appeared in his Advertisement: For I declare, I
never read the Book mentioned therein, and I judge I shall not be very Fond of
reading any thing that comes from under his Hand; having given such a Taste to
the world, of his Abilities in Writing and Collecting other men's Senses, that
it is to be doubted, whether he has yet well Collected his own: whose
Collection as I never read, so have I never received any account of the
contents of it; nor did any person ever require a Certificate from me, or my
Judgment of that Collection, or the Sermons said to be in it; nor did I ever
give any Certificate, or my Judgment to any person unrequired. This is all I
know of the matter, or the Gentleman's Collection. It may be a faithful one for
ought I know, but certainly he has not taken the best method to Assert the
Reputation of it, or his Own; since he must give leave to them who are as
ignorant of his Person and Collection, as I am to suspect that he who can find
a Certificate in Dublin that never was Written, may find a Sermon in London
that never was Printed. This, Sir, I thought was due as a return to yours,
which I kindly resent; and request you to believe that I am,

March 11. 1689. For the Reverend Dr. Will. King. These. SIR, Your faithful
Friend, and humble Servant, Nath. Foy.

No. 30. Colonel Luttrells ORDER for Numbering PROTESTANTS.
WHEREAS it is His Majesty's desire to Know the Names of all the Protestant
Subjects and Dissenters: I do in His Majesty's Name, Require and Order you, all
the Ministers and Curates of the several Parishes and Cures of this City and
Liberties, to bring me fairly Written, the Names of the said Protestants and
Dissenters, in a Book made for that purpose, that are in their several Parishes
or Cures: Declaring, That it is His Majesty's Resolution, to Treat all such as
will not pay Obedience to this Order, and enter in their Names by Thursday next
ensuing the Date hereof, as Spies, or Enemies. Dated this Third day of May 1690.

They are to Return only all from the Age of Fifteen, to the Age of Eighty that
are of the Male kind, and not of the Female.

By the Governor of Dublin, Sym. Luttrell.
To all the Curates and Ministers of the City, Liberty, and Subburbs of the
City of Dublin.
No. 31. Colonel Luttrells Order Forbidding above Five Protestants Meeting any
where, etc.
By the Governor of Dublin, June 18. 1690.
WHEREAS several Disaffected persons of the Protestant Religion, are of late
come to this City of Dublin, and some of them Armed with Swords, Pistols, and
other Weapons, contrary to His Majesty's express Commands by his Royal
Proclamation bearing Date the 20th. day of July, 1689.

I. THESE are therefore to Will and Require all Men whatsoever of the
Protestant Religion now residing or being within the said City of Dublin, or
within the Liberties of St. Sepulcher Donor, or Thomas-Court, who are not
Housekeepers, or have not followed some lawful Vocation therein these three
Months past, to Depart within Twenty-Four Hours after the Publication hereof,
out of the said City and Liberties, and repair to their respective Habitations,
or usual places of Abode in the Country, upon pain of Death, or Imprisonment,
and to be further proceeded against as Contemners of His Majesty's Royal
Commands, and as persons designing the Disturbance of the Public Peace.

II. And likewise, That all Protestants within the said City and Liberties, not
being of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, nor in his Army, or
actual Service, shall within the time aforesaid deliver up all their Arms,
both Offensive and Defensive, and all their Ammunition, into his Majesty's
Stores in the said City, upon pain of Death.

III. And that no Protestant whatsoever, Do presume at his Peril, to walk or go
in the Streets, from Ten a Clock at Night till Five in the Morning, nor at any
time when there is any Alarm. In which case, all such persons are required for
their Safety, and for the Security of the Public, to keep within Doors till
such an Alarm is over.

IV. And Lastly, for the prevention of Ryots and Unlawful Assemblies; These are
therefore to Will and Require, all the said Protestants, that no greater number
of them than Five shall Meet and Converse at any time, either in any House
within the said City or Liberties, over and above the Family of the House; or
in the Streets and Fields, in or about the same, or elsewhere: Hereby
declaring, That all persons who shall Offend against any Clause in this present
Order, shall suffer Death, or such other Punishment as a Court - Marshall shall
think Fit.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for R. Clavel, Published in Michaelmas Term, 1691.
A Defense of Pluralities, or holding two Benefices with Cure of Souls, as now
practiced in the Church of England.

The State of the Protestants of Ireland under the Late King James's
Government, in which their Carriage toward him is Justified, and the absolute
Necessity of their endeavoring to be freed from his Government, and of
submitting to their present Majesty's is demonstrated.

Observations on a Journey to Naples, being a farther Discovery of the Frauds
of Romish Priests and Monks: Written by the Author of the former Book,
Entitled, The Frauds of Romish Priests and Monks, set forth in Eight Letters.

L. Annaei Flori Rerum Romanarum Epitome, cum Interpretatione and Notis in usum
Serenissimi Delphini, una cum Indicibus copiosissimis oppido necessariis.

Compendium Graecum Novi Testamenti, continens ex 7959 versiculis totius Novi
Testamenti tantum versiculos 1900 (non tamen integros) in quibus omnes universi
Novi Test. voces, una cum Versione Latina inveniuntur. Auctore Iohanne Leusden:
Editio quinta; in qua, non tantum Themata Graeca and Voces derivatae
exprimuntur, sed etiam Tempora Verborum adduntur. Tandem ne aliquid ubicunque
desideretur, in hac Novissima Editione Londinensi cuilibet Voci aut Compositae
aut Derivatae Radix adjicitur propria, in Tyronum gratiam.

De Presbyteratu Dissertatio Quadripartita Presbyteratus sacri Origines,
naturam Titulum Officia and Ordines ab ipsis Mundi primordiis usque ad
Catholicae Ecclesiae consummatum plantationem complectens, in qua Hierarchiae
Episcopalis Jus Divinum and immutabile, ex Auctoritate scripturarum Canonice
expositarum and Ecclesiasticae Traditionis suffragiis, breviter quidem sed
luculenter asseriter. Authore Samuele Hill, Diaeceseos Bathoniensis and
Wellensis Presbytero. Londini Typis S. Roycroft L. L. Oriental. Typographi
Regis Impensis R. Clavel in Coemeterio D. Pauli, MDCXCI.

Sometime since Published for R. Clavel.
FOrms of Private Devotion for every day in the Week, in a Method agreeable to
the Liturgy; with Occasional Prayers, and an Office for the Holy Communion, and
for the Time of Sickness.

A Scholastical History of the Primitive and General Use of Lyturgies in the
Christian Church, together with an Answer to David Clarkson's late Discourse
concerning Liturgies.

Roman Forgeries in the Councils, during the first Four Centuries, together
with an Appendix concerning the Forgeries and Errors in the Annals of Baronius.


