EUROPE's Deliverance from France and Slavery: A SERMON, PREACHED AT St.
Patrick's Church, DUBLIN, On the 16th of November, 1690. Before the Right
Honorable the LORDS JUSTICES of IRELAND. Being the day of THANKSGIVING for the
Preservation of His MAJESTY'S PERSON, His good Success in our DELIVERANCE, and
His safe and happy Return into ENGLAND.

By WILLIAM KING, D. D. Dean of St. Patrick's DVBLIN: Since Bishop of
LONDONDERRY.

Printed at Dublin. And Reprinted at London for Tim. Goodwin, at the Maidenhead
against St. Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet. MDCXCI.

TO THE READER.
THE great Respect and Reverence which is universally paid by the whole Church
of Ireland, to the Author of this Sermon (who His Majesty has been graciously
pleased to advance to the Bishopric of Londonderry) and of whom we here in
England have large Accounts from those who have come from that Kingdom; made me
think it would be no unacceptable thing, to reprint this Sermon which was
received with so great applause at Dublin: But this is all personal to the
Author. The Book it self needs not any Foreign recommendations drawn from
Favor or Concern, for the Person who writ it: For here are many particular
Matters of Fact hinted at, relating to the Irish Affairs, which are little
known amongst us; and the Causes of their and our late Miseries and
Distractions are so distinctly and methodically set down, that tho very many of
them are generally known, and commonly talked of, and many more have been of a
long time fufficiently guessed at by thoughtful and inquisitive Men; yet such
Books can never be useless or unpleasant, which set those things all together
in one continued Light, that before for the most part lay dispersed in the
Minds of those who read them.

They that read the Sermon, will find other Beauties in it which will
sufficiently please them: Every thing is described in such moving and lively
Colors, that it was but a common piece of justice to so great and so good a
Man, to Reprint a Discourse which will assuredly convince the Nation, That the
great esteem which is paid to him in his own Country, proceeds neither from
want of Judgment, nor from an overgreat Partiality.

W. W.

To the Right Honorable HENRY Lord SIDNEY, Viscount SHEPPY; AND THO. CONNINGS
BY, Esquire Lords Justices of IRELAND.
May it please Your Lordships,
THIS Sermon was at first Composed, and is now Published, with peculiar Respect
to Their Majesty's Subjects in this Kingdom. Those in England who had the
Advantage of Enquiry and Correspondence, need not the Informations here
offered. But the Protestants of this Kingdom have been so long and
industriously kept in the Dark, and not suffered to look into the Designs of
those that had them in Subjection, farther than they felt the effects of them,
that many may be Strangers to the full extent of those Designs, and the
Miraculous Steps of Providence by which they have been delivered from them.

I know much more might be said, and has been said on this Subject. But I have
chosen those Points that seemed to me most proper for the Occasion. And, I
hope, enough to satisfy us all of the great reason we have to praise God for
our wonderful Deliverance, which was the design of the Discourse.

Your Lordships can witness what sense the Protestants of this City have of it;
and for ought appears, the whole body of them through the Kingdom, are in their
Present Majesty's Interest to a Man. Which could never have happened, if the
late Government had been in any measure Tolerable to them. And had others,
instead of being at ease where they were at that time, lived here under the
Government they fancied so Indulgent, I doubt not but they would have had the
same sentiments with us, and been cured of their Folly.

Your Lordships have come to the Government of this Kingdom in an Ill and
Unsettled Posture of Affairs: but you need look back only to Presidents in each
of your own Families to guide your Management with the happiest Success. Sir
Henry Sidney, five times Chief Governor between the Years 1557, and 1578. Adam
Loftus, Archbishop of Dublin, three times Lord Justice between the Years 1582,
and 1600.
Your Ancestors governed it in Times as difficult as the present, and had the
chiefest part in reforming the Superstition and Barbarity of the Natives, and
in settling Religion on that happy foot, on which it has since stood; but they,
and all since, have been forced to leave the Work imperfect: It remains now, I
hope, to be perfected by you.

Your Lordships may reasonably conclude, that it is not an easy undertaking to
Civilize and Reform this Nation, since so great Persons were not able to
perfect it. And yet that it is to be done, because they went so far in it. For
want of a vigorous prosecution it has been to do anew every forty years
hitherto. Your Lordships have the Experience of many such Periods to direct you
how to do it effectually. We hope, and heartily pray, that it may now at last
have its accomplishment in Your hands under Their Majesty's Government; and
that this may be one of the blessings of Their Reign, Providence has given you
an opportunity of making your Selves, and your Memory, grateful to present and
future Ages, by becoming happy Instruments in it. That you may be such, I hope
your Lordships will believe is by none more zealously desired than by,

My LORDS, Your Lordships most Humble and Obliged Servant, WILLIAM KING.

A SERMON Preached on the 16th of November, 1690.
PSALM. 107. 2d verse. Old Translation. Let them give thanks whom the Lord has
redeemed, and delivered from the hand of the Enemy.

V. 3. And gathered them out of the Lands, from the East, and from the West,
from the North, and from the South.


THanksgiving is all the Tribute we can pay to Heaven; and it is so easy a
return for our Beings, and the many Comforts we receive from thence, that he is
very inexcusable and unworthy the Mercies he receives, who is backward in so
easy an acknowledgment: hence the whole World has ever looked on it as the
securest way for continuing their present, and procuring new Blessings, to own
God to be the Author of them, and to express their gratitude in Hymns and
Sacrifices, and in other Acts of Devotion and Thanksgiving, as appears not only
from the People of God in the Old Testament, but likewise from the yet
remaining Devotions of the Ancient Heathen.

This Psalm is a solemn form used by the Jewish Church on such occasions: It Is
not material to explain to you the first occasion of its being made; it
sufficiently appears from my Text (which is the Introduction to it) that it was
designed as a solemn return of Praise to God for redeeming the Israelites from
Captivity, for delivering them from their Enemies, and bringing them back to
their own Country, whence they had been driven by Violence and Oppression,
verse. 39, 40.

Now this is so exactly our Case, and the design of our present appearing in
this place, that I think there is no more incumbent on me, than to endeavor to
beget in you a due sense of it, and to stir you up to an hearty acknowledgment
of God's present Mercies to us; and I promise my self some success in this
undertaking, and that the consideration of the following Particulars will make
the same impression on every body concerned, as it has done on me.

First therefore, Let us consider our Deliverance.

And Secondly, The Returns we are obliged to make for it.

In our Deverance we ought to reflect,

I. On the depth of the Contrivance and Design against us, from which God has
graciously been pleased at this time to deliver us.

II. On the great extent of it. All Princes in Europe, especially such as
profess the Reformed Religion, being struck at by it.

III. On the miraculous Concurrence of Providence for our deliverance, in
breaking this Design so deeply laid, and vigorously prosecuted.

You all have suffered so much by this Design, and the memory of your Dangers
and Deliverance from it is so fresh before you, that I need not trouble you
with the particulars of it: 'Twas, in short, to destroy you and your Religion,
and enslave all Europe under the Tyranny of the French King.

I. The depth of this Design appears, 1st, From the length of time, wherein it
has been formed and carrying on. Some, and not without reason, date it from the
very beginning of the Reformation; some from the Restoration of the Royal
Family, and some from the Pyrenean Peace; but as it immediately concerns these
Kingdoms, we can trace it by many Footsteps from the Year 1670. since which
time, not only we, but all Europe, have groaned under the fatal effects of it:
As to this Kingdom of Ireland, we find a Scheme of it laid down at large in a
Paper formerly found in the Earl of Tyrconnell's House; then Colonel Talbot,
dated July 1671. supposed to be drawn up by his Brother Peter Talbot, then
Titular Archbishop of Dublin, and accidently dropped about that time; several
Copies of which have for many years been in Protestants hands. In this Paper
are proposed, The modelling the Army. The admitting Papists into Corporations.
The bringing them to serve in Civil and Military Employments, and the raising a
vast Army of them to be transported into England on occasion.

One Particular in this Paper is remarkable. It Is in these words; The
Toleration of the Roman Catholic Religion in England being granted, and the
Insolency of the Hollanders taken down, a Confederacy with France, which can
influence Enggland, as Scotland can also, will together by God's blessing make
his Majesty's Monarchy Absolute and Real: Where we see that the Design was to
make the King Absolute; and the means proposed, Toleration of Popery, a War
with Holland, and a League with France, all which were at that time put in
practice, and have been prosecuted vigorously to this Day.

But 2dly, We shall better understand the depth of this Design against us, if
we reflect on the Power, Policy, and Number of the Persons engaged. The Power
and Money of France, the Cunning and Craft of the Jesuits, the numerous and
bigoted Roman Clergy, the Wealth and Arms of England, were all to be employed
to our Ruin; the Indigent and desperate Papists of Ireland were to be armed,
and let loose upon us: The Common Enemy of Christians, the Turks and Ravaging
Tartars were called into Christendom to promote this Design, and their
destructive methods of managing Wars by universal Slaughters, havoc and
burnings, brought into practice by the more Unchristian French: and to Crown
their Design for the general Slavery and Desolation of Europe, Protestants were
cajoled, bribed or compelled to fight against, persecute and devour one
another. All which might be proved by undeniable Instances, if this Sermon were
designed for a History.

But 3dly, We may have a further Idea of the depth of this Contrivance from
which God has hitherto delivered us, if we consider the Methods used for
effecting it: Had it been hatched in Hell, it could not have been more a
mystery of Iniquity than it was; more Black and Villainous means could not have
been applied to bring it to perfection.

For 1st, We find Wicked and Treacherous Leagues and Conspiracies entered into
in order to carry it on: One of which is more especially notorious and
remarkable for its folly and falsehood; A League so contrary to all sense as
well as faith, that the great Princes concerned in it are yet ashamed to own
it; a League so mischievous to Europe in general, and so destructive to England
in particular, that it has brought them to the very brink of destruction: and
it is only God's miraculous Providence that could, or yet can preserve them: A
League that broke the Balance of Europe, so carefully preserved by our wise
Forefathers, and by that means has advanced one, by depressing and sinking all
the rest. This is that fatal Confederacy with France, proposed in the
forementioned Paper: These are the Engagements of Friendship and Alliance which
Monsieur D' Avaux, the French Ambassador, tells the States of Holland, in his
Memorial of September 9. 1688* the King his Master had with the King of Great
Britain: This is the Secret Treaty Abbot Primi tells us his Britannick Majesty
signed in the Year 1670. whereby he should have secured to him an absolute
Authority over his Parliament, and the re-establishment of the Roman Catholic
Religion in his three Kingdoms: This is the Alliance with France which Maloony
the Popish Bishop of Killaloo in a Letter of his to Bishop Tyrest of March 8th.
1689. (the Original whereof was found amongst the Bishop's Papers, and is ready
to be produced) is so very angry that some Trimmers (as he calls them)
obliged King James to disown; and this is the very source and fountain of all
the present Calamities of Europe, but more particularly of ours.

A second method of carrying on of this Conspiracy to Ruin us, was by
corrupting Ministers, by granting large Pensions, and multiplying Bribes. I
wish this means of promoting this wicked design had stopped at Ministers, and
that the honor of Princes had set them above the suspicion of taking Bribes;
for we are willing to think that it should be below the Majesty of a Crowned
head to turn Pensioner, or to sell his Crown or People for Louis d' Ors.

A third means for carrying on this Contrivance against us, was Murdering and
Poisoning; an Art too much practiced of late in some Courts: and it is
observable, that wherever the Life of a Protestant stands between a Papist and
an Inheritance, it is of no long continuance; nor does any Prince begin to
appear vigorous or terrible to France, but he is in danger to be taken off in
the prime of his age, and that not without suspicion of foul play; witness
Prince Lewis of Brandenburgh, and the Duke of Lorrain. There is much Gold in
France, and there are every where wicked men ready to be bribed to do any
thing; and it is not supposed of some, that they scruple much to make the
experiment what it is able to do.

But 4thly, Where they could not Murder Protestant Princes, (it is hard to say
where they have not attempted it) they endeavor to defeat them of their
Succession* We all are satisfied that this was the only womb that conceived a
Prince of Wales for us, and gave him a Birth. There was an attempt of the same
kind in the days of Queen Mary, which did not succeed to their mind; but time
and experience make men wiser; hence it is that the contrivance that proved
abortive then, did with us come to perfection; but in such a manner, that at
the same rate (if allowed) we might be sure never to fail of an Heir to defeat
a Protestant Successor.

A fifth means of promoting this design, was by calling the Turk into Europe,
and by supporting that common Enemy of Christianity to the ruin of those that
profess the holy name of Christ. And the French King, that he might embroil
Christendom by Sea as well as by Land, has made his Pride stoop to his
Interest, and condescended to buy a Peace with the Algerines, Covenanting with
them, to assist them in their Piracies, and their enslaving Christians. A Man
and his designs are known by his Friends and Confederates: Now the French
King's Allies are the Bandity of Italy, the Pirates of Algiers, the Turks and
Tartars of Asia, and the Tories of Ireland: What a mercy of God is it, to give
us a Deliverance from the Conspiracy and Designs of such Monsters!

The depth of this Design appears from a sixth method used to effect it, and
that was to stir up and animate one party of Protestants to bite and devour
another. It Is not bare difference of Opinion that makes men of different Sects
so strange and unsociable to one another, as we commonly observe them to be;
but their strangeness and enmity proceeds either from interest, or from some
peculiar Principle that obliges them to persecute and destroy all that differ
from them, tho in a trifle. Where neither of these happen, or where men of
different Opinions are not encouraged or suffered to hurt one another, we see
they live very easily and lovingly together, of which Holland is an undeniable
instance, and likewise this City under our late common sufferings, in which the
generality of Protestants notwithstanding their difference in Judgment, lived
with much mutual confidence and friendship: but it is a Principle of the Roman
Church, that every Prince is obliged to root out and destroy all Heretics out
of his Dominions, and that under no less a penalty than Deposition. This is
required of Princes by the Councils of Lateran and Constance, and all Popish
States and Princes have been so true to it in their practice, that I do not
remember that there has been, nor believe that there is at this present, any
Prince or State of that Persuasion, who does Tolerate any Religion besides
their own in their Country, where they are able to suppress it with safety to
themselves: and they have generally been so eager upon it, that many have
attempted it to their own destruction. No wonder therefore if their Persons and
Religion be very odious to men of different persuasions, since every body
naturally hates one that is always ready to do him a mischief. But I wish that
they had kept this Principle to themselves, and not industriously sowed it
amongst Protestants, among whom they first by their Emissaries sow false
Doctrines and raise Schisms, and then set up others to persecute and destroy
those whom they themselves have seduced. And when they have prevailed with one
Party to bait, worry and exasperate another to the height, they then take them
off for a time, and put the Rods and Axes into the hands of the oppressed; and
whilst they yet smart under their sufferings, they stir them up and encourage
them to revenge themselves on their persecutors. By which Arts they make the
breach irreconcilable and the difference, tho inconsiderable in it self, to
become the ground of an eternal Schism and Feud between the parties whom they
have thus dashed against one another.

We all know that these were the methods used to set us together by the ears
ever since the Reformation; and in the two last Reigns 'twas particularly
observable, that Toleration and Persecution succeeded one another by turns, and
were timed just as they served most effectually to set People a madding against
one another. One day the Laws must all be put in execution, and none must be a
favorite that would not be forward to execute them; the next day the
Persecution must not only be stopped, but the instruments of it exposed to the
revenge of those they had exasperated, and forced to take their turn in
suffering, by the Actions and Lawsuits of such as they had wronged. Thus the
common Conspirators against our Peace, Liberty, and Religion, blow the coals
and kindled a flame amongst us that was like to devour us all: and it is God's
great mercy that we have escaped it. These are a few of those considerations
which might be offered to show the depth of this design, from which our good
God has graciously redeemed us.

II. But I haste to the Second Head of my Discourse, whence we may have
occasion to magnify God's goodness in our Deliverance; and that is from the
extent of the design against us, which was equal to its depth; it being of a
vast and comprehensive Nature.

The true and great design was to satisfy the ambition of the King of France by
advancing him to the universal Monarchy of the West: England might be cullied
and wheedled with the imaginary pleasure of Mastering his Parliament, of
getting his will of his People, and settling Popery: Holland with the hopes of
gain and a free Trade; The Pope and Emperor with the specious pretense of
re-establishing the Catholic Religion* but the true and bottom-design was to
enslave Europe, and to make the French King as great and as pernicious to the
Western Princes and States, as the Turk has been to the Eastern. And they did
not miss the matter, who in the Emblem represented these two as sawing the
Globe asunder, whilst the King of England's part was to pour in Oil to make the
work more easy for them: a thing so destructive to the true interest of his
Crown, that it is a miracle how he could be prevailed on to accept of the
employment, much more how he should be able to prevail with his Subjects to
assist him in it. Whatever be pretended of the stubborness or ungovernableness
of the People of these Nations; it certainly argued a very passive and
submissive temper in them to give Money so liberally, and to Fight so fiercely
as they did, to destroy themselves and their fellow Protestants, to make sport
for their common adversaries, and serve the interests of their most inveterate
and most dangerous enemy, the French King.

Secondly, The Design was universal, and aimed at the destruction and enslaving
all the Kingdoms and States of Europe: No distinction of Protestant or Papist,
Enemy or Ally. All were equally devoted to destruction in it.

The Duke of Lorrain was actually turned out of his Dukedom. The Prince of
Orange (his present Majesty) was deprived of his Principality of Orange. The
Empire was partly to be given up to the Turk, and the remaining Princes were to
apply themselves to France for Protection, and to choose his Son King of the
Romans. The Dukedom of Savoy was to be brought in under the notion of
Pupillage. The Princes of Italy were frightened, bought, or wheedled out of
their strong Holds; and the Keys of their Country (such were Ca^al and
Guastalla) put into French hands Sicily was persuaded to Rebel, and solicited
to serve the Spaniard, as they had done the French before in the famous
Vespers, Genoa was to be Bombed, England bought, and Holland drowned. Spain had
a Barren Queen designedly made so (as many believe) put upon him, that his
Crown might fall to France by Succession. The Northern Kingdoms, whose cold and
distance secured them from immediate attempts, were yet taken off from
assisting their Neighbors, and bought into something worse than a neutrality.
The great Contrivers and Managers of these, were the French King, the great
Turk, and I need not name the third in the Triumvirate. It Is too much that we
groan yet under the mischievous effects of their Conspiracy; which has been no
less pernicious to all Europe, than that of Antony, Lepidus, and Augustus was
to the Roman Commonwealth. There is no doubt but all these have been designed,
attempted, and almost brought to perfection within these 20 years by strength
of this Confederacy: and there is not one Prince or State in all Europe that
has not been concerned in the fatal effects thereof.

But 3dly. This design was levelled more immediately at the destruction of the
Protestants of Europe. The Extirpation of the Pestilent Northern Heresy has
been long known to be the Principal Article in it, and was probably the
pretense and bait that induced his late Majesty to espouse it. He was not
fonder of being obeyed without reserve than of propagating his Religion; and
perhaps, he chiefly desired an absolute Authority over his Subjects, that he
might compel them to come into the Bosom of his Church. What business had he
with a standing Army, or numerous Troops of Dragoons, but to employ them as
Missionaries to convert his Heretical Subjects? The example of France had
taught him their use; and that Dragooning was a much more effectual way to
Reconcile men than Sermons, or Arguments. In short, by this Conspiracy, the
Protestants of France are already destroyed: those of Savoy turned out of their
Country: those of Holland have been invaded, and forced to cover themselves
with their Waters. And as for us in Ireland, I need not tell you, how we have
been used: The least hint is sufficient to refresh your memories; and the
danger we have escaped, is yet so near, that it supersedes all necessity of a
description. It has been said of some, that when they have been showed the next
morning the danger they escaped in the night, they have died with apprehension.
I am sure no Precipice can have a more dreadful prospect to those that have
escaped it, than our danger ought to have, and will have to all that duly
consider, and look back on it. But God has Redeemed, and Saved us out of our
Enemies hands: He has brought us back into our own Land, and we are now before
him this Day to Magnify him for our Deliverance. Let us therefore join in that
which is the burden of this Psalm, O that men would Praise the Lord for his
goodness, and Declare the wonders he does for the Children of men.

But 4thly. This Conspiracy had a peculiar respect to the Free States of
Europe. 'Twas about the time of the entering into this League, that famous
saying was applied to Holland, Delenda est Carthago. It was pretended to be of
ill consequence to Princes and Crowned Heads, to let a Commonwealth be their
Neighbor, lest the fight and example of Liberty might influence their People:
they combined therefore to destroy them, that the slaves of France might not
understand, that there was a milder Government in the World, than the Tyranny
of their Master. If his present Majesty could have been prevailed on to come
into the Confederacy, he needed not have ventured his Life to rescue England,
and merited a Crown by such hazardous undertakings. He might have been a King
out of hand in his own Country, and secured of his Succession to the English
Throne, but he scorned Crowns of Lewis's giving: much more one, that he could
not take without injuring his Country; the Liberty of which is due to his
Ancestors, and the Preservation of it to Himself. But when they could not
corrupt, they resolved to destroy him; and that more particularly because they
looked on him, as the Patron and Defender of the Liberty of Europe, to which
they on all occasions declared their enmity. It Is not imaginable, with what
Passion and Zeal their whole Party here used to enlarge on the Praises of an
Absolute Government, how impatient they were to hear any one name to them the
Laws, the Liberty of the Subjects, or a Commonwealth. No, the King's Will was
the only Law they could endure to hear of, and they mightily admired, and
praised the submissive temper of the Mahometans, that counted themselves happy
to be under a Power, which when it pleased might present them with a
Bow-string. They did not mince the matter, but openly professed, that they
designed to free the King from the chains of the Laws, and the Pupilage of
Parliaments: or as the Irish Proposals, I mentioned before, word it, make his
Monarchy absolute and real. The very terms of the League, according to Abbot
Primi, were to secure to the King an Absolute Authority over his Parliament,
and the Re-establishment of the Roman Catholic Religion in the three Kingdoms
of England, Scotland, and Ireland.

But 5thly. This Confederacy, or rather Conspiracy, had a peculiar relation to
Ireland. The great Body and Magazine of Men, whose hands were to perform this
Work in these Kingdoms, were to be raised out of Ireland: The Irish Proposals,
I have so often mentioned, promise 150000, part of them were to be the King's
immediate Guards; part of them the standing Army of England; and all of them
the Instruments of our slavery. In order to make them considerable, and to hire
them to do their work cheerfully, Ireland was to be separated from the Crown of
England, and made independent on it. The English interest in it was to be
destroyed, and the Protestants, under the notion of Whigs, Fanatics,
Cromwelians, rooted out of it. How near these things were to taking effect, you
all can witness, they were not only designed and attempted, but actually, for
the most part, executed upon us; our Estates were taken away, and this Kingdom
cut off from England by Acts past in their late pretended Parliament, our
Houses were filled with Soldiers and Dragoons, our Churches possessed by Romish
Priests, our Persons shut up in Prisons, and our Religious Assemblies
interdicted. Our Friends and Relations, our Nobility, Gentry, and Clergy,
driven, for the most part, out of the Kingdom, attainted for Life and Estates,
and an Army ready to be transported into England, if God had not put a stop to
their Designs, and confounded their Devices. It Is by his Mercy we are Redeemed
from the Lands from the North, and from the South, and therefore let us give
Thanks unto him, and Praise him.

You see then the Extent of this Design, that it took in all the Princes and
States of Europe; that it struck at our Estates, our Liberty, our Lives, and
above all at our Religion; that it was carried on by many and powerful hands,
and by the most secret and efficacious methods. And who else could defeat such
a contrivance or put a stop to it, but the same God that bounds the Sea with a
heap of dust, and says to the Waves thereof, hither shall you come and no
further?

III. Which is a proper Introduction to my third Head, the miraculous
Concurrence of Providence for our Deliverance, in breaking this Design so
deeply laid, and vigorously prosecuted. These were so many and so remarkable,
that I doubt whether ever any Revolution was accompanied with a chain of such
strange and unaccountable Accidents. I shall mention only a few, that every
body must have observed, and leave you to judge, whether the Finger of God must
not be acknowledged in them.

First therefore, It was strangely unaccountable, that the Pope, who seemed to
have a great stake and interest in this Design, and, as one would imagine, was
most deeply concerned in the success of it, should upon a trifle break with the
French King; and not only desert his Party, but most cordially espouse the
opposite side: and that the King of France, who never before stuck at any thing
when interest was in the case, upon the World's counting it base or wicked,
should refuse his Ghostly Father common Justice in Matters of so little moment
as the Regale and Franchises. It is plain, that the Pope has right on his side
in both these, and that the French King was not much concerned either in profit
or honor to defend them: The Regale being a new Usurpation, and the Franchises
an ancient Nuisance: yet so obstinate have both sides proved in the contest,
that we hope it is become irreconcilable. Now if this had not happened, the
Counter-League of the Princes of Europe to the French Conspiracy could hardly
have been entered into or continued; it is this takes off the odium from the
Emperor and King of Spain of assisting his present Majesty to redeem England,
and deprives the French King of the advantages he proposed to himself by
declaring this a War of Religion: It being rediculous to pretend a Holy* War
against the Father and Head of his Church. This aversion of the Pope to the
French designs is an obstacle in the way that neither Lewis nor James, can yet
get over, tho the one begs hard, and the other offers fair to remove it: Having
proffered the Pope all that he desired at first, and to oblige the French Clergy
to own his Infallibility into the bargain.

Thus God shows, that the hearts of Kings are in his hands: that he can make
them stoop and do mean things, when it will do them no good; and obstinate when
yielding would be serviceable to them. It cannot but be esteemed a further
Providence, that two Popes should succeed one another of the same humor, which
is not common, and should persevere in the same enmity to France.

But 2dly. It must be owned as a signal piece of Providence in God to have
raised up a Man endued with the Courage, Closeness, and Activity of his present
Majesty: Who durst attempt so strange, and inhumane probability, such an
impracticable thing as our Deliverance. It Is a rare thing in the World that one
Man should have the dexterity to engage, and the wisdom to manage so many
different Interests into a Confederacy, and argues a particular Providence.

3dly. It was another piece of Divine ordering, that his Majesty should be so
particularly interessed and engaged to undertake this Work before it was too
late, and our destruction unavoidable. If we had gone on a few years in the
course in which we were, in all probability our condition would have become
altogether desperate. But the eagerness of the Conspirators to cut off their
present Majesty's from all hopes of Succession to the Crown, made them
introduce a Prince of Wales two or three years sooner than they were ready for
him: they knew very well when he appeared, the persons concerned would be
provoked to the height; and that then, if ever, their present Majesty's must
appear for their Right, and the Kingdoms for their Deliverance; against which
they were not as yet prepared: for they had not yet sufficiently trained the
Irish, nor filled the Army in England with Papists: for want of which they were
not able to make any resistance against the Prince of Orange: Having awakened
him before they were prepared for him, and necessiated him to make his descent
into England, whilst the Arms were still for the most part in the Protestants
hands, and the Papists in no capacity to awe them.

4thly. The very pretended Birth of the Prince of Wales was so ill managed,
that it was not so much as a well contrived Cheat. The very Papists complained
of it, and that publicly in Print. There was published here, amongst many
others under the late Government, a Virulent Paper against his present Majesty,
Entitled, England's Crisis, or the World well amended. To give it the greater
credit, the Author pretends to be a Protestant, and the evidence of truth
forced from him this following passage. One reason of his (the Prince of
Orange's) Expedition had at least a show of Justice in the Quarrel; I mean the
business of the Prince of Wales, which I cannot but confess, some People
managed, as if they designed either that we should not believe at all, or if we
did, our belief should be as implicit as to Successions and Inheritances here,
as that of the Romanist is in his expectation of Inheriting the Kingdom of
Heaven hereafter. This, it is true, they imputed to the Treachery of
Counselors and Managers: But when their Zealots writ, and King James permitted
such Accounts of that Matter to be published, it is a sign the business needed
an Apology; and that by God's just Judgment on them, their usual dexterity
failed them in it.

5thly. It was a peculiar Providence in this Affair, that King James did not
adhere determinately to any Councels or Counselors; but did things
irresolutely and by halves. I find Papists in their Letters to him complaining
of this, and cautioning him against it; one entreats him for God's sake, not to
listen to trimming Counselors, whose aversion to his Religion, and cunning
design of spinning out his Life with their Pian Piano put them upon urging to
him, that great alterations are dangerous, when carried otherwise, than by slow
and inperceptible degrees. The same tells him, that nothing causes irresolution
more than a medley of Counselors of a different Religion from their Prince,
yet King James could never free himself from this Medley: And that is the
reason that his Actions were never of a piece; and that he commonly spoiled his
business by doing too much, and yet too little; thus he ought either not to
have brought any Irish or French into his Army, or made the whole entirely
Papists. He ought either to have accepted the French King's Assistance and
Fleet without reserve, or else broken with him altogether, and declared against
him: But by hanging between both he lost the affections of his own Subjects,
which might have supported him, and the benefit of Foreign Assistance, his
doing and undoing things had the same effect, in which, and many other
particulars, his not sticking entirely to one sort of Counselors was to us a
great Providence.

I must reckon it as a sixth, That the States of Holland should without scruple
trust their All into His Majesty's Hand, and be content to run his fortune;
which they plainly did in his Expedition. We all know that the United
Netherlands are a free People, most Jealous of their Liberty, and who have done
and suffered more to maintain it, than perhaps any Nation in the World. And as
they are jealous of their Liberty, so they are close and wary, and not apt to
venture too much at one slake. Now that such a People should commit the
absolute disposal of their Navy, their Armies, and their Money, the very Sinews
of their State, to one Man, and venture all in the same Bottom with him, was an
unbounded Trust and Kindness, as his Majesty himself is said to have expressed
it to them. They trusted not only him, but the Winds and Seas for his sake: And
though they had such entire confidence in his Conduct and Faith, as not to ask
him what he designed, yet the hazard of a Winter-Voyage, where the whole of
their State was at once exposed to the Mercy of a Tempest, was sufficient to
have stumbled them, had not the same God, that inclined the hearts of Israel as
of one man toward David, knit their hearts to him and made them tender of his
Life and Person, where they without hesitation ventured their State.

7thly. It must be owned as an effect of the same Providence, that King James's
Court and Ministers were so blinded, that they could not see into his present
Majesty's designs: And so secure that they would not give credit to the many
Advices given them of these Preparations, of which we can give no other account
than that of Job, Chap. 5. 13. He takes the wise in their own craftiness, and
the council of the froward is carried headlong; they meet with darkness in the
day, and grope in the noonday, as in the night.

8thly. I shall only mention King James's deserting his Army in England, on
which if he had absolutely cast himself, and depended on their Fidelity, it is
certain by what has happened since, that a great part of them would have stood
by him. There were enough to make a vigorous Opposition, who were willing to
run his Fortune, if God had not enfeebled their Courage, and put fear in their
Hearts. It was this opened the way to one of the greatest Revolutions that ever
happened in that Kingdom, almost without a drop of blood; which must be owned
as a singular Providence.

9thly. It was an overreaching act of Providence, to make that the Key to open
a way for our settlement, which was projected by our Enemies, as the certain
means to embroil us for ever. I suppose no body doubts, but those who advised
King James to desert the Kingdom, believed, that we could never come to a
settlement without him: and yet the event proved directly contrary to their
expectation; for his presence in all probability had been such a rub to our
settlement, that it had not been easy to get over it. It was indeed strange we
should come to a Resolution so soon, especially where the weight of the matter
was so great, and the opinions of men so divided, that in the near equality of
voices, the wisest could not foresee how it would end, till Heaven it self
determined it. For what else could have brought such different Interests and
Judgments to acquiesce in the conclusion?

Neither, in the 10th place, must we imagine that the strange and absurd
division of Protestants in England into Jacobites and Williamites, happened
without a Providence. Whatever sense some may have of it in other respects, we
of this Kingdom must own it as a great and signal Mercy. King James and his
adherents here reckoned upon a strong and numerous Party in England, and were
afraid if they had utterly destroyed us, that they should have lost them, and
therefore in many cases were obliged to bear an easier hand toward us, than
otherwise they would have done. And whatever Favor or Forbearance we received
from them, was entirely due to this consideration. This was the use God made of
this Faction, and now it has served his purpose, I hope he will extinguish it.

11thly. God in his Providence so ordered it, that King James found an
unexpected diversion in Ireland, that employed all his Forces till things were
settled in England, and till his present Majesty had leisure to break the
Enemies power in Scotland, and prepare for the Conquest of Ireland. Had King
James on his Landing in Ireland, found no opposition in it, but been entirely
at Liberty to join his Forces with that Party that appeared for him in our
neighboring Kingdom, every one is sensible, how fatal the event might have
proved, not only to England, but also to the Liberty of all Europe. But it
pleased God to find him work here by an unexpected Opposition, which not only
employed, but ruined his best men; and lost him such an Opportunity as never
could again be expected. If we consider the Places and Persons that made this
Opposition, it is a Miracle that they should undertake, much more that they
should succeed in it, and it looks as if God Almighty in his Providence had
raised them up for that juncture, and inspired them with Resolution in an
extraordinary manner, to show his power in their weakness, and his care of us,
in the seasonableness of their undertaking. Our Enemies were very sensible of
the unluckiness of this accident, as they called it, and cursed Derry and
Eniskillin, as the occasion of the ruin of their affairs.

12thly. It was certainly a great Providence to us, that his Majesty in person
should undertake the Reduction of Ireland. At a time, and in such
circumstances, that King James and his Party judged it impossible, and promised
themselves, that they had made him such work at home, that he should rather
fear an Invasion from Ireland, than think of an Expedition into it. But the
Providence of God by his single Courage and Resolution broke all their
measures, and put them out of those methods, which they imagined so well
concerted, that it must be impossible to defeat them.

13thly. Can it be ascribed to any thing else than a singular Providence, that
they should mistake themselves, and disregard the advices, or rather (as they
themselves used to call them) their Orders from France, so as to put themselves
to the hazard of a Battle, when delay was so much their interest whatever it
cost them, and so easy to them had they not been infatuated?

14thly. It was no less an overruling Providence, that an Army so well
Trained, Disciplined, and Armed, and so advantagiously posted, should make so
little opposition. The advantage of their Post by all intelligent men was
reckoned above three to one; and it had been impossible to beat them from it,
had not the God of Battles enfeebled their hearts, and animated his Majesty to
an Attempt, that seems next in strangeness to that of Jonathan's on the
Philistines: and which perhaps only his Majesty of all men living would have
attempted.

15thly. Add to this, the strange panick fear that seized the vanquished. Though
their Troops were for the most part untouched, and a very few fallen, yet such
a dread and terror possessed them, as did formerly the Syrians at Samaria, and
they fled where no man pursued them. King James did not stop till he get out of
the Kingdom, and his Army fled as far as the Sea would let them, had they had
Ships they would have gone all togother.

16thly. I must remark it further as a peculiar Providence, that his Majesty's
victory happened* at such a critical time, that the Peace of England, nay
perhaps the fate of Europe depended on it. Had it but been delayed one week, no
body knows what would have been the consequence.

17thly. The saving of this City of Dublin from so often threatened, and as both
we and the generality of our Enemies believed, resolved destruction, is another
piece of Divine goodness, and withal so strange, that we can give yet no
account of it, or so much as guess at what altered their resolution. I need
only mention this to most of my Hearers, to fill their Hearts with Admiration,
and open their Mouths with Thanksgiving to God for the Miracles of his Mercies.

18thly. And yet there is still behind a greater Miracle and Mercy than this,
and which we can hardly think on without Terror, and that was the miraculous
preservation of His Majesty's Person in the Battle. To whom we may apply what
David affirms of himself, there is but a step between me and death, our danger
came nearer even within a hair's breadth. If there were no dangers and
difficulties in life, we should not be sensible of particular Providence: But
one such escape as this awakens the sense of Religion, and of God's Power more
in our hearts than many years of even and uninterrupted happiness. We must
acknowledge, that all our Lives in him were at the Mercy of that one Bullet:
and 'twas surely the God of Battles in his unspeakable Mercy and Providence
preserved us. If Thousands of us had died, the Enemy would not have cared for
us. And notwithstanding they lost the Battle, yet they would have counted it a
Victory, and their loss sufficiently ballenced by the single life of his
present Majesty. It Is certain they would willingly have given their Army for
it. And this alone is sufficient to teach us how to value it, and what thanks
we owe to God for preserving it.

In short, we had not, neither have we yet in our utmost view another Chance to
save us, our Liberties, Estates, or Religion, but this one, of His Majesty's
coming to the rescue of these Kingdoms: and his undertaking it has been carried
on by such a miraculous chain of Providence, that we must acknowledge, that it
is by the Grace of God, that William and Mary are now our King and Queen.
Perhaps they have more visible Reasons to put that in their Titles than any
Princes in Christendom.

Let us therefore own the whole of our Deliverance to be a Work of God, and
ascribe it entirely to him, without assuming any part of it to ourselves. God
in his Providence has so ordered the matter, that we in this place have had no
hand in it, or pretense to it. And as for others, it plainly appears not to be
so much a work of man, or carried on by humane means, as by the overruling
Providence of God. 'Twas manifestly God, rather than the People, set our King
and Queen on the Throne. The People obstructed it as much as they could, by
their Divisions; the Nobles opposed it; the Mighty stood up to hinder it; the
Nations combined against it; but God had them in derision, and not only
delivered Their Majesty's from the striving of the People, but also made them
their Head: It Is He, the most High, that rules in the kingdom of men, and
gives it to whomsoever he will: It Is He raised up King William to be a
Deliverer to us. And, to sum up all, It Is he that delivered us from so great a
death, and does deliver: in whom we trust that he will yet deliver us. And
therefore to him be the sole glory of it.

And now, that God has so signally appeared for us, let us (which was the
Second general Head I proposed) consider what returns we are obliged to make
him.

First, Let us remember, that it was not for nothing that he delivered us. He
had certainly a peculiar design in saving us from the hands of our Enemies, by
so many and so remarkable Providence, even that we might serve him without
fear. Let us therefore employ those Lives, Liberties, Estates and Churches to
his Service, that he has preserved for us, and restored to us. Let us avoid
those Provocations that induced him to bring such heavy Judgments upon us: and
let us remember, how easy it is for him to bring us to a condition much worse
than that from whence he delivered us; and assure our selves, that if instead
of serving him, we serve his Enemies, the Devil, and our Lusts, he will make
his Providence as signal in our future punishment, as it has been in our
present deliverance. It were easy to point out the Sins that provoked God, and
occasioned our late Sufferings, and the same Causes will always have the same
Effects.

2dly. Let us own God's goodness to us in our late Sufferings; how in the midst
of his Anger he remembered Mercy; how he made our Sufferings easier to us than
we expected, and Relieved us sooner than we could have reasonably imagined. He
continued us among the Living, when we expected Death. He gave us Hearts to
bear up under our Pressures; and made us Unanimous and Kind to one another. He
preserved us from Famine and Pestilence, which we feared; and granted us, for
the most part, opportunity of meeting together, to Worship him; and in many
things rather afforded our Enemies an occasion of showing their Malice, and
wicked Intentions against us, than of executing them. So that we must
acknowledge with the Psalmist, that the Lord has chastned and corrected us, but
has not given us over unto death.

3dly Let us be thankful to God for our Deliverers, and thankful to them for
the great Pains they have taken, and the great Dangers they have run to effect
it. This is in a manner all we can return them at present, for all the Pains
and Costs they have been at for us; and for all the Generosity they have showed
toward us; our Enemies having disabled us in a great measure either to help
our selves, or make any retribution to them. However, what we can do, let us do
cheerfully. And let us return at least our hearty Acknowledgments and Prayers
to God for them: Especially for Their Majesty's, whose parts have been so
signal in it, that they revive in our minds the Memories of the ancient Hero's
the Kings and Queens of England, the Edwards, Henry's, and Elizabeth, that made
us safe at Home, and dreadful to our Neighbors. If we consider what we have
seen the King do in Ireland, and what part her Majesty in the mean time acted
in England, it must be our own faults if we are not a happy People under such
Princes, and we must be very ungrateful both to God and them, if we are not
sensible of his goodness, in blessing us with such Governors; either of which
seems capable of Governing much larger Territories, than they yet possess; And
I hope, as they are entitled to them, so in time they will acquire them.

4thly. Let us spare no Pains nor Cost to perfect this Happy Work of our
Deliverance; and let us remember, that if this had not happened, we must have
lost our Estates and Liberty, and perhaps together with them our Lives. Who
would not within these last three years have given one half of his Estate to
save the other? And then what great matter if we give half of our Incomes for
some years, to enable Their Majesty's to secure the whole to us, since whatever
it cost us, it is but restoring part of what we have saved, or had restored by
Their means.

5thly. Let us not Grudge or Murmur at the Hardships or Difficulties, with
which we may be obliged to struggle for a few years. No great Cure was ever
perfected without putting the Patient to some pain, and then why should we
expect it? those that saw not what we suffered under the late Government, may
think some things hard at present. But I observe, that the People of this
Kingdom, that seem to have the greatest cause to complain, are best satisfied;
which gives us reason to suspect, that if any complain, it is rather from their
dissatisfaction with the present Government, than their particular uneasiness.
And I am afraid some amongst us are become like the Roman Commonwealth in the
time of Sylla, which, as the Historian observes, could neither endure its
Wounds nor its Remedy: It Is want of experience in the World for any one to
expect, that such a great Revolution should be brought about, without exposing
many to Hardships and Difficulties. But he that has Patience shall see the end
of his Hope.

Lastly, Let us lay aside all Animosities amongst Ourselves, and all Virulency
against our Enemies. Let us be Charitable to the Distressed, and mindful of
those that have not yet obtained their share in this Deliverance. Let us
perform our Vows and Engagements to God, which we made in our distress. Let us
say aside Self-interest, and set ourselves to lay the Foundations of a Solid
Peace, in Piety and Justice. That the God of Peace may delight to bless us and
our Governors; and grant us an Entire Victory over our Enemies; a Happy Union
and Agreement amongst Ourselves: and minister unto us many more Occasions of
Thanksgiving.

FINIS.

