A DISCOURSE CONCERNING The Inventions of Men IN THE WORSHIP OF GOD. By WILLIAM
Lord Bishop of DERRY. Printed for the instruction of his Diocese

DVBLIN: Printed for the Author, by Andrew Crook, Printer to Their Most Sacred
Majesty's. MDCXCIV.

The Contents of the several Chapters and Sections.
Introduction.COntaining a brief Description of the Inward and Outward Worship
of God; and Rules for Examining the ordinary parts of Outward Public Worship.
Chap. I. Of Praises. Sect. 1. What the Holy Scriptures prescribe concerning
them. page 6. Sect. 2. The manner of Praising God publicly, which is
prescribed and practiced by our Church. page 15 Sect. 3. The Dissenters manner
of praising God in public. page 18
Chap. II. Of Prayer. Sect. 1. What the Holy Scriptures prescribe concerning
Prayer. page 25 Sect. 2. The Rules and Practice of our Church. p. 41 Sect. 3.
The practice of those who differ from us. p. 43
Chap. III. Of Hearing. Sect. 1. What the Holy Scriptures prescribe concerning
it. page 68 Sect. 2. The practice of our Church, in Reading and Preaching the
Word. page 77 Sect. 3. The practice of the Dissenters. page 81
Chap. IV. Of Bodily Worship, and Kneeling at the Communion. Sect. 1. What the
Holy Scriptures prescribe concerning it. page 104 Sect. 2. The practice of our
Church in Bodily Worship. page 114 Sect. 3. The practice of the Dissenters.
page 117
Chap. V. Of the Lords Supper. Sect. 1. What the Holy Scriptures prescribe
concerning the frequency of Celebrating it. page 145 Sect. 2. The practice of
our Church, as to frequent Communions. page 155 Sect. 3. The practice of the
Dissenters. page 159
Conclusion, To the Conforming Clergy of the Diocese of Derry. page 164 To the
Dissenting Ministers in the same Diocese. p. 170 To the Conforming Laity
thereof. page 179 To the Dissenting Laity thereof. page 181

A DISCOURSE CONCERNING The Inventions of Men IN The Worship of GOD,
The Introduction.
OUR Blessed Savior has Taught us that there are some Ways of Worshipping God,
which have so great a Mixture of Human Invention in them, that they are Vain
and Unacceptable to Him, Mark VII.7. In vain, says He, do they Worship Me,
teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of Men. This obliges every Man who has
a Concern for his Soul, to examine carefully the Worship he offers to God,
whether it be such as God has Instituted; lest his Service should be Rejected
with that Censure in the Prophet, Who has required this at your Hands? But more
especially it concerns the Pastors of the Church, who have the Direction of the
Public Worship of God, to be careful in Examining this Matter, that they may
be able to satisfy their own Consciences, as well as the People's Committed to
their Charge, concerning the Purity of the Worship which they practice
Themselves, and recommend to Others.

II. It has pleased God in his Providence to make Me an Overseer over some part
of his Flock in this Kingdom; and I look upon it to be my Duty to use my
Endeavors to Instruct Those that are committed to my Charge, in the Worship of
God, according to the Rules He has prescribed; and to warn such as I conceive
to swerve from them, of their Mistakes. I hope it will be of Use and
Satisfaction to those that join with Me in the Public Worship of God, to find
on Examination, That what they there practice, is agreeable to God's
Institution: And as to those that think otherwise, I persuade my self that an
Admonition in the Spirit of Meekness can give them no just Offense, but rather
be of Use to them also, by obliging them to Examine and Revise their Ways, that
they may correct their Judgments, if from what I offer, they shall see reason
for it.

III. In Order to help those concerned to make a true and impartial Judgment in
these matters, I desire them to consider,

1 st, That it belongs only to God to give Rules how He will be Worshipped.
This, I suppose, will be granted by all, since it seems to be a Truth,
naturally implanted in the Minds of Men, and Universally acknowledged in all
times.

2 dly, I take it for a Truth agreed to by the generality of Protestants, That
the Holy Scriptures contain the Revelations of God's Will, concerning his
Worship.

3 dly, From these two, we may reasonably infer, That it concerns us to keep as
close as we can to those Directions which God has been pleased to afford us in
his Word; without adding to, omitting, or altering any thing that He has there
laid down. For since God has vouchsafed us a certain Direction for his Worship
in the Holy Scriptures, it is to be supposed that all ways of Worship are
displeasing to Him, that are not expressly contained, or warranted by Examples
of Holy Men mentioned therein.

4 thly, We must observe that the Worship of God is either Inward or Outward;
The Inward Worship of God consists in the inward Homage and Subjection of our
Minds to Him. The Outward consists of such Acts and Duties as serve to express
this inward Subjection of our Souls, or that promote, increase, or contribute
toward it. Thus, for instance, Vocal Prayer is a part of Outward Worship,
because it expresses the inward Dependence of our Souls on God: Thus reading
the Word of God is a part of the same, because therein we acknowledge our
Subjection to Him, and to his Laws, and use it as a means to promote and
increase this Subjection: Thus Celebration of the Sacraments is a part of the
same Worship, because in them we not only express our Dependence on God for his
Grace, but likewise oblige and bind our selves to serve Him: And the same holds
in all Outward Acts of Worship.

5 thly, We must remember, That it is in these Outward Acts that we are more
immediately concerned as Public Worshipers; for we cannot know the Inward
Worship which Men pay to God in their Minds, but as it appears to us by these
Outward Acts; And generally when we speak of the Public Worship of God, we
mean this Outward; and concerning it are the great Disputes and Differences
among us; all of us being agreed as to the inward, and of what sort that ought
to be.

IV. Having premised these few things, which I hope will be granted by all; I
shall proceed directly to my proposed Undertaking; and shall with the greatest
Fairness and Impartiallity I can, Examine and Compare the Worship of God, which
is directed and warranted by Scripture, as well with that which is prescribed
and practiced by our Church, as with that which is practiced by such as differ
from us.

V. Now if we consider the ordinary Service of God as prescribed and practiced
in Scripture, we shall find the main substantial parts of it to be these five:
vizt. Praises. Prayers. Hearing. Bodily Worship. And, Celebration of the Holy
Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ.


The Method I shall take in Discoursing of each of these, shall be,

First, To show what the Holy Scriptures direct concerning them particularly.

Secondly, I shall consider the Practice of our Church, with relation to those
Directions and Examples. And,

Thirdly, The Practice of Protestant-Dissenters.

CHAP. I. Of Praises.
Sect. 1. What the Holy Scriptures prescribe concerning them.
I. FIrst then, as to the Praises of God. The Scriptures both of the Old and
New Testaments require the use of the Psalms in offering up Praises to God. We
find in the Old Testament (2 Chronicles. xxix.30.) Hezekiah the King, and the
Princes, commanded the Levites to sing praises to the Lord with the words of
David, and of Asaph, and they sang with gladness. This Command of Hezekiah
proceeded from God, and was approved by him: The same way of praising God
continued in the Jewish Church till our Savior's time: And after that, we have
yet a more positive Command for the use of them by the Apostle. Ephesians. v.19.
Speaking to your selves in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual Songs. And Col.
iii.16. Let the words of Christ dwell in you richly in all Wisdom, teaching and
admonishing one another in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual Songs; singing and
making melody with grace in your hearts to the Lord. I think there is no room
to doubt, but by the Psalms, etc. in these places, is meant the Book of Psalms,
which the Holy Ghost has left for this purpose to the Church.

II. Though the Scriptures recommend to us singing of Psalms, yet in some cases
they allow us to say them; I will not insist on those places of Scripture that
seem to require us to do so (such as Psalm. cxviii.2. Let Israel now say that
his mercy endures for ever, let the House of Aaron now say, and let them that
fear the Lord now say, etc.) because these Expressions being Poetical, may be
so interpreted as to mean singing, though there is no Necessity of restraining
the general Command of Saying or Speaking the Praises of God to Singing only.
We find in Scripture several Sacred Hymns, particularly of Hannah, the Blessed
Virgin, Zacharias, and Simeon, and the Saints in Heaven, ( Rev. vii.12. and
xi.17.) which are said to have been Said by them respectively, and the
circumstances in the Story do not make it probable that they were sung. From
all which we may reasonably infer, That where People can sing, they are obliged
to do it, in obedience to God's Command: But where through any defect of Nature
or Art, they cannot Sing Decently, they may be dispensed with Saying. Only
People ought not by this Indulgence to be encouraged to neglect singing
altogether, or to think that God does not require it of them, when by a little
pains or industry they may attain to the Art of decently performing it in his
Service.

III. It Is certain the Word of God recommendeth to us Psalms and Hymns in
Prose, for our praising God. If we look into the Songs of the Blessed Virgin,
of Zacharias, or Simeon, we shall find them all in Prose, and such are the
Songs of the Blessed, which they are represented singing in the Revelations,
particularly Chap. v.9. and Chap. xv.3. As to the Hebrew Psalms, it is evident
that they are Poetical, but the Poetry of them consists rather in the Style and
manner of Expression, than in any certain Measures or Verses, which those that
have searched most narrowly into them have yet been able to discover, so as to
satisfy an indifferent Reader. But whatever Poetry there may be in them, we can
not find by any of the ancient Translations which were made use of by the
Church in our Savior, or his Apostles time, or in the Ages immediately
following, that they or the first Christians did sing any thing in Verse; but
we are sure that they sung Hymns in Prose: So that we have no certain
Scriptural Warrant for the Use of Verse or Meetre in the Praises of God.

Perhaps some may fancy that Verse or Measure was not in use in those
Countries, and that therefore they sung their Songs in Prose; but this is a
Mistake; Poetry and Verses were then in those places where the Psalms were
translated, in great request; and at the highest perfection, when the New
Testament was penned; and yet we have no Example therein of their Use in the
Praises of God.

And it is very manifest that this proceeded from Choice, not Necessity: For if
the holy Ghost had thought Verse necessary for Divine Psalms, we may presume he
would have inspired some of the holy Men in Scripture, when Extraordinary Gifts
were so common, either to Translate the Psalms of the Old Testament into Verse,
or else to Compose some of the other Hymns that are recorded in the New, after
that way: But neither of these having been done, it is at least a presumption
that we may praise God as acceptably in Prose as in Verse.

And there is one thing further to be considered, That the Prophets of the
Heathen, who pretended to be inspired, generally wrote their Prophecies and
their Hymns to their Gods, in Verse: We know not but this may be one Reason why
the holy Ghost thought fit that such as were inspired by Him should decline
that way of Recording their Prophecies or Praises.

IV. As the Scriptures prescribe us the Use of Psalms in the praises of God, so
they encourage us to offer those Praises by way of Responses, or Answering: For
this we have the best Examples that can be desired, even the blessed Angels and
glorified Saints: So Isa. vi.3. And one cried unto another, Holy, Holy, Holy is
the Lord of Hosts. And the Church triumphant through the whole Revelation is (I
think) constantly represented praising God after this manner. So Chap. vii.9.
where The Multitude, that represent the People, cried out with a loud voice
(verse. 10.) Salvation to our God, which sits upon the Throne, and to the
Lamb. And then, The Angels and Elders, who represent the Clergy, perform their
part, verse. 12. saying, Amen; Blessing, and Glory, and Wisdom, and
Thanksgiving, and Honor, and Power, and Might, be unto our God.

They are represented the same way answering one another, Chap. xix.1. I heard
a great voice of much People in Heaven, saying Alleluia; this they repeat (
verse. 3.) then the Twenty four Elders (representing, as before, the Clergy)
answer ( verse. 4.) Amen, Alleluia. Then ( verse. 5.) a Voice came out of the
Throne, saying, Praise our God. Upon which ( verse. 6.) the People resume their
part, and answer, Alleluia: for the Lord Omnipotent Reigns. I make no question
but this is taken by Allusion from the manner of the Church's Praising God on
Earth; and there is nothing in it but what is agreeable to St. Paul's Command,
of Teaching and Admonishing one another in Psalms, and Hymns, and Spiritual
Songs; which supposes every one to have share in them, either by turns, or by
bearing a part.

It is observable that the Psalms contain many excellent Instructions and
Exhortations, as well as Praises and Prayers, and therefore St. Paul recommends
them to Christians for their mutual Instruction and Admonition. It was common
therefore for one to sing, and the rest to hearken for their Instruction and
Edification, as appears 1 Cor. xiv.31. For ye may all prophecy one by one,
that all may learn and be comforted: Prophesying here (as we may find from the
26th verse of this Chapter) includes Psalms, as well as Doctrines, Tongues,
Revelations and Interpretations; and the praising God one by one, or by turns,
amounts to praising Him by way of Responses or Answering; and though these
Prophets were inspired, yet it is plain they acted in this according to the
settled Order of the Church, Verse. 33. As in all the Churches of the Saints;
and these inspired Prophets thus praising God one by one, is an unquestionable
Precedent that God approves this way in his Praises.

This Way of praising God by Answering one another, is the most Ancient we find
in Scripture. For thus Miriam praised God, Exodus xv.21. And Miriam, answered
them, Sing ye to the Lord, for He has Triumphed gloriously, etc. And the last
Song recorded in Scripture is of the same sort, Rev. xix. as is before
mentioned.

I reckon the songs with which the Women of Israel received Saul, 1 Samuel
xviii.7. to be Religious, and there it is expressly said, That they answered one
another: And Chap. xxi.11. Did they not sing one to another? etc. But whether
these songs were Religious or no, it is certain that the Frame and Composition
of some Psalms are such, as plainly discover that they were designed to be sung
in parts; and as much is owned by the best Commentators: Such are the xxiv. and
cxviii Psalms.

It is to be observed that the Law of Moses neither prescribes Psalms in the
praises of God, nor Singers, nor the way of Singing: These all therefore are
parts of Natural Religion, and indeed antienter than the Law, as appears by
Exodus xv. What therefore we find in the Old Testament concerning these, is
either from the immediate Prescriptions and Revelations of God by his Prophets,
or from the Dictates of Nature, and not any part of the Ceremonial Law. And
it is obvious that Natural Necessity will teach any considering Man this way of
alternate singing or Answering in parts, for if the Songs be long, as some of
the Psalms are, no one Man's Voice can hold out to the end.

V. The Holy Scriptures recommend to us the use of Instruments in the praises
of God; the Psalmist frequently uses and recommends them, and the whole Book of
Psalms is concluded with this advice, Psalm. cl.3. Praise him with Timbrel,
praise him with stringed Instruments and Organs, etc. Thus Religious persons
were taught to praise God before the Law. Ex. xv.20. And Miriam the Prophetess
the sister of Aaron, took a Timbrel in her hand, and all the Women went after
with Timbrels, etc. And thus the Blessed in Heaven are represented praising
God. Rev. v.8. and xiv.2. The Writers of the new Testament recommend to us the
Psalms which were the Hymns of the Jewish Church, and command us to sing them,
and it is observable that the word we render Sing, Jam. v.13. originally implies
singing with an Instrument. Now if they had not approved the Jewish way of
singing them, which was with Instruments, they would not have used a word that
imported it; nay it is not to be doubted but they would have cautioned us
against it; but the use of Instruments (as I have showed before in the case of
Miriam) being no part of the Ceremonial Law, but antecedent to it, ought not to
cease without some Command or Precept condemning it.

VI. Lastly, The Scripture requires that we understand the praises we sing to
God; and this warrants our Translating them into the Vulgar Tongue: It is a
Duty therefore incumbent on the Governors of the Church, to procure the Psalms
to be Translated for the Use of the people under their Charge, and they may
expect the Assistance of God's Spirit when they attempt it, in Obedience to his
Command. But if through Human Frailty, any mistake, not contray to Faith,
should creep in, this ought to be no Exception against the Use of the
Translation, since there are such Mistakes both in the Syriac, Greek and Latin
Translations, some of which are of great Antiquity, and were used by our
Savior himself, and his Apostles.

These are the Directions the Scriptures give us for the performance of this
first part of the Worship of God, which consists in praises, and the manner we
find them offered to Him by his Saints.

Sect. 2. The manner of Praising God Publicly, which is prescribed and
practiced by our Church.
NOw as to the manner of offering Praises in our Church, it is to be considered,

1. That we are directed to praise, glorify and confess to God every day, in a
certain number of Psalms of his own Appointment, out of the Old Testament; and
then in such Hymns as are recorded in the New: And to these there are added
such other Hymns, Confessions of Faith and Thanksgivings, as will appear by and
by to be agreeable to the general Directions of Scripture.

But inasmuch as the Mystery of the holy Trinity is more explicitly revealed to
us under the Gospel, than it was to those under the Law; Therefore our Church
has thought fit to require us with every Psalm and Hymn to intermix, Glory be
to the Father, to the Son, and to the holy Ghost; As it was in the beginning,
is now, and ever shall be: To signify that we believe that the same God was
worshipped by them as by us, the same God that is glorified in the Psalms,
having been from the beginning Father, Son, and holy Ghost, as well as now: So
that our ascribing this glory expressly to the Three Persons in whose Name we
are Baptized, ought not to be taxed as any real Addition to the Psalms, it
being only used as a necessary Expedient to turn the Jewish Psalms into
Christian Hymns, and to fit them for the Use of the Church now, as they were
before for the Use of the Synagogue; which practice I presume can give cause of
Exception to none but Socinians.

2. Our Church Orders these Psalms to be either Sung or Said, as the people are
able to offer them; not being willing to lay a greater restraint on them than
the Scripture has done: In which (as I have already showed) we have Examples
for both these ways of praising God.

3. They are proposed to us in Prose, without any other alteration from the
Original than what was necessary to make them intelligible in our Language.

4. The people are allowed to bear their part in them, and either to sing or
say them by way of Answering: This is according to the Scripture Examples, but
it is not imposed, except in very few Cases.

5. Our Church permits the Use of some grave Musical Instruments to regulate
the Voices of those that sing, and to stir up their Affections, which are the
Natural Effects of Music, and seem more requisite in Northern Countries, where
generally peoples Voices are more harsh and untuneable than in other places;
but this is not imposed in any Congregation, nor does any Rule of our Church
require it, and therefore it is at the peoples Choice, whether they will use
the help of these Instruments or no.

6. This then is the care our Church has taken, for the public performance of
the praises of God, and if we bring grace in our hearts, and an inward sense of
the Majesty of God, and of his Mercies toward us, when we come to join in
them, which is our part and duty to do, who can say that God's praises thus
celebrated, are not according to his Commands, and acceptable to Him? I think
it sufficiently plain, that they are agreeable to the holy Scriptures, which
ought to be our Rule for this, and all other parts of God's Worship.

I think no more necessary therefore on this Head, but with all earnestness, to
beseech you who are of our Communion to consider how great and important a part
these praises are of the Worship of God, and to apply your selves with all
diligence and holy zeal to the performance of it; for we never come nearer the
Employment of the Blessed, then when our Hearts and Mouths are filled with the
praises of our God.

Sect. 3. The Dissenters manner of Praising God in Public.
ANd now as to you my Friends and Brethren, who dissent from this Worship of
ours, give me leave with all calmness to examine how you perform this great
work of Praising God; and I desire you to compare your own practice in your
public Assemblies, with what you find in your Bibles concerning this Duty.

I. Your Directory determines it to be the duty of Christians to praise God
publicly, by singing of Psalms together in the Congregation, and that in
singing Psalms the voice is to be tuneable and gravely ordered, and lastly,
that it is convenient that the Minister, or some other fit person appointed by
him and the other ruling Officers, do read the Psalm, line by line, before the
singing thereof; and your common practice is to sing two or three verses of a
Psalm in Meetre, the Minister, or Clerk, first reading each line, and the
people singing it after.

II. Before I proceed to make any observations on these Rules and Practice, to
prevent mistakes, I desire you to observe,

1. That I do not condemn the singing of Psalms in Meetre as unlawful.

2. That I take it for granted that the Apostles and Primitive Christians did
praise God in Prose, and that Meetre and Rhyme are, for ought appears, purely
of Human Invention.

3. We must consider that if we take the Psalms (as We use them) in Prose,
there is not a more Exalted piece of Poetry in the World, nor any thing better
fitted to raise in serious and well disposed people the most devout Affections.
Whereas, if we take them as they are commonly used in Rhyme, the Force, the
Vigor, the Loftiness which are so Extraordinary in the Prose Translation, are
almost entirely lost in the Verse, and though several have attempted to Translate
them into English Verse, yet I cannot find that any one has done Justice to the
Majesty of the Expressions, and hardly to the Sense of them.

III. Having premised these things, I entreat you to consider impartially with
me how far this your practice agrees with the Scripture Rule.

1. Then the Scriptures command us to praise God in Psalms, and undoubtedly the
first Christians used whole Psalms at a time. Sometimes they joined together in
singing them, as our Savior and his Disciples did, Matt. xxvi.30. Sometimes
one only sung, and the rest attended for their Edification, as appears from 1
Cor. xiv.26. But the aforesaid method of singing the Meetre Psalms takes up so
much time, that it is impossible to praise God in whole Psalms after that
manner. But if we use the Psalms in Prose, according to the Order of our
Church, the Experience of Good Men does testify that we may easily pass through
them in a month, with seriousness and attention, whether we sing or read them.
And to well disposed minds no part of God's Service is more agreeable or
edifying: whereas some years would not serve to that purpose, if we should use
the new invented way of singing a few verses. And I question whether all of
them were ever yet sung through in one Meeting place, perhaps not in all the
Meetings of the Kingdom, and yet it must be confessed that every one of them
was left to the Church by the Holy Ghost for that use, and is profitable, when
thus used, for Doctrine, Reproof, Correction, Instruction and Comfort. Which
plainly proves that the singing the Psalms in Meetre, is not the Scripture Way
of Using them.

2. Let me mind you, that in the time of the late Usurpation, Dr. Manton, a Man
of considerable Reputation among the Dissenters, observes in his Comment on the
Epistle of St. James, Chap. v. verse. 13, That several scrupled singing Psalms
at all; others objected against singing them in verse; this he calls a va^n
cavil, yet proposes, if the scruple continues, that such may Sing the Reading
Psalms, as has been used in Cathedrals, and vouches St. Austin and Athanasius
for it; which is a plain confession from this considerable Person, that this
way of singing is less liable to exception, then yours.

3. I know it is alleged that we ought to have the Psalms in Verse for
singing, as well as we ought to have them in Prose for Reading. But I have
showed already that Christ and his Disciples sung their Hymns in prose; and I
desire you to consider whether it be necessary to vary from these Precedents.
We have a Command to Translate them (which supposes into prose, because the
Original is so) but none to turn them into Meetre, which necessarily requires
Paraphrasing, Changing the order of the Sentences, sometimes adding and leaving
out words; And on that account seems to give Human Wit too great a Liberty of
treating the Word of God as Men please: At least, we must acknowledge that the
Psalms so ordered partake of Human Frailty, and are hardly equal to the best
mere Human Composures. When therefore we use such Psalms we ought to use them
as Human Composures only, and not as God's Word: And thus they are used by our
people in our Assemblies, not as any main substantial part of the Worship of
God, but rather as a voluntary entertainment of Devotion, and a refreshment to
the people between the parts of the Service; much less are they allowed by us
to justle out the Psalms and Hymns appointed by God.

4. As to the manner of singing the Psalms in Meetre, at present in use, both
with you and us in some places, that is, the Minister or Clerks reading a line,
and the people singing it after, it is a great interruption to the Music, and
to the understanding of the Psalm, by breaking the sense of it, and in that
respect very inconvenient, and is likewise a late invention of our own, never
used by any Foreign Church, either Popish or Reformed, for ought I can find, to
this day; and has been taken up to supply the negligence and laziness of
people, who will not now, as formerly, be at pains to get Psalms by heart, or
so much as procure Books, or learn to read them.

5. Notwithstanding your Directory requires the voice in singing Psalms to be
tuneable and gravely ordered, yet you have not only refused the Use of
Instruments, (which are a natural means to help the Voice, and make it
tuneable, and are used by most of the Reformed Churches in Europe, but have
also determined it to be Unlawful.

I would entreat you to consider, that though perhaps it may not be so proper
to press the Use of Instruments in the service of God, in these parts, where so
many, for want of being used to them, have entertained prejudices against them,
and some are incapable of being affected by them, yet the making them Unlawful,
is against Nature and Scripture, and is on that account a dangerous
Superstition, and Encroachment on Christian Liberty.

6. The same Superstition and Encroachment it is, not only to forbear to praise
God in singing or saying Psalms and Hymns by way of Responses or Answering (of
which I have given such Noble Precedents out of Scripture) but even to
determine it to be Unlawful.

Lastly, I would entreat you to consider, That forasmuch as appears, you have
altogether laid aside the Psalms in Prose, and the other Scripture Hymns, that
are of God's immediate Appointment, and for the Use of which we have the
Example of our Savior and his Saints, insomuch that they are no where used by
you in the Praises of God; but in their stead you have substituted, as is
before observed, a few Verses of a Psalm of Human Composure, without
Scripture-Example or Precedent, and sing them in a way that has nothing of
Ancient Practice, much less Scripture, for it, but is purely and immediately an
Invention of Men.

IV. The Case then between our Church and you, in this point, I think
impartially stands thus: Our Church praises God every day with five or six
Psalms, besides other Hymns, of His Own Appointment, and in His own Words and
Method, and yet is deserted and condemned by you in this very point, as
Teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of Men; whereas you, who only praise
Him in a piece of a Psalm of a few Verses, and in a Method of your own finding
out, persuade your selves that you keep the Ordinances of God pure and unmixed
from Human Invention.

This is a thing seriously to be considered by you; for as it is easy to think
what all unprejudiced Men will judge of it now, so we may conclude what God
will judge it at the last day. If you in earnest lay these things to heart, and
reflect on them, I persuade my self that they will at least prevail with you to
be modest in your Censures of us your Brethren; and prevent your Judging, much
less Condemning us, or our manner of praising God, as Unacceptable to Him.

CHAP. II. Of Prayer.
Sect. 1. What the Holy Scriptures prescribe concerning it.
I. LEt us now proceed to the Second main part of the Worship of God, in the
Public Meetings of Christians, which I observed was Prayer, or Supplication.

And if we consider what Rules, Directions, and Examples the Scriptures afford
us for the performance of this Duty, we shall find,

That they direct us to offer up our Prayers in a set and prepared Form of
Words. That we may more clearly judge of this matter, it will be fit to
consider the several parts of Prayer distinctly by themselves; such as
Confession, Supplication, Intercession, etc.

1. Confession of our own Unworthiness, and of God's Mercy, to aggravate it, is
commonly looked on as the first part of Prayer, and proper to introduce our
Supplications. Now in searching the Scriptures we shall find express Command to
use a set Form of Words in both these sorts of Confession. So Deuteron. xxvi.3.
Thou shall go unto the Priest that shall be in those days, and say unto him, I
profess this day unto the Lord thy God, that I am come unto the Country which
the Lord swear unto our Forefathers to give us. And then the Offerer was to
make his Confession, (verse. 5) And thou shall speak and say before the Lord thy
God, A Syrian ready to perish was my Father, etc. Here we have a Form of
Confession of the person's Unworthiness, and of God's Goodness and Mercy,
together with a profession of Obedience and dependence on Him, prescribed by
God Himself in set and prepared words.

The same appears from Solomon's prescribing a Form of Confession for the
penitent Israelites, 1 Kings viii.47. which words we find accordingly applied
in Psalm. cvi.6. and made part of a larger Form of Confession, to be used in
their Captivity (as Solomon designed them) which appears from the 47th Verse of
the same Psalm (taken from the Form prescribed by David, 1 Chro. xvi.35) And
Daniel, in his Form of Confession in Captivity, ( Chap. ix. verse. 5.) uses the
same Form of Words: From whence it appears that they were not left Arbitrarily
to Choice, or Discretion, though other Words might be joined with them, when
there was occasion to enlarge or vary the Form.

Many of the Psalms are Forms of Confession, and were used and daily Repeated
by the Jewish Church: Psalm. li. was the Form of Confession David prepared and
used, for his Murder and Adultery, and he not only used it himself, but
directed it to the Master of his Choire, to be used in the Public Service, as
appears from the Title of it. Psalm. lxxviii. is a general Confession for the
whole people, setting forth at large the Mercies of God to them, and their
Ingratitude, Disobedience and Rebellion; and this not as a Pattern, but as a
set and prepared Form, to be used in their public Service: All which show us
that Addresses to God in such Forms, are of Divine Institution, and are a
warrant to us that he approves that our Confession should be made to him in
that manner.

2. The second part of Prayer is Supplication for good things; and in this Case
we have likewise the Commandment of God for a Form of Words, Deuteronomy. xxvi.13, 15.
Then thou shall say before the Lord thy God, Look down from thy holy
Habitation, from Heaven, and bless thy people Israel, and the Land which thou
have given us, as thou swarest unto our Fathers, etc. So Hos. xiv.2. Take with
you words, and turn to the Lord your God, and say unto Him, Take away all
Iniquity, etc. Moses in the Wilderness used a set Form of Words to this
purpose, and recommended it to be used by the Church of God for ever, as is
manifest from Psalm. xc. which has this Title, A Prayer of Moses the Man of God.
When such a person, by the Inspiration of the holy Ghost, used, and left to be
used by us in our Supplications, such a set and prepared Form of Words, we
ought not to doubt but that manner of Address is acceptable to God.

3. The third part of Prayer is Intercession in the behalf of others: Now
Blessing is an eminent sort of Intercession, and for the use of a set Form of
Words in this, we have likewise the Command of God, Numb. vi.23. On this wise
ye shall bless the Children of Israel, saying unto them, The Lord bless thee
and keep thee, etc. Here we have not only a Blessing, but an earnest
Intercession with God for his people, and the Form and Words prescribed by
Himself, which were not to be used by mean ignorant people, (who are only now
supposed by some to need the help of Forms) but by Aaron and his Sons the Chief
Priests: From which we may be assured, That God approves that manner of Address
in our Blessings and Intercessions for one another, not only from mean people,
but from the greatest.

4. The fourth part of Prayer consists in Petitions for averting evil,
commonly called Deprecation; and for this purpose, we have several Forms
prescribed by God, Joel i.14. Gather the Elders and all the Inhabitants of the
Land into the House of the Lord your God, and say unto the Lord, Alas, for the
day, the day of the Lord is at hand, etc. We have God's Commandment for another
Form, Joel ii.17. Let the Priests, the Ministers of the Lord, weep between the
Porch and the Altar, and let them say, Spare thy people, O Lord, and give not
thine heritage to reproach, etc. From whence it clearly follows, that God
approves the use of a Form in this part of Prayer, though commonly the most
earnest and importunate, and such as seems least to admit of being bounded by a
Form, so that we have the Approbation and Commandment of God for the use of a
set Form of Words, in all the parts of Prayer.

II. And accordingly we find Holy Men of God, though full of Wisdom and of his
Spirit, using the same set Form of Prayer always on the same occasion. Thus the
Scriptures inform us concerning Moses, Number. x.35. When the Ark set forward,
Moses said, Rise up, Lord, and let thine Enemies be scattered, and let them
that hate thee flee before thee. And when it rested, he said, Return, O Lord,
unto the many Thousands of Israel. From whence it appears that God approves the
use of one set constant Form of Words, in our Prayers, as long as the occasion
of repeating them is the same; for I presume none will suspect it was for want
of Words, or of the Spirit of Prayer, that Moses confined himself to this Form.

I shall add further, that the whole Book of Psalms is a Collection of Prayers
of all sorts: And there are few of them but what are most Excellent Forms of
Prayer, expressed in such pathetick, significant and moving words, that we have
great reason to thank God for furnishing us with them, and which we can never
hope to equal by any of our own invention, such are the 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 12,
etc. On this account they were used by the Jews as the constant Service and
Liturgy performed in their Temple, as we may gather from what I formerly
quoted, 2 Chronicles. xxix, 30.

III. But perhaps some may think these Commands and Examples of set Forms of
Prayer not to be a sufficient Warrant to Christians, because they are taken out
of the Old Testament, before the Spirit was poured out in so plentiful a
measure, as under the Gospel. I shall therefore proceed to examine the Commands
and Examples of the New Testament, and here,

1. I think it is certain that our Savior and his Apostles prayed by a Form,
for they joined in the Worship of the Temple and Synagogues, which consisted in
Psalms, as I have already showed, and in some certain Forms of Prayers added to
them, and constantly used in their daily Service, as we learn from those that
give an Account of the Jewish Worship at that Much to this purpose might be
urged out of the Rabbis; but the Author thinks it fit to confine himself to
Scripture.
time. Now our Savior and his Apostles being frequently present at their
Service, both in the Temple and Synagogues, it is manifest they approved the
manner of Addressing themselves to God in a set Form of Words.

2. But our Savior has put this matter out of all dispute with impartial Men,
by prescribing a Form to his Disciples, when they desired him to teach them to
pray as John taught his Disciples. For we find his way of Teaching them was not
by directing them to wait for the impulses of the Spirit, and immediate
Inspiration from God of what they were to offer up to him; We do not find him
saying, When ye pray, speak what shall then come into your minds, or what shall
be given you in that hour, without taking thought about what they should say;
as He did in another case, that is, when they should be brought before
Governors and Kings for his sake, Mat. x.19. But in addressing themselves to
God, he prescribed them a Form of Words, and Commanded them to use it, Luke
xi.2. And he said unto them When ye pray, say, Our Father which art in Heaven,
etc. Here is an express Command of Christ to his Disciples to use these Words
when they pray, Our Father, etc. A Command for the use of a Form, so plain,
that it is impossible to express it in clearer terms.

It Is not to be doubted but Religious Persons among the Jews offered up
constantly prayers to God. We see it in David, Psalm. lv.17. and in Daniel,
Chap. vi.10. And no doubt the Disciples of our Savior were not wanting in this
Duty, nor in skill to perform it, since we find that other devout Persons of
their time had their hours of Prayer, as we see in Acts iii.1. Therefore what
they desired of our Savior, was not to teach them absolutely, or in general,
to pray, but to teach them to pray as John also taught his Disciples; that is,
to give them a Form of Prayer proper to His Institution, as they saw the
Disciples of Moses and John had proper to theirs: Upon which our Savior gave
them the Lord's-Prayer, as a summary of the main points of his Doctrine, and as
a constant badge of their being his Disciples; As if he should have said, When
ever you offer up to God your usual Prayers, which Religious Custom has taught
you, as Jews and Disciples of Moses, or of John, whether in Secret or Public,
add this always to your other prayers, for a continual Remembrance to you of
those Duties, Privileges and Qualifications which belong to you as My
Disciples, and as a means of obtaining Grace from your Heavenly Father, to
enable you to persevere in them. The Lords-Prayer is therefore a badge of Our
Profession imposed by Christ himself, and to be used by Us, as we would be
accounted His Disciples.

Neither will saying the Substance of it in other Words of our own Invention,
answer the intent of this Command: Since

1. We are sure the Substance of the Prayer is put by Christ in the most
apposite and comprehensive Words that are possible, and therefore wholly to lay
them aside for others, is plainly to decline the choice of Words that Christ
has made for us, and substitute less apposite of our own, to express those
Petitions in.

2. The more particularly any thing is Commanded in the Worship of God, we
ought to be the more careful to observe it, and may be the more confident,
that God is pleased with our performance of it: since therefore we are
particularly Commanded, when we pray, to say, Our Father, etc. whatever other
prayers we offer to God, this ought not to be omitted.

3. In general we are Commanded to offer up our desires to God, and in
particular to offer this Prayer. These Commands agree very well together, and
therefore the one ought not to justle out the other: To lay aside the Prayer
particularly commanded by Christ, for others of our own composing, in pusuance
of the general Command, is too apparently to prefer our own Invention to God's
Command.

4. When we take the liberty to word our own Prayers, we may forget some
things, we may mix our own frailties and weakness in our Petitions; and this
too often appears both in the matter and wording of them: The way therefore to
supply these defects, and to obtain pardon for our Infirmities, is to use our
Lords perfect Prayer, not only as a Pattern for prayer, as some would have it,
but likewise as a Form necessary to be used, to correct what may be amiss, or
defective, in our own prayers.

5. They who lay aside the words of the Lord's Prayer, are in danger to lay
aside some of the substance of it also; particularly the substance of that
Petition, Forgive us our Trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against
us: For many who lay aside the Lord's Prayer, do neither in terms nor substance
offer this Petition to God; nay, are so far from making this the Condition of
their pardon, as Christ has taught us, that they publicly dispute against the
Form for this very reason: Though Christ, who foresaw the Objection which our
Corruptions would be apt to make, has Answered it, and bound it upon us
indispensibly as our Duty, to ask Forgiveness on these and no other terms,
Matthew. vi.15. And indeed if such a Sentence had been prescribed by our Lord to
be only repeated by Christians once or oftener every day, it would have seemed
but what was necessary to mind them of that peculiar and indispensible Duty of
their profession. We see the Wisdom of the Ancients thought fit to reduce their
Doctrine or Instructions into Proverbs, or short Sentences to be got by heart,
and kept continually in memory, as of great influence for guiding Men's Lives
and Actions; and such Sentences must be of much greater influence, when
repeated in the presence of God, as these in our Lord's Prayer are required to
be.

Lastly, This Prayer being given us as a Badge of our Profession, a Summary of
our Duty as Christians, and a Form of Sound Words, it is no more lawful to
alter it, than to lay it aside; and it would be the same presumption and hazard
to substitute other words instead of Christ's, in this Prayer, which we are
obliged always to use when we pray, as to change the words of our Creed; or as
it would be in a Battle to change the Word given by a General, or any part of
it, and to retain only the signification of it. From all which it is manifest
that God has required Forms of Prayer to be used by us, both in the Old and New
Testament.

As to the difference we find in the Lord's Prayer as delivered by St. Matthew
and St. Luke, it is to be observed that our Savior spoke in the Syriac or
vulgar Hebrew, and the Evangelists writ their Gospels in Greek: Now in the
Syriack, one and the same word expresses both those different words which the
Evangelists use in the same Petition, as Debts and Trespasses, etc. So that it
is no real, but a seeming difference between them; all the different Words
being the same in the Original Language in which our Savior spoke.

IV. As we have the Command of God, and the Example of his Saints, for offering
up our Prayers to Him, in a set and prepared Form of Words, so we have the like
Example for joining Voices, upon occasion, in offering these Words. Generally
it is sufficient that the People join in their hearts with the words of public
Prayers, yet the Scriptures warrant also, on some Occasions, their joining
their Voices.

1. Thus we find the people of Israel addressing themselves to God, Judges
xxi.2. And the people came to the House of God, and abode there till even
before God, and lift up their Voices, and wept sore, and said, O Lord God of
Israel, why is this come to pass in Israel? etc.

2. In Hymns and Psalms (which are also Prayers in great part, as I noted
before) the people are generally allowed by all (as being fully warranted by
Scripture) to join their Voices. So Moses and the Children of Israel sung unto
the Lord, Exodus xv.1.

3. In the New Testament we have an Eminent Example of this practice, Acts
iv.24. where the Apostles and their Disciples lift up their Voice to God with
one accord, and said, Lord thou art God, etc. If this prayer was immediately
inspired, as it seems it was, then the whole Assembly was inspired together,
not only to think the same Thing, but likewise to utter the same Words; and the
Spirit of God by it has attested the fitness and decency of a whole
Congregation's pronouncing the same prayer together. If it had not been
convenient that this should be some times practiced in our Christian
Assemblies, God would not have given us this Example. If the people were always
to join in their hearts only with our public prayers, it would have been so
here, for the Spirit of God would not have led them to do an indecent thing, or
a thing unfit for God's Worship.

4. St. Paul and Silas joined also their Voices in their prayers, as we may see
from Acts xvi.25. And at midnight Paul and Silas prayed, and sung praises unto
God, and the prisoners heard them: I know it may be alleged, That they sung
their prayers which they offered up to God on this Occasion, and on that
account joined their Voices; I confess the Original favors this Inference; but
if it be allowed that the Apostles sung their prayers together, it must be
allowed that they might likewise say them together: For we find the Blessed in
Heaven offering not only their praises together, but their prayers also; so
Rev. vi.10. They cried with a loud voice, saying, How long, O Lord, Holy and
True, do thou not Judge and Avenge our Blood, etc. From all which it is
manifest, that we are warranted by the Examples of God's people, both in the
Old and New Testament, to join our Voices, as well as our Hearts, in some of
our public Supplications to God; and that this practice is no New Invention of
Men.

V. If we consult the Scripture, we shall find that it is the Priest's part to
make public Intercession for the People, but yet so, that the People ought to
bear a part by themselves, and answer in the Service, which we commonly call
Responses.

1. They are commanded to do it, Psalm. cvi.48. where after the Prayers and
Praises of which the Psalm consists, are ended, it is added, Let all the people
say, Amen, praise the Lord; and accordingly we find 1 Chr. xvi.36. that the
People said Amen, and praised the Lord. And this is more signally observable in
that Solemn Service at the Dedication of Solomon's Temple, where we find first
the Priests and Levites praising God, 2 Chronicles. v.13. And saying, For he is
good, for his mercy endures for ever, the usual Form of Praising so often
repeated in the Psalms, particularly in the cxxxvi. which was probably used at
that time. Then Solomon, who built the Temple, performed another part of the
Service, Chap. vi.3. He blessed, First the People; Secondly, He blessed and
thanked God for his Mercy. And Lastly, offered that Divine Prayer of
Dedication, which we find in that Chapter; Then follow the burnt Offerings and
Sacrifices, which were peculiarly the Priest's share of the Service, Chap. vii.
And God gives his Approbation of their Praises, Prayers and Offerings, by
sending down Fire from Heaven to consume their Sacrifices: And then last of all
follows the people's part which they perform, Chap. vii.3. They bowed
themselves with their faces to the ground upon the pavement, and worshipped and
praised the Lord, saying, He is good, for his Mercy endures for ever. This
Service was Ordered by the Spirit of God, and plainly shows us that He approved
of the people's having a share or part peculiar to themselves in his Worship.

2. If it be said that this was the way of Worshipping God under the Law, which
is now Abolished and Unlawful, as well as the other Levitical Ceremonies: The
Apostles have answered this, by continuing this practice in the Christian
Church; and by admitting the people to bear a part in the public Service, and
to answer to the prayers, have assured us that this is no Legal Abolished
Ceremony. This is manifest from 1 Cor. xiv.16. Else when thou shall bless with
the Spirit, how shall he that occupies the room of the unlearned say Amen at
thy giving of thanks? which shows that even the unlearned had a part assigned
them in the Christian Assemblies. It may be added to this (what I observed
before, Chap. 1. Sect. 1. N. 4.) of the Responses in praising God, and of the
Worship described in the Revelations, where the Angels and Elders representing
the Clergy, and the Multitude representing the people, bear each of them their
distinct parts; in allusion to what was done in the Christian Assemblies. And
this is a clear proof, that the people bare a part, and answered to the
blessings and prayers of him that Officiated, ever since the Christian Worship
was Established.

Sect. 2. The Rules and Practice of Our Church concerning Prayer.
HAving thus seen the Directions and Examples which the Scriptures afford us
for the public performance of our prayers to God, let us now consider the
Worship of our Church, and compare it with Them; both as to the Words and
Matter of Our Prayers. And to the comfort of us, who are of this Communion, it
will clearly appear,

1. That there is not one thing we ask of God in them, which he has not
particularly directed us to ask, or any thing for which we ought to pray, that
is omited. This advantage we have toward the proof of this point, that our
prayers are fixed and stated, and may be examined by all that have a mind to be
satisfied in them. An Advantage we gain by putting them into a set and prepared
Form of Words, according to the Commands of God, and the Examples of holy Men;
whereas it is impossible for such as use only extempore prayer, thus to justify
their Service, because their prayers are altogether uncertain, and depend on
the present thoughts of the Speaker.

2. Our Church requires the people to join their voices with the Minister in
some of the prayers, in which they are more particularly concerned, and which
seem of the most general and greatest moment. Such are the general confessions
of sin, and the Lord's Prayer.

3. Our Church has assigned for the people some short Answers or Responses to
our prayers, whereby they may be stirred up to attention, and signify their
concurrence with the Minister. Thus to every prayer and blessing they are
obliged to answer Amen, as we find the people did in the Church of Corinth; and
to join Unanimously in some other short Ejaculations to implore God's Mercy, or
beseech him to hear us. In all which I have already showed we have the warrant
of Scripture; and it is plain to any one that will be at the pains to consider
our Service, that we have taken the Rules thereof from Scripture, and have not
invented a Service out of our own Heads; and then (as is too often the Custom
of Innovators) endeavored to make the Scripture comply with it. The first
Reformers of Our Church would never have retained and prepared Forms of
Prayers, had they not found such in Scripture: they would never have required
the people to join their voices in some prayers, and answer to others, if the
Examples of Scripture had not led them to it. They professed, and their design
was to make the Word of God their Rule; and we see how exactly they conformed
to it in these particulars. I wish I could say as much for all other ways of
Worship among Protestants.

Sect. 3. The Practice of those who differ from Us.
I. ANd here I must entreat you of my Diocese, who Dissent from Our Worship,
seriously to consider with me, what it is which you have substituted in the
place of these things which you have entirely laid aside, though so expressly
directed and warranted by Scripture; and examine whether your way have a solid
Foundation in God's Word. I shall endeavor to represent it with all fairness
and impartiality, and leave you to judge as God shall direct you, and as you
will answer it at the last day.

And here I find that some of your Writers are of Opinion, That the Spirit of
prayer is given to all the Children of God in some measure, for enabling their
Hearts to conceive, and their Tongues to express convenient desires to God* and
that therefore Forms of Prayer are of no necessary use, either in Public or
Private; on the contrary, that they stint the Spirit, and hinder Men from
stirring up or using the gift that God has given them.

2. Others of you go further, and affirm that all Forms of Prayer are unlawful
to Christians, and that therefore it is a sin to join in a Worship where they
are used, or to be present at it.

3. That the Minister is the mouth of the Congregation, and that he only is to
speak publicly to God in the behalf of the people, and that they are not to
join their Voices, but their Hearts only with him.

Upon these principles you forsake our Worship, and many of you think it is a
sin to be so much as present at our Religious Assemblies: It is of great
importance therefore that you should understand what the Scriptures determine
in this matter; for if our Worship (which you thus forsake) be plainly enjoined
by Scripture (as I think I have made it sufficiently appear;) and these
principles of Your Worship, and Your Practice pursuant to them, have no
Foundation in Scripture; I cannot see how You can answer your forsaking Our
Assemblies, to God and your own Consciences. Let us then consider each of these
Principles apart.

II. And first, for that position of your Directory, That the Spirit of Prayer
is given to all the Children of God in some measure, for enabling their Hearts
to conceive, and their Tongues to express, convenient Desires to God; I entreat
you to consider what Promise or Foundation it has in Scripture. I profess to
you seriously, That upon the strictest Enquiry I could make, I never could find
any such Promise made to all the Children of God, in the Old or New Testaments;
neither did I ever meet any Dissenter that was able to show any such, Exclusive
of the Use of Forms. If then there be none such, as we may be well assured
there is not, was it not too much presumption in the Compilers of your
Directory, to obtrude this Doctrine on the World, or persuade people to depend
on it, and neglect the help of Forms, which the Scripture prescribes, and
recommends to us? Nay, as there is no Promise for such extraordinary Assistance
to all the Children of God to conceive prayer, so neither is there any Command
in Scripture, requiring us to worship or pray to God in a conceived extemporary
or unpremeditated prayer; or so much as an Example in a settled ordinary
Congregation where it was practiced. If then you can show none of these in the
holy Scriptures, neither Promise nor Command, it is a plain case, that this
Doctrine is a mere Invention of Men, and the Worship built on it a Vanity, in
the sense of our Savior, Mark vii.7. If my design were only to confute an
Adversary, what I have already said were sufficient; but this Spirit of Prayer
is a point of such Consequence, that I hope it will be both grateful and
instructive to the Readers of all sorts, to explain it to them, and set it in
as clear a light as I can; which I shall do under the following Heads.

III. 1. First therefore I doubt not but it will be granted, That whoever
prays to God with Faith, Sincerity, Fervency, Love, Humility, Conformity to
God's will, Understanding, and Decency of Expression, prays Acceptably to Him,
and is endowed with the Spirit of Prayer; and whoever prays without these, does
want it.

2. I suppose no man of himself can attain these Graces that are requisite to
make our prayers Acceptable, and that therefore we must have the Assistance of
Gods Spirit to beget them in us.

3. I suppose that it is possible for a man to acquire, by natural means, an
ability to express himself decently in prayer, though he cannot so acquire Faith,
or any other inward Grace; so that Decency of Expression is the lowest part of
the Gift of Prayer, and not always a part of it.

4. I say that one praying by a Form may have all these Qualifications, and
therefore his prayer may be acceptable to God, and proceed from his Spirit.

This may be proved to the Dissenters, 1. From the Assembly's Larger Catechism,
which acknowledges it: For when the Question is put, How is the Lord's Prayer
to be used? The Answer is, The Lord's Prayer is not only for Direction, as a
pattern according to which we are to make other prayers, but may be also used
as a prayer, so that it be done with Understanding, Faith, Reverence, and other
Graces, necessary to the right performance of the Duty of prayer. 2. Many of
the Psalms are (as I observed before) Forms of Prayer, and the Dissenters make
no scruple to turn these Forms of Prayers into Meetre, and then sing them Line
by Line after the Minister. As for Example: The first Verse of the fifth Psalm,
runs thus, in the Translation they use: Give ear unto my words, O Lord,
My meditations weigh;
Hear my loud cry, my King, my God;
For I to thee will pray.
This is as much a Form of Prayer, as any in the Litany, and by their using it
as they do, they plainly practice praying by a Form; And do further also allow
that prayers, as well as praises, may be offered to God with singing, and that
they may repeat their Forms of prayer after the Minister. With what reason then
can it be said against us, That a Form of Prayer sung in Verse, and after the
Minister's Reading it, is Commendable; but the same said or sung in Prose, is
Unlawful?

5. Extemporary conceived prayers may want these spiritual qualifications of
prayer, as I believe will not be denied by those that contend most for them,
and they often are manifestly deficient; being sometimes performed without
Reverence or Decency of Expression, and by some even without Understanding; and
where these qualifications are found, others may be wanting. The Scriptures
observe, That a man may make long prayers, and yet have a mind disposed to
devour Widows Houses. He may want Faith, Humility, Fervency, and Affiance in
God, and yet be able to pray without a Form: And therefore such prayers are not
always Acceptable to God.

6. Therefore when God promises the Spirit of Grace and of Supplications to his
people, Zach. xii.10. this Promise does not extend to enable all men who are
God's Children, to conceive with their Hearts, and express with their Mouths,
convenient Desires, without a Form: for as I showed before, every one to whom
God gives a Heart and Disposition to pray, has the Spirit of Prayer, and he who
from this principle offers up his desires to God in a Form, prays Acceptably;
and he that offers them without that principle, though he do it in unpremeditated
and extemporary words, is rejected, and therefore the Spirit of prayer is the
grace, the heart, the disposition and ability to pray, and whether it be with,
or without a Form, such a Man's prayers are acceptable to God; and it is greatly
superstitious to think or teach otherwise. If God give us a heart to pray, and
by his providence has provided us a Form to express our Desires in, or enables
us to make one, it is sufficient, and we ought to be thankful.

7. In confirmation of this Account of the Spirit of Prayer, we may further
observe,

1. That no Worship is Acceptable to God, that is not offered to Him in Spirit
and Truth, John iv.24. and therefore the Scripture recommends to us prayers in
and by the Spirit; but that praying with the Spirit, does not signify
extemporary unpremeditated prayers, or exclude Forms, will appear from 1 Cor.
xiv.15. I will pray with the Spirit, I will pray with the Understanding, I will
sing with the Spirit, I will sing with the Understanding also: Here we find
singing with the Spirit, as well as praying with it; and whoever sings
otherwise, does not worship God as he ought; but though we are obliged to sing
with the Spirit, yet we must and ought to sing in the Congregation, with a set
Form of Words, and therefore for the same reason, though we pray with the Spirit,
we may pray by a set and prepared Form of Words: The most spiritual Songs
consist of a set Form of imposed Words, and so may the most spiritual Prayers.
Praying therefore with the Spirit in this place, is so far from meaning, or
being an Argument for the Use of extemporary unpremeditated prayers, that it is
rather an Argument against them: For either we are obliged by it to sing to God
in extemporary Hymns, or we are not obliged to pray to Him in extemporary
Prayers; since it is Unreasonable to interpret singing with the Spirit, in one
sense, and praying with the Spirit in a contrary.

2. And to confirm this further, we find the most spiritual Persons addressing
themselves to God in Forms; so did Moses, so did David, as I observed before;
and so did our Savior himself on the Cross, when in his Agony he repeated the
first Verse of Psalm. xxii. in Syriack, and as some believe, the whole Psalm; by
which Act, He recommendeth to us Forms of Prayer in his Dying Breath, as the
most proper means of expressing our condition to God, and as most suitable to
the Divine Majesty; and therefore praying -- in the Spirit, Ephesians. vi.18.
Praying in the holy Ghost, Jude 20. and with the Spirit, 1 Cor. xiv.15.
signify praying with Grace in our Hearts, by the Assistance and Motion of the
Holy Spirit: And a man may as well pray with Grace in his Heart, when he prays
by a Form, as sing with Grace in his Heart, when he sings by a Form.

3. We have a Promise that God's Spirit will assist us with this Grace in our
Hearts, but we have no Promise that He will help us to Words without the Use of
Forms; as will appear from Romans viii.26. The Spirit also helps our
Infirmities, for we know not what we should pray for as we ought, but the
Spirit it self makes Intercession for us with groanings that cannot be
uttered; those inward motions in the Heart, called here groanings, are that
Grace in the Heart with which we ought to pray, and to which the Spirit of God
does, and indeed only can help us, and to pray with this Grace, is to pray in
and with the Spirit, whether we use words or no; and if we do use them, whether
we reduce them into a Form first, or pour them forth as they present themselves
to our Minds; but we have no Promise that the Holy Ghost will always furnish us
with fit words on all occasions, and therefore ought not to presume that He
will.

4. It Is certain that he did furnish some with such words, for we find both
Prayers and Hymns dictated immediately by him, of which we have Examples in the
Hymns of the Blessed Virgin and Zacharias, and in the Song or Prayer of Simeon,
and in Acts iv.24. But then it is manifest that this was an extraordinary Gift
of God, and a part of Prophecy, and we may not depend on the holy Ghost for
this Gift, more then for any other Extraordinary Gift, till it be made appear
that it was to continue always in the Church, and to be communicated to All
the Children of God. Praying, and singing the Praises of God, are Duties
incumbent on all Christians; but we are no more obliged to pray Extemporary
Prayers, from any Example of inspired Men in Scripture, than to sing
Extemporary Hymns from the like Examples; to which yet none, I think, pretend.

5. It Is very observable that even those who composed their Prayers and Hymns
by immediate inspiration, did not generally offer them to God in the
Congregation till they had first reduced them into a Form: Thus David first
penned his Psalms, and then delivered them to be sung, 1. Chron. xvi.7. and
it is probable the Prophets, 1. Cor. xiv.26. did the same, for they are
supposed, every one to have a Psalm, a Doctrine, a Tongue, a Revelation, etc.
that is, to have them ready, and reduced into Form for the use of the Church
when they came together. That this is the meaning of having a Psalm, etc. in
this place, will appear very probable, not only from the words which naturally
import this, and can hardly be otherwise interpreted, but likewise from the
Apostles making a difference between what these Prophets had prepared, and what
was revealed immediately at the time of their being together, verse. 30. If any
thing be revealed to another that siteth by, let the first hold his peace.
Which shows that these Psalms, etc. were to give place to such as were
immediately inspired: So far were these inspired Men from countenancing an
extemporary, unpremeditated way of serving God, except where there was an
immediate Revelation for it, and so utterly void of Scripture Proof is this
great principle of the Dissenters Worship, that the Spirit of prayer is given
to every one of the Faithful to enable them to conceive with the Heart and
express with their Tongues their necessities to God without a Form of Prayer.

8. It lies therefore my Friends on your Teachers who are of this persuasion,
to produce plain Scripture for your principles, or else to confess that you
have laid aside Prayers by Forms commanded by God, and practiced by holy Men in
Scriptures, to make room for this way of Praying of Men's own invention. But
further that place, Eccl. v.1.2. seems to me to afford a strong Argument
against such Prayers, When thou go to the House of God, -- Be not rash with
thy Mouth, and let not thy Heart be hasty to utter any thing before God: for
God is in Heaven, and thou upon Earth: Therefore let thy words be few. It is
hard to say what it is to be rash with our Mouths, or hasty to utter any thing
before God, if it be not rashnesh to trust the expressing all our desires to
such uncertain and unpremeditated words, as our invention suggests unto us,
when we come before him, which (as I have showed) the Scriptures give us no
promise of being supplied to us by the Spirit on ordinary occasions. I appeal
to you whether it would not be looked on as rashness for an ordinary person to
speak to a Prince, or solemn Assembly, concerning a matter of great moment, in
words unpremeditated and unformed, and we shall hardly find any so rash as to
venture on it. King Solomon here seems to have recommended the same modesty to
Men in their Addresses to God.

9. But in as much as God has not expressly forbidden all extemporary prayers,
I would not be understood by this to condemn all such as unlawful. There may be
some Men (though not very many) able to express themselves significantly and
decently, extempore; and there are some occasions that require it even in
Public; and on these occasions, when a Man has not time allowed him to reduce
his desires into form before he offers them, he may depend on the assistance of
God's Spirit, as we may in all other cases of of necessity, or at least hope
for pardon of course to our infirmities: But to depend on that Spirit, and
neglect the means God has given us to provide our selves, looks so like
tempting him, that we ought carefully to avoid it: And I find Prudent Modest
Men are aware of this, and though they be very famous for extemporary prayers,
yet they pray really as much by a Form as if they had the Common Prayer before
them. The secret is only this, they compose Forms of Prayer of several sorts,
digest them well in their minds, and commit them to memory; so that they can on
occasion transpose the parts of them, change, add, or leave out, as they see
reason; and thus they are in effect provided with a Form, though the people
cannot perceive it, and admire them for their readiness and fluency. It is
easy for any Man of Moderate Parts to manage the matter thus, but the more
ignorant and ordinary Preachers that know not, or are not capable of the method
of it, fall into very indecent and vain repetitions, and are often at a loss
when they strive to practice this way of Addressing to God.

Another account may be given of these seeming Extemporary Prayers not much
different from the former, namely, That good Men who make a Conscience of
secret prayer to God, and have grown up in a constant Discharge of this Duty,
do by degrees fall into a Form even with themselves; for how much soever their
prayers were Extempore at first, yet having continual Occasion of praying to
God for the same things, they find in time that there is but one best way of
expressing the same thing; which necessarily leads to a form. However, the
various ways they made use of before they settled on one, serve them as so many
forms when they come in public: And by changing of these, they seem to pray
extempore.

10. Lastly, let me observe that the use of Extemporary conceived prayers, even
in cases of necessity, is founded on a general Rule of Scripture only, which
commands us to ask of God what we lack; Of which Rule our own prudence makes
the Application in such extemporary occasions, but when we set up this Human
Application of this general Rule in opposition to that particular manner of
asking, commanded by God, and practiced by Holy Men, which is by set and
premeditated Forms, in the ordinary Worship of God, and turn God's way out of
his Worship, to make room for one of our own; This is to displace a particular
command of God on pretense of guiding our selves by a general one: In which we
are not only more liable to mistakes, but we fail of paying due respect to
God's Directions. For general Commands ought only to take place in such Cases
where God has not laid down a particular Rule.

And thus I have examined the First Principle of Dissenters; That the Spirit of
Prayer is given to all the Children of God, whereby they are enabled to
conceive with the Heart, and express with the Mouth convenient desires to God.

IV. I come now to speak to the Second, That all Forms of Prayer are Unlawful
to Christians, and that it is a sin to join in a Worship where they are used,
or so much as to be present at it. If there be any of you for whom I intend
these Papers of this opinion, as I fear some of you are, and all of you do in
your practice comply with those that maintain it, and therefore cannot acquit
your selves from countenancing it; I desire you to observe that if there were
no harm in the opinion, or if it were a mere Speculation, we should not be much
concerned at their mistake. But by what I have showed of the Scripture
Authority of Forms, it is plain that they who maintain this principle, do not
only teach for Doctrines the Commandments of Men, but in effect set themselves
up above Christ, and countermand what he has required. They not only add to the
Gospel a new command, by Teaching that to be unlawful which Christ has no where
condemned, but they Teach that to be unlawful which he has positively
commanded. Whoever therefore do Teach Forms of Prayer to be unlawful, or
countenance those that do Teach this Doctrine of Men, cannot acquit themselves
from the imputation of resisting the Holy Ghost, by whose inspiration the word
of God is penned.

I can foresee only one thing that can be alleged in favor of those who
maintain this opinion, and it is, that to pray with, or without a Form
(excepting the Lords-Prayer) is in it self indifferent, and that therefore the
asserting the use of Forms is not a matter of such weight, as to justify our
contending with our Brethren about it; and that it seems uncharitable in us to
insist on a thing which they are fully persuaded is unlawful, and we our selves
count indifferent.

1. But in Answer to this, it is to be observed, First, That an opinion which
necessarily divides him who believes it from the Communion of all the
Established Churches in the World cannot be of so little moment as the
objection would make it. And such is this opinion of the unlawfulness of Forms
of Prayer; since there neither is, nor has been any Established Church these
1500 years, See Durel and Knoxes Book of Disc.
but has maintained their Lawfulness, and used them in the Service of God, and
therefore whoever believes them to be unlawful, in whatever Age he had lived,
he must have separated from all the Established Churches of the World at that
time; and surely an opinion that necessarily produces such a Division must be
of mighty consequence, whether true or false, and ought to be carefully
examined, and if false, to be zealously opposed. But,

2. I suppose it will be granted, that eating Swines Flesh, or drinking Wine,
are as indifferent as using a Form of Prayer, and of less concern to the Souls
of Men, and that therefore to Teach these to be unlawful would be as innocent a
mistake as to Teach the unlawfulness of Forms. For if we compare these two
Doctrines together, and the mischiefs that each of them have, or may hereafter
produce, It is hardly conceivable that the forbidding the use of some
particular Meats should have so many ill effects as the forbidding Forms of
prayer has had already. Yet it is observable how St. Paul judges of that
Doctrine, 1 Timothy iv.1. In the latter times (says he) some shall depart from
the Faith, giving heed to seducing Spirits and Doctrines of Devils --
Forbidding to Marry, and to abstain from Meats, which God has Created to be
received with Thanksgiving. You see here St. Paul counts it a departure from
the Faith, and a Doctrine of Devils to forbid, as unlawful in it self, any sort
of Meat which God has Created for the use of Man; and if it be so Criminal to
Teach any sort of Meat to be unclean when God has not forbidden it, then sure
to Teach a Form of Prayer to be unlawful, when God has commanded it, must be a
very ill Doctrine. And this consideration alone ought to make those who
maintain it, or any such Doctrine whereby they are obliged to condemn their
Brethren as practicing unlawful things, to examine it carefully and impartially
by the word of God, lest they be imposed on by Seducing Spirits.

The great Design of the Devil is to bring us into an entire subjection to his
will. But when he despairs of this, his next Attempt is to share with God in
our Obedience, and impose new Commands of his Own upon us, as if they were
God's, and so to procure himself to be obeyed. This he does most successfully
by giving them an appearance of Religion, and of more than ordinary strictness.
Thus in St. Paul's time, under color of Mortification, he forbad Meats and
Marriage, as Unlawful, which God had allowed; speaking Lies in Hypocrisy, and
under show of Religion. And thus it is to be feared he has prevailed on some
under color of greater spirituality, to abstain from Forms of Prayer, as
Unlawful, which God has enjoined.

And here it is very remarkable, that wherever the Devil gains this point with
men, and brings them to believe a thing to be forbidden by God, which he has
not forbidden, he soon brings a super-added Command of his Own, in Competition
with some of God's, and prevails with them to prefer his Commands to God's; and
so plungeth them into direct Disobedience, which was his Design at first. Thus
when he had prevailed with Men to abstain from Marriage, they soon fell not
only to Commit Fornication, but even, in some cases, to Allow it, rather than
Marriage, as the Papists do: And by persuading Men to abstain from Forms of
Prayer, as Unlawful, he has deprived them in many places of all opportunity of
Public Worship, and made them choose rather not to serve God at all in
Public, than with a Form; which is the case of many Thousands now in this
Kingdom, who worship God publicly no where. But,

3. This Doctrine of the Unlawfulness of praying by Forms, is no such
indifferent thing, that we may safely indulge Men in their own sense about it:
Since it is very apt to puff them up, and make them take false measures in
judging of their own Condition, and of the influence of God's Spirit upon them.

We know that all good Men have the Spirit of God, and are guided and
influenced by it in the whole tenor of their Lives; we make no doubt but they
are assisted by Him in their prayers, but no less in forgiving an Injury, or
resisting a Temptation; and his influence on a good Man's Mind is rather
greater and more sensible in these and other Acts of Religion, than in Prayer.
Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness,
Temperance, are the Fruits of the Spirit, Gal. v.22. And it is principally by
these we ought to conclude that we have that Spirit. But the Opinion of the
Unlawfulness of Forms of Prayer, on a persuasion that the Spirit of God enables
every Child of God to conceive with the Heart, and express with the Mouth
suitable Desires, entitles every one to God's Spirit in some measure, that is
able to express himself in apt and fluent Words, though without the other Graces
of the Spirit, and exposes every one to despair that is not able to do this, as
looking on himself to be destitute of the Spirit, though otherwise meek, humble,
and charitable, and endowed with such Graces as are much wore certain signs of
his presence. Nay, so far are many deluded by this Opinion, that they judge
themselves or others Children of God, and in his Favor, according as they are
more or less endowed with this Gift, without respect to other Qualifications.
And I dare appeal to your selves, Whether some very Immoral Persons, guilty of
gross and scandalous Crimes, have not been eminent for this Gift of Prayer? And
whether such persons are not apt to flatter themselves that they are the
Children of God, and endowed with his Spirit, notwithstanding all their
Wickedness? And it is impossible either to convince these persons of their
mistake, or to comfort poor ignorant people, dejected only for want of this
Gift, whilst they are possessed with this Opinion of the Unlawfulness of Forms.

Which in the 4th place ought not to be countenanced or indulged as an
indifferent thing, because it has been a great hindrance to secret Devotion:
Every Christian ought at least twice a day to address himself to God in secret
prayer, but a great part of the World cannot do it without a Form; Children and
ignorant persons are at a loss for Words, and even other people are often not
able to find them readily, especially when wearied, dull, or indisposed, as is
sometimes the condition of the the best Christians; this makes secret prayer,
at least a constant regular course of it, uneasy to most that are absolutely
against all Use of Forms, and it occasions too many to neglect it, which
otherwise would not: And as for Children and ignorant people, amongst those of
this Persuasion, I am well assured many of them never bow their Knees in secret
to God; and several of those that are grown up, are forced to speak aloud, or
cannot pray at all, which is against the nature of secret Prayer; and exposes
not only the Persons that use it to the censure of Hypocrisy, but the Duty to
Contempt. It Is on this account that the pious Custom of Training up Young
People to a constant course of Devotion, in their morning and evening secret
Prayers, is too universally laid aside among you, as I have found by
experience, and for the truth of the Observation I dare appeal to all of the
Dissenters. On the contrary I am well assured that there cannot be a more
effectual or easy method to revive and continue this regular and constant use
of secret prayers, than to oblige every one to some certain Forms every Morning
and Evening, which they may not omit, whatever other prayers they use: But this
can never be done whilst the opinion of the unlawfulness of forms prevails; and
therefore all good people are obliged to oppose it, as they would retrieve the
constant use of secret prayers; which shows that this is no indifferent matter,
as the objection would suggest, but of great weight and fit to be contended for.

I will not mention some other Reasons that are of great moment, because they
would but exasperate, and tend to make the Duty of Prayer, when performed
extempore, ridiculous, which ill men might extend (as it too often happens) to
expose Devotion in general; such are the indecent Expressions which sometimes
fall from persons that pray thus: I will only observe to you, that Extemporary
Prayers of some Preachers have too often given occasion of Offense to serious
persons even among your selves. It Is certain, that to print some of them, as
they have been spoken, as those that we make use of are printed, would not be
for the Honor of the Holy Spirit, to whom they are ascribed, nor much
recommend them to serious Men. But I esteem it an ill thing for Men to ridicule
one another Devotion, whatever it is.

V. There remains yet the Third Opinion of Dissenters which they advance
against us in this matter of Prayer, to be Examined, That the Minister is the
Mouth of the Congregation, and that the People have nothing to do but to join
with him in their Hearts; An Opinion far from any Authority of Scripture, which
expressly requires us, Romans xv.6. with one Mind, and one Mouth, to glorify God;
We produce this, and many other places and Examples in Scripture, for the
People's joining their Voices, and bearing a part in their praises and prayers;
and we are assured there is no Scripture forbids it; and therefore when you
Condemn it, or teach it to be Unlawful, we must charge it upon You, as an
instance of Your Teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of Men. Which is all I
think needful to be said to this Head, after what I have showed before in
defense of our contrary practice from Scripture; and, I think, sufficient to
induce you seriously to consider it.

And thus, I presume, I have faithfully examined the Rules and Examples the
Scriptures afford us for the performance of that part of our public Worship
that consists in Prayers, and compared the Service of our Church, and the
Dissenters way of Praying, with them, and made it appear that our performance
of this Duty, both as to the Matter and Manner, is agreeable to the
Commandments of God, and to the Examples of Holy Men recorded in Scripture: And
that the Service the Dissenters have substituted in the room thereof, has in
many particulars laid aside God's Commands, and deserted the Examples of
Scripture, and is in the main part thereof an immediate Invention of Men.

And I entreat you who are of this Persuasion, and adhere to these Principles
of Worship which I have now mentioned, and showed to be disagreeable to
Scripture, to consider seriously whether you are not thereby literally guilty
of that Sin with which our Savior taxes the Jews, Mark vii.7. of Teaching for
Doctrines the Commandments of Men; And also of that Superstition condemned by
St. Paul, Col. ii.21. which says, Touch not, taste not, handle not, (that is,
which teaches to forbear those things which God has made Lawful) after the
Doctrines and Commandments of Men: And I beseech God to inlighten your Minds to
make a true Judgment in it, that you may deliver your Souls.

CHAP. III. Of Hearing.
Sect. 1. What the Holy Scriptures prescribe concerning it.
I. ONE great design of Our Christian Assemblies is Hearing, and that which is
to be heard is the Word of God. I shall proceed in examining this, in the same
manner as I have done in the former Chapters; And consider, First, What
Directions the Scriptures afford us for the public performance of this Duty.
Secondly, Shall compare our own practice with them. And, Thirdly, That of the
Dissenters.

First then, God has positively Commanded us to read His Word in our public
Assemblies. So Deuteronomy. xxxi.10. In the feast of Tabernacles, when all Israel is
come to appear before the Lord thy God, in the place where the Lord shall
choose. Thou shall read this Law before all Israel in their Hearing. Gather the
people together, Men, Women and Children, and thy Stranger that is within thy
gates, that they may hear, and that they may learn, and fear the Lord your God,
and observe to do all the Words of this Law. And it is observed* Jos. viii.35.
that there was not a word of all that Moses Commanded, which Joshua read not
before all the Congregation.

Neither was this confined to their Solemn Assemblies at Jerusalem; It was
likewise a constant part of their Sabbath Service in their Synagogues. As we
may learn from Acts xiii.14. where it is observed, that Paul and Barnabas went
into the Synagogue on the Sabbath day, and sat down; and after the reading of
the Law and the Prophets, the Rulers of the Synagogue sent unto them, etc. and
St. Paul takes notice, verse. 27. that the Prophets were read every Sabbath day,
meaning undoubtedly in their Assemblies. And St. James (Acts xv.21.) of Moses
his being read in the Synagogues every Sabbath day.

II. This reading the Law was the great, and most effectual means God provided
for preserving the knowledge of himself amongst his people; and where it was
omitted, the people immediately sunk into Idolatry; and the best Reformation
began, and was carried on by Restoring this Ordinance. Thus it is observed of
Josiah, 2 Chronicles. xxxiv.29. that he gathered together all the Elders of Judah
and Jerusalem -- And all the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and the Pri^sts and the
Levites, and all the people great and small, and he read in their ears all the
words of the book of the Covenant that was found in the House of the Lord. The
like is observed of Ezra, Neh. viii.3. And he read therein before the street
that was before the Watergate, from Morning until Midday, before the Men and
the Women, and all that could understand. It Is remarkable that after the
Captivity, the Jews never fell into Idolatry: and the chief reason given by
themselves was the strict Observation of this Ordinance of God, the Law being
constantly read to them afterward publicly in their Synagogues; so powerfully
does God bless his own Ordinances to preserve those that use them from Error
and Sin.

III. From the practice of the Synagogue in reading the Law and the Prophets,
the like Order was brought into the Christian Church; and Reading was made a
part of the Office of the Christian Elders, as it was before of the Jewish. And
hence it is that Timothy is Commanded by St. Paul, 1 Timothy iv.13. To give
attendance to Reading as well as to Exhortation and Doctrine. And the inspired
Writings of the Apostles were read in the Christian Assemblies, as well as the
Law and Prophets among the Jews, According to St. Paul's Command, Col. iv.16.
When this Epistle is read amongst you, cause that it also be read in the Church
of the Laodiceans, and that ye likewise read the Epistle from Laodicea. And it
was but reason, since the Gospel contained the Christian Law, that it should be
read in the Christian Assemblies, as well as the Law of Moses was in the
Synagogues. And that it was so read in the first Christian Assemblies, I might
show by many instances out of the Ancient Fathers, if there were occasion.

IV. This public Reading the Law was of so great Reputation, that it is termed
Preaching it; as we may see from Acts xv.21. For Moses of old time has in
every City them that preach him, being read in the Synagogues every Sabbath
day. The word Preaching has a peculiar sense in the New Testament, and
signifies properly to Declare or Proclaim the Word of God, as a Herald or
Crier proclaims the Laws or Orders of a King. Hence only those that Proclaimed
the Gospel to such as had not heard it before, or read the Old Testament to the
people, are said to Preach. Preaching is distinguished from Teaching and
Exhortation; and it is observable, that in the whole New Testament, though reading
the Scriptures is called Preaching, yet interpreting them, applying them, or
exhorting the people from them in a Christian Auditory, is never called by that
name.

If it be objected that St. Paul is said to preach to the Disciples, Acts xx.7.
when he only in probability made a Sermon, or Exhortation to Believers, as is
usual now; I answer, that the Original of this Word ((...)) is never translated
preach in any other place of the New Testament, and should not have been here,
but discoursed, disputed, spoke, or reasoned; so it is translated in Acts
xvii.2, 17. xviii.19. xix.8, 9. Heb. xii.5, etc. for the Original Words which
properly signify preaching are (...) and (...). From all which it is manifest
that there are only two ways by which the Word of God is properly preached; the
first is, when it is declared to those that never heard of it before; and the
second is when the very words of the Scripture are read publicly to the
peodle, as a Crier does a Proclamation, which he does not word himself, but
reads it in the words in which it is delivered to him.

In short, The Scriptures are Sermons out of the Mouth of God, being dictated
by his Holy Spirit; for the Reading of which to the People for their Conviction
and Instruction, there is a peculiar Command of God; and where this Ordinance
is duly observed, they are sure of the Word of Life; and it is impossible they
should be ignorant of their Duty, for the Scriptures are sufficient to mak^
them wise to Salvation; and the hearing them with Humility and Attention, is a
means sufficient to beget Faith in the Hearts of those that hear them; for they
are profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in
Righteousness, that the Man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished to all
good Works, as we see 1 Timothy iii.16, 17.

V. We find in Holy Scripture that the Public Reading of the Word of God was
with great Solemnity. It Is observed Nehem. viii.5. When Ezra opened the Book,
all the people stood up, and Ezra blessed the Lord, the great God; and all the
people answered, Amen, Amen, with lifting up their hands, and they bowed their
heads, and worshipped the Lord with their faces to the ground; and I find it
generally agreed that both the Readers and Hearers stood up whilst the Law was
read, though not when other things were read or taught; hence it is observed Luke
iv.16. that our Savior stood up for to read; and Verse. 20. after closing the
Book, that he sat down to teach: Hence Rev. v. God is represented in allusion
to the High Priest, with a Book in his Right Hand, containing the Revelations
of his Will; and the Lamb, as his Minister, takes it out of his Hand to declare
the Contents of it; and Verse. 8. When he had taken the Book, the four Beasts
and four and twenty Elders fell down before the Lamb -- And they sung a New
Song: The Angels join with them, Verse. 11. and the whole Creation, Verse. 13.
From whence we see the Scriptures teach us to receive the Revelations of God's
Will out of the Book of Life, with Adoration and Praises: And therefore we find
that at the Reading the Law, Confessions, and Praises of God, were intermixed,
and succeeded one another, Neh. ix.3. And they stood up in their place, and
read in the Book of the Lord their God one fourth part of the Day, and another
fourth part they Confessed and Worshipped the Lord their God.

VI. We find that the Word of God is to be read in such a Language as the
People understand. After the Captivity, the People being Born and Educated in a
strange Land, their Language was changed, and they did not understand, at least
Universally, the pure Hebrew in which the Law was first written; therefore when
Ezra read in the Law, a certain number of the Priests and Levites interpreted
the Words of the Law, as Ezra read them to the People: Neh. viii.7. And they
caused the people to understand the Law, and the people stood in their place;
so they read in the Book in the Law of God distinctly, and gave the sense, and
caused them to understand the reading: And this Custom continues among the
Jews to this Day; first the Hebrew Text is read, and then a Translation or
Paraphrase, in a Language understood by the Hearers. And indeed there may be
good reason for reading the Originals in Public Assemblies, such a Custom
being an effectual means to preserve the knowledge of them; but they cannot be
useful to the People without a Translation. Therefore St. Paul does not
absolutely forbid speaking in Unknown Tongues in the Church, but orders, 1 Cor.
xiv.27. Let one interpret; but if there be no Interpreter, let him keep silence
in the Church.

VII. We find that after reading the Word of God, there was sometimes an
Enlargement or Comment on some part of it, and an Exhortation to the People:
Thus when our Savior had read a portion of Scripture, He applied it to the
people in a Discourse to that purpose. But it does not appear that this was
constantly done, on the contrary it is rather probable that it was not. For had
there been a constant Provision for such Enlargement, and Exposition of the
Law, and Exhortation from it, there had been no occasion for the Rulers of the
Synagogue, Acts xiii.15. to send to St. Paul and Barnabas, after the reading of
the Law and Prophets, that Message we find there, Ye Men and Brethren, if ye
have any Word of Exhortation for the People, say on. St. Paul supposes him who
Teaches, and him whose Office it was to Exhort, distinct from him that Ruled,
and him that Ministered, Romans xii. And it does not appear that every Church was
furnished with all these Officers. The same St. Paul joined Exhortation and
Doctrine with Reading, in his Charge to Timothy, 1 Timothy iv.13. which shows that
they went together, but whether indispensibly or no, does not appear; though it
is manifest in the practice of most Churches in the Ages after the Apostles
they were all generally exercised in the Public Worship.

VIII. Lastly, We find that they had a Summary of the Principal Doctrines of
the Gospel, which they delivered to the people, and by which they ordered their
own Discourses, and judged of what was delivered by others. Thus St. Paul to
Timothy, 2 Timothy i.13. Hold fast the Form of sound Words which thou have heard
of me; and Chap. ii. Verse. 2. And the things that thou have heard of me among
many Witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful Men, who shall be able to
teach others: Perhaps this may be that proportion of Faith according to which
the Prophets are exhorted to prophesy, Romans xii.6. I think it is not doubted
but this Form of sound Words contained the main Fundamentals of Christianity;
and St. Paul tells us what those were, Heb. vi.1, 2. Therefore leaving the
Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, let us go on unto perfection; not laying
again the foundation of Repentance from dead Works, and Faith toward God, of
the Doctrine of Baptisms, and of Laying on of Hands, and of the Resurrection of
the Dead, and of Eternal Judgment. In all probability therefore the Form of
sound Words delivered by St. Paul to Timothy, and by him to others, contained
these six Heads or Principles of Christianity, which every Christian was
obliged to hear and learn.

Sect. 2. The Practice of Our Church in Reading and Preaching the word.
THese are the Rules and Examples the Scriptures propose to us for our feeding
the people with the Word of Life, and their Hearing it in Public. Let us in
the second place compare the Practice of Our Church with them, and surely no
copy can come nearer the Original.

1. For first, Our Ministers are expressly obliged in their Ordination,
diligently to read all the Canonical Scriptures of the Old and New Testament
unto the people Assembled in the Church where they shall be appointed to serve.

2. Our Church has disposed the Holy Scriptures in a certain Order, and has
appointed four or more Chapters to be read every day in the Public
Congregations, by which means all the most edifying parts of the Old Testament
are Ordered to be read once a year, and the New Testament (except the
Revelations) thrice in the same time; And some select Chapters of the
Revelations are appointed on extraordinary occasions. There are indeed some
Chapters (about one tenth) of the Old Testament, left out of this Order: But
then it is to be observed, that those which are left out, are either
Genealogies, names of Persons and Places, Historical repetitions, or some
obscure and mystical Prophecies in Ezekiel, which are not so proper for an
ordinary Assembly (for which reasons, some part of the Revelations is also left
out) yet these are not excluded, though not particularly Commanded. The general
obligation on every Clergyman in his Ordination to read all the Canonical
Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, still allows him to read these, and
also obliges him to it when he shall perceive that it may be for the
edification of the people.

3. Besides this Order for the whole Scriptures, on every Lord's Day, and other
solemn occasions, there are appointed certain select Portions out of the
Epistles and Gospels to be read, which are adapted to the occasion; and contain
some great mystery of our Faith, or other weighty matter necessary to our
Edification.

4. For the more solemnity of these readings; Our Church joins with each of
them Praises, Thanksgivings or Confessions, according to what we find practiced
in the Holy Scripture.

5. That the people may benefit, and be Edified by hearing the word of God, a
plain Authentic and most excellent Translation is provided by public
Authority, in which the Scriptures are read to the People. This was the first
care of our Church in the Reformation, and the generality of Dissenters are
forced to be beholden to it for the word of Life, and draw all the knowledge
that they have from the Fountains which our Bishops opened for them, by
Translating the word of God, and putting it into a Language they understand.

6. It Is ordered in our Church that the Ministers shall explain some part of
the Holy Scriptures every Lord's Day, and exhort their Congregations in a Sermon.

7. To inculcate the great Mysteries of our Faith the better, our Church has
appointed certain solemn times, wherein once in the year they are obliged to
explain, and inculcate every great Mystery of our Faith, and most material
passages of the Gospel. Such are the Conception, Birth, Passion, Resurrection
and Ascension of Our Savior.

Lastly, There is provided a Form of Sound Words in a short and plain
Catechism; in which are contained the first principles of the Oracles of God;
this is adapted, as it ought to be, to the capacity of Children, and is indeed
sincere Milk, without School Notions, or hard words. And all the six principles
which the Apostle mentions, Heb. vi.1, 2. are briefly explained in it, and yet
largely enough to make those that attend to it wise to Salvation. The Teaching
and Explaining these Fundamentals, is a part of our Public Instruction, and
injoined as a constant Duty on Ministers and People in our solemn Worship. The
Minister in each Parish being required diligently upon Sundays and Holy Days --
openly in the Church to instruct and examine so many Children of his Parish
sent unto him, as he shall think convenient, in some part of the Catechism, and
the people are obliged to come at the time appointed, and obediently to hear.

And by our Twelfth Canon, for the better grounding of the people in the
principles of Christian Religion, it is ordained, That the heads of the
Catechism being divided into so many parts as there are Sundays in the year,
shall be explained to the people in every Parish Church.

This is the care our Church has taken to Teach the People in their Public
Assemblies, and the method is so effectual, that it is scarce conceivable how
any one who duly conforms to these Orders should be ignorant of any thing that
concerns his Soul.

And by the blessing of God, the effect is such that we may affirm without
Vanity or Partiality, that our Clergy, and Laity, especially where we can
prevail with them to conform to the Rules of our Church, are generally much
more knowing, modest, governable, devout and charitable, then perhaps may be
found in any other Church, of which our late contests with the Papists, and
behavior under their Government, and since the present Revolution, are Evident
proofs.

Sect. 3. The Practice of the Dissenters in Hearing, and Reading the Word.
I Come now to consider with you my Friends who dissent from us, how this great
Duty of Teaching the people the Law of God is performed in your Assemblies, and
to compare your practice in this point with the Scripture Rules and Examples.
Which I shall do with the same Candor and Integrity that I have hitherto
endeavored to observe.

I. And here I must needs say that your Teachers seem to have had very little
Regard, either to Scripture Rules or Examples in framing this part of your
Worship, having laid aside all those methods of instruction that the Scriptures
recommend to us, except it be that of Exposition and Exhortation: Which among
you is called Preaching, in so much, that though a Man frequent your Meetings all
his Life, yet he has no security, or hardly possibility of learning from your
public Teachings all the great Mysteries of his Religion, or the necessary
principles of his Faith.

1. For first, Your Preachers are entirely left to their choice what place of
Scripture they will explain, or what Subject they will handle: And hence it
happens that hardly any one Man in his life ever goes through the necessary
Articles of Faith, or of practice, in his Public Sermons, and for the truth of
this I appeal to your selves.

2. You have no summary of Principles injoined to be either Read or Taught in
your Public Assemblies. A Catechism you have, but neither your Directory nor
Practice make it any part of your Lords-day-Service; And besides your Catechism
is such, that it no ways answers the design of a Form of sound Words. I have
already showed that such a Form should contain only the first and necessary
principles of the Oracles of God, in such Words and Methods as may make it
easily apprehended and retained by the weak and unlearned, which make up the
bulk of the people. But your Catechism is full of Hard Words, School Terms, and
Abstruse Notions, no wise necessary to be known by the generality of
Christians, or possible to be understood by Children, or unlearned Persons, for
whose Edification principally a Catechism ought to be contrived. Besides all
this, it is so long and intricate, even the Shorter that not one child in ten
ever gets it by heart, nor one in five hundred retains it, as I have found by
experience, and desire that you would judge of this matter as you find upon
trial. Lastly, After all, it is imperfect of some of the principles of the
Apostles Catechism, being quite left out of it, I mean laying on of hands;
Joined with Baptism, Heb. vi.2. a great defect sure in a Catechism to leave out
a Fundamental of Christianity.

II. But the most sad and deplorable defect of your performance of this Duty,
is your casting out the reading of the Word of God, from most of your Public
Assemblies, directly contrary to God's Institution and Ordinance for the
Instruction of his Church; insomuch that in many of your Meetings, setting
aside a verse or two for a Text, or Quotation at the discretion of the Teacher,
the voice of God is never publicly heard amongst them. This is matter of fact,
and undeniable; And in all the Meetings in the North of Ireland in a whole
year, perhaps there is not so much Scripture read, as in one day in our Church,
by the strictest enquiry which I could make. One would think this alone were
sufficient to show the people where the Worship of God is to be found in its
Purity, and to prove our Assemblies to be the True Church of God, against all
that come in competition with us; whereof some hide the Word of God in a
strange Language, and others banish it out of their Meetings. It being in our
Congregations only, that the voice of God is heard speaking to his People,
without cover or gloss. Sure it is a sad thing that a Man may go to most
Meetings many years, and never hear one entire Chapter read in them. Now this
omission is the more inexcusable in you, and must render you manifestly
self-condemned.

1. First, Because you so vehemently press the necessity of Preaching, and
quote the Holy Scriptures to prove it. In which, reading the Law (as is showed
before) is termed Preaching, Act, xv.21. but interpreting the Scriptures
applying them, or exhorting the Congregation from them in a fixed Christian
Auditory (which you count Preaching) is never called so in the whole New
Testament. Therefore by laying aside the reading the Scriptures in your public
Assemblies, you have entirely cast aside Preaching, in the proper
Scripture-sense of it. But,

2. This must render you self-condemned, because you pretend to honor the Holy
Scriptures above other Christians: Your Mouths, Commendably and with just
Reason, are continually full of the praises of the Holy Bible; you own it, with
the generality of the Reformed Churches, for the only sufficient Rule of Faith
you appeal to it, and seem to found your selves on it: And yet your not
allowing the Reading of it a constant place in your Religious Assemblies, makes
it seem as if you had a very low Opinion of it in your hearts. If you really
value it as you profess, why do you banish the Reading of it from your public
Worship, to make room for Discourses, Lectures, and Sermons of your own
Teachers? Remember of whom it is said, ( Mark vii.6.) This People honors me
with their Lips, but their Heart is far from me. While you thus justle the Word
of God out of your Solemn Meetings, to make room for your own Sermons, I
beseech you to consider whether this be not a laying aside the Commandments of
God for Men's Inventions; unless you will call your Sermons (as some Quakers are
said to do) as much the Word of God as the Bible.

III. I look on this as so Material a Point, and conceive the Honor of the
Holy Scriptures and the Salvation of Christians to be so deeply concerned in
it, that I think my self obliged to Examine the Pretenses I have found to
justify it: Though I confess they seem to me so weak, that I am afraid I shall
be almost suspected by indifferent persons not to do Justice in representing
them: For it is unaccountable that any body should urge so slight Reasons for
so considerable an Omission: And yet these are all I have ever met with, or
heard from you.

The first Reason I have heard urged, is, That the people are obliged to read
the Scriptures at home, and being thus acquainted with them, the Reading of
them is not necessary in their public Meetings. But to this I Answer.

1. That we see from what has been said; That the Reading of the Holy
Scriptures is by God's Appointment a part of his solemn public Worship;
therefore to leave it out in our Assemblies, on any pretense whatsoever, is to
lay aside his Command, and so to corrupt and dismember his Worship.

2. The private performance of a Duty ought by no means to interfere with, or
hinder the public. We must pray to God, praise him, and instruct our Families
in private; and yet God forbid that our doing these privately, should banish
the use of them from our Public Assemblies; or that any one should think
himself excused from Attending on the Public Performance of them, on account
of his Private Diligence in them: And the same Rule holds for Reading the Holy
Scriptures.

3. God tells the Children of Israel, Deuteronomy. vi.6. That these Words which I
command thee this day, shall be in thine heart, and thou shall teach them
diligently to thy Children, and shall talk of them when thou sit in thine
house, and when thou walk by the way, and when thou lie down, and when
thou risest up -- and thou shall write them on the posts of thy house. Here is
as much private diligence in Reading and Teaching the Law, required of the
Israelites, as any Christian can pretend to exercise; and yet all this care to
preserve the knowledge of the Law by private study and exercise, did not make
the Reading it in their Synagogues unnecessary, or prevent God from requiring
them to Use it as part of his public Worship, Deuteronomy. xxxi.11. And therefore all
your diligence in reading the Scriptures privately, or Your Teachers exhorting
and requiring You to do it, ought not to warrant Their or Your dispensing with
the Command of God, that appoints the Reading his Word as part of his public
Service. But,

4. When people are left to themselves in private, they may either do or not do
a thing, as they please: And we are assured that there are many who come to
Church, and hear the Word of God read there, that neither can, nor ever would
be at the pains to read it in private. It is therefore a great Temptation to
the people to be negligent, and a great want of Care in a Church, to leave so
material a thing as the Reading of the Word of God, to private diligence. We
find by experience, that where no public effectual care is taken to inform the
generality of Men, the Knowledge of God's Word sensibly decays, and is in a
fair way to be lost. The Papists read the Scriptures in a Language that the
people do not understand, and we see into what gross ignorance they are fallen
by this means. Those of Your Persuasion (generally speaking) do not read them
at all in your Meetings, and the consequence of this is, That many of your
common people are strangers to the very History of the Bible, and the First
Principles of Christianity; as I have found on Trial, to my great trouble and
astonishment. This pretense therefore of Peoples Reading the Holy Scriptures in
private, will by no means justify you, for breaking God's Command, in omitting
the public Reading them, as a part of God's Service, in the Congregations.

The Second Pretense that I have met with for this Omission, is, That since the
penning of the Scriptures, and settling of the Church by the Apostles, the case
is much altered with Christians; That Printing was not then known, and
consequently Copies of the Bible were few, and hard to come by: Few could then
read them if they had them, and therefore (say some) Reading the Scriptures in
the Assemblies was then absolutely necessary, otherwise the generality must
have been strangers to them: But now Copies of the Bible by means of Printing,
are become common, and easy to be had, and most Families have some in them
that can read; And therefore the public Reading them is not now necessary.

1. The plain Answer to this is, First, That the Reading the Scriptures
publicly is an Institution of God: Therefore to lay it aside on the account of
the Invention of Printing, is in effect to say, That Men have found out a
better way to propagate the Knowledge of God's Word, than He instituted; and
plainly to lay aside his Command, for Men's own Inventions.

2. God has promised that there shall be always Religious Assemblies, and has
commanded his Word to be read in them, which is a certain means to preserve the
Knowledge thereof, as long as there is a Church; but he has no where promised
the constant commonness of Bibles, nor ability to people to read them at home.
To omit therefore the Institution of God for Teaching his Word, and to rely on
peoples procuring and reading Copies of the Bible privately, is to leave God's
way, and presumptuously depend on that which has no Promise annexed to it.

3. How easy soever we may imagine the obtaining Copies of the Bible, and
notwithstanding the number of those that can read, there are still many
Families, even amongst Protestants, that can neither compass a Bible, or get
any to read it, if they had one; and therefore this Expedient is no ways
sufficient to supply the Design of God's Institution, in commanding it to be
read publicly.

4. Let us suppose Bibles to be as common as we can desire, and that every one
can read them, yet who will secure us that they will do it? People whilst the
first Fervor of a Reformation is on them, may perhaps be diligent so long as
the Scripture is a Novelty to them, or Zeal for a party inspirits them; but
when this wears off, as it generally does in a little time, we see by
experience that their care of Reading and Meditating in the Scriptures decays
with it; and there are at this day too many of all Parties that neither read
themselves, nor hear one Chapter read in a whole Year, except at Church. And
therefore to omit the public Reading them, on presumption that the people will
do it themselves, since it is so easy for them to do it, is the ready way to
introduce an Universal Ignorance of God's Word, and reduce us again to Popery;
the most effectual Bar against which, is the Bible in our own Language.

5. People may be obliged to come to the public Congregations, and hear the
Word of God read, though they have no inclination to it, and when they neglect
they may be reproved or punished, but this is not practical when the Scriptures
are required only to be read in private Families. Experience shows us that
there is great difference between these two Methods in point of Efficacy. We
see in England and Wales, where public Reading was practiced, the people
generally embraced the Reformation, but in Ireland, where the same care was not
taken, they rejected it. Had God's Way been taken, and the Scriptures as
constantly read to the Native Irish, in a Language they understood, as it was
in England or Wales, there is little doubt but the Reformation had succeeded as
Universally here as it did there, but the want of this has kept them in
ignorance to this day, which may convince us how ineffectual all our
Contrivances are to enlighten Men, in respect of God's Institution. I am
persuaded that if ever the Native Irish be brought to the Knowledge of God's
Word, it must be by having it read to them publicly in a Language they
understand, and not by thrusting Bibles privately into their hands; of the
ineffectualness of which, we have had an Experiment of 150 Years.

6. But lastly, Instead of all other Arguments, None of us are ignorant, that
the Word of God cannot be presumed to have the same Efficacy when read
privately, as it has when read in the Assemblies of Christians, according to
God's appointment: Since he has given us a peculiar promise to be present in
such Assemblies. And there are no diligent Hearers of the Word Publicly read,
but are able from their own experience to testify, that they often find it to
have a different force and efficacy, when they hear it read, as a part of his
Ordinance, in the Public Assemblies, in which he has peculiarly promised his
presence, than when they read it in private by themselves.

The Third pretense I have found alleged for omitting the regular reading the
Bible in your Meetings, is, That it takes up too much time, and is a hindrance
to the more profitable Duty, of what you commonly call Preaching.

1. I entreat you to consider, That there is a time for every thing, and since
God has appointed reading his Word a time and room in our Public Assemblies,
who are we, that we should presume to throw it out? This surely is to set up
our selves against God, and to think that we are able to Order things better
for the Edification of his Church then he has done. Surely we ought rather to
take care so to dispose our Sermons, that they may not interfere with any other
Institution of God: But, that whatever time we allow them, there may remain
sufficient for reading God's Holy Word; Which I have proved is in Scripture
Language Preaching; And therefore to justle this out to make our own discourses
longer, is plainly to prefer our way of Preaching to God's. If there were a
necessity that one or the other must be omitted, Modesty ought to Teach us to
omit our own Words rather then God's.

2. Suppose that upon some Extraordinary Occasion it may be Lawful to omit
Reading God's Word in our Assemblies, that we may have the more time to manage
a discourse for the Instruction of the People, yet it can never be justifiable
to make this a common practice; which is to put a manifest Contempt on the Word
of God.

A Fourth Pretense against reading the Scriptures publicly in a Regular
Method, is, That they are hard to be understood, or applied, and therefore only
so much of them ought to be read at a time as the Minister may explain and
apply to his Auditory. And that one Verse thus Applied, is better than many
Chapters read without such Application.

1. It is to be considered, First, That it is against the general opinion of
the Reformed Churches, who universally teach that the Scriptures are plain, in
all things necessary to Salvation. And therefore there is not that universal
necessity of an explanation of every place of Scripture that is to be read, as
is pretended.

2. The Holy Scriptures, when heard with Humility and Attention, apply
themselves better then any Man can do it. The Words of them are the Words of
God, and they have a plainness, force and spirit in them, which no Humane
Eloquence can improve, and therefore it is a great affront to them to say that
they have little efficacy except a Minister apply them.

3. Suppose one verse well applied to be better than many Chapters (for which
there is no color) yet this would not justify the omission of reading them
publicly; for no Application can be so well made of them whilst people are not
thoroughly acquainted with them. It ought therefore to be our first care to
read them to the People often and solemnly, that they may be acquainted with
the whole Body of them, and then one word of Application may do more good then
many Sermons to People not so prepared with the general knowledge of them.

The literal knowledge of the will of God must always go before the saving, and
is the best Introduction to it. Now the reading the Law in the ears of the
people is the means appointed by God to teach them that literal knowledge; and
therefore while your Teachers have laid aside this means of God's Appointment,
they have in a great measure debarred people of the Spiritual and Saving
knowledge of his Will.

4. Fourthly, Reading a verse or two, and trusting to the Ministers
Application, without the peoples being acquainted with the whole body of the
Scriptures, does put Christians too much in the power of their Teachers, and
makes them liable to be seduced by them. This is the very Artifice whereby the
Romish Priests keep their people in ignorance; and your Teachers using the same
Method (while it is manifest that so great a part of their people either do
not, or cannot, read them at home) seems too like a design on their Hearers,
and tempts the World to suspect that they are afraid of the naked simplicity
of the Scriptures, since they dare not trust their people with Hearing them
Publicly read, except they add their own glosses to them.

The Fifth Pretense that I have met with for laying aside the public reading
the Word of God, is, That the dead Letter (as some call it) is a dull formal
thing, without Spirit or Life, where it is not applied to the Souls of Men, by
the Spirit of God speaking in his Ministers, and that without such Assistance
the Scriptures have little Efficacy on the Heart.

I hope there are few of any Communion will own this pretense, since it is so
horrid a Reflection, and affront on the Word of God. I will however in answer
to it offer these following Considerations.

1. That the Holy Scriptures give a Character of themselves very different from
this. They represent the Word of God as the Sword of the Spirit, as quick and
powerful, as able to make a Man wise to Salvation, as giving wisdom to the
simple, as Converting the Soul, with many other Expressions to denote the
Efficacy thereof on the hearts of Men; and therefore to reflect on the Word,
as dull and formal, as a mere dead Letter that cannot engage the attention of
the Hearers, or reach their Hearts, is too near Blasphemy.

2. We are certain that God speaks to us immediately by his Holy Spirit in his
Word: And where the Spirit of God is, there is Power. But when Men speak their
own Words, or pretend to apply the Words or Passages of Scripture, though they
seem to do it with the greatest Zeal and Learning, yet they may be mistaken,
nay, they may decieve us: And therefore wholly to lay aside the immediate
dictates of the Holy Ghost recorded in the Scriptures for any pretended
Explication or Application, made by Men, is manifestly to exchange God's
undoubted Words and Command for what may be a mere Humane Invention.

3. It Is to be considered, that the people have always been apt to grow weary
of the Service of God in the way of his own appointment, and complain of it, as
dull and tedious, so Mal. i.13. Ye said also what a weariness is it, and ye
snuffed at it. And the reason is because the way of God's appointing is always
more Spiritual, in respect of that which is of Man's own Invention, and
therefore it cannot be so easy or agreeable to the Carnal minds of Men.

4. It ought therefore to be considered by you, when people complain of being
dull, and unaffected by mere Hearing the Word of God read, whether this do not
truly proceed from a Carnal and Wicked Heart estranged from the Spirit of God,
and whether the reason that Sermons please and affect more then a Chapter out
of the Bible be not the novelty and outward Ornaments of them, rather than the
Spiritualness of the discourse. We are sure St. Paul supposes such as are not
affected with the Words of God, to be mere Natural, or Carnal Men, 1 Cor.
ii.13. where having taken Notice of speaking, Not in Words which Man's Wisdom
Teaches, but which the Holy Ghost Teaches, he adds, but the Natural Man
receives not the things of the Spirit of God: For they are foolishness to him,
neither can he know them, for they are spiritually discerned. From whence it
clearly follows, that the reason why Men do not understand or receive the
things of God delivered to them in the Words of Scripture, dictated by the Holy
Ghost, is, because they are mere Natural Men, and want the Spirit of God.
Whoever therefore is more affected, or delights more in a Sermon then in a
Chapter of the Bible, has reason to look into his Heart, and examine himself
whether he have the Spirit of God. Those mentioned in Scripture that had that
Spirit delighted in the Law of God: It was the joy of their Hearts; they
preferred it to all things, they meditate in it Day and Night: And were so far
from turning it out of their Public Assemblies, that the Hearing it read was a
great part of their Worship. Whoever therefore lays aside this practice, have
reason to suspect that they want that Temper and Spirit with which those Holy
Men were inspired; and notwithstanding all their pretenses to a more then
ordinary Spiritualness and Reformation, are little advanced above the Natural
Men that neither receive or relish the things of God, at least not as they
ought.

I find it alleged as a Sixth pretense for not Reading the Word of God in your
Meetings, That a Child may read them, and perform this Duty; and then what need
it take up the Ministers time.

To which there needs no other answer then that the Service of God is not less
his, or the less to be valued because it is easy. On the contrary it is the more
sinful to neglect it, the more easy it is. Ministers are not set apart for
difficult things only, which others cannot perform; but they are to execute the
Office that God has imposed on them, whether it be easy or difficult. As for
Example. God has Commanded his Ministers to Baptize, In the Name of the Father,
etc. Now to pour on Water in this Form is no such difficult thing, but a Child,
or any else might perform it; Neither is there any greater difficulty in the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, as to the Essentials of it. Yet I suppose it
will be granted by all, that it belongs only to the Minister's Office to
perform these, and that they must not delegate them, or any part of them to
others, or omit them because they are easy; And that they have a quite
different Sacredness, Efficacy and Force, when performed by a Person Ordained
and Authorized to this purpose, then when performed by another; and the same
Rule holds in offering up our Prayers, and in Reading the Scriptures: A Man may
read them at home, a Child may read them in Church, but they have not the same
assurance of Efficacy, and a blessing, as when they come from the Mouth of a
Person set apart by God's Ordinance for this purpose.

I make no doubt but the Experience (as I have said) of most Christians, from
what they have felt in their own Hearts in Hearing the Word of God publicly
read, will attest the Truth of this. Now if you, my Friends, know and own this,
as I hope the generality of you do, you must see the unreasonableness of this
pretense. If any of you do not know it, you must give me leave to say that I
fear it is from ignorance, and not considering the Scriptures. And it is your
Teachers Duty to inform you better. Reading the Scripture being allowed by
their Directory to be a part of God's Public Worship. We have this Rule there
in express words, That it is requisite, that all the Canonical Books be read
over in order, that the people may be better acquainted with the whole Body of
Scriptures. Now if you can show but one Meeting in the last Age, in which this
has been duly performed, we will not accuse you so generally of violating God's
Command in this point; but if there be not one such Meeting, you ought to
consider how you will excuse your selves before God. And I think it necessary
here to observe to you how insignificant general Rules are without descending
to a particular Determination of Circumstances. Here we have in your Dir^ctory
a general Rule (such as it is) for Reading the Scripture, but for want of being
particular, as the Calender in our Common Prayer Book is, I question if it yet
was ever once observed, or indeed that it is Practical to observe it. And it is
so almost in every other general Rule, and therefore to leave the Service of
God to be Ordered by such general Rules only, is in effect to Teach people to
neglect it.

V. These are all the Reasons that I can possibly think of, or have heard urged
for Your practice in this point. I will not say but others may be pretended,
but I must profess that I do not remember to have met with them; if I had, I
would have given them a due consideration: I am persuaded that they cannot be
of greater force than those I have examined. And that they can never excuse You
in this matter, from manifest breach of God's Command, in preferring Men's
Inventions to his Institutions.

After all, I must profess to You, That I look on all these to be only
Pretenses; and that the true Reason of Men's Negligence in this Duty, is given
us, 2 Timothy iv.3. For the time will come, (says the Apostle) when they will not
endure sound Doctrine; but after their own Lusts shall they heap up to
themselves Teachers, having itching Ears. An itching Ear here, can signify
nothing so properly, as an Ear that loves Novelty and Variety: Because
therefore our Church gives the people little that is New, in her Prayers, or
Reading the Scriptures, but retains a Form of sound Words in the one, and the
plain Word of God in the other; Hence it is that some people cannot endure our
Service, but heap up to themselves Teachers, that instead of the Praises,
Prayers and Sermons of God's immediate Appointment, will gratify them every
Meeting with a New Prayer, without troubling them with such Prayers or Sermons
as they think old, which are incomparably better, only the itching Ears of the
People, as the Apostle foretold, are pleased with the Novelty and Variety of
the one, and disgust the Repetition of the other, as the Israelites did that of
Angels Food, Psa. lxxviii.25 Number. xxi.5. and xi.6

It is the Duty of all Ministers, and the business of the truly Conscientious
to check and curb this Humor in the People; and notwithstanding all
Discouragements, the Ministers of Our Church, instead of complying with them,
have constantly reproved them for their Negligence and Levity, where they found
them guilty. But as Aaron, to please the Israelites, made the Golden Calf, so
some Ministers (though contrary to their own Principles) have changed God's
Institution to please their people; and lest out the constant and regular
Reading of God's Word, because their people grew weary of it. But let all Men
judge who behave themselves most like the Ministers of Christ; We, who keep to
the Reading God's Word, according to His own Institution, whether the people
will hear or forbear, or They that comply with them, and lay aside God's
Command to oblige and gain them.

CHAP. IV. Of Bodily Worship.
Sect. 1. What the Holy Scriptures prescribe concerning it.
I. THe Fourth part of the Public Worship of God, or Design of Religious
Assemblies, is Visible or Bodily Adoration; such amongst us are Uncovering the
Head, Bowing, Kneeling, and other Outward Signs of Reverence and Submission; by
which we openly acknowledge the Mercy, the Justice, and Power of God, and
express the inward sense we have of these Attributes.

In treating of this Head, I will keep my self to the same Method, as in the
former, and consider, First, The Rules and Examples that the Scriptures afford
us for the performance of this Duty. Secondly, Compare the Practice of Our
Church with them. Thirdly, Examine the Dissenters Practice, and the Reasons
they allege for it.

1. As to the first of these we find a Positive Command of God for Bodily
Worship in Public, Psalm. xcv.6. O come let us Worship and bow down, let us
kneel before the Lord our Maker. The second Verse of this Psalm plainly shows
us that this is meant of Public Worship: Let us come before his presence with
Thanksgiving. And that this bowing or kneeling is to be interpreted, literally,
not figuratively, appears from the same Verses, where Singing, Thanksgiving and
Psalms, are all literally to be understood; and there is no more reason for
understanding bowing and kneeling in a figurative sense, than the other.

II. The same Bodily Worship is required by the Second Commandment, which
forbids us to bow down to a graven Image, by which words we are commanded to
bow down to God; for it is confessed by all, and laid down as a Rule by the
Assembly's larger Catechism, That the Negative Commandments include in them the
contrary Positive; that is to say, When a Commandment forbids us any thing, it
requires us to perform the Duty contrary to what is forbidden. As for Example:
When the first Commandment forbids us to have any other Gods before the Lord,
it requires us to own and worship Him for our only God; and after the same
manner all other Commands are to be interpreted. By which Rule, when the Second
Commandment, Exodus xx.5. forbids us in these words, Thou shall not bow down to
them, nor serve them, it requires us to practice the contrary Duties in our
Addresses to God. To bow down to Him and serve Him, that is, to worship Him
both with the worship of our Bodies and Minds: Therefore as he that either bows
or kneels, or uses any posture of Reverence to a graven Image, breaks the
second Commandment; so does he who on occasion of Public Worship either
refuses or neglects to use some such posture to God. It being a Contempt of
God, and contrary to His Commands, to pray to Him, for instance, without some
posture of Adoration to Him, when we can do it, as well as it is a sin to kneel
to an Image, without praying to it, which the Papists pretend to do; the one is
Idolatry, and the other Sacrilege: For the Reason why we are not to bow down
to an Idol, is, Because it is an Act of Worship due to God. And whether we give
what is due to Him to an Image, or refuse to pay it to Himself, we are equally
Robbers of God, we deny him his Honor, and are guilty of Sacrilege.

I wish all concerned may seriously consider, and amend their practice in this
particular.

III. But the practice of Holy Men, and of the Church of God in Scripture, are
the best Interpreters of God's Commands; and from them we may learn what he
requires or approves in his Worship. Now through the whole Old Testament, we
shall never find any one sitting at his Devotions: But on all occasions of
Worship, especially in Public Assemblies, the people of God stood, kneeled,
bowed, or prostrated themselves. It Is said indeed, 2 Samuel vii.8. That King
David then went and sat before the Lord: But here the Original Word is capable
of another signification, and may as well be translated, that he remained,
stayed, or abode before the Lord; and accordingly it is thus translated in
other places of Scripture, particularly Genesis xxii.5. and xxiv.55. and xxix.19.
1 Kings xii.2. This place therefore is no Exception against that practice which
is so evident through the whole Old Testament, that Holy Men worshipped God with
their Bodies as well as with their Minds.

IV. We shall find the same practiced by our Savior and his Apostles in the
New T. Our Savior undoubtedly is the Best Example we can propose to our selves
for the worship of God, and we ought to imitate what he did and approved. Now
if we consider the worship he offered to his Father, we shall find him
addressing himself to him with bowing the Body, with Kneeling and Prostration,
as well as with strong Cries and Tears; so Mat. xxvi.39. And he went a little
further, and fell on his Face, and prayed, O my Father, etc. and Luke xxii.41.
He kneeled down and prayed. And as he paid this Bodily Worship to God, so he
accepted the same from Men when he was on Earth: Thus the Wise Men worshipped
him in his Cradle, Mat. ii.11. When they saw the young Child and his Mother
Mary, they fell down, etc. Thus they that desired to be Cured by him, addressed
themselves to him, Mark v.22. When he saw him, he fell at his Feet, and
besought, etc. And after the same manner those who were Cured by him returned
him Thanks, Luke xvii.16. Thus his beloved Mary came into his presence, John
xi.32. And Matthew. xxviii.9. They held him by the Feet and worshipped him. Our
Savior looked on this Bodily Worship to be so indispensibly his due, that he
accepted of it from the very Devils, and they durst not forbear to pay it to
him, Mark iii.11. And unclean spirits, when they saw him, fell down before him,
and cried, Thou art the Son of God. And thus the very Heathen, as well as his
Disciples, approached him, even whilst he was in his state of Humiliation.

And that we may not be tempted to think, that our Savior admitted this Bodily
Worship to be paid him only whilst he was Bodily present, we may observe St.
Stephen presents his Prayer with the same posture, Acts, vii.60. He kneeled
down and cried with a loud voice, Lord lay not this sin to their charge.

V. The Scriptures represent to us the First Christians thus glorifying God
with their Bodies, (as St. Paul expressly commands us 1 Cor. vi.20) in the
Public Assemblies, as we may learn from 1 Cor. xiv.23. where the Apostle
speaking of a Heathen coming into the Assembly of Christians, and being
convinced, adds, and so falling down on his face he will Worship God. If it
had not been the custom for Christians to do thus, it would never have been
expected from a Heathen, or reckoned an Argument of his Conviction. If the
Church Triumphant in Heaven may be allowed a fit Pattern to us of what is
decent in the Worship of God, we find them paying this Bodily Worship to God,
Rev. vii.11. And all the Angels stood about the Throne, and about the Elders,
and about the Beasts, and fell on their faces before the Throne, and Worshipped
God, so Chap. iv.10. and Chap. xix.4. And the same we find practiced by the
Church on Earth, Acts xxi 5. where St. Paul, and the Church of Tire kneeled
down on the Shore and prayed. After the same manner he took his leave of the
Elders of Ephesus, Act. xx.36. He kneeled down and prayed with them all. So
constantly are Bodily Worship and Prayer joined together, that bowing the knee,
sometimes signifies, Prayer, Ephesians. iii.14. For this cause I bow my knees unto
the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

VI. The Scriptures represent this Bodily Worship as the most proper external
Act of Adoration: If we look into the Scriptures we shall not find Praying,
Praising, Reading the Scriptures, or Administering the Sacraments, termed
Worship; they are indeed Duties which we are obliged to perform to the Honor
of God, but not immediate direct Acts of Worship, properly so called: For
Worship is properly the subjection of our minds to God; and that is a proper
Act of External Worship, which directly signifies this subjection or submission
of our minds; But Prayer signifies our desires of good things from God, and
only indirectly our subjection to him; Praises immediately signify the sense we
have of God's Excellencies, and only by consequence our submission; Reading the
Scriptures is a means of Instruction, and tends to bring us to submit to God,
but does not directly express it; And the Sacraments primarily signify God's
grace to us rather then our submission to Him. All these may in a large sense,
upon very good grounds, be looked upon as parts of Worship, because they do
imply such submission; but bending or bowing the Body is that which is properly
in Scripture called Worship, as signifying immediately and naturally the
bending and submission of our Souls, and nothing else.

In the Old Testament the words rendered Worship* signify properly and
originally to bow down or prostrate the Body. This is the proper signification
of (...) and of (...) the latter of which in the Second Commandment is rendered
to bow down, and very often when the Original has they bowed down themselves,
the Translators render it they Worshipped. So Psalm. xcv.5. and Jer. i.16. And
Worshipped the work of their own hands. In the Original it is They bowed
themselves down to the work, etc. Genesis xxiv.52. He worshipped the Lord bowing
himself to the Earth. The Original has no more but He bowed himself to the
Earth to the Lord, so Psalm. xcv.5. And the same holds generally through the
whole Old Testament, from whence it follows that in the opinion of our
Translators, to bow ones self to the Earth, is that proper Act which they call
Worship. And hence the whole Worship of God is signified by bowing before him,
Micah vi.6. Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and bow my self before the
High God? that is, How shall I worship him acceptably?

As to the New Testament, the Word generally there rendered Worship, properly
signifies a Bodily Action (...) is Originally to pay Homage by a kiss, as we
now kiss the King's Hand, which usually was done kneeling; And hence Kneeling
and Worshipping signify the same thing in the New Testament, and the one is put
for the other. Thus Matt. viii.2. There came a Leper and worshipped him. The
same is said ( Mark i.40.) to come beseeching him and kneeling to him. Of the
Canaanitish Woman it is said ( Matt. xv.25.) That She came and worshipped him.
And Mark says (Chap. vii.25.) She came and fell at his feet. Luke says of the
Man among the Tombs, that he fell down before him (Chap. viii.28.) Mark, that
He worshipped him, (Chap. v.6.) Of Jairus, Mark and Luke say, that He fell down
at his feet. Matthew, that He worshipped him. Luke viii.40. Mark v.22. Math.
ix.18. So promiscuously do the Evangelists use the words kneeling, or falling
down, and worshipping, to signify the same thing. Whence we may learn that when
any is said to Worship Christ visibly, by it is meant they kneeled to him. And
when we are Commanded to Worship God in the Congregation, the meaning is, that
we are required to express the submission of our minds by bowing our selves, or
kneeling unto him. Hence the very Soldiers, that in derision bowed their knees
to Christ, are said to Worship him, Mark xv.19. And St. John, Rev. xxii.8. when
he would Worship the Angel, fell before his feet, to which the Angel replied,
See thou do it not -- Worship God: From which Text it clearly follows, that
falling down is an Act of Worship, and that we are Commanded by the Mouth of an
Angel to pay it to God.

VII. We find in Scripture some Act of this Bodily Worship accompanying every
Religious Performance. Thus Prayers are generally offered with kneeling, and
that so constantly (as is observed before) that to bow the knee, in
Scripture Language, is to pray. Thus Praises, Thanksgivings, and Confessions of
Faith, are offered standing, 1 King. viii.14. And the King turned his face
about, and blessed all the Congregation of Israel (and all the Congregation of
Israel stood) and he said, Blessed be the Lord, etc. the same posture is
observed, Ver. 55. 2 Chronicles. xx.19. And the Levites -- stood up to praise the
Lord God of Israel with a loud voice, 2 Chronicles. xxix.26. Neh. x.40. And this was
not a voluntary act, but imposed on the people, as appears from Neh. ix.5. Then
the Levites -- said, Stand up and bless the Lord your God, etc. In conformity
to which, the Saints and Angels in Heaven are represented to us thus praising
God, Rev. vii.9. They stood before the Throne, and before the Lamb -- and cried
with a loud Voice, saying, Salvation, etc. At Reading the holy Scriptures, both
Reader and People used the same posture, as appears from Neh. viii.4, 5. And
Ezra the Scribe stood on a Pulpit of Wood -- And Ezra opened the Book, and all
the People stood up. And Chap. ix.3. And they stood up in their place, and read
in the Book: Which our Savior likewise observed, Luke iv.16.

Lastly, They offered their Sacrifices with Bodily Adoration, 2 Chronicles. xxix.27.
And when the Burnt Offerings began, the Song of the Lord began also -- And all
the Congregation worshipped, and the Singers sang, and the Trumpets sounded; and
all this continued until the Burnt Offering was finished. The word, as was
observed, here rendered Worshipped, signifies literally they bowed themselves
down, and the meaning is, They continued prostrate, or kneeling, whilst the
Burnt Offering was offered. Thus in every Religious Performance, the Scripture
has taken particular notice and Recorded to us, with what Acts of Bodily
Worship it was offered up unto God.

Sect. 2. The Practice of Our Church in Bodily Worship.
LEt us in next place compare our own Practice with this Representation, and
see how we perform this part of Visible Worship in our Church.

I. First then, when we come into the Public Assemblies, we believe our selves
to come into Christ's presence; because he has promised Mat. xviii.21. Where two
or three are gathered together in My Name, there am I in the midst of them: And
therefore in Obedience to the Commands of God in Scripture, It Is our Custom to
lift up our hearts to Him in Prayer, and bow our Bodies before Him: This bowing
our Bodies when we come into the Assembly of Christians met together in Christ's
Name, and for his Service; which though it be not enjoined by any Constitution of
our Church, is generally practiced by good people, as very decent in it self,
and edifying to others. Our bowing our Bodies therefore at our coming into a
Christian Assembly for Worship, is only to pay that Bodily Worship to God that
He requires from us when we come into his peculiar presence, which presence He
has promised in such Assemblies. Some indeed are so weak as to term our thus
worshipping God, a bowing to the Altar: whereas our Church expressly declaring
against any Adoration to be paid to the Consecrated Bread and Wine, does much
deelare against doing it to the Altar.

II. Uncovering the Head is a Mark of Respect among us; and therefore we
continue Uncovered whilst the Assembly lasts; that is, whilst we are in Christ's
presence. The custom of the Eastern Church was to Uncover their Feet in the
presence of God; so Moses and Joshua were commanded to do; (to which Solomon
alludes, Eccles. v.1.) This was easily practiced with them, because they wore
nothing on their Feet but loose Shoes and Sandals, which were readily slipped
off; And this continued till our Savior's time, as appears by their washing
their Feet when they came into Houses, Luke vii.44. Uncovering the Head is the
same common mark of respect with us now, as uncovering the Feet was with them
in their time; and this uncovering the Feet being neither practicable with us,
nor any note of respect among us, but rather the contrary, Our Church has
required us instead of it, to uncover our Heads, Can. vii.

For the justification of this practice, give me leave to digress so far as to
explain one passage in the New Testament, which seems to require that a Man
should have his Head uncovered in the presence of God, not as a note of
respect, but of Privilege, 1 Cor. xi.7. For a Man indeed ought not to cover
his Head, forasmuch as he is the Image and Glory of God; but the Woman is the
Glory of the Man. Which passage does not primarily relate to the covering the
Head, but the Face, by a Vail, according to the Custom of the Eastern
Countries: and this covering the face, was a note of respect, as the contrary
was a note of Privilege: So we find that when Rebecca was to appear before her
Husband ( Genesis xxiv.65.) She took a Vail and covered her self. So ( Exodus
iii.6.) Moses hid his face, for he was afraid to look upon God; and Elijah
wrapped his face in his Mantle when he went out to meet God, 1 Kings xix.13. On
the same Account the Seraphins cover their faces with their Wings, Is. vi.2.
It Is therefore a peculiar Privilege and favor to be allowed to appear before
God uncovered, and it is reckoned as such, 2 Cor. iii.18. but we all with open
face beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, etc. Those that were out of
favor might not appear barefaced before their Prince, but with their Heads
covered, as Haman was when the King signified his displeasure against him.
Ester vii.8. Now for the understanding of the before cited place, we must
consider that Man being the Image and Glory of God, is allowed to take this
Confidence before God, which is denied to Women: For since God was pleased to
make Man his Image and Glory, it is not fit that this his glory should be
covered before him: but on the other hand, it is fit that Man's glory, which is
Woman, should be covered before God. This I conceive is the full meaning of
this place, and has no relation to the manner of uncovering the of Head in use
with us now; which is only a mark of civil respect, and that peculiar to Men,
and not to Women. But however being an honor paid to Men, there is no reason
why it should not be paid to God: On the contrary it seems to be required by
the Apostles general Injunction, Let all things be done decently. And it is one
of the Articles of our Church, That the Church has power to order Rites and
Ceremonies; that is, to determine what particular things come under the
Apostles general word of Decency.

3. We stand up at our Praisings, Thanksgivings, and Confessions of Faith, in
Conformity to the Examples of Holy Scripture.

4. At our Confessions of Sin, and at our Prayers, we present our selves before
God on our knees, by order of our Church, according to the Example of our
Savior, and the Church of God.

III. We Celebrate the Holy Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ in a
Worshipping posture. I know that many except against this. It would engage me in
a longer discourse to examine it fully; perhaps God may hereafter give me an
Opportunity to discuss it at large, at present I shall only hint at the
Scripture-Grounds we have for it, by the following deduction.

1. The Altar was of Old the Lord's Table, The Author's Intention is not to
assert that the Scriptures require Kneeling at the Lord's Supper, but to show
that it is not contrary to the Institution of Christ, or Practice of the
Apostles, who compare our receiving it with the Jews partaking of their Altar,
to which they approached with Adoration.
from whence his Attendants were fed, Mal. i.7. Ye offer polluted Bread upon
mine Altar, and ye say, Wherein have we polluted thee? In that ye say, The
Table of the Lord is contemptible.

2. On this account the Israelites came to the Altar, and worshipped before it,
as being God's Table, on which the Sacrifice was presented, as his Meat, of
which they were permitted to partake: So 2 Chronicles. vi.12. And he stood before
the Altar of the Lord -- verse. 13. And kneeled down on his knees. And 1 Kings
viii.54. He arose from before the Altar, from kneeling on his knees. Nor can it
be said; That this kneeling of Solomon was only because he offered up a Prayer
at that time, and that therefore he was in a praying posture; for undoubtedly
it was the Duty of all that were present at any Sacrifice, to offer up prayers
to God with the Sacrifice: And accordingly we find it commanded 2 Kings
xviii^22. Ye shall worship before this Altar in Jerusalem; literally, Ye shall
bow down your selves.

3. The Communion Table is called the Lord's-Table, 1 Cor. x.21.

4. The Israelites partaking of the Altar is proposed as an Example for our
partaking of the Lord's Table, 1 Cor. x.16. The Cup of Blessing which we bless,
is it not the Communion of the Blood of Christ? The Bread which we break, is it
not the Communion of the Body of Christ -- verse. 18. Behold Israel after the
Flesh: Are not they which eat of the Sacrifices partakers of the Altar?

5. In allusion to this Religious Eating with Bodily Worship, it is Prophesied
of our Savior, Psalm. xxii.29. All they that be fat upon Earth (that is, the
favored and happy Servants of God here; called in verse. 26. The meek) shall
eat and Worship.

Since then the Scripture sets forth to us a Relious Eating at the Lords-Table
with Worship, and the Holy Communion is such an Eating at his Table, it follows
that the Scripture Warrants our Worshipping when we Eat.

2. We are Commanded in Scripture to receive the Holy Eucharist In remembrance
of Christ's death, and by it we show his death till he come. The same
Scriptures Command us to Worship our Savior: For he is the Lord, and Worship
thou him. Psalm. xlv.11. If ever then we are to Worship our Savior, it is
certainly when we come to him in the nearest approaches that we are capable of
in this World, and with the highest sense of Gratitude that our Souls can admit
of; to remember and adore him for the greatest Act of love that could be
extended toward us, even laying down his Life for us, and partake of the
benefits thereof by feeding on him. If it be not our duty to Worship him with
our Bodies, as well as our Minds, on this occasion, it is hard to say when we
are obliged to do it.

This consideration prevailed with the Protestant Church of Poland, to oblige
all their Members to receive kneeling or standing, in Opposition to the
Socinians, who refused to pay any Worship to our Savior; and therefore
Celebrated his Supper sitting. The Words of their General Synod are these. (
Corpus Confession. p. 236.) Quod attinet ad Caeremonias, etc. As to the
Ceremonies of the Lord's Supper, the Decree some time ago discust in the Synod
of Sandomir, and the Conclusion made and repeated in the General Synod of
Cracow and Petrokow, is also approved in this Session of the Synod of
Vladislaw, vizt. That sitting at the Lord's-Table shall not be used in any of
the Churches of Poland or Lithuania, etc. of our Communion: For this Ceremony
(though indifferent as others are) is not used by the Christian and Reformed
Churches; and is proper to the Infidel Arrians only, who place themselves in an
equal Throne with the Lord. Since then sitting has crept into some of our
Churches, chiefly by the occasion and countenance of those who have miserably
fallen from us, and denied the Lord that bought us, We entreat and exhort all
those Congregations, and our Brethren in the Lord, that they would change
sitting into the Ceremonies used by us Protestants in all the Reformed Churches
of Europe, even that the Lord's Supper may be administered to the Communicants
standing or kneeling (with a protestation against Bread-Worship used by the
Papists) both which Rites (as they have been hitherto used in some Churches) we
leave free, and approve; without blaming or giving offense to those who use
either. This Synod was held June 19 th: 1583.

The Synod of Petrokow above mentioned (held June 1.2.3. 1578. pa. 234.)
expresses it self in these words. Because those Traitorous Fugitives from us to
Arianism, who change all things in the Church, pretending to imitate Christ
without discretion, were the first Authors amongst us of sitting at the Lord's
Table, contrary to the Rites used in all the Reformed Churches through Europe.
Therefore we reject this Ceremony, as proper to them who treat as well Christ
as his Sacraments irreverently, as indecent and irreligious, and very offensive
to well meaning people.

It ought to be observed, that this Church reckons Sitting a Ceremony; and a
Ceremony of an ill signification and Original; and not used by any Protestant
Church in their time.

IV. But I find most people acknowledge the reasonableness of this, and grant
if it were left to us how we would Receive, that we ought to do it with
Adoration, but, say they, Obedience is better then Sacrifice; we are commanded
to do what Christ did, and he Instituted, and his Disciples received it, in a
Table posture, and therefore so ought we. Notwithstanding the Scriptures,
Reason, and Decency seem to recommend another posture to us.

Now to this Argument, which is the only one I find brought from Scripture, and
which seems to prevail with most. I answer,

1. That we are not required, nor is it convenient to imitate all that Christ
did. Neither the time, nor the number of Receivers, nor the posture being
obligatory to us, as appears from St. Paul, 1 Cor xi 23. who having occasion to
mention what he received of the Lord concerning this Sacrament, mentions only
our Savior's taking Bread, giving thanks, and breaking it, and then saying,
Take eat, this is my Body, etc. without the circumstances of the number of
Receivers, his posture, or being at supper. Nay, that we may not think that
this had any relation to a common supper, or the circumstances of it, he
observes that Supper was done when he took the Cup. Our Savior's posture
therefore, whatever it was, is no wise obligatory to us, it not being any part
of what St. Paul professes to have received from Christ concerning this
Sacrament.

2. I have already proved that Religious Eating was accompanied with Bodily
Worship, and therefore if it were granted that we were obliged to receive this
Sacrament in a Table posture from the example of our Savior, yet it would not
follow that we should not receive it kneeling. It Is certain our Savior did not
sit, but lie at Table when he did eat his usual Meals. Suppose then he had
obliged us to his posture of Eating, we ought to lie as he did, but none assert
the necessity of our doing so, or practice this way. Since then all Parties
change it, sure we do better that change it into the Religious way of Eating,
recommended to us in the Scriptures, with Adoration, then others that change
our Savior's way into sitting, the common way of our Eating.

3. We have this further to say for our practice, That our Savior was not at a
common supper when he Instituted this Sacrament, but at the Passover, which was
a Sacramental Eating, and had a peculiar posture prescribed for it, Ex. xii.11.
and though some think (but without warrant from Scripture) that the Jews did not
observe this, yet it is owned they observed another, which differed from the
common posture of Eating, and was reckoned Religious: However it is spoken that
our Savior performed this Eating with several Religious Ceremonies that were
not in the first Institution. Such is that we find, Luke xxii.17. And He took
the Cup, and gave thanks, and said, Take this and divide it among your selves.
This Cup is different from the Sacramental Cup, which is Instituted verse. 20.
and therefore if we would imitate Christ, we ought to Eat the Lord's- Supper in
a way peculiar to it self, and different from our common Meals.

4 But fourthly, The full Answer to the Argument is, That it goes on a false
Supposition that our Savior instituted this Sacrament in the common posture of
Eating; which no wise appears in Scripture, neither can it be inferred from any
thing said or intimated by the Evangelists, or St. Paul, but rather the
contrary. It is true, whilst the Disciples were Eating, he took Bread, but
after that he gave thanks and blessed it, and then he brake it, and gave it to
them; and it is not to be supposed that the Disciples continued Eating, whilst
our Savior was giving thanks and blessing; that is, praying. Our Savior
therefore, or his Disciples, were not Eating, but giving thanks and praying,
whilst this Sacrament was instituted; and therefore it was proper to be done
(and in probability was done by our Savior) in a thanksgiving and praying
posture; neither was there any necessity to take notice of this change of
posture, since the change of the Action, from Eating to Thanksgiving and
Blessing, sufficiently signifies and infers it. There is no Notice taken of our
Savior's rising at all from the Table, by any of the three Evangelists that
deliver to us the Institution of the Sacrament; and yet it is plain from John
xiii.4. that he did rise from that Supper, and washed his Disciples Feet, and
sat down again, Verse. 12. and so he might rise to bless and distribute the holy
Sacrament: And therefore we have no assurance from Scripture that our Savior
instituted this Sacrament in a common Table-posture, rather the contrary seems
probable. So that He has left us at liberty to follow the general Rules of
Decency and Reason, and what the Scriptures represent to us as fit, and
practiced in the like cases.

Lastly, We find the Apostle severely reproving the Corinthians, for their
Irreverence in Receiving this Sacrament, and threatening them with Damnation,
for not discerning the Lords Body; that is, for receiving it as their common
Food, without distinguishing between them by a Reverend and Religious Receiving
it: And sure it is but a due distinction between It and our common Food, to
Approach the Lord's Table with as much Reverence as the Jews did their Altar,
at which they never sat down.

Upon the whole, I think we do nothing in this, or any other sacred Action, as
to Bodily Worship, but what is warranted and grounded on the Holy Scriptures,
and particularly as to what we do at the Holy Sacrament of the Lord's Supper:
It is as unjust to suspect or accuse us of worshipping the Lord's Table, or the
Elements of Bread and Wine, because we receive them kneeling; as it were to
accuse the Jews of worshipping their Altar or Sacrifices, because they worshipped
before them, as God commanded them to do, 2 Kings xviii.22. I beseech God to
give us true Submission and Humility of Heart; for the Outward Expressions of
these Inward Dispositions of Mind which our Church has appointed by Bodily
Worship, are certainly such as God has approved, and holy Men have practiced in
Scripture.

Sect. 3. The Practice of the Dissenters in Bodily Worship.
I. AND now, I come to you, my Friends, who Dissent from Us, to consider how
You perform This Part of God's Worship, and to compare Your Principles and
Practice with what I have represented from the Holy Scriptures.

And first as to Your Principles: I need not tell you, That you do not allow
Bodily Adoration to be any part of God's Worship, which you cannot but discern
to be Plainly contrary to the Holy Scriptures, that make it the most proper
peculiar Act thereof, as I have showed before, Chap. IV. Sect. 1. No. 1.2.3. In
your Confession of Faith, Chap. 21. Prayer, Reading, Scriptures, etc. singing
Psalms, Administration of the Sacraments, are reckoned up as parts of Religious
Worship, but not a word concerning the worship of the Body. Your Directory does
not only leave it out, but excludes it, by requiring all to enter the Assembly,
and to take their Seats and Places without Adoration or bowing themselves
toward one Place or other, that is, without bowing themselves at all; A Rule
directly opposite to Natural Reason, as well as to the Commands of God, and to
the Examples of his Saints: And it is unconceivable how it should be laid down
by a Society of Men that professed to believe Christ peculiarly present in
their Assemblies; which yet the Authors of your Directory profess to do in that
very place where they forbid all Adoration: Let us then, I pray you, compare
their Rule with Gods Word; You have the Bible in your hands, and you look upon
it to be your Privilege to use it: The Scriptures say, O come, let us worship,
let us bow down, let us kneel before the Lord our Maker. Your Directory says,
Let us enter the Assembly without Adoration or bowing: Where notwithstanding it
allows that we in a special manner appear in God's presence. Surely you cannot
but see this is not only to lay aside, but to contradict the Rules of Scripture.

II. Your Practice is conformable to your Principles: For,

1. At your Thanksgivings or Praises, you neither bow nor stand up.

2. Whereas We, and the Churches of God in all Ages, have used to stand up at
the solemn Confessions of Faith, you have cast out of your Religious Assemblies
not only this Act of Worship, but the Confessions of Faith themselves; so
material a part of the service of God, as appears from Romans x.9, 10. If thou
shall confess with thy Mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thine Heart
that God has raised Him from the Dead, thou shall be saved: For with the Heart
Man believes unto Righteousness, and with the Mouth Confession is made unto
salvation. To profess solemnly that we expect no Happiness but from the good
pleasure of God, and that we freely acquiesce in his Provisions for us, is no
small Evidence of the submission of our Minds to God; and upon that account may
be reckoned an Instance of External Worship, and accordingly many of the Psalms
contain such Confessions.

3. You sit generally at your Public Prayers.

4. At the holy Sacrament you sit, not only whilst you Receive, but likewise at
the Thanksgiving and Blessing before; and your Directory imposes this posture
on Communicants, though contrary to Holy Scripture, in respect of that part that
concerns the Prayer and Thanksgiving; and without any Command, or so much as
Example from Scripture, in respect of the sitting at the time of Receiving.

5. Too many of your persuasion condemn us, who conform to God's Word in these
particulars, as guilty of Superstition; and endeavor to render our Conformity
ridiculous; not being content to lay aside the Commands of God themselves, but
endeavoring likewise to condemn and scoff at the Observation of them in Us.

In short, I entreat you to consider, That you have not any one Visible Act of
Adoration amongst you in your Assemblies, except we reckon in this Number, That
your Men Uncover their Heads at Prayer; and yet even this is not required by
your Directory.

III. And now let me a while Examine calmly with you, the Pretenses I have met
with for laying aside this part of God's Worship; for it is not probable that
any would banish Adoration out of their Assemblies, and allege no Reason for
their doing so.

1. First therefore, I find that place of Scripture produced to this purpose,
John iv.24. God is a Spirit, and they that worship Him must worship Him in
Spirit and in Truth. Some think that all Bodily Worship is here forbidden, and
that only the Worship of the Spirit or Mind is required of us under the Gospel:
Upon this, some have declared against all Churches, or separate places for
Worship; Others are against all Bodily Worship; Others against all
Sacraments,; Others against all Vocal Prayers, Praises, and Thanksgivings; And
even in the Apostle's time, some were against all Visible Assemblies. And
indeed, if we understand this place as some do, that all Bodily Worship is
excluded by it, and that it is sufficient to Worship God in our Spirits or
Minds only, I do not see but all these are in the right; and those who pretend
to be above Ordinances, and worship God nowhere, are most conformable to this
Rule; and next to them, the silent Meetings of the Quakers, without Sacraments,
without Vocal Prayers or Praises, are the most spiritual service. For if other
Dissenters think Bodily Worship, such as Bowing, Kneeling, etc. Unlawful or
Unnecessary, because they are Acts of the Body, and unfit on that account to be
offered to God, who is a Spirit, why may not the Quakers omit the Sacraments,
and the Words of the Mouth, which are Outward Things as well as the other? Nay,
why should not outward Teaching or Preaching cease? Since the Spirit is a
sufficient Teacher, and has promised us, Heb. viii.10. I will put my Laws into
their Minds, and write them in their Hearts -- Verse. 11. And they shall not
teach every Man his Neighbor, and every Man his Brother, etc. The Principle
and Reasoning is the same in all these, and will justify the Silent Meetings
of the Quakers, nay the Extravagance of Those that pretend to be above all
Ordinances, as well as the Irreverence of other Dissenters.

But we ought to interpret Scripture so as one place may not contradict
another; and since the Holy Scriptures show us, that God requires our Vocal
Prayers and Praises, our Visible Sacraments and Adoration, we ought not to
interpret worshipping in the Spirit so as to exclude these, but rather conclude
that they may be offered up to God in such a manner as to become proper for
spiritual Worship, or God would never have required them.

When therefore our Savior represents the Worship He taught the World, as a
Worship in Spirit and Truth, his meaning doubtless is not to exempt us from
worshipping his Father with our Bodies, whereof He Himself has given us an
Example; but to teach us, That the Outward Acts of Worship that we pay to God,
are only Acceptable to Him, when they proceed from, and are accompanied with a
hearty submission of our Souls; and that every Act is more or less Acceptable,
as it has more or less of our Hearts and Affections in it: But that
Circumstances of place, and the like, give us no Advantage, and are of no value
toward making our Worship Acceptable.

This meaning of the words directly answers our Savior's design, which was to
show the Samaritan Woman that the time was coming that the Worship offered to
God under the Gospel would be nothing more acceptable for being offered at
Jerusalem, or Mount-Gerezim, or any other place; But the Heart being right, all
places were alike. Which was directly contrary to the Jewish Law, that allowed
no Sacrifice or Oblation to be acceptable to God, that was not offered at the
Temple, and consequently their Worship derived its acceptance from the place,
and not from the Heart alone of him that offered it.

We affirm therefore, as our Savior has here taught us, that it is only from
the Heart, or Spirit, that our Worship becomes acceptable to God, and that the
time or place where it is offered contributes nothing to our acceptance: But
that in whatever place, at whatever time, in whatsoever posture we offer up our
Spirits and Hearts to God, we are accepted by him.

But then we say likewise, a Man who neglects the Assemblies of Christians,
cannot have a good Heart toward God, because he breaks his Command; that such
as do not take care to provide a convenient and decent place, and set it apart
for Christians to meet, and to perform God's Worship in, cannot have a value
for it; that such as neglect the Holy Sacraments, want Faith in His promises,
as well as Obedience to His Commands; and that those who neglect to Worship him
with their Body, and to pay outward Reverence and Adoration when they come into
his presence, must want inward submission of their minds, because they do not
approach as he requires. If a Man truly Worship God in his Spirit, it will
oblige him, if able, to perform these outward Acts; and if he be not able, God
does not require them.

It is in this, as in Faith, Jam. ii.18. A Man may say, Thou have Faith, and I
have Works: Show me thy Faith without thy Works, and I will show thee my Faith
by my Works. After the same manner a Man may say, Thou Worshipest God inwardly
in Heart and Spirit, and I Worship him outwardly, and in the face of the Church
with my Body. Show me thy inward Worship without bowing, kneeling, or other
Bodily act of Worship, and I will show thee my inward Worship, and dread of
God's Majesty by the worship of my Body.

From all which it is manifest, that our Obligation to worship God in Spirit
and Truth, does no more exclude Bodily Worship, then Faith does exclude Works.

2. The second pretense I have heard for banishing of Bodily Adoration is much
like the first. It is alleged, That God has no value for it, and that if our
Hearts are humble and right with God, no matter whether we signify it by
outward acts of Adoration or no.

But to this I answer,

1. That God himself is the best Judge of what befits His Majesty, and it is a
sure sign that He valueth a thing when he requires it; since therefore he has
Commanded us to render him this Bodily Worship; for us to allege, That He does
not value it, is too like setting up our own Wisdom above His.

2. The Words of our Prayers, or Praises, and all the Fruits of our Lips, are
outward things, as well as the gestures of our Bodies, and God values them as
little as our prostrating our Bodies before him, when the Heart goes not along
with them, as appears from Is. i. where he shows his Abhorrence, not only of
Sacrifices, Feasts and spreading forth hands, but likewise of Prayers, verse. 4.
And Mark vii.6. This People honors me with their Lips, but their Heart is
far from me, howbeit in vain do they Worship me, etc. Yet to throw Vocal
Prayers and Praises out of the service of God, were absolutely to destroy His
Visible Worship; and after the same manner to throw out all Outward signs of
Reverence, such as kneeling, etc. is a fair step to it. For the same God that
has sworn, That every Tongue shall confess unto him, has likewise sworn, That
every knee shall bow unto him, Romans xiv.11. Both therefore are alike required
in the Worship of God, and both alike insignificant when separated from the
sincere concurrence of our Hearts. When the Meditations of our Hearts go along
with the words of our Mouths, they are acceptable to God; and when the
submission of our Souls goes along with the Worship of our Bodies, it is
grateful to him, and valuable in his sight, as all other acts of Obedience are.

3. Though Bodily Worship in it self were a small thing, yet the omission of it
may be a great and Crying sin, and a great Contempt of Almighty God. Thus
eating the forbidden Fruit was in it self a very inconsiderable Outward Action,
and yet being forbidden, is was the Ruin of all Mankind. Thus the washing a
Man with Water, In the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, is in it self
no great matter, yet the willful omission of it is acknowledged by most to be
damnable. Thus kneeling, or standing at our Prayers, is but a Circumstance, yet
since God has required it, and Holy Men recommended it by their Example, to
omit it wilfully may be a great sin, and render our best meant Prayers
ineffectual. Much more must it be sinful to condemn, or mock at those who
practice it according to God's Institution.

4. As small a value as you think God has for Outward performances, yet it is
plain, that you lay great weight upon the doing, or not doing of them. In cases
of necessity we think they may be lawfully omitted; but you are Taught that in
no cases they may be lawfully practiced. You are Taught rather to stay at Home,
and not to Worship God at all Publicly, than to conform in their Outward
Gestures, or Circumstances. You are advised rather to abstain all your lives
from the Lord's- Supper than recive it Kneeling. Now if you think God does hate
them so much, upon supposition that he has not required them, and accounts them
a polluting of his Ordinance. How must it displease him to omit them, if it
appears that He has Commanded them, as I think I have made sufficiently plain.

5. I entreat you, my Friends, to consider, That whatever Bodily Worship be in
it self, yet to throw it out of Our Public Assemblies is of fatal
consequence, since it does in a great measure defeat the design of them. The
great design of Public Worship is, First, To signify, and Testify to the World
the Sense and Belief we have of the Being, Power and Providence of God, To
declare his Name to our Brethren, and in the midst of the Church to sing Praise
unto him, Heb. ii.12. And Secondly to be a means to beget, stir up, and
preserve this sense and belief in one another. Heb. x.25. To both these ends,
Bodily and External Worship do very much contribute; and it is hardly possible
to attain either of them without it. For we cannot see into one another
Hearts, and therefore we must signify our sense and belief of God in the
Public Assemblies, either by Words or Actions, and if possible, by such as are
peculiarly appointed by God to this purpose. But in your Meetings there is no
Obligation on any one to signify his Concurrence with the Congregation in any
Ordinary act of Worship, either by Word or Gesture, and therefore this end of
Public Assemblies is utterly defeated by you. Your Directory does not require,
or allow the People so much as to signify their assent by adding an Amen to the
Prayers or Thanksgivings there offered: But on the contrary, you ridicule those
that practice it pursuant to the Directions and Examples in Scripture. And as
to Gestures, such as kneeling, standing, or bowing the body, etc. you condemn
them all as Relicts of Idolatry, or Superstition. There remains therefore in
your Assemblies nothing whereby the people may testify their Belief, or assent
to what they hear, which was one design of the Meeting. Thus by turning all
Bodily Worship out of your Assemblies, you have made void this great end of
them, and left no visible distinction whereby any one may signify whether he
assents to the Worship that is offered, or dissents from it. The whole Assembly
being to one another mere Spectators and Hearers, not Joint-Worshipers.

As to the other end of Public Worship, which is to keep alive, and stir up
our affections; you cannot but own that the omission of this outward Worship is
a great hindrance to it. For it must needs be a great check to Devotion to see
a Man come into the presence of God in a Christian Assembly, with less
Reverence, or show of respect, then into the presence of an Ordinary Superior;
and behave himself less civilly there, then he would do in a Court of Justice.
And let people pretend what they will, That can never be suitable Worship to
God, which would be rudeness to a Judge. And therefore the Quakers act much
more reasonably, who refuse to take off their Hats, or pay Bodily Worship to
Men, then other Dissenters, who pay it to Men, and refuse it to God. For to do
so must Naturally tend to extinguish the aw and sense we ought to have of His
Majesty, and the Belief of his peculiar presence in our Assemblies, and it is
much to be feared that this proceeds too often from the want of such aw.

6. To conclude, There is a Language of Gestures rather more significant and
moving than that of the Tongue; and he must have a peculiar make of Mind, that
is not more awakened and affected by seeing a whole Congregation on their
Knees, with their Hands and Eyes lift up to Heaven; than to see them sitting or
leaning, whilst their Petitions are offering up to God. Words therefore and
Gestures being only different parts of the Language whereby we express and
communicate our Thoughts and Affections to one another, and Both being
Recommended to us by Nature, and Commanded by Scripture, to be used in the
Worship of God, he who lays aside Gestures, does sin against the Commandment of
God, as well as he that lays aside Words. I heartily wish You, and all
Dissenters, would consider this; which if you did, I assure my self you would
perceive this to be a matter of some moment, and neither condemn our Bodily
Adorations, nor continue your own (what I must call) Irreverence.

3. But thirdly, Some allege, for their omiting this part of God's Worship,
That they do not condemn Bodily Adoration in his service; but that to stand up
and kneel in the Congregation is so troublesome to them, that they judge they
are better omitted.

To which I Answer, That I verily believe that these persons do give the true
Reason of this Practice; For, as it has been showed before, 'twas of old the
Reason of people's Neglecting God's Service, and Matter of their Complaint
against it, That it was a weariness, Mal. i.13. But sure it is no less a sin to
lay aside the Commandments of God for our Ease, than to change them for the
Traditions of Men. It Is an Effect of our Natural Corruption, to desire to serve
God with that which costs us nothing, and without trouble; and most are willing
to save their Pains, as well as their Money, in his Service. But this is a
certain sign that they have little Heart and Affection to It; if they had, it
would not seem a trouble to them to show it by all the Outward Demonstrations
that the Scriptures recommend to us. A devout Heart bows the Body, bends the
Knees, and lifts up the Hands in Prayer, without any trouble. And they have
reason to suspect their own Hearts, that find these demonstrations of Reverence
to their Creator and Redeemer, Uneasy to them.

This very Pretense ought to show you, That it is the Negligence and
Dead-heartedness of People toward God's Service, that has banished these
Bodily Adorations out of it. We think it no Disadvantage to our Church, that we
are forced to acknowledge, That your way of Worship is much Easier than ours,
to such as are present at it; it being much less trouble to a Man that has no
value for Religion, to come into an Assembly, and there sit down, and lap his
Cloak about him, without being obliged to any Word or Gesture that may disturb
his sleep, or VVorldly Thoughts, than to be under an Obligation every moment to
signify his Attention by some Word or Gesture, under the Penalty of being
remarked by the whole Congregation, for his Negligence and Irreverence; which
is the case in our Assemblies; and it is to be feared, is the Reason that some
leave us, and go where they may be at ease and negligent more securely.

4. I confess, in the fourth place, There are some that excuse themselves more
handsomely, for not kneeling at their Prayers, etc. Say they, We want
Convenience, we have no room to kneel.

To these we Answer, That where such a thing is omitted out of Necessity, not
Negligence, or Contempt, we believe God will not impute it to them, neither do
we accuse them for it.

But then we cannot but observe that this is not the general Reason of omitting
this part of God's Worship among you: For, First, It is not your Custom to
kneel in your Public Worship, though you have Convenience, as is manifest from
the Practice in all your Meetings; in which, I could never learn that any one
kneeled; on the contrary, you condemn Us who do.

2. When you want Convenience for Kneeling, you might Stand at your Prayers,
which is a Scripture-posture, as well as Kneeling; you might bow your Bodies
when you come into God's presence; you might continue Uncovered whilst in it:
But you omit all these, as well as Kneeling; and thereby plainly show that your
Neglect in this point, is an Effect of Choice, not Necessity.

3. If Kneeling at Public Prayers be a Duty, we are obliged to provide
convenience for it, for it is certainly a sin to suffer any part of God's
Service to be omitted for want of care. It is as easy to provide convenience
for kneeling as for sitting in Public Assemblies: And if we Consider, how
careful most people are to provide Seats for their ease, and how negligent to
make any provision for kneeling; It Is but too manifest a sign (whatever is
pretended) that they are much more zealous for their ease, then for the Service
of God.

But what convenience is it that Men desire? It is easy for them to have as
much convenience as St. Paul and his Congregation had when they kneeled on the
Shore, Act. xx. If they had the Devotion of St. Paul, they would not fail to
imitate his Example: Be ye followers, says he, of me, as I am of Christ. St.
Paul followed the Example of Christ in this particular; and surely we ought to
follow his, except we think our selves grown wiser then He was, or prefer our
ease to our Duty.

But the Truth of the matter, as it seems to me, is, That your Neglecting to
kneel at the most solemn of all Christian Ordinances, the Lord's Supper, does
harden you against Reverence in the other parts of Divine Worship: And it is no
wonder it should do so; for if Reverence be not thought necessary in that Duty,
it may well seem unnecessary in any other.

CHAP. V. Of the Lord's Supper.
Sect. 1. What the Holy Scriptures prescribe concerning the frequency of
Celebrating it.
I. THe Fifth Main and Substantial part of the ordinary Worship of God in the
Assemblies of Christians, is the Celebration of the Lord's Supper. It is not to
be expected that I should treat concerning the preparation requisite in the
Receivers, or any of those other circumstances, which are generally agreed on
as necessary in this matter; and concerning which so many excellent Treatises
are extant. I shall confine my self to one Point, and that is the Frequency of
it, as a Public act of Worship, and examine, First, what the Institution and
Practice of the Church of God in Scripture Teach us, as to this particular.
Secondly, Compare our Practice therewith. And Thirdly, The Practice of those
who differ from us.

As to the Frequency of Celebrating the Lord's Supper, I find many People of
opinion, that the Scriptures have determined nothing in it, and that therefore
it is entirely left to the discretion of the Ministers, how often they will
Celebrate it, and to the People's how often they will receive it: And that on
this Account every one is left to judge for himself, when he will be a partaker
of it, as he thinks it most for his Comfort and Edification; which makes the
Celebration and Receiving it so Arbitrary a thing, that many never receive it
at all. And the Universal neglect of it is become one of the Crying sins of
these Kingdoms, and a great Objection against the Reformation.

But if we Consider the Institution of this Sacrament, it will help us to pass
a right judgment, as to the Obligation of the frequency that lies on us. I
shall endeavor to make this plain in the following particulars.

1. Our Savior when he had blessed, broken, and delivered the Bread to his
Disciples, Commanded them to Take Eat, and do This, that they saw Him do, in
Rememberance of him; and when He had Blessed the Cup, and given it to them, he
Commanded them to Drink all of it, and as often as they drink it, to do it in
Remembrance of him. 1 Cor. xi.26. Now I conceive the most Natural
Interpretation of these words of our Savior, Do this in Remembrance of Me, and
This do Ye as often as often as you drink it, in Remembrance of Me, to be, as
if he had said. We have now Celebrated together the Jewish Passover in
Remembrance of our Forefathers deliverance out of Egypt. But I am about to
purchase for you by my Death a much more glorious deliverance from the slavery
of Sin, and the power of Hell. And I order you for the future to do this (which
you see done by me) in Remembrance of Me, as what you have hitherto done, has
been in Remembrance of your Deliverance out of Egypt. From this Institution it
appears,

1. That the Lord's Supper is substituted in the place of the Passover, which
was Commanded by the Law to be Celebrated once in the Year; and that in a place
appointed by God, where all Israel were to assemble for it.

2. That Our Savior has confined us to no Place, or prefixed time for the
Celebration of his Supper that succeeds it; which makes it much more easy for
us to observe it, and renders us much more inexcusable if we neglect it.

3. Since Our Savior has taken off the Confinement to Time and Place, that
made the Passover such a Burden. It follows that they who Celebrate it
seldomer then the Jews did their Passover, must needs have less regard to the
memory of Christ's Death, and the deliverance wrought by it, then the Jews had
to their Deliverance out of Egypt. There being no other imaginable reason that
can tempt them to neglect purifying themselves for this solemnity of Worship,
and frequenting it, but the deadness of their Hearts toward Christ, and the
want of Sense, Gratitude and Love toward their Master.

4. Christ's positive Command to Do this in Remembrance of Him, etc. must
oblige us in some Times, and in some Circumstances; And there can be no better
way of determining when we are obliged to do it, then by observing when God in
his goodness gives us Opportunity, for either we are then obliged to do it, or
else we may choose whether we will ever do it or no; there being no better
means of determining the frequency, then this of God's giving us the
opportunity. And the same Rule holding in all other general, positive Commands,
such as in those that oblige us to Charity, we may be sure it holds likewise in
this. Therefore whoever slights, or neglects any Opportunity of Receiving,
which God affords him, does sin as certainly as he who being enabled by God to
perform an Act of Charity, and invited by a fit Object, neglects to Relieve
him, or shuts up his Bowels of Compassion against him; concerning whom the
Scripture assures us, That the Love of God dwells not in him: And the Argument
is rather stronger against him who neglects this holy Sacrament; for how can it
be supposed that a Man has a true love for his Savior, or a due sense of his
sufferings who refuses, or neglects to remember the greatest of all benefits,
in the easyest manner, though Commanded to do it by his Redeemer, and invited by
a a fair opportunity of God's own offering.

5. It is manifest that if it be not our own Faults, we may have an Opportunity
every Lord's Day, when we meet together; And therefore that Church is guilty of
laying aside this Command, whose Order of Worship does not require and provide
for this Practice. Christ's Command seems to lead us directly to it: For, Do
this in remembrance of Me, implies that Christ was to leave them; that they
were to meet together after he was gone; and that he required them to remember
him at their Meetings whilst he was absent. The very Design of our Public
Meetings on the Lord's- Day, and not on the Jewish Sabbath, is to remember, and
keep up in our Minds a sense of what Christ did and suffered for us, till He
come again; and this we are obliged to do, not in such a manner as our own
Invention suggests, but by such means as Christ himself has prescribed to us;
that is, by celebrating this Holy Sacrament.

It seems then probable from the very Institution of this Sacrament, that our
Savior designed it should be a part of God's Service, in all the solemn
Assemblies of Christians, as the Passover was in the Yearly Assemblies of the
Jews. To know therefore how often Christ requires us to celebrate this Feast,
we have no more to do, but to enquire how often Christ requires us to Meet
together; that is, at least every Lord's Day.

II. And the same is farther manifest, in the second place, from the Examples
of the Apostles, and of the Churches of God in the New Testament. They cannot
be supposed but to have understood what Christ meant by these words, Do this in
Remembrance of Me; and if it appears that they did make this Feast a constant
part of their Ordinary Worship, we may safely conclude, That Christ meant it
should be so. And here it is observable, That we do not find any solemn stated
Meeting of Christians for Worship in the whole New Testament, without it.

At first the Disciples had their Meetings every Day, and then they likewise
daily received this Sacrament, Acts ii.46. And they continued daily with one
Accord in the Temple, and in breaking Bread from House to House: And St. Paul
supposes that their Meeting together was on purpose, and with express Design to
Celebrate this Feast, 1 Cor. x.20. When ye come together therefore into one
place, this is not to eat the Lord's Supper; which intimates, That one main
Design of their coming together, was and ought to have been, to eat the Lord's
Supper; though by their misbehaviour they so corrupted the Ordinance, that it
could not be called His Supper.

If one should now reprove Christians, whom they observe to mis-behave
themselves in Church, in these words: When you come together into one place,
this is not to hear the Word of God Preached to you; for one is Talking, and
another is Sleeping: Would not every Body conclude, That in the Opinion of the
Reprover, the Hearing the Word of God Preached, ought to be one End of their
coming together? And then surely the Apostles saying that when you come
together into one place, this is not to eat the Lord's Supper, etc. gives us
ground to conclude, that in his Opinion, Eating the Lords Supper ought to be
one constant End of our coming together. Which is further manifest from the
Advice he gives them, Verse. 33. Wherefore, my Brethren, when ye come together
to eat, tarry one for another. One End therefore of their coming together, was,
as Children come together in a Family at Meal-time; that is, to be fed at their
Father's Table: For what the Apostle called in the former Verse, coming
together into one place; in this Verse he calls, coming together to eat;
intimating, that a main end of their coming together into one place, was to eat.

3. When the Meeting of Christians came to be fixed to the First Day of the
Week, or the Lord's Day, the Breaking of Bread was likewise brought to the same
Day: So Acts xx.7. And upon the first Day of the Week, when the Disciples came
together to break Bread, Paul preached unto them. From which words we may
conclude two things; First, That the First Day of the Week was the Disciples
time of Public Worship. Secondly, That the Breaking of Bread, or celebrating
the holy Eucharist, was a part of that Worship. The Scripture is as plain for
the one as the other. There have been some Disputes raised about Changing the
Day of Worship from the Last to the First Day of the Week, and this place is
usually produced to justify the Change; And sure the same place is as clear
for the Celebration of the Lord's Supper on that Day, as for the Observation of
the Day it self, instead of the Sabbath. And therefore whoever wilfully passes
the Lord's Day without it, does not observe it as the Scriptures, from the
Practice of the Disciples, direct us to do.

4. I have endeavored all along to confine my self to the plain words of
Scripture, and to use such Arguments only, as the meanest persons might be able
to judge of from their Bibles: Yet in a Controverted place of Scripture,
concerning the meaning of a Command of Christ relating to some positive Duty, I
take the constant practice of the Church from the Apostles downward, to be a
good means of determining the sense of it; And as there is not any Example of a
stated Assembly for Worship in the New Testament without the Lord's- Supper, so
I think there is not any Example of that Nature in all Antiquity. For the truth
of which I appeal to those that are skilled in it. The nearer we come to the
Apostles, we shall still find the Lord's- Supper the more punctually observed,
as a constant part of the Ordinary service of the Church: And it is remarkable,
that when first some who had been present at the Prayers and Preaching of the
Church began to go away from the Public Assemblies without Receiving (which
was a corruption that came in about 300 years after Christ) it was looked on as
so great an Innovation and breach of the Scripture Rule, that the Church
decreed whosoever was guilty of it should be Excommunicated. So, particularly
the Ninth of those commonly called the Canons of the Apostles, and the second
Canon of the Council of Antioch. Thus the Practice of the Church continued for
many Ages. And though the generality of Men could not be persuaded constantly to
partake of the Lord's- Supper, after the Discipline of the Church was
dissolved, and the piety of Men began to cool, yet still it was Celebrated on
the Lord's- day, according to the first settled Practice of the Church.

5. And indeed the corrupt practice of the solitary Masses of the Papists is a
further evidence of its being counted Originally a part of the ordinary Worship
of God. I think it is confessed by all, even by the Papists themselves, that
those Masses had their Original from the universal corruption and negligence of
Christians; For whilst the People had either Piety or Zeal, they communicated
with the Bishop, or Ministers, in every Assembly, at least a competent number
of them: But when Piety and Devotion were in a manner lost in the corrupt Ages
of the Church, it came to pass, that though the Minister Consecrated the Elements
every Lord's Day, according to the Example of the Holy Scriptures, and
Antiquity, yet he could prevail with few or none to receive with him, but was
often forced to receive alone. This was a great corruption and a falling from
the Scripture precedent; but the Roman Church instead of Reforming the abuse,
by obliging the people to receive as formerly, corrupted her principles, as
well as practice, and decreed it lawful and sufficient for the Priest to
receive alone. Yet this abuse shows us what should be, and what has been the
practice; and that the Church has constantly reckoned the Lord's Supper, as an
Ordinary part of Public Worship in Christian Assemblies on solemn days; and
sure then to lay it aside can be termed no less then an Invention of our own,
Since we can neither in Scripture, or in the Church of God for 1400 years
together, (which is a sufficient commentary on the Scripture Text) produce one
Example of a stated solemn Christian Assembly without it.

Sect. 2. The Practice of Our Church as to frequent Communions.
I. HAving thus considered the Rules and Examples that the Scriptures afford us
in this point, let us in the second place compare the Rules and Practices of
Our Church with this pattern. I will not pretend that they come fully up to it,
this being the most defective part of the Reformation; But I doubt not on view
it will appear that Our Church comes nearer the Scripture precedent then
perhaps any other.

'Twas the design of the Reformation to throw out the corruptions of the Church
of Rome, and to bring things back to what was practiced in the Apostles time,
and in the purer Ages of the Church. And as to the present point before us, Our
Reformers found two corruptions crept in by time: The first was, That the
Priest received the Lord's Supper alone, without the people, which destroyed
the Nature of this Holy Sacrament, as a Communion; The second was, That the
people thought they had sufficiently observed the Lord's Day if they saw Mass,
without understanding it, or receiving. Our Church therefore to Reform the
first of these, Ordains, That there shall be no Communion, except 4 (or 3 at
the least) Communicate with the Priest. So where 3 are willing to Receive, the
Ministers may proceed to the Holy Communion every Lord's Day. For our Savior
has promised that Where two or three are met together he will be in the midst
of them.

Three therefore make a Congregation, and have a Title to the Ordinances of
Christ; and there is no reason that the Obstinacy or Negligence of others
should hinder such as are willing from Worshipping God, according to his
Institution; and therefore Our Church has taken care to provide for them, by
Ordering that some part of the Communion-Service be read every Lord's Day; both
with design to put all people in? mind of their Duty, and to accommodate such
as can be prevailed on herein to live up to the Rules of Scripture, and the
practice of the Primitive Church.

2. It Is Ordered, That in Cathedral and Collegiate Churches and Colleges,
where there are many Priests and Deacons, they shall all receive the Communion
every Sunday at the least.

3. That every Parishioner shall Communicate at least three times in the year,
whereof Easter to be one; and surely such as cannot fit themselves so often,
must, in their own Opinion, be out of a state of Grace, and deserve to be
Excommunicated by the Church.

4. Lastly, As to our Practice, we have prevailed so far, that Universally the
Lord's Supper is Celebrated Thrice every year; and where either our
Persuasions, Arguments, or Entreaties can prevail with our People, we have
Monthly Communions; and in Cities and large Towns, by the changing the Monthly
Days in several Churches, people that are devoutly disposed, have Opportunities
of Receiving Weekly: And we have reason to bless God that our Church wants not
some, and I hope I may say many such.

5. Upon the whole, it must be confessed, That to hold Solemn Assemblies of
Christians* without Communicating, is a corruption of Popery, and came in by
dissolution of Manners, and slackning of the Discipline of the Church; and though
we have not been able to Root-out and Reform this Popish Practice entirely, yet
we have done our Endeavor; and, by God's Blessing, may say we have made some
progress in it; insomuch that if we take that for Ordinary which has a constant
fixed time for its Observation* the Holy Sacrament is an Ordinary part of our
public Service of God.

And I verily persuade my self, That by God's Assistance we should have brought
our people before now to the Scripture-Order of constant Weekly Communicating,
had not the Ill Example and Obstinacy of those that separate from our Church,
Encouraged them in their Negligence, and weakened our Discipline: For our
Church orders Non-Communicants to be presented and punished; and our Ministers
do not generally flatter the people in their sin, or dissemble their Duty in
this point; but frequently and earnestly, by Sermons, Admonitions, and
Treatises purposely published to this intent, press them to it; and therefore
we are blameless before God and Man. Nor is it our Fault that the practice of
our people is not Reformed, according to the Pattern of the Apostolic Church,
and the Rules of our Own: So that we cannot be accused of laying aside the
Commandments of God, or of teaching any Doctrine of our own Invention, in this
particular; though we are yet too far short of the Primitive Practice and
Institution.

Sect. 3. The Practice of the Dissenters about Frequency of Communicating.
I. I Come now (according to my former Method) to You, my Friends, who Dissent
from us, and entreat You to Examine, with Me, your Principles and Practice, by
these Scripture-Rules and Examples: And here first I must observe to you, That
you have no fixed or set Times for the Administration of this Sacrament; on the
contrary, your Directory orders, That the times how often this is to be
Celebrated may be considered and determined by the Ministers and other
Church Governors of each Congregation, as they shall find most convenient for
the Comfort and Edification of the People committed to their charge: By which
Rule, the Lord's Supper is Excluded from being any ordinary constant part of
God's Service, it being referred to the Discretion of the Ministers and Elders
of each Congregation to determine, as in other occasional things, how often the
people shall have the comfort of it. It had been as reasonable to refer it to
their Discretion how often the people should have the comfort of Hearing the
Scriptures read, of joining in the Praises of God, or in Prayers to Him; which
yet they determine they are obliged to every Lord's Day. Had they made the same
Rule for the holy Communion, they had indeed conformed to the
Scripture-Precedent, and might have pretended to some Reformation: But to leave
the celebration of this Feast altogether Discretionary, I have showed to be
directly against what we find practiced in Scripture.

II. Whereas it is a corruption of Popery to suffer the people to be present at
the public Assemblies for Worship and celebration of the Lords Supper, without
being obliged to Receive; your Teachers, instead of endeavoring to reform this
Abuse and Innovation, have fallen into another practice as unprecedented in
Scripture, the Excluding this Sacrament entirely from your Ordinary solemn
Meetings. And truly in this point you seem more inexcusable than the Papists
themselves; for the Papists order the Elements to be consecrated every Lords
Day, and distributed to those that desire it: But your Teachers neither offer
it to the people, nor invite them to it; nay, so far are they from it, that
they do not so much as afford an Opportunity to those that desire to be
constant Receivers: Which is plainly to multiply the Abuses introduced by
Popery, instead of Reforming them.

III. They rarely press their people to Communicate; they have few Sermons or
Discourses to that purpose; and many of them condemn our Zeal, for endeavoring
to restore the constant Communion precedented in Scripture.

I must further make you sensible that your Practice is yet worse than your
Principles. Your Directory owns that the Communion, or Supper of the Lord is
frequently to be celebrated, etc. But it fares with this, as with all other
indefinite Rules: they signify only that people may do what they please in the
case. No body can certainly tell what frequently, many, often, or convenient,
signify; and therefore where only these words are used in a Rule, it is little
better than to have no Rule at all; as appears in this very case: For when
people were relaxed from the particular and certain Rules of our Church, by the
first breaking off of those of your Persuasion from us, the Lord's Supper was
laid aside wholly for several years by some Congregations; and at last too many
came to look on it as a matter of no constant necessity. I appeal to You,
whether it is not yet reckoned a great thing among many of you, if once in a
year or two a Communion be celebrated in one of your Meetings; Nay, among some
of you it is often omitted for several years together, and in some places for
ten or more: I fear I may say, Your people generally have too little sense of
the Obligation of Receiving it at all; and your Ministers indulge them so far
in this corruption, that a Man may live comfortably amongst you, and with the
Reputation of a Professor, to Thirty or Forty Years of Age, and never Receive
at all; And by the best Enquiry I could make, I could not compute that One in
Ten that go to your Meetings ever Receive through the whole course of their
Lives, notwithstanding Christ's positive Command to do it in remembrance of
Him. So unhappily are Men over-seen in laying aside the Commands of God, for
their own Inventions. I should be glad to find that I were mistaken in this
Computation: In the mean time you must give me leave to tell you plainly, That
this practice of Rare or No Communion, is so peculiarly your own, that I think
you are altogether singular in it; and are so far from having any Precedent for
it in Scripture, that I doubt whether any Precedent can be found for you, even
amongst the most degenerated or Barbarous People that ever called themselves
Christians.

And therefore, if you have either any true regard for Scripture, or Reverence
for the Constant and Universal Practice of the Church of God. You ought to
reflect upon your practice herein; and consider how You can answer it to God,
or your Consciences.

I will not Examine the Reasons, commonly given for your Omissions in this
weighty Affair, since it is manifest no Reason of Man's Invention ought to be
admitted for direct disobedience to Christ's Command; If You are Christians in
earnest, you ought, as often as you have Opportunity, to remember the great
Love of Our Lord and Master, as he has Commanded; And your Ministers ought to
take care to afford you frequently such Opportunities. If you or they neglect
this, I do not see how you can with Reason insist so much on the Purity and
Observation of Christ's Institution.

CONCLUSION.
I Have gone through the Five Principal Parts of the Public Worship of God;
and (I hope) in all of them have made good what I first undertook, and showed
that there needs no more to justify the Public Service of our Church, than to
compare it with the Rules and Examples of Scripture. I have only a few words to
add by way of Conclusion, First to my Brethren of the Clergy, and then to the
Laity who are under my Charge.

To the Conforming CLERGY of DERRY.
1. AND first as to you, My Brethren., that are of Our Communion, and owning My
Authority, let Me, as a Brother and a Fellow Laborer, exhort you to be
thankful to God, that has Entrusted you with such an Excellent Ministry and
Service, which being built on so sure a Foundation as the Word of God, can
never be shaken, or put you to any great Difficulty to defend it, since you
need no more than the plain words of your Bibles, without gloss, or
Commentators, to assert and justify it.

2. Let me recommend to you Reverence, Devotion and Diligence, in the Use of
this Service. I have already observed that there is a Language of Gestures
rather more significant and affecting than that of Words. It becomes us
therefore not only to Love and Use our Service, but likewise to recommend it to
the people, by a distinct and affectionate manner of pronouncing and reading
it, and by a devout and grave behavior at it. This can never be pressed too
much on you, or on others by you; since it is absolutely necessary to give Life
and Efficacy to it; as the contrary will expose the best and most sacred thing
to contempt; and bring a greater disparagement on our Service, then all Our
Adversaries endeavors can ever do. Though Our Service be appointed by God, and
Warranted by Scripture, yet even God's Appointments are Abominations to him,
when separated from the heart, and are only acceptable to him, as they
contribute to Inward Devotion. Let me therefore entreat you to labor so to
perform the Service of Our Church, that it may attain the End for which God has
designed His Worship.

3. Since the Service of Our Church is such as God has required in his Word,
let nothing discourage us in the use of it: Let us Remember that we perform it
in Obedience to God; And though some hate, some revile, and some despise it, yet
that the Author of it is able to vindicate it. This is no New Thing, It Is the
Entertainment the World has generally given God's Service, and his Truths: And
therefore neither Obstinacy, Perverseness, or Negligence of the People, whom
you are to persuade, ought to discourage you. Be Diligent, be Constant, be
Resolute, and be assured that God will always give you success so far as is
necessary to support his Truth. All means are therefore to be attempted; and
when one fails another is to be applied; And the more averse people seem to
the way of Worship prescribed by God, and the more eager they are for any
Corruption, the more Industry is to be used to bring them off from it; And when
all other means fail, earnest Prayers and Intercessions with God still remain:
We are never to despair whilst we have God's Truth on our side, though whole
Provinces should fall off from the Church, As all they in Asia did from St.
Paul, 2. Tim. i.15. Though few or none should believe our Report, as it happened
to Our Savior himself; Yet God will have a Reward for the Faithful Endeavors
of his Ministers; And therefore me must not desist, though people seem obstinate,
but in season and out of season, by Exhortation and writing, by all means of
Importunity and Industry, we must press them to their Duty, and endeavor to
bring them back to the purity of God's Worship as he has Instituted it.

4. Let me put you in mind, That the Motives you have to do your Duty are the
most Noble and Generous that can be; And you have this Advantage, that you
cannot be supposed to be zealous in your Office out of any private Interest, or
prospect of particular profit. Your Maintenance and Preferments are ascertained
to you by Law, and do not depend on the Voluntary Contribution of the People.
And as you are under no Temptation to please them, by complying with their
vices or humors, so neither can you be suspected to be diligent and
industrious in your Office out of any such mean Considerations. Since therefore
what pains you take may well be supposed to proceed only from sense of Duty,
and the love of God, let me entreat you to labor in it. It is certain, That
neither Popularity, Faction, nor Worldly Interest can influence you to this, so
as they may some, that have no other way to attain to Honor, or Support, but
by making or gaining a Party. But God forbid that true Piety and Zeal for Souls
should work less effectually upon you, then those carnal and servile motives do
on others.

Let me therefore earnestly encourage and entreat you to do it more and more,
and that you will endeavor to become all things to all Men, and decline none
of those Arts which are allowable, when applied, to gain the people to Truth
and Holiness; But very wicked, when employed to divide and seduce them.

5. Let me put you in mind, That you are Ministers of the Gospel, and not of a
Party; And therefore it concerns you to mind the common interest of Holiness
and Religion, more then those differences that are often of little concern in
themselves, and are insisted on only as the occasions and badges of those
people, who being resolved to separate themselves, are obliged to take up
little differences for a distinction. The less you meddle with these disputes,
it is commonly the better; And indeed it is not prudent to mention them, till
Men's minds be fitted and prepared by a true sense of the great Duties of
Religion: And then the best way perhaps will be to show of what little weight
they are, to cause or justify divisions or quarrels amongst Christians.

I am well aware that it may be objected to us, that whilst we press the great
Duties of the first and second Table. and spend our pains and diligence in
defending our common Christianity against Papists, Socinians, Deists and
Atheists, those that are our Adversaries in these lesser points, have made
their advantage of Our being employed against the common Enemy, to undermine us
with the people; nay, that some of them have even joined with those Enemies to
pull down Our Constitution. But yet I persuade my self that we are in less
hazard from them, whilst we do our Duty and apply our selves to the great and
common Obligations of Our Holy Religion, then if we should leave this exposed
to the Assaults of Our Common Enemies, to guard our selves from the attempts of
such back Friends. We must therefore have an eye to them; But the other, the
great and common Truths, and Duties of the Gospel, must be our main business. I
might add many more Remarks proper to my present subject, but I know your own
Prudence and Observation are sufficient to suggest them to you; I shall only
add my Prayers for you, that God will increase your Wisdom and Zeal, and
effectually turn them to his own Glory.

To the Dissenting Ministers of Derry.
BUt as to You, My Brethren, That disown my Communion and Authority, I have
reason to fear that what I shall offer to you may receive some prejudices from
my Station and Character, with which you seem offended; Yet reason is reason
from whom soever it proceeds; and I only desire that you would weigh seriously
what I have here offered, in defense of the Service of Our Church; and if the
Arguments do not convince You, yet let me pray You to reflect thus far on the
matter, as to remember that all Men's minds are not of the same make; and that
it becomes You, and all good Men, at least to treat Our Service with respect;
Since we believe, and think we have proved, That it is clearly founded on the
Word of God. It will not excuse scurrilous, or unseemly Reflections on it, to
say that we are mistaken: For all Men are fallible, and You may as well be
mistaken, as you suppose We are; And therefore lest You should be in the wrong,
it will be the safest way to be modest in censuring.

No Man ought to take it ill that another proposes Reasons against his Opinion;
but to scoff at, or revile any practice, or opinion that another believes to be
founded on the Word of God, is not only ill manners, but is of dangerous
consequence; being apt to breed Bitterness and Animosities between the Parties;
And if it should happen in a Case where the Practice, or Opinion is really
Warranted by the Word of God, it would be Blasphemy and Impiety. And therefore
in all matters of Religion we ought to avoid this manner of treatment; and
whatever Book uses it, we need trouble our selves no further with it, for it
certainly is written only to serve a Party, and not Truth.

There is another thing that in Justice I think I may request of You, which is,
That in Your Worship and Practice, You will not make the difference between us
seem greater then really it is. To abstain from a thing confessed to be lawful
in the Service of God, merely because observed by us, is surely very far from a
Spirit of Meekness and Moderation: And therefore I may hope that you will not
Indulge Your People in such affected distances, that can serve to no other
purpose but to make Parties irreconcilable; and must proceed from a greater
bitterness of Spirit then a good Man can be guilty of toward any Christian.

And that You may understand my mind the better in this matter, I will give You
a few instances that I hope will be inoffensive; and in which we may justly
expect Your Compliance.

1. The first is in the use of the Lord's- Prayer, which is owned in Your
larger Catechism, to be Not only for Direction, as a Pattern according to which
we are to make other Prayers, but may be also used as a Prayer. And in your
Directory it is recommended to be used in the Prayers of the Church. Yet I am
informed that You, my Brethren, of this Diocese, who separate from Our
Communion, do universally neglect it, and thereby confirm Your Hearers in an
Opinion too common amongst them, that all Forms of Prayer are unlawful. And
that for no other reason, that I can learn, but to keep up a difference from us
in practice, where we really agree in point of Doctrine:

2. Your sitting at Public Prayers, may be a second Instance, in which we may
reasonably expect some Reformation. It Is a very irreverent thing in it self,
against the Command and Examples of Scripture, as I think I have sufficiently
showed, and against the Opinion of your best Casuists, particularly of Dr.
Ames, de Conscientia, Lib. 4^ Cap. 18. Sessio per se non est gestus Orandi,
quia nullam exprimit reverentiam neque in Scripturis approbatur. That is,
Sitting is not of it self a posture of prayer, because it expresses no
Reverence. neither is it approved in Scripture. Yet I understand that this is
the general posture in which your people Offer their public prayers; and
either because it is for their Ease, or because you are unwilling to seem to
lay any stress on Outward Performances, or lastly, lest you should be like us,
you indulge them in it; and some of them are so ignorant that they reckon it a
piece of Superstition in us to kneel at our prayers; and are averse to our
Service, amongst other Reasons, because this is required at it. Which Notions,
I suppose, you your selves do not approve; and therefore we may justly expect
that you should endeavor to inform your people better, and bring them to a
Compliance with the Rules of Decency in their Religious Performances.

3. My third Instance shall be in the Matter of the Holy Sacrament of the
Lord's- Supper. I suppose no serious considering persons amongst you can deny
but the celebrating it so seldom as it is done in your Meetings, and the
people's backwardness in Receiving it, are very great faults; and therefore we
may reasonably expect that you should press home to your people the Danger of
their Neglect, and represent to them truly the sin of it, so as not to suffer
any to assume the Name of a Professor or a Religious Person, that does not in
some measure come up to the Scripture-precedent in this particular; and withal,
so order the celebration thereof, that every one may have sufficient
Opportunities to Receive, as the first Christians did; which in your present
way of managing, is impossible: From whence you may be sure, yours is not the
Scripture-way, and therefore needs Reformation.

4. Let me put you in mind, That it is ordered by your Directory (as I have
already observed) that ordinarily one Chapter of each Testament be read at
every Meeting, and sometimes more. I think you cannot dispense with this Rule,
without being liable to just Censure, from all that have a true value for the
Word of God: And yet I am informed that there is not one of your Meetings in
this Diocese, where it is observed; to the great detriment of our common
Christianity, and offense of your Brethren. I know the people are fonder of
Sermons and Lectures of Human Composure, than of the pure Word of God in its
Naked Simplicity; but you know this to be a carnal and sinful Humor in them;
And God forbid any that claims to be a Minister of the Gospel should indulge
them in it: And therefore as you would maintain a due Reverence in the people
for the Word of God, I think we may expect your Conformity to us in this
particular.

5. I suppose you very well know that the most learned and sober Nonconformists
do own that Occasional Communion with our Church is lawful, and that people had
better come to our Worship (at least where he that officiates is of Ability and
Sobriety) than sit at home on the Lord's Day, or frequent no Assemblies at all;
And you cannot be ignorant that many thousands in these parts neglect all
Public Worship, and many suffer their Children to die Unbaptized, for want of
Ministers of their own Communion; And therefore in this case, it is a point of
Justice due to the Souls of these poor people, and to our common Christianity,
to let them know that it is their Duty to join with us both in Worship and
Sacraments, as far as your Brethren in England have Allowed it on such
Occasions.

6. You are sensible that amongst those Protestants that dissent from our
Church, some are Congregational, and others Presbyterians; You of this Diocese
where I am concerned, profess to be of this latter sort, and agree with us in
owning that by Christ's Appointment, the particular Churches in convenient
Districts, ought, according to Scripture-Precedents, to Associate under one
Government; and these again to Unite themselves into greater Combinations of
Provincial and National Churches. The Difference between You and Us is
concerning these particular Districts; Namely, Whether the Government of them
ought to be in a Presbytery, with a Bishop as President and Governor, by
Christ's Appointment; or in a College of Presbyters absolutely Equal. So then,
we both own National and Provincial Churches, as well as single Worshipping
Congregations; but the Congregational Dissenters deny that Christ Instituted
any other Church, besides a single Congregation; and affirm that all other
Churches, such as Classical, Provincial, or National, are Human Inventions; and
that every single Congregation is Independent, and may indeed keep a fair
correspondence with its Neighbor Congregations, but is not under any common
Government with them. These last are the avowed Principles of Mr. Baxter, Dr.
Owen, Mr. Lob, Mr. Humphrys, Mr. Boyse, Mr. Alsop, Mr. Clerkson, and generally
of all the late defenders of the Dissenters cause in England and Ireland that I
have met with. Now it is manifest that these Principles of theirs, are much
more different from your Principles, then ours are; And the difference is much
greater, and more material. For it is possible on your Principles and ours to
preserve Unity, and to keep up some value for Excommunication, and other
censures of the Church; since he who is censured in one Church cannot be
received into another, neither with you, nor us: Whereas in the Congregational
way, he that is Excommunicated in one Congregation, may remove to another, or
set up one for himself if he pleases; at the worst, if he should, it would be
counted but an Irregularity. These Principles are destructive to the Peace and
Unity of the Church, as well as to our common Cause; and our Learned Men have
carefully Answered all the principal Writers of that sort; so that no Books of
that kind have remained Unanswered, but such only as were mere Repetitions of
what had been said and answered before. I do not remember any of you have of
late undertaken the Defense of this important Truth; though the Assembly of
Divines in their Humble Advice -- concerning Church Government (which I suppose
you approve) do prove it from the Holy Scriptures, in their Title of Classical
Assemblies. Now we think, in Justice to your Own Cause, as well as to Us, you
ought to warn your people against those Books that maintain Principles contrary
to us both; at least not to bear them in hand, that those Books written against
Us, make for You; for this will appear a great piece of Insincerity, as well as
Ingratitude; and will tempt the World to believe that you are willing to
encourage Principles destructive to your own Cause, (as the Principles of those
Books manifestly are in this very Point) so they do but serve a Turn, and
strengthen your Party amongst the ignorant People.

6. Lastly, I think we may justly expect from you a ready concurrence with us
to beat down such Vices and Immoralities as are confessed on all hands to be
against our common Christianity; such as Adultery, Fornication, Blasphemy,
Profanation of the Lord's Day, etc. And since the Bishop's Courts are Legally
Empowered to punish these, and many are guilty of them who yet will not appear
or submit to acknowledge their sins, and upon that Account are Excommunicated:
The least that can be expected from you in these Cases, is, Not to encourage
such Sinners in their Obstinacy, or to admit them to Communion amongst You,
whilst they lie under such Censures; which might be a means to Reform, in some
measure, these Crying Vices.

These are but a few of those things that might be instanced; in which we may
concur in our Practice, as well as we do in our Opinions; and if we did, I
persuade my self, that tho they did not bring us to one Religious Communion,
yet they might much contribute to our living easily with one another, and take
off that Uncharitableness which our Religious Dissentions are apt to cause
amongst us: However, it would be a great Satisfaction to Me, and I should
reckon it some kind of Success in my Office, if I could prevail with any sort
of people, that profess to meet in the Name of Christ, to come nearer to his
Institutions in their Worship; though I should not be able to persuade them to
the Communion whereof I am a Member.

To the Conforming LAITY of the Diocese of DERRY.
AS to You, my Friends and Brethren of the Laity, who profess your selves
Members of the Established Church; It has pleased God to place Me amongst you,
and to give Me an Inspection over you; and it is chiefly on your Account that I
have written and published this Treatise, that it may be a Pledge and Testimony
to you of my concern for you, and make my care to reach as far as may be
amongst you. I hope my Labors this way may be Useful to you, to settle the
Minds of the Doubtful, and to awaken you all to Diligence and Zeal in the
performance of the Service of God.

The great Principles of your Religion, as you are Members of the Established
Church, are Uncontroverted on all hands; and I have here endeavored to show
that your particular Way of Worship is warranted by the Holy Scriptures. You
have reason to bless God, that He has afforded you so many conveniences of
frequenting it: In which He has been pleased to give you so manifest Advantage
above your Dissenting Neighbors, that notwithstanding their Numerousness, you
have Five places for Worship, for One that they have. This will render you
inexcusable, if you neglect attendance at them, or spend any Lord's Day (as is
too common in this Country) in a mere Rest from Labor, without any Public
Worship.

I must likewise put you in mind, that our Service is not only fitted for the
Public, but is likewise proper for private Families; And therefore I would
advise you to make use of the words with which Our Church has furnished you, in
your Houses, as well as in the Church. At least to use such select Hymns and
Collects as seem most adapted to that purpose. And at more solemn times I
conceive our Litany is as full and proper a Service as any Master of a Family
can desire to offer to God.

I must therefore most earnestly and passionately exhort you, by the Name of
Our Lord Jesus Christ, for his Church's sake, and your own, that you will add
Diligence and Zeal to this your reasonable Service, and prepare your hearts to
seek the Lord your God in his Holy Worship. And particularly that you would
endeavor to convince the World, that it is not Faction, or a Party you contend
for, but the Fruits of Righteousness; And thereupon strive rather to outlive
those that differ from You, then to out-argue them. Let the innocence of your
Lives, and your Christian Moderation convince them of the unreasonableness of
their separation from You.

I beseech the God and Father of Our Lord Jesus Christ to multiply his Grace
and Peace upon You; and to influence You by his Holy Spirit, that You may be
perfect in every good Work; and particularly in that of Worshipping him in
purity and Holiness.

To the Dissenting-LAITY of the Diocese of DERRY.
AS to You, My Friends, that dissent from Our Communion, it remains only, that
I beseech You in the Spirit of Meekness, (as one that is appointed by the
Providence of God, and the care of a Christian Magistracy, to watch over Your
Souls) That You will seriously consider, and lay to heart what I have here
tendered to You. I cannot prevail with you to come and receive Instruction from
my Mouth; And therefore I have taken this way to inform You. I will only add a
few Observations, which I recommend to You, and shall leave the success
entirely to God.

1. Therefore You may observe that in this Treatise I have not led You into
long Reasonings, or the intricacies of Human Learning; but I have referred You
to your Bibles, and You need go no further then to them to be satisfied whether
the things I have said be as I have represented them or not. Those of Berea are
reckoned a Noble People (Acts xvii.11) because they searched the Scriptures,
and I pray most heartily to God to give You a part in that Nobleness of mind,
that You may search and find the Truth.

2. I would desire You to observe that it ever has been, and in all probability
ever will be the humor of the World, to be more fond of Their Own Inventions
then of what God Commands. If we look through the whole Scriptures we shall find,
that the Prophets sent by God, the Doctrines revealed by him, and the Worship
he Commanded, have had but ill Entertainment amongst the people. There never
appeared half so much Zeal or inclination in the generality of Men, for the
true God and his Worship, as for the false Gods, and their Prophets. And there
is an obvious natural reason for it, since what Man invents must needs have a
near agreement to the Carnal and Corrupt inclinations of our depraved Nature,
then what God prescribes: which is the very reason that induces Men to change
the Institutions of God, and substitute their own Inventions instead of them. A
thing that would never come into any Man's mind, if he did not find more ease
or gratification to his humor in them, then in observing God's Commandments.

If it were proper to refer you to the History of the Church, you would find
that most of all the Corruptions in the Worship of God were introduced by the
fondness and violent inclinations of the people for them: And that the Church
Governors did long oppose them, and were brought with difficulty at last to
comply with them. Thus the Worship of Images, Prayers for the Dead, Purgatory,
the intercession of Saints, half Communion, being present at Church Assemblies
without receiving the Lord's- Supper, and Worshipping the Host, were all vulgar
practices at first, against the Opinion of the Governors of the Church, who
generally Opposed and Condemned them; but being Human Inventions, the People
were so violent for them, that there was no withstanding them, so that if the
Governors they had would not comply, the people did set up those that would.

Now let me entreat you to reflect a little, and consider with all seriousness
whether there may not be something like this in your own Case, especially in
the matter of Extemporary Prayers. It is plain you have brought them into
practice against the opinion and constitution of the Church Governors, and of
the First Reformers, who all did settle Lyturgies in the Churches which they
Reformed: This Knox did in Scotland, whose Lyturgy we have ready to produce, to
the Conviction of those who pretend to be his Successors, and yet condemn Forms
of Prayer as Unlawful. This Luther did for Germany, and Calvin for Geneva, and
for the French Church, whose Liturgyes are still used by them. Yet I find this
weighs not much with you, though you seem to me to have little to oppose to it,
besides a strange fondness and passion you have entertained for the contrary;
and let me tell you that it is no hard matter to give a reason why the
generality of the people are better pleased with such Extemporary Prayers, than
with Forms: For can any one wonder that a prayer which people never heard
before, and is adapted to the Fancies and Humors of a Party, with all the
Advantages which Novelty gives, should gratify carnal and itching Ears, more
than the fixed and settled prayers of a Church, or that Form dictated by Christ
himself? To join in these with Devotion, requires us duly to prepare our
Hearts, to strain and lift up our minds with much seriousness and attention, or
we cannot be affected by them, whereas there is a pleasure, and a kind of
sensual delight, in the novelty of the other Prayers; and the tone with which
they are sometimes delivered, makes the Hearers imaginarily Devout; though they
come to them without taking pains to strain their minds to true Devotion. But
you ought to remember that Images and Relics and Mediatory Saints had the very
same effect on people long ago; which made them so fond of them, that they
brought them into their Worship, in spite of the Bishops and Pastors of the
Church; as you have now brought in Extemporary Prayers: But it is rare to find
the generality of Men fond of what is truly Spiritual; And therefore people's
fondness of your peculiar way of Worship is so far from being an Argument for
it, as I find some of you use it, that on the contrary it is a shrewd
presumption that it is not from God: Especially since ill people are fond of
it, as well as good; As is manifest from many undeniable Instances; which could
not be so if it were Truly, and of it self, Spiritual.

3. I would desire you to consider that nothing can generally induce our Clergy
to decline these Extemporary Prayers, but their Conscience and Conviction that
they are not convenient in the Public Service of God: It Is manifest that
Extemporary Prayers would be much more easy to most of us, and less burdensome
then the Service we use; you may think otherwise, but assure your selves that
you are mistaken; And I dare appeal to those that have tried both, whether is
most easy: There are such both amongst You and Us who have made the Experiment;
And I dare referr it to them to declare on their Consciences, which of the two
Services they look on to be the greater burden to him that performs them.
Whatever You may think, if we would Indulge our selves, it were no hard matter
for the meanest of Us to pass an Extemporary Prayer on our Auditory, or to turn
the Heads of our Sermons into one.

Lastly, I have one thing which I would more especially request of You, that
You would believe that I sincerely and heartily desire and study the good of
your Souls; and that I have in this Treatise endeavored to promote it, and by
God's Assistance ever shall in all my Undertakings.

And if You had the same Apprehensions with Me, You would not wonder at my
concrn in this matter; for how is it possible that any man that has a zeal for
the purity of God's Worship, should not have his Spirit moved within him to see
a well-meaning people so strangely misled, as to content themselves to meet
together, perhaps for some Years, with a design to Worship God, and yet hardly
ever see or hear any thing of God's immmediate Apointment in their Meetings.
Now to my thoughts this is manifestly the case of many of You; since a Man may
frequent some Meetings amongst You for some Years, and never hear a Prayer, a
Psalm, or Chapter which has been immediately dictated by God; and never be
called on to bow his knee to God, or see either Minister or People address
themselves to him in that humble posture. Lastly, never see any body offer to
Administer, or desire to receive the food of Life in the Lord's Supper. These
are Melancholy Reflections to me who believe that God has required these in his
Worship; And therefore I hope you will take it in good part that I endeavor to
restore them to You.

I have only to add my most earnest Prayers to God for You. And to beseech him
who is the God of Mercy and Purchaser of his Church, by a price Inestimable, to
vouchsafe his blessing to these my Endeavors for your Souls Instruction; That
You may reap the benefit, and I the comfort of them in the great day of our
Lord Jesus Christ; who only is the true Teacher of Souls, by his Spirit; and is
able to Seal the Instructions of his Ministers to Your Hearts, to open the Eyes
of Your Understandings; and to guide You into all Truth.

FINIS.
Errata.
PAge 5 l. 20. for words read word. pa. 13 l. 10, r. the timbrel. p. 14 l. 16 r
contrary: p. 24 l. 22 for judge it, r. judge of it. p. 33 ult. r. pursuance. p.
39 ult. Levitical. p. 41 l. 15 r. omitted, p. 45 l. 11 instead of Exclusive of
the use of Forms, r promise to furnish us with words in Prayer, without the use
of Set and Premeditated Forms. p, 54 l. 6 r. rashness. p. 72 l. 15 and 16 r.
people. p. 73 l. 3 r. thoroughly. p. 83 l. 16 instead of the first of put in a
semi-colon. p. 97 l. 7 r. deceive. p. 98 l. 25 r. Meditated, p. 101 l. 11 r.
Calendar. p 112 l. 1 after the same r. Person. p. 114 l. 16 r. in the next. p.
115. l. 4 de. which Ibid. p, 16 for much deelare r. much more declare. p. 118
l. 17 after for ic, r. And that. p. 120 l. 1. after and r. to. p. 127 l. 1
after Scriptures a colon. Ib. 3 after Supper a comma. p. 131 l. 7 de. are. 137
l. 16 de. their. Ib. l. 18 r. receive. p. 149 de. a. p. 164 l, 14. for owning
r. own. 169 l. 3. after table a comma.


