A TRUE HISTORY Of the Several Designs and Conspiracies, AGAINST HIS Majesty's
Sacred Person and Government; As they were continually Carried on From 1688
till 1697.

Containing Matters Extracted from Original Papers, Depositions of the
Witnesses, and Authentic Records, as appears by the References to the
Appendix, wherein they are Digested.

PUBLISHED With no other Design then to acquaint the ENGLISH NATION, that
notwithstanding the Present Posture of Affairs, our ENEMIES are still so Many,
Restless and Designing, that all imaginable Care ought to be taken for the
Defense and Safety of His MAJESTY and his THREE KINGDOMS.

By R. K.

Pax erit haec nobis Hosti dum vita manebit,
Cum Pecore infirmo quae solet esse Lupis.
Ovid. LONDON, Printed for the Author, and sold by Abel Roper at the (...) Boy
against St. Dunstan's Church in Fleet Street, 1608.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
ONE of the Principal Reasons that induced the Author to publish the following
Account, was to raise his Fellow Subjects into a Belief, That besides our false
Friends, our Enemies are still so many, restless and designing, That we ought
not, all of a sudden, to grow so secure, as voluntarily to drop the Sword out
of our Hands, till we see more weighty Reasons for disarming our selves, than
those which contributed to our first Equipping: Least we thereby make too
dangerous an Experiment of our Enemies Virtue, by putting it too much in their
Power to annoy us. England is yet but in the Dawning of a PEACE, and being a
desirable Land, it can never expect Security from any Thing but an equal Force
with our Neighbors; for if we cannot resist them by our Arms, it is in vain to
dream of any other Means of our PRESERVATION.

His next Design is to vindicate the Government from the vile Aspersions cast
upon it by the avowed Enemies of our Religion and Liberties, I mean the
Adherents to the late King; for as all their Writers have had the Insolence and
Vanity to charge our Government with inventing Sham-Plots, and think under
those ungrateful Calumnies to skreen themselves from the Imputation and Guilt
of their Barbarous Conspiracies; so I thought my self obliged to lay open the
Falsehood of these Suggestions, and to set every thing in its proper LIGHT, that
the abused Multitude may see Things, as they really are, or have been, and not
as the Enemies of our QUIET have falsely represented them.

In this Undertaking I may confidently affirm, That neither the Desire of
expressing my Gratitude to the best of Kings, and the most regular
Establishment in the World, the Hopes of a future Reward, nor the Advantage of
revenging former Piques (the common Objections against all that write for the
Government) has influenced me in the least to deviate from what I ever
accounted the Soul and Life of History, TRUTH. And to convince the World, that
this is not precariously asserted, I have, after the Example of some of the
most Celebrated Historians of this and the last Age, cited my Authorities all
along in the Margin, which are Printed at large in the Appendix, and those the
Reader may consult at Leisure for his farther Satisfaction; So that all the
Business I had to do, was but to digest these Materials into a proper Method,
according to the Series of Time, when the most remarkable Incidents happened,
and to collect out of them what I thought most convenient to be inserted into
the Narration. For,

As the Author lay under no Necessity to disguise or perplex the TRUTH, much
less to sacrifice it to any private Resentment; so he has all along taken Care
to express himself in such a plain, familiar Style, as is the Language of
Business, and lies within the Reach of the meanest Capacity.

Father Maimbourg, Varillas and several other French Historians, who have been
dabling in our English Affairs; and whose Business it was, not so much to
instruct the Readers Understanding as to prevail upon his Passions, have indeed
observed another Conduct: Their Periods are very Harmonious, and the Turn of
their Language exceeding beautiful; but still a Snake lies under their
Rhetorical Flowers: for as it was not their Design (as I intimated before) to
confine themselves to the Severity of TRUTH, which does not require any such
Artifices to recommend it; so they fondly thought to conceal and supply the
Defect of it by the Elegance of their Expressions.

The Reflections I have taken the Liberty sometimes to incorporate with the
Narration are just and obvious, and such as properly arise from the Matter of
Fact, and upon this Head I cannot forbear to acquaint my Reader, that it was
not without some Regret, that I found my self obliged to the necessity of
making them: For as my Zeal to my Native Country forced me to display the
Unnatural Betrayers of it in their proper Colors; so I could heartily wish for
the HONOR of it, that it had never produced such a Sort of detestable Animals.

Indeed, it is no Wonder at all, That Papists should endeavor the
Re-establishment of a PRINCE, who had given the World such convincing Proofs of
his Biggotry to their Church: Nor was I surpised to find Men of broken
Fortunes to Herd with them, and Declare for them; for these might naturally
flatter themselves to make a better Figure in the World upon another
REVOLUTION; at least they could not find themselves in worse Circumstances than
what they labor under at present; but that Protestants and Men of Reputation
and Quality should embark in the nefarious Design of entailing an execrable
Servitude upon themselves and their Posterity, or that any who call themselves
Members of the Church of England should interest themselves in a Monarch's
Quarrel, who in the little time he reigned over us, so ill requited them for
their Fidelity and Zeal, is a Prodigy, for ought I know, not to be matched in
History; and Livy, who is tedious to a Fault, in recounting unnatural
Phaenomenas, has nothing to equal it.

I am of Opinion, That he who saves a Professed Enemy against his Will, and
puts him into a Capacity of Destroying his Benefactor, has a greater Measure of
Charity than Discretion, and may be reckoned among the Number of those we call
Felo's de se.

Invitum qui servat, idem facit occidenti. Now the late King had given us such
Notorious Indications of his Aversion to our Religion, and that he never
designed to live under a limited Constitution, as ours is; by trampling our
Laws and Liberties under his Feet, by violating the most Sacred Oaths, and
assuming an Arbitrary Despotical Power, that I wonder we should have so many
weak headed Men amongst us, that would hazard their Lives to restore him to
Three Crowns, that he voluntarily threw away, and gayete de Ceur. It Is true;

The Israelites, when they were reduced to the last Extremities in the
Wilderness, longed for the Onyons and Plenty of Egypt; but it is no where
intimated, that they were fond of Returning to the Vassalage of Making Bricks
under their cruel Taskmasters, or that they dispatched any of their Body to
compliment the King of Egypt with a free Surrender of their Lives and Fortunes:
If they had been Guilty of such an unpardonable Stupidity, I may be bold to
say, That they had been so far from deserving such a Country, as the Land of
Canaan, that Lapland it self had been too good for them;

-- mutato nomine de te
Fabula narratur --
I will no longer detain the Reader from the History it self, wherein if he
find by Undeniable Proofs, That our Enemies have hitherto been continually
designing upon His Majesty's Life, and the Ruin of the Kingdom, I hope he will
agree, That what has been already, may be again repeated; and therefore, That
we ought not by our own Sloth or Covetousness, lead our Enemies into
Temptations to attack us unprovided; but that we should always have a Defense
suitable to our Dangers.

AN ACCOUNT OF SEVERAL CONSPIRACIES AGAINST His Majesty's Sacred PERSON and
GOVERNMENT.
AS nothing of Public Concernment has been so variously discoursed of at home
and abroad, as the Lancashire Plot, and that perpetual Train of Conspiracies
that have annually succeeded it; some endeavoring to sham the whole by
scandalous Invectives against the Discoverers, whilst others searching into the
bottom of the several Designs, are not only convinced of the Truth of them, but
also of the Honor and Integrity of the Government in relation to these
Affairs; I cannot imagine, but that a True and Impartial Account of them, will
be equally useful, and acceptable, to the Public, and because the Lancashire
Plot has had the Honor not only to be the Parent, but Companion of all the
other Conspiracies, I find my self obliged to begin, though the Series of the
Narration will not permit me to conclude with it.

The Contrivance then of this Plot is owing to the Politics of the late King
James; who finding himself utterly lost in the love and affections of his
People, and the Crown fallen from his Head by his own mal-Administration, yet
flattering himself with the vain hopes of regaining by the Sword, what he had
forfeited by breaking the Laws of the Land, and endeavoring to subvert the
Constitution: He fled into France for shelter till he could put his Affairs
into such a Posture as might facilitate his Return, and enable him to establish
Popery and Arbitrary Power in these Protestant Kingdoms.

But before he took his Voyage for France to gain Assistance from that potent
Monarch, 'twas concerted by him and those Popish bigoted Friends, that had
espoused his Interest, that they should also endeavor at the same time to
raise a Ferment in England, Scotland and Ireland to concur with the Designs
that carried him into France, and therefore that some Person of known
Experience, Courage and Secresy should be dispatched on that Errand to imbroyl
the three Kingdoms.

Mr. Bromfeild, a pretended Quaker, and so dexterous and bold a Counterfeit,
that he was able to personate the the Disciple of any Sect, Member of any
Faction, or Person of any Quality, had this Office assigned him, and from the
Earl of Salisbury's by the Name of Thompson advanced toward Scotland: Not
forgetting (according to the Instructions given him by the late King) to sow
such Seeds of Discontent and Jealousy as he passed through the North of
England, as might ripen into an Insurrection and Rebellion, at his Return.

He had not been long in Scotland before he effected his wicked Purposes, in
laying a Foundation for a Civil War in that Kingdom, and from thence sailed
into Ireland on the same Errand: Where he acquaints the Earl of Tyrconnel, how
successful he had been in his Negotiations in Scotland, viz. That the Duke of
Gourdon had garrisoned Edenbrough Castle, and that the Viscount Dundee would be
suddenly at the Head of a great Army there, and both declare for the late King
James; but Mr. Bromfeild finding the Earl of Tyrconnel, so zealous for the
Cause, that he wanted no Arguments or Preswasions, to make him more active and
daring, in promoting the late Kings Service; he sailed from thence into
Lancashire where he might be more useful; intending to make that and the
adjacent Countries the Provinces he would act in.

When Bromfeild landed in Lancashire, he intended for Croxteth, the Seat of the
Lord Molineux; but for fear of being too much observed there, he altered his
purpose, and took up his head quarters at Mr. Fitz Herberts of Wapra Vid Mr.
Edward's, and Wilson's Depositions in the Appendix.
and sometimes at Mr. Wilson's in Redland, where the Jacobites resorted to him
in great Numbers, to concert what was necessary to be done for the Restoration
of their old Master.

From Wapra he often made Excursions into the neighboring Countys, and through
by-ways to Croxteth to confer with the Lord Molineux, and his Son, and other
considerable Persons of the Roman Character. And having adjusted Matters there
for an Insurrection, he returned into Ireland with his Dispatches, and so
backward and forward, as the Emergency of his treasonable Affairs required.
Having a safer Conveyance for his Lancashire Pacquets to, and Answers from
France by the way of Ireland, than to hazard them through the several
Post-Offices in England.

This treacherous Employment was carried on by Mr. Bromfeild for some Months,
the Habit of a Quaker securing him from the Suspicion of a Jacobite; but at
length his Visor dropped off, and the traiterous half-fac'd Papist was seen
through the demure Looks and canting Dialect of the Quaker. The Vessel that
Bromfeild bought to transport him to, and from, Ireland, was seized by Mr.
Morston for the use of the Government, and Bromfeild had certainly been
committed to Prison, and tried for his Life, had not the means of his Escape
out of Lancashire Vid Depositions pradict.
been contrived by his quondam Host and entire Friend and Confident Mr. Wilson.

Mr. Bromfeild and his Intelligence being once more landed in Ireland May. 1689.
(where the late King James was arrived also) he acquaints the late King with
the Effects of his Travails, viz. That his Friends were up in Arms in Scotland,
and that the Lancashire Papists, and others were ready to engage in his
Quarrel, in Order to re-inthrone him, as soon as they were commissioned by him
to undertake it. Nor did he forget to acquaint the late King how narrowly he
escaped a Goal, and the Gallows at his last being in Lancashire; and that since
he was too well known there to be sent again into that Country, he begged some
other Person might he employed in carrying over the Commissions desired: Which
the late King complied with, and as a Reward of these Services, made Mr.
Bromfeild one of the Commissioners of his Irish Mint, in which Post he
continued till the Reduction of Ireland by King William.

If any object that Bromfeild's Agency in Scotland has no Authorities to
support it, let the Reader know, it is not for want of them they are not
produced; but for prudential Reasons it is thought fit to conceal them at
present, there being other and farther Uses to be made of them by the
Government here after at his Trial, whenever he falls into the hands of
Justice. However that I may not be thought to impose upon my Reader, if Mr.
Bromfeild be told, that the Proof of that Matter is contained in the Papers
under his own hand, which he sent out of Ireland by the Carver, I am almost
confident he will not deny it. I equally abhor a false and partial Author; but
Mr. Bromfeild's Crimes are of themselves so heinous and execrable that his
Historian need not give himself the Trouble to add to their Blackness,
therefore I have rather abbreviated than enlarged the Share he had in the Plot,
and made no other use of him, but what serves to trace the Conspiracy from its
dark Original at the late Kings going off, and lets the Readers into the
Methods that began the Treasonable Confederacies.

Here you see the Foundation of the Lancashire Plot, to involve the Nation in
Blood and Ruin. And as if this would not prove a Tragedy deep enough Si
nequeant Superos, Acheronta movebunt.
the Murder of the King (as it has done ever since) must either precede or go
hand in hand with the Invasion. For no sooner was King William settled on the
Throne, but he received Information Vid. the History of the late Conspiracy
written in French.
that several Persons were sent into England to Assassinate him. The same
Discovery was made to a great Man in Holland, and to the Right Honorable the
now Earl of Romney in England, though Thanks be to God, they found no
Opportunity to execute their barbarous Design.

It Is impossible for a sober Man to imagine a Provocation strong enough, to
excuse either the committing or encouraging such a Villainy; but it seems, his
Majesty's Enemies were more afraid of the Kings single Person, then of the
united Strength of all the Allies. And therefore resolved to take off his
Majesty, by ways peculiar to such degenerate Wretches, that dare commit the
basest and most unmanly Sort of Treason to advance their Interests. And this I
think will suffice at present to convince the Reader of what will be more
plainly proved to him in the Sequel, viz. That the Lancashire Plot and the
Assassination of the King were Twins of the same Birth. And agrees exactly with
Mr. De la Rue's Depositions at Mr. Charnock's Trial. Vid. his Trial, page 29.
The Conspiracy (says he) to Assassinate his Majesty has been carrying on a
great while, for some years, and it originally came from Col. Parker,
especially, as to my knowledge of it, and that was about six years ago at St.
Germains, when I was there, he propounded it to me, Vid. Mr. Geo. Harris's
Depositions as to Parker's being privy to it.
and said he would propound it to my Lord Melfort. So that it is clear, that
from 1689 till 1696, there was a Design to murder his Majesty, and that Col.
Parker, who managed the Insurrection and Rebellion in Lancashire, was one of
the chiefest in the Assassination Plot also. My next Work is to acquaint you,
how Bromfeild, having agre'd the Plot when he was in Lancashire, sent over
Commissions from the late King to the Northern Conspirators, to raise a
Rebellion against their Majesty's in those Parts. Which was to be carried on
after this Manner.

Mr. Lunt, who followed the late King into France immediately after his Vid.
Lunt's and Langley's Affidavit in the Appendix.
Abdication, was sent from thence with the rest of his Guards into Ireland, and
in May 1689, renewed his Acquaintance with Mr. Bromfeild, who was lately come
out of Lancashire; and a general Report being spread upon his Arrival, that
Lancashire and the adjacent Counties would rise, in order to re-inthrone the
late King, and that they only waited for Commissions from him for that Purpose.
Mr. Lunt asks Bromfeild, if there was any Truth in that Report? Bromfeild avers
it to be true, and knowing that Lunt was a bold and active Fellow, laid hold on
this Advantage, to persuade him to be one of the Persons that should carry
over, and deliver Commissions to some of the late Kings Friends and
Confederates in England. Lunt at first refused that dangerous Office, but being
further pressed and courted to it by many of his pretended Friends, and
particularly recommended to the late King for that Service, by the Lords Vid.
Lunt's Depositions in the Appendix.
Thomas and George Howard, and thereupon sent for by Bromfeild to the Lord
Melfort's Office, he was there over-perswaded to shut his Eyes against the
visible Danger to which they were exposing him, by ventring on such a hazardous
Employment, which was no wonder, for what will not Men of a Senceless Bigottry,
and desperate Fortune undertake, who hope to raise themselves upon the Ruin of
their Country?

The Lancashire Papists having now received the News, that the late King was
arrived in Ireland, and had raised so great an Army there, that (as they fondly
thought) he would soon be Master of that Kingdom and from thence sail into
Lancashire, as had been concerted between Bromfeild, and the Heads of the
Conspiracy, and not knowing what Care was taking in Ireland to send over their
Commissions: These Gentlemen, I say, growing impatient for them, resolved to
send a Messenger of their own to fetch them, that they might be in a Condition
to to join the late King with their Forces at his Arrival among them. Mr.
Edmund Thrillfall of the Ashes in Goosner, was pitched upon for this Service;
and the means for his safe and unsuspected Passage into Ireland, as well as his
secure Returning again into Lancashire, was thus contrived.

The Right Honorable the Earl of Derby sending every Year to fetch Cattle from
the Isle of Man into Lancashire Vid. John Cawson 's Depositions taken before
John Patten of Preston Esquire
and John Cawson of Cockram in the County of Lancaster or his Son Charles
Cawson, having for some years past been employed in this Service (and had now
leave from one of that noble Peer's Servants to enter again upon that Voyage as
soon as he pleased) Mr. Thrillfall treated Vid. his Affidavit taken Jun. 17.
1689 before John Patten of Preston Esquire
with John Cawson for his Passage to the Isle of Man, and being denied by the
Father, treats with his Son Charles who was to go Master of the Vessel; and
finding him more pliable, trusts him with the Secret, and for ten pounds in See
John Knowles's Affidavit taken before Mr. Patten.
hand, and ten pounds more at his return, hires the Master to land him at
Dublin, and bring him back into Lancashire; but this Design was to be kept
Private, and none of the Ships Company were to be acquainted, that they were
going upon any other, or farther Voyage, then to fetch Cattle from the Isle of
Man.

About the beginning of May 1689, the Pink called the Lion of Lancashire,
(Charles Cawson Master) being ready to sail, Mr. Edmund Thrillfall and two
Strangers (yet unknown) came on board the Vessel, showed the Master and
Mariners the Earl of Derby's Pass, and then the Pink with her Passengers, and
five Mariners and a Boy Jo. Preston. Hen. Knowles. Ja. Tompson. Jo. Barrowe.
Ri. Whiteside.
in the Night time, without any Cocket, or Certificate from the Custom House,
or any Lading; loosed out of Lune Road near Lancaster, and as all the Saylors
believed were bound for the Isle of Man; See John Preston's Affidavit sworn
before the now Earl of Maclesfeild, Jun. 17. 1689.
but before they could compass it, Mr. Thrillfall proposed Sailing to Ireland,
to which the Master readily consented, saying he had some Debts to get in
there, accordingly they went to Dublin and continued there three wekes. All
which is proved by the Oaths of the whole Ships Company whose Affidavits are to
be found in the Appendix.

Now are the Commissions preparing or the Northern Conspirators. Thrillfall and
Lunt are brought acquainted, and instructed in the Affair they were engaged in:
And Passes provided for each of them under the Hand and Seal of the Lord
Melfort (one of which was ready to be produced at the Trial at Manchester, but
Sir W. W. for reasons best known to himself would not suffer it.) All things
being ready in the three weeks time the Pink continued at Dublin, Thrillfall
and Lunt went aboard the same Vessel there, the former carried with him a
Portmantle Trunk covered with Hair, and a Sword and a pair of Pistols, the
latter only a pair of Leather Baggs and Sword and Pistols, and arrived in Lune
See the Affidavit of the Ships Crew.
River near Cockram in Lancashire in the beginning of June 1689.

As soon as the Pink came to an Anchor Lunt and Thrillfall pressed to be set on
Shore, and the Master was no less concerned to be quit of them, least they
should be seized by the Officers of the Customs, who come on board every
Vessel, as soon as it comes into Harbor. To escape this Danger, the Offenders
make such have, that Lunt leaves his two Bags wherein were some Commissions,
Declarations, Blanks and other written and printed Papers, behind him in the
Ship. Which Lunt missing when he landed, he desired the Boats Crew to fetch
them and bring them to him at Cockram See the Depositions of Hen. Knowles and
Ri. Whitride who rowed the boat ashore.
but before the Cock-loat could reach the Ship, the Officers of the Customs
came on board the Pink, seized the Papers, and finding them of dangerous
consequence pursue Thrillfall and Lunt; but not overtaking them deliver the
Commissions, Declarations, and the other written, and printed Papers, into the
hand of Authority.

These Papers being further inquired into, Charles Cawson conscious of his own
guilt, absents himself; but his Father and the Ships Crew viz: Preston,
Knowles, Whiteside, Thompson and Barrow being called to account, they all of
'em deposed either in the whole, or in part, all that is related in the six
foregoing Paragraphs.

This early and open Design against their Majesty's, and the Government, making
no small Noise in Lancashire, the Matter came also to be examined at Manchester
by the then Earl, now his Grace the Duke of Devonshire, the now Earl of
Macclesfeild, the Earl of Scarbrough and the Lord Wharton. All these noble
Peers being at that time in Lancashire to view and regulate the Army. And their
Lordships all agreed that the Earl of Macclesfeild, as Lord Leiutenant of that
County, should immediately issue out his Warrant against Lunt and Thrillfall,
which was done accordingly.

Thus far you have found Lunt's and Thrillfall's bringing Commissions into
Lancashire from the late King, substantially, and credibly proved, and where
Interest or Prejudice can no way suspect any Collusion. I shall therefore
proceed in the next Place to show you how they disposed of 'em.

Thrillfall and Lunt having escaped the Officers of the Customs, they hasten to
Mr. Tildesly's of the Lodge, vid John Wilson's Depositions.
and there divided their Pacquets. The Commissions directed to Gentlemen in
Yorkshire, the Bishopric of Durham, etc. were taken Care of by Mr. Thrillfall:
Who having a Guide provided for him, began his Journey thither, as soon as he
had refreshed himself. The rest of the Commissions appointed for Lancashire,
Cheshire, Staffordshire, etc. were committed to the Care of Mr. Lunt.

Thrillfall, pursuant to the late Kings Orders, having delivered his share of
the Commissions, and what else he had in charge to the more Northren Gentlemen;
he privately returned to his own House at Goosner in Lancashire, and, having
notice there, that his treasonable Practices were discovered by Mr. Kelly, Mr.
Dodsworth, and the Commissions left in the Ship, he took all imaginable Care to
secure himself there, till he could find an Opportunity of returning to the
late King in Ireland.

But this Designincounter'd a severe disappointment, and he with the Reward of
his Treachery. For it being whispered among the Party that he was returned, it
quickly took Air; and a Warrant (as I said before) being out against him from
the Lord Lieutenant, he was sought after by a Party of the Militia, and found
by the Corporal in a hollow Place made for that purpose in a Stack of Turffs.
As soon as he was discovered, the Corporal attempting to seize him, Thrillfall
violently snatcheth the Musket out of the Corporals hand, and knocked him down
with it; but the Corporal recovering himself, and finding his own Life, and the
Prisoners Escape in such apparent Danger, he drew his Sword, and run Mr.
Thrillfall through the Body, of which wound he died immediately.

And what but the Sense of his own Guilt, and the Dread of the shameful Death,
that he knew must attend it, could have forced him to such a desperate
Resistance of lawful Authority. For though we allow him to be a Man onever so
great Courage, yet we can not suppose he would have thrown away his Life as he
did, if he had not known his Crimes were so great, and the Proof of 'em so
plain, that 'twas impossible for him to escape the Punishment inflicted for
Treason, if he should have been apprehended and brought to a Trial.

When Mr. Lunt and George Wilson his Guide, had delivered his Vid. Lunt's and
Wilsons Depositions, in the Append.
share of the late Kings Commissions to the Gentlemen, whose Names and Places
of Abode, they give you a List of in their Depositions, Lunt was sent by the
Conspirators to London to buy Arms, list Men and send them into Lancashire to
be subsisted at the Charge of the Conspirators, till they had occasion to
employ them in the Service of the late King. And this Lunt performed as appears
upon the Oaths of the several Persons whose Names are in the El. Langley, Mr.
John Edwards, George Wilson, Law. Brandon, Robert Bradly, John Wilson, Anne
Elliot, Eliz. Hearst, Edw. Brown.
Margin. And now having so stocked that County with Irish and other Soldiers
that it became the public Discourse and Conversation of the whole Country, a
fresh Discovery is transmitted to the Government of the Lancashire Plot, in a
Letter to the Right Honorable the Earl now his Grace the Duke of Shrewsbury,
His Majesty's Principal Secretary of State. Dated from the Quarter Sessions of
the Peace holden by Adjournment at Manchester, the 18th of October 1689.

Right Honorable,
WE account it our humble Duty to make his Majesty (by the Favor of your
Lordship's Relation) acquainted, that many of our Roman Catholic younger
Gentry, some of good Quality, have for some Months absconded, though we are sure
they remain in our County. We have had diverse Discoveries by Information, that
there has been some Modelling of Officers, and Men, preparatory to their Hopes
of an Insurrection; and after several too plain Proofs, though not affecting us
yet to that Degree, as to think it material enough to trouble your good
Lordship with; yet the Continuance of them, and the Observation that spreads,
and becomes a Public Remark, puts us upon it, to present your Honor with the
Account, that to some of the Gentlemen now absconded, there has been sent from
London Boxes with Scarlet Cloaks, and Pistols, and Swords, directed for safer
Conveyance to Protestants, who knew nothing of them; and by neglect of the
Correspondents, unintentionally delivered as directed, and so came to be
discovered. That there has been War Saddles bespoke and privately conveyed to
disaffected-Persons five or six Months ago; and tho our Goals are full of Irish
Papists, yet we have frequent Accounts of many others at Popish Houses, and
that which gives the occasion of this, is, that the last day but one, six new
War Saddles were sent for in the night by a Popish Gentlewoman, one Mrs.
Culchith a Widow, who has three Brothers now absconded, and we have five
Persons in Prison about them, all Papists; and the Remour so possesses the
enraged Rabble, that we are more solicitous to appease that, then afraid of
what the Male-contented restless Gentlemen can do; for we are sufficiently able
and vigilant, to free our Country from danger. There are some Constables and
others deserve Rewards for their extraordinary Care, what we shall do with
these Offenders, with these Saddles, or with other upon the like Occasions,
your Lordships Appointment according to his Majesty's good Pleasure, will with
the greatest Humility, and Faithfulness, be complied with and obeyed by,

Your Lordships most humble and obedient Servants, H. Willoughby Ralph Ashton
Ja. Holte Tho. Lever Joseph Yates Nic. Starkie Hen. Farringdon Jos. Horton.


This Letter, next to finding the Commissions in the Ship and the Depositions
of Mr. Cawson, and the five Seamen, is the first Discovery I meet with of the
Lancashire Plot. And truly it is so full, plain, particular and convincing, and
stands upon such unquestionable Authority and Truth: The Subscribers being
Persons of known Honor and Integrity, that 'twere a Boldness exceeding all
Hopes of Pardon, or Belief, to raise an Objection against it. Having thus
acquainted, and I hope convinced, my Reader, that there was a dangerous Plot
forming against the Government in 1688 and 1689. That they were then modelling
of Officers, and Soldiers, to assist an Invasion, and raise a Rebellion. And
were providing themselves with Scarlet Cloaks, War-Saddles, Swords, Pistols and
other Requisits for that bloody Enterprise; my next Affairs is to acquaint you
by what Persons and Methods, it was transacted, as well as the several
Disappointments that attended it, till it was more fully discovered in 1694.

The Tools they wrought with, were first Papists in general See Mr. Kelly 's,
Mr. Dodsworth 's and Robinson's Depositions.
who thought themselves obliged to restore that Prince, who had sacrificed his
Crown, to advance their Religion and Interests. The Second were those whose
Safety depended upon the subversion of the Laws, and fishing in troubled
Waters. And the last were disbanded Irish Soldiers, who looked upon our
Happiness with Envy, and could no longer endure to be Subjects to those they
once hoped to Enslave. And truly such Men as these were the fittest to be
employed in a Conspiracy of this Nature: And in all Probability would have
proved, if success had accompanied their Endeavors, the most effectual
Instruments, for the Destruction of our King, Religion and Country.

Mr. Lunt having (as is before recited) sent many Soldiers into Lancashire,
was returning thither in Company of Mr. Abbot then, and now, Steward to the
Lord Molyneux, to give an Account to his Masters of his Negotiations in London;
but in Coventry they were both seized and imprisoned, as Enemies to the
Government, August 1689.

A while after Lunt's and Abbot's Confinement in Coventry, Providence so
ordered it, that Charles Cawson, Master of the Vessel that brought Lunt and
Thrillfall out of Ireland, being apprehended in Lancashire was carrying up to
London a Prisoner for that Fact: And lodging at Coventry was told as a piece of
News, that two of his Countrymen were committed to that Goal as Enemies to the
King and Government. Cawson desires to see them, the Kings Messenger that had
Cawson in Custody consents to it, and walking together into the Prison, Cawson
knows Lunt at first sight, charges him with being one of the Persons he brought
out of Ireland in June last, and who brought over the Commissions, Declarations
and other Papers which were left in his Ship, and for which Cawson was now in
Trouble; and being examined in London by the Council, acquaints the Government
with the whole Relation of Thrillfall's going into Ireland, and his, and Lunt's
coming back, landing at Cockram, leaving the Papers behind them, and that
Thrillfall was killed, and Lunt in Coventry Goal. Which being heard, and
attested by the Kings Messenger, Cawson was bound over to give Evidence against
Lunt, and for the present discharged. And if this and the foregoing Testimonies
do not prove, that Lunt was an Agent for the Lancashire Papists, and his
bringing over Commissions from the late King, I know not what can.

Matters appearing so plainly against Lunt, he and Abbot, Steward to the Lord
Molyneux, were removed from Coventry to London, examined by the Privy Council,
and both committed to Newgate for Treasonable Practices, November, 1689. Where
I shall leave them, and proceed to prove the Lancashire Conspiracy by other
Testimonies, and let the World see, what little Credit is to be given to that
hardy Man, that with so much Confidence denied the whole Plot, and called it a
sham Contrivance of some little Ministers to ruin those that were accused
without Cause.

And having already proved the bringing over Commissions, and the delivery of
them, I proceed to acquaint my Reader with the Use the Papists made of those
Commissions, and that will appear by the Depositions of Mr. Kelly, taken in
November, 1689. before Thomas Yarnol Mayor of Evesham in the County of
Worcester, Richard Earl Bellemont, Sir James Rushout, William Bromly, Edmund
Letchmore and Richard Doldswel Esquires, Justices of the Peace for the County
of Worcester, viz. That there was a design on foot to raise a Rebellion against
the King and Queen in Lancashire. That diverse Persons in that and the adjoining
Counties, had received Commissions from the late King, to raise two Regiments
of Horse, two Regiments of Dragoons, and three Regiments of Foot, that great
numbers of Irish Soldiers and Arms for them were privately kept in diverse
Places in that County. Particularly that Mr. Thomas Tatlock of Simmondswood
Ferguson in his Letter to the Lord chief Justice Holt, Printed 1694.
near Sefton did harbor above threescore Men, for the Service of the late
King. And that Arms for them were hid in that Wood. That Mr. Molyneux of
Marborow did harbor above twenty Irish Soldiers for the same Service. And
that Arms, Saddles, Bridles, Holsters and other Necessaries for them, were hid
in a Cellar under a Tower at the Entry of the House of Mr. Blundel of Ince in
the Parish of Sefton. That John Holland of Prescot, and his Partner, and a
Sadler in Legh, made Saddles and Holsters for them, and were privy to the
Design. And that he saw and heard read a Letter in the Hands of the Lord
Molyneux 's Son, from the late King James 's Queen, encouraging the
Insurrection intended in Lancashire and giving Assurance of Assistance from the
French King, of Men and Arms.

This Information caused many of the Lancashire Papists to be Imprisoned; but
others who tacitly confessed their Guilt by flying, and were looked upon to be
dangerous Persons absconded, See the Justices Letter from Middleton.
and would not be found till they had also prevented the Punishment, by
removing Kelly into another World. I suppose by private Murder, for as soon as
it was known that Mr. Dodsworth had also discovered the Conspiracy, that the
King might not have two Witnesses to prove the Treason, Kelly was made away,
and could never be heard off to this time. His Fate continues a Mystery; but
whether he was killed or carried away, it is certain the Conspirators from that
very time began to resume their Courage, which was extremely sunk upon the
notice of Mr. Dodsworth's discovery. And that these were the Artifices by which
they concealed the Plot so long, and frighted others from discovering it, for
fear they should meet the like Fate, is too plain to he denied.

In December, 1689. the Lancashire Plot was discovered also by Mr. Dodsworth,
to his Kinsman Roger Kirkby of Kirkby Loinsdale Esquire and Governor of Chester
Castle, and on the 27th of March, 1690 to the Right Honorable the Earl of
Macclesfeild, which his Lordship laying before One of his Majesty's Principal
Secretaries of State, Mr. Dodsworth was sent for to London, to declare his
Knowledge of the whole Matter, and on May the 16th 1690. gave Information upon
Oath of this Conspiracy, before the Lord chief Justice Holt. And the Clamor
that was made, upon several Persons of Note being seized, and Search made after
others, brought it to be examined before the Honorable the Commons assembled
in Parliament. The substance whereof was,

That certain Roman Catholic Gentlemen and others in the County Palatine of
Lancashire, and Parts adjacent (of whose Names and Dwellings he gave a List
into the House of Commons, where the Original still remains) were entered into a
treasonable Conspiracy to make War against the King and Kingdom, with design to
reinthrone the late King James, and in order to accomplish these Designs, had
received Commissions from the late King James, brought over from Ireland by Mr.
Thrillfall to raise some Regiments of Horse, and Dragoons. To furnish which,
Ammunition was provided, Arms and other Necessaries bought, and hid in diverse
Places by the confederated Colonels. Which Troops were to be joined by the
late Kings Forces from Ireland, whilst the French that were to be landed in
Cornwall gave the King Diversion there, and the Duke of Berwick in Scotland: And
all to be kept close and still, till the late King arrived in Lancashire, which
according to the late Kings Promise, should be in a Month or two at the
farthest.

With this Discovery the Honorable House of Commons were so well satisfied,
that they recommended Mr. Dodsworth to the King for a Reward of his Service to
the Public. His Majesty gratified him with a present Reward in Money, and
recommended him to the Lords Commissioners of his Treasury, for what Employment
he was capable of; but Mr. Dodsworth being a Papist, and consequently incapable
of any Place under his Majesty, was too long forgot, and had no other Reward
but what was given him by the Jacobites to stop his Mouth for ever, viz.
Murdered, for as soon as that Party (who have their Spies and Intelligencers
in all Places) heard there was a Correspondence between Dodsworth and Lunt, and
that it was whispered, that Lunt would also discover, Mr. Dodsworth was
Murdered by Mr. Deane a known and professed Jacobite.

Mr. Edward Robinson also made a Discovery of this Conspiracy on the 17th day
of March, 1690, before Richard Wright Esquire One of his Majesty's Justices of the
Peace for the County of Lancaster, in Substance thus.

That Mr. Fitzakerly at Spello House in Lancashire, showed this Deponent a
Commission from the late King James, for the raising Men for his Service, and
Arms wrapped up in Straw, and hid under the Tyles of the House. That Mr.
Fitzakerly had promised all his Tenants that would serve under him in the
Service of King James, that upon the Death of any of them, he would renew their
Leases to their Children. That they heard from the late King James very often,
and that he had sent them Word by a Servant of the Lord Molyneux 's, that he
would be with them in two Months. That John Harrington of Egboth Esquire told this
Deponent, that he also had received a Commission to be a Captain under King
James, and that Mr. Moore then in the House (who had been a Captain of Dragoons
in the late Irish Army) was to be his Lieutenant.

Thus have I proved without any help from Mr. Lunt, Mr. Wilson, or Mr. Womball,
that there was a Conspiracy against the King and Government formed by Mr.
Bromfeild and the Lancashire Papists, his Confederates, as early as the latter
end of the Year, 1688. That Commissions were sent from the late King James to
the Conspirators in June 1689. That Arms were provided, and Soldiers listed
and maintained by the Lancashire Papists to be ready at the Invasion in August
1690. That at the same time the Duke of Berwick was to invade Scotland, and the
French England, and give the King Diversion in the West, while the late King
was doing the like in the North. And now he that disbelieves the Lancashire
Conspiracy, after he has seen it thus separately and singly proved, by Persons
at great distance from, and utter Strangers at the times of their Discoveries
to one another, his Incredulity carries such dangerous Symptoms with it, that I
despair of seeing it ever confuted by a Miracle.

True and Manifest, why was not the Prosecution and Conviction of the Offenders
as Public at the same time?

Jacobites were too nimble for the Kings Prosecutors, and Murdered the Kings
Witnesses, before the Conspirators could (by the Formalities of Law) be brought
to a Trial.

England in August 1690, what was the Reason he came not? All the Duke of
Schombergs Forces were not able to hinder him.

William landed in Ireland June 14. 1690.
in June, routed the late King James's Army at the Boyn, and drove him out of
Ireland in July July 1. 1690.
and that was the Reason he came not into Lancashire in August, as he solemnly
promised.

The News of this glorious Victory was no little Mortification to all the
Jacobites as well as the Lancashire Papists. Yet still persisting in their
restless Designs of destroying King William, and restoring the late King James,
the Lancashire Plot must sleep while another is devised, and that was to gain
Assistance from France Vid. Lord Preston 's Trial. page 50.
to invade England, and to compass this End the Heads of the Jacobites in all
Countys immediately repair to London, and there consult what new Measures were
to be taken after this fatal and unexpected Disappointment by the Victory at
the Boyn. Now Clubs are set up in all quarters of the Town, for finding they
could make no Archievements in the Field of Honor, like Moles they endeavor
to undermine the Government by working deeper and darker. And because the
Conspirators were then generally speaking but of one Faction, and they such as
made no great Figure in England, it was resolved, that the Plot to restore the
late King should be laid wider, extended farther, and more Interests be united
in private Cabals of their most considerable Friends, Lords and Gentlemen, both
Whigs and Tories, See the Result of a Controversy between some Lords and
Gentlemen both Whigs and Tories, in order to restore the late King. Lord
Prestons Trial p. 49. and 56.
and that at every Meeting they should propose and debate the most effectual
ways to restore the late King, and when come to a Resolution, they should
transmit their Sentiments to the Royal Club (so called) in Covent Garden, and
they select the most Rational among the various Opinions, and digest them into
such Methods for Practice, as should govern the whole Party.

This Stratagem gratified all the Jacobites, by making their Persons and
Opinions, considerable in what they thought so Great and Glorious a Work, and
took so mightily, that in two or three Months, all were agreed to ruin their
Native Country, by their unanimous Consent to these two Proposals.

First, that the Jacobites being unable to reinthrone the late King by their
own strength, they should endeavor to obtain Assistance from Lord Preston's
Trial, p. 49 and 60.
France, who had formerly made them such Promises.

Secondly, since delays were dangerous, sending Letters into France hazardous,
Lord Preston's Trial, p. 50 and 56.
the Court at St. Germans Factious and Treacherous, that some Men of Quality,
and known Ability, should go over into France to transact that Matter for the
whole Party. Now,

Every Cabal being Ambitious of the Honor of sending some Member of their own
Club on this promising Enterprise, it took up more time to adjust this
particular, then to agree the other Preliminaries. At length viz. in December
1690, all centred in the Nomination of the Lord Preston, Mr. Ashton and Mr.
Elliot, some would have had their number increased, but were overruled by this
standing Maxim among them Lord Prestons Trial. pa. 55.
viz. Choose well, but have to do but with a few, for a Multitude may give, but
can never keep Counsel.

These Gentlemen thus appointed by the Party were not long before they were
ready for their Voyage. And having hired a Vessel of Mrs. Jane Pratt of Berkin
in Essex to go into France See her Depos. Lord Prestons Trial. pa. 30. and 31.
they went on board her near Battle Bridge in December the 30. 1690, and were
all taken by Captain Billup the same day a little below Gravesend. In Mr.
Ashton's Bosom was found See Cap. Billups Aiffidavit in Lord Prestons Trial.
pa. 38, and 39.
a Packet of Letters and Papers, which declared they were going to France to
promote the treasonable Designs of that Party, against the King and Queen. To
invade the Realm, subvert the Government, and to restore the late King by the
Assistance of French Forces. So that the Invasion Plot did still continue, only
that from Ireland is translated into one from France, which is but shifting of
Hands, for the Conspirators are still the same Persons.

In January 1690, the Lord Preston and Mr. Ashton were brought to their Trials:
And being found guilty of high Treason, received the Sentence of Condemnation,
Mr. Ashton was Executed, and the Lord Preston discovering the Design upon Oath,
had his Life given him; but how well he deserved that Favor, let his future
Demeanor justify. However it quashed the Conspiracy, and all hopes of an
Invasion and Insurrection are laid aside for the Present, till the Jacobites
could meet with a more lucky Opportunity to revive them. And this concludes the
Jacobites Conspiracies and Disapointments from the Years 1688 to the Year 1690.
And ingages our Thanks to God and the King, for our Deliverance.

Now, who would not believe but that after all these Disappointments, our
Enemies should have been reconciled to their own Quiet and the Kingdoms
Tranquillity; but instead of giving Demonstrations of their peacable Tempers,
like sworn Enemies of their own and our Happiness; they begin the Year 1691
with fresh Attempts to destroy the King and subvert the Government. And to
accomplish these horrid Designs, are continually sending Intelligence to, and
receive Advices from, France, by such hardy Persons as were thought qualified
to undertake it: And the Courrers, by the Assistance of Mr. Shelton of
Canterbury, Mr. Nowel and Paul Peper of Dover, and Hunt of Rumny-Marsh, for
some time passed to and fro with the greatest Security. Not to name every
little Runner on these detestable Errands, some of the chief of them were Coll.
Parker Mr. Bromfield and his Son, Mr: Waugh, Mr. Charnock both the Crosbies,
Johnson the Priest, Mr. David Lloyd Sr. -- Sympson a Scotchman, who passed by
the Name of Jones, Mad. Sackvile, Ingram, Mrs. Alred, and many others of both
Sexes, (who upon occasion can be named:) All which in their several Turns,
performed their Parts with great Applause of the Party. By this means the Court
at St. Germans kept up the Spirits of the English Jacobites, and they made
large Offers to the French Court, who fed them with as large Promises of
Assistance with Men, Arms and Money, as raised their Hopes and Expectations
into moral Impossibilities; viz. That England should be speedily Invaded and
Conquered: If a Project that was then on Foot did not accomplish the Work by a
quicker Dispatch and restore the late King without the Loss of much Blood. With
these dark Sayings the Jacobites entertained themselves, and thought they
obliged others, when with great Seriousness and seeming Favor, they told them
there was a great thing on Foot, that would quickly reestablish the late King
and confound the Williamites. And when most Men were wondering, what this great
Thing should be, Providence (to the eternal Reproach of the Contrivers and
Encouragers) discovered it to be the Murder of King William. For,

His Majesty's Enemies having failed in other Attempts, and unwilling to wait
any longer the uncertain Fate of War, thought this Project the best Expedient
for their purpose, and this Time most agreeable. For the King being now in
Flanders to murder him there would admit of more Excuses then in another
Place. this horrid Enterprise with the Promise of great Rewards; Grandvalle was
to be made a D. and to have an Estate proportionable, and Dumond to be a Knight
of St. Lazar and have 20000 Livers in Estate.
being communicated to Granvalle, a Captain of Dragoons in the French Service,
he and Dumond undertook it, and travailed to Loo while the King was there to
effect it; but missing their Opportunity, followed the King to his Royal Camp
in Flanders, where Granvelle returned to the French Army, and Dumond, according
to the Orders given him, entr'd himself into the Confederate Army, that he
might take his Opportunity, when his Majesty went to visit the Grand-guards or
the Lines, to Shoot him behind his Back, and then make the best of his way to a
Body of Horse, that Granvalle, and Parker should have in readiness, upon a
previous Intimation; to rescue and carry him off. But Heaven took Care of the
Preservation of Europe, that so visibly depended upon one single Life; and
whether Dumond's Heart failed him, or whatever else was the Cause, after some
weeks Attendance, not being able to effect his Design, he returns to the Court
at Hanover, and for this Year gives over the acursed Design of Assassinating
his Majesty.

In November 1689, we lest Mr. Lunt and Mr. Abbot committed to Newgate, where
they reinain'd twenty weeks, and then were bailed to appear at the Assizes at
Lancaster. Lunt appeared according to his Recognizance, and in August 1690 was
committed to Lancaster Goal for high Treason, where he continued a close
Prisoner till about April 1691, and was not only maintained at the Charge of
the Lancashire Gentlemen; but was Caressed and Applauded, as their principal
Favorite; and now if you ask, after all this plain Proof, why Lunt was
discharged, it happened on this Manner.

When the Officers of the Customs feiz'd the Commissions, Declarations and
other Papers that Lunt left behind him in the Vessel, they forgot to set such a
mark upon them before they delivered them out of their Hands, as might enable
them to know the Papers again, when produced, and for want of such Mark, being
unable to swear 'em to be the very same Papers, after they had been so long out
of their Hands; the Government that always expressed an Unwillingness to
prosecute for Life, where the Proof was doubtful, would not produce them as
Witnesses against the Prisoner. Nor will I for that Reason recite their
Affidavits.

Nor was this the only Cause of Lunts Acquittal, but Mr. Cawson falling sick a
little before the Assizes, of a Disease that carried him to his long Home, and
the Mariners being all at Sea, there was now but one Witness against him ( viz
Mr. Dodsworth) which is not sufficient, in a Case of high Treason, and thus
Lunt was discharged.

Thus you have heard it proved, beyond all Possibility of Contradiction, that
Lunt did bring Commissions from the late King, that he delivered those
Commissions (excepting those few that were lost) as directed, that he listed
Soldiers, and bought Arms for the Lancashire Papists, that two of those
Commissions were seen by Mr. Robinson, See his Depositions.
that the Jacobites were modelling Officers and Men, preparatory to an
Insurrection: That many of 'em absconded till Kelly was made away, that Lunt
was accused, imprisoned, indicted and arraigned for these Treasons, and had
certainly been hanged, if it had not been for those intervening Accidents. And
now let the Reader judge, how ill this agrees with Lunt's inventing the
Lancashire Plot, as Taffe falsely charges him at the Trial at Manchester: and
what little Reason the Jacobites had to slander him with the Names of perjured
Cannibal, when what he deposed is so strongly confirmed, by Honorable,
Irreproachable and Uncontrollable Testimonies.

Lunt having the good Fortune to be thus discharged from Imprisonment, is again
entertained and employed by his Lancashire Friends in listing Men, and buying
Arms, that if the King should be taken off in Flanders, they might be ready for
an Insurrection in England, as soon as the Blow was given. These Preparations
having spent the Summer, and the Campaign in Flanders ended, and no News of the
Kings Assassination, nor the Invasion. In November 1691 they sent Lunt into
France, See his Depositions.
to acquaint the late King, that they were in a Condition to receive him, and
therefore desired him to inform them, when his Affairs would permit him to make
a Descent into this Kingdom. Lunt returns again in December following with
Advice, That the late King would be in England the next Spring, and that in the
mean time Col. Parker and others should be sent over with full Instructions,
how to put themselves into a Posture fit for his Reception; for now the Descent
from la Hogue was agreed on.

Col. Parker and Johnson the Priest, two of the Infamous Cabal, that in
Conjunction with some of the F -- C -- contrived the intended Murder of the
King, and Invasion of England, having digested the Theory of both in France,
landed in England about the latter End of Jan. 1691 to put 'em in Practice. The
Murder of the King was their darling Project; and being the only Means they
thought would make their Invasion practicable, and their Conquest of England
speedy, was the great thing they primarily drove at, and therefore communicated
it to all they could trust, See Goodman's Depositions in the Secretaries Office.
in hopes to have done it before the King went to Holland; but were so long in
contriving how, by whom, when, and where it was to be done, that the Time
elapsed, before their Resolves came to Maturity. But this Loss of Time gave
them no great Trouble, since Parker had assured them that the
Assassination-Plot would (notwistanding the late Disappointment) be reassumed
by the same Persons, the next Campaign in Flanders, who had their good Wishes,
while they were busying themselves about what was to follow, namely, the
Invasion.

The Scheme of this Descent was laid in France, and Parker and others sent over
to communicate it to the Party here. Vid. Captain Blaire's Depositions before
the Council.
This he did by calling their General Officers and Colonels together, and
acquainting them (but very privately) That their old Master had now obtained *
of the most Christian King, thirty thousand effective Men, and that when the
Spring was a little more advanced, the late King, who was already marching into
Normandy, would be wafted over with them into England, with Assurance, Vid.
Blaire's Dopositions in the Secretaries Office.
that if that Number was not great enough to reduce his rebellious Subjects;
France would spare him thirty thousand more. Therefore desired all to be in
Readiness with the greatest Speed and Secresy imaginable; To Captain Blaire he
addressed himself more particularly (at the Instance of Johnson the Priest)
telling him, he was going to his Command in Lancashire, but intended to move
Southward at the late Kings Landing; and therefore desired Capt. Blaire to join
him, in Regard his own Men were raw, and the Captains for the most part were
all old Officers and Soldiers.

When Parker went into Lanashire, he took with him Blaire's Depositions in the
Secretaries Office.
several good Officers, some of which stayed with him in Lancashire, and others
he disposed of in Yorkshire, and the Bishopric of Durham. His head Quarters
were at Mr. Vid. Depositions of Geo. Wilson, and Oliv. Pearson.
Walmsley's at Dungan-hall, and from thence issued out necessary Ordens for
that County. And because their Arms were (for fear of Discovery) hid in Woods,
and Grounds, buried between Walls, and in Cellars and Outhouses, he ordered
them all to be taken out, and forthwith distributed Jo. Womball's Affidavis in
the Appendix.
among their Officers: For now the late King and his Army of English, Scotch,
Irish and French Papists Ap. 1692.
were at la Hogue, imbarking for England.

This Allarm being early given among the Party, all the Officers are rallying
together the Soldiers they had under Subsistence, and listing others. Among
the rest,

Mr. James Fountain, as Lieutenant Coll. to the Lord Montgomery, had raised a
Regiment of Horse in London, and was ready to have joined the late King, if he
had landed. His usual listing Places were three Alehouses in Fullers Rents,
and at Redman's at the Bottle in Devoreaux Court, near the Temple. To the Truth
of which, tho I need call no other Witnesses, than Mr. Day, Mr. Cousins, Mr.
Willoughby, Mr. Holmes the Japanner, and Mr. Symms, who were all Officers under
him, and brought Men to him to be listed, yet having by me an Authentic
Affidavit, be pleased to take the Contents of it as follows;

M. Seaton makes Oath, That James Fountain was Captain in the Lord
Montgomery's Regiment of Foot, and thereafter Major to the said Regiment. At
the Revolution he followed the late King James into France, thence into
Ireland, where he was made Lieutenant. Coll. to Coll. Cannons Regiment. From
Ireland he went into Scotland and joined the Viscount Dundee, and a little
after the Highlands were reduced, he came to London, and lived Incognito; but
when the French were at la Hogue in order to invade England, Fountain did buy a
considerable Number of Horses, and Accoutrements for Horses, and Riders he had
provided for them, and did keep the said Riders under Pay and Subsistence to
serve King James, and join him and the French at their Landing.

Jurat. 2, Julij 1694. Coram me James Vernon. M. Seaton.


Colonel Holman was at the same time raising, and had almost completed,
another Regiment to join the French at their Landing: And to subsist those that
were actually listed, he paid fifty Pounds one Week, fifty Pounds the next
Week, and thirty Pounds the Week following, to Captain Brice Blaire, See Mr.
Blair's and Mr. Bertram's Depositions in the Secretaries Office.
who distributed it among the Soldiers, by the Hands of Mr. Bertram, as
appears by their Depositions in the Hands of the Government, but after the
Defeat at la Hogue, Mr. Holman would pay no more. To these Instances of the
Jacobites Attempts to ruin the Government, add but the Share that Sir John
Friend, Sir William Perkins, and the Persons of Quality in other Parts of the
Kingdom mentioned in Crosby's Papers had in it, See Crosby's orginal Papers
page. --
and then tell me, whether the Enemies of the Government, and their repeated
Conspiracies, ought to be so much flighted and despised; and reckoned so
inconsiderable in their Numbers, and weak in their Power and Interests, as some
(out of no good design I fear) would have them thought to be. For all these
wicked Confederacies, and those mentioned by Crosby, are but Branches of the
Lancashire Conspiracy, which at first was thought but the Capricio's of light
Heads, but you now see it spread almost over the whole Kingdom: And justly
roused the Government, to prosecute the first Contrivers of so much intended
Mischief, to the King and Kingdom.

Nor were these Preparations for the Invasion the only part of the Plot against
England; for whilst the English Jacobites are bandying together to join their
old Master at his Landing, the Kings Enemies Beyond Sea are as hot and forward
in their cursed Design to Murder his Majesty in Flanders, that so the Invasion
might find us all in a Confusion, and for want of a King and a Government,
scattered like Sheep, without a Shepherd, and consequently the easier Prey to
our Foreign and Intestine Devourers. For now Granvalle returning from Paris,
where he had engaged one Leefedale to join with Dumont in the Murder of King
William, appoints a Meeting at Uden, whither Dumont was to come from Hanover,
and both to go from thence into Flanders: Where as soon as the Murder was
committed, Mounsieur Chandlois, with a Party of 300 Horse from the Duke of
Luxemburg's Army, was to be posted at the advanced Guards, to rescue the
Murderers, and persuade the World, the Assassination of King William was a
Stratagem of War; but God Almighty confounded their hellish Politics. Dumont
and Leefedale discovered the Conspiracy. Granvalle was taken, and received the
Reward of his Villainy, after he had made (without being put to the Torture) a
full Confession of his Crimes. At his Execution he seemed very Penitent, and
declared with some Resentment, that he was ruined by the Authors of that
detestable Project.

Matters being thus settled by the Kings Enemies on the other side of the Water
for his Assassination in Flanders, and the Invasion carrying on by the Conduct
of Colonel Parker and the rest of the confederate Colonels, and other
Officers in England, and every one acquainted with the Design, all Jacobite
Eyes were fixed upon the Weather-Cocks, and the first Salutation was how is the
Wind, which standing long in a Protestant Quarter of Heaven, some of them were
silly enough to curse it, saying 'twould serve them as Treacherously now as it
did at the Revolution. However that nothing might be omitted on their Part,
they send an Express to the Lord Melfort, by Captain Lloyd, acquainting his
Lordship, that they had corrupted many of our English Sea Commanders, who would
go over to the French, and with that Notice, a true List of the Number and
Rates of the English Fleet, and how long it would be, before it was possible
they could be joined by the Dutch. Praying his Lordship to lay it before the
most Christian King, and procure his Command to Marshall Tourville, to seek
and immediately sight the English, before they could be joined by the Dutch. And
now the Jacobites thought they had nothing to do, but to kill and take
possession. And therefore were as Insolent and Unsufferable in their Behavior
before the Engagement, as their Fears' and Cowardice were apparent after it.

Whilst the Jacobites were pleasing themselves with the hopes of approaching
Wealth and Opulence, the great thing that put a damp upon their Mirth, was the
various Reports abo^ut the joining of the English and Dutch Fleets. Once they
had notice they were joined, but being contradicted the next day, least that
Report should have Influence upon the French, they send over Sir Adam Blaire,
to assure the French they were not joined. But so it happened before that
Gentleman could reach Dover, they had good Assurance, that the Fleets were
joined indeed; and therefore Mr. Clark is now in England and I appeal to him
for the Truth of it.
Mr. Clark, better known by the nickname of Count Cl. is posted into France to
acquaint them with this fatal Junction; but the Count was so far from gaining
Credit to his Report (Sir Adam Blaire averring the contrary) that Mr. Clark was
imprisoned, as a spreader of false News, till the late King owning him, and
their being beaten, procured his Liberty.

But whilst the Queen's Majesty, of blessed Memory, was taking such measures as
might frustrate their wicked Designs, and secure the Nation; and all Men gazing
in dubious Expectations of the Event, comes the happy 20th of May 1692, with
the joyful News, that through the Providence of our good God, and the Valor of
our courageous Seamen, the French Fleet was beaten off la Hogue, and their
Majesty's victorious Navy was pursuing, burning and sinking those that by
flying endeavored to escape. And not long after, to make our Joy complete, was
brought the Notice of Granval's Execution. Both, great and miraculous
Deliverances. For,

This Year the ultra Marine and English Jacobites were resolved to play all
their Engines at once. The French King was to be in Flanders, Namure was to be
besieged, King James was to land in England, and his Majesty was to be
murdered all about the same time. Here are Plots with a Witness, and all so
substantially proved, that the very Thought so crushes me with Horror and
Amazement, that I tremble to think what the Consequences of them would have
been, if they had succeeded, for it is much more easy to imagine then express,
what a dismal Scene of Barbarity and Cruelty, of Blood and Horror, must have
followed in England, and the greatest Part of Europe; but the Snare is broken,
and we are delivered for which we ought to be Eternally thankful.

This is the fifth Disappointment of the Jacobian Plot, began in Lancashire in
1688. First, by Kelly's and Dodsworth's Discovery in 1689. Then, by King
William's Victory at the Boyne in July 1690. Next, by seizing the Lord Preston
and Mr. Ashton in December 1690. Fourthly, by Dumont's Disappointment. And
Lastly, by the detecting of Granvalle, and beating the French at la Hogue in
1692.

However, that they might prove themselves such, as neither Mercies not
Judgments could effect, about Michaelmas 1692, these Malcontents, through the
Clemency of the Government, assumed the Confidence to cabal again, to find out
some new Conspiracy, or rather to revive those two old ones, of Assassination
and Invasion, by some more secret Methods than they had hitherto found out. And
that they might not commit the same Solecisms again, like grave Politicians,
they first enquire into the former Miscarriages, and particularly that at la
Hogue. And 'twas agre'd among them, that Marshall Turville's not fighting the
English, before they were joined by the Dutch, was the Cause of the Overthrow
that happened afterward; That it was originally, if not designedly, the Lord
Melfort's Fault: In not giving the Notices which he received from England, time
enough to the French Court (viz. to fight the English, before they were joined
by the Dutch) but suffering the Time prefixed by his English Advices to be worn
out, 'ere he communicated what he had in Charge to deliver immediately. Hereupon
great Complaints are made to the late King against the Lord Melfort's Ministry,
and in plain Terms they tell the late King, unless Melfort be removed they will
concern themselves no Vid. Letters against Melfort in Crosby's Papers.
more in his Affairs.

The Popish Jacobites defend Melfort with their utmost Art and Interest, and
lay the Miscariages at la Hogue Vid Letters on Melforts behalf.
upon the Protestant Compounders, and so far engage the Court of Rome in their
quarrel, that the late King's Pension from the Pope was taken off, for siding
with Heretics. But the Protestants, who had gained some Papists to their Party
against Melfort, making use of Sir -- Sympson a Scotch Knight (then, and still
residing at St. Germans by the Name of Jones) between whom and Melfort there
was an old Grudg, he staggered the Lord Melfort in the Opinion of the late
King, and the French Court, and when Sir James Montgomery came over, he threw
him quite out of Favor, insomuch that he was forced to leave St. Germans and
retire to --

In the mean time two such strong Parties were formed at St. Germans, that the
late King (according to his usual Politics of altering his Measures according
to the Variety of his Circumstances) took the Lord Middleton into his Counsels,
and employed both him and the Lord Melfort by Turns, as his Affaris required.
And these Transactions made an end of the Year 1692.

Both the Jacobite Parties being now seemingly pleased in having each their
Favorite at the Helm (for Sir James Montgomery was not yet come into France)
the Murder of King William, and the Invasion of England are again revived. The
Management of the Invasion is committed to Sir Sympson, Major Crosby, Captain
Lloyd and Mr. Walter Crosby. Sympson and Lloyd came and went over several times
about it in the beginning of the Year 1693, continued so doing till June
following; and then having laid the Plan for an Invasion, returned into France
in August following.

Major Crosby (as he was commonly called) came into England about Michaelmas
1693, staid in London a while, went down into Lancashire, and from thence
returned into France.

Mr. Walter Crosby, Son of Sir Thomas Crosby (a Member of the late Kings
Parliament in Ireland) was educated in Dublin College, and left that Society,
to carry Intelligence into France. From thence, through Flanders and England,
he returned into Ireland, and under the Disguise of a Williamite, contributed
his utmost to the Destruction of his Native Country, till the Seizure of his
Letters discovered him and made him a Prisoner; but being admitted to Bail he
lest his Security in the Lurch, and escaped into France, and his former
Management of Affairs gave him so much Credit at St. Germans, that the Revival
of the Plot for an Invasion, Insurrection and Rebellion, was at last solely
committed to his Management.

November 1693, to the great Satisfaction of the Party, he lands in England;
brings Colonel Parker again out of Lancashire to London, revives their former
Cabals, and adds fresh Life and Vigor to their drooping Spirits. Jacobite
Meetings are now more frequent and numerous, in order to draw up such Proposals
as might satisfy the Court of France, that the Conquest of England was both
practicable and easy.

I have now showed you by what means they were carrying on the Invasion, and
must now leave Mr. Crosby at his Work (in collecting the Sentiments of the
Jacobites, and putting them into such a Method as might persuade the French
King to assist them with Men and Arms to restore the late King) and return to
the Assassination Plot, which always preceded or kept Pace with the Invasion.
And this calls me back to one of the first Contrivers of it;

The Lord Melfort, who had still some small share in the Management of public
Affairs, finding his Interest sinking proportionably with the hopes of
conquering England, resolves to recover his former Credit, by pushing on the
Assassination of King William, by any Methods that would effect it. To this
end, his old Confidents Colonel Parker Vid Mr. La Rue's Depositions at
Charnocks Trial.
and Johnson the Priest being absent, he takes to his Assistance, Mr. Bromfeild
and Captain Griffin, who promised in a short time to give him a good Account of
his Project, from some Friends they had about Dover, which it seems they had
already engaged in this wicked Vid Lunt's Depositions in the Appendix.
Enterprise, at the Instigation of some more concealed and private Person. And
whilst they were thus in Expectation from Dover, another Occasion to strengthen
the Number of those already engaged, seemed to offer it self, thus,

The Lancashire Gentlemen being willing to pay their Devoir to the late King,
and to receive his Commands as they usually did by a Messenger of their own
from his Lips. Mr. Lunt whose Services and Sufferings had rendered him the
Confident of the Party, was sent by the Lord Molyneux and others on this Errand
into France, July the 3d 1693. coming to St. Germans, he delivered his Message
to the late King in his Closet, the Lord Melfort being present: Who thinking he
had now a fit Opportunity to execute his Plot, and Assassinate King William, he
sends Lunt to Mr. Griffin, telling him that Griffin had an Affair to engage him
in. Captain Griffin sends him to his old Friend Mr. Bromfeild, who after
bewailing the ill Success that had so long attended the late Kings Affairs,
told Lunt, they were now upon a quicker Expedient for their Masters
Restoration, and that was, to cut off the Prince of Orange (for so they call
King William) by any way or method the Vid Lunt's Depositions in the Appendix.
Undertakers should think fit, and if Mr. Lunt would make one in that Service,
he should have a Reward of five hundred Pounds a Year. Lunt consented, and
after various Discourses at sundry Times upon this Subject, Lunt taking his
leave of the Lord Melfort, his Lordship told him, that if the Design that
Grissin and Bromfeild had imparted to him took Effect, the late King would soon
be in England. And Bromfeild at Lunt's departure gave him a Signet to carry to
the Persons, that, as Bromfeild told him, were in the same Design.

In December 1693, Lunt arrived at Dover, and met with four of the sixteen
Persons that were engaged in the Assassination of the King See Lunt's
Depositions in the Appendix.
viz. Captain Nowel of Dover, Captain Walton of Foulston, Mr. Pepper of Dover
and Mr. Preston of Feversham; two of which acknowledged that they were in the
Design of killing the King, and made no question but in a Month or two to
Effect it. Lunt traveling from Dover toward London, told several Romish
Priests of his Acquaintance (though not in Plain words) the Design he was engaged
in. Some of the Priests were against it, as a damnable Sin, and others
encouraged him to it, as a meritorious Work; these different Opinions, and the
dismal Reflections that his awakened Conscience, made upon his engaging in an
Action so Inhuman and Barbarous, gave him so much Disquiet, that he resolved to
act no further in it; but had then no Intention to discover it, till a good
Friend made him sensible it was his Duty, and then he discovered the whole
Conspriacy beginning to his Knowledge in May 1689, and continuing till June
1694, which was the time he discovered it, and now I must return to Mr. Crosby.
Who,

Having acquainted himself with the Sentiments of the Party, agre'd what
Proposals to make to the French King, and collected the Names of those, that,
according to his Account, were to assist at the Invasion and Insurection, was
preparing to return to France with these Writings, of which for fear one should
miscarry, there were two Copies. One kept by himself, and the other by Coll.
Parker, but good Heaven discovered this Treason also, and Mr. Crosby, who had
completed the Work he came about, and only waited for a Wind to Transport him
into France, was apprehended, May the 9th and committed to Newgate, and Coll.
Parker who was defign'd to supply that Fault, was taken May the 20th committed
to the Tower, May the 22th, and by this means the Carriage of the Papers was
delayed, till Parker broke Prison, which was August the 12th following.

The next day after Mr. Crosby was apprehended, the King's Messengers Mr. Legate
and Mr. Hopkins searched the Chamber where Crosby laid up his Papers. In the
first Room they found store; but while they were there, Cosen Mally Mary Jones
with another Fomale Jacobite, that lodged in the same House, ripped up a Feather
Bed and took out thence great quantities of written Papers and Letters directed
to Mr. Crosby, and that they might tell no Tales, threw them into the House of
Office and a Pail of Water after them, but strewing Feathers in the way
(through the haste they made to destroy the Writings) they guided the
Messengers to retrieve them. Now,

Before I produce these Papers, give me leave to acquaint you, that the
following Papers are truly copied from the Originals, sworn by two Witnesses
Mr. Legate and Mr. Hopkins.
at Crosby's Trial to be found either in his Pockets, in his Chambers, or in
the House of Office, and were all marked by the Messengers at their first
Seizing. the Names in Cant are explained by a Key found among Crosby's Papers
for that purpose, who seldom was called by his own Name in England, but by
these that follow, viz. Philips, Williamson, Traveller, James. Clynch, Thompson
and Jack Crew. I will next show whither he was going, the Company he kept, and
what he had been doing, and then produce the Scheme for an Invasion. Mr. Crosby
had a Chamber at Mr. Pugson's house a Tailor in German-street, who gave the
Information following;

That he believes Philips (Crosby) was going beyond Sea, and had waited some
considerable time for a Wind, for that he reported he was going a Journey, and
would be often inquiring about the Wind which was then Easterly, and many that
inquired if Philips was gone, would immediately look upon the Wind. One
particularly wondered Philips was not gone, for the Wind was then shifted from
the East, and fair for him. The same Imformant says that most of the Persons
that visited Philips brought him letters and Pacquets: Among others that came
to him, he remembers Mr. Simon Harcourt used to bring Writings to him,
pretending they concerned a Suit of Madam Elliot's; he the said Harcourt came
to Philips immediately after Sr. James Montgomery was taken, and carried
himself, as if he had been stark Mad. He was also often visited by Bromfeild
the Quaker, Lady Slaney Daughter to Sir Patrick Trant and Lady Philips, lately
come out of France. Sir Andrew Forrester, Captain Waugh of Brentford, Mr. James
Urwin in Kingstreet, Doctor Smith late Fellow of a College in Oxford, Doctor
Sherridon late Bishop of Kilmore, the Lady Griffin who lodged in Pel-Mel, sent
Letters often to Philips by her Yallow hair'd Boy: And Coll. Oglethrop by his
maid Servant. An Indian Boy brought Letters often from Mr. Nay Smith Gentleman
of the Horse to the Duke of Norfolk. So did Captain Charnock and Penelope
Higgins, who this Informant believes were privy to all Philips Affairs: These
and Colonel James Graham come often to him, and were long with him, and
further this Informant says not,

Pugson.


In Mr. Crosby's Custody was found a Letter from Mr. Simon Har**^ Cl -- of the
P -- for the County of Mid -- x. Desiring to see Mr. Philips at his House at
eight this night, and desires Cousin Molly (an intreaguing Female) to let him
know so much if she can. I have sent (says he) also to his Coffee-house to
signify so much. I am Madam your most Humble Servant

S. Har**t.


directed to Mrs. Mary Jones at Mr. Pugsons over against the Coffee-House in
German-street dated 13 Ap. 94.

In the same Chanber was also found a bantering Letter against the Government,
written by Sir John Knight of Bristol, directed to Mr. Simon Harcourt, and
desiring him to tell Mr. Philips (Crosby) that he had very earnest Business
with him, and must of necessity speak with him at Harcourts House at his first
Leisure.

J. Knight.
dated April. 2d 1694.



You see Mr. Crosby is invited by both these Gentlemen to a Conference, the
Place where, and Time when, but about what they met, I will leave my Reader to
judge, when I have told him that Mr. Crosby was taken by the Kings Messengers,
with his Pockets full of Treasonable Papers, knocking at Mr. Har**t's Door in
Lincolns-Inn-Fields, about eleven at Night; I shall make no Reflections on it,
but methinks it is a Jest all over, that after this, and many other Instances
of their Aversion, such Men should still enjoy such great Places of Trust and
Profit under the present Government.

In Mr. Crosby's Chamber was likewise found (among Scores of others) a Letter
of the same Date, directed to Mr. Hatton, desiring to speak with Mr. Phillips
(Crosby) before he took his Journey, and signed,

Cl***n.




Another directed to Mr. Crosby.
Phillips, dated April 6. 1694.

Mr. Cole Mr. Noseworthy.
at whose Lodgings I dined, has received several other Letters for you from
Ruth Goodall, King James's Queen.
and he will bring them to morrow Morning to the House where I saw you last, he
will be there exactly at ten, I am,

Yours C. Temple. Tempest.



To Mr. Phillips, March. 28. 1694. In hopes Elizabeth Franklin The Court of
France.
will give her Consent to a Marriage with Peter East, England.
I have sent you the Grounds on which his Relations promoted the Match with
Assurance Money.
Abraham Munson shall be really to attend it, and defray the Expenses, and
Bales of Woollen Troopers.
and Linen Foot-Souldiers.
shall not be wanting, when both Parties are agreed, and Writings interchanged
for a Settlement. However you will be so kind to send Word, where the Wedding
must be kept, that those who have so long expected it, may be all in a
Readiness, of which they shall have Notice, from, Sir,

Your humble Servant, J. Micklethwaite Mollyneux.



Fergusen calls these Papers, for which Crosby was apprehended, Baggatells, and
Stories of Robin Hood and little John, but if this be not such, there is none
in Prince Butler's Petition against Pamphylius; but if you explain the Canting
Original by the Notes in the Margin, which are all taken from Crosby's Copy,
you will find it a plain Indication, how ready the Lancashire Conspirators were
for a Rebellion, which was then carried on by Coll. Parker, Crosby, Johnson,
and their Accomplices.

I shall next present you with brief Heads of a Letter, written into France in
Crosby's own Hand, and found in his Pockets when taken at Mr. Har**t's Door,
directed to the late Queen Mary, Wife to the late King James, which gives
Assurance of his utmost Endeavors in order to accomplish the late King's
Restoration, complains of keeping Melfort.
Mills in the Ministry, who has ruined all the late King's Affairs in England.
That two of Melfort.
Mills's Friends, viz. My Lord Alis. and Sr. Robert Ham, assured him there was
no need of it, he had writ to Mills Melfort.
to withdraw himself for some Time, and therefore hopes the late Queen will
take better Measures for the future.

Another Letter dated March 1694, and directed to Mr. James Clynch, Crosby
says,

I received yours of January the 26th with that enclosed for Mr. Melfort.
May, which was very full and satisfactory, he ordered me to make a fair Copy
of it to send to Elizabeth The French Court. Ferguson.
Franklin, that which our Friend * Robin writ did not a little quiet my Spirit,
if some Persons had not rendered every thing falsely to Mr. French King.
Knowles, we should not have wanted to supply all the Manufactories, wherein it
is as plain to him as us, he could not lay out his Money to a more considerable
Advantage. For if Things were upon this Foot, honest Mrs. Sarah The Descent.
Dolton's Match would not be now to make.

See how the Jacobites are bartering with France for England; and there is no
Question to be made, if the Charge of a Descent must be out of the F -- K -- 's
Pocket, all the three Kingdoms must be in his Power till the Debt is cancelled:
Which will never be till our Claims are extinguished in our Blood and Ruin; and
yet upon this Foot would the Jacobites have their native Country invaded. I
will trouble the Reader but with one Letter more, before I produce the Scheme
for the Invasion, and that was dated March 1694. and sent by Mr. Bolton, and
directed to Mr. Crosby.
James Clynch.

I Had yours of the 26th of January, and Mr. Nihil Mr. Neale, Lord Melfort's
Secretary.
showed me one of yours of the same date to Mr. May, Melfort.
who has writ at large to you by this Packet, we are all pleased with the
hopes you give us of uniting all Interests, if this could be improved to a
Degree of collecting all their Sentiments, from time to time, into one Letter
written by their Directions, it would have wonderful Effects here, and make all
Answers expeditious and satisfactory.

Here are Directions how Crosby and his Accomplices are to proceed in order to
form a Descent from France, and an Insurrection and Rebellion in England, all
Parties must be cajoled, Factions humored and such Promises made, as were
never intended to be performed. That Is the true English of the Words, uniting
all Interests, for according to the Jacobites settled Decrees, if they could
Re-inthrone the late King James, none but the Papists must be sharers in the
Government, or in their Kings Affection or Bounty; for they equally hate all
Protestants under what Denomination soever, as I will prove by their own Words
and Matter of Fact: It being one of their own deliberate berate Advices, at a
Consult, and sent to the late King James as a Rule to govern himself by, viz.
That he should make use of the Whigs but never trust them, See Crosby's Papers.
they might it seems be employed in promoting his Designs, and their own Ruin;
but the Administration and Advantages of it must be given to the Papists.

Now since the Dissenters Hopes are all lopt off at one blow, sure there
remains great expectation of Favor and Bounty, to the Church of England- Men?
Vid. same Paper.
No, they were the Papists first, and most formidable Enemies at the
Revolution, as having the Law on their side, and must also be thrust behind the
Door; nay they so load them with Reproaches now, for deserting a Popish King
and their Doctrine of Passive Obedience together, that they can hope for no
Mercy: As is plain from the Epithets given them in a Letter directed to Philips
dated the 4th of May, and sworn to be found in his Custody by two Witnesses,
which among others have these Words. Let Lord Middleton.
Toncroft know I meant the Church of England by the pack of Rogues, and the
Bishop of N. the Clergyman that was his Enemy; their Characters now I will not
venture to send him, being so various in their Politics. This is the true and
undisguised Language of Popery among themselves, which I will make no other use
of, than to persuade all Protestants of what Denomination soever, to Love
fervently and Unite inseparably against these common Enemies of our Nation and
Religion.

In the last Letter produced, Crosby had Orders from France to inform himself
of the Sentiments of the whole Party, and digest them into one Letter. For this
purpose he frequented all their Meetings, and was carressed and assisted in
this Undertaking by all that bore a Figure or Name amongst the Jacobites, both
in City and Country, and this great and finishing Stroke being given at their
several Consults, he only waited for a Wind to waft himself and his Scheme into
France, to be put in Practice; but Heaven crossed their Designs, and threw into
the hands of Justice both the Plotter and the Papers, some of which are these
that follow, and contain the Scheme for an Invasion of his Majesty's Dominions.
Why 'twas fitting to be attempted then, the ways of accomplishing it, and the
Names of some Persons from whom as the Jacobites say, Assistance might be
expected, directed to Mr. Toncroft. Lord Middleton.


Sir,
AS we are sensible of your very great Goodness and Zeal in promoting his
Majesty's Interest, so we are in a special Manner for your Favor, in opening
us a way whereby we dare freely and impartially impart our Thoughts to you; and
that at a Time when there never yet offered a fairer Opportunity for his
Majesty's Restoration, nor a greater Concurrence of Causes.

At a Time when the Government is under the greatest Contempt for it is
Miscarriages abroad; and Mismanagements at home.

When the Nation is fully sensible their Representatives are of a Party against
them, and so bribed into false Notions of their Interest, that every of them
seems to be at Work to dig the Kingdoms Grave.

When the whole Army to defend us, is not above twelve Thousand, and that
dispersed into the several Corners of the Kingdom, so that not above seven or
eight Thousand can be drawn together into the Field, and the Garrisons left
provided; and many of them justly suspected, not to be ill inclined to their
Lawful Sovereign, and none to be expected from abroad, without eminently
exposing our Allies. Egregiously false in every Particular.

When the Fleet cannot possibly be out till the beginning of May at soonest,
the Preparations in order thereunto moving slowly (notwithstanding the pressing
Instances of the Court) for want of Funds, the Stores in bad Conditions, and
the best Ships and Seamen gone with the Merchants Fleet Convoys to the
Streights: The difficulty of getting other Seamen to supply their Places,
greater than ever, from the hardships they were made to endure from ill
Payment, and the frequent deluding them with Proclamations of great Promises,
and no Performances: All which may give his M. C. Ms. Fleet an Opportunity of
being out earlier then ours, and to profit of this our Condition by possessing
himself of such a Station, as may prevent the Junction of our Portsmouth and
Chattam Fleets, and the Transportation of Troops from Flanders (if they could
be spared from thence) or what else might be thought proper.

What Pains the Jacobites take to persuade the French to be beaten a second
Time.

When the Militia are in such hands as will make little Opposition, and at the
worst of no use in Winter. The Exchequer in the lowest Ebb and very much in
Debt. The lendable Money of the Nation from twelve hundred thousand pounds
reduced to Six and not above one in the Exchequer to answer all the Exegencies
of State, a great part of the Funds now to be given already anticipated and no
Credit to be had till the Parliament pass a Money Bill, and none then, if there
appear the least Shadow of a Descent. If the French had believed them, or they
had believed themselves, surely we had had an Invasion, or some other
Disturbance from them before this time.

When the Nation is generally uneasy and discontented for it is great Losses,
the burden and weight of Taxes, and no hopes of an end of them, but by the
Change of Government.

When the whole Kingdom is divided into Parties and most against the Governors
and Government and Contentions of State arise in Private Families. Verdicts and
Judgments found and given as the Litigant Parties exceed in strength more than
by the Merits of the Cause; which engages the whole People of one side or the
other in every Case. This Paragraph might have been spared till we had a
Jefferys our Chancellor and a Wright Lord Chrief Justice.

When things frame as if it was the Design on all hands, to foment and increase
our Devisions, instead of pacifying them. And when it is the Opinion of the
Wisest and Coolest Men amongst us, that those ill Symptoms of a divided and
distempered Kingdom, can only hope for, and receive, a Cure, from what God has
put into the hands and Protection of his M. C. Majesty. From a Prescription
more baneful than the Malady, a Cure worse than the Disease, and a Physician
that first beggars then murders his Patient, Libera nos Domine.

When the most violent of his Majesty's Enemies are softened and disarmed by the
Promises in his late gracious Declaration; others drawn off and his Friends
reassured and confirmed in their Duty. His Declaration was too mean for a
Prince that had a grain of Courage, and too condescending to be credited, but
this was a stroke of Flattery to the Lord Middleton, who was the Author of it.

But on the contrary, if this time and opportunity be slipped, and not improved,
we see nothing but an Inundation of Evils breaking in upon us on all sides, and
no hopes of relief, no remedy, no stop to be put to them. The King's Friends
long deluded with false Alarms from St. Germains, will be apt to entertain odd
Notions of his Restoration, to stager in their Duty; and perhaps many of them
close with the Government, or at the best grow jealous of the Intentions of his
most Christian Majesty. Where pretended Friends prove false, wise Men will
throw themselves into the Hands of generous Enemies.

By sliping this Opportunity, the P -- of Orange will become Master of such a
Fleet and Army, (after the Supplies voted him by Parliament once begin to be
returned into the Exchequer) which together with his Pensions and Bribes will
make him as absolute and despotic here, as he is already in Holland (especially
if he be attended with the least good Success abroad) and by his Practices in
both Countries enslave both, and retain them in Subjection by the help of each
other.


The first Part of this Paragraph shows their Fears, and the last proclaims
their Falsehood.

Whereby all hopes for the future of a Restoration will become desperate, by
undermining the Endeavors and emasculating the Courage and Constancy of the
greatest Sufferers for their Loyalty and Integrity; and giving Leisure and
Scope to his Enemies to make yet greater Barriers and Fences against it.

The hopes of a Restoration must needs be desperate, when it is attempted by
none but undermined and emasculated Jacobites.

Whereas if it shall please his most Christian Majesty, by laying hold of this
Opportunity, to deliver us from the Calamities and Oppressions we lie under,
and the greater we are like to be exposed to, by restoring to us our lawful
Sovereign, ancient Laws and Constitutions, it will not only be a means to
remove all Jealousy and Fears hitherto entertained of his Power and Greatness;
but beget such a Confidence in him, and a mutual Love between the Subjects of
both Kingdoms, as may be evermore the Grounds of an everlasting solid Happiness
to them both.

Toward the attaining of which wished-for-end, in which the Peace of Europe,
the Happiness of our Native Country in particular is so much wrapped up in, and
in which the Glory, Honor and Justice of his most Christian Majesty seems to
be so eminently concerned. We shall heartily and cheerfully concur with our
Lives and Fortunes, in Company of a great many more of all Ranks, Degrees and
Professions, and upon your Directions, be ready to enter into Action in
Conjunction with such Succors as the present Circumstances of his M. C.
Majesty will permit him to furnish us.

This Paragraph that so loudly proclaims a Plot against the Government, and
humbly begs help to ruin their Native Country, gives us the true Effigies of
the Jacobites, who represented our Affairs to the French, not as they truly
were; but after such a manner as might tempt the French King to assist them;
but the French, it seems, had more Kindness for themselves, then to be again
deluded by their repeated Falsifications; and therefore would neither credit
their Assurances, nor comply with their Requests, in hazarding 30000 Soldiers,
and a Fleet of Ships and Seamen, for Moon-shine'ith Water; having lately sound
by a dear bought Experience, that our English Seamen and Soldiers were not so
few, nor so false, nor the Nation so poor, nor so factious; but that they were
always agre'd to be irreconcilable Enemies to all that were so to King William
and the English Nation, and being so united, would exert their Courage and
Fidelity, and Chastise the Insolency of all that opposed them at their
Pleasure; as a late Event had already justified. Now,

That this solemn Invitation had no Effect, was not want of Will, but Power in
the Jacobites, since they pusht it so far, and made it so public, and is not
this Project enough to astonish all that consider the Design, and its
Consequences. That the Jacobite having devoured the English Man, a Monster
should grow up in the room of him; who cares not if Great Britain might but be
Lost, who gains it; so our Religion were but destroyed, whether Popery, or
Mahometism, were placed in it is stead. And that so England be but Invaded, they
are neither afraid, nor ashamed, to see it accompanied with the Desolation of
our Cities, demolishing of our Temples, converting the whole Land into one
Foreign Slaughterhouse, and leaving a rich and fertile Kingdom to be
possessed by a pack of beggarly, hunger-starved, naked Slaves and Vassals.

Much more might be added upon this Head, if the Author could take any Pleasure
in so melancholy a Subject: And that it were not to make little Account of the
Wisdom and Justice of English Men to whom he writes, that he did not think them
capable of resenting the Jacobites Treachery, and were not of Ability, Skill
and Honesty, to countermine them, and all their Confederates.

The Second Paper follows.
WE no ways doubt but his Most Christian Majesty is fully informed by the King,
who has had laid before him the Representations of the several Classes of his
Friends, in answer to his late Instructions, and of many considerable Men in
his Interest unknown to each other. As to the properest Place, the Time, the
Number requisite, and the Concurrence to be expected from hence upon a Descent:
But because the best and most solid Conclusions are drawn from an Union and
Harmony in Opinion, we think it not amiss to explain our selves upon that Head,
to the end, that if ours agree with those you have already before you, it may
have the greater weight with you.

First then, as to the Number, it is our Opinion and that of all we converse
with, that 30000 Men, or 25000 in England, and 5000 in Scotland, would carry
the King through all difficulties, will be a sufficient shelter for his
Friends, and an Encouragement to others to come into him, and declare for him,
that such an Army, or a much less, according as the Army here rises or falls,
as the Person who conveys this, and has concerted it with us, will be able
further to explain unto you, seconded with an agreeable Ministry, and the Kings
late gracious Declaration, would meet with little Opposition is most certain,
and may be entirely relied upon; but it ought not to be forgot at the same
time, that some particular Assurances be emitted, suitable to the Constitution
of some Shires, as will be further explained to you and the present Condition
of the Army.

Thirdly, As to the Place proper for such a Descent, that must be left to the
Wind, Weather and Season. If it could be early the nearer London would be the
better, for the whole Kingdom would follow the Fate of that City, which would
make no manner of Resistance if a Descent were made near it; and at the same
time would give an Opportunity to 5000 Foot and 1500 Horse all formed Troops
and Remains of the old Army, to join the King; besides what (...) would go in
of the greatest Consideration; we now speak within the narrowest Compass.

Fourthly, If later, then in our Opinion, Bristol is the properest Place, which
is a great Town, well affected to his Majesty, lies in the heart of the
Kingdom, and that and the Counties about it, is capable to furnish all
Necessaries for such an Army as he shall think fit to bring; besides a great
many other Advantages which have been already explained to you, and will be
further by this Gentleman.

Fifthly, Upon a Descent in that Place, his Majesty may depend upon a great
Concurrence of the Nobility, Clergy and Gentry from the adjacent Counties,
Cities and Towns. Gloucestershire, Worcestershire, Monmouth-shire will move
with the D. of B**rt Mar**ss of W**ter his Son, and my Lord N**ry, who
immediately upon the Kings Direction to them, will change the Lieutenancy of
those Countries, and bring the whole Militia into the King, as is concerted and
agreed upon.

North Wales and South Wales are honest, and will be influenced by the D. of
(...), etc. It Is concerted there amongst the chief Gentry, that those who were
in the Lieutenancy in the late Kings Time, will reassume their Posts as
before, upon his Landing, and bring the whole Militia to join him, as will be
further explained to you by the Person that conveys this to you.

The Gentry of Dorsetshire are the same, particularly the Towns of Dorcester
and Weymouth.

Sommersetshire will be altogether influenced by my Lord P**t, Lord Bishop of
B. and W. Sr. Fr**s W*r, Sr. Ha**ll T*t, Sr. Wm. P**n, Mr. A**ll, Mr. L**y, Mr.
St'd, who have concerted, immediately upon the Kings Landing, to call all the
Gentry of the County together, and prevent them from raising the Militia, and
upon his Majesty's Directions will reassume their Places as before, when his
Majesty was upon the Throne.

From Devonshire his Majesty will be joined by the Honorable J. Gr**ll, Sir
Ed. Se**r, Sr. Bo. W*y, Sr. Sy. Li*h, Sr. P. Co***n, who have great Interest in
that County.

From Cornwall by my Lord Ar***l of Tr**e, Lord Mo**n, Capt. Mo**n his Uncle,
Lord La**n Lord Bishop of E***r, Sr. Wm. Co***n, Sr. J. Ar***l, Sr. Jos.
Te***m, Sr. Wm. Go***n, Sr. J. St. Au**n, Sr. J. M**h, Sr. J. A**y. In a Word,
that whole County is honest, and entirely devoted to the King; but particularly
the Miners, who are chiefly influenced by Go***n, St. Au**n, J. K*p, H. T**n,
J. K*n, Hen. Vi**t, who may bring together a Body of 8 or 9000 of them to join
the King upon an Occasion, and if mixed with some regular Troops, and headed by
a good Officer, would settle that part of the Country for the King; the
Freeholders there are tired with Taxes; no Fish taken, Tin low, scarce worth
the working. Wool and Yarn very low; so that some particular Promises and
Assurances to that County, would have great Effects among the Tin Miners. That
should be his Majesty's particular Care to enhaunce the Price of that
Commodity, etc. which since his Time is fallen from 4. l. to 50. s. at which
Price it is now.

Wiltshire will move with my Lord We**h and Ay**y.

From Shropshire the King may expect to be joined by most of the Gentry. The
City of Shrewsbury is honest.

From Warwickshire by my Lord Fe**s, Lord B*r, Lord L*h, Lord D**h, Lord D**y,
who with those that have been in the Lieutenancy, will reassume their Posts,
and bring the Militia of that County to join the King.

Northamptonshire, Lord E***e, who has lately offered the King, he will come at
the Head of 3000 Horse, with the chief Gentry of the County to join him, Lord
Gr**n and his Son.

Derbyshire, and Leicestershire, by Lord C***d, Lord H***n, Lord R**d, Lord
S**le. Who will in that County as in others, reassume the Lieutenancy upon the
Kings Directions, and make it serviceable to his Majesty.

Cheshire, Sir F. E***n, Sir P. E***n, Mr. C**y of V*e R**ll, Mr. To -- t Ch**y
of H**d, Sir Wm. M***ll, Mr. Ar**n, Mr. M**ll, Mr. Lo*s, M -- r. B*h, Coll,
M**ll, Mr. Fr***lls, Mr. Br*ks of Norton, Sir T. S*ley; with a great many of
the Clergy and City of Chester is well inclined.

Oxfordshire, Lord A***n, Lord N**s his Son, Lord L**d, Sir T. Cl**is, Sir W.
his Son, Lord T***t, the Honorable Henry B***s, Sir E. N**s, Sir E. R*d, Sir
Wm. W**s.

Lincolnshire, by the Earl of L**y, his Br. and the greatest Part of the Gentry.

So much as to the Places adjacent to Bristol, now it is most certain, that
while the Kings Western Friends are employed, his Northern Friends, and those
in London will not be Idle, if his Majesty will but send them Directions.

There are actually in the North above 4000 Men Compare this account with that
of the Discoverers and they exactly agree.
listed ready to march upon occasion, and will be headed by Men of great
consideration, all the North being generally well inclined; his Majesty has
particular Assurance from thence, and a true State of those Parts before him,
so that there is no need we should lay it down here; but this it is fit you
should rest satisfied of, that the Moment he lands, Carlisle and New Castle
will be put into his hands: And there will be an Attempt made upon Chester and
Berwick. Falmouth we are sure of, upon the first notice, and some are in Treaty
with the Deputy Governor for Ply**h, in case my Lord of B*h should fail: there
is a Person has carried you over a Project for the securing another Place. You
may depend upon 500 of the Inferior Clergy's joining the King upon his
Landing, which will greatly influence the Nation. If this be true the
Government was well advised, to oblige them to join in the National Association.

It must be left to your Discretion and the Wisdom of your Counsels, what
Directions to send to his Majesty's Friends in the North, the City, and the
West, what you would have them do, whether they shall join his Majesty, or make
some Diversion where they are.

Their best way is to study to be quiet, and to mind their own Business; for
Plotting is a Trade that few Men thrive by.

You must understand that this Representation coming from such Persons whereof
many of them have been in a long Correspondence with his Majesty, they refer
you therefore to him to inform you of the particular Assurances each have given
him themselves, or their Friends in their Names, out of which and the
Assurances you have from the new Party that are fallen into this Interest, P.
Middleton Melfort, Mr. Carryll.
under the Management of Mr. Toncroft, Mills and Ryfeild, you may collect what
is to be depended upon from this Place: But after all, the surest Rule an
Attempt can be grounded upon, is, the Discontents of a Nation, headed and
seconded with Men of Figure and Reputation in their Countries the first were
never greater and Universal, nor the last in greater Numbers, for by the common
Estimate it is judged two Parts in three of the Commonalty, and Gentrey are
against the Government, and one half of the Nobility.


Unless the Jacobites pretend to invade the Prerogative of God Almighty and
know Men's Hearts, I am very confident they are grievously out in their
Reckoning.

Another Paper thus.
Sir,
THAT this is the proper Juncture for France 's making an Attempt for the Kings
Restoration, for the following Reasons.

First, From the Temper of the Nation, inclining and bending toward a
Revolution, which appears upon all considerable Divisions in the House; the Men
of the greatest Interest and Substance still dividing against the Court.


If any in that August Assembly do so, they will scarce thank the Jacobites,
for assigning their hopes of a Revolution as the Cause of it.

By the delays of the House to supply the present necessities of the
Government. This is so False, that in other Places they complain of the
contrary, surely they have a bad Cause or very treacherous Memories.

The many open and scurrilous Speeches against the Ministry.

Scurrility is not the Language of that honorable Assembly.

The constant Divisions at the Council Board.

The slowness to condemn State Criminals.

That is a Fault indeed, though I did not expect the Jacobites would have
complained of it; but where they cannot arraign the Government for it is
Severity, they quarrel at it is Lenity and Mercy.

The Discontents of the Seamen and Admirals.

The many open Declarations of the Officers and Soldiers of the Army, of their
Respect and Duty to the King.

The great Alteration that appears every where upon the least Alarm of the
Kings Coming.

They did not find it so at the late Action off la Hogue.

In the City, upon the Exchange.

In the Country, the many Mortgages made by Men of the greatest Fortunes, upon
the least Report of his coming: From whence 'twas generally concluded, those
Men had thereby prepared themselves to join his Majesty upon Occasion.

What a strange Inference is this, they will not give a Gentleman Leave to raise
Money to pay his Debts or serve his other Occasions, but they will construe it,
contrary to his Intention, that he is equipping himself for a Rebellion.

The general desponding of the Kings Enemies on such Reports.

The Resolution of all Men in Office throughout the Kingdom, except it be the
very Military Officers alone, nay and many of them will lie quiet or go into
the King.

If they had known any such they would not have forgot their Names to increase
the Number of their Party.

Add to this the general Influence it has upon moneyed Men.

I know not how moneyed Men can be interessed in an Invasion, Insurrection and
Rebellion, unless it be to hide their Cash.

An assurance of Forts and Places of Retreat, which holds beyond Expectation.

Now let us examine what Reason they had for these Representations. For that the
City of London would not oppose an Invasion made near it by the French, is such
a horrible Abuse upon that Honorable and Loyal City, that none would have been
guilty of it, but such a Set of Men as are ashamed of nothing. And as to their
Boasts of great Numbers to support the Descent, it is a piece of the same Dye.

Bristol, it is true, might be represented by that turbulent Man Sir John
Knight, who held Correspondence with Crosby, to be in the late Kings Interest,
but if he had put it to the Trial, he would have found a vigorous and sturdy
Opposition: The ablest Merchants and greatest Traders in the Town being all
Williamites, as appeared at the Election of Citizens to serve in Parliament,
when they threw out Sir John Knight and Sir Richard Heart, from being Members of
Parliament by a great Majority.

What they say of the Towns of Dorchester and Weymouth in particular, I am well
assured is wholly false, for they are both known to be universally well affected
to the present Government; and few, if any Towns, in the West so entirely: For
there are not in either of them above three Jacobites, and those in no Credit,
but discountenanced and contemned by every Body for being so. I wish I were as
able to do Justice to other Places and Persons, as a worthy Gentleman has made
me in this. And now,

What need is there of producing Lunt, Womball or Wilson for further Proof of a
Plot in general, or of a Lancashire Plot in particular, when the Managers of
the whole Party say, that there were in the North four thousand Men actually
listed for the Service of the late King James, and were ready to march upon
Occasion, and would be headed by Men of great Consideration. For the Kings
Evidences have said no more than what is here confessed by the Jacobites
themselves.

The foregoing Papers do also give you an Account of the State of our Fleet,
and of the Inclination of several Persons in the Government, as affected or
disaffected (if you can believe them) all which I find in Letters taken in
Crosby's Custody dated 22d, 26th, February 1693, but neither subscribed nor
directed.

About 10 days ago here was News of King James 's Coming, and it was not
disbelieved at Court, but now quite fallen to the ground. The Jacobites say,
there was never a better Disposition in all generally to receive King James and
give their Reasons for it. Which are the same contained in the foregoing Papers
which having briefly repeated the Letter proceeds, the rest regard their own
more then any King's Interest, and will not hazard any thing for either, if the
Practice now in Design don't engage all the Presbyterians. Lord Ca***n laid
aside, M***ne to succeed, S***y solicited to be Secretary, Lord Mar***h to be
General of the English Foot, Lord S***e ruling Minister behind the Curtain,
Lord B*h turned out of all; he with many other Offenders would have King James
restored, if they thought their Crimes could be pardoned, nothing can hinder
raising Money but an Invasion. Bristol declares mightily for King James;
Worcester disaffected, but if any Disturbance should happen we have some
thousands of Hugonites in this Town privately subsisted, on whom we depend not
a little; As to what Business Mr. K. James.
Vandeleur and you may have I will be deligent in it, but what may relate to
any of the Trading Ships being taken Prizes, there is one Mr. Anselme, who was
Secretary to the Admirals last Year, Crosby.
and understands the Business very well, but will not be mercenary in it, and
with his Help something may be done; 'twill therefore be necessary that he see
something from Mr. Vandeleur, or by his Order, to that purpose. Some of Mr.
Anselm's Letters falling into the Hands of the Government, he was sent for from
on board and discharged: The Jacobites knew him their own before, but since his
Discharge treat with him aboveboard, as you may see by the foregoing Letter,
and another from Philips to Mr. Abraham Anselm, dated May 5. 1694.

I must needs see you before I go into the Into France.
Country, which will be to morrow, you will hear of me at Barnsley's
Coffeehouse to night at 11, or to morrow at 7 in the morning, let me see you,
that we may settle some Matters.

Philips. Thus they endeavored to corrupt the Officers of the Fleet, Army and
Militia and tampered with the Clerks and. Secretaries of those, who either were
or had been employed in eminent Posts under the Government, that by their
assistance they might get Intelligence of what they wanted to know, thus they
obtained an Account of the Naval Forces of one, a List of the Army of another;
and transmitted them into France, that the Enemy might take his measures
accordingly, so that nothing is more apparent than that the whole Design
against the Government was always carried on by Men of no essential Honor or
Virtue; but by such a confused Medley of disaffected Persons, as were the
Creatures of the late Reign, who had lost either their Employments or
Expectations by the Revolution, or Disbanded Officers and Soldiers, who delight
in Tumults and Insurrections.

I have now done with Mr. Crosby and his Papers, by which the Reader will soon
find that the Plot for an Invasion, Insurrection and Rebellion was carried on
by the Jacobites in General in the Year 1693, and part of the Year 1694, and
since the Lancashire Gentlemen, instead of Blessing their Stars for so strange
a Deliverance, have aggravated their guilt, by endeavoring to represent the
legal Prosecution of some of their Party as a State-trick, a Sham-Plot, and the
Contrivance of some little Ministers to enrich themselves by the Ruin of
others: I shall descend to the particular shares which they and their Friends
had in the whole Conspiracy to subvert the Government, to Destroy the King, and
reinthrone the late King James; and then leave the Reader to judge, what little
Reason they had to raise such loud Clamours for bringing Criminals to Justice,
and because I have hitherto proceeded Annually, and given an Account of the
several Conspiracies in order of time, as they were discovered; I hope the
Reader will think it no impertinent Digression to refresh his Memory with a
brief Rehearsal of their Proceedings, till they were discovered in 1694, as
they occasionally occur in the following Depositions.

In June 1694, Lunt made this Discovery, viz that he Vid, his whole Depos. in
the appendix taken before Sir John Trenchard.
fellowed the late King James into France, thence into Ireland, from Ireland
was sent into England with Commissions from the late King James to certain
Gentlemen in Lancashire, Cheshire, etc. To raise War against King William and
Queen Mary, that he and George Wilson his Guide delivered those Commissions to
whom they were directed (whose Names you have in his Narrative) that at the
Instance and proper Costs of those Gentlemen to whom he had delivered
Commissions, he bought Arms and listed and subsisted many Soldiers, for the
Service of the late King James, in order to an Invasion and Insurrection in
that Country, that he was twice sent by those Gentlemen into France to the late
King to signify their Readiness, and receive his further Commands. Though I don't
question but the Reader has had already sufficient Reason to believe what is
above rehearsed, I think it not amiss to show him, for confirmation sake,
something that Lunt discovered in 1694, that has since proved it self, he says
in one part of his Depositions, That when he was in London, besides his
Employment of buying Arms, and listing Soldiers, he helped some Jacobites over
to France, and secured others that came from thence, who all of them told Mr.
Lunt, that generally Sr. John Friend furnished Money for those Expeditions, and
paid Subsistence Money to them as Soldiers. Which was the Crime he dyed for in
1696. And no doubt was one of the things that enraged the Party so much against
him, knowing that that Hint might in Time be attended with a fuller Discovery.

George Wilson deposes, Taken before Sir John Trenchard.
That he keeping an Inn in Redland, near the City of Chester; there came a
Stranger to his House, whose Name he afterward understood was Dr. Bromfeild,
recommended thither by Mr. Fitz Herbert of Wapra in Flintshire, where Bromfeild
had been concealed some time for a Passage into Ireland, that Bromfeild bought
a Vessel to transport him, which Vessel was seized by Mr. Morston, an Officer
in the Government, and Bromfeild escaped into Lancashire, and thence into
Ireland. He further deposes, That being known to be accessory to See Mr.
Edwards's Affidavit in the Appendix.
Bromfield's Escape and harboring and furthering the Escape of many of the
late King James's Friends; he was sought after by Soldiers from Chester, and
the Civil Officers of the County, insomuch that he was compelled to fly from
his own House, and never durst return; but after having hid himself in Woods,
got at length into Lancashire, whither his Wife and Family followed him, and
was received into the Houses of the Lord Mollyneux, Mr. Tildesly, Mr. Standish,
Sr. Rowland Standley, Sr. James Pool, Sr. Wm. Gerrard, Mr. Townley and others;
sometimes at one House, and sometimes at another. That being at Mr. Tildesly at
the Lodge, and the Wind fair, he was commanded by the Gentlemen aforesaid to
look out about the Seacoasts for any Gentlemen that should land; for they
expected some Friends and News from Ireland. Wilson did so, and about the
Beginning of June 1689, Mr. Edmund Thrillfall of the Ashes in Goosner
Lancashire, and Mr. Lunt arrived at Vid. the Master of the Vessel's and the
Seamens Depositions in the Appendix.
Cockram in Lancashire, and came immediately to Coll. Tildesly's with several
Bundles of Papers, which they immediately opened, and took out diverse
Commissions, Declarations, Blanks, and sealed Papers from the late King James,
directed to several Persons of Quality in that County and Yorkshire, and
divided them. Those for Yorkshire Mr. Thrillfall put up, and undertaking to
deliver them had a Guide immediately provided him. The Commissions and other
Papers for Lancashire. Cheshire and Staffordshire, and Parts thereabouts Mr.
Lunt charged himself with the Delivery of, and took this Informant with him
from Place to Place to guide and assist him. After they had delivered Mr.
Tildesly a Commission for being a Colonel, with Blanks for his inferior
Officers, which he received on his Knees, and kissed. They went to the Lord
Mollyneux's, and delivered a Commission for a Coll. of Horse to his Son, Mr.
Wm. Mollyneux, with Blanks for his inferior. Officers. Coll. Mollyneux filled
up the Blank for Lieutenant Coll. and delivered it in their Sight and Presence
to Mr. Wm. Gerrard, who was with Mr. Mollyneux when Mr. Lunt and Wilson came
into the House; and so he went on with Lunt from place to place, till he had
delivered all the Commissions and Blanks to the Gentlemen mentioned in Mr.
Lunt's Depositious. He further deposes, That to his own Knowledge Lunt did
list Men in London, and sent them down into the Country, and that the Soldiers
so listed and sent down were subsisted by the Lancashire Gentlemen. That he did
(in or about February. 1692) see Mr. Walmsley then newly come out of France at
his dwelling House at Dungan-Hall in Lancashire, and that the said Mr. Wamsley
did employ this Informant in the Year 1692 and 1693, to list Soldiers under
him for the Service of the late King James, and had Money from Mr. Walmsley,
Captain Penny and Mr. Standish of Standish-Hall to maintain those Soldiers, he
further Deposes, That he has seen great Quantities of Arms in the Houses of
several Persons mentioned in Mr. Lunts Depositions.

Here are in substance the Depositions of Ten several Persons (some at great
distance from, and utter Strangers one to another) all agreing in the
Lancashire Conspiracy, the Time when, Places where, and the Persons who were to
be the principal Actors in that bloody Tragedy; and tho Lunt and Wilson name
some more Persons to be concerned than were named by Mr. Dodsworth and Mr.
Kelly, being three years longer in the Conspiracy than the first Discoverers;
yet for so many as each of them have named, they exactly agree, which there is
no Question, but the scribbling Party among the Jacobites were fully possessed of;
but finding it so directly cross their Designs in shamning the Plot, and
scandalizing the Government, they take no more notice of Mr. Dodsworth's, Mr.
Kelly's, Mr. Robinson's, or the Master and five Seamen's Discoveries, nor of
the Informations that were sent to his Grace the Duke of Shrewsbury from the
Sessions of the Peace at Manchester, than if there had been no such Persons, or
Things in the World; which willful and designed Omissions in Matters of Fact,
shows a greater Disingenuity and want of Integrity, than can be equalized in
other Authors.

Thus much for the Listing and Maintaining of Soldiers, and receiving
Commssions from the late King James, to levy War against the King and Kingdom.
The next thing is providing Arms for these Soldiers, and they were for the
Generality bought by Lunt, Righy, Hatton and Minns, at the holy Lamb in
long-Acre, by the Order of Mr. Townley, Coll. Parker, Mr. Standish and the rest
of the Conspirators, and carried into Lancashire* by several Carriers, that
travel from thence to London, particularly by John Womball of Wiggan-Lane in
that County, who begun to be employed in this Service at the latter end of the
Year 1688, and in the beginning of the Year 1689.

These Arms were commonly put into large Boxes and Trunks, and for fear of
discovery in London, they were for some time lodged for him at Barnet Vid
Oliver Pearsons Affidavit in the Appendix.
where he took them up, and to prevent Suspicion in the Country, the Gentlemen
commonly sent their Serviants, to meet Womball or his Servant upon the Road,
there to receive them from him, and carry them to their Masters Houses upon
their own Horses. When this way failed, Womball and his Servants carried them
to the several Gentlemen's Houses by Night, and at other unsuspected Seasons.

Notwithstanding, as privately as they managed their Design, the watchful Eye
of the Government discovered their Practices, and at one time in Litchfeild,
Vid. Oliver Pearsons and Clayton's Depositions.
as Womball was carrying down Arms into Lancashire, the Government took from
him there, one hundred and two Swords, which came to pass on this Manner.

Womball accidentally discovers his Carriage of Arms to Mr. Green of Wiggan,
who was at that Time in London, Mr. Green apprehending that the Discovery of
what Womball had told him might be serviceable to the Government, repairs
forthwith to the Earl of Macclesfield, Lord Lieutenant of Luncashire, and
acquainting him with it. His Lordship sends for Womball, who was going out of
Town that morning, commands one of the Boxes to be opened, and seeing it filled
with Horse-Mens Swords, very prudently orders Womball to carry them down; and
in the mean Time, his Lordship gave private Directions to some Friends of the
Government in Wiggan, to observe where these Boxes were delivered, with these
Orders his Lordship acquaints the Earl of Portland, who well approved the
Management of the whole Matter; but by whose Directious these Arms were seized
at Litchfield, that they might not be traced to the Owners in Lancashire is
worth enquiring after.

All this was done before Wombull came into the Government, and perceiving
there was no further Enquiry into the Matter, he renewed his former Trade of
carrying Arms, and among many other weighty Burdens, he received four Packs of
Arms from Mr. See Womball's Depositions in the Appendix and El. Langly's (...).
Lunt, and delivered them at Preston, Standish and Croxton. In the Year 1691
and 1692, he carried down great quantities of Arms in Trunks and Boxes, to Mr.
Standish of Standish to Mr. Tildesley of the Lodgo, to Mr. Ashton, Mr.
Stanford, Mr. Eccleston, Mr. Dickinson, Mr. Gradill and others; but this
continual carrying of Arms made so great a Noise, that Womball (the Confident
they trusted in this great Affair,) was forced to be more cautious for the
future, for two Boxes of Arms were seized in his Custody at Wiggan in
Lancashire, and this made him forbear a while, but other Carriers being
entrusted, and with worse success, Womball was again employed, to carry up
Money to buy Arms, and bring them down when bought; in which Service he
acquitted himself so much to the Satisfaction of his Masters, that he was
invited to their Meetings, and trusted in most of their Affairs: Nay, in that
which they fancied would crown all their hopes, for the late King James being
almost ready to embark at la Hogue to invade England, they thought it a
necessary piece of Service to disperse these Arms that lay buried under Ground
and crowded up in particular Houses, (...) Brown's A^^^davit, Kelly's
Depositions in the Appendix.
amongst all the Officers concerned, that every thing might be in a readiness
at their old Masters Landing. Now who so fit to pack them up and make this
Distribution as their trusly Womball which he performed, and by this means came
to the open sight and view of great Quantities of Arms and Warlike Equipage. As
Kettle Drums, Trumpets, Jack-Boots and Saddles, of which he could not have such
particular Knowledge when made up in Packs, Trunks and Boxes, and assisting in
the Dividends, packing them up in Boxes, and helping to load the Horses, he
might also readily guess at their Numbers, which he computes to be as many as
would equip a Thousand Horsemen See his Depositions in the Appendix.
and further believes, that if a proper and secret Method had been taken (and
all Notice thereof prevented) for seizing of Horses in Lancashire provided for
this wicked Purpose in the Hands of the Conspirators, there might at that Time
have been seized five hundred good Horses fit for Service.

This is the Substance of Mr. Womballs Evidence, which though I have thought
needless to confirm by more Testimonies, the Jacobites themselves making no
Exceptions against him, yet I cannot forbear telling my Reader, that having
some Discourse with Captain Porter upon this Subject, he was pleased to tell
me, that at the Request of Coll. Parker he bought two pair of the best
Kettle-Drums that London aforded, they cost him seven Pounds a Pair, and sent
them to Mr. Standish of Standish-Hall, and that Coll. Parker returned Money to
reimburse him by Johnson the Priest, who at the same time complaining of the
great Necessities of many of that Party, Cap. Porter gave Johnson, part of the
Money that Coll. Parker sent him for the Drums, to be distributed amongst them,
Mr. Porter told me also, that, to his own knowledge, Mr. Minns at the Holy-Lamb
in Long-Acre, very often bought Arms for the disaffected Gentlemen in
Lancashire, as well as for himself. More than this he was pleased to say, he
personally knew not of the Lancashire Plot, but well remembers, that Mr.
Charnock told him, that Mr. Tempest of Durham was to be a Coll. of Dragoons,
Mr. Townley of Townley was to be a Coll. of Horse, Mr. Tempest that married Mr.
Farmers Sister was to be a Coll. of Horse, and one Sir Huge Smith was to be a
Cap. of Horse under Coll. Parker in the Army they were forming in Lancashire,
which is a greater confirmation of the Plot, and it is continuance than could
(not long since) have been expected.

The Government being thus fully informed of the Plot in all the parts and
dimensions of it, Warrants are issued out to seize the Conspirators, and though
for the greater Secrecy, the Names of the Offenders were not put into the
Warrants at the Secretary's Office by those that drew the Warrants, but were
afterward put in by the Secretarys themselves, yet by some treacherous
Correspondence between the Lancashire Gentlemen and their Bifarious Friends
that lurk about the Court, they had notice given them of all Proceedings here,
as appeared by Madam Standish's telling Captain Henry Baker, when he came with
the Kings Messengers to search her House, that he might have saved himself the
trouble, for they had notice from London of his coming ten days before. And I
believe it to be true, or greater Discoveries had been made of Persons and
Arms, than could be expected after notice was given them to provide for their
Safety, by concealing what ever might give cause of Suspicion; for thereupon
they burnt their Commissions See Dodsworth's Depositions.
and the Arms and other Warlike Equipage were buried under ground, or otherwise
disposed of, and the greatest Part of the Conspirators fled, or absconded; yet
through the extraordinary Care and Diligence of those employed in that Service,
some of the Plotters were apprehended, and Arms enough found to convince the
World, that there was a wicked Design on foot against their Majesty's and their
Government. For,

In the House of Mr. Standish of Standish-Hall, whither Lunt deposes he sent,
and Womball deposes he delivered, great Quantities of Arms and other
Habiliments of War, though the notice they had from London caused them all to be
See Brown's and Kelly's Depositions.
concealed, and the Lady of the House and Servants by many Execrations and
Asseverations avowed no such Things were in the House: Yet after five hours
diligent search by Captain Baker, and the Kings Messengers, there was found
walled up in an upper Room or Garret, Thirty new War Sadles, furnished with
Breast-plates, Cruppers, Girths and all other necessarys for Troopers Saddles;
forty new Curb-Bridles, sixty new Ammunition Horsemen's Swords, with a great
Bunch of Swivels for Carbines. Which certainly could be for no other Service
then the intended Rebellion.

Nor may I omit a Dialogue between Madam Standish and Mr. Peter Morisco, one of
the King's Messengers, who coming to make a narrower Search in her Bedchamber,
finding the Hangings near the Chimney loose, and looking in at the Hole, that
was behind it, the Lady told him it was needless; for there was nothing; The
Messenger attempting to pull aside the Hangings, and make the Hole wider, the
Lady endeavored to divert him by her repeated Asseverations, and laying her
Hand upon her Breast, said, Upon my Honor there (...) nothing; but the
Messenger replied, upon my Honor, Madam, there is something, and immediately
drew out a great Bundle of Horsemens Swords never used; and if these Arms, that
were hid so close, were not intended for ill purposes, they would do well to
assign some other use of them for I cannot. For not to reproach Mr. Standish
with a small Estate, and being much in Debt, a great House not half furnished,
and those few Goods he had in it very Mean and Poor, there were but four Men
Servants in the whole Family; and for a private Gentleman, and a known Enemy to
the Government, to make all this Warlike Provision, what other Construction can
be made of it, than that some ill Design was forming against the Government.

These Saddles could not be intended for his own use, since more of the same
kind were found (and left) in his Stables, than (according to the Number of his
Servants) could be worn out in seven Years. And if we could suppose him to be
so prodigal under a narrow fortune; to make so great provision of Saddles and
Swords for his own use, why were they all War Saddles, of what use were the
Swords, Breast, plates, and so great a quantity of Carbine-swivells and large
Curb-Bridles, without so much as one Pad or Hunting Saddle among them.

Are Hares in Lancashire such formidable Enemies; that all this Warlike
Provision is made to encounter them? In other Countries we kill those timorous
Animals with Dogs, and equip our Horses for the Chase with the lightest
Furniture; seldom carrying any other Weapon into the Field than a long Whip and
a short Hanger; but it seems these Lancashire Gentlemen ride a Hunting like
Troopers into a Campain, with heavy War Saddles, great Horsemens Swords,
Pistolls, Carbines, Jack-Boots, Kettle-Drums and Trumpets. Why else did their
Solicitors Mr. Banks and Mr. Beresford avouch them in a great Audience to be
only Hunting Saddles, though they were then, and still are, in the custody of Sir
John Sweet-Apple and Sir William Cole late Sheriffs of London, and ready to be
produced before the Parliament, as Evidences to convict them both of Falsity;
but to end this: If they were bought for his own use as others would suggest,
what Cause had Mr. Standish to keep them soprivately, and put himself to the
Charge and Trouble of walling them up in a Garret, and leaving no kind of Door
or Entrance into the Place where they were hid; besides, what Reason had Mr.
Standish to hide See Brown's Affidavit in the Appendix.
so great a Quantity of Arms and Ammunition at his Tenant Emer's. Those found
in the House (when they had no other Shift or Excuse to make) Mr. Banks and Mr.
Beresford say were for the Defense of it; but others think that Excuse was as
foolish as needless: Since there was scarce any thing in the House worth the
Stealing, and his known Poverty was a greater Security against Thieves, than
Swords or Pistols.

And now I thought (having answered all these Objections) I might have taken my
Leave of Standish-hall, and paid a Visit to Mr. Tildesly of the Lodge; but a
Person of Quality, that made Observations on the whole Proceedings, both in
Parliament, at Manchester, and at Lancaster, tells me. I have another Objection
to answer, viz.

Object. Mr. Standish was a Captain in the Militia in Lancashire, in the Reign
of the late King James, and in all Probability these Saddles, Carbines, Swords
and other warlike Equipage had remained in his Custody ever since that Time.

Answ. To which I must answer, That all their Objections require more Trouble
to raise then to lay; For Mr. Standish was a Capt. of Foot to the late King
James, and there was no need of so much Horse-furniture for a Foot Company.

At Mr. Tildesly's of the Lodge in Lancashire, was found in a private Cupboard,
behind a Wainscote walled up with Bricks, where also lay his Money, Plate,
Rings, Jewels and other things of Value, an extraordinary Provision of Silver
embroidered Housings These are also yet in being in the Hands aforesaid.
and Caps on Velvet, and Scarlet embroidered Housings and Caps; which though I
think a greater Quantity and much finer Caparisons than are usually provided
for that Family: Yet I had not mentioned them, but to tell you at the same Time
and Place Mr. Sutton, the Kings Messenger, found among other Papers, one of the
late King James's old Commissions.

But Lunt and Wilson deposed, That he had received a new Commission from the
late King James, and Mr. Dodsworth's Depositions say, that Mr. Tildesly being
advised by Mr. Dalton upon the Noise of the Discovery to burn it, he said, He
would burn himself before he would do it.

At Mr. Massey's of Puddington in Cheshire, Mr. Jackson Vid. Dodsworth's
Depositions in the Appendix.
the Constable found, July the 4th 1694, put into a Chest, covered over with an
old long Pillow, Nine new Dragoon Saddles, with Buckles, Rings and Staples fixed
to them for Breast-plates, Holsters and Cloaks with Cruppers, Girths and
Stirrups to them, all new, and six new Half-cheek Bit-bridles. This, I suppose,
was Mr. Massey's Share upon the general Dividend, mentioned by Mr. Womball to
be made a little before the Battle at la Hogue.

But if in Favor to Persons of these Gentlemen's Characters and Qualities, the
Government was obliged to wink at, or overlook, all these Preparations for War;
how will Mr. Shakerley, Mr. Banks, Mr. Beresford, Sr. W. W. Mr. Taffe or Mr.
Hat, Vid. his Depositions in the Appendix.
desend themselves against a virulent Paper, found in Mr. Standish's Closet at
the Search made at Standish-Hall July 16. 1694, Found by Capt. Baker and the
Original delivered by him into the House of Commens.
containing Heads for a Remonstrance, or Declaration, to be Printed and
Published at King James's Landing, which according to Mr. Crosby's Papers and
Mr. Robinson's Depositions, to be attempted very speedily. The original Paper
was delivered into the House of Commons when the Plot was examined, and there
it still remains. The whole is so sttuffed with Scandal, Malice and bitterness
of the Party against the King and Government, that I think it not worth the
charge and trouble of procuring a Copy, much less to recite it unless I
designed to affright the Modest, or poison the unwary Reader.

Now after all this, I cannot but stand amazed at the Confidence of those
Gentlemen, who industriously sought to sham and ridicule the Lancashire Plot;
for if all that has been proved already, might, in Compliment to their Quality,
pass for nothing (which it can never do among uninteressed Men,) yet this very
Scandalous, Mutinous and bloody Paper, as any Man will judge it to be that
reads it and never was denied to be found in Mr. Standish's Custody, is
sufficient to prove that a Conspiracy against the King and Government was
hatching, and almost came to Perfection among them; and that having formed a
Rebellion and Insurrection in the Northern Parts, this Paper (when finished by
the rest of the Club) was to be Printed to justify their Proceedings, and
encourage others to join with them; for no other Construction can be put upon
it, though the unbiased Reader had all the Charity and good Nature, which these
Gentlemen seem to want.

As many of the Gentlemen and others accused, as could be found, being taken
into Custody, they are brought up to London to be examined; and after
Examination, some were committed to the Tower, and others to Newgate, where
they continued about a Month: During which time their Friends and Solicitors,
exerted all their diligence to take off the Kings Evidences, by See Agnes
Baker's Depositions, Elizabeth Hearft's Deposition and Mr. Claytons Desition,
in the Appendix.
offering them large Sums, that failing to find out Persons who either out of
Malice, or hopes of a future Reward, would load the Kings Witnesses with such
Crimes as would take away the Credit of their Evidence. And truly this was all
the Game they had now to play, for Matters of Fact being so legible and the
Truth as apparent as the Sun on the Meridian, there was no way to prevent the
Gentlemen's being found guilty, but by representing the Witnesses under such
heinous Characters, as the Jury might not believe what they deposed. To
accomplish this end in Scandalizing the Evidences, many Persons were practiced
upon, See Claytons Brown's Affidavit, Eliz. Hearst's and Ann Elliot's in the
pendix.
some of which refused so base an Action, but others through great
importunities and promises of large Rewards, were brought to say such things
against some of the Evidences, both at Manchester and in the Parliament House,
which the Procurers had dictated to them; all which were utterly False and
Scandalous, as has since been Acknowledged upon the Oaths of the very Persons,
who were prevailed upon to declare them in the House of Commons.

But that which raised the great Clamor against the Discovery of the Plot, and
put a new Life into the Plotters, was gaining Mr. Taffe to the other side,
which happened on this Manner.

When Mr. Lunt came last out of France, December 1693 (being troubled in
Conscience for having engaged in the barbarous Design of assassinating the
King, and resolving to atone for that Crime, by discovering all he knew that
had been acted, or was then plotting against the Kings Majesty and his
Government,) his coming over was made known to Mr. Taffe ( a too familiar
acquaintance of Lunt's Wife,) who was represented to Lunt as a Person that had
done some considerable Service to the Public: To him Lunt's Wife had told, that
her Husband was lately come out of France; which made Taffe (who pretended to
be zealous for the Government) enquire how Matters stood at St. Germains,
adding, that if Lunt could discover any thing that might be serviceable to
their Majesty's, he would introduce him to a Person of Quality that would
receive his Information. Lunt giving Credit to Taffe's pretended kindness,
immediately showed his willingness to make a Discovery, and accordingly Taffe
brought Lunt to the Right Honorable the Earl of Bellemont, told his Lordship,
that Lunt was an honest Man, and Credit might be given to the Discovery he
intended to make. After his Lordship had heard Lunts relation, he commanded him
to wait on him again in two or three days, which Lunt obeying, and his Lordship
being somewhat indisposed, he sent Lunt with his Lordships Letter to Sir John
Trenchard. Taffe accompanied him thither, and Mr. Secretary hearing what Lunt
had to discover, first sent him into Kent, and afterward commanded Lunt to put
his Depositions into Writing and bring them to him. Lunt performed it. Taffe
heard all the Information read, aggravated the Crimes, and appeared the most
zealous and forward of any to have the Persons accused and brought to Justice;
accordingly pretending to be serviceable in knowing the Country and People
there, went down into Lancashire, assisted the Messengers in searching at
Standish-Hall, and seizing the Arms; directed and assisted the Kings Messengers
in other Searches: Seizing some Persons, and bringing the Prisoners to Town,
and in every thing showed an extraordinary Zeal in his Majesty's Service. Not
withstanding;

Whilst Taffe was in the Country I must not forget to acquaint my Reader, that
though he seemed very Officious, and might have been much more useful than he
was, in finding concealed Arms and Persons (if he had been Honest, and had made
more use of his Head, and less of his Fingers;) the Manager of that Affair, and
the Kings Messengers, quickly perceiving his pilfering Practices to be very
Injurious to the Inhabitants, as well as Scandalous to themselves, were forced
to have as watchful an Eye upon him, as the business they were employed in;
though notwithstanding all their Care, he committed some egregious Felonies, from
Mr. Bartholomew Hesketh a Romish Priest near Preston in Lancashire, he stole a
Silver Chalice and three or four Damask-Napkins, two of which Napkins he gave
to a Whore he lay with at Salford near Manchester, whose Husband catching them
in Bed together, had beat his Brains out, and spoiled his Evidence at
Manchester, if People in the House had not prevented it, and the Chalice he was
compelled by Captain Baker to restore (as Mr. Hesketh had directed) to Mrs.
Tailor of Standish near Wiggan.

At Mr. Molyneux of the Lodge, he seized a great Sum of Money, and had carried
it off, if he had not been forcibly hindered by one of the Kings Messengers;
however though he lost the great Prize, which was thought to be near a thousand
Pound, he found an opportunity of playing a small Game, and stole from thence
also a Silver Chalice, an Altar Cloth, five or six Damask-Napkins, and a
walking Cane, which Mr. Morisco the Kings Messenger, with a little rough
handling made him restore again to the Owner: These and other his scandalous
Behaviors every where, was the only Reason that Mr. Aaron Smith and Mr. Baker,
slighted and contemned him, as unfit to intermeddle in any public Business,
which he perceiving, took up Resolutions to provide for himself, and make his
Fortune among the Jacobites. However, to make a fair Show, and seem what he was
not.

Soon after he came to London, he waited on my Lord Bellemont, gave his
Lordship an Account what Persons and Arms had been seized, that several
Gentlemen had made their escapes, and that others absconded, and fled from
Place to Place, to secure themselves; whereupon my Lord Bellemont asked Taffe,
if this was the Business Lunt had discovered. Taffe answered it was, and that
Lunt was the main Evidence and Discoverer of the Conspiracy, had been with them
in the Country, was very well known at the respective places he had mentioned
in his Depositions; and had done greater Service at his being there, if the
Lancashire Gentlemen had not received notice from London of their coming ten
days before they came to Standish-Hall. This fit of pretended Zeal, I know the
Reader will think it very strange, when he arrives to the following Part of
this History: But what can be expected from steady hardened Wretches of his
Complexion but a train of Villainies to the end of the Chapter.

This Account being given to my Lord Bellemont, Taffe addressed himself to Mr.
Aaron Smith and Captain Baker, for the Reward of his Service, but finding
himself slighted and reprimanded for his scandalous Behavior, and (as he
thought) not sufficiently rewarded for his Journey into Lancashire, he grew
very angry and vowed a Revenge upon the Government even to the spoiling of the
Plot, as he pleased to call it, and, if it were possible, the Ruin of all those
that were concerned in it, particularly of Mr. Smith and Mr. Baker who had
dealt so ungratefully by him.

In order to execute this wretched Design, in acquitting the guilty and
punishing the innocent, he is immediately upon the hunt after the Friends and
Relations of the Prisoners, and knowing Mr. Legh of Lime was reputed the
richest among them. Taffe was very solicitous to be acquainted with any Person,
that was concerned for Mr. Legh's Safety.

Whilst he was upon this Enquiry (in the Temple-walks) he meets with one Mr.
Wybrand, desires him to speak to Captain Cottingham to bring him acquainted
with some Friends of Mr. Legh's of Lime. For, says he, Smith and Baker have
used me barbarously, and I will be even with them and spoil the Plot. See
Wybrand's Depositions in the Appendix.
Mr. Wybrand desires Taffe to be ingenious with him, and tell him, whether he
was concerned in the Plot, for he heard it would come to nothing. Taffe
replies, he was no Evidence nor knew any thing of the Plot himself; but he knew
there was good Evidences against the Prisoners, and enough (as he worded it) to
hang them all; but if he could speak with any Friend of Mr. Legh's, he might
get a good Sum of Money and make his fortune, by telling him away how to save
all their Lives; but Taffe after further Discourse, finding this Gentleman Mr.
Wybrand not for his purpose, he leaves him; but gives not over his Search, till
he is first met by Mrs. Dickinson, Wife to one of the Prisoners, and afterward
by Mr. Banks and Mr. Beresford, who were Friends, Relations, and as they
demeaned themselves, were thought Solicitors for all the Prisoners. Taffe no
sooner acquaints them with his Designs of spoiling the Plot and saving all the
Prisoners Lives, but the Bargain was struck, his Terms agreed to, Twenty pounds
is paid him in hand Sworn in the House of Lords and Commons.
with assurance (as it is commonly reported) of a good Annuity for Life, to be
settled in Lancashire, and now (least he should cool) he is sent immediately
into the Country to be their Champion Evidence, when the Trials should commence
at Manchaster.

This was the first Step that Taffe made toward spoiling of the Plot, the
greatest Part whereof was either confessed by him, or proved against him in the
House of Lords and Commons. But the Certainty of the Aunuity, and how much it
amounts to, I cannot yet learn, though I have reason to believe it is
considerable, since Mr. Dickinson told his Cousin Barker at the Trial at
Manchester, that See Mrs. Barker's Affidavit in the Appendix.
the gaining Taffe on their side, had cost them very dear.

Here you see is a great Point gained (though after a very ill Manner) for the
Prisoners. And this Success upon Taffe so fleshed their Solicitors, that they
are now fit to attempt any thing for the Service of their Friends and Kindred.

The next step they made is atempting upon Lunt, to which end Mr. Banks
counterfeits himself Drunk, and afterward by mean and little Artifices
insinuates himself into a Familiarity with him, squeezes out of unwary Lunt the
names of the Kings Witnesses, and the whole Matter of their Evidence, with
design to destroy it, which by the way was very unfair and dangerous Practice,
and rather exceeds than equals Reading's Case in the Reign of King Charle's the
Second; and I believe, if prosecuted in Westminster Hall, would there have been
judged one of the highest Crimes (under those that are Capital) and have met
with a Sentence accordingly; but how great soever this Crime is, it will apear
a very minute and inconsiderable one, when compared with these Gentlemen's
nefarious Practices, when the Matter was examined in Parliament, which shall be
produced in due Time and Place.

Having thus gained Taffe (...) a Morsel fit for the Devils Stomach, into the
Bowels of their Party, and by the like Clandestine Methods got the Names of the
Kings Witnesses and a Knowledge of what they could depose against the
Prisoners, the next Attempt for Shamming the whole Plot, and setting the
Prisoners in Statu quo prius, was engaging Ferguson to write in their Defense,
to set up the Jacobites in general, and the Prisoners in particular, as an
innocent and peaceable People, and to render their Accusers the very dregs of
Mankind: To the end, that People might be prepossessed with favorable Opinions
of the Gentlemen accused, and enraged with prejudice at the dismal
Representation which Ferguson should make of the Witnesses before the Trials
could begin, and this Stratagem had such a notable Effect, that the Popish Mob
at Manchester animated by reading Ferguson's Libel (which was almost in every
Hand in that Country) had resolved to prevent the Trials of the Prisoners, by
stoning the Kings Evidences to death, as they came into the Town; but those
that knew the Scene, was better and closer laid for the Acquittal of the
Gentlemen, than to do it by Force, prevailed with the Mob, under Assurance the
Prisoners would be acquitted, to forbear the Execution of that inhuman
Resolution till the Trials were ended; but no sooner was the Trial over and the
Witnesses leaving the Town, but the Popish Mob endeavored to stone them to
death, and that in such a rude, barbarous and tumultuous Manner, that not only
the Witnesses but an honest and worthy Gentleman of Counsel for the King, the
Kings Prosecutor, and the Kings Clerk in the Crown Office, very narrowly
escaped with their Lives, and all this done too, without fear or shame, in the
very sight of my Lords the Judges in the Town of Manchester.

The Trial begun at Manchester the 16th October 1694, where the Kings Evidences
proved, See their several Deposions in the Appendix.
that the Prisoners at the Bar had received Commissions from the late King
James, to raise War against their present Majesty's and Government, and to that
end had bought Arms, listed and subsisted Soldiers at their own Charge, and had
frequent Correspondence with the late King James for the carrying on an
Invasion and Rebellion against King William and Queen Mary, which having been
already related, as to the Time, Manner and all other Circumstances, I shall
forbear a further Recital here, and proceed to tell my Reader, that whilst the
Kings Witnesses were delivering their Evidences, Sir W. W. (tho he afterward
treated the Prisoners Evidences with all imaginable Respect and Civility,) was
observed to brow-beat them, and by cross, impertinent and extraneous Questions,
foreign to the Matter in Hand, endeavored to baffle, puzzle, confound and
entrap them, in what they Swore, but failing in that main Point of his Skill;
he requires Mr. Lunt to point at the several Prisoners by Name: In doing which,
some say he pointed at the wrong Man, though they were so hudled and crowded
together, it was hard to say which was the Person he pointed at; however this
gratified the Popish Mob, and raised a loud Laugh: But their Mirth continued
not long; for one of my Lords the Judges commanding Lunt to Touch and Name all
the accused Gentlemen with the Cryers Staff, he named them all Right, nor had
it been Material (in my Opinion) if he had been Guilty of a Misnomen, since
Lunt had said upon Oath, that he never saw that Gentleman but once, which was
in the Night too, and that also 'twns two Years since be saw him, that was
pretended to be misnamed.

However it gave Sir W. W. an Opportunity (tho he was then one of the Kings
Counsel) to show which side he was on now as well as at the Trial of my Lords
the Bishops.

The Kings Witnesses having delivered their Evidence against the Prisoners, and
all agreeing with one another as to Matter of Fact; Witnesses were produced for
the Prisoners, to invalidate the Testimony of those who had Sworn for the King;
and such a Noise had the Jacobites made with these Witnesses, that greater
Matters were expected from them, than performed by them, for at length their
mountainous Boasting was delivered of a ridiculous Mouse. All that their
Witnesses said, was only accusing the Kings Witnesses of some petty
Immoralities, that they pretended to have gathered from their own Mouths, in
Alehouses and at other Compotations; but not one Word in disproof of what they
had sworn against the Prisoners.

And truly it is a wonder they said no more, nor no worse things against the
Kings Witnesses, when we consider by what Means they procured those that were
Witnesses against the Kings Evidences in Parliament, viz. Down right Bribery,
and by telling them they were not to be put to their Oaths, and therefore not
being in danger of Perjury, might safely and confidently tell all the Stories
that Clark and Beresford had dictated to thembefore-hand: All which is now
undeniably proved upon Oath, by the Persons themselves that were See Clayton's
and Brown 's Depositions in the Appendix.
bribed.

But that which (I suppose) prevailed with the Jacobites to instruct these
Witnesses no better, was the great Dependence they had on Taffe, and the stress
they laid upon his Testimony, which in short was, that there was no Truth in
the pretended Plot, the whole being a villainous Contrivance between himself
and Lunt.

Or rather to speak Truth was a wicked Contrivance between Taffe and Mrs.
Dickinson and Clark and Beresford to shamm the Plot, and acquit the Gentlemen
accused; for if Lunt was as bad a Man as Taffe would render him, it no way
destroys the Reality of the Plot (which to the eternal Reproach of them that
contrived to ridicule it, or defend the Plotters) will remain True and stand as
firm as a Rock (notwithstanding all the Batteries the Jacobites can raise to
demolish it) if there was no such Man in the World as Mr. Lunt. And this I
shall further prove, when I have taken leave of this Father Vincent, Thomas O
Mullen, John Taffe, Teague O Devilly, who for making his Fortune has confessed
himself one of the greatest Villains in the World, nay to gratify his
Lancashire Benefactors, has made himself a greater Rogue than he was in
attributing such Hellish Contrivances to his own, and Lunts Invention, which
was only a Calumny invented by the Devil against Lunt and ramm'd down Taffe 's
Throat by the Lancashire Papists.

Some Men undergo hard Censures in the World from the ill Character given them
by their professed Enemies, out of Malice and Hatred, and these are to be pittyed
if not wholly excused; but for the Man that calls himself the worst of Men (and
that in solemn Judicial Proceedings where his Affirmative ought to have equal
Credit with an Oath,) there is no Apology, for though it destroys what he says of
another, it is the best Evidence in the World against himself, and will be so
esteemed by all Mankind: And yet this Man's single say-so without any Oath,
contrary to the Oaths of twenty several Witnesses for the King, which
corroborate the Testimonies of ten positive Witnesses that discovered the Plot,
was all the ground the Jacobites had to redicule it and rail against the
Government for prosecuting the Offenders, and call the Plot a shamm-Contrivance
of some little Ministers to enrich themselves by the ruin of the Persons
accused; though now that Calumny too is proved a mere Invention of the Mercenary
Scribler, by making the whole a Contrivance between Lunt and Taffe, which
having no better Authority than the former will have a like Dismission in the
Sequel.

Diverse Excuses and Apologies have been made by the Jacobites for Taffe, in
owning himself to be so vile a wretch, some say it amounts to nothing unless he
were also guilty of Perjury; and if that be true, then there is no Credit at
all to be given to him, for he See Mr. Wybrand's Affidavit.
swore his Name was John Taffe, when it may be proved by the Oaths of hundreds,
that his Name is Thomas O Mullen; but having committed so many egregious Crimes
under that Name, that he was forced to fly his Native Country, Ireland, and
Lucifer-like leave his right name behind him, he assumed that of John Taffe;
though it seems there is no greater Sanctity in this than the other. For under
this Name he also forswore himself in the House of Lords in the Service of the
Lancashire Gentlemen; for which their Lordships committed him, and for which he
had been Prosecuted in the King's Bench to a Conviction, if he had not fled from
Justice, and hid See the Secretary's Warrant (to apprehnd him) in custody of
Mr. Barker of Warrington in Lancashire.
himself so privately among his Friends in Lancashire that he could not be
apprehended.

Others plead in his Excuse, that his saying Lunt and himself made the Plot,
was an effect of his Repentance, and the only Satisfaction he could make for
having gone so far, and contrived so much Mischief already; and truly I should
not only have allowed this Excuse; but highly commended and encouraged the
Action, if it had been true, and Conscience had been the Motive to this
Discovery; but seeing the Plot proved by other credible Witnesses whilst Lunt
acted in it, I cannot believe what Taffe would suggest to the contrary,
especially when filthy Lucre, putting a great sum of ready Money into his
Pockets, See Mr. Wybrand' s Deposition in the Appendix.
and making his Fortune for the future is proved to be the only Inducement he
had to declare what he did at Manchester. For,

If Mr. Smith, or Mr. Baker, had concealed their Resentments of his base and
dishonest Practices and answered his over-large Demands, you had heard nothing
of all this; but in complying with the Conspirators he both gratified his
Revenge and his Covetousness together, for no other end does he propose to Mr.
Wybrand in desiring to be acquainted with some Friend of Mr. Leghs; but because
there was Money enough and he might make his Fortune: Nor was it in kindness to
the Gentlemen to save their Lives, but in kindness to himself, that he
Mortgaged his Soul to purchase an Annuity. And that there was no Truth in what
he said at the Trial at Manchester is plain, for he acknowledges, that there
was not only Witnesses enough to take away all the Prisoners Lives, but these
Witnesses were good ones, and very Honest Men; and being told by Mr. See Mr.
Wybrands Depositions in the Appendix.
Wybrand, that it looked like a Contradiction, or an Impossibility to save Men's
Lives accused of High Treason, and that Treason (by his own Confession) proved
against them by several creditable and substantial Testimonies, Taffe alias O
Mullen replied, it was no matter for that; if the Gentlemen would give him
Money to make his Fortune, he would contrive a way to do it.

Again, if Conscience had been the Motive, why did he go so far in it? Why was
he so active in seizing of Arms, and apprehending the Conspirators? If he knew
it to be a Piece of Roguery, he must know it to be so from the Beginning; for
he introduced Lunt to the Earl of Bellemont, read Lunt's Depositions taken
before Mr. Secretary Trenchard: And knew the Transactions of the whole Matter,
why then did he not relate it before? Why did he not declare it to the Lord
Bellemont, Mr. Secretary Trenchard, Mr. Attorney General, Mr. Aaron Smith or
some other proper Officer. This had been the honestest and easiest Way to have
put a Stop to all Proceedings? And had been fair, candid and upright Dealing,
as well on the behalf of the Government as the Gentlemen. But, alas, this
would have quite spoiled the making of his Fortune.

Again, if what Taffe says (in relation to Mr. Lunt's Evidence) had any kind of
Truth in it, it no way answers the End for which it is designed; for the Truth
of the Plot does not (as I have said before) depend only upon Lunt's single
Evidence, but upon the Discovery of Mr. Kelly, Mr. Dodsworth, Mr. Robinson, Mr.
Cawson and the Ships Company, the Custom-house-Officers, and several Persons of
Quality and others in Lancashire, whilst Lunt was acting in it; nor was the
Discovery from Manchester the Act of any single Person, who might be liable to
be imposed upon; but the premeditated Act of the whole Bench of Justices at
their Sessions in Manchester, as appears by the Letter to his Grace the Lord
Duke of Shrewsbury; which was also seconded by several others of his Majesty's
Justices of the Peace in their Session from other See the Letter from Middleton
in the Appendix.
Parts of the County, as well as from many private Gentlemen. So that Taffe
must say something to disprove all these Matters of Fact, attested by so many
Honorable Persons, and others of known Reputation before he or any of that
Party can hope to gain Credit to what they said against Lunt. But this was the
subtle Trick of the Conspirators and their Multinominal Friends, to leap over
all former Discoveries, and fall foul upon Lunt, and endeavor to persuade the
World, that he invented and contrived the Plot in May and June, 1694. Whereas
Lunt, and all the rest of the Kings Evidences depose the Plot begun in the
latter end of the Year 1688, and in the Year 1689, and by several Progressions
continued till 1694. So that what Taffe says, must of necessity be false, both
as to the Fact and Time. Besides,

What Taffe says (without reflecting upon his former vile and lewd
Conversation, in being a Renegado Irish Popish Priest, changing his Name, and
being manifestly guilty of Felony and Perjury) is only his own naked
Affirmation procured by Bribery; but what Lunt has sworn as to the Plot in
general, nay almost in every Particular, is confirmed by the best and surest
Testimonies in the World.

But since what Taffe had the Impudence to affirm has made so much Noise
abroad, and seemed the only Reason why Sr. W. W, threw up the Trial, I will sum
up both their Evidences, and leave the Reader to judge which of them is most
reasonable to be believed among the sober and unprejudiced Part of Mankind.
Father Vincent, All these Names be went by.
alias Thomas O Mullen, alias John Taffe says (but not upon his Oath) There was
no Truth in the Plot, but that the Whole was a Contrivance between him and
Lunt, in or about May 1694, but has no Evidence or Circumstance to confirm what
he so boldly affirms, nor has any thing to say further in the Whole.

Mr. Lunt deposes, that he followed the late King James into France, and from
thence into Ireland, and confirms it by a Which is now among the rest of the
Papers in the Custody of the Clerk of the Parliament.
Pass under the Hand and Seal of the Lord Melfort.

Lunt deposes, that in France and Ireland he was acquainted with Bromfeild,
who negotiated Affairs (in Order to a Rebellion) between the late King James
and the Lancashire Gentlemen: But being discovered, the Vessel he had bought,
taken, and himself in great Danger, he thought it not safe to go any more
thither, but having brought word that the Gentlemen had embraced the late Kings
Commands, and only wanted Commissions, the Carriage of the Commissions was to
be performed by Mr. Thrillfall and himself, and this he confirms by the Oaths
of Mr. John Edwards, See their several Depositions in the Appendix.
George Wilson, John Wilson, Elizabeth Langley, Elizabeth Hearst, and the
Master of the Vessel and five Seamen.

Lunt deposes, that in or about June 1689, he and Mr. Thrillfall of Goosner in
Lancashire sailed from Ireland in Mr. Cawson's Ship, landed at Cockram in
Lancashire; brought over several Commissions to the Lancashire Gentlemen, some
of which were left in the Ship, and taken by the Officers of the Customs, and
are now in the Hands of the Government, this is proved by Mr. Cawson the Master
of the Ship, that brought Lunt and Thrillfall out of Ireland, all the Seamen in
the Ship and by the Officers of the Customs, that seized the Commissions,
besides the Noble Peers aforenamed that examined the whole Matter in
Lancashire, and the Commissions themselves seen by Mr. Robinson, and are now in
the Custody of the Clerk of the Parliament.

Mr. Lunt deposes, that after he delivered the Commissions above named, the
Lancashire Gentlemen having formed a Rebellion, employed him and others to list
Men and send them into Lancashire, which he did, and subsisted them at the
charge of the Gentlemen accused, in order to be ready for the Service of King
James when called for, and this is proved by the Affidavits of John Wilson,
Lawrence Brandon, Robert Bradly, Elizabeth Hearst, Elizabeth Langley, and many
others, as also virtually confirmed by the Letter from the Quarter Sessions at
Manchester, signed by eight Justices of the Peace, See the Letter in the
Appendix.
dated 18th October 1689, where they desire his Grace the Duke of Shrewsbury to
acquaint the Kings Majesty, That there has been some modelling of Officers and
Men, preparatory to their hopes of an Invasion or Insurrection; and though our
Goals (say they) are full of Irish Papists, yet we have frequent Account of
many others at Popish Houses.

Mr. Kelly in his Information, See his Information in the Appendix.
tells you also, that, to his own knowledge, Mr. Thomas Tatlock of Symonds-Wood
in the Parish of Sefton Lancashire, did for above a Month together harbor
threescore Irish Men, who had been Soldiers to the late King James, and
disbanded at Hounslo-Heath, and were then listed under Gentlemen in Lancashire
for the same Service; that Arms and Furniture fitted for them were hid in that
Wood, and that Mr. Molyneux of Mosbrow did harbor about twenty Irish Men for
the Service of King James: Nay some of the very Persons accused by Lunt 1694
were inpeach'd by Mr. Kelly in the Year 1690 and were then looked upon as very
dangerous Persons to the Government, as appears by a Letter to a Minister of
State, dated at Middleton April 9th. 1690 Se the Letter from Middleton in the
Appendix.
and signed by five Gentlemen, to which we add, that Crosby's Papers in the
Appendix.
affirm there were four Thousand Men actually listed in the North for the
Service of that King, there needs no more be said in the Matter.

So that the Plot in Lancashire against the King and Government could not be a
Contrivance of Taffe and Lunt in 1694, it being thus credibly discovered, and
Search made after the Conspirators in 1690, whilst Mr. Lunt was acting in it,
and had been prosecured with effect then, if the Jacobites had not provided for
their own Safety by removing Mr. Kelly into another World; as not long after
they served Mr. Dodsworth by Murdering him as soon as they heard of this
Correspondence will be proved by Mrs. Dodsworth who was privy to it.
a Correspondence and Letters passing betwixt him and Lunt.

Now were not the whole Proceedings in behalf of the Conspirators so plainly
proved to be made up of Fraud, Fallacy, Bribery and Barbarity, a Man would
wonder with what Face they could impose Taffe's Lies upon the World, or
endeavor to baffle Lunt's Testimony, which has so many undeniable Witnesses
to confirm it. But,

Sir W.W. laying so great stress upon what was said by Taffe, as to refuse to
proceed further in the Trial at Manchester, I beg his Worships Leave to ask him
a few modest Questions, viz.

When the Master of the Vessel brought Lunt and Thrillfall out of Ireland, was
apprehended and carrying up to London for so doing, and by accident hearing of
Lunt's being a Prisoner in Coventry, charged him to be one of the Persons that
brought those Commissions from the late King James; which were found in his
Vessel; Whether that was of Taffe 's Contrivance?

When Lunt was committed to Newgate upon the Oath of Mr. Cawson and the five
Seamen for bringing over these Commissions, and afterward (in great Danger of
Hanging) committed to Lancaster Goal for high Treason (where he lay three
Assizes) Was that of Taffe's contriving?

When Mr. Thrillfall having delivered the late King James's Commissions in
Yorkshire, and being accused for it by Mr. Dodsworth, and like to be
apprehended by the Lancashire Militia, chose rather to be killed than to be
taken? Was that Mr. Taffe's Contrivance?

Was the Discovery of the Kettle-Drums that were bought by C. P. by Order of
Coll. Parker and sent to Standish-Hall, of his contrivance? The first hiding,
and than finding and seizing (walled up in a Garret) all the Arms and Saddles
aforementioned, Was that also of Taffe's Contrivance?

If so I assure you Sir W.W. he is a very Wagg, and for ought, I know, that the
Gentlemen when accused of high Treason and Prisoners in the Tower, had by their
Friends frequent Consultation with, and Advice and Directions from, one that
was then of the Kings Council. Before they consulted with Sir Bartholomew
Shower, might be of his Contrivance also.

Nay since Taffe is so excellent at contriving, the very procuring Sir W.W. to
be the sole Manager of the Trial at Manchester (from which many honest Men
foretold what happened) might be of his Contrivance too, and if it was the
Lancashire and Cheshire Gentlemen are more obliged to Taffe for that piece of
excellent Service, than for all that he swallowed in London, or disgorg'd at
Manchester. For if all the Kings Witnesses might have been heard, what Taffe
said there would have signified nothing.

However, a Contrivance there was, and though it does not effect Lunt (as they
would have it) in forging the Plot. It lies very close and heavy on Mr.
Dickinson, Mr. B*ks and Mr. B***ford; for bribing Taffe to say so: And also Sir
W.W. who upon Taffe's Evidence would proceed no further in the Trial at
Manchester; but sat down like a winning Gamster, unwilling to tempt his
Fortune, and positively refused any more of the Kings Witnesses to be heard,
though at the same time he knew there were many, whose Names were in his Breviat,
more especially one that was a Prisoner for the same Treason with the
Gentlemen, which could have cleared all the seeming, or pretended difficulties
in the whole Matter, might he have been heard.

This Politic Piece of Chicanery strongly amazed the Kings Prosecutors, that
one of the Kings Council should so far influence the rest, as all (but one)
should refuse or neglect to let all the Kings Witnesses he heard; whereupon Mr.
Bale the Kings Prosecutor (being put upon it by Captain Baker) prayed Sir W. W.
twice, that the rest of the Kings Witnesses might be called, and being refused
by Sir W.W. Mr. Bale addresses himself to the Court, insomuch, that my Lords
the Judges urged the Witnesses being heard, that had not yet deposed: But all
was to no purpose, Sir W. W's. having gained the Point for the Prisoners, and
knowing he could not proceed further without eminent Danger, would not
condescend to open, but kept his mouth as close as if his Lips had been sealed
with cross Scepters; till Richard Knapp Esquire who was also of Council for the
King at the Trial, desired Sir W. W. that the rest of the King's Witnesses
(whose Names and what they could swear was in his Breviat) might be called and
heard, and then, in great Passion, but with little Decency, Sr. W. W. replied,
He would not suffer it, and none but a Knave or a Fool would desire it. Sworn
by Mr. Knapp in the House of Lords.
Thus the Session ended, and if this was not a horrible Contrivance against the
Government, certainly there never was one in the World: Yea so open and
barefaced was this Lancashire Juggle, that some of the Jacobites themselves
were ashamed of it, and Mr. Upton (who was one of the Council for the
Prisoners) banter'd Mr. Aaron Smith with it at Manchester, saying, If the
Judges intended to try Mr. Legh at Chester, Mr. Legh resolved to retain Sr. W.
W. for his Council, for he believed, none of his own Council could do his
Business so effectually.

Sr. W. W. having thus gratified his old Clients, Friends and Neighbors with
an unexpected Deliverance, to complete the Scene (for Malice is like one of the
four Things that never say, It Is enough) away he posts from Manchester to
London, and there makes such a black and dismal Representation of the Kings
Witnesses for forging a Plot (before any could reach the Court to disprove him)
that the Government, in Abhorrence of such a Fact, as it was represented to be
by Sr. W. W. immediately ordered the Witnesses to be indicted in the Court of
Kings Bench, for a Conspiracy against the Lives and Estates of the Lancashire
and Cheshire Gentlemen, and the Witnesses, at their return to London, were
accordingly committed to the Kings Bench Prison, in order to their Trial upon
that Indictment.

This strange Turn being given, many of the wiser Sort, of those that were
Friends to the accused Gentlemen, and dreaded the Consequence of a melius
inquirendum, advised them to sit down quietly; and leave it to the Government
to punish their Accusers, if they saw fit (and happy had it been for the
Gentlemen, if their Advice had been followed) but some Lawyers, and their
hotheaded Solicitors overruled this Advice, and not being contented, unless
some of the tallest Cedars might be rooted up, and sacrificed to their Humor
or Lust of Revenge.

The Lancashire and Cheshire Gentlemen brought the Affair into the Honorable
House of Commons. And to know how they and their Solicitors managed the Matter
there, it will be worth the Reader's Time to read over Mr. Clayton's and
Brown's Informations in the Appendix, which will show him by what base, unjust
and indirect Methods they carried on the Affair of slandering the Kings
Evidences, and vilely abused Earl of Macclesfield.
a Noble Peer, who for being a known Friend to the Government, they thought of
consequence was their mortal Enemy.

The Honorable House of Commons, after several Hearings and long Debates,
which continued at the several appointed Times, See the Journal of the House of
Commons.
the Space of seventeen Weeks: On Wednesday the 6th Day of February, according
to the Order of the Day, proceeded further in reading the Informations and
Papers delivered into the House by Mr. Aaron Smith, touching the late
Proceedings and Trials in Lancashire and Cheshire, and Mr. Lunt's Information
was read through, and also Mr. Wilson's and Mr. Womball's Informations, and the
other Papers delivered into the House by Mr. Aaron Smith were also read, among
which were several Printed Papers. And it was then Resolved.

That it does appear to this House, that there was sufficient Grounds for the
Prosecutions and Trials of the Gentlemen at Manchester.

Resolved,

That upon the Informations and Examinations before this House, It does appear
there was a dangerous PLOT carried on against the King and Government.

Neither was this all, but that Honorable House (after an Order of the House,
That Mr. Standish of Standish-hall in Laneashire should be taken into Custody,
and their Messenger returned and reported he was fled) addressed the Kings
Majesty to issue out His Royal Proclamation for the apprehending Mr. Standish;
but he upon Notice of it, fled into France, the then Common Sanctuary for the
Enemies of the English Nation.

This Disappointment in the House of Commons so contrary to the Expectations of
the Party, and the Promises they fed themselves withal, though it was a great
Mortification to the whole Party, yet in hopes of better Success, they lay
their Complaint also before the Right Honorable the House of Peers, where
after examining some Witnesses, and many Debates had, the Question being put,
Whether the Government had sufficient Cause to Prosecute the Lancashire and
Cheshire Gentlemen. It was carried in the Affirmative.

All this while the poor Creatures, who were Witnesses for the King, were left
in a starving Condition, and under barbarous Usage four Months in the
Common-side in the King's Bench Prison, upon the Indictment of Conspiracy before
named; till their Council in Hillary Term 1694, moving the Court of
King's Bench, that they might either be tried or admitted to bayl; the latter
was granted them; but the Time for their Trial could not be yet ascertained.

In Easter-Term following, they expected to be tried, but were not. In
Trinity-Term following they pressed for a Trial, and were assured by Mr. Aaron
Smith they should be tried, either the last day of the Term, or the Sitting
after the Term, and in order to their Trial Mr. Smith called them together, and
jointly asked them these questions.

Whether (Sir John Trenchard being dead) they would admit of the Informations
they gave before Sir. John upon Oath, as Evidence, without further Proof of the
same being so given?

Whether they would admit of the Trials and Acquittals of the Gentlemen in
Lancashire, without producing Records, Witnesses, etc.

To which they unanimously replied (being very desirous of a Trial) That they
would, and for the ease of the Government, saving Expense, and that Truth might
appear in a Legal Trial, would also be obliged by a Rule of Court, not only to
admit the Things there propounded by Mr. Smith, but every Matter, or Thing
else, that might expedite their Trials, save only owning themselves guilty.

Having this Assurance of a Trial, the Witnesses took out Post-Warrants,
bespoke Subpoenas, and engaged Persons to serve them; but when ready for their
Journey, the Defendants had notice from Mr. Attorney General Ward, that he
could not try them that Term, it is said he consulted with some of the Kings
Council, and they for Reasons, best known to themselves, resolved they should
not be tried.

Now a new Scene appears, and instead of trying them upon the Indictment of
Conspiracy, which above all things, one would think, the Gentlemen should have
been most solicitous for.

The next Lancaster Assizes, August 1695, the Gentlemen having a Grand Jury
wherein were four or five Persons, which had never taken the Oaths of Fidelity
to their Majesty's, See the Panel in the Office.
but were known Enemies to the Government. A Sheriff, and consequently a Pettit
Jury, for their Turn, which were most of them Tenants to the Popish Gentlemen,
they brought on Trials upon an Information of Perjury against three of the
Witnesses, without giving Notice to any of the Defendants, and managed the
Trials with so much Scandal, and so animated the Popish Mob to awe the Court by
a great Concourse of disaffected Persons from all Parts of England, that one of
their own Party exclaimed against it to a Person of great Quality, who was then
in the Country: And besides all this, one of the Persons, which the Witnesses
had Accused of High Treason, was a Witness against them, upon the Indictment of
Perjury; and then none will scruple believing, but they would acquit themselves
and load their Adversaries, having this advantage of being their own
Compurgators. And so as it was laid, it happened, the Witnesses were all found
Guilty.

This Advantage over the Innocent Evidences, so exalted the Party, they could
not forbear expressing their Joy at it, by ungrateful Reflections upon his
Majesty's Government in all public Companies, and because some Body in the
Government (they care not who) must always be blamed as the Cause of their
Trouble, some of the Party were so void of shame, as (after the Witnesses were
convicted of Perjury) to tell the Honorable Judge Turton, that the Earl of
Macclesfeild, being Lord Lieutenant of the County of Lancashire, had sent down
thither great Quantities of Arms, and immediately added this malicious Innuendo,
and what if his Lordship designs thereby to entrap us. An Inference so full of
Venom, and so wickedly False, that nothing could be guilty of it, that had a
Grain of Honesty or good Manners, for his Lordship was never acquainted with
any thing in that Prosecution.

In Michaelmas-Term following, the Witnesses moved the Court of King's Bench,
that the aforesaid Trials might be set aside, for that the Defendants had no
notice of them, and after very hard struggling with the Popish Gentlemen's
Council, Sir Bartholomew Shower, Mr. Northey, Mr. Harcourt, etc. for four or
five Days, notwithstanding several odd Affidavits, made, and procured to be
made by Mr. Legh and Mr. Simon Harcourt of the Crown-Office these Trials at
Lancaster (upon the irregular Practices that appeared to have been committed)
were set aside by the Court.

The same Term Mr. Attorney General, by the Kings Council Mr. Cooper, moved the
Court of King's Bench, that Lunt, VVomball and Wilson, might be tried upon the
Indictment of Conspiracy the next Term, being Hillary, a Rule of Court was made
for it, and Mr. Robert VVintour the Kings Clerk in the Crown-Office was ordered
to give the Defendants notice of it, and be ready for it at their own Perils.

The Defendants received this Notice with great Satisfaction, as the only means
to acquit themselves of the horrid Imputations they had long suffered under,
and in order to it, engage all their Friends to assist them with what Money
they could, and at a very great Expense, Subpaena'd and brought up to London
out of Lancashire, Cheshire and North-VVales, more than twenty VVitnesses,
besides fifteen or sixteen more they had in or about London, which would have
cleared and justified every Article in their Informations against the Gentlemen.

The Term being come, the Witnesses brought to London, and no certain day
appointed by the Kings Prosecutors for the Trial, Mr. Attorney General was
attended, and requested to name a short one, in respect of the great Charge the
Defendants were at in keeping so many Witnesses in Town; to which his Honor
was pleased to answer, he would take care of it; but three or four days after,
when all the Witnesses out of the Country, and in or near the Town, were ready,
and their Council retained, Mr. Attorney General gave notice, he would not
bring on the Trials, and ordered Mr. Wintour the Kings Clerk in the
Crown-Office, to countermand it.

Next day after, the Defendants gave notice they would move the Court (tho they
were told they could have no remedy there against the King) whereupon the Kings
Managers, in the Attorney Generals Name, offered to pay the Defendants Costs,
if they would for bear the Motion, but the Defendants refused the Offer, and
the Court was moved the next day; and Mr. Attorney General and Sergeant Gold,
being sent for into Court, the Court asked them, why they refused to try the
Defendants, since there was a Rule of Court made the last Term for their being
tried in this?

Mr. Attorney and Sergeant Gold, answered, they had no VVitnesses (which was
not his Fault.) For how was it possible for Mr. Attorney to have Witnesses,
unless the Lancashire Gentlemen or their Solicitors furnished him with them;
and truly their refusing to do it, after such timely Notice given them, by Mr.
Attorney's Order, looks so like a Trick, or an Abuse put upon Mr. Attorney by
the Jacobites, that he must have Abundance of good, Nature if he forgive them)
the Court replied in Words to this purpose, how Mr. Attorney, do you indict Men
for a Conspiracy, keep them in Prison, or under Bayl above a twelve Month, move
your self for a Trial the last Term, give the Defendants Notice they must be
tried in this, and their Witnesses being in Town, do you say you have no
Witnesses against them, these are very strange Proceedings and hard upon the
Defendants. We cannot award Costs against the King; we can only recommend it to
Mr. Attorney, and so we do. Upon which Mr. Attorney General promised to pay the
Defendants Costs. And here I suppose is an end of all the Gentlemen's Pretenses
against the Kings Witnesses; for since they have declined their Proof, and will
not suffer the Law to decide it, especially, when all the Prosecutions were
carried on at the Kings Charge; it is an evident Presumption they have no Proof
to make, that will bear the Scrutiny of Westminster Hall.

The Lancashire Plotters and the rest of the Conspirators, being thus
disappointed in the Year 1694, one might reasonably expect the Jacobites would
have given over a Toil and Trouble, that had so often endangered their Lives
and Fortunes, by it is ill Successes and repeated Discoveries; but on the
contrary, they are more enraged at their Misfortunes, grow desperate at their
Disappointments, and carry on both their Plots (of Assassination and Invasion)
at the very Time, when the Lancashire Gentlemen were endeavoring to prove
themselves peaceable Subjects to the King and Government in both Houses of
Parliament: For Capt. Waugh of Brentford, who was sent over by the Jacobites in
November 1694, to concert their Affairs in France, addresses to Coll. Parker,
Mr. Caryl, and the other Confederates of the Party, who telling him, the French
were not yet at Leisure to furnish the English Jacobites withso many Men as
were desired for the Invasion, fell upon what they thought would more speedily
accomplish their Designs in the Restoration of their old Master, and that was,
Murdering King WILLIAM.

These Persons had been so long in the Secret, that they agre'd upon the
Methods, but because there were some Jacobites that had not yet so far
extinguished all Sense of Honor and Conscience, but that they utterly refused
to be concerned in such a black and horrid Enterprise, as the Assassination;
and others scrupled engaging in it, unless they had a Commission from the late
King for that Purpose, and that this Year would also be lost, unless the Design
were quickly put in Execution; it was agre'd, that Mr. Waugh should forthwith
return into England, and give the Jacobites Assurance, that those that would
engage in the Assassination should have the Commission desired immediately sent
them by a safe Hand; and those that were for the Invasion, should have their
Spirits kept up with the Hopes of a Powerful Assistance from France, as soon as
the Blow was given, and these two Things they thought would effectually employ
both the Factions, without clashing or intersering; that both the Plots might
succeed to their Wishes.

About the latter end of February 1694.
, Mr. Waugh returns from France, visits his Friends the Jacobites in London,
and gives them an Account what the grand Plotters in France thought would be
the most expeditious and effectual Project to restore the late King James, viz.
Killing King William, for which Action there would quickly be sent a Commission
from the late King to command the doing of it, and an Order to all his General
Officers which were then in England to be aiding and assisting in the
Enterprise: And that in the mean time all things ought to be so well adjusted
among themselves here, that there might be no time lost, nor nothing to do when
the Commission came, but to put it in Execution.

At this Juncture comes Major Crosby also from France, March 20. 1094.
with Assurance, That he saw the Commission signed, and under Seal in France,
that it was sent away before him, and if not already come, he was certain it
was upon the Road, and would be here in a few days. This was communicated to
all the Assassinates, in order to cut off his Majesty before he went to
Holland, but that God that designed him for a further Blessing to England,
prevented their Treachery, and conveyed him safe to his Army in Flanders. Now,

If the Jacobites enquire, how I prove this Plot upon the King's Life, so early
as to be laid in January and February 1694, and to be executed in the beginning
of April 1695, that was (say they) scarce heard off till a twelve Month after,
they may please to know, that, besides my being told of it by Captain Blaire,
Mr. De la Rue swears it at Mr. Charnocks Trial, p. 37. And Sir John Fenwick,
when living, was one of the Kings Evidence in this Matter, and declared it in a
Paper annexed to the Lady Mary Fenwicks Petition, praying a Repreive for Sir
John Fenwick, delivered into the House of Lords, January 22th 1696 Vidahe Lords
Journal.
in these Words.

The beginning of the Weck the Parliament was prorogued, I was walking in the
Court of Requests, and there came to me Sir William Perkins, Mr. Porter and Mr.
Charnock, Mr. Waugh was there also with the same Company but Sir John names him
not.
and asked me if I did not know of an Order come from King James, directed to
those that had been General Officers under him, I answered them I knew nothing
of any Order from him, and asked for what purpose it should be. They told me
they had for some time expected a Commission from King James to seize King
William, and that Mr. Crosby was newly come over and required of them, if they
had not received such a Commission? They told him, they had not, he said he
wondered at it, for he saw it signed before he came away from St. Germains; and
also an Order to the General Officers to be aiding and assisting to them. I
told them, I believed what Crosby said was False, that it was a Scandal upon
King James, and I was sure he never would give any such Commission or Order for
so base an Action. That they could intend no less by seizing the King than to
Murder him, upon which Sir W. Perkins said, the Parliament would be Prorogued
on Friday next, and then the King would go for Flanders, and that Saturday was
the only day they had left to do it, and though, the Commission was not come,
they would not loose the Opportunity of attempting it as he returned from
Richmond that Night, and swore he should never go out of England alive.

Mr. Porter and Mr. Charnock said, they were resolved of it, and tho the
Commission was not yet come, Crosby assured them it must be upon the Road, for
it was come away before him.

I used all Arguments against it, and told them what Injury they would do King
James, and bring certain Ruin upon all his Friends here; that if it was upon
the Road, as Crosby said, it might be here on Saturday, and with much
Persuasions prevailed with them to dine with me that day at Twelve a Clock at
the Fountain-Tavern by the Temple-Gate, and got them to Promise they would do
nothing in it till they met me there that day. We met accordingly: And I kept
them there (discoursing upon the business, and showing them the baseness of the
Action, and the impossibility of their succeeding, for none of King James 's
Friends would back them in it) till it was too late to make any such Attempt:
The King went for Flanders next Morning early, this I attest for Truth, and for
this Reason I suppose they did not acquaint me with their Last Design.

John Fenwick.


Though the main end for which this Paper was designed, would admit of many
severe Reflections, as wanting that Sincerity which might be expected from one
in Sir John's Circumstances, and naming none of the Persons that managed that
Treasonable Discourse in the Court of Requests, but what are either Dead, or in
the Government; when he knew what a large share Mr. Waugh had in it, I shall
content my Self, and I hope satisfy my Reader, only in observing three things
as the natural Consequence of what the Paper acquaints us with; Viz.

That there was a Design to assassinate King William in the Year 1694 and 1695.

That the late King James not only knew of it, but commanded it.

That Sir John Fenwick knew of it, but did not discover it, and therefore no
Objection lies, but that he might be acquainted with the last Design also.

The Parliament was prorogued the 3d of May 1695, and the King set forward for
Flanders the day following, so there being no hopes of Executing their
barbarous Design till his Majesty's Return, they resolve so to employ the
Summer, that Winter might find them ready to perform what they had so long and
unsuccessfully resolved on. And that the Invasion might still accompany the
Assassination, they revive the Latter, that it might be in a readiness to
follow the Former, as soon as the fatal Stroke had made way for it. For this
Purpose several Meetings are appointed, and particularly one was held in May
1695, at the Old King's Head in Leaden-Hall-street London, where met the Lord
Aylesbury, the Lord Mountgomery, Sir John Friend, Sir William Perkins, Sir John
Fenwick, Mr. Charnock, Mr. Cook, Captain Porter and Mr. Goodman who came in
after Dinner, See Mr. Porter's Deposition in Sir W. Perkins Trial, p. 14.
there they consulted of the best way to restore the late King James, and all
agreed to send a Messenger over to the late King to desire him to procure of
the French King ten thousand Men, viz. 1000 Horse, 1000 Dragoons and 8000 Foot.
Mr. Charnock was the Person appointed to Manage this Affair, who said, he would
not go on a foolish Errand, and therefore would know what the Company would do,
if Foreign Forces could be procured, whereupon they all unanimously promised,
if the late King would come over with such a Number of Men as was defired, they
would meet him at the Head of two thousand Horse wherever he would appoint.
At the latter End of June 1695 or beginning of July, they had another meeting,
where after many public Discourses and private Whisperings, Mr. Charnock
desiring the Company to acquaint him, whether they continued their former
Resolutions, they assured him they did, and would meet him with the Number of
Men promised at the former Meeting. Upon which Mr. Charnock told them, he would
begin his Journey in a few days.

The Invasion being thus promoted by dispatching Mr. Charnock into France, that
the Assassination might not lagg behind it; some of the Assassines calling to
mind, that nothing would be attempted in that kind till the Commission, which
Crosby said was upon the Road, was come to their Hands. See Goodman's
Depositions taken April 24 1696,
Capt. Porter and Mr. Goodman communicate the Project to Sir George Barclay who
was then in England, and upon his Departure for France telling him what
Difficulties they labored under for want of it, and that a longer Delay of the
Commission would extremely embarrass the Affair. Sir George not only approves,
but commends the Design, and that such a hopeful Project might not miscarry,
promised to use all his Interest, when he came to St. Germains, that such a
Commission should no longer be wanting.

This Encouragement from so considerable a Favorite as Sir George Barclay
(whose Biggotry to the Romish Persuasion, and the late Kings Interest, would
prompt him to any thing, in favor of them) employs all their Heads, and opens
all their Purses, to contribute the last Assistance for the Accomplishment of
the Assassination.

The beginning of August 1695, brings Mr. Charnock again to London with the
unwelcome News, that the French King was not in a Condition to spare the Sea
Charnocks Trial.
Jacobites such a Number of Men as they defired, which being imparted to the
Chief of that unruly and blood-thirsty Faction, the two Branches of the
Conspiracy to overthrow the established Government, were both laid aside till
the approaching Winter should give them another Resurrection. But,

Notwithstanding this positive Answer to the English Jacobites, our Foreign
Enemies were at the same Time taking such Measures as might suit with the
Request made by the Jacobites, though they durst not trust them with the Secret:
For a great Politician being at Marli, and considering the Posture of Affairs
in England, as represented to him in Crosby's Papers, he thought this the
fairest Opportunity he could wish for the Invading of England: Whilst Mr. Caryl
the late Queens Secretary, Coll. Parker, etc. were carrying on the Plot to
Assassinate his Majesty; for no question but a certain great Man in the World,
that shall be nameless, knew what they were contriving at St. Germains, though
they were utter Strangers to the Invasion-Plot, that was laying at another
Place, which as it had the Honor of a great Man's own contriving, so it was not
communicated even to the late King James himself, till the Squadron of Men of
War, and four hundred Transport Ships were fitted, and the French Army
consisting of thirty Battalions were ready to embarque, and Money and Orders
sent him to go on Board, and take possession of England.

In November 1695, Sir George Barclay with several Officers and Soldiers and
eight hundred Pounds in Money comes into England, and brings with him a
Commission from King James (all written with his own Hand) to Seize King
William, which Sir William Perkins confesses to a Committee of Parliament See
the Journal of the House of Commons April 2, 1696. And C. Porters Depositions
in Perkins Trial, p. 14.
that he saw: But neither Sir George Barclay, nor the Commission, being yet in
the Hands of the Government, and the Jacobites ashamed to set up their late
King and themselves under the inglorious Title of Murderers, they mince the
Matter into more relishable Terms, and say it was only to levy War upon the
Prince of Orange and all his Adherents. Others say it was to attach the Prince
of Orange in his Winter Quarters, which are all mere Tricks and Evasions,
invented by the Party to disguise the Horror of the Action; for the very Gloss
they themselves put upon it, sets it in its true Light; for all the Party knew
the meaning of attaching the Prince of Orange as appears by Mr. De la As
appears by Mr. De la Rue's Oath in Charnocks Trial.
Rue's Oath, who deposes, that when the Muscatoon was lent by Mr. Porter to
Mr. Pendergrass, that would carry six or eight Bullets, Mr. King desired him
when he shot at his Majesty's Coach he would not be afraid of breaking the
Glasses.

Sr. George Barclay after his Arrival at London loged in Covent Garden, and
kept very private, till he could speak with Sr. William Perkins, Capt. Waugh
and Mr. Charnock; and that the two and twenty Men that were sent by King James
out of France, and appointed to obey his Orders were come to London also; and
now they endeavor to strengthen their Party by the Addition of more Friends.
And Mr. De la Rue, Mr. Pendergrass, Mr. Rookwood, Major Lowick, Mr. Knightly,
Mr. Bertram, Chambers, Durant, Cramburne, Kendrick, Grimes, Waugh and Goodman,
some of which were engaged in the Assassination the Year before, were now again
confirmed in it.

As for Capt. Porter (who has now so Honorably and Honestly atton'd for his
former Offenses,) they were sure of already, to others in whom they had not
more than ordinary Confidence they discoursed of the Assassination at a
distance, See Captain Blairs Depositions in the bands of the Government.
and if they found any Reluctance, or Indisposition to the Assassination, they
turned them over to the Invasion Plot, and desired them to be ready to meet
their old Master at his Landing; but to those whom Wickedness had made fit for
any Impression, they imparted their Villainy in words at length, and so secured
the whole Party to be either Rebels, or Murderers.

Those that came from France knew not what Affair they were sent upon, till
they arrived at London; but were kept in a blind Obedience to Sr. George
Barclay's Order, as appears by the Depositions of Mr. George Harris, Taken
April, 15, 1696.
who says, he was an Ensign of Foot under the late King James in Scotland, and
has since served his second Troop of Guards in France, that about the 14 of
January 1695, King James sent for this Deponent and Michael Hare his Comerade,
and in the Queens Bedchamber told him, that he had an Opportunity of doing
something for him, as a Reward of his faithful Service; that he would send him
into England, where he should be subsisted, and that he should follow Sr.
George Barclay's Orders, and in so doing he would take Care of him. That he had
ordered them Money for their Journey, which they should receive from Mr. Caryl,
the late Queen's Secretary, and farther told this Informant, that he should
find Sr. George Barclay every Monday and Thursday, between six and seven at
night, in Covent Garden Square, whom they should know by a white Handkercheif,
hanging out of his Coat Pocket, and thereupon the late King James pulling a
List out of his Pocket told this Deponent, that when he was in England he must
go by the Name of Jenkins, and his Comerade Hare by the Name of Guiney, and
further this Deponent says, that Coll. Parker was present, heard all that the
late King said, and went with this Informant and his Comerade to Mr. Caryl, who
told them, that the King had ordered each of them Ten Louis d' Or's which would
be sufficient to carry them into England, and if they should be Wind-bound, he
had writ to the President Toss at Calais to furnish them with what they should
have occasion for; the rest of the Assassins were all Men of desperate
Fortunes, hangers-on at the Court at St. Germains, or Soldiers taken out of
several Regiments, whose Characters rendered them fit for such an inhuman
Enterprise.

All the Assassins being come to London, that were expected from France, and
their Number completed by the Addition of others that were in England, the
execrable Design was communicated to all the Desperados: Some of which were
startled and amazed with horror at the first Relation of it; but all the
Scruples that Conscience could raise were soon extinguished by the Authority of
the late King James 's Commission, and their Phanciful Prospects of Wealth and
Honor, that would attend the Action: And therefore all consented to forfeit
their Honors, and hazard their Lives in it.

Now several ways are proposed by the Conspirators to execute their long
designed Attempt against his Majesty's Person. Some proposed the seizing his
Majesty and carrying him alive into France, and to that purpose a faint was
made, that a Castle on the Seaside was secured to detain the King in, till a
Ship was ready to transport him thither; but the wiser and more wicked among
them, that understood what was meant by seizing the King's Person, laughed at
this as a mere Chimera.

Others proposed, to kill his Majesty at Kensington, by attaching his Guards
and forcing his Palace in the dead of the night; but this upon debating was
also thought wholly impracticable.

Some were for Murdering the King as he came on Sunday to St. James 's
Chapel, and for this purpose forty Men well armed were to Assault his
Majesty's Guards, which commonly do not exceed above twenty five, while six Men
on Foot should shut Hide Parke-gate, and the rest Assassinate his Majesty, See
Mr. Fishers Deposition Feb. 25 1695.
'twas agreed also to kill the Coach Horses as they were entering into the Park,
that the Passage being stopped, the Guards might not be able to come up, till
they had done their Work.

Another Proposal was, to Murder the King as he returned from Hunting, in a
narrow Lane by a Wood-side, leading to the Thames on the other side of the
Water, about a hundred and fifty paces long, in which there is a Gate that when
it is shut, hinders Coaches, or Horses, from passing that way: One of the
Assassins was sent to view this Ground, and another to view the Lane
aforementioned; but Sr. George Barclay who was to command this infamous Party
did not approve that Lane, and the Difficulties that arose in the Debate,
caused that Project to be rejected, at last they fix upon a Place betwixt
Brentford and Turnham-Green. In a bottom where the Ground is moorish there is a
Bridge where diverse Roads meet, and cross one another; on the North side there
is a Road that goes round Brentford, and on the South a Lane that leads to the
River, so that one may come thither by four several Ways. After you past the
Bridge, the Road grows narrow, having on one side a foot Path, and on the other
a tall and thick Hedge; and this Place was pitched upon for the Execution of
their barbarous Design: And truly, if Heaven had not discovered their Treasons
(all Circumstances considered) a more unlucky Place and Time could not have
been found out. For,

His Majesty very often returned late from Hunting, and usually crossed the Water
at Queens-Ferry by Brentford, with no greater Attendance than five or six of
his Guards. 'Twas also his Majesty's Custom to enter the Ferry-Boat without
coming out of his Coach, and as soon as he landed on this side the Water, the
Coach drove on, without expecting the rest of the Guards, who could not cross
the Thames, till the Boat returned to Surry-side to bring them over; and so the
King must inevitably have fallen into the Hands of his Murderers, before the
rest of his Guards could have come up to his Assistance.

Neither was the Time and Place more cunningly and devilishly contrived, then
their Men were disposed of; for having secured several Places at Brentford,
Turnham-Green and in scattered Houses thereabouts, to set up their Horses till
the King should return from Hunting, One of the Conspirators was ordered to
wait at Queens-Ferry till the Kings Guards appeared in sight on Surry-side of
the Water, and then to give speedy Notice to the rest, to be ready at their
respective Ports, while the King was crossing the Thames. For this wicked end,
they were divided into three Parties, which were to make their Approaches by
three several ways, one of which was to come from Turnham-Green, another from
the Lane that leads to the Thames, and the third from the Road that goes round
Brentford. One of these Parties were to attack the Guards in the Front, and the
other in the Rear, whilst ten or twelve Men of the bloodiest Sort were to
assassinate his Majesty in his Coach: And put a Period to that Sacred Life,
whose Safety and well Being is a Terror to the Common Enemy of Europe, as well
as the particular Joy, Delight and Safety of England.

When their execrable Design was accomplished, the Conspirators resolved to
keep in a Body till they came beyond Hammersmith, and there to separate, and by
several Roads hasten to London, and from thence to the Seaside, where the
sudden Landing of the French might secure them from the Rage of the Multitude,
and the Hand of Justice. Thus was the Assassination to make way for a French
Invasion, and the Invasion to shelter the Murderers of our King and Country.

Horses were now the only necessaries wanting, and Sir George Barclay Vid.
Captain Porter's Depositions in the Appendix.
complaining, that the eight hundred Pound he brought over was already so far
exhausted, that he could not out of the Remainder provide so great a Number as
forty, they all agre'd he should find but half, and the other twenty should be
supplied by Sir W. Perkins, Mr. Porter and Mr. Charnock.

All Things being thus agreed on, and the day appointed for the Execution of
this inhuman Conspiracy, the Duke of Berwick, who came into England to
countenance the Action, and secure a Party among the great Ones to assist at
the Invasion, having been three Weeks in England, left London on Friday the 7th
of February 1695, and having a speedy Passage, was posting toward Paris; but
meeting his supposed Father the late King James upon the Read, traveling
toward Calais, he acquaints him that all things were so well settled in
England for his Restoration, that he would have little else to do than to take
Possession of that Kingdom; there being an utter Impossibility, that Projects
so well concerted, should miscarry.

With this Account the late King James sends the Duke of Berwick to the --, who
not a little pleased, that a Design of his own Laying should succeed so
luckily, communicated it to the Folks about him, and after some time spent in
diverting themselves with the Account of the Duke of Berwick's going into
England, and escaping from thence, the -- sent the Duke back to accompany the
late King James into England.

The 15th day of February, 1695. was the Day appointed to Murder the King, if
kind Heaven had not prevented it. And now the Leaders having quartered the
Assassines in several Parts of the Town to prevent Suspicion, they all lay
close and still, expecting Notice from their orderly Men of the Kings being
gone to Richmond; but so it pleased God, that his Majesty did not go abroad
that day.

This Disappointment and Fears of a Discovery made Plowden, Kendrick and
Sherborn decline the Action, and withdraw themselves, but Sr. George Barclay,
Sr. William Perkins, Capt. Porter and Mr. Goodman concluding the Design was not
discovered, because they were not taken up by the Government, had another
Meeting February 21st, and there resolved to execute their bloody Project on
Saturday 22d of February 1695.

The Forenoon of that Day was spent in a tedious Expectation of News, that the
King was gone abroad; but instead of that Account, Keys (one of the orderly
Men, which they lodged at Kensington, to give them Notice when the King went
out) tells them, that the Guards were all come back in a Foam, and that there
was a Muttering among the People, that a damnable Plot was discovered, and this
unexpected News dispersed all the Conspirators, and drove them to shift for
themselves by a speedy Flight.

Nor were their Apprehensions of a Discovery groundless; for the Plot and the
Progress that was made in it from time to time, had been discovered by Richard
Fisher to the Right Honorable the Earl of Portland a considerable Time before
any other Person discovered it, and, as Things ripened for Action, his Lordship
was acquainted with the Particulars. On the 10th of February, he acquainted
that Noble Lord, how far it was advanced, and promised to wait upon his
Lordship with a fuller Account in a few days, accordingly he did on February
the 13th 1695. And then gave his Lordship a full Account of the Design it self,
and the Time, Place and Manner of it is Execution; but refusing to give to his
Lordship the Names of the Conspirators, made his Discovery suspected, till the
Addition of other Witnesses gave an unquestionable Authority to the Truth of it.

Mr. Pendergrass, who was wholly ignorant of this barbarous Design, till he was
sent for to London; and there acquainted with it; being struck with Horror and
Astonishment at the first Proposal of it, even then took up a Resolution to
preserve his Majesty's Life, and discover the Conspiracy. Accordingly on
February 14th 1695, he waited on the Earl of Portland at his Lordships Lodgings
at Whitehall, and being admitted to Privacy with his Lordship, though wholly a
Stranger, without farther Address, accosts his Lordship with this surprising
Request, Pray, My Lord, persuade the King to stay at home to morrow, for if he
goes abroad to hunt he will be murdered. To this he subjoined a Relation of
the whole Plot, as it had been communicated to him by the confederated
Assassines: Which he said, he would have told the King himself, but that he
durst not go to Kensington for fear of the two orderly Men, which were kept as
Spies there, to give Intelligence of what occurred in that Court. He was
introduced that Night to the King, though very late, and there in his whole
Deportment showed himself to be a Man of Honor.

Neither was Mr. De la Rue short of Mr. Pendergrass in making a Discovery of
the intended Assassination; though his Friend Brigadier Lewson, who he designed
should acquaint the King with it, being then out of Town makes his Information
appear somewhat latter than the former. For as he is a Man of too much Honor
to be engaged in a Murder, so his Concern to discover it was from the
Beginning, though he did not declare it, till his Discovery might be
serviceable to his Majesty, and then as soon as he had an Opportunity to impart
the Secret, he did it; and Brigadier Lewson much about the same time acquainted
the King, that Mr. De la Rue had informed him of a Design carrying on to
assassinate his Majesty, and had given him a particular Account, by what
Methods it was designed to be accomplished, and proposed a way, if the King
thought fit, how all the Conspirators might be taken in Arms, when they thought
to attempt it. But that which seems strange in all these Discoverers, though
they punctually agre'd in the Act and in the Circumstances, yet they all
peremptorily refused to Name the Conspirators, which might have been of fatal
Consequence, if the Earl of Portland had not found out the happy Expedient to
prevent it, by persuading his Majesty to give himself the Trouble of examining
Mr. Pendergrass and Mr. De la Rue himself in his Closet. His Majesty overcome
by the Reasons alleged by that Noble Peer, condescended to his Request, and
examined them Feb. 21. 1695.
both seperately.

At Mr. Pendergrass's Examination was present the Earl of Portland and the Lord
Cutts; and Mr. De la Rue's Examination was heard by the same Noble Earl and
Brigadier Lewson. After the Examination his Majesty showed himself extremely
well satisfied in the Truth of their Discoveries, and in a very Obliging Manner
expressed his Resentments of their Generosity in the great Care and Zeal they
showed for the Preservation of his Life and the Safety of the Kingdom; and at
last gave them such unanswerable Reasons, why as Men of Honor and Lovers of
their Country, they should complete their Duty and Kindness in discovering the
Names of the Conspirators, as quite subdued their former Obstinacies, and
prevailed upon them to make a full and true discovery of the Names of the
Assassins under the Promise of not being made use of as Evidences; but Mr.
Pendergrass hearing that Mr. Porter, who engaged him in it, had discovered and
accused him; he thought himself discharged from any Obligation of Honor in
concealing it, and therefore afterward as an Evidence for the King freely told
all he knew at Charnocks Trial, p. 40.

The King having now a perfect Knowledge of the Conspiracy and the Names of the
Conspirators, his Majesty issues out his Royal Proclamation, requiring all his
loving Subjects to apprehend the Conspirators, promising one thousand pound
Reward for every Offender that should be taken and brought to Justice.

And here give me Leave to take Notice of the extreme Fury, Madness and Bigotry
of Mr. Charnock, who meeting Mr. Bertram accidentally at Lincolns-In back Gate,
told him, See Mr. Bertram's Deposition in the Secretaries Office.
that Warrants were out against them (as he heard) and they had as good, if he
would come to his Lodging, go out to Kensington, and do the Work at once, and
take off the Spark, and then they should all be at quiet, and have the Meaning
the late Kings James.
King peaceably here, what a strange Infatuation this Ingenious Man was under
is a Wonder to all that knew him.

Immediately after the Proclamation was out Mr. George Harris, one of the
Persons that was sent out of France to obey the Orders of Sir George Barclay,
and was actually engaged in the Assassination, resigned himself to the Right
Honorable Sr. W. Trumball One of his Majesty's Principal Secetarys of State,
and generously convinced him of the Reality of the Assassination and
Invasion-Plots, though he was not able to declare the particular Circumstances
that attended them.

Every day still producing the King fresh Evidences of the Conspiracy, his
Majesty was pleased to communicate it to both Houses of Parliament, in the
following Speech.

My Lords and Gentlemen,
I Am come hither this day upon an extraordinary Occasion, which might have
proved fatal, if it had not been disappointed by the singular Mercy and
Goodness of God; and may now, by the Continuance of the same Providence and our
own prudent Endeavors be so improved, as to become a sufficient Warning to us
to provide for our Security against the pernicious Practices and Attempts of
our Enemies.

I have received several concurring Informations of a Design to Assassinate me,
and that our Enemies at the same time are very forward in their Preparations
for a sudden Invasion of this Kingdom. And have therefore thought it necessary
to loose no time in acquainting my Parliaments with these Things, in which the
Safety of the Kingdom and the Public Welfare are so nearly concerned, that I
assure my self, nothing will be omitted on your Part which may be thought
proper for our present or future Security.

I have not been wanting to give the necessary Orders for the Fleet, and I hope
we have such a Strength of Ships, and in such a Readiness, as will be
sufficient to disappoint the Intentions of our Enemies.

I have also dispatched Orders for bringing home such a Number of our Troops, as
may secure us from any Attempt.

Some of the Conspirators against my Person are already in Custody, and Care is
taken to apprehend so many of the rest as are discovered: And such other Orders
are given as the present Exigency of Affairs do absolutely require at this Time
for the public Safety.


My Lords and Gentlemen,
HAving now acquainted you with the Danger which has attended Us, I cannot
doubt of your Readiness and Zeal, to do every thing which you shall judge proper
for our common Safety: And I persuade my self, we must be all sensible, how
necessary it is in our present Circumstances, That all possible Dispatch should
be given to the Business before you.


His Majesty's most gracious Speech was seconded by Sir William Trumball, who
opened the Matter more at large, in an excellent and seasonable Speech before
the Honorable House of Commons. For his Honor knowing, that the disaffected
Party were endeavoring to ridicule the Plot, and render the whole Discovery of
it to be merely fictitious, he took the Advantage of acquainting that
Honorable Assembly with the Credibility of the Witnesses, the Concurrence of
their Testimonies and the Improbability of their conspiring together to abuse
the Credulity of the Nation, with what was either False, or Feigned.

The Lords and Commons under a deep Sense of his Majesty's Danger and
Deliverance, Feb. 24. 1695.
were pleased to express their Duty and Affection, in the following Address to
his Majesty, which for the greater Solemnity, was presented by both Houses in a
Body, in these Words.

WE Your Majesty's most Loyal and Dutiful Subjects, the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal and Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, having taken into
our serious Consideration what Your Majesty has been pleased to communicate to
us this day, Think it our Duty, in the first Place, to give Your Majesty most
humble Thanks for having acquainted your Parliaments with the great Danger your
Sacred Person has been so nearly exposed to, and the Design of an Invasion
from our Enemies abroad; we heartily congratulate Your Majesty's Happy
Preservation, and thankfully acknowledge the Signal Providence of God in it, and
at the same time declare our Detestation and Abhorrence of so Vilainious and
Barbarous a Design. And since the Safety and Welfare of Your Majesty's
Dominions do so entirely depend upon Your Life, We most humbly Beseech Your
Majesty to take more than Ordinary Care of Your Royal Person. And we take this
Occasion to assure Your Majesty of our utmost Assistance to Defend Your Person,
and Support Your Government, against the late King James and all other Your
Enemies both at Home and Abroad, hereby declaring to all the World, That in
case Your Majesty shall come to any Violent Death (which God forbid) we will
Revenge the same upon all your Enemies and their Adherents; and as an Instance
of our Zeal for Your Majesty's Service, we will give all possible dispatch to
the public Business. And we make it our Desire to Your Majesty to seize and
secure all Persons, Horses and Arms, that Your Majesty may think fit to
apprehend upon this Occasion.

To which His Majesty, in a very obliging Manner, returned this most Gracious
Answer.

My Lords and Gentlemen,
I Thank you heartily for this kind Address: On my Part you may be assured that
I will do all that is within my Power for the Preservation of this Kingdom, to
which I have so many Obligations; I will readily venture my Life for Preserving
it, and Recommend my self to the Continuance of your Loyalty and good
Affections.


February 25th 1695, Both Houses enter into an Association to defend his
Majesty's Life, and to revenge his Death: That of the House of Commons was
presented to his Majesty April the 3d 1696. In these Words.

WHereas there has been a horrid and detestable Conspiracy, formed and carried
on by Papists and other wicked and Traitorous Persons, for assassinating his
Majesty's Royal Person, in order to encourage an Invasion from France to
subvert our Religion, Laws and Liberty: We whose Names are hereunto subscribed,
do heartily, sincerely and solemnly Profess, Testify and Declare, That his
Present Majesty King William is Rightful and Lawful King of these Realms, And
we do mutually Promise and Engage to stand by and assist each other to the
utmost of our Power, in the Support and Defense of His Majesty's most Sacred
Person and Government against the late King James and all his Adherents. And in
case His Majesty come to any Violent or Untimely Death (which God forbid) We do
hereby further freely and unanimously oblige our selves to Unite, Associate and
Stand by each other, in revenging the same upon his Enemies and their
Adherents; and in supporting and defending the Succession of the Crown
according to an Act made in the first Year of the Reign of King William and
Queen Mary, Entitled an Act declaring the Rights and Liberties of the Subject,
and Settling the Succession of the Crown.


His Majesty received it very Graciously, and expressed his Sense of their
Extraordinary Zeal and Fidelity in the Words following;

Gentlemen,
I Take this as a most convincing and most acceptable Evidence of your
Affection: And as you have freely Associated your selves for our common Safety,
I do heartily enter into the same Association; and will be always ready with
you, and the rest of my Good Subjects, to venture my Life against all who shall
endeavor to subvert the Religion, Laws and Liberties of England.


The House of Lords also presented their Association not long after, which
being almost the same, for Brevity sake is here omitted: The House of Commons
then proceeded to make Laws for the Security of His Majesty's Person and
Government, containing these Heads. First,

That such as shall refuse to take the Oaths of Fidelity to His Majesty, shall
be subject to the Forfeitures and Penalties of Popish Recusants Convict.
Secondly,

To inflict Penalties on all that by Writing, or otherwise Declare, that King
William is not Lawful and Rightful King of these Realms. Thirdly,

To ratify and confirm the Association. Fourthly,

That no Person shall be capable of any Office of Profit or Trust, Civil or
Military, that shall not sign the Association. Fifthly,

That whenever it shall please God to afflict these Nations by the Death of his
Present Majesty, that the Parliament then in being shall not be dissolved
thereby; but shall continue till the next Heir to the Crown in Succession
dissolve them.

Whilst the Parliament were thus providing Good Laws for the Preservation of
His Majesty, and the Peace and Safety of the Kingdom, three of the Assassins,
viz. Robert Charnock, Edward King and Thomas Keys were on the 11th of March
1695 tried, and upon full Evidence being all found guilty of high Treason,
received Sentence of Death accordingly at the Sessions House in the Old Bailey:
And upon March the 18th 1695, were all executed at Tyburn. Before their
Execution the Malefactors severally delivered each his Paper to the Sheriffs of
London and Middlesex, in which Papers they all confessed themselves Guilty of the
Crimes they were accused of, and then about to suffer for; Mr. Charnock in
these Words, as concerning an Invasion intended by King James upon England, and
that there was certain Intelligence of it from abroad, I presume every Body was
satisfied; and to the facilitating of which, I own that my self and some others
did agree upon the Undertaking, to attack the Prince of Orange and his Guards,
for which I am now to suffer. Mr. King in these Words, I am now within a few
Moments of Eternity, brought to this Place by the just Hand of God, in
Punishment of all my Crimes, but particularly of that, of which I have been
lately Arraigned, and for which I stand here Condemned. Mr. Keys in these
Words, God is just in all his Judgments, and I accept of this Death as the
Punishment of my Iniquities.

Sir John Friend also owned himself guilty of the Treason he died for in
endeavoring to justify it in these Words. To assist King James in the Recovery
of his Right, is Justifiable and our Duty. Sir William Perkins confessed at his
Execution, that he was privy to the Design upon the Prince, meaning King
William, that he was entirely in the Interest of King James, and looked upon it
as his Duty to assist him in the Recovery of his Throne. Now that these two,
contrary to the Example of Charnock, justified their Treasons must be
attributed to the blind Zeal and Rebellious Principles of those Clergy Men, who
administered Absolution without any Precedent Confession in direct Opposition to
the Laws of that Church whereof they would be thought Members; but those
Proceedings being Sentenced by fourteen See the Declaration of the Sense of the
Archbishops, Bishops, etc.
Reverend Bishops, all that were then in London, and consented to by the rest
that were absent, I refer the Reader to their Lordships printed Paper for
further Satisfaction and shall only add, it is the Leaders of these People that
cause them to err.

Sir John Fenwick, who was attainted by Parliament, and beheaded on Tower Hill,
January 28, 1696, was the last that suffered for these treasonable Practices
against the King and Government. At the place of Execution he delivered a Paper
to the Sheriff, which can be called his, for no other reason but because he
owned it to be so; for the Paper is so closely couched to avoid the danger of
unwary Digressions, so cautiously writ to prevent Reflections and so
artificially adapted to humor the Party, and not irritate the Government, that
if compared with what was truly his own, no Man can think Sr. John was the
Author of it, who, without Complement, had no such extraordinary Talent in
speaking or writing; Let us take a transient View of it.

If Sir John Fenwick was of the Communion of the Church of England, this Paper
does not truly represent him; for it is a Scandal to the Purity of her Doctrine,
and wholly inconsistent with the Simplicity, Fidelity and Candor, which that
Church requires in her dying Members. The Author of Sir John's dying Paper
would fain excuse him from the guilt of Treason, because he was for the lineal
Descent; but if by lineal Descent he means the next in Blood, he is as great a
Stranger to our Histories, as to our Laws; for the lineal Descent was broken as
early as Edward the Confessor both in his taking and leaving the Crown at his
Death, besides many other Presidents of it is Interruption since, By Will. 2d.
By Hen. 1st By K. Stephen.

By King John and King Ed. 2d and Rich. 2d both deposed by Parliament, etc.


and in this I find he had a bad Tutor for our Laws, and not our Religion, does
determine our Loyalty, and in the Matter of Succession are the indubitable
Guides of Englishmen. He thinks the Deposing King James was Illegal, but
that is a grand Mistake; for what can be more criminal and dangerous to the
Being of any Polity, than to restrain and disable the Legislative Authority
from providing a Remedy against the greatest Mischief that can happen to a
Community: Since no Government can support it self without an unlimited Power
to correct Abuses, and provide for the Happiness of the People, nor no civil
Establishment in the World be of any Duration in Safety, unless it be
controulable and alterable to the Public Good.

All human Constitutions are, or at leastwise ought to be made, Cum sensu
humanae Imbecilitatis, under reasonable Exceptions of unforeseen Accidents and
Emergencies, that may happen to human Affairs: And so they ought to be
intended, and so interpreted; otherwise we render our selves the most miserable
People upon the Face of the Earth, for want of a Power to preserve our selves,
and depose a Prince unable in Nature to support the Constitution, and not only
imbued with pernicious Principles, but actually confederated and engaged to
destroy it, which is a sufficient Confutation of Sir John Fenwick's ill
grounded Loyalty, and renders what he thought a commendable Endeavor to be a
treasonable Conspiracy.

If he means by his True and Lineal Course of Descent, that the pretended
Prince of Wales ought to succeed, I must answer, that the way they took to
prove him so, has made it very doubtful and suspicious, and therefore we ought
not to part with the Act of Settlement which has preserved the Right in the
Blood, though for good Reasons, they have laid aside the forfeiting Person and
the Suspicious Pretender.

He proceeds. As for what I am now to dye for, I call God to Witness, I went
not to that Meeting in Leaden-Hall-street with any Intention as to invite King
James by Force to invade this Nation.

All this depends upon the Word Intention, which as he uses it is mere Evasion,
or Equivocation; for the Actions shows the Intention, Men have no other way of
judging; for did ever Man grasp at the Power to do Mischief without the
Purpose? His Discourse about King James 's Restoration, promising to meet him
with two thousand Horse at his Landing, and giving his Consent that Mr.
Charnock should give the late King James that Assurance in all their Names,
that was the Treason proved upon him, See Captain Porter's Depositions at Sr.
W. Perkin's Trial.
and what he died for, and 'twould be a Piece of inexcusable Folly, to say,
when a Man is setting his house on fire he had no Intention to burn it, or
whilst a Man was using the Means, to say he never intended the End.

He was not himself provided (he says) with either Horse, or Arms, or engaged
for any Number of Men.

What Necessity was there he should be so provided of Horses, when 'twas his
own Project, See Goodman's Depositions taken Ap. 24, 1696.
that they should take Horses wherever they could find them. And some of the
Party were so fond of this Project, that they took a List of the Number of
Horses, that were kept in, and about, London and Westminster.

Nor did I (says he) give particular Consent for any such Invasion, as was most
falsely sworn against me.

Sir John Fenwick has confessed a general Consent, and he was not charged with
a particular Consent: For the Words sworn against him were, And they all rose
up, and said to Charnock, Yes you may: See Captain Porter's Depositions in
Charnock's Trial.
And therefore it looks with an ill Face upon the Writer of the Paper to stick
in that Word Particular, to give himself the Advantage of slandering the
Evidence with Perjury (upon the nice Distinction of a particular and general
Consent) who has had the Confirmation of so many dying Acknowledgments and
Confessions to the Truth of what he has deposed.

That he knew nothing of King James's coming to Calais, I will not undertake to
disprove, since I know the English were trusted with no more of that Secret,
than F -- thought fit to communicate. The Assassination, which F -- had so
often fruitlesly projected, and carried a Face of Villainy and Danger with it,
was allotted to them, and if they perish in it, let them perish; and this
Tragical Part See the Paper annexed to the Lady Mary Fenwick's Petition.
Sr. John was acquainted with, but did not discover it, and, I wonder, he
should be ignorant of the Invasion that was immediately to succeed it.

The rest of the dying Paper, so far as it concerned those he accused, being
only Hearsay, and so obscure, that it rather amuses than instructs the Reader,
I shall pass it over. As for what relates to his own Guilt, it is so fully and
clearly proved and confessed under his own Hand, in his Letter ( wrote with a
black lead Pencil, when he was taken in Kent, directed to Mrs. Farrar ( Sr.
John Fenwick's Lady's Woman) at the Lady Carlisle's, delivered to Mr. Webber,
the Companion of his Flight, and afterward intercepted by the Mayor of Rumney,
and so proved before the House of Lords and Commons.) That I shall need only
produce that Letter, which proclaims his Guilt louder than I can, and leave the
Reader to judge of the whole, as he finds Cause in reading it. It begins, See
the Journal of the House of Lords.


WHAT I feared is at last happened, had I gone alone, I had done it; but the
other was betrayed from London. It is Gods Will, so we must submit, I know
nothing can save my Life, but my Lord Carlisle's going over to him, backed by
the rest of the Family of the Howards, so beg it; and offering I will live
abroad all his Times, where I cannot hurt him, and that I will never draw my
Sword against him. I must leave to you what else to say, all Friends must be
made, my Lord Devonshire may perhaps be made by my Lady, my Lord Godolphin, my
Lord Pembrook, by my Lady Montgomery, Mr. Nelson by the Bishop of Canterbury,
My Lord Arran might engage his Brother Silkerke to use his Interest with
Keppell. I believe, if my Lord Carlisle would go, 'twere best before my Trial,
or else they may cut me short before my time; if he can prevail with him for a
Pardon, he will procure it as well before my Trial as after, or at least he may
prevail for a Reprieve till some can come over to him. My Lord also will have
an Opportunity to engage Benting, and get my Lord Essex to join with him, I
cannot think what else to say; but the great Care must be the Jury, if two or
three could be got, that would starve the next; that or nothing can save me.
Money I know would do it, but alas, that is not to be had, nor shall I get
enough for Counsel, I beg of you not to think of being shut up with me, I know
'twill kill you, and besides I have no such Friend as you to take Care of my
Business, though 'twould be the Comfort of my Life, that little time it lasts, to
have you with me; and the only Comfort I have now left is, that my Death will
make you easy. My dearest Life grieve not for me, but resign me to God
Almighty's Will. You will hear as soon as they bring me to Town, where they put
me, and then I would have a Servant or some Body with me and a Nightgown. I am
in a sad Condition with Riding; that day I parted with you I rid above 100
Miles; but be not concerned, my Health is well enough, I am interrupted, and so
can say no more now, engage Sir John Lowther the New Lord, who has more
Interest than any Body. Let my Lord Scarsdale engage Overkirk for me, speak to
my Lady Arlington, if my Trial would be put off till the King comes back, there
would be more Opportunity to solicit him.

This, Letter was brought to the Lords Justices, and at his first Examination
before them, in which he denied every Thing he was charged with; their
Excellencies told him, he was not of that Mind when he wrote that Letter, which
was then showed him, to which Sir John Ferwick made no Reply, but laid it down,
and was utterly silens'd by such a violent Presumption, or rather ingenious
Confession of his Guilt, attested under his own Hand.

FINIS.
THE APPENDIX.
Affidavits of the Ships-Crew, about Lunt's Coming from Ireland.
The Informations of John Preston of Cockeram Mariner, who upon Oath says;
THAT about a year ago John Cawson Part-owner of the Pink or Vessel, called the
Lion of Lancaster, hired this Informant as a Mariner to serve in the said
Vessel; the Burden whereof is twixt 40 and 50 Tun, and he has ever since
served in that Employment, and the said Vessel in that time has performed four
Voyages to Dublin in Ireland, one of which Voyages was about Christmas last,
and since Christmas last, to wit, about a Mouth ago she loosed out of Loyne or
Lune River for the Isle of Man, having then on Board only three Passengers, viz
Mr. Edmund Thrillfall, and two Strangers, who this Informant never saw before
or since, which said Thrillfall, when he was on Board showed Charles Cawson,
Master (...) the said Vessel, the Earl of Derby's Pass for the said Voyage. And
this Informant and others of the said Mariners made for the said Island, but
before they could compass it, the said Owner proposed to this Informant, and
the rest of the Mariners so make for Ireland, which they did accordingly, and
landed in Ireland, and there continued about three Weeks, during all which time
the said Master continued a Shore, and returned not Aboard till she was ready
^o sail. And this Informant further says, That the said Vessel went out of
Loyne in the night-time-without any Cocket or Certificate from the
Custom-Office, and without Fraught, or any on Board, save the three Passengers
aforesaid, and the said Master and five Mariners, and a Boy. And at her Return
had nothing Aboard save a Tun and a half of Iron-pots, and half a Tun of Iron
Bars, and nine Barrels of Beef, and two Passengers, viz. the said Mr.
Thrillfall, and a young short Man wearing his own hair; which said Passengers
had two Cases of Pistols, and one Sword, and the said Thrillfall had a Hair
Port-mantle Trunk, which he took on Shore with him. And he further says, That
on Thursday morning last, the said Vessel came to Anchor in Loyne aforesaid, a
little before Sunrise, and by the Cock-boat belonging to the said Vessel sent
the said Thrillfall and the other Passenger ashore at the Crook, being on the
South side of the said River, before the Custom-house Boat came up to them. And
the said Passengers, or the one of them left behind them in the said Vessel,
two Leather Baggs with Writings, which the Custom-Officers, when they came on
Board, took into their Possession. And further says not,

John Preston.
Jurat apud Preston in Com L^ne' xvii^. Junii 1689. Little me, C. Brandon.

The Information of Henry Knowles, one of the Seamer in the Pink or Vessel
called the Lion of Lancaster: Who upon Oath says;
THAT he is a Pepist, and has been a Mariner or Seaman in the said Vessel, in
several Voyages betwixt England and Ireland, and more particularly in two
Voyages since Christmas last. And he further says, that this day five Weeks
last past about two a Clock in the Morning, the said Vessel weighed Anchor from
the River Lune, being designed, (as this Examinant and the other Mariners on
Board understood for the Isle of Man) without any Fraught or Persons on Board
her, saving Mr. Thrillfall and two other Passengers, who this Examinant knows
not, besides Charles Cawson the Master, five Mariners, whereof this Examinant
was one, and a Boy. But in the Voyage, and before, they did reach to the said
Isle, Mr. Thrillfall proposed, that they should go strait for Dublin in the
Kingdom of Ireland, where the said Mr. Thrillfall pretended he had business; to
this the Master readily consented, saying, he also had business at Dublin to
get in some Debts; which Voyage they performed accordingly, and Landed at
Dublin the Saturday following, and there continued at Anchor some days above
three Weeks, during which stay this Examinant several times saw the said Mr.
Thrillfall in Dublin: And in order for their Return to England, there was
brought on Board the said Vessel at Dublin, only one Tun and a half of Iron
pots, half a Tun of Iron Bar, and nine Barrels of Beef; and upon Monday was
seven night the said Vessel set sail from Dublin for England, no Persons being
in her besides the said Ships-Company, the said Mr. Thrillfall, and one other
Person (to this Examinant unknown) who brought with them into the Vessel only a
Trunk Portmantle covered with Hair, that this Examinant knows of. And this
Deponent says, that the said other Person was low of stature, wearing his own
Hair, and went under the Name of Mr. Lunt, who pretended to come to an Uncle of
his in England. And this Examinant further says, That the said Vessel about
two or three a Clock last Thursday Morning came to an Anchor in the River Lune
in that County. And the Master, immediately after their coming to Anchor,
Ordered the Cock-boat to be let down, and appointed this Examinant and Richard
Whiteside, another, of the said Seamen, to set the said Mr. Thrillfall and Mr.
Lunt on shore upon Cockeram side, which accordingly they did, and carried with
them (which they delivered to the said Thrillfall) the said Trunk; and as this
Examinant, and the said Whiteside were rowing the Boat back toward the Vessel,
the said Lunt called back of them, that he had left his Baggs on Board, but
said, that he and the said Mr. Thrillfall would go to refresh themselves at
Cookeram, and desired this Examinant to bring his said Baggs thither to him.
But before this Examinant was returned to the Vessel, a Boat with some Officers
belonging to the Custom-house were come up to the Vessel, who searching the
Vessel did after this Examinant's Return to her, find in the Hold of the said
Vessel, two Leather-baggs, with several written and Printed Papers in them, as
this Examinant afterward saw, which this Examinant believes to be the said
L^n^'s Baggs. And this Deponent further says, that he believes the said Vessel
had no Cocket, when she went for Ireland. And has heard, that the said Mr.
Thrillfall gave ten Pounds for her that Voyage.

Henry Knowles.
Capt' and Jurat' apud Preston in Com' Lancast' 18 Junii 1689, coram me, T.
Patten.

The Information of James Tomson; one of the Mariners belonging to the Pink or
Vessel called the Lion of Lancaster: Who upon Oath says,
THAT he is a Protestant, but being Examined about several Voyages lately made
by the said Vessel into Ireland, as to the last, says, that it was begun about
five Weeks since, and having heard the Information of Henry Knowles, this
Examinant agrees with the same in the relation thereof.

James Tomson.
Capt' and Jurat' die and loco praed' coram me, T. Patten.

The Information of John Barrow one of the Mariners belonging to the Vessel
called the Lion of Lancaster. Who upon Oath says;
THAT he is an Apprentice to Mr. John Cawson, and by his Order went on Board
the said Vessel, which about five Weeks ago sailed into Ireland, and he hearing
the Information of Henry Knowles now taken and read over, this Examinant agrees
with the said Knowles in the relation thereof, except that this Examinant heard
not what the said Lunt came over for, nor the Discourses betwixt Mr. Thrillfall
and Lunt, and the Seamen when they set them on shore at Cockeram.

John Barrow.
Capt' and Jurat' die and l^c^ praed' coram me, John Patten.

The Information of Richard Whiteside, one of the Mariners belonging to the
Vessel called the Lion of Lancaster. Who upon Oath says;
THAT having heard the Information of Henry Knowles, another of the Mariners,
read over, this Examinant agrees with him in every particular thereof, relating
to the said Vessel's last Voyage into Ireland, except that this Examinant has
not heard what Mr. Thrillfall was to give for the Hire of the said Vessel.

R. Whiteside.
Capt' and Jurat' dis and loco sup' dict' coram me, T. Patten.

The Examination of John Cawson of Narbock within Cockeram in the County of
Lancaster, Merchant. Who says,
THAT he is half Owner of the Vessel, called the Lion of Lancaster, and the
other half belongs to this Examinant's Son Charles Cawson, and to his Son
in-Law Robert Curwen, to wit, to either of them one Quarter. And that having
for several years last past, about May or June been employed to carry the Earl
of Derby's Cattle from the Isle of Man to England, he this Examinant did about
two or three Months ago desire Mr. William Backhouse the Attorney, who designed
shortly afterward to go with Mr. Thomas Simpson to London to put the said Mr.
Simpson in mind of knowing from the said Earl, when he designed the said Cattle
should be fetched over, which Mr. Backhouse promised to do. And at Mr.
Simpson's Return he informed this Deponent, that he this Examinant might send
for the Cattle as formerly to Mr. Cockett my Lord's Servant in the said Isle.
And thereupon this Examinant gave consent to his said Son Charles, that if he
pleased he might fetch over the same in the Vessel aforesaid. And about five
Weeks ago the said Vessel loosed Anchor, and went out of Lunt Water, designing
only as this Examinant then believed, for the Isle of Man, upon the Account
aforesaid. And this Examinant further says, that since the return of the
Vessel, this Examinant has been for about an hours time with his said Son to
enquire about his Voyage, who informed him, that in the Voyage Mr. Edmund
Thrillfall, who was then a Passenger on Board the Vessel, offered to him the
said Charles Cawson ten Pounds to put him the said Mr. Thrillfall a shore in
any part of Ireland, and that accordingly, he had set Mr. Thrillfall a shore at
Dublin, and that after some stay there, he returned back for England, bringing
the said Mr. Thrillfall and another Person (who his Son called Mr. Lunt) hither
with him. And the said Charles informed this Examinant, that he was detained
and could not be admitted to return from Dublin till he brought the said Lunt
and Thrillfall with him. And this Examinant says, that upon Ascension day
last, the said Mr. Thrillfall came unto him at Garstang, and treated with him
about a Passage into the Isle of Man, but an Embargo being then upon Vessels,
this Examinant told the said Thrillfall, his said Vessel could not go. And upon
the Monday before the Vessel went from Lancaster-water, the said Mr. Thrillfall
came to this Examinant's House to treat with him again for a Passage to the
Island, but this Examinant denied him one in the Vessel, having resolved to
take no Passenger thither; and thereupon the said Thrillfall went away from
this Deponant, and since then this Examinant never saw the said Mr. Thrillfall.
And this Examinant demanding from his Son, why he called not at the Isle for my
Lord's Cattle in his return from Dublin, his said Son told him the said
Thrillfall and Lunt (who were too strong for him, being armed with Pistols)
would not let him, and that withal they promised him other ten Pounds for their
Passage from Ireland, but never yet paid it him.

John Cawson.
Capt' die and loco praed' coram me, T. Patten.

Elizabeth Engley 's Affidavit.
ELizabeth Langley makes Oath, That she this Deponent knows Mr. John Lunt, and
has done for eight or nine years past, and that in or about the Month of
December 1688, a little after the late King James went into France, the said
Lunt came to this Deponent, and desired her to take a private Lodging for him,
until such time as he could get a Passage out of England to follow the said
King; which this Deponent did accordingly, and about a Fortnight after, he the
said Lunt acquainted this Deponent, that he then had an opportunity to go over
into France with the Lord George Howard; and this Deponent does believe he went
accordingly; for is a week or ten days after, she this Deponent did receive a
Letter from him the said Lunt, bearing date from Calais, Jan. 14. 1688, which
Letter this Deponent has yet in her keeping; and about July following 1689,
the said Lunt came in a Coach to this Deponent's Lodging in Castle-street by
Leicester-fields, so disguised, that she did nor know him till he spoke, and
desired this Deponent to come into the Coach to him, which she did, and then he
drew up the Glasses, fearing lest any one might see him, and discover who he
was; and as the said Lunt and this Deponent sat together in the said Coach, as
it stood at the door of this Deponents Lodging, this Deponent laid her hand on
a Green-Bag, which was in the Coach, and does believe that it had Papers or
Parchment-writings in it, but did not at that time ask the said Lunt, what they
were; but as they were sitting together in the said Coach, he the said Lunt
told this Deponent, that he had been in France, and that he went from thence
into Ireland, and that he was sent thence by King James with Commissions and
Deelarations to several Roman Catholic Gentlemen, and others in England; and
did then further tell this Deponent, that at his Landing in Lancashire from
Ireland, he had lost his Linen, and several other things, which if they were
taken would cost him his life; and then desired this Deponent to bring him some
Linen the next Morning, to the Cock and Dolphin-Inn in Gray's Inn Lane, and
that she would enquire for him by the Name of Beunet; and the next Morning she
this Deponent did go to him accordingly to to the said Inn; and as the said
Lunt and this Deponent were there discoursing together, she asked, what those
things were that she laid her hand upon in the said Bag the day before, when
they sat together in the said Coach? and the said Lunt answered, that they were
Commissions and Declarations which he had now disposed off to several
Gentlemen, in and about the Town, according to his Directions from the said
late King James, and the Lord Melfort; and he then showed this Deponent one
Printed Declaration, which (as he said) was all that he had left; for that he
had disposed of all the rest, and he read it to her, but this Deponent does not
remember the Contents, but did observe it to be in the name of James Rex, and
about a Month or five Weeks after, she heard, that the said Lunt was a Prisoner
in Newgate for High Treason, and a little before Christmas in the year 1689, he
the said Lunt came to this Deponent and told her, that he was Bailed out of
Prison, and was then going into Lancashire. And this Deponent does believe,
that he did then go into that Country, for within a Week or ten Days after,
this Deponent did receive a Letter from the said Lunt, bearing date from one
Mr. Tildesley's of the Lodge in Lancashire; and in February next after, the
said Lunt returned to London, and sent for this Deponent to an Alehouse in
Great Queenstreet, known by the Name of the Hole in the Wall, who did presently
go there and found the said Lunt in a Room with 10 or 12 Men (Strangers to this
Deponent) and a little while after the said Men departed, and this Deponent did
ask the said Lunt, who they were? who answered, they were Irish Men, and was to
be Listed for King James's Service; and then he desired this Deponent to bring
him to the said Hole in the Wall in two or three days some Linen, which she
did accordingly, and when she was showing him the Linen, the Master of the
House came and told the said Lunt, that there were three Men in the House, tha^
waited to speak with him; and the said Lunt told him, that they might come to
him i^ they pleased, and then they did immediately come into the said Room to
the said Lun^, and be asked them what they came about? and they told him about
the Concern that he knew of; and that they were sent to him by one Mr.
Whitfield a Card-maker, and then asked them if they were willing to serve King
James their Lawful King, as Soldiers? and they answered, they came to him for
that Intent; and then the said Lunt gave every one of them a Shilling, and set
down their Names in a Paper, where there were the Names of many more; two of
their Names the said Deponent does remember to be Thomas Burk, and Patrick
Lacy; and he told them, that Care should be taken of them, and that they should
have Money to carry them into Lancashire, and when they came there all possible
Care would be taken of them, and that they should choose what Officers they
pleased to serve under, Naming Col. Tildesley, the Lord Mollyneux, and several
others whose Names this Deponent does not remember, that as he said were to be
their Officers; and he then Ordered them to be there at ten a Clock the next
Morning, for that there was to be several of their Countrymen to meet him there
at that time that were to go with them on the same Account into Lancashire. And
in a day or two this Deponent went to the said Lunt to the Hole in the Wall
aforesaid, and found in his Company the said Whitfield the Card maker, and
several others, who this Deponent did not know; and when she went into the Room
where they were, Whitfield whispered with the said Lunt, and Lunt spoke aloud,
and said there was no danger of her. And two or three Days after this Deponent
came to the said Lunt at the House aforesaid in the Evening, and there found
the said Lunt, and another Man putting into Boxes, Sword-Hilts, Belts and
Bagonets, with Flacks and Carteridges for Powder; and when they had put those
things they intended into Boxes, they directed three of the Boxes to Mr.
Tildesley of the Lodge, and to be left at Preston in Lancashire, and the others
to several persons, that this Deponent does not remember the Names of. And the
said Lunt and the other Man with him, put three Boxes into a Coach that was
waiting at the Door, and they put into a another Coach a Hair Trunk, and three
other Boxes. And by the said Lunt's Directions, this Deponent went into one of
the said Coaches to the Swan with two Necks in Lad-Lane, and delivered the
three Boxes, that she had in the Coach to one Knowles a Carrier, as sent from
her self. And the said Lunt, and the other Man aforesaid came in the other
Coach at the same time, and delivered the said Trunk and three Boxes to the
said Carrier, and in a Week after the said Lunt came to this Deponent, and told
her he was going into Lancashire, and she does believe he did go accordingly;
for in a Month or five Weeks after she did receive a Letter from him, bearing
date from Lancaster Castle. And this Deponent farther says, that in the
beginning of the year 1691, the said Lunt did, in the Presence of this
Deponent, list about twelve or fourteen Men for the Service of the late King
James, at the said Hole in the Wall, by the Assistance of one Mr. Rogers a
Tailor, who at that time brought them to the said Lunt to be Listed, as
aforesaid. And this Deponent further says, that in or about the Month of
November, in the year 1691, the said Lunt came to this Deponent's Lodging, and
told her, That he ^as then going in all haste possible into France to his Old
Master King James, and that he must return in a Months time; And about a Month
or five Weeks after, he the said Lunt returned to this Deponent's Lodging, and
told her, He had been with the said King James, and seemed to be in great have,
for he said, He was to be in Lancashire in two or three days; and withal told
her, that he did not doubt but that in the Spring following, she, this
Deponent, might see him the said Lunt at the Head of a Troop of Horse of his
own; and this Deponent does believe, that he did then go into Lancashire; for
she did receive a Letter from him the said Lunt, bearing date from Townley in
Lancashire in a Week or ten days after.

Elizabeth Langley.
Jurat' 19 die Febr. 1695/6 Coram Sam. Cyre.

The Affidavit of Mrs. Agnes Barker.
WHO upon her Oath says, That in or about the latter end of the Month of
February, or beginning of March, which was Anno Dom. 1689, Sir Rowland Stanley
of Hoolton in the County of Chester, Baronet, bought two Horses, viz. the one a
Stoned Horse, and the other a Gelding of this Informants Husband (at the value
of forty Pounds) and this Informant also says, that the said Sir Rowland,
being a Roman Catholic, and the late King James then in Ireland, desired this
Informants Husband to take the Horses back for a while to his own House; and
after this Informant's Husband had kept the said Horses a Week, he sent this
Informant to the said Sir Rowland at his own House, to acquaint him that in
regard the said Horses were troublesome, desired they might be fercht away;
upon which the said Sir Rowland desired this Informant to use her endeavor to
her Husband, that be would keep the Horses a while longer (because he could not
with Safety keep them himself) he then expressing, that he expected the King
speedily over (which this Informant conceived to be King James) and doubted not
but the next light Moon would bring him over: Whereunto this Informant replied,
that she thought it not convenient to move her Husband to keep the said Horses
any longer, for fear he should suspect any thing touching the matter; this
Informant being then a Roman Catholic, and her said Husband a Protestant.

And this Informant further says, That William Gerrard, Esquire Son and Heir
apparent of Sir William Gerrard of Garswood in the County of Lancaster
aforesaid, Baronet (another Roman Catholic) by one William Calland, formerly
his Servant, did also buy two Horses of this Informan's Husband, and upon her
demanding of the said Calland what buying two or three Horses ^ould signify?
he answered, that they were only intoded for the Officers, but as for the men
(meaning ^ommon Troopers) as she conceived, they were all ^n a readiness, and
would as soon as King Jame was landed take Horses where they found them for his
Service, or words to that effect. And t^is Informant sometime afterward going
to G^rswood aforesaid, he the said Mr. Gerrard changed this Informant to be
careful in avulging the matter; saying to her, You know Cousin since the King
has been so kind to send to us, (who this Informant conceived to be King ^am^^)
we cannot but put our selves in a readiness ^^ receive him; which was as this
Informant be^^e^es about the same time, or a little before that of Sir
Rowland's Business above mentioned.

And this Informant also says, That much about the same time before mentioned,
Roger Dickinson of Wrightington in the said County of Lancaster, Gentleman
(also a Roman Catholic) this Informant's Kinsman came frequently to see this
Informant at her Husband's House at Hulme near Warrington in the said County of
Lancaster; and amongst other Discourse he the said Mr. Dickinson told this
Informant, that he himself had a Lieutenant's Commission from the late King
James; and then named what Commissions most of the Roman Catholic Gentlemen
had in the said County of Lancaster; the Particulars whereof this Informant
has forgotten. And this Informant also says, that the said Mr. Dickinson
desired this Informant to prevail with her Husband to buyor procure for him
thirty or forty Case of Pistols, to which she answered, she durst not for fear
^er said Husband should suspect any thing by it; however, she prevailed with
him to buy two Case of Pistols for the said Mr. Dickinson, which he accepted
and paid for; this Informa^t's Husband then suspecting nothing at all. And this
Informant farther says, That both (...) the time the late King James was in
Ireland, and also several times since, she has heard in mo^^ Companies which
she then kept (being Papists) of the landing of King James, and buying Arms,
and such like Discourse, the Particulars whereof this Informant does not
remember well.

And this Informant farther says, T^^^ when the Roman Catholic Gentlemen came
do^^ to be Tried at Manchester, this Informant going to see Mr. William
Dickinson, Eldest Brother (...) the above named Roger Dickinson, she said to
him, Cousin, I fear Taffe is come over to be (...) your side; who answered,
Yes, Cousin, I believe he is, but he cost us dear, or words to that effect.
Upon which this Informant replied, She knew Taffe to be so Mercenary a Villain,
that he would do nothing without Money, or such like words.

Agnes Barker.
Capt' and Jurat' die 10. Febr. 1695. Coram me, Ralph Egerton.

Mr. John Edwards's Affidavit.
MR. John Edwards Vicar of Redland in Flintshire, makes Oath, and says, he
knows George Wilson one of the Defendants in this case This was taken when
Wilson was to have been tried upon the Indictment of Conspiracy.
, and that he was an Innkeeper in the said Town of Redland, near or about the
year 1685, to the beginning of the year 1689, to his Personal Knowledge, That
the said Wilson was a person of good repute, most of the Neighboring Gentlemen
in the County using his House: That the said Wilson unhappily entertaining some
Irishmen after they were Disbanded and broke up from Hounslow and Salisbury;
contrary to the Persuasions of this Deponent, and several other Friends to his
Knowledge, and he this Deponent has been informed, that the said Wilson
assisted one Bromfield a Quaker to get Passage for Ireland to go to King James;
but this Deponent says, he knew nothing thereof till Bromfield was gone. And
this Deponent further says, that the said Wilson was at that time reputed to
be of the Romish Persuasion; and that this matter being known, some of the Earl
of Meaths Regiment came and seized several Persons in that Part of the Country
for being Papists, upon which the said Wilson was forced to fly, and returned
no more publicly to his House; but whether he retired himself this Deponent
knows not; but this Deponent supposes for want of time to dispose of his
Concerns, left several Debts to pay, which if it had not been for those sad
unhappy Circumstances, this Deponent does believe might have been honestly
paid. And this Deponent further says, that he has had considerable Business
with the said Wilson in respect of Tithes, and several other matters, and had
very honest dealing from him.

Jo. Edwards.
Capt' and Jurat' 8. die Febr. 1695, Coram me, Tho. Rokeby.

The Information of John Womball late a Carrier, Given the Twenty Eight of
June, 1694.
THIS Informant says upon his Oath, that about the latter end of the year
1688, or beginning of the year 1689, he was employed by Mr. Townley of Townley
in Lancashire, to carry several large Trunks and Boxes for him the said Townley
from Barnet to his House in Lancashire; and that several times since, he this
Informant has carried several other the like Trunks and Boxes, etc. for him
the said Mr. Townley into Lancashire as aforesaid; and this Informant says,
that by the frequent Service of that kind, he this Informant did perform for
the said Mr. Townley, he became very conversant and well acquainted with the
said Townley and his Family, insomuch that the said Mr. Townley himself has
upon several Occasional Discourses with this Informant of business of that kind
often told him this Informant, that the Trunks and Boxes he carried for him
from Barnet, and also the others the like since were full of Arms, viz. Swords,
Pistols and Carbines. And this Informant says, He has been showed great
Quantities of such sort of Arms in the House of the said Mr. Townley, both by
himself and Servants, and has been told by them they were some of those that he
this Informant brought from Barnet and London. This Informant farther says,
that one Nich. Rigby Servant to the said Mr. Townley has been several times at
London to buy Arms, by the direction of his said Master, and others, and sent
them down by this Informant in several Boxes for that purpose made. And
further, that the said Rigby told this Informant, that he had also bought
Kettle Drums and Jack-Boots, which he this Informant afterward saw at
Standish-Hall, and p^ckt them up in several Ca^ks, which Casks he this
Informant carried into Lancashire, and delivered as he was directed. This
Informant says, that amongst a great many others, that he this Informant
carried, there was one of the Boxes seized at Litchfield, in which was 102
Swords.

This Informant farther says, that in March 1690/1, one Mr. Lunt delivered
this Informant at his Inn in London four Packs, which he this Informant is very
well assured were Arms; which said Packs he this Informant delivered as he was
by the said Lunt directed at Preston, Standish, and Cr^ston in Lancashire.

This Informant farther says, that in the year 1691 and 1694, he this
Informant received at his Inn, and carried for several Lancashire Gen^l^men,
great Quantities of Arms in Trunks and Boxes. viz for Mr. Standish of Standish
Mr. -- Tildesley of the Lodge, Mr. Ashton, Mr. Stamford, Captain Eccleston, Mr.
Dickinson, Mr. Gradill of Barbers-moor, Captain Green (a Frenchman) at
Standish-Hall, and several others. And this Informant says, that it was usual
for the Servants of the said Gentlemen to wait the Coming of this Informant's
Horses, and take the said Boxes and Trunks of him upon the Road.

This Informant says, that in February 1692/3, the Lord Brandon Gerrard, and
the Lord Willoughby, having Information of his this Informants customary
Carrying of Arms from London did cause two Boxes of Swords, that this Informant
then had brought from London to be seized at Wigan.

This Informant farther says, that in the latter end of the year 1692, he this
Informant was employed by several of the aforesaid Gentlemen, to carry Arms (as
aforesaid) for them, and also to bring up the Money to pay for them, which at
one time, as this Informant verily believes, was about 200 l. but this
Informant says, that he very well knows, that the Servants and Agents of some
of the Gentlemen aforementioned had far greater Sums returned up per Bill,
which they laid out for Arms in London, as aforesaid.

This Informant says, that at a Meeting at Standish Hall in the Months of
March or April 1692, of a great many Gentlemen, viz. Mr. Mollyneux, Sir William
Gerrard and his Son, Captain Eccleston, Mr. Tildesley, Mr. Townley, Mr.
Dickinson, and his Brother Captain Green, Mr. Haughton, Sir Thomas Clifton, Mr.
Worthington, Mr. Trafford, Mr. William Standish, and others; he this Informant
heard it discoursed amongst them of its being very necessary, that the Arms
lodged in their several Houses should be divided and distributed amongst them.
And also says, that at another the like Meeting in July last at the same place
of most of the same Gentlemen, and others, he this Informant saw a great
Quantity of Arms and Warlike Equipage, as Kettle-Drums, Trumpets, Jack-Boots,
and some Saddles divided amongst the Gentlemen following, to every one some,
viz. to Sir William Gerrard, Mr. Mollyneux, Sir Thomas Clifton, Mr. Dalton, Mr.
William Standish, Captain Green, Mr. Thomas Gerrard, Captain Eccleston, Mr.
Ashton, Mr. Dickinson, Mr. Stamford, Mr. Gradill, Mr. Trafford, Mr. Tildesley,
Mr. John Gerrard, Mr. Westley, Mr. Hesket, Mr. Haughton, Mr. Worthington,
Captain Radish, Mr. Mollyneux of Mosbrough, Mr. Gillibourne, Mr. Anderton, Mr.
Walmsley of Slowley, Mr. Shuttleworth, Mr. Sherbourn, for Mr. Walmesley of
Dungan-Hall, and to several other Gentlemen. And says, that he this Informant
was assisting, and did help to pack up many of the said Arms in Boxes, and
otherwise, and in loading on Horses, etc. in the night, and he this Informant
verily believes the whole quantity then so divided as aforesaid, did amount to
at least Arms enough for one thousand Horsemen. This Informant farther says,
that he this Informant is very well assured, that besides him this Informant,
there were several other Carriers in Lancashire, that have been employed by the
said Gentlemen aforesaid, and have carried very great quantities of Arms for
them, as well as he this Informant. This Informant also says, that at the said
Meeting, the said Gentlemen did agree and resolve amongst themselves, that they
would send for, and have provided for them, more and other Quantities of Arms
of the same kind, and that Mr. Rigby, and Mr. Hatton should (more especially)
be employed to buy the same, they having very dexterously, and with great care
provided very great Quantities before. And he this Informant says, that he is
very certain (in pursuance of the said Agreement and Resolution) there has been
bought and provided in London, and sent into Lancashire, great Quantities since
the time of the said Meeting last mentioned.

This Informant farther says, That there has been kept for two or three years
last past, and yet is amongst the Gentlemen mentioned in this Information,
great numbers of very good Horses fi^ for Service; and that the said Gentlemen
their Servants or Agents do daily buy and provide as many as they can by any
means come at, and particularly, that at Preston. Fair the tenth of March last,
they bought up several very good Horses, and would then have employed this
Informant to have gone to Rixham Fair to have bought for them, where they also
bought many more. And this Informant says, they were the more earnest at that
time to furnish themselves with as many Horses as by any means they could,
because they did expect King James would be ready to Land here by our Lady Day
last, or soon after; as he this Informant has several times heard them say
amongst themselves he would.

And this Informant says, that if a proper and secret Method be taken (and all
notice thereof prevented) for the seizing all Horses in Lancashire so provided
and fit for Service, as aforesaid, in the hands of the Gentlemen before
mentioned, there might be seized (he verily believes) five hundred very good
Horses.

Jo. Womball.
Jurat coram me, J. Trenchard.

Lawrence Brandon 's Affidavit.
LAwrence Brandon of Pennington in the County of Lancaster makes Oath, that he
knows William Standish of Standish-Hall in the said County, Esquire and his Son,
commonly called the Young Lord of Standish; and that about May in the year
1691, this Deponent being invited by one James Leightagh to go with him, and
several other Persons to dine at Standish-Hall aforesaid; and upon such
Invitation this Deponent and the rest did go to Standish Town in the way to the
said Hall, and being at the said Town, it was agreed on between the said James
Leightagh, and the rest of the Company rather to dine at the said Town of
Standish, then to go to the Hall, because there seemed some difference like to
arise between the said Leightagh and John Neyler on the one part, and John
Sharp Servant to the said Mr. Standish, and James Hayes on the other part,
concerning the Places of Quartermaster and Corporal of a Troop of Horse to be
raised by the said Mr. Standish for the Service of King James, which was
promised to the said Leightagh and Neyler; and the said Sharp and Hayes
pretended unto the same: Whereupon the Deponent and the rest of the Company did
dine at Standish Town at the Charges of the said Leightagh and John Neyler, and
after Dinner they went from thence to Standish-Hall, where in the Kitchen, the
said Leightagh and Neyler met the said Sharp and Hayes, and after some
Discourses on both sides concerning the Places aforesaid, the said Sharp and
Hayes were contented to quit their Pretensions to the same, and consented that
Leightagh and Neyler should have the same. Upon which Agreement the said
Leightagh and Neyler desired to speak with Mr. Standish, and bid this Deponent,
and the rest of the Company to follow them, which they did, and were conducted
into a Parlour, where the Young Lord of Standish was; and being told by the
said Leightagh and Neyler, that they had broughe Men to be Listed under his
Command; he wellcomed this Deponent and the rest, and made them sit round the
Room, and made them drink, and told them, that the Nation had a great deal of
wrong done by Banishing King James, that was their Rightful King, and that the
design in hand was to do no Body wrong, but only to bring in their lawful King;
and that some Aid for that purpose was shortly expected to come out of France
and Ireland into England, and that they did design upon the News of the Landing
of any Foreign Forces to make a general Rising of such Forces as they could
procure for the said Service; and hoped they were willing, and would be ready
to serve their King and Country on this Occasion; and assured them that they
should go no further than he would lead them. And that upon their consenting
and promising to be ready at his Command, the said Young Lord of Standish went
out of the Room, and soon after returned with a Horseman's naked Sword, and
bending the Blade thereof by way of Trial, showed it to the Company, and told
them, they should be furnished with no worse than that, and should have
Pistols, Holsters, Saddles, and all other Accoutrements fit for Troopers. And
having some farther Consultation with the said Young Lord what course they
should take to provide Horses, in case they should be called suddenly to meet,
it was agreed, that such as had Horses of their own should make use of them,
and those that had none should take the first they could meet with, and
immediately upon any Alarm, or notice come to Standish-Hall to rendezvous, That
after Directions about the Horses were given, some of the Company being
apprehensive that Mr. Standish the Father might be offended, in case they
should agree to go under the Command of his Son without his Consent; desired to
speak with him, to be satisfied therein. Whereupon they sent to speak with him,
and he came to them into the Hall, where being asked the question aforesaid, he
told them all, it was indifferent to him, whether they choose to go under the
Command of himself or his Son; and such as were not willing to go with his Son
should be welcome to go with him, for their design was all one, and that was to
bring again King James; or words to that effect. Whereupon about twelve of the
Company (among whom this Deponent was one) made choice to go with the Young
Lord, and the Remainder being to his remembrance the greater number, did
resolve to go with Mr. Standish the Father, and then the Company divided, and
this Deponent and those that had made their Election, went again into the
Parlour to the young Lord, and drank some short time, and at their taking their
leaves of him he gave them a word, by which they should know one another, which
was, Go thy way old Trip; and then they parted from the said House to Wigan, in
the way whither the said John Neyler overtook this Deponent and his Company,
and told them he had brought some Money from Standish-Hall to be drunk by them,
and carried them to the House of James Green in Wigan aforesaid, where he staid
with them some time and drank the Health of King James and their Captains, and
then left them. And this Deponent farther says; that at his this Deponents
Return to his own House, his Wife being informed, that he had Listed himself a
Soldier for King James, would not let this Deponent rest, or be at quiet until
he had promised not to concern himself any farther in the matter. Upon which he
this Deponent never went near them any more.

Lawrence Brandon.
Jurat' 11. Feb. 1695 Cor'me, Tho. Rokeby.

Robert Bradley 's Affidavit.
RObert Bradley of Chippin in the County of Lancaster makes Oath, that he
knows John Lunt, and became acquainted with him about the latter end of the
year 1689, by the means of one Mr. Thrillfall, who brought him to his House, he
this Deponent keeping an Inn in Chippin aforesaid; and that at that time the
said Lunt went by the Name of Jackson, and that about a quarter of a year
afterward, there came into that Country several Irish Men, who said they were
sent by Lunt from London, and that when they wanted Money, they said they were
to have Money of Lunt, and amongst the said Irish there used to come to this
Deponent's House several English Papists, and frequently used to drink their
Old Master King James's Health; and threatened this Deponent (being a
Protestant) to hang him when King James came in, often affirming he would come
into England at such and such times; and Lunt often told this Deponent, that he
had Listed not only the Irish, but several of this Deponent's Neighbors,
besides Thirty that he had Listed at Wiersdale, and amongst the Neighbors
named Clerkson, Hodgkinson and Hearst, and that one Cottam was to be
Quartermaster. And this Deponent says, that Lunt desired one Sharpless, where
the said Lunt Tabled, to be Listed, as the said Sharpless informed him; but
said he refused to be Listed by the said Lunt fearing he had not wherewith to
maintain his Soldiers. And this Deponent says, one John Wilson kept the List
and burnt it by his own Acknowledgment at the Request of Lunt. And this
Deponent farther says, that several of the Irsh Men were furnished with all
new Clothes at Chippin, and that Lunt was among them and lived with them: And
that the said Irish Men were lodged at Mr. Harris's, at Mr. Perkinson's and
several other Popish Houses: And this Deponent says, that Lunt always went in
good Habit, that he had Money and paid as well as any Man, and many times for
the Irish, and gave them Money.

Robt. Bradley.
Jurat' 11. die Febr. 1695, Coram me, Tho. Rokeby.

Francis Jackson's Affidavit.
FRancis Jackson of the City of Chester, makes Oath, that in or about the
Month of July 1694 he this Deponent being a Constable, did receive from the
Hands of S. John Manwaring two Warrants of High Treason under the Hands of one
or both of the then Secretaries of State, against Sir Rowland Stanley and Mr.
-- Massey of Puddington, and likewise for the Seizing of all Arms and
Accowtrements of War, belonging to them: And this Deponent in pursuance of the
said Warrants, did Apprehend and take into Custody the said Sir Rowland
Stanley, and did deliver him into the Castle of Chester to the Deputy Governor
thereof; but could not find the said Massey: But this Deponent did find and
seize in a dark Room of the House of the said Massey ( put into a Chest covered
with an old long Pillow nine new Dragoon's Saddles, as this Deponent does
believe, with Buckles, Rings and Staples to them for breast-Plates, Holsters
and Cloaks, with Cruppers, Girts and Stirrups to them all new, and six new half
Gheek bit-Bridles.

Francis Jackson.
Jurat' 14. die Febr. 1695/6, Coram, Sam. Air.

The Information of John Wilson of Chippin in the County of Lancaster.
THAT he this Informant does remember, that at Christmas last was four Years,
one Mr. Thrillfall of Goosner in the said County of Lancaster and one Mr. John
Lunt who went then by the Name of Jackson, said they came from King James out
of Ireland into Lancashire, as he had been informed also by others, and this
Informant being at that time in their Company at Goosner heard them say, they
had brought several Commissions from King James to several Roman Catholic
Gentlemen and others in Lancashire and other Places, one of which he this
Informant saw, viz. One for Mr. Lunt to be a Lieutenant under Mr. Thrillfall,
and Mr. Thrillfall told him, be had a Commission to be a Captain.

And this Informans farther says, that at the same time of his seeing them at
Goosner as aforesaid, there was one with them that went by the Name of
Alderton, who was writing to London for Arms as they said, and heard them
discoursing, that they had others that had bought great Quantities of Arms and
other things for War, some of which he this Informant at that time saw, viz.
five or six Swords, two Case of Postols and one Pocket-Pistol, and to the best
of his remembrance a Dagger, and Armor made of white Paper sowed together with
yellow Wire, and that they were endeavoring to get a great many more, all
which were for King James's Service: And this Informant further says, that
soon after Mr. Thrillfall and Mr. Lunt their coming over as abovesaid, he was
employed by the said Thrillfall and Lunt to make double Girts for four Buckles
for Troopers Saddles, and accordingly did make 34, 23 of which be delivered to
the said Thrillfall, who told him that upon their having Occasion he should
make more.

That the Candlemas after this Informant was at Goosner, Mr. Thrillfall told
him he had twenty Irish Men already for his Troop, most of which this Informant
at that time saw, who said themselves, that Lunt spoke to them, and sent them
down from London to be Soldiers for King James under Mr. Thrillfall, and the
said Irish Men was at Thrillfall's, and in the Country for several Months; some
of which were afterward imprisoned in Lancaster Goal, he does remember the
Names of some of them, viz. Thomas Lock, William Macarty and Oneal, Dumbarton,
two whose Names were Bourn, and two whose Names were Cook, Kelly a tall Man,
Walter Tate, Richard Lettice a little Man well skilled as be said in fencing,
Hugh Neal, one Locksome who used to have a Spaniel with brown Spots, which used
to lie with him upon the Bed, one they called Long-Boy a Tailor, one Mr. Dalton
a very handsome comely Man, a fat Man that wore a blew Apron who was taken for a
Preston Butcher, who used to ask any body that looked upon him, if they had any
fat Calves or Sheep to be sold.

And this Informant farther says, that betwixt 2 or 3 Years ago the said Mr.
Lunt came to this Informants House, and then did declare to this Informant,
that he the said Lunt had been at Dungan-Hall with Mr. Walinesley, who a be
said was lately come from France, and the said Lunt said, he had received from
the said Walmesley a Commission to be a Captain of Horse in a Regiment to be
raised for King James's Service, and that the said Walmesley was to be Colonel
of the same, which Commission he this Informant at that time saw in the Hands
of Mr. Lunt and heard him read the same. And this Informant says, that a
little after the said Lunts receipt of the said Commission as aforesaid, he
this Informant saw the said Mr. Lunt lift severel Men for King James 's
Service, viz. Richard Cottam, Edward Cottam, The. Swinghurst, Lancellot Bolton,
William Hodgkinson, Henry Bourne, Richard Beesley, Robert Clarkson, his Brother
Cuthbert Wilson, and this Informant, and several others promised that they
would list themselves the next time Lunt came to this Informants House.

And about 3 Years and a half ago Mr. Lunt told this Informant, that he the
said Lunt had listed six Men in Wyersdale for King James's Service, and that he
was promised a great many more there, and about three Years since Mr. Lunt told
this Informant, he had listed twelve Men in Cheshire for the said Service.

At Inglewbite Fair was three Years, Mr. Lunt sent this Informant to one James
Bradley a York Carrier, that lived a little beyond long Ridgefel with a Letter,
this Informant brought him the said Lunt back to the best of his remembrance a
Letter in answer to that sent, but does positively say, he brought back a Watch
from the said Carrier and delivered it to Lunt. Near three Years ago (to the
best of this Informants remembrance) Mr. Lunt came to this Informants House and
told him, he was going to the Lord Molyneux's to meet a great many Gentlemen
there. Much about the same time Mr. Lunt sent him this Informant, to one
William Hodgkinson of Legrum about buying of a black Mare of the said
Hodgkinson, and ordered him to bring him back an Answer to Dungan Hall, and
accordingly this Informant did return with his Message to Dungan-Hall, and then
and there he this Informant saw in Company with Mr. Lunt, viz. Mr. Charles
Harris, Robert Holden and several other Gentlemen that this Informant did not
know, and this Informant after a little stay there, did see a Gentleman they
called Mr. Walmesley come down Stairs into a Room at the foot of the Stairs,
where the said Lunt and the other Gentlemen were, and a little time after he
came into the said Room he saw the said Lunt pull a Paper out of his Pocket,
and deliver it to the said Walmesley who received the same, which this
Informant does believe was a Roll of Men listed for King James 's Service,
because the next Time he this Informant met with and saw the said Lunt (which
was about a fortnight after,) he told him that the Paper he saw him deliver to
Mr. Walmesley, was a Roll or List of the Names as aforesaid.

John Wilson,
Jurat' 5. die Oct. 1694. Coram me, G. Air.

Ann Elliot's Affidavit.
ANN Elliot late of Chippin in the County of Lancaster now living in London
makes Oath, that about the beginning of the Year 1691. She this Deponent then
living in Chippin aforesaid, knew John Lunt, who then went by the Name of
Jackson, and this Deponent says, that about that Time there came into that
Country several Irish Men, who said they were come from London, and sent down
by Lunt, and that they were listed at London by the said Lunt for the Service
of King James: And this Deponent says, that the said Irish Men called Lunt
their Lieutenant, and at all times when they were together, that they could be
free, owned him and obeyed his Commands as their Lieutenant, and in this
Deponents hearing promised to be ready to rise in Arms with the said Lunt to
bring in their old Master, which they said was King James: And this Deponent
further says, that several Roman Catholic Gentlemen and others, contributed
toward their Subsistence, and amongst the rest this Deponent her self. And
this Deponent says, that Lunt received the Money for the use of the said
Irish: And this Deponent says, she has heard one Mr. Lock, who went under the
Name of an Irish Man, complain that Lunt had brought him down from London to
his Prejudice, because he did not find what was promised was performed,
Nevertheless he would be ready with the rest for the said Service. And this
Deponent says, she set up many Nights to wait on the said Irish Men, sometimes
by 12 in a Company or more. And this Deponent says, she has often questioned,
whence they would have all those Arms they pretended to have, who answered we
know very well whence to have them.

Ann Elliot.
Jurat' 11. die Febr. 1695. Coram me, Tho Rokeby.

The Information of George Wilson.
THIS Informant upon his Oath says, that in or about the Month of April 1689,
one Doctor Bromfeild came to William Fitzherbert Esquire at Wapra near West-Chester
in Flintshire, where he the said Bromfeild lay concealed for some time for a
Passage into Ireland, from whence he was recomended to this Informant to assist
him, who then lived near the Seaside, at a Place called Redland, where after
the said Bromfeild had stayed about a Week; this Informant did assist him in
the buying of a Boat of about 25 Tun, which said Boat being victuall'd and
ready to Sail, was seized by Mr. Morston, and Bromfeild escaped to Mr. Crosby's
in Lancashire, from whence by the Assistance of Mr. Pierce Morston, Mr. Winn of
Gop, Mr. Lloyd of Greith, Mr. Robert Brierwood of West Chester, Mr. George
Pennant, Mr. Pue of Pendall, and this Informant, he afterward got over in a
open Boat.

This Informant farther says, that being searched for by Troopers from West
Chester, and other Soldiers, and by the Civil Officers of the Country, was
forced to leave his House and Family, and hid himself in the Woods for many
Days, and could never return to his House again; but got into Lancashire,
whither his Wife and Family followed him, where he this Informant was received
and entertained by Lord Molyneux, Coll. Tildesley, Mr. Standish of Standish,
Sir Rowland Stanley, Sir James Pool, Sir William Gerrard, Coll. Townley and
others; sometime at the House of one Gentleman, and sometimes at another.

This Informant says, that about Midsummer, 1689, he this Informant and others
were ordered and directed by the Gentlemen asoresaid, and others, to look out
about the Seacoasts thereabouts, for any Gentlemen that should arrive from
Ireland; for at that time he this Informant was told they expected some Friends
and News from Ireland, which he this Informant did, and about the beginning of
June 1689, Mr. Edmund Thrillfall of the Ashe^ in Goosner; and one Mr. Lunt
arrived at Cockram, and came immediately to Col. Tildesley's with several
Bundles of Papers, where this Informant was then attending their coming, etc.

This Informant says, that upon their coming to the said Coll. Tildesley's,
the said Thrillfall and Mr. Lunt, immediately opened their Cloakbags, and took
out several Commissions, Declarations, Blanks and sealed Papers from King
James, to several Persons and Gentlemen of Quality in that Country and York
shire and divided them; those for Yorkshire Mr. Thrillfall put up, and
undertook to deliver, and had a Guide immediately provided; the others for
Lancashire, Cheshire, Staffordshire and Parts thereabouts, Mr. Lunt took to
himself to deliver; and had this Informant with him from Place to Place to
Guide and Assist him in the Delivery of them, and after they had left and
delivered to Coll. Tildesley his Commission for being a Colonel ( which he the
said Coll. received upon his Knees and kissed it, with the Blanks for his
inferior Officers) they proceeded, and went to the Lord Molyneux his House,
and delivered one Colonels Commission to Mr. William Molyneux his Son for a
Regiment of Horse, with Blanks for his inferior Officers; he the said Coll.
Molyneux immediately filling that Blank for the Lieutenant-Collonel, delivered
it in the Presence of this Informant to Mr. William Gerrard, who was with the
said Coll. Molyneux when he this Informant and Mr. Lunt came in.

This Informant further says, that he this Informant was present, and did see
Mr. Lams deliver to Mr. Sherbourn of Stonyhurst, a Collonel's-Commission with
Blanks as aforesaid for a Regiment of Horse.

To Mr. Townley of Townley the like for Horse.

To Mr. Girlinton of Girlington Esquire a Collonel's Commission.

To Mr. Westby of Mobrick Esquire the like for Dragoons.

To Mr. Legh of Lyme Esquire a Cossonel's Commission with Blanks as aforesaid.

To Sir Tho. Stanley of Alderley the like for Horse.

To Mr. Chumley of Vale Royal the like for Horse, etc.

To Sir Rowland Stanley the like for Horse, etc.

To Sir Robert Throgmorten the like for Horse, etc.

To Sir Henry Titchbourn he being then at the Lord Molyneux the like for Horse.

To Sir -- Gisfard of Chillington the like for Horse.

To Sir James Symmons of Ashton in Staffordshire, the like for Horse.

This Informant says, that be also saw Sir Robert Throgmorton fill up a
Lieutenant Collonel's Commission to his own Regiment, and deliver it to one Sir
Charles Neale, who accepted the same, and kissed it upon his Knees.

And that he this Informant also was present, and saw Sir James Symmons deliver
a Captains Commission to Mr. William Fowler of St. Thomas near Stafford.

And also when Sir Thomas Gifford delivered a Captains Commission to Mr.
Augustine Gifford, and also to Capt. Gowre the like Captains Commission, and to
Bazil Brooks Esquire the like Captains Commission, and to Mr. John Pursel a
Cornet's Commission, and to Thomas Pursell a Warrant for Quarter Master, and to
several other inforiour Officers and the several Colonels aforesaid.

This Informant says, that all these Colonels Commissions with the Blanks as
aforesaid, were delivered by Mr. Lunt in the presence of this Informant: And
this Informant says, he knows they were such Commissions, because he saw them
and heard most of them read at the time of the delivery to them. And for the
Lieutenant Colonel and other inferior Officers Commissions, he this Informant
saw most of them filled up by the Superiors, and delivered to the inferior
Officers as aforesaid: And this Informant further says, that at the same time
aforesaid, he this Informant saw the aforesaid Mr. Lunt, deliver to my Lord
Molyneux a sealed Paper, which he this Informant saw him the Lord Molyneux
open, and read; which to the best of this Informants Memory was purporting a
Commission and Instructions for the Care and Government of Liverpoole.

This Informant also says, that he was at a Meeting at Sir John Lawsons in
York shire, about the Month of March then next following with Mr. Lunt, where
were the Gentlemen Mr. Lunt names in his Information, where he this Informant
then heard most of them publicly own, that they had received Commissions by
Mr. Thrillfall some time before from King James, and would then have obliged
this Informant and Mr. Lunt, to have engaged with them the Gentlemen of the
Country, etc.

This Informant further says, that about the beginning of the Year 1691, he
this Informant heard that Mr. Lunt was employed in and about London to list
Men: And this Informant says, that some short time after several Men came into
Lancashire as from London, and said they were listed by the said Mr. Lunt, and
sent down to serve under the Command of some of the Officers aforesaid; and he
this Informant says, that as fast as they came down, he was ordered by my Lord
Molyneux, Sir Thomas Clifton, Coll. Molyneux, Coll. Tildesley, Coll. Townley,
Sir William Gerrard and his Son, and several there is the Officers aforesaid, to
take Care of them and provide Quarters or Lodgings for them, which the said
Informant did accordingly, and that at several Times this Informant had, and
did, receive Money from my Lord Molyneux Coll. Til^desley, Coll. Townley, Sir
William Gerrard and sime others to pay the said Soldiers for their
Subsistence: And this Informant says, he did pay and distribute the Money he
so received amongst them, which this Informant says, in the whole did amount
to (to the best of his Mneoy) about 3 or 400 l. the Names of many of the
Soldiers, this Informant yet remembers, and a List of them was delivered into
the House of Commons when the Plot was examined there.

And this Informant says, that he is very well assured, that the said Mr. Lunt
did at several other times before, and after, List a great many more than those
named in the List aforementioned.

This Informant further says, that about the Month of February 1691, he this
Informant was at a general Meeting of several Gentlemen at Coll. Walmesley at
Dungan-Hall in Lancashire, many of whom he yet remembers, viz. Coll. Townley,
Coll. Tildesley, Coll. Molyneux, Coll. Dalton, Sir William Gerrard, Mr.
Gerrard, Mr. Dickingson, Mr. Stanley, Mr. Shuttleworth, Mr. Tildesley of
Stansare, Mr. Massey of Buddington, Mr. Langton of the Lo, Mr. Gerrard of
Inch, Sir Thomas Clifton, Mr. Blundell of Crosby, Coll. Westby of Mobrick,
Coll. Parker, and others the said Coll. Walmesley being then lately come out of
France, he the said Coll. then produced publicly in the said Meeting several
Commissions, Declarations, Grants or Patents, that he had then lately brought
from King James of several Gentlemen's Estates of that Country to other
Gentlemen there, that were King James 's Friends, (...) Coll. Tildesley, Lord
Molyneux, Coll. Westbey of Mobrick, Coll. Townley of Townley, Sir Th^^as
Clifton, Sir William Gerrard, Coll. Molyneux, Mr. Gerrard of Inch, Mr. Langton
of Lo, and s^^e others.

This Informant further says, that above a Fortnight after, he this Informant
was at the like Meeting at Philip Draycots of Painesley-Hell in the County of
Stafford Esquire, of most of the aforesaid Gentlemen, and others as Mr. Bazill
Brooks, Sir James Symonds, Sir Richard Fleetwood and his Sons William and
Rowland, -- Carry of Carry Esquire, and others where were produced several of the
like Grants and Patents as aforesaid, brought over by the Lord Stafford, and
there also given out to those they did belong to; this Informant further says,
that at this Meeting aforesaid Coll. Par^^^ being also there, and was then also
lately come out of France, he the said Coll. did then publicly produce and
deliver to one Capt. George Penny then in the Company a Commission from King
James, for the said Penny to be a Major of Horse, which he said Capt. Penny
accepted of with many Thanks, and promised to do the King the best Service be
could.

And this Informant further says, that at another Time being at a Meeting with
the said Coll. Parker at the Sign of the Star an Inn in Holywell in Flintshire
and about twenty Gentlemen more, he this Informant there saw the said Parker
deliver one Commission from King James to one Mr. Pew of Pendrell to be a
Captain of Horse; and at the same time, he the said Parker delivered in the
presence of this Informant to one Mr. George Davies of Treloughnel and to
several others, and that the said Parker did there and at several other times,
as well as at the aforementiond Meetings, order, direct and desire all the
Officers to take Care to have their Men ready at an Hours warning, with a Pound
of Powder and Ball proportionable to each Man, for that he expected News of the
Kings Landing every day, etc.

This Informant says, that about the beginning of the Year 1689, he this
Informant was ordered and employed by Mr. Massey, Sir James Symonds, Sir Thomas
Gifford and Capt. Fowler to List as many Men as be could in Staffordshire and
North Wales for King James's Service under their Command, and that he this
Informant had Money of the aforesaid Gentlemen for that Purpose: and this
Informant says, that he did at that Time (that is to say) within the space of
three Weeks List about sixty Men, whose Names this Informant has by him ready
to produce as he then took them. This Informant also says, that he has been
since employed to List Men several Times in the latter end of the Year 1691,
and in the beginning of the Year 1692, by several other Gentlemen as Coll.
Walmesley, Capt. Penny, Mr. Standish of Standish, Mr. Morst^n of Delakerey and
Capt. Pennant of Baggal.

And this Informant says, he did at these Times by the order and directions of
those Gentlemen last above mentioned, List about the number of Sixscore, and
had Money of the said Captain, by the Hands of Capt. Pennant for that Purpose.

And this Informant further says, that he did several Times after he had so
listed the said Soldiers, pay them subsistence Money by order of Penny and
Pennant, from whom he had the some.

And this Informant further says, that he has several Times seen great
quantities of Arms in the Houses of the Gentlemen hereafter mentioned in
North Wales, Cheshire, Staffordshire and Lancashire, viz in the House of Mr.
Massey of Puddington, Capt. Penny, Capt. Pennant, Sir James Symonds, Sir Thomas
Giffard, Mr. Fowler, Mr. Draycott, Sir William Gerrard, Mr. Walmesley, Mr.
Standish of Standish-Hall, and in some other Houses that he cannot at present
remember.

In the whole this Informant verily believes, that there were in the several
Houses abovesaid, that he this Informant saw, Arms for at least a Thousand Men,
and that it is not above two years at the most since he this Informant saw them
there;

George Wilson.
Jurat' 27. die Junii 1694. Coram me, J. Trenchard.

Elizabeth Hearst 's Affidavit.
ELizabeth Hearst of the Hough in the County of Lancaster, makes Oath, That
last Summer was twelve Months, in the year 1694, when John Womball and others
were seizing of Horses in the said County, she this Deponent desired the said
Womball to go no longer abroad upon that account, and also to lea^^ any further
prosecuting the matter against the Gentlemen in the said County, and she this
Deponent would give him the said Womball One hundred Pounds, and moreover that
he the said Womball should never want; and that 'twas the only way to prevent a
distraction amongst the Gentlemen, but that he the said Womball refused so to
do, and that after the late Trials at Manchester, when the General Voice of the
Country went, that Womball was to be set on the Pillory, she this Deponent went
to one Houghton a Romish Priest, and told him, that she heard Womball was
whipped, and Pillored; he advised her to go home, and be satisfied; for there was
no such thing; and that Womball had sworn nothing but what was Truth, and the
Gentlemen were satisfied in it; But that the Gentlemen were Men of great
Estates, and would do what in them lay to save themselves, for Life was sweet.
Some time before which one John Brown, menial Servant to William Standish of
Standish, Esquire lay all Night at her House, and told her, that if Womball would
have been content to have left off the Prosecution of the Gentlemen aforesaid,
his Master speaking, William Standish Esquire would have settled One hundred Pounds
a year upon him. And also this Deponent says, that one Cuthbert Thrillfall Son
of Edmund Thrillfall of the Ashes in Goosher in the said County, and one Bacon,
that was with him said, that John Lunt came over with Edmund Thrillfall Father
of the said Cuthbert, and brought over Commissions with them from King James
then in Ireland; and that both Father and Son were to be Captains; and that
this Deponent knew the said Lunt, and that he the said Lunt went from place to
place as this Deponent was informed, to Gather Money; and that she this
Deponent Contributed thereunto;

El. Hearst.
Jurat' 8. die Febr. 1695. Coram, Tho. Rokeby.

Thomas Clayton 's Affidavit.
THomas Clayton makes Oath, that in or about October 1694, when the
Proceedings and Trials of the Lancashire and Cheshire Gentlemen was under
Examination before the House of Commons, he this Deponent being then a Servant
at the Swan-Inn at Holborn-Bridge, was then and there, in Company with one
William Ashton, a Lancashire Man, and one of this Deponent's former
Acquaintance, and as they were sitting together in the Tap-house of the said
Inn, this Deponent asked the said Ashton in what Country he had been (this
Deponent being before that time informed that the said Ashton had been in the
Country) who told this Deponent, that he had been in Lancashire; and this
Deponent asking him what business he had in that Country? he answered, he had
been there as an Evidence for the Gentlemen that were Tried at Manchester. And
this Deponent asking him the said Ashton what he knew of that Affair? He
smiled, and said that be knew little or nothing of it; but that the Gentlemen
had given him at the Blew Boar in Holborn the Sum of Ten Pounds, before he went
down into the Country, as an Evidence for them, and that since his Return from
thence, Madam Legh, (Mr. Legh of Lime's Mother) had given him Five Pounds more;
and then told this Deponent, that if he would but say any thing in the House of
Commons (for the matter was to be Examined there) that would vilify John
Womball, or blacken the Reputation of the King's Evidences, that Mr. Legh of
Lime, and the rest of the Gentlemen concerned in that Affair, would be very
kind to this Deponent. And a little after this Discourse, the said Ashton
parted and left this Deponent, and about two days after the said Ashton called
again on this Deponent at the said Swan-Inn, and told him, that Sir Gilbert
Clark and Mr. Peter. Shackerley desired him this Deponent, to go to Sir Gilbert
Clark's House in Red Lion Square; but this Deponent answered the said Ashton,
that if they had any Business with him, they might come where he was, for he
had no Concern with them; so the said Ashton went away immediately, and about
two hours after the said Ashton came into the Yard to this Deponent, and told
him that Sir Gilbert. Clark and Mr. Shackerley were now come themselves, and
desired him this Deponent to go to them into the Tap house of the said Inn, and
this Deponent went accordingly; and after his fitting down as they desired, the
said Sir Gilbert Clark going then by that Name; and Mr. Shackerley, whom this
Deponent did know, asked this Deponent, if he knew Womball? and he answered,
that he knew him very well, for that he had been his Fellow Servants for several
years; and then they asked this Deponent, if Womball had not pressed him, or
solicited him to swear, That he this Deponent had (being formerly a Lancashire
Carrier) carried Arms for those Gentlemen, that had been accused by the said
Womball and others: But this Deponent told them, that the said Womball never
did solicit him to any such thing; but the said Sir Gilbert Clark and Mr.
Shackerley did then tell this Deponent, that they would take care to prefer him
to a good Place or Employ, provided he would appear, and declare in the House
of Commons (for the Lancashire Gentlemen were to have a Hearing of that Matter
there) that Womball before the Trials at Manchester bad offered to this
Deponent One hundred Pounds to swear, That when this Deponent was a Carryer, he
had carried Arms to Mr. Dickinson's of Rightington, and Mr. Standish of
Standish-Hall in Lancashire; and that he would farther say, That Womball told
him, that the Earl of Macclesfield was the first Men that gave him the said
Womball any Encouragement to swear against the Lancashire Gentlemen. And that
he and his Horses were both maintained and kept at the said Earl of
Macclesfield's Charge upon that account; and that be also was promised
Preferment, and an Estate by the said Earl for so doing. And that this Deponent
should speak as fully upon that Point concerning the said Earl as he could. And
the said Mr. Shackerly did then, and there, write a Paper in the presence of
this Deponent, of these Particulars, and of what the said Sir Gilbert Clark and
himself would have had this Deponent to have declared in the House of Commons
as aforesaid. And the said Mr. Shackerley read it over several times to this
Deponent, that he might the better remember it. But this Deponent showing some
unwillingness, and great fear of speaking such things that he knew in his
Conscience to be wholly untrue of so great a Men as the Earl of Macclesfield,
Mr. Shackerley replied, and told him, that he was not to be upon his Oath
before the House of Commons, and therefore assured him he could receive no harm
or prejudice by declaring the same there. And then the said Sir Gilbert Clark
and Mr. Shackerley said, they could not stay, but were in haste, and went away;
but left one Shilling with this Deponent, and the said Ashton to drink; and
about two or three days after a Gentleman who went by the Name of Beresford
(and this Deponent has been informed was Cashire to Mr. Legh of Lime, and the
rest of the Gentlemen concerned in that Affair) came to this Deponent to the
said Swan Inn, and told him, that Sir Gilbert Clark desired to speak with him
at his House in Red Lion Square; and the said Beresford and this Deponent went
immediately to the said House, and Sir Gilbert Clark and they two went
presently to Madam Legh's, and went into an inner Room of the said House, where
there was a Young Gentleman of little stature, in a Morning Gown, whose Name
(as this Deponent was then informed by the said Clark and Berasford) was Mr.
Legh of Lime, and then and there the said Clark, Legh and Beresford, by their
Persuasions, make this Deponent promise to appear (upon their notice) at the
House of Commons, and there declare those Particulars aforesaid, that Sir
Gilbert Clark and Mr. Shackerley had dictated to this Deponent to speak against
the said Earl of Macclesfield and Womball as aforesaid; and the said Mr. Legh
did then and there give to this Deponent twenty Shillings, and promised to give
him a far greater Sum, but said he could deposite no more Money till the
Business was ^over in the House of Commons, about three or four days after that
time the said Beresford and Ashton came to this Deponent at the Swan Inn
aforesaid, and told him, that Sir Gilbert Clark and Mr. Shackerley desired him
to go immediately to the House of Commons, and upon his Examination there, he
should declare all those things concerning the said Earl of Macclesfield and
Womball as aforesaid, and this Deponent went accordingly with the said
Beresford and Ashton to the Lobby of the House of Commons, and a little after
they came there, the said Beresford gave to this Deponent 25 s. desiring him
not to acquaint any Body, that he, or any one else, had given him Money upon
that Account; withal promising this Deponent when the Business was over in the
House of Commons, he should be taken care of, and preferred. And while this
Deponent was waiting in the said Lobby of the House of Commons in order to
declare those things to the House when called in, that were dictated to him by
the said Sir Gilbert Clark, and Mr. Shackerley, as aforesaid, the said Mr.
Shackerley came out of the House (being a Member thereof) and bid this Deponent
not to mention any thing in the House of or against the Earl of Macclesfield,
because he said it was not then convenient; But that he should villifie and
speak as much against Womball as he could, for that the rest of the King's
Evidence signified but little, or words to that effect. And this Deponent was
accordingly called in at that time of his Attendance there, and did say as much
as he could remember according to their direction as aforesaid. And this
Deponent farther says, that he knows John Womball very well; for that he was a
Fellow Servants with him several years, with one James Knowles of Croston in
Lancashire a Carrier; and that he the said Knowles did always very much confide
in the said Womball's fidelity and honesty, and that to this Deponent's
Knowledge, the said Womball was Industrious and Careful in the Concerns of his
said Master. And this Deponent does farther say, that the said Womball did
never at any time offer, or promise him this Deponent, any Sum of Money, or
Reward whatsoever, to invite him this Deponent to swear to his carrying Arms as
aforesaid, or otherwise. And this Deponent farther says, That about three
years and a half ago the said Womball being then a Carryer, and had then a Gang
of Horses of his own; he this Deponent being then traveling out of Lancashire
to London, met one Richard Ryley, who was at that time Womball's Servant, in
the way from London into Lancashire, with the said Gang of Horses, at an Inn
near Daventry in Northamptonshire, and this Deponent did then and there see a
great Trunk carried by a Gray Gelding of the said Womball's called Stubb, and
the Directions upon it were for Mrs. Mary Ridley, or Ridgley, to the best of
this Deponent's remembrance, and to be left at Wigan Lan-house in Lancashire,
till called for; and about seven or eight days after, as this Deponent was
returning from London he met in Coventry one Mr. Tho. Badiley of Nemcastle in
S^affordshire, a Carryer, who at that time had the said Trunk, and this
Deponent did then see the same, and the said Badiley did then tell this
Deponent, that the said Trunk had been seized of Wemball at Litchfield, by one
of the King's Messengers; and that the said Trunk was full of Swords when so
seized; and that he the said Badiley saw the Swords taken out of it. And this
Deponent farther says, That it was commonly discoursed in Lancashire before
and after the time of seizing the said Trunk at Litchfield as aforesaid, that
the said Womball did frequently carry Arms for the Roman Catholic Gentlemen in
the said County. And this Deponent farther says, That at the time he was in
the Lobby of the House of Commons, as aforesaid, the said Mr. Shackerley and
Beresford came to him and urged him to say in the House of Commons, That be
knew Mr. Lunt 's Father (though this Deponent never did) and that his Father
should tell him this Deponent, that his Son the said John Lunt had four Wives,
and that he was a very wicked Fellow, and did not care what he either said or
swore, or words to that effect; But desired him to say nothing of the matter to
any, out of the House of Commons, till the Business was over, for if he did, it
mould certainly be carried against the Gentlemen, and then this Deponent would
lose what they intended to give him;

Tho. Clayton.
Jurat' 11 die Febr: 1695, Coram Tho. Rokeby.

Oliver Pearson 's Affidavit.
OLiver Pearson of Longridge in the Parish of Ribohester, and County of
Lancaster, makes Oath, that about Christmas last was three years, he this
Deponent being a Servant to John Womball of Wigan-Lane Carryer, was employed as
his Servant to manage his Affairs, he this Deponent went to meet his said
Master's Pack-horses laden with Goods from London, and coming through Wigan
Lane aforesaid, at an Alehouse formerly known by the Sign of the White Bull,
adjoining to the way-side, Mr. Standish of Standish-Hall in the said County,
and Mr. Standish his Son came out of the said House, and they knowing this
Deponent, called for a Pot of Ale and gave it him, and this Deponent going a
little further in Wigan-Lane aforesaid with the said Pack horses to a Pool or
Pond, where Horses used to wash and water, a Mare with her Pack by accident was
thrown down, and after she was recovered, he drove the Horses home to his said
Master's house, and there he uncorded the Pack that was upon the said Mare, and
in the mean time came Mr. Standish the younge^ aforesaid, and asked for this
Deponent's Master, and this Deponent answered, he left him at Wigan, then the
said Mr. Standish said, he had some Goods brought from London upon those
Pack-horses that were directed to Blackbourn, and told this Deponent the Marks
of the Goods, but to whom they were directed, or the Marks of those Goods, this
Deponent cannot remember; then the said Mr. Standish desired he might have the
said Goods brought home that same night, which this Deponent promised should be
done; and when this Deponent's Master came home, he told him of it, and
likewise told him what a Misfortune had happened to the Mare in the Pond as
aforesaid, and desired his Master to look upon the Goods that were in that
Pack, to see if they were not spoiled; and his said Master going into the Barn
where all the Packs lay, he opened the Boxes that were in the said Pack, and
found in them Pistols for Horsemen, and when he saw that they were Pistols, he
threw straw ever them that they might not be seen, and this was upon a Saturday
night. And this Deponent farther says, that upon the Sunday night following
about Twelve a Clock his said Master ordered him to Saddle a good Gelding, and
a Mare, and to take two Corn-Sacks into the Barn, and there this Deponent and
his Master filled those Sacks with the Pistols as full as they could well be
carried on Horseback; then his said Master opened other Packs and found two
Kettle Drums (the Kettle Drums were in a Cask made for the purpose) which be
whelved upon this Deponents bead as he sat on Horseback upon one of the Sacks
of Pastols; and when this Deponent began to ride forward, the Kettle Drums made
a noise by rattling one against another, and so frighted the Horse that this
Deponent was thrown, and with the Fall wounded his head upon a Scone.
Afterward this Deponent and his Master went to the said Standish-Hall with the
said Pistols and Kettle-Drums and delivered them to Thomas Hatton (the said Mr.
Standish's Steward) upon the Bowling Green belonging to Standish-Hall, and that
done the said Thomas Hatton took this Deponent and his said Master into the
House and gave them some drink, and likewise gave this Deponent a Shilling, and
then this Deponent went home with his Master. And this Deponent farther says,
that his Master did usually go to the said Bowling-Green upon public
Bowling-days (if he was not abroad upon Business) and he the said Womball did
very often stay longer than ordinary, when he went to Standish Hall upon
Bowling-days; and when his said Master did stay longer than ordinary, this
Deponent did go to fetch him home; and one time amongst the rest his said
Master told him, that he had been with, viz. Mr. Dickinson, Mr. Townley, and a
great many more whose Names he has forgot (but these he remembers) and likewise
told him, that these Gentlemen promised to give him a considerable Sum of Money
for what Losses and Trouble he had been at upon their Account: And the said Old
Mr. Standish in Discourse said, that he would gratify him himself. And this
Deponent farther says, that before and after, the Kettle Drums and Pistols
were carried to Standish Hall, as aforesaid, his said Master brought several
Boxes in Packs from London (the Boxes being like those the Pistols were in, and
had the same marks as they had) to his own House, and afterward carried them
to Standish Hall. And his said Master often times told him, that he believed
these Boxes were full of Pistols or other Arms. And this Deponent farther
says, that about seven years ago he called at a House within a Mile of
Blackbourn aforesaid, where some Gentlemen were drinking in an Inner Room, and
the Room door being open this Deponent enquired of some of the People of the
House, who these Gentlemen were, and Answer was made that one of them was Mr.
Walmesley, which said Walmesley this Deponent took particular notice of,
because there was then a great talk in the Country of Mr. Walmesley's of
Dungan-Hall his Coming to his Estate, and about four years ago this Deponent
met the same Mr. Walmesley in Church-Parish about three quarters of a Mile from
his House called Dungan-Hall, on Horseback with two or three Men in his
Company. And this Deponent farther says, that between three or four years
since one Thomas Clayton then a Carryer, called at Thomas Smith's House in the
said Wigan-Lane, and there he began to rail against this Deponent's said Master
for carrying of Arms, and said he would Hang him for doing it, whereupon the
said Smith (who was also a Carryer, and all inning at the Castle-Inn in
Woodstreet London) rebuked the said Clayton for his so railing against this
Deponent's Master, saying, that he would ruin both himself and other People,
and by Persuasions made him hold his peace;

Oliver Pearson.
Jurat' 15. die Febr. 1695. Coram me, Tho. Rokeby.

The Information of Robert Dodsworth of Crosby Ravenswith in the County of
Westmorland Gentleman.
THIS Informant upon his Oath says, that about August last, he went to Mr.
Tho. Carus of West-Hall in the County of Lancaster, and the said Mr. Carus told
this Informant, that he could do him a kindness, and get him a Commission from
his Cousin Tildesley meaning Col. Thomas Tildesley of the Lodge in the said
County of Lancaster, Esquire who had a Commission from the late King James to be a
Colonel of Dragoons: And this Informant deposes, that about a Month after
came Edward Tildesley to Mr. Girlingtons at Thurland Castle in the said County
of Lancaster, where Mr. Henry Butler and Mr. Thomas Carus desired him to speak
to the said Thomas Tildesley the next time he saw him for a Commission for this
Informant, and a little time after the said Thomas Tildesley and one
Thrillfall, who went by the Name of Capt. Brown, came over to Thurland Castle,
where this Informant did speak to the said Thomas Tildesley for a Commission,
and the said Tildesley told this Deponent, that care should be taken that this
Informant should have a Commission, and one Thomas Ducket told this Informant,
that the said Thrillfall, alias Brown, had brought Commissions from the late
King James. And it was reported amongst them, that the said King James would
Land in a Months Time; and some short time after the said Tho. Tildesley came
again to Thurland Castle, and there this Informant asked him for a Captains
Commission, and the said Tildesley said, they were all disposed of, but told
this Informant, he would put him into a Post. At the same time Mr. George Carus
of Halton in the said County of Lancaster, came to this Informant and said,
that he had been ordered a Month before to ask this Informant, if he would
accept a Lieutenants Place of Horse; to which this Informent gave his Consent,
and therewith acquainted the said Thomas Tildesley, who told this Informant,
that if he would bring a Troop of Dragoons, ^e should have an Independent
Troop; for his Regiment being full, he could give out no more Commissions for
Captains without Order from his Master, meaning the late King James, and most
of the Discourse between this Informant and the said Thomas Tildesley, George
Carus of Halton, Henry Butler, Thomas Ducket, Thomas Carus and John Girlington
was hoping for the speedy Return of the said King James: And this Informant
further deposes, that some time after, which was in Christmas last, this
Informant, went to Manchester, and carried a Letter from George Carus to
Christopher Carus his Father, who read the same, and asked this Informant if he
the said Christopher was a Captain, whether he would go under him, to which
this Informant answered with all his Heart, then the said Christopher Carus
said, he had a Commission under Coll. Molyneux, and had Power to choose his own
Lieutenant and Cornet, only the Coll. desired to put in the Quartermaster: And
then the said Mr. Christopher Carus told this Informant, that he should be his
Lieutenant, and desired him to keep it private. This Informant further
deposes, that at Christmas last at his return from Manchester, he came to Mr.
Standish at Standish in the said County of Lancaster, who asked this Informant,
if he was named for a Commission, and the Informant told him, that he was a
Lieutenant under Capt. Christopher Carus, and after Supper the said Mr.
Standish went with this Informant into his Chamber, and having called for some
Drink, he drank the Healths of Coll. Molyneux and Coll. Townley and Lieutenant
Coll. Gerrard (Sir William Gerrard's Son, then Mr. Thomas Ducket a Relation of
the said Mr. Standish drank a Health to the Lieutenant Colonel to Mr. Townley,
this Informant asked who that was, the said Mr. Ducket replied, there he is
pointing to the said Mr. Standish, which said Mr. Standish replied, yes for
want of a better, or to that Purpose, and further said, he thought he might
have been Lieutenant Colonel to Mr. William Molyneux, because their
Acquaintance had been so great, but since he was not, he was satisfied with
that Post under Coll. Townley. This Informant further deposes, that the next
day the said Lieutenant Colonel Standish, Mr. Thomas Ducket, one Dr. Worton
and this Informant dined together at Standish-Hall, and the said Mr. Standish
bid this Deponent take notice of the said Dr. Worton; for that he was, or was
to be, Doctor to the Regiment, and after Dinner this Informant went to Preston,
and the next day to Halton near Lancaster to the House of the said Christopher
Carus, where was George Carus his Son, who was to be Cornet to that Troop, and
there the said George Carus and this Informant did confult about procuring Men,
and securing what Horses they could; but were to meddle with none until they
had Orders from the late King James. And this Informant further deposes, that
about a Month after the said Christopher Carus who then was, and had been for
some time, a Prisoner at Manchester, had leave to come to his own House at
Halton, where this Informant met him, and there he told this Informant, that he
had received a Letter from Mr. William Molyneux, which intimated, that he had
disposed of the Lieutenant's Place, but he would provide as well for this
Informant, whereupon this Informant finding himself to be at an uncertainty,
went to the said Mr. Molyneux with Mr. Richard Woolfall of Highton, and then
this Informant and the said Woolfall, went to Mr. Harrington's, being a Captain
to Mr. Molyneux, who told this Informant that he had more then his Complement,
and the said Capt. Harrington named one Protestant, who this Informant knows
not, who offered himself to be a Soldier; then this Informant said to the said
Harrington, I hope you have not told him, to which the said Harrington answered
no, but said, that the said Protestant told him, that he knew that there was a
Design on Foot, and that he would sooner serve under him the said Harrington
than under any other Man; then the said Captain showed this Informant his fine
Laces and said, that all his Arms were in a readiness, and that some of them
were at Home and the rest at London; and he further said, he had twelve Pair of
Gloves coming down, which he would give to the first twelve Men that came in to
him, then the said Capt. Harrington and this Informant had Discourse of how
many Troops Coll. Molyneux's Regiment consisted; and the said Capt. Harrington
told this Informant, how many there were, but this Informant cannot tell
whether he said thirteen or fifteen. And the said Mr. Harrington named these
Officers following, viz. Coll. William Molyneux, Lieutenant Coll. Gerrard,
Capt. Penny, Capt. Robert Mobneux, Capt. Westby of Mobrick, Capt. Massey of
Puddington, Capt. Harrington, Capt. Christopher Carus, all of Coll. Molyneux
his Regiment, besides some Officers in Staffordshire, and several others
engaged at London, and as for the Majors they were all to come out of Ireland:
Then this Informant asked the said Harrington, who was his Lieutenant, he
answered he was coming from London, and had rid in the late King James's Guards
and was a good Soldier; this Informant further deposes, that he has
frequently discoursed in the Company of Coll. Tildesley, Mr. Girlington, Mr.
Richard Butler, Mr. Thomas Butler, Mr. Thomas Carus, Mr. Cole and Mr. Henry
Butler, that the French designed Landing in Cornwall or thereabouts, and the
English and Irish in Lancashire: And this Informant further deposes, that
before his going to Mr. Harrington as aforesaid, Mr. George Carus of Halton and
this Informant designed to go for Ireland, to receive Orders from the late King
James, and to bring them into England, for which purpose this Informant and the
said Mr. Carus went to Mr. John Summers of Kirby Loynsdale, and desired him to
go to Milthrope to provide a Vessel to carry them, and the said Mr. Carus went
to Coll. Dalton to receive his Advice, who told the said Carus (as he said)
that he would not have him go as yet, for that very lately there came a
Messenger from King James, who brought Word that so soon as they heard of the
Duke of Berwick's landing in Scotland, they might expect the said Kings landing
in England, and desired his Friends to be in what Readiness they could.

This Informant further deposes, that some time after Mr. Christopher Carus
sent his Son George Carus to the said Mr. Dalton who had a Commission, to
desire him to provide for this Informant, because Mr. Molyneux had disposed of
the Lieutenants Place which this Informant should have had, the said Mr. Dalton
answered he would take care of this Informant, but desired this Informant
should not come to his House for fear of Suspicion: And this Informant has
heard by the said Mr. George Carus, that Mr. Dalton had burnt his Commission
for fear it should be found, and sent to Mr. Tildesley to do the same, who made
answer, he would as soon burn himself, or Words to that effect.

This Informant further deposes, that Mr. Marsden a Protestant was one of our
Companions, and he having a great Estate always protects Roman Catholics when
there is Occasion: This Informant further deposes, that Mr. Husband a
Protestant, a Tradesman in Kirby-Lonsdale, sent to London for two Pair of
Holster Caps and two Housings, for the use of the Roman Catholics, and has
always been very intimate with them.

And this Informant further deposes, that the List of Officers hereunto
annexed, were to be under the late King James when ever he commanded them, as
several of them declared to this Deponent; and as this Informant has been told
by others;

R. Dodsworth.
Jurat 16 die May 1690. Coram me, J. Holt.

A LIST of those OFFICERS I know.
Under Colonel Thomas Tildesley.
LIEUTENANT Colonel Girlington a Protestant. Capt. Thomas Tildesley. Capt.
Ralph Tildesley. Capt. Henry Butler. Capt. Richard Butler. Capt. Alexander
Butler a Protestant. Capt. Thomas Carus. Lieut. William Westby. Mr. Goodwin the
Priest was to raise a Troop at his own Charge, and to put in Officers. Lieut.
George Carus of Sellet. Lieut. Thomas Butler. Cornet Knipe Protestant. Cornet
Coal Protestant.
Under Colonel Townley.
Lieut. Coll. Standish. Capt. Bierley or Barlow. Cornet Woolfall.
Quartermaster Ducket.
Under Colonel Molyneux.
Lieut. Coll. Gerrard, Son to Sir William Gerrard. Capt. Westby. Capt.
Harrington. Capt. Molyneux. Capt. Massey. Capt. Penny. Capt. Carus Protestant.
Lieut. Stanley. Lieut. Penalt or such like Name he lives in Wales and came into
my Place. Cornet Carus. There is also one Coll. Tempest in Yorkshire.
Under Coll. Dalton I know none.

Several of these Officers I had it from their own Mouths, the others only by
Hearsay.

R. Dodsworth.

The Information of Edward Brown of Langtree in the Parish of Standish and
County of Lancaster.
THIS Informant upon his Oath deposes and says, that about the beginning of
the Year 1690, there came a Man to the House of William Standish of
Standish-Hall in the County of Lancaster aforesaid Esquire who went by the Name of
Capt. Brathet, and this Informant was told, that he was sent by King James out
of Ireland to consult with the Roman Catholic Gentlemen in Lancashire, about
raising of Men and buying of Arms for the Service of the said King James, in
order to bring him into England, and that there was then a Meeting of several
Roman Catholic Gentlemen, to consult about the said Affair; and this Informant
further says, that about the same Time, there was a Man came to the said
Standish-Hall, who went by the Name of Mr. Dodsworth, who (as this Informant
was told, by the said Mr. Standish) was to have been an Officer in an Army
designed to be raised for the Service of the late King James, but being
disappointed of his said Officer's Place, he the said Dodsworth came to London,
and made a Discovery of the Design to the Parliament.

And this Deponent further says, that in, or about, the Month of May 1691, he
this Deponent, bought six Case of Pistols of one Elizabeth Small Widow, who
lived near Warrington in the said County of Lancaster, and who at the said Time
had three Case of Pistols more, and three Carbines, which this Deponent would
have bought of her, but she said, they were bought and paid for before, saying,
she had sold one Case of the said Pistols and one Carbine, to one Richard Booth
of Ouston near the said Warrington; and further said, that she had great
Quantities of Arms a little before, but had lately sold them; and this
Informant enquiring of her where she bought the said Arms, she told him at
Liverpool, and this Informant paid her seven Pounds for the said six Pair of
Pistols, which he bought of her, which Money he received from the said M^.
Standish of Standish Hall, who about a Month before had givin him the said Sum,
to buy Arms with: And further says, that as he was carrying of the said six
Case of Pistols, which he bought as aforesaid, the Bag which they were put in
burst, he this Informant thereupon went to one Edward Brown of Round Moore in
the said Parish of Standish, who lent him another Bag and saw the said Pistols
put therein, after which, this Informant delivered the same into the said Mr.
Standish's own Hands, Thomas Hatton and John sharp (two of the said Mr.
Standish's Servants) being then present, and the said Mr. Standish did at the
same time Order this Informant to buy what Pistols and Carbines he could
procure, and he should have Money for them, and the said Mr. Standish did then
declare to this Informant, that if King James landed in England, there would be
Men enough to take up the said Arms. And this Informant faith, that four Days
after the Delivery of the said Arms as aforesaid, Mr. Townley of Townley in the
said County of Lancaster and his Servant whose name is Nicholas Rigby, came to
the said Standish-Hall, and had the aforesaid six Case of Postols delivered to
him by the said Thomas Hatton, being packed up in a Box covered with Laurel,
and one Thomas Fox a Servant to the said Mr. Standish, was appointed to go with
the said Rigby, as a Guard to the said Mr. Townley's of Townley.

And this Informant further says, that about the Year 1691, or beginning of
the Year 1692, there came to the said Standish-Hall, one who went by the Name
of Mr. Green in public Company, but privately in the said Mr. Standish's Family
was called Coll. Parker, who kept two Servants, his Gentleman who went by the
Name of Gandy a Frenchman, and one Thomas Merrick his Groom; and further
says, that he has several times seen in Company together at the said Standish
Hall, the Lord Molyneux's Son, Sir William Gerrard's eldest Son, William
Dickinson of Wrightington Esquire Mr. Blundell of Crosby, Mr. Townley of Townley,
the said Mr. Green (or Coll. Parker) the said Mr. Standish and diverse others,
and heard it discoursed amongst them, that they would all be ready upon King
James 's landing in England, with Men and Arms to serve him. And this Informant
further says, that he knows John Womball very well, and has seen him several
times at Standish-Hall aforesaid, amongst the Gentlemen last mentioned, who
seemed to be very familiar with him, and has heard it discoursed at the said
Standish-Hall, that the said Womball used frequently to carry Arms from London
to the said Standish-Hall, for the Roman Catholic Gentlemen in Lancashire: And
this Informant further says, that the said John Sharp Servant to the said Mr.
Standish, was employed by his said Master Standish and others, to list Men for
the late King James 's Service, and the said Sharp in pursuance of his said
Orders did List several Men for the said Service at Preston, Legh, Wiggan, the
said Standish Town, and other Places, gave them one Shilling to each Man
listing Money, and promised them half a Crown a Day, when they served under the
respective Officers they were listed under, and the Men so listed used
frequently to meet the said Sharp at the said Standish Town.

And this Informant further says, that about the 24th June 1695, one Roger
Emer of Standish, told this Informant, that he had then in his Custody several
Swords, Pistols and Saddles and two Kettle Drums, which Drums were brought to
the said Emer by Thomas Smith of Park Brook in the said Parish of Standish,
all which Arms, Saddles and Kettle Drums were Mr. Standish's of Standish
aforesaid, and removed from Standish-Hall, for fear of being seized by some of
the Kings Messengers, when the Lancashire Gentlemen were taken up about two
Years since.

And this Informant further says, that in or about November last, a little
after he had given in an Information before Coll. Kirby and two other of his
Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the said County of Lancaster, the said John
Sharp came to this Informant, who was then a Prisoner in Lancaster-Castle, and
seemed to be very angry with him, and told this Informant, that he had
discovered some of their Designs to a deal of Rogues, but before May last
either the late King Jam's or some one else would come into England, and then
this Informant and all the Rogues else should be cut off.

And this Informant further says, that in August 1695, at the Assizes then
held at Lancaster-Castle, at which Assizes Mr. John Lunt, Wilson and Womball
were tried upon an Information of Perjury; and this Informant seeing one Thomas
Hatton in the said Castle-Yard a little before the said Trial, asked him how he
thought the Trial would go: Who answered, that all Things would go very well,
for that Sir John Fenwick (who as this Informant was told, was then in
Lancashire) would take Care, that Lunt, Wilson and Womball should all be
convicted of Perjury, and the Lancashire Gentlemen all cleared.

And this Informant further says, that within 3 or 4 Days after he had given
in his Information before three Justices of the Peace, as aforesaid, there came
to him into Lancaster-Castle (he being then a Prisoner there for Debt) one John
Rigby an Inhabitant of the said Parish of Standish, and told this Informant,
that the Gentlemen (naming no particular Person) had taken Care, that his Debts
should be Paid, and be released out of Prison, provided he would go with him to
such a private Place, as the Gentlemen would appoint, where this Informant, his
Wife and Children might privately live out of the Way, and the Gentlemen would
take Care, they should be well maintained, to the intent he might not be found
by the Government, to justify what be had upon his Oath deposed in the said
Information: And that he had brought a Horse for this Informant for that
purpose, aforesaid.

And this Informant further says, that the said Rigby further told this
Informant, that he had a Letter from one Mr. John Haddock a Rich Quaker in the
said Standish Parish (who used to supply the said Mr. Standish and others, with
several Sums of Money upon Purchase and Mortgages) to his Friend one Henry
Coward, a Shopkeeper in Lancaster, the Purport of the Letter (as the said
Rigby told this Informant) was to let Rigby have what Money he pleased, in
order to give this Informant in case of his Acceptance of the Gentlemen's said
Offer, but this Informant denying to go with the said Rigby, who staid three
Days in Lancaster for the said purpose, within two Hours was immediately after
his so denying, put in Fetters by the Jailer of the said Lancaster-Castle that
now is.

And this Informant further says, that in December 1694, when the Lancashire
Conspiracy was under Examination before the House of Commons, he was sent for
by the said Mr. Standish of Standish, who desired this Informant to go to
London with some of his Servants, who were to be Evidence in the said Affair
before the Parliament, to the intent he might Coroberate what they said: Withal
telling this Informant, that he needed not be any ways afraid what he said in
the House of Commons, in the said Matter; for that he was not to be upon his
Oath.

And this Informant further says, that a little after the House of Commons
sent a Messenger for the said Mr. Standish, he the said Standish told this
Informant, that his Wife had given the said Messenger a Mare and Money, so that
the said Messenger was returned to London without effecting his Message.

Edward Brown.

The Information of Mr. John Lunt, given the Fifteenth Day of June, 1694.
THIS Informant upon his Oath says, That when King James left the Kingdom upon
the Arrival of the Prince of Orange, in the Year 1688, he this Informant went
then immediately after him into France, and upon his Arrival at St. Germains,
was introduced to kiss his (the said King James's) Hand in his Closet, by the
Lords Thomas and George Howard, that from thence he was about the beginning of
March then next following, ordered with the rest of his Guards, to go for
Dublin, that immediately upon his Arrival there about the latter end of May
1689, one Dr. Bromfeild came there also from England, expecting to meet his
Majesty, and brought over with him an Account of the Condition and Readiness of
his Friends the Papists and Jacobites there, but more particularly in London,
Sussex and Kent, and in Staffordshire, Lancashire, Cheshire and Yorkshire, and
from them all desired of his Majesty Commissions for the several Persons of
Quality hereafter named, with Blanks for their Inferior Officers, which
accordingly the late King caused immediately to be issued forth, both for
England and Scotland. And because Bromfeild was so well known, and it might be
dangerous for him to come back himself, he desired the King to advise of a
proper Person or Persons, whom he might trust to bring them over and distribute
them here in England, according to his Majesty's Orders; amongst others, he
this Informant was recommended to him by my Lord Thomas Howard, who told him
(the said King James) he would engage Life for Life for him this Informant,
that he would not betray him in the Service, and that if he were taken would
rather die upon the spot. Upon which this Informant was sent for to my Lord
Melfort's Office, where he found my Lord Thomas Howard, Dr. Bromfeild and my
Lord together in his Closet, whither he was carried to them, and then and there
they asked this Informant, Whether he would venture to undertake to carry
Declarations, Papers and Commissions, and other things for his Majesty's
Service to England? They told him it was a hazardous thing, that he should
think well of it, for if he should happen to be taken his Life was certainly
gone; but if he would and did escape, be should be sure of (and they promised
him in the King's Name) very great Preferments, and Rewards, when the King
should come into England. Upon which he this Informant undertook it, and my
Lord Melfort gave an Account of it; whereupon to blind the business, and to
take off any Thought of his this Informant's being employed or sent any where,
my Lord Melfort told him, the King had thought fit to order the Officer of the
Guards (who was a Frenchman) to casheer him, and that he might say to any one
that asked him the reason, that he knew none, but was resolved to get his Pass
as soon as he could, and go for England. About a Week after this, all things
were got ready both for England and Scotland, and one Mr. Thrillfall of the
Ashes in Goosner in Lancashire Gentleman, and this Informant were dispatched
for England, and one Mr. Gourdon (who was this Informant's Comrade, and
cashiered as he was) went for Scotland. This Informant and Mr. Thrillfall
brought with them Declarations, Commissions and other Papers, and Landed at
Cockram within four Miles of Lancaster, in or about the beginning of June 1689,
upon our Landing we had like to have been wholly surprised by some Custom house
Officers, but we escaped and brought off the most Material of our Business,
only lost some Commissions, Blanks and one of the King's Declarations, two Case
of Pistols of this Informants, that the King gave him, and some Clothes of this
Informant's, etc. The greatest part of the Commissions and most of the Blanks
in several Bundies were saved; and this Informant delivered them as fast as he
could one after another as follows, viz. in Lancashire.

To my Lord Molyneux's Son William a Colonel's Commission for a Regiment of
Horse, with Blanks for all his Inferior Officers to be filled as he should
think fit.

To Thomas Tildesley Esquire the like for a Regiment of Dragoons.

To -- Dalton of Thurnham, Esquire the like for Dragoons.

To -- Sherbourn of Stonyhurst Esquire the like for Horse.

To -- Townley of Townley Esquire the like for Horse.

To -- Girlington of Girlington Esquire a Colonel's Commission.

To -- Westby of Mobrick Esquire the like for Dragoons.

This Informant farther says, that he delivered my Lord Molyneux himself a
Paper of Instructions, where amongst other things, He was to be Governor of
Liverpool; and this Informant took notice of it, because my Lord Melfort, and
Dr. Bromfeild both told him, this Informant saw and showed it him in the Paper
before they Sealed it. Cheshire.


To Peter Legh of Lime Esquire a Colonel's Commission, with Blanks for his Inferior
Officers.

To Sir Thomas Stanley of Aldersley, Protestant.
the like for Horse.

To Mr. Chumley of Vale-Royal, Protestant.
the like for Horse.

To Sir Rowland Stanley, Protestant.
the like for Horse.

To my Lord Brudenell a Colonel's Commission for Horse, with Blanks for his
Inferior Officers.

To Sir -- Throgmorton, the like for Horse.

This Informant farther says, That to these two Gentlemen last above written,
he delivered four other Colonel's Commissions for four Gentlemen, whose Names
he was not to know, because (as he did then conceive) they were Protestants;
for they told him this Informant, they were honest Gentlemen and Protestants.

Besides all these before mentioned this Informant delivered to one Mr. Jackson
in Castle-street near the Meuse two Bundles of Commissions, with a King's
Declaration, and two other Papers Sealed up with each with Orders to him to
deliver one of them with a Declaration and Sealed Papers immediately to my Lord
Griffin, and the other to Mr. W. Pen the Quaker, which this Informant supposes
he did; for in his sight he took Coach, and said he would.

And besides all these, which he this Informant so as aforesaid delivered, Mr.
Thrillfall undertook to deliver several Bundles of the same to several
Gentlemen in Yorkshire.

This Informant farther says, That every Colonel had with his Commission
Blanks for double his Inferior Officers, and that all the Colonels had the
Liberty to raise Foot, Horse, or Dragoons; but Horse was more especially
recommended.

This Informant farther says, That after the dispatch of these Commissions,
and other Business, he had the ill luck to be made a Prisoner for a
considerable time upon the Accusation of the Captain that brought him over out
of Ireland.

This Informant farther says, That during the time he was a Prisoner under
Bail, that is to say, about the beginning of the year 1691, he this Informant
by the Order of Colonel Tildesley, Col. Townley, Col. William Molyneux, Mr.
Gerrard, Col. Dalton and others, Listed in London several Men for Soldiers to
serve as Horse or Dragoons, to be under the Command of the said Colonels, or
any other as they should dispose of them to.

Here he names about a hundred of the Soldiers Listed, and the Pay they was to
receive.

This Informant farther says, That being discharged of his Imprisonment in the
Month of November 1691, he this Informant was desired by several of the
Gentlemen, that he had delivered of the Commissions aforesaid to, viz. Lord
Molyneux, Col. Molyneux his Son, Sir William Gerrard and his Son, Mr. Dickinson
of Wrightington, John Harrington of Heightonhay, Esquire Col. Townley, Col.
Tildesley, Col. Dalton, and others, to go into France to give King James an
Account in what condition they were, and to bring his Majesty's Commands, how
they might be serviceable to him, which this Informant did, and gave his
Majesty the said Account. He the said King James commanded him to return for
England, and then amongst other things, that he this Informant should tell them
from him that he did not doubt but in the Spring following to be in a condition
to come for England; And at this Informant's coming away, he was ordered by my
Lord Melfort himself to go to Captain Griffith in the Meuse, as soon as he this
Informant should come to London, and deliver him the said Griffith a Paper from
his Lordship, it was Sealed, this Informant did not know what it was, and to
advise and receive Orders from him the said Captain Griffith. This Informant
says, that he arrived in London about the latter end of December 1691, and
that he went immediately to Captain Griffith, and delivered him the said Paper,
and that the said Griffith read the said Paper, and told him this Informant, he
did not question but this Business, meaning that in the Paper, mentioned, as
this Informant then supposed, will be accomplished in a little time, and then
he disclosed to this Informant what it was he meant, which was the cutting off
of the Prince of Orange at some proper time when he was a Hunting; and then he
put it to this Informant, Whether he was willing to make one, and be concerned
in it. This Informant first desired to know the Persons engaged in it. He the
said Griffith then told him, he was not to tell him their Names, but he would
at any time bring this Informant into the Company of several of them that were
engaged in it, and about two days after this Informant came to him again and
went with him into the Company of several Gentlemen at the Queens-head in
White-Hart-Yard in the Strand, where, and with whom, the said Captain Griffith
and this Informant discoursed the Method of doing it, and all agreed, it was to
be the easiest done when he should be a hunting, or some time late when he went
to, or come from, Kensington.

This Informant says, there was in Company at that time about Nine or Ten,
three or four, or more of them this Informant knew, three of which are since
dead. Captain Griffith then told this Informant and the Company, he had about
Sixty brave Fellows engaged in the Business, who he did not at all doubt but
would one way or other effect it. Several of the principal of them, as Whitney
the Highway Man, and several others happened to be sometimes after taken and
secured, which was the only reason that this Informant knows of, that it was
not attempted.

This Informant farther says, That about the same time abovesaid, that he this
Informant came last out of France, viz. about the latter end of December 1691,
there came several English Gentlemen of Quality, viz. Lord Stafford, Mr.
Stafford, Col. Parker, Col. Walmesley, a French Lieutenant General, whose Name
this Informant does not remember, and others with Commissions, Declarations,
Grants and Patents for themselves and others, and for their Inferior Officers
from King James.

This Informant farther says, that in the Months of March and April 1692, he
this Informant was employed by, and assisting to, several private Gentlemen and
Tradesmen in or about London to list Men, buy Horses, Arms and Sadles, and that
the said Men, Horses and Arms, were to be employed in the Service of the late
King James.

And this Informant farther says, That by the Defeat of the French Fleet their
design of Rising being wholly disappointed, they fell upon other measures, and
this Informant remained in several Parts of this Kingdom, and was at several of
the like Meetings as aforesaid, until the last Summer, and then about July
1693, was desired with some others to go to France by several of the Gentlemen,
that this Informant has before mentioned, to have delivered Commissions to in
Lancashire, that is to say, by my Lord Molyneux, Col. Molyneux, Sir William
Gerrard, Mr. Gerrard, Mr. Standish, Mr. Dickinson, Col. Townley, and several
others of that Country to give the King an Account of the Condition they were
in, and to bring them back an Account of what hopes, and when he thought he
should be in a condition to come for England; and this Informant went
accordingly to St. Germains, and spoke with the King, and delivered him what he
had in charge from the Gentlemen in England, and my Lord Melfort, being at that
time with the King in his Closet, bid him this Informant go to Captain
Griffith, who was then at St. Germains; the Captain ordered him this Informant
to speak with Dr. Bromfeild, who told him this Informant when he came to him,
that if he would undertake to carry a Signet with him into England, and show it
to such Persons as he would direct him this Informant to, that were concerned
in a Design, and would engage to make one with them in the same, he this
Informant should receive the same Reward that was intended for them; which
design he then told him this Informant, was to cut off the Prince of Orange by
any such way or means that the Undertakers amongst themselves, when they came
together, should agree upon: Whereupon he this Informant promised and engaged
to them the said Bromfeild and Griffith to make one in the Business; and was
then forthwith dispatched with the Signet, and other Matters for England; where
he arrived and landed at Dover in December last, and there he this Informant
met with those, that the said Dr. Bromfeild and Captain Griffith had directed
him to, which were, viz. Captain Nowell, Captain Walton, Mr. Pepper, Mr.
Preston and Captain Roberts, who were in the Design of cutting off the Prince
of Orange, as this Informant was told; and that there were in all Sixteen
Persons concerned, but there he this Informant met Four of them only, who were
as follows, Captain Nowell, Sergeant of the Admiralty, and one of the
Principal Gunners, as this Informant was told, who told him this Informant, He
had his Son and two more ready for the occasion; Captain Walton of Foulston, a
Custom house Officer there, who told him this Informant, he had Six more
engaged in the Business, who with us together, he said, Walton was very
confident might in a Month or two's time do the Business effectually with
little hazard. Mr. Pepper of Dover, a Custom house Officer as this Informant
was told, or some place there worth about Three hundred Pounds per Annum, and
Mr. Preston of Feversham, one of the Militia Officers were the other Two of the
Four before mentioned.

This Informant farther says, That the said Dr. Bromfeild and Captain Griffith
did order this Informant to assure the said Nowell, Walton, Pepper and Preston
from them, and in the Kings Name, that every one concerned in the Action should
have the Reward of Five hundred Pounds per Annum each, which was the same made
to him at St. Germains by the said Dr. Bromfeild and Captain Griffith; and my
Lord Melfort told him this Informant, after he had kissed the King's hand, and
was coming down Stairs, That if the Design that Griffith and Bromfeild had
engaged him this Informant in, took effect, the King would soon be in England.

Upon this he this Informant came for England, and in traveling, being
somewhat troubled in his thoughts with what he had undertaken, he called upon
several Priests that were his Friends and Acquaintance (and Relations) in
France, as he came along, and did, though not in plain terms, acquaint them with
what he this Informant was engaged in, some were positively against it as
damnable, and others for it as meritorious, which difference amongst them gave
him this Informant more disturbance; so that as soon as he came into England he
resolved not to be one in it, and to prevent it, if he could; but this
Informant did not resolve then to discover it, until he was persuaded thereunto
by a Taffe.
Friend, by whom after he had often times discoursed the Matter with him, he
this Informant was at length prevailed with to discover it.

This Informant further says, that being at Sr. Germains in the Months of
October and November 1693, the Lord Melfort, Capt. Griffith and some others
then told him this Informant, that there was a Design laid by their Friends the
Protestants, engaged with the Roman Catholics there for the seizing the Tower
of London, Tilbury Fort, Sherness, the Ports and Coasts, etc. the Manner, viz.
That some of the Officers within the Tower, who were sure and firm to King
James's Interest, whose Names this Informant knows not, they being kept as a
Secret to the Chiefs, only were to be ready to receive several Gentlemen and
others that were to pass as private Persons, some in the Habit of private
Gentlemen, with good private Arms, others with the same Habit as the Horse
Guards do wear, and others in the Habit of Foot-Soldiers all armed accordingly,
and some like plain Countrymen, until there was a sufficient Number with the
help of those within, to have secured the Gate and Brig, when on a Signal
given, those without, who were in great Numbers to have been lodged about the
Tower Hill, St. Katherines, East-Smithfield, Thames Street and Places adjacent,
a great many that were to be walking carelessly about the Gates and upon the
Wharf provided for that Purpose, who were to have made to the Gates, secured
the Guns and all within, by cutting them off, and making them Prisoners; and
for Tilbury Fort by the help of some within much after the same Manner, and
that for Sherness, they did not doubt but to have secured by some Officers of
the Fleet, and for the Ports of Dover and Foulston and the Coast upon Rumney
Mash, those they said were undertaken to be made theirs by those Officers of
King William, that this Informant has named above, viz. Nowell and the rest,
with the Correspodents they pretended to have in those Parts, and that Hull
also, and all those Parts in the North, were at the same time provided for in
the like Manner.

This Informant farther says, that some time after his Arrival at London,
which was in December 1693, he was at a Meeting at the Queens Head in white
Hart-Yard in the Strand, where was the Lord Griffin, the Lord Baltimore, the
Lord F -- was gone before this Informant came there, the rest this Informant saw
there, and Capt. Tozier, Mr. Whitefield, Mr. Tasbrough, Mr. Kingsley and some
other Gentlemen, told this Informant, they had consulted and agreed of the
Method abovesaid, with those Lords, for the securing the Tower and the other
Places, and that there would be no doubt of accomplishing it, etc. with a great
deal of case, but still, that they the said Lords and Gentlemen had a great
dependence and assurance from those Gentlemen and others in Commission as
aforesaid; for that they were well assured they had an Army listed and
Officer'd and ready well Armed and Accoutr'd at all Points at twenty four Hours
warning, to the Number of at least thirty Thousand Horse, Foot and Dragoons in
the North Parts, besides those here, in and about London and Parts adjacent,
which were under the Command, Care and Conduct of Lord Fe***m, Lord Griffin,
Coll. Griffin his Son, Col. Porter, Col. Holman, Coll. Sir William Go**g, Coll.
Bernard H**d, Coll. T**n, Lieut. Coll. B*s and some others.

This Informant farther says, that in March last, about the middle or latter
end of that Month, he this Informant was at a Meeting, at my Lord Str -- e's of
about twelve or sixteen Protestant and Popish Gentlemen, some of which this
Informant knew, as Mr. Basteen of Dover, Capt. Roberts, Dr. Clark, Mr. Lee,
Capt. -- that lives two Miles from Sir Bazill Dixwells. The Meeting was to
consider and agree to be all ready for securing that Country and the Ports and
Coasts there, upon any Occasion for the Kings Landing or otherwise, and to
compute what their Strength they might depend upon might amount unto, and it
was then agreed amongst themselves, that they had between five and six thousand
Men well Armed and Disciplined, besides what they might reasonably expect would
come in upon their rising, whose Numbers they did not doubt would be very
considerable.

This Informant further says, that in his frequent passing to and again from
the Ports, to and from London at his Inn in Rochester, kept by one Alderman
Cross of that City, he was well known to him the said Cross, who several Times
and Nights that he has lain in his House, did introduce him this Informant into
the Company of several Commanders, who being by him the said Cross satisfied
what this Informant was, were extremely civil and kind to this Informant,
entertaining him and inviteing him Aboard their Ships and otherways.

And this Informant says, that in December last, he did bring from my Lord
Melfort, a Paper sealed to that Innkeeper, this Informant did not see what was
in it, but he the said Cross told this Informant, that it was for some honest
Gentlemen that did belong to the Sea.

This Informant further says, that about six Weeks since Capt. Tozier and Mr.
Kingsley, a Gentleman that then lately came from St. Germains, told him this
Informant, Mr. Whitfield and another, Mr. Kingsley being present, that since
there was an Account given there, that the late Kentish Design upon the Life of
King William, was by some Traitor or other prevented; it was there resolved to
try another way upon him in Flanders, which was by causing several resolved
Gentlemen and others of the English, Scotch and Irish Nations, and some French
of seeming Quality, to desert from the French Army in Flanders as early this
Campaign as they could, that would undertake to watch and take the first
Opportunity they could in their several Posts, to attempt upon his Life.

This Informant further says, that he is very sure, that he this Informant can
point to, and carry and Body, to the very Place, some he believes in or near
the Town, but more particularly in several Parts of Yorkshire, Lancashire,
Staffordshire and Cheshire, where there were, and this Informant is very
confident yet are, lodged, secured and kept great Quantities of Arms and
Warlike Equipage of all Sorts, with great Numbers of Horses fit for Service.
And this Informant says, that if he were Authorized and Empowered thereunto,
he this Informant would undertake to Seize and Secure them.

The Examination of John Kelly taken upon Oath the 23. and 27. days of February.
THIS Informant says, that he came over to England in the Irish Army about
Michaelmas last was twelve Months, since which time he has wandered up and
down from one Gentlemen's House to another, and was entertained in the Lord
Molyneux's House about twelve Days before Christmas, during which time he was
there, he saw a Letter from Queen Mary which came from St. Germaint, directed
to the young Lord Molyneux, which Letter this Informant heard read, the
Contents of which Letter was that with good Hopes of the Encouragement they had
from other Countries, and that the Queen had got from the French King a Grant
of assisting them with Arms, to the Number of eight or nine Thousand as near as
he remembereth; and my Lord Molyneux on receipt of this Letter, sent to several
Sadlers to prepare Saddles, Bridles and Holsters, and as fast as they were
made, this Informant says, they were conveyed to secret Places under Ground:
And farther this Informant says, That he was at the House of one Esquire Tildesley
at a Place called the Lodge, in Lancashire near to a Town called Preston, where
he saw many Commissions which came from King James out of Ireland, which said
Commissions were to raise two Regiments of Horse and three of Foot, which
Regiments were to be at an hours warning when King James sent any Assistance
out of Ireland into England, or when King William should go into Scotland, one
of which Regiments of Horse was to be Commanded by the young Lord Molyneux,
another Regiment of Horse was to be Commanded by Esquire Townley of Townley in
Lancashire aforesaid, one other Regiment of Foot, was to be Commanded by Mr.
Standish of Standish Hall in Lancashire aforesaid, and the other Regiment of
Foot was to be Commanded by Sir James Pool of Pool Hall within six Miles of
West-Chester: And this Informant farther says, that Mr. Standish sent one
Lieut. Burke from his House with Letters to King James into Ireland, who gave
the said Lieut. Burke forty Guinea's, which this Informant saw delivered to the
said Lieut, Burke, which said Letters were sent immediately after the Receipt
of the said Commissions from Ireland. And farther this Informant says, he was
sent by the Lord Molyneux with a Letter to my Lord I**t of I**t-Hall aforesaid,
and also he was sent with several other Letters from Place to Place to several
other Gentlemen, the Contents of which Letters this Informant believes, was to
be in a Readiness for the rising aforesaid, and they were to repair to the
Castle of Liverpool, which they did conceive might easily be surpised, where
were many Barrels of Gun Powder and Arms, that so thereby they might be
furnished with Ammunition and Arms; and further this Informant says, that he
was sent now and then a Foot, and then a Horseback from one Gentleman to
another, who were Confederates, and was kindly received by all with Plenty of
Provisions and Money; and further this Informant says, he knew several other
Persons sent upon the same-occasion; and further this Informant says, that he
himself does know Irish Soldiers to the Number of five Hundred, now lying in
Lancashire, which lie to be ready at an hours warning, if there should be any
Insurrection to assist King James. And this Informant says, Mr. Thomas Tatlock
of Symons-Wood, near the Parish of Sefton in Lancashire, did for near a Month
together, harbor about three Score Irish Men, who had served King James, and
were then listed under other Gentlemen to serve King James again, and that Arms
and Furniture for them-were hid in that Wood.

He further says, that Mr. Molyneux of Morbrow, did harbor about twenty Irish
Men for the Service of King James, and that Arms, Saddles, Bridles and Holsters
for them were concealed in a Cellar under a Tower at the Entry of the House at
Mr. Blundell of Inch in the Parish of Sefton. That John Holland of Prescot and
his Partner made Saddles, Bridles and Holsters for them, and was privy to the
Design, and that a Sadler in Legh was employed by the Popish Gentlemen for that
Service. That all the Officers and Soldiers were to be ready at the Time they
should have Notice from King James from Ireland. That Arms, Saddles, Bridles,
Holsters, etc. were also hid in Cellars and under Ground, in the Parish of
Prescot and Parish of Legh and other Parishes, by Gentlemen and the Sadlers
that live there.

J. Kelly.
Taken and Sworn this 27. Febr. before us whose Names are here under Written.
Thomas Yarnold Mayor of Evesham, Bellemont, James Rushout, William Bromley,
Edmund Letchmore, Richard Dodswell.


Mr. William Wybrants Information.
ABOUT the Time when the Lancashire Gentlemen were brought Prisoners to Town, I
met Mr. Taffe, I told him I met Capt. Cottingham, who hoped that you were not
concerned in the Plot, especially against Mr. Legh of Lime; for he heard he was
a very honest Gentleman, after which Mr. Taffe pressed me two or three Times to
speak to Capt. Cottingham, if he could bring him acquainted with any Friend of
Mr. Legh of Limes, some time after I met him in the Temple, where he told me he
was mightily disgusted, for that Mr. Baker and Mr. Smith who was then walking
in the Temple, did use him barbarously, for they would not give him any Money,
not so much as would pay his Horse-hire into the Country, but he would be even
with them and spoil the Plot, and several Words to that effect, I asked him to
be Ingenious with me, and tell me whether he was concerned in the Plot, for I
heard it would come to nothing. He told me he was no Evidence nor knew any
thing of the Plot: But he knew there were very good Evidence, and enough to
hang them all; and immediately afterward he asked me whether I could help him
to a Friend of Mr. Legh of Lime; for he was in the Tower, and there was no
getting to speak to him, but if he could get to speak to a particular Friend of
his, he could make his Fortime, and get a good Sum of Money by it, for he could
put them in a way to save their Lives: I asked him how could that be, when just
before he told me the Evidence was Good, and enough to hang them all; he
answered that was no Matter, for he could contrive a way: But when he found I
was not inclinable, he said, now I think on it, he would not be concerned in
it, for it would look ill for him to be concerned against the Government, who
had appeared so much for it.

William Wybrant.
Sworn before the Houses of Lords and Commons when the Plot was examined there.
I can also aver, that when I was concerned as one of the Commissioners, for the
forfeited Estates in several Counties of Ireland, he on Oath gave in his Name
to be John Taffe; but since going into Ireland, and making Enquiry after him;
there are several Hundreds that will make Affidavit, that his Name is Thomas O
Mullen.

William Wybrand.



A Letter from Three of Their Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the County of
Lancaster, Dated at Middleton, April 9. 1690, and directed to a Minister of
State.
My LORD,
WE have received your Lordships of the Fifth Instant, and make bold to
acquaint you that at the same time that we sent out our Warrants for Byra^,
Burton, Boardman and Ellam, (who are now in Lancaster Castle) we did also send
our Warrants for apprehending of Mr. Molyneux, Mr. Standish, young Townly, John
Holland, Edward his Partner, and Mr. Blundel of Ince, for High Treason, and
ordered them to be carried to Lancaster Castle, but none of the last mentioned
Persons can as yet be apprehended, as we are informed, though searched for, and
will still be searched for with what diligence we can; we indeed much question
the apprehending most of them, they having been searched for by the Militia for
mear Twelve Months past, and have notwithstanding so concealed themselves in
this County or elsewhere, that they could never yet be apprehended. We have
also sent out our Warrants for many of the Persons mentioned in Kelly's
Information for High Treason, which are judged by us to be dangerous Papists;
and also against others to bind them to the Assizes, who are not positively
charged with High Treason in the Examinations, and upon apprehending any of the
Great Ones, We shall impart the same to your Lordship, and in all things
demonstrate our willingness to be Serviceable to Their Majesty's and their
Government to our Power; and to approve our Selves,

Middleton, Apr. 9th. 1690. My Lord, Your Lordships most Faithful and Obedient
Servants, Ralph Ashton. Jos. Horton. Jos. Yates.


A Letter from May Melfort.
to Clinch Crosby.
, Dated March 30. 1694, and should have been inserted in the Body of the
History after Crosby's Scheme for the Invasion, Page 97. at the End of the
first Paragraph.
MR. Crosby, having now Collected the Sentiments of the whole Party, is, by the
late King James's Order commanded to hasten into France with the Scheme before
recited, as appears by the following Letter from the Lord Melfort, Dated March
30. 1694.

SIR,
The Affair you went about being near done, it is Mr. Kemp 's K. James.
positive Order, that you return immediately hither, that he may consider what
further will be fit for him to do upon such Information as you can give him,
which he desires may be as full as you can get them. I shall be glad to see
you: And am,

SIR. Your most Affectionate Servant, Ja. May.

A Letter to Mr. Crothy while he was a Prisoner in Newgate, directed to Mr.
Hutchinson in Bishops Gate-Street London.
IT IS impossible to express the great (...) are in here upon the Notice of your
Person and your Papers falling into the Hands of our Enemies. Mr. Vandeleur
King James and his Queen.
and Mrs. Kemp are so sensibly afflicted with it, they refuse all Comfort, and
almost despair of Success in any Attempt for the Future, Elizabeth Francklin
French Court.
reads our Discontents in our Faces, though we don't declare our. Misfortunes
by our Words, for fear they should quite desert us, seeing we are betrayed in
all our Projects: And truly such a Blow was never given to our Manufactory as
this, that at once has discovered the Secrets of our Trade and confined the
best of all our Factors. We have now but one Project more left, and if that
miscarry also, we must give up our Hopes of supplanting the Interlopers, and
wait with Patience till they ruin themselves by dividing their Interests and
their Stock^, in setting up for themselves singly, as they have once done
already. All Care here shall be taken to supply your Wants, and our Friends
with you, must use all endeavors to delay your Audit, for in that particular
lie our Hopes and your Safety, God Almighty Comfort you, and grant the hearty
Wishes of

SIR, your, etc. J. M.
Dated August 12. 1694. and directed to Mr. Clynch under Mr. Hutchinsons Cover.
Having now I hope sufficiently Proved what I promised in the Preface, and
showed my Vouchers for all I have related in the Body of the History: I thought
fit before I take my leave of the Reader, to acquaint him: That if this
Undertaking gives Satisfaction to the Public, another Volum of the most secret
Intreagues and Letters of Correspondence between our English Jacobites and
those at St. Germains, and other Places, shall speedily be Printed and put into
his Hands, as the best Answer (I could think of) to the Argument against a
standing-Army.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 4. Lin. 11. instead of preswasions read persuasions p. 64. the last lin.
for come r. came One of Mr. Crosby's Letters which should have been inserted at
the bottom of page 97. being omitted by the Printer is put in the last Page of
the Appendix. Page 119. in the Margent for depition r. deposition. P. 145. l.
11. after more r. to. p. 207. l. 18, for next r. Rest. In the Appendix, p. 225.
last line for Cyre r. Air. P. 254. l. 15. for Mneoy read Memory. P. 255. last
lin. after he r. the.


