THE Breach Repaired in God's Worship: OR, Singing of PSALMS, HYMNS, and
Spiritual Songs, proved to be an Holy Ordinance of JESUS CHRIST. With an Answer
to all Objections.

AS ALSO, An Examination of Mr. ISAAC MARLOW'S two Papers, one called, A
Discourse against Singing, etc. the other An Appendix. Wherein his Arguments
and Cavils are detected and refuted.

BY BENJAMIN KEACH, Preacher of God's Word, and Pastor of the Church of Christ
meeting on Horselydown, Southwark.

Job 6. 25. How forcible are right words! but what does your arguing reprove?

Isa. 52. 8. Thy Watchmen shall lift up the Voice, with the Voice together
shall they sing.

London, Printed for the Author, and sold by John Hancock in Castle-Alley on
the West side of the Royal Exchange, and by the Author at his House near
Horselydown in Southwark. 16^^.

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY TO ALL THE Baptized Congregations In England and Wales,
Who are in God the Father, and in our Lord Jesus Christ, Grace, Mercy and Peace
be multiplied. Particularly to the Church of Christ, meeting on Horslydown.
Holy and Beloved,
IT cannot but rejoice my Soul, when I consider of the exceeding Grace and
abounding Goodness of the Holy God toward you his poor and despised Church and
People, in respect of that clear Discovery he has given you of most of the
glorious Truths of the Gospel, and of the true Apostolical Faith and Practice
thereof. You have not made Men, General Councils, nor Synods, your Rule, but
God's Holy W^^d: your Constitution, Faith, and Discipline, is directly
according to the Primitive Pattern; God has made you (in a most eminent
manner) to be the Builders of the old Wastes, and Raisers up of the former
Desolations, and Repairers of the waste Cities, the Desolations of many
Generations, Isa. 61. 4.

You have labored to sever the Gold from the Dross, and to build with proper
and fit Gospel-Meterials, viz. Spiritual and L^^^ing Stones, well hewed and
squared by the Hammer of God's Word and Spirit, and will not take one Stone of
Babylon for a Corner; you will go forth (as far as you have received Light) by
the Footsteps of the Flock, and feed your Kids beside the Shepherds Tents,
Cant. 1. 8.

And God of a small People has graciously made you a Multitude; you have been
helped, and so born up by everlasting Arms, that you have held fast your Holy
Profession in the Day of Trial, and exposed all that you have had in the World
to spoil and loss, for the sake of Jesus Christ, when many turned their Backs,
and exposed the Holy Name of God to Reproach; and to our further Joy, many of
you have of late, more especially in your General Assemblies, showed your great
Zeal for the Name of God, and Care of his Church, in a more than usual manner;
and particularly you have endeavored to revive our hopes, for the continuation
of a faithful and laborious Ministry for the time to come, by striving to
promote such Learning and Studies as God's Word directs to; and not require
(like Israel's Taskmasters) poor Ministers, as I may so say, to make Brick and
allow them no Straw; but you do now more fully see that Gospel Ministers ought
to have a Gospel-Maintenance, even such as God has ordained; that so they
might not be entangled with the Affairs of th^^ Life, but wholly give
themselves up to that great Work they are called to. Go on and prosper, Holy
and Beloved, Let not your Hands be weak, nor Satan obstruct or hinder so
hopeful a Beginning; let it appear you do love Jesus Christ more than Father or
Mother, more than Son or Daughter; and labor to reform what is amiss as to
those great Evils that abound too much in the Churches of the Saints, tho I
hope not so much amongst you as among some others, particularly in respect of
Pride and Covetousness, or that base Worldly and Earthly Spirit that is the
Bane of Religion, and makes the Lor'd People of so ill a savor in the World;
let your Lives declare whose you are, and to what Country you belong; and as
you have a good Doctrine, so labor for a suitable Conversation; and then,
Brethren, what can or will be wanting to make you complete in the whole Will of
(...)? Truly, according to my small Light, I know not, unless it be a
restoration of this lost and neglected Ordinance of Singing Psalms, Hymns and
Spiritual Songs, which I fear, and partly understand, some of you want light
in. I have therefore made bold to dedicate this small Treatise to you all,
hoping you will take it from me in good part, and well weigh what is here said,
before you judge and condemn it for an Error.

I am afraid of some old Prejudice some of you have taken against this Sacred
Truth of the Gospel (for so I must call it); you cannot think you have as yet
come to a full attainment, or are already perfect in Knowledge. Besides, I hear
you generally own Singing of Psalms, etc. an Ordinance of God; and indeed I
cannot see how any, who own the Bible and New Tastament of Christ to be their
Rule, can deny it. Why then, consider whether you have this Ordinance at all,
or can be said to sing in any proper Sense: Certainly many of you are wholly
without it, as will I hope appear fully, if you read this Treatise quite
through impartially. Can ^t be thought the Churches should be enjoined by the
Holy Ghost to sing Psalms and Hymns, and yet there is no coming at the practice
of it^ without an extraordinary Spirit, or miraculous Gifts?

I have been provoked by our Brother, who wrote against Singing, to set Pen to
Paper, and not only by him and his Book, but I have been induced by Multitudes,
for several Months, to give him an Answer, so that I hope you will not be
offended with me in what I have done. I have much Peace in the doing of it; and
truly, Brethren, the loss of this Ordinance does, I am afraid, more obstruct
the increase of our Churches than many are aware of. What a Multitude are
convinced of Christ's true Baptism, and yet refuse to have Communion with our
Churches when baptized, because they say, if they should, they must lose this
Ordinance of ^inging, which they have an equal Esteem ^or: And how does it open
the Mouths of ^ur Godly Brethren of other Persuasions, ^o speak against us, for
being so zealous for ^ne Gospel-Ordinance, and so careless about another, that
very few Christians, who have ^ad the greatest Light, Zeal and Piety in any Age
of the Church, ever doubted of? (...) grieves me to think there should be a
^reach made in God's Worship among you, ^o whom God has given so much Light in
other Cases. And, O that what is here said, might through the Blessing of God
prove a Means to repair it.

In a Word, Singing is enjoined; Some thing it is: If we have it not (but it is
with ^ou) we would willingly know what your Singing is, or what you call
Singing: For we do say and testify, we believe you are wholly without Singing
in any proper Sense at all. The Lord give us Moderation; don't let us be bitter
one against another.

I shall beg a part in your Prayers, and entreat you to look over what Weakness
you may see in this small Tract, for I am, you know, but a Babe in Christ's
School, and know but in part.

And now to you, my Beloved Brethren and Sisters, (who meet on Horselydown)
whom I hope I may say are my Joy and my Crown, whose Souls are most dear to me,
and whom I can say I truly love and long after; it rejoices my Spirit to see
how generally you are enlightened into this Gospel-Duty; but it is no small grief
to me to see (since the Church in such a solemn manner agreed to sing the
Praises of God on the Lord's Day) to find some of you so much offended; I am
persuaded it is for want of Consideration, for you have no new thing brought in
among you. Has not the Church sung at breaking of Bread always for 16 or 18
Years last past, and could not, nor would omit it in the time of the late
Persecution? And have not many of the honest Hearers (who have stayed to see
that Holy Administration) sung with you, at that time, and yet none of you ever
signified the least trouble? And have we not for this 12 or 14 Years sung in
mixed Assemblies, on Days of Thanksgiving, and never any offended at it, as ever
I heard? What is done more now? it is only practiced oftener: and sure if it be
God's Ordinance, the often practicing of it, by such who find their Hearts draw
out so to do, cannot be sinful.

And on that Solemn Day, when the Church would have it put up, to see (...) the
Members stood affected about Singing, almost every ones Hand was up for it, or
to give Liberty to the Church at such times to sing. And when put up in the
Negative, but about 5 or 6 at most (as I remember) were against it. Did any one
of you, at that time say, if we did proceed to sing at such times, you could
not have Communion with us? which if you had, I perceive the Church, nay every
one of us who had born our Burden for many Years, would have born it a little
longer? Besides, did not the Church agree to sing only after Sermon, and when
Prayer was ended? And if those few Brethren and Sisters who were not satisfied,
could not stay whilst we sung, they might freely go forth, and we would not be
offended with them; so far was the Church, or my self, from imposing on the
Consciences of any. But is it not hard that some of us should so long be laid
under a Burden, when the Church generally was against Singing at that time, and
you cannot bear it now it is come to be your Lot? I am afraid the noise of
these things are misrepresented abroad, and therefore I thought it might not be
amiss to rectify Mistakes in you, or any other Brethren. The matter of
Difference that is at present between the Church and some few of our dear and
beloved Brethren and Sisters, is not about Singing it self, nor singing with
others, for that has been all along the practice of the Church for many Years
(as before I hinted) but only about singing on the Lords Day, unless it be one
Member, except the Judgments of any other are lately changed.

But my Brethren will, I hope, seriously consider of the Matter, and labor
after that Christian Love, Tenderness and Forbearance the Gospel calls for. We
are exhorted to bear one another Burdens, and so to fulfill the Law of Christ.
For the Lord's sake let us not fall out by the way, and lay things grievous on
one another Spirits; for we are not Lords over one another Faith, but Helpers
of each others Joy. O my Brethren, pray let us all watch against Satan, and
strive to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace. I must confess,
diverse of you did much desire me to answer Mr. Marlow's Book before this time,
but I hope you will excuse my neglect, for some of you know the occasion of it;
^tis done now, and in the fear of God recommended to your perusal. And O that
the Lord would be pleased to bless it to your Satisfaction, then shall I have
cause to praise the Lord that I undertook the Work. I can ^^y you lie near my
Heart, and I would do any thing I am capable of to promote Truth and Peace
amongst our selves, and in all the Churches of Christ.

If any of you should say, How can we be satisfied to have Communion with the
Church, when we believe it is an Innovation? (that is a hard word.) Ar^ you
Infallible? Is there not ground for you to fear you are mistaken, or to think
in the least it is a doubtful case, since so much is to be said for it, and has
been so generally received from the beginning by most enlightened Saints, and
you your selves with the Church for so long a time been in the Practice of ^t
at other times?

Besides, can you find any ground from God's Word, that will warrant you to
separate your selves from the Church upon this account? and also may not the
same or like Scruple rise in our Spirits against having Communion with you, who
we be^ieve lie short of a plain Gospel-Ordinance, and so, through want of
light, diminish from God's Word, as you say we add thereto by doing of it? But
far be it from us to have a thought to act that way toward any of you.
Moreover, will not such a practice, of a Separation from the Church upon this
account, justify other Godly Christians, who are Members of such Churches who
do not sing, (that are convinced as well as we it is their Duty) to separate
from those Congregations, to join with such Churches as are in this practice?
Doubtless that Door that will let you out of this Church, will let others out
of those Churches, (I mentioned before) and there are not a few such in this
City. There is one thing I think good to note here, to prevent any mistake,
that tho I call Preaching a moral Duty, yet to preach the Gospel only,
appertains to such whom God particularly has gifted for that Work, and who
have a lawful call to it.

I shall conclude with the words of the Holy Apostle, Finally, Brethren,
farewell: be Perfect, be of good Comfort be of one Mind, live in Love and Peace,
and the God of Love and Peace shall be with you. 2 Cor. 13. 11.

Which is the Prayer of him Who is, Your unworthy Brother, fellow Servant, and
poor Labourer in God's Harvest, B. Keach.
From my House near Horselydown, Southwark, April 3d 1691.
The Contents of the chief Things contained in the ensuing Treatise.
WHat it is to sing, Page 5. That there can be no proper Singing without the
Voice, page 6. It Is not simple Heart-joy, or inward rejoicing without (...)
Voice, p. 7. A Metaphorical Singing mentioned in Scripture, p. 7. No mental
Singing, as there is no mental praying, p. 12. The Essence of Singing no more
in the Heart or Spirit, (...) the Essence of Preaching, etc. p. 14. Singing is
a musical melodious Modulation, or timing of (...) Voice, p. 15. It Is not
praising of God in Prayer, p. 16. Wherein Singing and other praisings of God
differ, p. 16, 17. Several distinct Noises of the Tongue, or bodily Organ, 19,
20. They that (...) not with the Voice, sing not at all, p. 21. Singing the
Praises of God, proved our Duty from the Anti^^^ of that Practice, of the
Angels singing at God's bringing (...) the first visible Creation. The Angels
sung also at the ^^nging in the second Creation, or Work of Redemption, 22, 23,
24. Singing an Act of the Voice, and also an Act of God's ^^rship, p. 24. The
Devil a great Enemy to the singing of God's Praise. (...) sing to Christ, p.
25, 26. An Argument to prove Singing part of God's Worship, p. 27. Singing a
Moral Duty, proved by four Demonstrations, ^ 30, to p. 40. An Argument to prove
it our Duty to sing Praise to God, ^^ken from its being a part of Natural
Religion, p. 41. Singing our Duty, from the Practice of God's People be^re the
Law, under the Law, and under the Gospel, p. 41, (...) p. 45. Singing of
Psalms, etc. our Duty, proved from Scripture-Precepts, p. 45, to p. ^2. Singing
under the Law with Instruments of Music typical, p. 53. Singing the Praises of
God proved to be our Duty, because instituted under the Gospel, and enjoined on
the Churches, p. 54, to p. 56. An Argument from thence, p. 59. Obj. We cannot
tell how to come at Singing, answered, p. 85. Singing God's Praises, etc.
confirmed by a Miracle, as other Gospel Ordinances were, p. 60. Obj. Singing
was done by an extraordinary Gift, therefore we must not sing now; answered, p.
62, 146, 147. The direful Consequents of such an Assertion, p. 63. An Argument
drawn from the extraordinary Gift in the Apostolical Church, in bringing in a
Psalm, etc. p. 64, 65. Proving Singing of Psalms our Duty, from the Practice of
the Churches next after the Apostles Times, p. 65, 66, 67. Showing the form or
manner of singing, and that it ought to be with united Voices, p. 70, 71, 72.
Singing together with united Voices, proved from the Practice of the Saints
under the Old Testament, p. 74, 75. Proving Singing together in public Worship
our Duty, from Scripture-Prophecies that relate to Gospel-days, p. 75, 76, 77,
78, 79, 80. Proving it is our Duty to sing God's Praises with united Voices,
from the great Noise singing in the Scripture is said to make, p. 83. Four
Sylogistical Arguments to prove singing together with united Voices, the true
manner of performance of this Duty, p. 85, 86, 87, 89. Showing what Matter it
is we should sing; that the Matter in general must be the Word of Christ. What
is meant by Psalms, Hymns, and spiritual Songs, p. 90. Ephesians. 5. 19. Col. 3.
16. distinctly opened, p. 91, 92, 93, 94. Other Hymns may be sung besides
David's Psalms, p. 95, 96, 97, 98. and p. 154, 160, 161. Showing who ought to
sing God's Praises, and that the whole Church ought so to do, p. 10^. Obj. What
ground to sing before or after Sermon, Answered, page 102. Obj. What ground for
the Church to sing with Unbelievers, Answered, p. 105, 106, 107, 108, 120. Mr.
Marlow's Book exami^^ and answered, p. 111. No Apostasy, or going back to sing
God's Praises, p. 112. Speaking and Admonishing one another in Psalms, etc.
what, plainly opened, p. 113, 114. The speaking to our selves in Psalms, Ephesians.
5. 19. and Admonishing one another in Psalms, mean^ one and the same thing, p.
114, 115. Paul speaks not to Ministers in those words, but to the whole Church,
p. 117, 118. The folly of Mr. Marlow laid open, about what be speaks of the
Essence of Singing, p. 122. His Notion about the Essence of Singing, etc. tends
to destroy all External Duties and Ordinances, p. 123, 124. It confirm
Quakerism, and their Silent Meetings, p. 125, 126. Obj. No Institution for
Singing till David's Time, Answered, p. 127, 128. Obj. Singing of David's
Psalms only suited, to Levitical Ceremonies and Temple Worship, answered, p.
129, 130. Objections about the Matter of David's Psalms, Answered, p. 131. Mr.
Marlow's Objections and Cavils against precomposed Hymns, Answered, p. 134,
135. Like Rule for precomposed Spiritual Hymns out of God's Word, as for
precomposed Sermons, largely proved, p. 136, 137. Obj. Women must not speak in
the Church, therefore must not sing in the Church, Answered, p. 139, 140, 141.
Obj. 1 Cor. 14. 20, to 34. about an extraordinary Gift to sing, Answered, p.
142, 143, 144. What meant by Winter, and time of the singing of Birds, Cant. 2.
opened, p. 147, 148. Obj. Singing in the Temple by an Extraordinary Gift,
Answered, p. 146, 147. Mr. Marlow's Reply to Isa. 52. 8. about the Watch^^^
singing together, Answered, p. 149, 150. The Antitype of Solomon's Temple, not
the Church in the 1000 Years Reign, p. 150. Mr. Marlow's Reply to Christ's
singing an Hymn with ^is Disciples, p. 151. His Objections from Acts 4. 24.
Answered. Dr. Du-Veil's sense of the Greek word Hymnos, p. 151. Mr. Marlow's
Reply to Paul and Silas's singing, Answered, p. 153. Obj. Moses's Song by
Inspiration, Answered, p. 160. Obj. Prayer under the Law, differs from Prayer
under the Gospel, and so singing differs also. There were Shadows and Legal
Rites used in them then, largely Answered, p. 162, 163. Jewish Temple-Worship,
Jewish Day of Worship, Jewish M^sick in Worship, the Levites Maintenance, all
Legal Rites and Shadows, yet to meet together to worship God; a time of
Worship; a Maintenance for Gospel Ministers, and Singing, all moral and
perpetual Duties. p. 165, 166, 167, 168. Obj. A greater Measure of the Spirit
required to sing than to pray, answered p. 170, 171. Obj. None must sing but
such who are Merry, or have an extraordinary cause so to do, Answered, p. 172.
Obj. No Command to sing in Public Worship, again answered, p. 173. As much
Rule to sing before and after Sermons, as to pray at those times, proved, p.
173. The Cause of the Decays in Churches, what, p. 176. Obj. Precomposed Forms
Carnal, Answered, p. 177. As much ground to object against precomposed Sermons,
p. 179. Obj. David's Psalms, the Original not in Meter, Answered, p. 180. The
dangerousness of Mr. Marlow's Cavils about the Form and Manner of performing
Ordinances, opened, p. 181, 182. Singing, a piece of Art, Answered, p. 103.
Obj. The Gift for Singing not continued in the Church, Answered, p. 185. Mr.
Marlow's unchristian Conclusion of his Book, answered, with Reflections
thereupon. p. 186, 187. Singing God's Praises, an Universal Duty, done by all
sorts of Men at all times, in Affliction, and at Martyrdom, p. 189, 190. The
Use and excellent Profit of singing God's Praises, p. 190, 191, 192.
The Contents of our Answer to Mr. Marlow's Appendix.
OTher ways to praise God, than by singing of his Praises, yet that is one way
notwithstanding, page 16. Dr. Owen is cited by Mr. Marlow to no purpose for his
Cause, p. 17. The direct and primary signification of Hymnos, is to sing, or
they sung, p. 18, 19, 20. Obj. Singing in the Primitive Days, was by a special
Gift, Answered again, page 21, 25, 26, 27. Mr. Marlow has a bad Cause to plead,
appears by the Mediums he uses, showed in five things, p. 22, 23, 24. Inward
Joy, Peace, etc. not the Fruit of the special Gifts, but of the Graces of the
Spirit, p. 25, 26. Fillings of the Spirit necessary for Saints in discharge of
all Duties, p. 29. Mr. Marlow's Arguing dangerous, proved by one Argument, p.
31. Obj. Women must not sing in the Church, because they must not speak in the
Church, again answered, p. 32, 33, 34, 35. Women may speak several ways in the
Church, and sing too, p. 33. Not for women to speak in the Church, it is not to
usurp Authority over the Man. Singing not Teaching, tho a Teaching in it, p.
34. Women allowed to prophess in the Church, p. 35. What Teaching is in
Singing. How all may be said to teach, and yet all Hearers too p. 37, 38. Mr.
Marlow confounds Singing and Preaching together one while, and Prayer and
Singing at another, p. 38. Mr. Marlow's Singing in the 1000 Years Reign
examined. And what Precepts the Saints shall have to sing then, that do not
empower us to sing now? p. 38, 39. Every word of a Sermon may be premeditated
by the Spirit, and yet be Spiritual, and so may Hymns too, p. 40. What Mr.
Marlow says may lay Men under Temptation not to pray at all for want of a Gift,
p. 41, 42. If we must not sing who have not a full assurance of God's Love, we
must not also rejoice in God, p. 42, 43. We are come to such a Perfection of
Divine Worship, as to know what God's Ordinances are, p. 45. One Note more
worth observing on Ephesians. 5. 19. Col. 3. 16. p. 44. Obj. How shall we sing the
Lord's Song in a strange Land, answered, p. 45, 46. Singing a Moral Duty, and
more acceptable to God than Sacrifice, or Mosaical Rites, p. 44, 45. The
genuine and proper Signification of the word Hymnos, and Mr. M's Citation of
Dr. Owen, examined by another Hand, p. 48. Other Authors upon that Greek word
examined, and his Mistakes about it detected, p. 49, 50. to the end.
Reader, before you read, you are desired to correct these Faults that have
escaped the Press.
PAge 27. last line, blot out, as the Hebrew word signifies. P. 33. l. 22. for
in, r. to P. 64. l. 19. for with Miracles, Gifts, r. miraculous Gifts.

Appendix, Page 19. lin. 32. r. Is the Greek word there, he hymned?

The Introduction.
IT cannot but be lamented to see what Temptations many Men have been laid
under, by the great Enemy of Truth, in every Age of the World, in their fierce
opposition against one or another blessed Ordinance and Institution of Jesus
Christ; and this not only by bad Men, but also by Men fearing God: All which,
no doubt, arises, either from their Ignorance, or else from that Prejudice
there is in their Hearts against it; from a fond Conceit that it cannot be a
Truth of Christ, because they never looked upon it so to be, (nor some wiser
than they); nor are they willing to believe it to be a Truth, since some (who
have not such Light and Knowledge in other blessed Truths) do practice it: as
if, because some Men, who hold and maintain some gross Errors and Falsities,
can hold and practice no Truths at all; whereas it is evident, the Church of
Rome, which is Mystical Babylon, are sound in the Doctrine of the Trinity, as
far as I can gather, and possibly in some other Points also: For they believe
the Resurrection of the Body, and the Eternal Judgment, and that Christ died
without the Gate of Jerusalem: but I am afraid some Men have a Fancy they know
all the whole Mind of Christ, and that they need not be taught any other
Truths, than those which they have received: notwithstanding cannot but know,
the Church is but newly come out of the Wilderness, or Popish Darkness; and not
so fully neither, as to be as clear as the Sun, as in due time she shall.

Reformation, it is evident, is a hard and ^^^ficult Work, and ever was; it is no
easy th^^g to restore lost Ordinances, I mean, such as have for many Years been
neglected, and strangely corrupted, through that Antichristian Darkness that
has for so many Ages and Generations overspread the Earth, which is manifest
(...) respect of Baptism, and Imposition of Hands upon Baptized Believers (as
such.) One would even stand and wonder to see how many godly, learned, and good
Men, should be so dark as to maintain, and that resolutely too, that corrupt
Practice of Pedo-Baptism, (or rather Rantism) considering it has not the least
footing in the Word of God, but is so directly contrary to the Nature and
Constitution of a Gospel Church, and Administration of
New-Testament-Ordinances. But let not those of our own Persuasion much longer
wonder at this, since some of them seem as blind and dark in another Blessed
Truth, and Sacred Ordinance of the ever glorious God, that hardly was ever
opposed as by them; but has been generally owned in every Age of the Church,
and that by the most godly and enlightened Christians from the beginning of the
World till of late days; and not now neither, but by some People of the
Baptized Way, and others who are against all Ordinances. I must confess no Man
(through the Grace of God) can be better satisfied touching the Truth of
Baptism, as practiced by my Brethren, than I am, and of the true Order and
Constitution of our Churches, and soundness of their Faith in all the
Fundamentals of Religion; yet do I not think we have arrived to such a
perfection of Knowledge of all practical Truths, that we need not enquire after
any thing which we may not yet have understan^ing in.

I must confess, (as one observes) that the great Design of Satan is, and
always was, to put a Cheat upon God's People, as well as to hold the World in
Blindness and Wickedness; by the one (says he) Satan holds Men in a state of
Impenitency, and by the other he deludes Christians to neglect their Duties,
and to obstruct their own Comfort and Privilege. He acts as well in the shape
of an Angel of Light, as of a Prince of Darkness, stirring up vain Scruples and
Objections, especially in the Minds of weak Christians, and filthy Imaginations
in those who have not yet turned to God.

I must confess, I my self, when first God enlightened me into his Truth, was an
opposer of this Sacred Ordinance; but it was not for want of Ignorance, and
partly through Prejudice, perhaps to such who I esteem, and even looked upon
since that time, a corrupt People, and false in their Church-Constitution, and
polluted with humane Innovation, or Inventions of Men: the abuse of an
Ordinance is subject to raise Men's Spirits to a dislike of the thing it self.

But, blessed be God, I have, for near twenty Years last past, been fully
convinced of the Truth of the Ordinance I now contend for, and have an equal
esteem for it, (through Grace) as I have for any other Truth, knowing every
Word of God is pure; and have found no little comfort in the practice of it,
publicly in the Church, and in private also.

And that all may see upon what Authority we have received, and do practice
this Ordinance of singing of Psalms, and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, I have
wrote this Treatise; and do hope, with the Blessing of God, it may tend to
establish such who own it to be an Ordinance of Christ, and convince others,
who either oppose it, or through want of Light, live in the neglect of it.

Singing of Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, an Holy Ordinance of Jesus
Christ.
CHAP. I.
Wherein it is showed, what Singing is, or what it is to sing, or what the Word
does import.
IT may seem strange to some wise and learned Men, that I begin here; possibly
they will say, there is no need to speak a word about this, for all the World
are agreed in the Case; all know what it is to sing, as well as they know what
it is to speak. Though this be true, yet I find a necessity to open this Act of
the Bodily Organ, as will appear by what follows; for some Men, it seems, are
so confounded in their Thoughts, that they do not know what Singing is, but
think there may be a Singing without the Tongue, taking the word [Melody in the
Heart] to be all the Singing the Holy Ghost exhorts to in the New Testament;
and so would have us believe there is a mental Singing, as well as mental
Praying; nay, which is worse, would wholly exclude all other Singing besides
that, which is very hard; if they should do so by Prayer, it would strangely
amuse all good People, viz. that we must have nothing but Heart-Prayer, without
a Voice. Others say, that one Person may be the Mouth in Singing, as well as in
Praying; and so a multitude may be said to sing with him, though there is none
sings but that single Man, as in Prayer. A third sort there be, I find, who
conclude Singing is wholly comprehended in the Ordinance of Prayer, and from
hence please themselves that they do sing, when in Prayer they give Thanks to
God, or praise God. But very remarkable it is to see how these Men are
confounded by this last Assertion, in respect of one Objection they bring
against Singing.

Object. What will you sing your Prayers? you may as well go to Common Prayer,
etc.

Thus I have heard one or two worthy Men speak, not long since: Why, truly
Brethren, it appears you do sing your Prayers, nay, and that always too when
you pray; for I am persuaded you never pray to God for what you want, but you
see cause to praise him for what you have received. All that ever wrote of
Prayer, that I have met with, do jointly agree, that praising of God, or giving
of Thanks, is one part or branch of Prayer, and that part, it appears in your
opinion, you sing. And if this be so, pray allow us to sing some Prayers too,
and do not charge us with Common Prayer, unless David's Psalms be a
Common Prayer Book: And then it will appear that Common Prayer is of Divine
Institution; nay, and enjoined on the Churches too in the New Testament; for we
know no Psalms, I mean called so in God's Word, but the Book of Psalms, or
Psalms of David.

Now these things being considered, I shall show you what it is to sing, and so
remove these Cavils and Mistakes about it.

I shall not in this Chapter show you what it is to sing with the Spirit, or
with Grace in the Heart, that respects the right performance of ^inging, but
what it is to sing in our common Acceptance, and in Scripture too.

First, It may not be unnecessary to consider of those several distinct and
internal Acts of the Mind and Heart of a Man.

Secondly, Of those external Acts of the Tongue of a Man.

1. To think, muse, or meditate, is an inter^al Act of the Mind, wherein the
Excellency of the Soul is discovered unto a Man's own ^elf; as David says, I
am fearfully and wonderfully made, and that my Soul knows right-well, Psalm.
139. 14. The Soul has its diverse Passions, as Fear, Anger, etc. there lie the
Desires; Sense of Want or Fullness; it is the Seat of Joy and Sorrow. But yet
nevertheless there are several Acts that the Soul cannot do without the bodily
Organ; it is capable of praying, or to join wi^^ others in Prayer, without the
Tongue; because there are the Desires (as I said before) an^ God hears and
knows the Groans, Sighs, an^ earnest Desires of the Soul, as well as if the^
were expressed by words, yet ought the Tongu^ to be employed in that Service
notwithstanding and not only for the sake of others who are (...) join in with
them in those servent breathings (...) Man may put up to God, but it may be
expedient when a Man is alone verbally to express his Desires to the Lord, for
several reason^ which I shall not mention here, it being not (...) our present
business: Yet nevertheless the So^^ without the Tongue cannot preach God's Word
cannot dispute for it, etc. nor do many other things; neither can the Soul, I
say, be said (...) sing in a proper sense without the Tongu^ True, there is a
Metaphorical Singing spok^ of in the Scripture, so by a Metonymie the Tre^^ of
the Wood, and Mountains, and Fields (...) said to sing; and thus, in an
improper Sense the Heart may be said to sing, when it on^ rejoices in God. Many
proper Acts of Me^ are often in the Scripture ascribed to Veget^bles and Animal
Creatures, and many prop^^ Acts of Men are attributed to God.

Fire and Hail, Snow and Vapors, Mountains and all Hills, fruitful Trees and
Cedars, Beasts and all Cattle, creeping things, and flying Fowl are exhorted to
sing and praise God, Psalm. 148. 8, 9, 10. which all know they cannot truly and
in a proper sense be said to do.

It Is frequent (as Mr. Caryl observes) in Scripture to attribute Acts of Life
to Lifeless Creatures, and Acts of Reason to those which have no Sense; the
Earth is said to mourn, Tsa. 33. 9. the Trees of the Forest, as the Hills and
the Valleys, are said to rejoice, Isa. 65. 12. 13. the Birds praise God, says
he, by their singing, and the Stars by their shining. Caryl on Job, chap. 38. 7.

Now in like manner, if there be any such sort or kind of singing as these Men
plead for, viz. a mental singing, i. e. a Heart-singing without the Tongue,
mentioned in Scripture, (tho I must confess I know none) yet it could be no
more a proper singing, than the Blood of Abel, which is said to speak, is a
proper speaking: so that if they could show us in any place of God's Word,
where any Godly Man is said to sing, and yet his Voice was not heard, it would
signify nothing to their purpose in turning all singing unto Heart-Melody, or
inward rejoicing only, without the Tongue expressing of it musically, or in a
melodious manner; for this is just to destroy the Propriety of different
Actions and Things said to be done. As to the other Objection, take what Mr.
Sid^^^am, in his Treatise of Singing, says in Answer to this Objection, page
208.

Obj. But if one say ( says he) when one prays all may be said to pray, tho
they do but consent, it may be so in singing of Psalms, etc.

Answ. It is answered, says he, All Ordinances must be considered according to
their proper nature; some Ordinances are so to be administered, as that only one
at once can perform it, as public Prayer and Preaching, and yet there must be
a distinction even in these; my Silence in Prayer ought to be when I pray with
another, and yet I may be said to pray as well as he, which is the mouth of the
whole, because my Heart is with him in the same Petitions, and my Desires go
equally with him: but in Preaching, where Silence must be likewise from the
nature of the Ordinance, yet, tho I consent fully with the Matter, and agree in
all that is said with never so much Affection, yet I cannot be said to preach,
but only he that speaks preaches. So now as to Singing, there is a difference
likewise of another Consideration, if only one sing, none else can be said to
sing, tho they join with the Matter and agree to it in their Hearts; for it is
an outward Act, and terminated in the Person that performs it: And tho in my
silent Conjunction, I may readily praise God, yet I can in no sense be properly
said to sing with others, without I do use my Voice and bodily Organs as they
do. This Consideration, says he, may give light to Men that mind the nature
and distinction of Ordinances in their Administrations; that which is the
Confusion of other Ordinances, is the Beauty of this; for two to preach or pray
together at the same time and place, were the greatest Confusion imaginable;
but for an hundred to sing together, is most harmonious and pleasant, so far
from the breach of Order, that Harmony is most discovered by it. So far Mr.
Sidenham.

I hope our Brethren do not think there is Confusion in Heaven, where the
Heavenly Host with one Voice-celebrate the Praises of God by singing to him.

2. Further, to prove that Singing properly cannot be done without the Voice, it
is material to observe the Hebrew word (...) Psalm. 104. 12. where our
Dictionaries, as well as our Annotators on the Bible, show it signifies giving
a Voice, and such a Voice too, that is melodious in Odulation, or tuning the
Voice. And, says Reverend Dr. Roberts, To limit Singing only in the Heart, and
inward Melody of the Spirit, is utterly besides the Apostle's intent, and
contrary to the nature of Singing, and destructive to all Edification or
Advantage to others by Singing. Where do we read of singing in all the
Scripture without a Voice? How gross, says he, and ignorant a Contradiction in
the Adject, and absurd Nonsense is it to talk of singing in the Heart without a
Voice. Dr. Roberts's Key of the Bible, p. 177.

Moreover, Mr. Caryl, whose Learning and excellent Parts and Wisdom shines (tho
dead) through the World, positively affirms, That Singing is an Act of the
Voice, on Job 38. 7. So that it appears from hence, tho there is Heart-Prayer,
Mental-Prayer, and that may be said as properly to be Prayer, tho the Voice be
not heard (as in Hannah's Case) as that which is vocal, yet there is no proper
singing but that which is performed with the Tongue.

3. Were it not so, all Mankind are and would be mistaken in one of the common
Acts of the bodily Organs, and not be able to resolve so plain a Question, What
is it to sing? or what is singing? But so easy a Question is this to be
answered, that every Child can readily resolve it, that is not above six or
seven Years old; nay, if a Turk, Indian or Pagan should come into our
Assemblies, that understands not one word of English, and so cannot distinguish
in other Acts of Worship the one from the other, yet if he hears us a singing,
he knows what that is; and if but one Man sings (tho the rest may show their
liking or approbation of it) if any should say they all sing, every one would
say he told a Lie, there was but one Man only who sung; but in Prayer, that
being an Act of Worship, that may be performed without the Voice, it is quite
another thing, all may be said to pray, tho but one is the Mouth.

Now this being so, what is become of Mr. Marlow's Essence of Singing? for tho
I shall not answer his Book until I come to the main Objections; yet what he
speaks in that place, and upon that occasion, I shall take notice of ^ere. Now
(says he) what can be more plain, ^han that Singing, and other Gifts of the
holy Spirit, have their Essence in our Spirits, wherein we are capable of
worshipping God, without Verbal and Vocal Instruments of the Body? These are
his very words.

I answer, Some have so smiled at this Expression, that they cannot tell what he
intends by ^t, unless he would show himself skilled in Chemistry. But since he
meddles with Divine Things, I must confess I am troubled to see such kind of
words used, that no Body knows what to make of them: By Essence of a thing, I
always understood the Substance or Being of a thing: Now if the Substance and
Being of Sing^ng, and other Gifts of the Spirit, (by which I suppose he means
other Duties of God's Worship which are to be performed by those Gifts,) ^ie in
our Spirits, and may be, wihtout distinction, performed acceptably to God,
without Verbal or Vocal Instruments of the Body, ^hen farewell to Verbal or
Vocal Preaching and Praying too: It grieves my Soul to see the Ho^y Truths of
God's Worship invaded. Is not the Essence of Preaching in our Spirits, as much
as the Essence of Singing is there? And are we not as capable in our Spirits to
worship God, in all other Ordinances, without the Verbal or Vocal Instruments
of the Body, as well as in Singing without Voice, by your Argument? And let me
tell you, you have said more to justify the Quakers Silent Meetings than you
are aware of: Nay, it is an Argument, as far as I know, they may thank you for;
but by this way of reasoning, there is no mo^^ need of the poor Body to glorify
God in his Worship; and our Glory, ( viz. our Tongue) is brought to shame
hereby; and it is no less (...) to rob God of the Glory of his Holy Ordinances,
and his Church, and every particular Saint, of the use and comfort of them, so
far as (...) Body or Members thereof are employed in (...) about them, they
being of no use at all; And what is this, but to turn all outward or external
Worship, into a spiritual, inward, or heart-business?

The Essence of Singing then, (if that word may be admitted) lies no more in
our Spirit than the Essence of Preaching, etc. And sha^^ the Quakers, or any
other deceived People (...) Person, say, (when they meet together to preach,
pray, or sing the Praises of God) tha^ in their Spirits they have the Essence
of tho^^ Duties, and so perform them to God, notwithstanding there is not one
of them verbally and vocally done; certainly nothing can be more ridiculous.
Besides the main part (Essence too, if you please) nay the whole of Singing,
lies in the Voice. I speak of the act, or thing (...) self, not of a right
spiritual and Gospel-Performance of it, for he may be said to preach, who has
not the Spirit of God to assist him in the doing of it, (nor is he affected
with what he says) as properly as he that preaches spiritually, or by the
assistance of the Holy Ghost in his own Heart. Doubtless, Birds sing as truly
as any Men can be said so to do; and so do those who sing profane Songs;
t^ere's all the parts of Singing manifested in their Act, so much difference
there is between the doing of an Act, or Work, and the Manner, Design, Spirit,
and End, in performing of it.

Fourthly, to proceed, By Singing of Psalms, Hymns and Spiritual Songs,
therefore, we understand a musical melodious Modulation, or tuning of the
Voice, expressing our spiritual Joy for edifying one another, and for
glorifying of God.

1. And that this is all the Singing the Holy Scripture speaks of, and is meant
or intended therein, will yet further appear, if we consider these things
following.

First, It Is called the making of a joyful Noise; Sing a loud unto God our
strength: make a joyful Noise unto the God of Jacob, Psalm. 81. 1. O (...) let
us sing unto the Lord, let us make a joyful Noise to the Rock of our Salvation,
Psalm. 95. 1. Let us come before his Presence with Thanksgiving, and make a
joyful Noise unto him with Psalms, verse. 2. So in Psalm. 98. 4, 5, 6. and 100.
1, 2. this is the Singing the Holy Ghost bears witness of; it is not merely that
in Word, Joy or rejoicing in Spirit, but an expressing of it wi^^ a melodious
Voice, or by making of a joyful Noise unto the Lord.

Secondly, What the act of Singing is, or what it is to sing, may be easily
manifested by the Birds of the Air, those melodious Notes they make, God in his
Word ( Cant. 2. 12.) calls Singing; and it is easy to know when they sing, and
when they do not; and it is as easy to know when the Lord's People sing, and
which of them sing, and who do not, if Men will not shut their Eyes and Ears,
against an Ordinance of Christ, and in opposing of it, render themselves
ridiculous to Mankind.

Thirdly, Singing is distinguished from Prayer, as another thing differing from
any part or branch of it; and that by the great Apostle himself, and therefore
it cannot be comprehended in that great Duty; What is it then? I will pray with
the Spirit, and I will pray with the Understanding also: I will sing with the
Spirit, and I will sing with the Understanding also, 1 Cor. 14. 15.

Prayer, all Expositors affirm, consists in three parts (as I hinted before):
1. In confession of Sin, etc. 2. In supplication for what we stand in need of.
And, 3. In giving of Thanks, or in Praising of God with raised affections, for
what Mercies we have received from him. As if the Apostle should say, I will
confess my Sins and Wants to God by ^he help of God's Spirit, and with the
inward ^ttention, and utmost intention of my own spirit, or greatest devotion
and Fervor of Af^ections imaginable; and so will I seek to him, and supplicate
his holy Majesty for what I ^ant, and so will I praise him, and give ^hanks to
him for all the good things I have ^eceived at his most bountiful Hands. See
our ^ate Annotation, Phil. 4. 6. They mention there a Petition or Apprecation
of Good to our selves or others; and also in Prayer, a Deprecation of Evils
felt or feared. 3. A grateful acknowledgment of Mercies received, Benefits
conferred, and Deliverances vouchsafed; Implying (says he) that no Prayer is
acceptable to God without this Ingredient of thankful resentment of his
Favors. Nor can I think that any gracious Soul does ever leave out this sweet
and great part of Prayer when he is at the Throne of Grace, viz. Praising of
God: Therefore this the Apostle would do when he prayed. But observe, besides
this, and as something quite distinct from it, he adds, And when I sing, I will
sing with the Spirit, etc. If therefore Singing were comprehended in Prayer, or
praising of God when we pray unto him, then the Apostle uses as great and
palpable a Tautology as can possibly be; nay, and leaves all Men under a Cloud
and Mistake, if he meant nothing else (or no more) than praising of God in
Prayer; since all the World ever understood a clear distinct difference between
those two things, viz. Prayer, or praising of God, and singing of his Praises:
for though all right Singing to God is a praising of him, (nay, and in the
highe^^ manner that we in our mortal Bodies are capable to do;) yet all
praisings of God are not singing of his Praise. Moreover, the difference there
between Prayer, etc. and Singing, (...) clearly hinted by the Apostle James,
where he exhorts those in Affliction in an extraordinary manner to pray: James
5. 13. Is any afflicted? let him pray. And is any merry? let them sing Psalms.
Certainly he wills the Afflicted to praise God, as well as to pray unto him,
but to such who are merry, or whose Hearts were greatly lifted up, or affected
with the Love, Mercy and Goodness of God, why then, and upon such Occasions, to
sing, ye^, to sing Psalms. In which words, by the way, it is worth noting, to
observe, that the Apostle stirs up Christians to perform these Duties more than
in an ordinary manner at such^ Times and Occasions: for it is a Man's Duty to
pray whether he be afflicted or no; and so in like manner it is a Man's Duty to
sing the Praises of God, whether he has such an extraordinary cause and
special frame of Spirit upon him, or not.

Fourthly, It Is easy to conceive of Singing, or to know what it is, if we
consider how it differs from mere rejoicing in the Lord; for a Man may rejoice
in Spirit, when he does not signify it by Singing of Praises. It Is said, our
^viour rejoiced in Spirit, Luke 10. 21. and ^anked his Father; yet it is not
said he sung; (...) Joy is inward, not known till expressed; ^^d many times
it is expressed by Singing, tho ^^t always: The end why I mention this, is to
^ew they are two different Acts and Duties; (...) I am enjoined to rejoice, so
I am enjoined so from that Joy to sing, Jam. 5. 13.

Fifthly, and lastly, to pass over this; Sing^g is a Duty performed always with
the Voice, ^ad cannot be done without the Tongue, we may ^ather from the Noise
it makes to the hearing ^f others; as it is noted in the Scripture: See ^xod.
32. 17. And when Joshua heard the Noise (...) the People as they shouted, he
said unto Mo^s, There is War in the Camp. Ver. 18. And (...) said, It is not
the Voice of them that shout (...) Mastery, neither is it the Voice of them
that ^^^y for being overcome; but the Noise of them ^at sing, do I hear. They
that doubt about that the Act of Singing is, I desire them to ^nsider this Text
well, in which it is to be ob^^ved, that there are several distinct Acts vo^lly
performed by the Tongue, and all Man^nd easily distinguish the one from the
other, ^nless depraved in their Minds, or under a De^^sion and Temptation of
Satan.

1. There is a shouting Noise of the Tongue, and all Mankind know what it is,
and can ^eadily resolve any Person about it, when he ^istinctly hears it.

2. There is, it appears, a crying Noise likewise.

3. There is a preaching Voice, or a Noise made that way.

4. A praying, or praising Voice.

5. A singing Voice. And all these distinct from each other.

Moses could readily resolve the Doubt that was upon Joshua, when he lent his
Ear to hearken to the Noise of the People. Truly I am almost ashamed I have
this occasion to speak, and to be so large upon it; but knowing what I have met
withal, from some poor, weak, and doubting Christians, who stumble at Noonday
about the very Act of Singing, not knowing what it is, or at least raise such
Objections against it, I have thought good to begin here, and if this may but
satisfy them, I shall bless God for what I have said in all plainness; and do
know it makes an easy Passage to the next Chapter, wherein I shall, by God's
Assistance, prove Singing (yea such a Singing, there being no other known to
Mankind) an Holy Ordinance of God, and to be practiced in the Congregation of
Christians, and in Private also; only let me conclude this Chapter with two
Inferences.

1. If this be so; then we may naturally infer from hence, that all such who
never sing the Praises of God with a Vocal Melody, notwithstanding all those
sweet Rejoicings they may have in the Spirit at any time, never sing at all.
And if Singing be that which the Great God looks for from, and enjoins upon his
People, and every one of them, that then they lie short of their Duty, and want
an Ordinance. Moreover, if it be our Duty, and that which belongs to God, it is
to take away one great part of his glorious Praise, yea, the highest manner of
performance of it we are capable of; and so it is a robbing of the Holy God, as
well as it deprives their own Souls, and the Souls of others of much sweet and
Heavenly Joy and Refreshment.

We may also infer, that those, who think they may be said to sing with him
that sings, when they approve of the Matter of his Song, and are affected with
it, are mistaken, seeing there is no proper mental or Heart-singing, or joining
that way with others in Singing, as there is in the Duty and Ordinance of
Prayer. For all may be said as well to preach, who like and approve of what a
Preacher says, as they may be all said to sing, who sit and hear one Man sing
with delight, when they themselves hold their peace and sing not.

CHAP. II
Wherein it is clearly demonstrated, and proved, that Singing of Psalms, Hymns,
and Spiritual Songs, is an Holy Ordinance of God, and part of Gospel Worship,
and continues an Ordinance for ever, by the Antiquity of it.
Arg. 1. MY first Argument shall be taken from the Antiquity of this Practice,
it is as ancient as this World; the World, and Singing of the Praise of God,
came even in together, or very near each other. I have respect to that
triumphant Singing of the Angels.

When Jehovah laid the Foundation of the Earth, Job 38. When the Morning Stars
sang together, and all the Sons of God shouted for Joy.

I find an Eminent Writer paraphrasing thus on these words, viz. Where wast
thou when I laid the Foundation of the Earth? etc. at which sight the Morning
Stars sang together, and all the Sons of God shouted for Joy. Taking the words
as carrying an Allusion to, or a Similitude taken from some noble Buildings or
Structures, whose Foundations use to be laid with Solemnity, and with Singing
or shouting Acclamations.

See Mr. Caryl on the Place, who after he has given several Opinions of Men
about these Morning Stars, some supposing they mean the Stars in the Firmament
of Heaven, he gives two Reasons to prove, by them are meant the Angels of God.

There are some (says he) who take these Stars Metaphorically or Figuratively,
for the Angels, and then their Singing is proper: And there are two Reasons
given why, by the Stars in this place, we should understand the Angels.

First, If we consider the Truth or Course of the History; because the Earth
being created the first Day, the Stars were not in being till the Fourth;
unless we comprehend them (as was said before) as to their Matter and Reality,
under those words of Moses, In the beginning God created the Heaven and the
Earth. But as to their Appearance and Formality, so they were not till the
fourth Day; and if so, how could they sing together the Praises of God at the
laying the Foundation of the Earth?

A second Reason is given from this Chapter afterward, Verse. 31, 32. Can
thou bind the sweet Influences of the Pleiades? (or seven Stars) or loose the
Bands of Orion? etc. Here the Lord treats with Job about the Stars in proper
Senses; therefore probably the Morning Stars here mentioned, are not to be
taken Properly, but Tropically, for the Angels. And then he goes on to prove
how fitly the Angels may be called Stars, etc. And from this of the Stars or
Angels Singing, he infers;

First, Singing is an Act of Divine Worship, they sang to the Glory of God.

Note, Secondly, says he, Singing is an Expression of Joy: It Is very
remarkable the Angels sang at God's bringing forth the first Creation, to teach
us our Duty, and how we should celebrate the Praises of Jehovah, by Singing for
the Works of the first Creation; doubtless this was, and is, the Will of God,
and we are to pray that we may do the Will of God on Earth, as the Angels do it
in Heaven, i. e. do what is his Will, and do it so, viz. with all readiness Mr.
Caryl tells us, They are not worthy to be reckoned Sons of God, who have not a
readiness, or present disposition in them, to join with all, or any of his true
Sons in this Work to celebrate the Praises of God at his graciou^ Appearances
in his mighty Works of Mercy, etc.

Secondly, As the Angels sang at God's laying the Foundation of the first
Creation, so also they sang at the beginning, or bringing in the second
Creation, as Mr. Caryl also observes, even at the Birth of Christ, they sang,
Glory to God on High, and on Earth Peace, good Will to Men. To teach us that as
we should sing the Praises of God for the Works of Creation, and so much the
more for the Work of Redemption. Shall they sing to see the good Will of God
toward us, and shall we be dumb? Shall we, who are thus raised to Glory, and
magnified by the mighty God, not sing, or imitate the Angels, to join together,
with united Voices, to sing and celebrate his Praises?

When the Disciples rejoiced and sang those Hosannahs to Jesus Christ, Blessed
be the King that comes in the Name of the Lord; Peace in Heaven, and Glory in
the Highest, Luke 19. 38. the envious Pharisees, says Mr. Caryl, did not like
the Music; and therefore said unto him, from among the Multitude, Master,
Rebuke thy Disciples. By this it appears, that the Devil is a great Enemy to
Singing; he does not love such Hosannahs and Praises should be sung to Jesus
Christ; he it is that rules in the Hearts of the Children of Disobedience* and
'twas he, no doubt, that influenced and stirred up these Pharisees with Envy,
to have Christ's Disciples rebuked for singing and praising him in such a high
and triumphant manner. Take heed, you that are God's People, (who do (...) see
it is your Duty to sing Hosannahs to Christ) you do not forbid others so to do,
lest you are found in doing of it, to degrade the Holy Jesus, and take from him
(through the Temptation of Satan) part of the chiefest Glory that is due to his
glorious Name. For, pray observe the Answer of our Lord Jesus to those blind
Pharisees, Verse. 10. I tell you, if these should hold their Peace, the Stones
would immediately cry out: as if he had said, you labor in vain to suppress or
hinder these to sing my Praises, or to give Glory unto me; for should they be
silent, the Stones would cry shame of them for neglecting their Duty; and God
would rather cause senseless Creatures to proclaim his Praise, than to want it.

Object. But some may say, It Is not said they s^ng.

Answ. There is no doubt to be made but they sung; all generally understand
those Hosannahs were delivered in a Song. Our Annotators hint, that it might be
the name of a Song that was used to be sung in Festivals.

Moreover they tell you, that the Expressions seem to be taken out of Psalm.
118. 24, 25, 26. Also they were uttered as with one Voice. The whole Multitude
of the Disciples began to rejoice and praise God with a loud Voice, Luke 19. 3^
and uttered these words, Hosanna, blessed it he that comes in the Name of the
Lord; Hosannah in the highest. As God always was praised with Singing, so now
they seem to be raised with holy Triumph, to express his Praise in the highest
manner, and therefore they sung.

But that I may close this, take one or two Arguments.

Arg. 1. If Angels in Singing do the Will of God, do that which is pleasing and
acceptable to God, and in so doing worship God; then Singing, or to sing, is
the Will of God, well-pleasing to him, and is acceptable in his sight, and is a
part of his Worship. But Angels, in Singing, do the Will of God, do that which
is well-pleasing to him, and acceptable in his sight, ^and in so doing they
worship him. Ergo, To sing, is to do the Will of God, it is well-pleasing to
him, and acceptable in his sight, and in so doing we worship him.

I never met with any that deny Angels to sing the Praises of Jehovah, but all
as one Man grant, it is part of their great Work and Business. And this being
so, my Argument needs no Confirmation, but is unanswerable.

Arg. 2. If Heaven, and all the Host of Heaven, or all that is therein, and
Earth, and all that is in it, are commanded by the Holy Ghost to sing the
Praises of God; then it is the Duty of Men and Angels to sing his Praise. But
Heaven, and all the Host of Heaven, and all that is therein, (...) Earth, and
all that is in it, are so commanded to do. Ergo, It Is the Duty of Men and
Angels to sing the Praises of God. See Psalm. 148. There, and in diverse other
places, all in Heaven and Earth, all are commanded to praise God in the
Heights; that is, to sing Hallelujahs, as the Hebrew word signifies, Verse. 1.

CHAP. III.
Proving Singing the Praises of God to be a Moral Duty.
OUR third Argument to prove Singing (...) Ordinance of God, shall be taken
from the Nature of the Duty it self, which generally worthy Men call a Moral
Duty, as well as it is brought under express Institution, and so consequently a
Branch of natural Worship. And now, because some weak Christians are offended
at this Phrase, viz. calling Singing a part of natural or moral Worship or
Religion, I shall explain what we mean when we speak thus. First of all, not
but that it is a spiritual Ordinance, and a positively Law: but we must
distinguish between Precepts that are purely Moral, and merely Positive.
Breaking of Bread, and Holy Baptism, are mere positive Ordinances: and they had
never been known nor practiced, if there had not been a positive Institution to
give being to them; but to fear God, to love God, to pray to God, and diverse
other Precepts of the same Nature, had been the Duty of all Mankind, if there
had been no written Law or Prescription positively to injoin them on the
Creature; and that by the Law or Light o^ God in the Conscience of Men; as Paul
shows in Romans 2. 14, 15. For when the Gentiles which have not the Law, do by
nature the things contained in the Law; those having not the Law, are a Law
unto themselves, which show the Work of the Law written in their hearts. All
Mankind throughout the World know, by that of God written in their Hearts, they
ought not to wrong their Neighbors, they ought not to Steal, nor commit
Adultery, nor Kill, etc. They are taught, in a word, the substance of the whole
moral Law of God hereby, if not wholly darkened and obliterated by their Sin and
horrid Lusts. Even so we say, if there had been no written Law, or positive
Injunction, to pray, and sing the Praises of God, yet the Light of Nature would
have taught us thus to do.

Remarkable is that passage of Moses in Genesis 4. Then began Men to call upon the
Name of the Lord]. Ainsworth shows that the Text is taken two manner of ways,
the Chaldee in the Masovites Bible says, Then in his days Men left off
Praying, or became profane, so that they prayed not in the Name of the Lord.

Others understand it directly the contrary way, i. e. Then Men begun to pray,
or call on the Name of the Lord, or erected public Worship, Preaching in the
Name of the Lord. So Ainsworth.

Take it either way, it appears they knew it was their Duty to Pray and Preach;
yet there was no positive Law, or written Precept for either in those Days,
nor* for many Years after, even till Moses came; so that it is clear, these are
parts of moral or natural Worship.

And so is Singing no doubt: for as all the Heathen generally invocate their
Gods, pray to them, so they sing their Praises, as might abundantly be
demonstrated.

And what is more clear (further to evince this) than that Passage of the
Children of Israels's Singing after their great Deliverance at the Red Sea,
Exodus 15. 1. Then sang Moses, and the Children of Israel this Song, etc.

Either they did it by the Dictates of their own Conscience, as a part of
Divine Homage due to God, from the Law or Light of God in their own Hearts, to
magnify him for That wonderful Salvation, or else by some special means of
Inspiration or Injunction from the Lord, though I incline to the former. Plain
it is, this was before the Law was given forth, or there were any written
Prescription or Rule to walk by; which clearly shows, take it either way, it
was no Levitical Ceremony (as some are ready to assert) but a Duty it was, and
it has been practiced by multitudes that never had any knowledge of the
Scripture or positive Precepts.

Further, to confirm what we have said upon this respect, i. e. that Singing
the Praises of God is a moral Duty, and a part of God's natural Worship, as
well as Prayer, take what Mr. Robert's says; Singing of Psalms, etc. to God
with the Voice (says he) seems to be part of God's natural Worship; which upon
due consideration of God's Nature, Man by the Light of Nature should perform to
him, though there were no particular Law requiring it, nor Institution
appointing it.

For, 1. Singing of Psalms, etc. to God, is a king of Prayer; a Prayer, not in
Prose, but in Meeter, with Melody. The Apostle joins them together as of like
Nature. And who can be so gross as to deny Prayer to be part of God's natural
Worship?

2. Singing of Songs to God, was practiced by God's People at the Red Sea,
before the Law was given forth, or any particular Law for that Duty.

3. Singing the Praises of God is a Duty of the first Commandment, peculiarly
requiring all natural Worship to be performed to him; and so it is ranked by
the Godly Learned; and say, Singing with Heart and Voice is a Moral Worship,
such as is written in the Hearts of Men by Nature. As to pray in distress, so
when we have cause of solemn Thanksgiving unto God, to sing his Praises. Now,
says he, that which is a part of God's natural moral Worship, is a Duty under
the New Testament, as well as under the Old, natural Worship is always and in
all times a Duty obliging, semper, tho not ad semper. Doubtless even the Pagans
by the Light and Law of Nature, are bound to sing Praises unto God, for his
invisible Excellencies made known to them by his visible Works of Creation and
Providence, tho they never come to the Knowledge of the Scriptures, of Psalms
and Songs. Roberts's Key to the Bible, page 172.

But further, to evince this, and make it appear yet plainer, that it is
without all doubt ^ Moral Duty to sing forth the Praises of God, I might argue
thus; All Men are to pray to God; every one says Prayer is a Moral Duty, then
all are bound to praise him, since Praise is comprehended in Prayer, as a
branch or part of it. This being granted readily by all, I further argue; Ought
not every Person then to perform this Duty of praising of God in the highest
and most acceptable manner they are capable to do? none to be sure will deny
this; why then, say I, they are all therefore taught to sing by natural or
moral Principles it is evident.

First, Because to sing forth the Praises of God or Man, is the highest manner
or mode of praising, either God or Man, that we know of or are able to attain
unto: which does appear.

1. Because when any Man naturally is filled with Joy and Gladness, or sees
extraordinary cause of rejoicing, he by a natural Instinct falls into singing,
all the World knows this is so. Now who is he on such occasions bound to
rejoice in^ and sing to, but the Lord only, who gave him those good things he
possesses, or delivered him from those evil things he seared? and so upon the
one account or other filled his Soul with Joy and Gladness. Why ought the
Saints particularly to rejoice in Christ Jesus, and sing to him, but because
all that Good their Souls are made partakers of, is in and through him? Why did
the People break forth into those sweet and triumphant Songs of Praise to
David, when they sang, Saul has slain his thousands, and David his ten
thousands? was it (...) from the Consideration of those singular Blessings and
Victories they had received from David, and hoped further to partake of from
his Hands, as an Instrument in the Hand of God? And if Moral Principles lead
People forth thus upon all occasions of this nature to sing to the Instrument
of Blessings and Salvation, how much more to the great Agent and Author of
them, viz. the great God of Heaven and Earth? who will not give his Glory in
another, etc.

2. Because this way of praising of God by singing, is called by the Holy Ghost
a praising of him in the Heights, or as the heavenly Hosts Praise God with
Allelujahs, or in the highest manner; Praise ye the Lord, praise ye the Lord in
the heights, Psalm. 148. 1. Praise ye him all his Angels; praise ye him all his
Hosts verse. 2. See Ainsworth.

The Angels singing forth God's Praises, there can be no higher way doubtless
to praise (...) than that way by which the glo^^^^s S^^^^^ims and Cherubims do
express and perform (...) Also all the Godly in every Age have ^^^ified it as
their steadfast Belief (as well as ^^e holy Scriptures bear Witness to it) that
this is the way by which the glorified Saints in Heaven do, and we with them
shall, when we come thither, celebrate the Praises of God, viz. by Singing;
therefore this of singing sorth the Praises of God is the highest and be^^ ^^y
and manner Praises can be given to the lord.

Secondly, All Creatures are called upon to praise God, to sing to him. Now
surely the Holy Ghost would not have enjoined this on all that have Breath, if
it did not belong to them; and that which all Men are, and ought to do, is
certainly a Moral Duty; nay, it is evident there are more Precepts that injoin
all Men to sing the Praises of God in the Old Testament, than there are for
them to pray unto him: which seems to be done as if it were on purpose to
silence those Men's Spirits (whom the Holy Ghost might foresee would in some Age
or another oppose this sacred Ordinance;) and so more reason to repeat it than
that of Prayer, that never was opposed or cavill'd against.

Thirdly, That Faculty (as one observes) which God has placed in Men to praise
him in an harmonious or a melodious manner, shows that it is a moral Duty
belonging to all Men (tho more especially the Saints of God) to be found in the
Practice of singing forth his Praise. God, who made nothing in vain, but all
things for his own Glory, even the Tongue of little Birds to warble forth with
their pleasant Notes the Praises of their Creator amongst the branches of the
Trees, Psalm. 104. 12. Who made our Tongues, and placed that singing Faculty in
them but the Almighty? We see all Men and Women more or less are naturally as
apt and ready to sing as to speak. Now was this tunable and musical Tongue, or
that Faculty of Si^^ing, not given to us and to all Mortals, think you, to sing
forth the Praises of our Creator? Can any be so weak as to think it was given
to be employed to sing any other Songs, but such as are sacred and divine? If
it be a great abuse of the Tongue, or rather a Dishonor to God, for any to
employ their Tongues to sing profane and carnal Songs, that stir up Lust, and
promote Ungodliness, as all will say doubtless it is; then it follows clearly,
this tunable or melodious note or faculty of Singing that God has placed in
the Tongue, can be for no other reason, but that thereby, viz. with a sweet and
melodious manner, they, nay all of them, might discharge this Duty of singing
the Praises of the Almighty God. And indeed upon this account, as well as any
other (or more than upon any other) the Tongue may be called our Glory, i. e.
because thereby we, in the highest manner we are capable of, do praise and laud
the Name of God in singing and setting forth that Glory that is owing to him
from

Now if to sing God's Praise we^^ not the Duty of all Men, it would follow, God
has given them one Faculty in that Member for no use: But of use it is, and
Men will use it too; they will sing, and, say I, they may, nay more, they
ought; but not to the Dishonor of God, not filthy, or vain and foolish Songs,
but such as may be to the Glory and Honor of his Name, who made all Creatures
and Things for his own Praise. And since Mankind are naturally thus inclined to
Singing, and that this natural Gift and Faculty might be improved (as all
others) to the Honor of God, who (as Austine, in his Preface to the Psalms,
observes) has left in his Word, what they should sing, and how to perform that
Moral Duty: Spiritus Sanctus videns obluctantem ad virtutis viam humani generis
animam, ad delect ati^nes hujus vitae inclinari, delect abilibus mod^lis
Cantilenae vim suae Doctrinae permiscuit, ut dum servitate carmine mulcetur
auditu^ divini sermonis pariter utilitate miseratur. The Holy Ghost seeing the
Soul of Mankind struggling in the way of Godliness, and being inclined to the
Delights of this Life, he mixed the Power of his Doctrine with sweet Singing,
that whilst the Soul was melted with the sweetness of the Verse, the hearing of
the Divine Word might be ingrafted with profit. Austin in his Preface to the
Psalms.

Object. I know it is objected, Has not God given to the Tongue a faculty to
laugh as well as to sing? and, is it their Duty to laugh?

Answ. There is no doubt to be made, but to laugh at some time is lawful and
good, it may be done without Sin, though in much laughter there wants not
Folly. Man has not that Faculty in vain; and many will tell you, it is found in
some Distempers very good for the Body, and tends to remove them too; besides,
it may refresh the natural Spirits, when suppressed with Melancholy
Gogitations. But what a trifling Objection is this! for as the one seems to be
disallowed, unless it be on some special Occasions, so the other is given, it
appears, on a far more excellent and subli^e Account and Consideration, with
frequent Injunctions to be found in it, which is not to be found of Laughter;
therefore away with such contentious reasoning, against Reason and Scripture
too. God has injoined you to sing Psalms, etc. to hi^ that dwells in Sion,
Psalm. 9. 11. Singing forth the H^^^ur and Praise of his Name, Psalm. 66. 2. That
does wondrous Works for the Children of Men, for his Mercy endures forever,
Psalm. 107. 8. And so much the more ought Saints to be found in it, because he
delights to hear the sweet Voice of his Church. Cant. 2. 14. Let me hear thy
Voice, for sweet is thy Voice, etc. not only of Prayer, but of such sweet
Praises too, no doubt. Christ's Ear is affected with this harmonious Praise,
when performed by his own Spirit with Grace in our Hearts; it also elevates and
carries up our Spirits to him. The Cloud of the Lord's Divine Presence (says
one) descended not before, but when the Trumpets and Singers were as one, to
make one Sound to be heard in praising and giving Thanks to the Lord; and when
they lifted up their Voices in Praises to him, saying, For he is good, for his
Mercy endures for ever: then the Lord bowed his Ear, and vouchsafed his
gracious Presence to his People; then the House was filled (...) a Cloud, even
the House of the Lord, 2 Ch^^. 5. 13.

Then God takes possession of it as his Dewlling Place, he is so affected with
the Praises of his People, when in a right manner they sing to set forth his
Glory. And (as he minds) for the neglect of this Ordinance in the Church, viz.
the not improving our Tongues and Faculties, by the Assistance of the Holy
Ghost, in Singing the Praises of God, he may withhold the Influences of his
Spirit, and may not be found to that deg^^^ in his Dewlling Place.

Fourthly, We may perceive what the Nature of this Ordinance of Singing is, if
we consider how often it is in the Holy Scripture joined with Prayer. When we
are exhorted to pray to him, to worship him, we are called upon also to sing
his Praises. And thus Paul seems to join them together in his practice, When I
pray, I will pray in the Spirit, etc. and when I sing, I will sing with the
Spirit, etc. 1 Cor. 14. 15. So does the Apostle James join them together, as of
equal Worth, Nature, and Authority, James 5. 13.

From all which Considerations, it appears, ^inging is of the same Nature with
Prayer, even a Moral Duty. These things I thought good to communicate to the
consideration of all, especially for the sake of some weak Christians.

Object. What, you then (say some) plead for a natural or carnal thing, natural
Religion and Worship. Away with your Singing, we thought all our Religion ought
to be Spiritual.

Answ. We plead for Spiritual Worship as well as you, and say, That all the
Parts of Religious Duties must be Spiritual, or they will not be accepted of
God. But what is this to the purpose? Diverse Ordinances, in their original and
proper Nature, are Moral, and part of natural Worship: Is not Prayer in
particular by all acknowledged so to be? And may not Prayer be carnally
performed too, as well as Singing? nay, and so may any other Ordinance of
Christ. Another Man will tell you, whilst you plead for Prayer, you plead for a
Moral Duty, and a Branch of natural Worship: But does that detract from its
Glory? No sure, all wise Men know it adds greatly to it.

Cornelius (Act. 10. 1, 2, 3.) was a Man much in Prayer, tho a Gentile, and
without the knowledge of the Gospel, (or Law either, as far as we know); So the
Mariners which were with Jonah in the Ship, in their Distress, (tho Heathens)
it is said, every Man called upon his God, Jonah 1. 5. But why shall any call
Singing a low or carnal thing? they have the least reason so to term it of any
Ordinan^^ performed by the Spirit: Pray, are Angels sound in any carnal
Ordinance, or the ^lorified Saints in Heaven? What Ordinance can shine more
glorious and subli^^ in its Nature, than this of Singing Psalms, Hymns and
Spiritual Songs, if this be duly considered? But as to the true or right manner
of performance of this Duty, as in all others, we must have our recourse to the
Word of God.

For though Prayer is a Moral Duty, yet it is commanded, and also the manner
prescribed how to be performed as acceptable to God; so is Preaching likewise:
(Yet every Man, by the Light of Nature, is taught to instruct his Children and
Servants, nay, and his Neighbors too as Matters may present): So is Singing of
Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, brought under express Institution. It Is
required and enjoined on the Churches and Saints of God in the Gospel-days,
with Matter and Manner how to be performed, (as shall hereafter, before I have
done, God assisting) be fully proved: so that it is a mistake in our Brethren,
to think we pl^^^ for any natural Religion that is Carnal or Fleshly. Though
diverse Precepts were Moral in their own Nature, and so part of natural Worship
due to God from his Creatures, and known without the written Word, (the Duty I
mean) though not the Manner how to be performed. And from the whole I draw this
third Argument.

Arg. 3. That Duty, which in its Original or Primitive Nature is Moral, and a
Branch of Natural Worship, or Religion, as well as it is given forth by Divine
Institution is the i^^^spensable Duty of all the Lord's People for ever ^o be
found in the practice of. But Singing the Praises of the Lord, is a Duty or
Ordinance, ^n its Original or Primitive Nature, that is Moral, and a Branch of
Natural Worship or Religion, as well as it is given forth by Divine
^nstitution. Ergo, Singing of the Praises of God, is the indispensable Duty of
all the Lord's People for ever.

All Men know Laws or Duties which are Moral in their own Nature, lay all Men
under a perpetual Obligation: And that Singing is of such a Nature, let what we
have said be well considered. Hereafter, if I am answered, I shall say more to
it, if God please to spare my Life.

CHAP. VIII.
Proving Singing of Psalms, etc. an Ordinance of Christ from the Practice of
the Saints, before the Law, in the Law, and under the Gospel.
MY next Argument shall be taken from the Practice of the Saints and People of
God in all Ages of the World. It Is strange any should doubt of the truth of
Singing the Praises of God, if it be made appear it was the Practice of the
People of God before the Law, and also under the Dispensation of the Gospel.

1. Not wholly to pass over what I have before hinted of the Angels Singing,
though I shall but touch upon it here, and do little more than cite a Passage
out of a Sermon preached by Reverend Mr. Wells, in the Supplement to the
Morning Exercise, these (...) his words; Singing is the Music of Ang^^^ Job
tells us, the Morning Stars sang together, Job 38. 7. Now these Morning Stars
(says he) as Pineda tells us, are the Angels to which the Chaldee Paraphrase
accords, naming these Morning Stars Aciem Angelorum, a^ Host of Angels: nay,
when this heavenly Host was sent to proclaim the Birth of o^^ dearest Jesus,
they deliver their Message in this raised way of Duty, Luke 2. 13. they were
(...) delivering their Message in a laudatory Singing, the whole company of
Angels making a musical Quire; nay, in Heaven, there is the Angels joyous
Music, they sing Hallelujahs to the most High, and to the Lamb who sits upon
the Throne, Rev. 5. 11.

As I said before, Singing, as it appears by this Singing of the Angels, is as
ancient as the World it self, and well-pleasing unto God, he would never imply
his Angels else in it, as I showed in the second Chapter. But to our Business,

First, That it was practiced before the giving forth of the Law, is evident
from that ^assage before mentioned, Exodus 15. 1, 2, etc. ^hen sang Moses, and
the Children of Israel, (...) S^ng unto the Lord, and spoke, saying, I ^ill
sing unto the Lord, for he has triumphed ^^oriously, etc. [and spoke.] Note,
in Singing, here is a speaking; and though they spoke, ^et the Holy Ghost
says, they sang what they (...) spoke; and though it were the whole
Con^regation that sang, yet it was as if it were ^ut one Man, so united were
they in their ^oice, (which will further appear in its proper place.) Also it is
worthy observing, this very ^ong the Gospel-Saints shall sing at the
destru^tion of Babylon, Rev. 15. 3. Nay, some con^lude, they have already sung
it; though I am ^ot of that Opinion, not believing any of the (...) Via^^ are
by the seven Angels yet poured ^ut, but that this Song shall be sung at that
^ime when the Saints have gotten temporal Victory over the Beast and Mystical
Babylon, is evident. But let none mistake, though the Saints cannot yet sing
that Song, yet they may, and ought to sing the Song of the Lamb, which is to
praise God for spiritual Victory obtained by Jesus Christ over Sin, Satan, the
World, etc. This is the chief Song we should sing, and this we have perpetual
cause or ^easong to sing. But to returm, it appears the Saints did celebrate
the Praise of God by singing before the Law was given forth on Mount Sinai.

And then, Secondly, under the Law are a multitude of Instances of their
Melodious Singing to God: Moses, (as Mr. Wells observes,) penned the ninetieth
Psalm; and no doubt (...) he, and the Children of Israel, sang it. D^vid, and
all the Lord's People, sang in (...) Worship of God in his time: Also Hezek^^
sung, and Asaph sung, 2 Chronicles. 37. 30. (...) Prophets sang; the Jews sang
before and (...) the Captivity, Nehemiah and the People (...) him sung and
praised God.

Thirdly, The Lord's People, in Gospel days, were found in this Ordinance (...)
Practice of Singing the Praises of the Lo^^ To pass by the Song of Zacharias
and Elizabeth, and Simeon: How sweetly did (...) sing? it is called by the
Annotators, the famo^^ Song of the blessed Virgin, Luke 1. 46. Al^^^ our Lord
Jesus, with his Disciples, after (...) celebration of the Holy Supper (the holy
Gh^^ says) sung an Hymn; they praised God, (...) they praised him by Singing.
Moreover, (...) and Silas sung Praises, tho in Prison, and (...) Fe^ were fast
in the Stocks, Act. 16. Sh^^ any Men now dare to say, There are no P^^cedents
for Singing Psalms and Hymns, etc. (...) the New Testament? certainly they will
forb^^ to assert any such thing. And now from (...) whole take this Argument.

Arg. 4. That which was the Practice of (...) Lord's People before the Law, and
under (...) Law, and also in the Gospel Dispensation, is (...) indispensible
Duty of the Saints and People (...) God, to practice in all Ages. But Singing
(...) Praises of the Lord, was the Duty of the Lord (...) People before the
Law, and under the L^^nd also in the Gospel-time and Dispensation. Ergo. It Is
the indispensible Duty of the Saints to ^^actise singing the Praises of God in
all Ages.

If any should go about to answer this Argument, they must show what Duty or
Ordinance was ever practiced before the Law, under the Law, and in the
Gospel Dispensation, that notwithstanding is not obliging or binding to ^s, or
else they will say nothing to the pur^ose; but the Argument will stand as firm
as Rock.

CHAP. V.
Proving Singing of Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, an Holy Ordinance of
Jesus Christ, from Scripture-Precepts.
WE shall now prove and demonstrate, that Singing of the Praises of God, not
only in Private, but also in Congregations, is a Duty incumbent on us in
Gospel Times, as well as it was of Old. As there is the same God of Mercies, so
the same Praises are to be rendered to him for his Blessings, no doubt, and in
the same manner now, (that is, by Singing) as was then, will appear;

1. Because the Lord (who alone appoints his own Worship) has commanded and
(...) it at our Hands; and his Command and P^^cept is the Rule of our
Obedience: Rejoice (...) Righteous; Praise is comely for the Vprig^^ Praise the
Lord, sing unto him. Psalm. 84 1, (...) 3, 4, 5. Sing aloud unto the God of our
Stren^^ make a joyful Noise unto the God of (...) Make a joyful Noise unto the
Lord; come ^^^fore his presence with Singing, Psalm. 100. 1, (...) Psalm. 95. 1,
2. O come let us sing unto the (...) let us make a joyful Noise to the Rock of
(...) Salvation. And many such Precepts are gi^^ forth by the Holy Ghost, as
it is well kno^ to all. 1 Chronicles. 16. 9. Sing unto him; (...) Psalms unto him,
and tell of all his wond^^ Works. So Psalm. 68. 32. Sing unto the Lord (...) the
Earth; O sing Praises unto the Lord.

2. Consider these Commands, by which (...) Lord established this part of his
Worship of (...) are as obligatory unto us in Gospel Times, (...) they were
then to them when first instituted, ^^cept it could be proved to be either
Ceremo^^ or Judaical, or has received a change in (...) Gospel. And this is
evident in many resp^^^ particularly as to Prayer, that was a Duty (...) and
the Precepts contained in the Psalms (...) the Prophets, which enjoin it, are
of the (...) Authority with those in the New Testament and equally bind the
Conscience. So also (...) Fasting, a Duty (as one observes) required (...) the
Prophets; and not so clearly repeated (...) any Institution under the Gospel,
as this (...) Singing is; and the same might be said for Days of Thanksgiving.
Nay, and it is obser^able, how often our Brethren, upon all proper and fit
Occasions, fly to those Precepts to press Prayer, Fasting, and Thanksgiving
too. If therefore Singing, as it is laid down and en^oined in these Sacred
Precepts in the Book of Psalms, etc. is not binding, notwithstanding ^tis
repeated and given forth in the New Testament afresh; Why do you, when you
exhort ^o other Duties, make use of Arguments and Proofs out of the Book of
Psalms and the Pro^^ets, in other Cases, since the Commands thereof, though
neither Ceremonial nor Judai^al, are (as you seem to affirm) of any Force, ^or
obligatory to us? This seems strange, for ^ertainly Men have more reason in
them, than ^o press Obedience on Subjects to their Su^eriors, by abrogated or
antiquated Sta^utes; And shall the Lord's Ambassadors be more irrational in
pressing Obedience to the Lord, than mere rational Men are in Civil Affairs?

Now, says one, Since there is no Man that questions whether Singing of Psalms
was instituted and commanded of God of old; how can they avoid the Power of
such Precepts, considering, as he minds, particularly Psalm. 81. ver. 4, 5.
where Singing is called a Statute for Israel, and the Law of the God of Jacob,
and ordained in Joseph for a Testament; which, says he, refers to a Time,
before they were brought into the Ceremonial Worship? Hence, says he, it
inevitably follows, that until any Man ca^ show us, that Singing of Psalms,
yea, Singing of the Book of Psalms, was Ceremonial or Judaical, or are changed
or abrogated (...) the Gospel; those Precepts lie upon us now with the same
Power and Obligation as (...) laid them under then; for the Antiquity of a Law,
or Institution, rather commends it to us, than any ways abates of its
Obligation so that had there been no other Institution^ for Singing of Psalms,
etc. than what is (...) the Book of Psalms, we should have had sufficient
Authority to be found in them. ( A Manuscript called Psalmody.) He might have
added, Since especially it is of (...) like Nature with Prayer, viz. a moral
Precept^ as well as brought into a written Law. But (...) all I might add, it is
much more unreasonable to plead an exemption from the Force and Obligation of
those Precepts, since the Saints are injoined to sing those Psalms of David by
the Holy Ghost in the New Testament; for (...) grant there are no other Psalms,
none called Psalms besides the Book of Psalms.

3. To this, take what Mr. Wells affirms; (...) shall (says he) take one Shaft
out of the whole Quiver, i. e. I shall use one Argument, among many, which is
this, viz. W^ always find this Duty of Singing Psalm^ linked to, and joined
with other moral Duties; thus the Psalmist joins Singing and Prayer together,
Psalm. 95. 1, 6. O come let us sing unto the Lord -- O come, let us worship, and
fall down, and kneel before the Lord our Maker.

There is Prayer and Singing con^exed, Singing being of equal necessity and
authority with other Ordinances (...) so the Apostle James joins these two
together, Is any (...) you afflicted? let him pray. Is any (...)? let him sing
Psalms, Jam. 5. 13. You (...) observe, both these Services are equally
calculated for Man's Necessity. Thus Paul and Silas join them in their
practice, Acts 16. 26. And so Justic^ Martyr, in his 117^^ Question, ad
Orthod^^^, tells us, That they sang, and sent up Prayers to God; the Primitive
Church confirming David's Injunctions, and the Apostolical Commands. So that by
these Instances we may observe, that the Duty of Prayer and Singing have walked
in the same Equipage, and lay claim to an equal Authority from Divine Writ, the
Scripture jointly favoring both, p. 177.

Secondly, This Duty and holy Ordinance of Singing in Gospel-Days is evident
from these Prophetic Psalms. I may speak, says Mr. W^lls, of Singing, as Paul
speaks of Timothy's Ordination, 1 Timothy 4. 14. it was given by Prophesy. There
are diverse Prophecies in the Old Testament concerning Saints singing in
Gospel Times, on Psalm. 108. 2. says he, M^^r^ observe^, that there David pours
forth his ardent Prayers and Wishes for the Kingdom of Christ. And so Divines
observe, that the 100 Psalm is Prophetical; Make a joyful Noise unto the Lord,
all ye Lands. Serve the Lord with gladness: Come before his Presence with
Singing. O sing unto the Lord a new Song: Sing unto the Lord all the Earth.
Here we, and all (...) Gentiles be sure who believe in Christ, are required to
sing, nay, and to come into his Presence, that is, into his Public^ Worship,
with Singing. The like (...) 1 Chronicles. 16. 23, 24. Sing unto the Lord all the
Earth: show forth from day to day his Sal^ation. Declare his Glory among the
Heat^^; his mavelous Works among all Nations. So Psalm. 66. 1, 2. Make a
joyful Noise unto (...) God, all ye Lands. Sing forth the Hono^^ (...) his
Name: make his Praise glorious. Psalm 21. 13. Be thou exalted, O Lord, in thine
(...) strength: so will we sing, and praise thy Power. These, and many other
Psalms, are, it is evident, Prophecies of Gospel Times, when the old Boundaries
of the Church should be broken down, to give an entrance unto the Gentiles into
the Church of God; and to show us, that is the Jews in their Church State were
to celebrate the Praises of God by Psalms, so are we: and as Israel sang the
Praises of God in the Widerness, and at the Red Sea, and therein acknowledged
the Benefits they received; so (...) we, with Songs of Thanksgiving, show forth
from day to day his Salvation, and declare his Glory among the Heathen, with a
joyful and triumphant Noise; otherwise we fall short of answering the Prophesy
in our Day and Times, and render not to God the Duty he requires. And to all
the prophetical Psalms, I might add that pregnant Prophecy recorded by the
Prophet Isa, Chap. 52. 8. Thy Watchmen shall lift up the Voice, with the Voice
together shall they sing.

Which clearly (says Mr. Wells) prognosticates this. Musical Ordinance in
Gospel Times. Musculus faith, These Watch^en shall jubilee, when they shall
consider the great Joy approaching for the Redemption obtained by Christ. There
are two things, which not only establish, but sweeten and honor an Ordinance.
1. Promises. 2. Prophecies. Christ himself was the Fruit and Issue of both.

These things clearly inform us:

1. That Singing of Psalms, etc. is not a legal part of Worship, but fuitable
to Gospel Times.

2. That there is clear and manifest Institution of it; Manuscript Psalmody.
nay, and that these prophetical Gospel-Psalms and Prophecies, are part of the
Gospel, (being Prophecies of it, as the first Chapter of John is). What think
you of those places of the Prophets and Psalms, that speak of Christ as they
are mentioned and recited in the New Testament? are they not Gospel as well as
any thing ye find therein taught or laid down anew? Does not the Apostle tell
us, That unto them (that is, to Israel) the Gospel was preached, as well as
unto us? And that in Promises and Prophecies it was preached to Abraham?

3. Consider that there is no attainment under the Gospel, of special spiritual
Privileges, that can exalt Christians beyond the practice of this Duty; the
more our Mercies are, the greater are our Obligations (...) praise God by
Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs; and so express the Joy of our Hearts, by
Singing forth the Praises of God: they that attain to the greatest purity of
Gospel Worship and Institutions, are to do as Moses and Israel did at the Red
Sea. Rev. 13. 3.

4. And they sang the Song of Moses the Servant of God, and the Song of the
Lamb, saying, Great and mavelous are thy Works, (...) God Almighty; just and
true are thy Way, thou King of Saints. Who shall not fear that, and glorify thy
Name, O Lord? for thou (...) art Holy; for all nations shall come (...) worship
thee, for thy Judgments are (...) manifest. Manuscr. Psalmody.

These were such that have attained to the Purity of Gospel-Institutions, being
purged (...) by Fire from Antichristian Pollution, being become as pure and
transparent Glass, having (...) a perfect Conquest and Victory over Antichrist,
who are said thus melodiously to sing forth the Praises of God; and to close
this, we (...) sing in Heaven in the highest Glory: and therefore it follows,
the highest state of Grace (...) upon us; be sure to be found in this so holy
(...) sublime Duty, which as we have showed, in the Work of Angels.

Obj. But by the same Argument you bring to prove we ought to sing Psalms, etc.
in Gospel Times, from the Precepts given by David; Why may we not, as David
did, use an Instrument of ten Strings?

Answ. 1. Singing with Instruments, we say with Reverend Mr. Cotton, was
typical, and so a Ceremonial Point of Worship, and therefore ceased; but
Singing, says he, with Heart and Voice, is a Moral Worship, such as is written
in the Hearts of all Men by Nature. As to pray in distress, page 6. let it be
observed, that I am not alone in my Apprehensions, as touching Singing being a
Moral Duty. Here you see that this worthy Man positively affirms the same: And
again, he says, That singing of Psalms, etc. is not a Ceremony, but a Moral
Duty, and so continues in the New Testament, [ Cotton's singing of Psalms,
page 23, 24.] But, faith he, suppose singing with Instruments were not typical,
but only an external Solemnity of Worship fitted to the Solace of the outward
Senses of Children under Age, (such as the Israelites were under the Old
Testament, Gal. 4. 1, 2, 3.) yet now in the grown Age of the Heirs of the New
Testament, such external pompous Solemnities are ceased, and no external
Worship reserved, but such as holds forth Simplicity and Gravity, etc. I
might add, and by the same Argument we may not sing, because they used
Instruments, etc. We must not pray, or their praying is no Rule to us, because
they offered them up to God with Incense, and diverse such like Absurdities in
other respects would follow; therefore there is now no other Instrument to be
used in singing but that of the Tongue, well tuned with Grace, from a holy and
spiritual Heart. But more of this hereafter. It Is enough to remove this
Objection, Singing is given forth a-fresh in the New Testament, and no
Instrument of Music mentioned. Which brings me to the sixth and main Argument,
to prove, Singing of Psalms, Hymns and Spiritual Songs, a Gospel-Ordinance.

CHAP. VI.
Wherein it is proved, that singing of Psalms and Hymns, etc. is a
Gospel-Ordinance, because instituted and required of the Churches by the Holy
Ghost.
WE shall now show you it is one of Christ's Institutions, or that which the
Holy Ghost does positively require, or enjoin the Churches of God in the New
Testament to be found in the Practice of. To make this fully to appear, I shall
direct you to Ephesians. 5. 19. (...), Psalmis and Hymnis, in Psalms and Hymns, and
(...), and Canticis spiritalibus, and in spiritual Songs, (...), cantantes and
psallentes, singing and psalming in your Hearts to the Lord. Col. 3. 16. Let
the Word of Christ dwell in you richly in all Wisdom; teaching and admonishing
one another in Psalms, and Hymns and spiritual Songs, singing with Grace in
your Hearts. The holy Apostle in this Epistle to the Coloss^ans, strenuously
labored to take off this Church from all Jewish Rites, Shadowy-Ordinances and
Ceremonies, and yet injoyns the Duty of singing of Psalms and Hymns and
spiritual Songs upon them by the Authority of the Holy Ghost, as that which is
the absolute Duty of the Saints and Churches of Jesus Christ in Gospel-days.
What a foolish thing is it for any to object against this Ordinance, because in
the performance of it under the Law it was with Musical Instruments, since it is
to these Churches so plainly given forth as a Gospel-Duty, and in them to all
the Churches of the Saints to the end of the World? For by the same Argument
one may deny singing of Psalms, etc. to be a Duty, notwithstanding so fully
commanded or enjoined by the holy Spirit, another may object against any other
Precept, and so till they leave us not one Gospel-Ordinance. I must confess,
whatsoever was given forth under the Law, or enjoined as an Ordinance (unless a
Moral Precept) that is not given forth anew under the New Testament (there
being neither Precept nor Precedent for it) I never believed it does in the
least concern us. Hence we object against the Jewish Sabbath (for tho a time of
Worship is Moral) yet the Seventh Day, which was commanded to the People of the
Jews, and prosely^^ Stranger that was within their Gates, yet it ^^ing not
given forth in the Gosp^l by (...) nor his Apostles, nor ever observed (as we
(...) find) by any Gospel Church, it concerns us (...) in the least, especially
considering that (...) Gospel Churches observed another Day in (...) Worship,
and not that, viz. the first Day of (...) Week.

But as touching this of Singing, there (...) remain certainly no doubt about
its being (...) Duty, since, as I have already proved, it (...) observed before
the Law, and under the (...) and in the Gospel, and given forth here (...)
these Churches as an absolute Institution: (...) if these words don't contain a
Precept, we (...) be at a great loss to find a Precept for (...) other Duties
in the New Testament, which are no otherwise expressed.

As for Example, Only let your Conversa^^^^ be as it becomes the Gospel, Phil.
1. 27.

Is any afflicted? let him pray, James 5. 1^.

Let no corrupt Communication proceed (...) of your Mouth, etc. Ephesians. 4. 29.

Let every one of you so love his Wife, and^. Ephesians. 5. 33.

All these Precepts are enjoined in the very same form of Speech, Let the Word
of (...) dwell in you richly in all Wisdom; teaching (...) another in Psalms,
and Hymns, and Spirit^^^ Songs, singing with Grace in your Hearts to (...) Lord.

Is any merry? let him sing Psalms, James 5. 13. It Is not left to our liberty,
whether we will sing or not, or that we may, or may not do it; it is as
absolutely enjoined as Prayer, or any Gospel-Duty, and that not only on single
Persons at special occasions, but on the Churches also; they are here required
to sing Psalms and Hymns, and Spirituals Songs likewise.

A Man may as well say, any one of them who were Members of the Churches, were
not concerned in other Precepts, as to say, this does ^ot concern them all
generally as well as some in particular. May not you as well say, and stand by
it too, All are not to be filled with the Spirit, or to desire the further
influence and assistance of it; or, all are not required to pray, nor to put on
the whole Armor of God; or, all are not to let their Conversation be as
becomes the Gospel? nay, what not?

Now since one Command, or two at most, for breaking of Bread is judged a
sufficient ground for all Christians Obedience, and we finding no mention made
of the practice of it in diverse Gospel-Churches; Why is not this Command,
thrice repeated in the New Testament, as binding on our Consciences as the
other? especially considering how it corresponds with the Practice of Christ
and his Apostles, as shall, God willing, be further evinced. For we have, in a
word, both Precepts for it, and Examples too. Tho if we had no Precedents for
Singing in the New Testament, yet these Precepts are sufficient; and where we
have the one, we need not the other.

Besides, where there is the like Ground or Reason of a Law, one would think
that might tend somewhat to satisfaction: Have not we like cause to praise God,
and to sing forth his Praise, as they had? And does not God deserve the like
Glory and Honor from us, as from them? And do not our Souls need those sweet
Soulrefreshing Comforts and Consolations which many* meet with in that
Ordinance, as much as they did? And is not every Word of God alike pure and
righteous, and equally to be esteemed?

Nor will that Objection some raise against it, signify any thing, viz. Why, we
cannot come at it; we do not know how we should sing.

Ans. How! has Christ not been faithful then (who is the Son over his own
House) in declaring the manner how we should sing? has he not left us a
Pattern, or an Example himself? Is it not said, they sang an Hymn, viz. he
himself with his Disciples? And since there is no other Rule, Mode, or Manner
of Singing differing from that practiced by Moses and Israel before the Law,
(and others after them) and these in the New Testament, what can be clearer?
the manner is plainly described. But will your utter neglect of it upon this
pretended Ignorance excuse you before the Lord? ought you not to do it as well
as you can? But I am afraid rather some have taken up a Prejudice against it,
and do not desire to be informed about it. But I shall from what I have said
upon this last Proof, draw one Argument, and proceed to the next thing.

Arg. 1. That which Christ practiced in Gospel Worship, and his Holy Apostles
by the Authority of the Holy Ghost did enjoin on the Gospel-Churches as their
Duty to do, is the undoubted Duty of the Saints and Churches of Christ to do
and perform to the end of the World. But Christ did practice the Singing of a
Hymn with his Disciples in Gospel Worship, and his Apostles did enjoin, or
require the Gospel-Churches to sing Psalms and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs as
their Duty, by the authority of the Holy Ghost. Ergo, It Is the undoubted Duty
of the Saints and Churches of Christ, to practice Singing of Psalms, Hymns, and
Spiritual Songs to the end of the World.

The Minor, as to the practice of Christ and his Disciples, I have already
proved; the Scripture is plain, read Mat. 26. 30. And when they had Sung an
Hymn, they went out into the Mount of Olives. The same is recorded by St. Mark,
Chap. 14. 26. And his Apostles did injoin it on the Churches, Ephs. 5. 19. Col.
3. 16.

As touching the Major, if that be not granted, farewell to all
Gospel-Institutions.

For if neither Christ as our Pattern, nor the Apostolical Institutions and
Injunctions contained in the New Testament as our Rule, gives no sufficient
Authority as to do what was so practiced and injoined, what Ordinance can bind
us?

CHAP. VII.
Proving Singing of Psalms, etc. An Ordinance, because it was confirmed by
Miracles, as other Ordinances were.
MY next Argument to prove it is a Gospel-Ordinance to Sing Psalms, Hymns, and
Spiritual Songs, is taken from that visible witness that God did bear to it, in
the New Testament, it seems to me, (and others whose Eyes God has opened) that
it was confirmed by a Miracle, as all other Gospel Ordinances more or less
were, Heb. 2. 3, 4. As the whole of Christ's Doctrine, or the Christian
Religion, was confirmed by Signs and Wonders, and diverse Miracles and Gifts of
the Holy Spirit according to God's own Will and good Pleasure; so were most, if
not all, Gospel Ordinances particularly.

1. Meeting together on the first Day of the Week was miraculously owned, and
confirmed by that wonderful effusion of the Holy Ghost, Acts 2. 1, 2, 3.

2. Preaching the Word was after the same manner confirmed. Whilst Peter yet
speak these words, the Holy Ghost fell on all them which heard the Word, Acts
10. 44. For they heard them speak with Tongues, and magnify God, verse. 46.

3. Baptism was as wonderfully confirmed at the Baptism of our Savior, for
when he came out of the Water, the Heavens were opened, and to, a Voice from
Heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, Mat. 3. 16,
17. And the Spirit descended like a D^ve, and lighted on him.

4. Laying on of Hands was after the like manner owned and confirmed: And when
Paul had laid his hands on them, the Holy Ghost came on them, and they spoke
with Tongues, and magnified God, Act. 19. 6.

5. Also when the Apostles had prayed, it is said, the place was shaken where
they were assembled; and they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, Act. 4. 31.

6. In the last place, we find. Singing also was in the same sort confirmed:
And at Midnight Paul and Silas prayed, and Sang Praises (...) God; (...) the
Prisoners heard them. And suddenly there was a great Earthquake, so that the
Foundations of the Prison were shaken, (...) immediately all the Doors were
opened, and every Man's Bands were (...), Act. 16. 25, 26. Mr. Wells taking
notice of this place, says, God honored the Ordinance of Singing, etc. with
Miracles: Behold here, faith he, an eminent Miracle, Prisons saluting their
Prisoners Liberty. Paul and S^l^^ Singing, set God on working. And if their
Tongues were loosed in Duty, their Hands shall be loosed for Liberty; Singing
and Praying can work ^^^ders. Certainly had not this Duty, as well as others,
been to continue in the Church as most acceptable to God, he would never have
witnessed to it after this manner: but since he has, let such tremble that
slight and contemn it. As these Miracles confirmed the Gospel in general, so
all must needs confess each Ordinance thus owned and born witness to, was
miraculously confirmed, and as others, so this.

Jointly with this Argument, it is necessary also in the next place to
consider, how Singing of Psalms was brought into the Church in the
Gospel Times, as other Ordinances were, even as a Doctrine, Prophesying,
Interpreting, etc. 1 Cor. 14. 26. Nay, and it seems it was in their Public
Assemblies, when Unbelievers were admitted to come in among them, as appears by
verse. 33.

Object. But this was an extraordinary Singing, or a Singing by an
extraordinary Gift, and there are none have such Gifts now; and therefore none
must sing in these days, since the miraculous Gifts are ceased.

Answ. That the Psalm was extraordinary as to the Matter, is doubtful; because
we know no Psalms but the Book of Psalms, or those called the Psalms of David:
so that it is very likely it might be one of them; but let it be a Psalm, or an
Hymn, given forth by the extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit, and sung too by the
same extraordinary Spirit, yet this does not weaken, but strengthen my Argument.

1. Because, as I said even now, all Gospel Ordinances were witnessed to by the
miraculous Gifts of the Holy Ghost, in the Apostles days; and so likewise they
had extraordinary Gifts to discharge those Duties respectively.

1. They had an extraordinary Gift of Prayer, extraordinary Gifts to Preach and
handle a Doctrine; the like in Interpreting and Prophesying, so no doubt
likewise for Singing. But if after these extraordinary Gifts ceased in the
Church, the Saints were to sing no more, but leave off that Ordinance,
notwithstanding the Churches are enjoined to sing by the Holy Ghost:

Pray consider the direful Consequences of such an absurd Conclusion, i. e. the
Apostles had an extraordinary Spirit, nay, an infallible Spirit, in Preaching,
in Praying, in Prophesying, in Interpreting the Scripture; and in the whole of
their Work, in the Administration of the Gospel, in respect of every Duty and
Ordinance thereof; these are all ceased, since none have these miraculous Gifts
now. From hence it will follow, There Is none now can, or ought to Preach, Pray,
Interpret, etc. or dispense any one Ordinance of the Gospel, etc. Nay, and it is
not unknown to many, there are some have lately made use of this Argument
against all Ordinances: And this I will say, and by the help of God stand by it
too, That if Singing must be rejected or thrown away, by virtue of this
Argument, viz. Because none have an extraordinary Gift to bring (...) forth,
all Ordinances are gone, or must be cast off. God deliver poor Christians from
the pernicious Arguings of such weak Opposers of Singing of Psalms, Hymns, and
Spiritual Songs. Besides, it is evident, none of those Duties and
Gospel-Administrations, were tied up to such who (...) those extraordinary
Gifts, but that others who had but the ordinary Gifts, might and ought to
attend upon the Administration of the same Duties and Ordinances, as well as
those so miraculously endowed: for the main Business the Apostle strives to do
there, was not to order the Matter of the Worship of the Gospel, but to
regulate the Manner how those extraordinary Gifts in the Church should be used
to prevent Confusion; and that all might be done to edification of the People,
whilst God saw good to continue them in his Church. Doubtless there cannot be a
stronger Argument brought to prove and confirm this Ordinance. The Holy Ghost
inspired the Saints with Miracles, Gifts of the Spirit, to bring forth a Psalm,
as well as to bring forth a Doctrine; and so witnessed to it, and established
it as a standing Ordinance in the Church, as being of the same Nature and
Authority with Prayer and Preaching, or any other Gospel-Institution. I will
close this with one Argument.

Arg. That Duty or Ordinance which was owned and witnessed to by the Lord in
the New Testament, with Miracles, and the extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit, is
to abide in the Church as a standing Ordinance. But Singing of Psalms, etc. was
thus confirmed, owned, and witnessed unto. Ergo, Singing of Psalms, etc.
remains in the Church as a standing Ordinance.

CHAP. VIII.
Proving Singing of Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, a Gospel-Ordinance, to
continue in the Church, from the practice of the Churches in the succeeding
Ages next the Apostles Times, particularly in the second and third Centuries;
with the practice of all the Godly generally in all Ages, nay, the most strict
in Grace and Godliness till this present Age.
AS Singing of Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, was instituted and given
forth by the Holy Ghost in the Gospel, and practiced by Christ and his Saints
in the Primitive Times: so we shall show you, from the best and most approved
Ecclesiastical Histories, it was practiced in the Ages next unto the Apostles
Days.

Here I shall give you what Mr. Roberts in his Key to the Holy Bible, has said
upon this account, page 173.

And as Singing of Psalms, etc. (says he) was used in the purest Primitive
Apostolical Times in the Church Assemblies: so it was continued all along in
the successive Churches hitherto, though it is too evident that some
Corruptions and Vanities, by little and little, crept into this, as into other
parts of God's Worship.

Singing of Psalms, etc. was used in the second Century, to celebrate Christ
and his Deity, against the Calumny of Theodosi^^ Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. Lib. 5.
cap. 28.

Eusebius tell us, that Pliny the Second, abo^^ Anno 98, wrote an Epistle to
Trajan the Emperor, that the Christians being gathered together before day,
were wont to sing Hymns together, and praise Christ as God. And the same
Eusebius affirms, that Philo-Judaeus did testify the same of this Christian
Practice; and also assures us, that the said Pliny and Traja lived in the Time
of the Apostle John, who did not die till about 100 Years after Christ.

This very Passage out of Eusebius, This Epistle of Pliny is extant in Eusebius.
Hist. Eccles. lib. 2. c. 17.
I find cited by Mr. ^^berts, Mr. Wells, Mr. Cott^^, and also by Mr. Sidenham
(...) others. But having the History. I need not mention them; yet for one
Reason I shall add the same over again out of Mr. Sydenham's Treat. of Singing,
p. 209.

Eusebius (says he) in his Eccles. Hist. lib. 3. cap. 35. quotes two Epistles
of Plinius Secundus to Trajan the Emperor, testifying that the Christians were
wont to assemble themselves, before day, to sing Psalms and Hymns together. The
same does Philo-Judaeus testify, who lived in the Apostles Time, as the same
Esebius says, Lib. 2. cap. 22. Now in the Time of Plinius and Trajan did the
beloved Disciple live, says Zanch on Ephesians. 5. 18, 19.

Tertullian, who flourished near the Apostles Time, about 194, says, the
Christians were wont to sing out of the Holy Scripture, Apol. cap. 1. 9. as
their usual custom.

Athanasius maintains it was practiced in his Days, Episcop. eo locis.

Cyprian pressed this Duty in his Epistle to Donatus.

Chrysostom in his Commentary on Psalm. 41. admonishes all Persons, Countrymen,
Mariners, Weavers, etc. to sing Psalms and Spiritual Songs.

Estius cries out, says Mr. Wells, to take notice of the Custom of the
Primitive Christians, who did not only sing Psalms and Hymns in their public
Assemblies, but in their private Families.

I might quote Ambrose, who zealously pressed this Duty on the Western
Churches, of singing Psalms and Hymns, Lib. 9. Confessionum.

Mr. Cotton says, that one Samosaten^^ the Heretic, who denied the Deity of
the Lord Jesus, was one of the first that within these first 300 Years, opposed
the Singing he speaks of.

No marvel if the Saints sung to Christ, as unto God, that such a Man opposed
the practice of Singing such Hymns.

Basil the Great, a most Famous, Pious, and Learned Man, mightily commends the
Singing of Psalms, as I find him quoted by several worthy Writers, I need not
go lower.

Obj. But they Sung with Orrgans, or musical Instruments; the Ordinance was
corrupted, and we cannot come at it now, etc.

Answ. 1. We find no mention in the least of any other Singing, but that of
united Voices, in Eusebius, nor Tertullian, etc.

2. But, pray, what Ordinance has not been corrupted and the purity of it (as
practiced in the Primitive Time) lost? Now by the same Argument, viz. because
adulterated and intermixed with foolish Ceremonies, we must not Sing: So we must
not practice Baptism, nor the Lord's Supper, nor any other ^^stitution of the
Gospel, for none have been more abused and corrupted than they have; and indeed
it is rather an Argument for Singing, than against it; for here in Satan showed
his Malice and Hatred of it, by seeking thus (...) add Poison to it.

But ought not we to labor to restore it (...) its primitive Practice (as in
other Ordinances through Grace, we have been helped to do?) Shall we not have
the pure Food of God^ Word, because Antichrist has put Poison (...) theirs?

There is one thing I omitted which is worthy to be noted in Eusebius; It seems
the Christians would not part with this sweet Ordinance of the Gospel, though
it cost them the loss of their Lives, for though they were discovered by their
Singing in their Assemblies, yet they would not leave it off.

To pass by the Wald^nses practice in Singing, etc. and all other Godly
Christians since the beginning of the Reformation; How zealous were the Godly
Puritans (as they were called) for this blessed Ordinance, in whom Godliness
shone so gloriously, that few since may compare with them?

Also our Brethren of the Independent and Presbyterian Persuasion are as well
established in this sweet Ordinance, as in Prayer and Preaching. What though
they mistake in Baptism, does it therefore follow they must needs mistake here
too? Why may they not be wrong, and off the Rule in their Preaching and Praying
and all else they do?

I must confess, I value not the Practice of all Mankind in any thing in God's
Worship, if the Word of God does not bear witness to it, but sense it is
positively injoined in the New Testament, and also an Example left of our
Savior, and his Disciples practice, I thought it could not be amiss to take
notice of the unanimous Agreement, and joint Consent and Practice of the
Churches and Godly Christians in the succeding Ages next after the Apostles,
and to this very Day; but all this is needless, since ^tis to me all one as to
go about to prove the Saints in every Age of the World did pray and praise God,
this of Singing being an Ordinance of the same nature.

CHAP. IX.
Showing the true Form or Manner of Singing in the Gospel-days; and that it
ought to be with united Voices, or to sing together harmoniously.
I Having in the first Chapter proved there is no proper Singing but what is
with the Voice, part of my Work here is done already; till I come to the
Objections? I need not handle that Point any farther. But the Question is,
Whether one Person only, or the whole Church, should sing together with united
Voices?

It Is the latter that I do assert, and shall, by God's assistance, endeavor to
make appear; and I shall begin with our Pattern, I mean that Example our Lord
Jesus and his Disciples have lest us; Is it not said they sung? that is, Christ
himself with his Disciples sung a Hymn^ together, in the end of the
Administration of the Holy Supper, Matthew. 26. 30.

The second place I may direct you to, is Acts 16. 25. And at midnight Paul and
Silas prayed, and sang Praises unto God, and the Prisoners heard them.

Obj. The place in Matthew 26. 30. may as well be translated, they praised God.

Answ. Though it is true they praised God, and it will bear that sense, yet, as
Mr. Cotton and all learned Men I can meet with say, the Greek word signifies,
their Praising of God in a Hymn. That is to say, they praised God by Singing.
[See Dr. Du-Veil on Act. 16. 25.] Where is the Man that says the Word will
bear a praising of God without Singing? if there should be such a Person, I
perceive (by my converse with several Learned Men) that I shall bring twenty,
may be an hundred to that one that will refute and contradict him in what he
says.

But let this be considered, viz. Though all spiritual Singing is a Praising of
God, yet all Praisings of God, are not Singing his Praise.

I have already proved that Singing in the Spirit in a melodious manner, is the
highest manner to express the Praises of God that the Scripture bears witness
of; so that it is no marvel that some tell you it signifies Praising of God. But
it is a poor sorry Cause that puts Men upon a temptation to quarrel with the
Translators of the Bible, who from the word they hymned, positively affirm,
they sang a Hymn. This is enough to stumble many weak Christians, who from such
Dangerous and unnecessary exceptious may be ready to conclude, the Holy Bible
is not truly translated in other places, and so may not know what to receive as
a Truth, especially when they shall render a Greek word Singing, and another
shall say it signifies no more than giving of Thanks. Yet Mr. Marlow seems to
affirm no less, page 30. All know these are two different things, and tho he
says truth, that says they praised God, when they sung an Hymn ^ yet if they
did no more than in the common manner say Grace, or give Thanks, he that says
they Sung, tells an untruth; in plain English, he lies; and so every Man will
say: Should I give Thanks after Supper, and one that is by should say I sung a
Hymn, would not others who were with me wonder at his Impudence, and say he
related a false Story, and testify I did no more than say Grace, or give Thanks?

Nor does it signify any thing, if some Greek Copy or old Traslation should
render it, they gave Thanks, from the word [they Hymned:] For of what Authority
is such a Translation, when compared to our late faithful and laborious
Translators, who having many Greek Copies, and comparing them together, do
affirm the Greek Word signifies, they sung (...) Hymn? and so says Learned Dr.
Du-Veil.

Object. But might they not be said to sing together, tho none sung but Christ
only, and (...) Disciples at the close say, Amen; as in Prayer Men are said to
pray, when there is but one that is the Mouth?

Ans. This cannot be, since there is so great a difference between the nature of
Prayer, and that of Singing, which I have clearly opened in the first Chapter
of this Treatise; there is Mental Prayer, praying in the Heart, and
Heart-rejoicing; but there is no proper singing without the Voice, so that this
would be justly to confound the Propriety of Speech. A whole Multitude that
hear a Sermon, and say Amen to what they hear, may as well be said all of them
to preach, as many may be said to sing, when there is but one only indeed that
does sing.

2. But further, to remove this Doubt; I must say with Mr. Cotton, If the
Disciples did not join in singing that Hymn, but only by silent Consent, then
they might as well be said to have taken the Bread and blessed it, and broke it
and distributed it, and so the Cup; for all this Christ did with their silent
Consent. But what our Savior did alone, is expressly recorded as done by
himself: He took the Bread and gave Thanks; it does not say, they gave Thanks;
and he took the Cup, etc. But observe, this of Singing or Hymning, is laid down
in the plural Number, when they had siung an Hymn, they departed into the Mount
of Olives: They that departed into the Mount, were they that sung the Hymn: Now
it was not Christ alone, but his Disciples with him that departed into the
Mount of Olives; therefore, says Mr. Cotton, it was Christ and his Disciples
that sung the Hymn together.

CHAP. X.
Proving Singing the Praises of God with united Voices, from the Practice of
the Saints in the time of the Old Testament.
BUt to proceed in the next place, to prove the Ordinance of Singing ought to
be performed with united Voices, pray consider the Practice of Moses, and the
Children of Israel in singing after their Deliverance at the Red Sea, Exodus 15.
1. Then sang Moses and the Children of Israel this Song, etc. Moses did not
sing alone, but the whole Congregation sung with him: Psalm. 106. 12. They
believed his Word, they sang his Praise; but soon forgot his Works; namely, the
most of them that sung at the Red Sea; not Moses, but the Children of Israel
who sung with him, they that sung his Praise soon forgot his Works: Moses, say
our late Annotators, composed the Song, and he, together with the Israelites,
sung it to the Honor of God. Thus sung Deborah and Barak, and indeed we find
no other Singing generally throughout the Old Testament. And therefore, since
we are commanded to sing, and Christ has given no other Direction about it but
that of his own Practice, with his Disciples after the Holy Supper, and that of
the Practice of Paul and Silas, who sung together, we may assure our selves
there ^s no other manner of Singing to be brought into the Church but that with
united Voices; and he that should set up, or bring in any other way or manner,
doubtless would be guilty of an Innovation. Should one alone sing in the midst
of the Congregation, like a Ballad-Singer, what Word of God is there to justify
any such Practice? I doubt not but to make appear, when I come to it, that that
Refuge in 1 Cor. 14. will fail them.

CHAP. XI.
Proving that singing the Praises of God in Public Worship with united Voices,
from the Prophecies of the Scripture, that foretold how the Saints and Church
of God should sing in Gospel-days.
OUR third Proof to demonstrate singing of Psalms, Hymns and Spiritual Songs in
God's Public Worship with united Voices, shall be taken from those Prophetical
Psalms and Passages in the Old Testament, that clearly relate to the Practice
of the Saints in Gospel Times. Take Dr. Roberts words here in the first place.
Singing of Psalms, etc. by Believers under the New Testament (says he), is
oftentimes prophetically foretold (...) fore-required in the Old Testament;
and therefore Singing of Psalms is clearly an Ordinance of Christ under the New
Testament. The Antecedent is evident in sundry instances of the Old Testament.
(Wherein pray take notice, that this Argument the Doctor brings, does not only
prove, that Singing is a Duty, but shows the manner of it also, how it should
be used in our Congregations). He then proceeds to mention some of those
Prophetical Scriptures.

O sing unto the Lord a new Song: sing ^^to the Lord all the Earth. Sing unto
the Lord, bless his Name, etc. Psalm. 96. 1, 2. Again, Make a joyful Noise unto
the Lord, O all the Earth. Serve the Lord with Gladness; come before his
Presence with Singing. Both which places, all the Earth, (says he) must needs
refer to the Gentiles as well as the Jews at that present Time; to the Gentile^
afterward, when they should be called and converted to the Lord, then the
Gentiles also should worship the Lord with Singing of Psalms, with a joyful
Noise. Which cannot be any other than Singing together with a melodious Voice.
But he goes on. So that these Passages (says he) are tacit Prophecies of
calling the Gentiles, and of their New-Testament-worshipping God by Singing
forth his Praise. Add hereunto that notable passage; O come let us sing unto
the Lord: let us make a joyful Noise to the Rock of our Salvation. Let us come
before his Presence with Thanksgiving; and make a joyf^l Noise unto him with
Psalms. Psalm. 95. 3. This Psalm is undoubtedly a Prophecy of Christ, and of
that Worship that shall and ought to be performed to him solemnly in Sacred
Churches under the New Testament, and especially on the Lord's-Day-Sabbath. The
Sabbatism, or rest of the New Testament, for the Apostle interprets this Psalm
of Christ, compare Psalm. 95. 7. to the end, with Heb. 3. 6, 7. and 14. 15. as
upon that Psalm I have noted. This Psalm judicious Calvin thinks, agrees to the
Sabbath Day, wherein Sacred Assemblies worship God. And it is evident in the
current Psalm, that herein the Holy Ghost prophetically exhorts to that solemn
Worship of God under the New Testament, which was usual on Sabbath Days, viz.

1. Praising the Lord, and Thanksgiving to him with Singing of Psalms, (with a
joyful Noise, or melodiously with united Voices) Verse. 12. urging the same with
sundry Arguments, Verse. 3, 4, 5.

2. Solemn public Prayer, with the Reasons thereof, Verse. 6.

3. Willing, believing, and obedient attention to the Word of God then
published, without hardening their Hearts against it through unbelief, To day
if you will hear his Voice, harden not your Hearts, Verse. 7, 8. So that this
Prophecy of Christ, and of the New-Testament-Worship, evidently shows, that the
Praises of God, solemnly with Singing of Psalms, solemn Prayer, and solemn
Preaching, and hearing of the Word of God, should be those Ordinances of
Christ, (and in such manner as there mentioned) as the Duties of Christians
under the New Testament. And it is here further added, whereas the Apostle
says To day; this day is interpreted by the Apostle to be meant, 1. Not of the
Seventh-Day-Rest from the Creation, Heb. 4. 6, 7, 8. 2. Nor of the Typical-Re^^
Joshuah gave them in the Land of Canaa^, Heb. 4. 6, 7, 8. but of another
certain Day limited in David's Psalms, Heb. 4. 7. which is called (...), a
Sabbatism, a keeping of a Sabbath, remaining to the People of God, Heb. 4. 9.
And this Sabbatism is the Day of our Lord Jesus, when he ceased from his Work
of Redemption, as God did from his of Creation, Heb. 4. 10. And which is that
Day of our Lord Jesus? Is it not the Day of his Resurrection, that is our
Lord's-Day-Sabbath, which David so long before foretold should be celebrated
with solemn Prayer, Preaching, and Hearing of the Word, and with Singing of
Psalms with a joyful Noise. [And thus what was written afore-time, was written
for our Learning, and is full of Instruction to us, and does serve for Reproof
and Correction; likewise to such who do not hearken to every part of those
Duties which are enjoined upon them therein, but cavil themselves out of the
practice of it, with groundless and unnecessary Objections, and childish
Questions]. But further, (says he) our Spiritual and Eternal Sabbatism, partly
as with Christ from Sin and Misery, both in this World, and that which is to
come, Jesus our High Priest being passed into the Heavens, Heb. 4. 15, 16. Mr.
Cotton speaks the same with this worthy Man, page 10, 11.

2ly, The next Scripture-Prophecy, that shows clearly how the Lord's People
should sing now in Gospel-Days, is that in Isa. 52. 7, 8. Thy Watchmen shall
life up the Voice; with the Voice together shall they sing. It is worthy your
noting to consider, what Time this Prophecy did refer to; which you may soon
see, if you read the Context, How beautiful upon the Mountains are the feet of
them that bring good Tidings, etc. Which the Apostle absolutely applies to the
Time of the Gospel, and to Gospel Ministers, Romans 10. 15. And the Prophet does
not only say, The Watchmen shall lift up their Voice, and with the Voice
together sing, but also calls upon the desolate and waste places to sing
together; which can refer to none but the Lord's People, who in Gospel-Days
shall be made a Praise to him who had been as a poor barren and waste
Wilderness. For (says the Prophet) in the next words, The Lord has made his
Arm bare in the Eyes of all Nations, and the ends of the Earth shall see the
Salvation of God, Verse. 10.

Now this place directly declares the manner how we ought to Sing, that is,
with Voices together. And thus I find a most Reverend and Learned Man speak
upon the place: David's Psalms (says he) were Sung together in Heart and
Voice, by the twenty four, Orders of the Musicians, who typed out the twenty
four Elders, (which our Annotators, and others say signify the Church and
Ministers of Christ), and so says this Author, viz. All the Members of
Christian Churches, Rev. 5. 8. who are made Kings and Priests to God, to praise
him as they did; for if there had been any other Order of Singing besides the
Body of the People, to succeed those formerly used, the Lord would doubtless
have given directions how or what it was. Not Moses only, but all Israel sang;
and the Women, as well as the Men, also intimates that that Song John speaks
of, Rev. 15. 3. which, says he, the Protestant Churches getting Victory over
the Beast, with Harps in their hands, and Singing the Song of Moses refers to
that Song and manner of Singing Exodus 15. 1, 2. And there is no doubt of it but
it does. Moreover, (says he) Isaiah foretells, in the days of the New
Testament, that God's Watchmen, and dissolates lost Souls, (signified by
desolate and waste places) should, with their Voice, Sing together, Isa. 52. 8,
9. The Song of the Lamb (says he) was with many together, Rev. 7. 9, 10. And
the Apostles expressly command the Singing of Psalms, Hymns, and spiritual
Songs, not to any select Christians, but to the whole Church, Ephesians. 5. 19.
Col. 3. 16. Paul and Silas sang together in Prison, Act. 16. 25. and must the
Public hear only one Man Sang (I must say it would be a strange sight to see
and hear, and without any Warrant from God's Word, or Practice of any Church of
Christ). To all these (says he) we may add the Practice of the Primitive
Churches, the testimony of the ancient and holy Basil is instead of many,
Epist. 63. When one of us (says he) has begun a Psalm, the rest of us set in
to sing with him, all of us with one Heart, and with one Voice; and this (says
he) is the common practice (speaking of Basil) of the Churches of Egypt, Lybia,
Thebes, Palestina, Syria. To the same purpose Eusebius gives witness, Eccles.
Hist. lib. 2. cap. 17. The Objections (says he) made against this, do most of
them plead against joying to Sing in Heart, as well as in Voice, as that by
this means others out of the Church will sing, as also that we are not always
in a suitable Estate to the matter Sung, and likewise that all cannot Sing with
understanding, and are not all therefore who have understanding to join in
Heart and Voice together. Are not all the Creatures in Heaven, Earth, Seas,
Men, Beasts, Fishes, Fowls, etc. commanded to praise the Lord? and yet none of
these, but Men, and Godly ly Men too, can do it spiritually and with
understanding.

The third Scripture Prophecy is, Hos. 2. 15. which clearly alludes to the
Gospel-days, (...) Expositors show, viz. when God should make a New Covenant
with his People, and betr^^^ them to himself for ever: verse 19. I will all^^^
her, and bring her into the Wilderness, and speak comfortably unto ber. Verse.
14. And (...) give her Vineyards from thence, and the Valey of Achor for a Door
of Hope, and she shall sing as in the days of her Youth, and as in the day when
she came up out of the Land of Egypt; which is clear has respect to that of
Exodus 15. see our Annotators on this Text, for it fully confirms Singing under
the Gospel, and such a Singing as was of Old.

I shall close this with what Dr. Roberts says, in his Key to the Holy Bible,
page 175. Finally, that passage in the Prophet, Thy Watchmen shall lift up the
Voice, with the Voice together shall they Sing, is (says he) prophetically
spoken of the Times when the Feet of the Messengers of glad-tidings shall be
beautiful, who shall say unto Sion, Thy God reigns. This is interpreted by
the Apostle Paul of the Gospel Times under the New Testament.

I rather choose to give my Understanding of this glorious Truth, in the words
of other Men, such worthy and renouned Men as these, than in my own, thinking
some may more readily incline to receive the Truth from them, than from such a
poor Nothing-creature as I am; yet, did not I verily believe as they did in
this matter, I should not have cited a word from their Pens. Besides some of
their Works ^ie in great Folio's, that very few may meet ^ith and what they
say, which they prove from God's Word, we ought carefully to receive, though in
some things they differ from us: Therefore if any Answer me, they must also
answer them in what I have cited out of their Writings, or I shall conclude I
have no Answer at all.

CHAP. XII.
Proving it is our Duty to sing the Praises of God with united Voices, from the
great Noise such are said to make when they sing.
THis appears by that in Exodus 32. 17, 18. And when Joshua heard the noise of
the People as they shouted, he said to Moses, There is War in the Camp, verse.
17. And he said, It is not the Voice of them that shout for mastery, neither is
it the Voice of them that cry for being overcome; but the noise of them that
sing, do I hear, verse. 18. Certainly one Man's Voice could not have made such a
Noise, nothing can be more clear, but that they sung with united Voices
together.

Obj. But here it is objected, This was in praise of the Golden Calf, and so no
rule.

Answ. It Is no matter to whom they sung, it was their Sin and horrid Wickedness
to give that Divine Worship and Praise to a molten^mage, that belonged to God
only; but there is no question but they sung now to this false God, as they had
done, cap. 15. to the true God of Heaven and Earth, and therein lay part of
their wicked and horrid Deed.

The second Scripture is Psalm. 81. 1, 2. Sing aloud unto God, make a joyful
Noise: which cannot be applied to one Man's Singing, and diverse others in the
Book of Psalms before cited.

The third place is that in Rev. 19. which is a Prophecy of that triumphant
Singing tha^ shall be in the Church throughout the Earth, or in all Nations, at
the downfall of Babyl^^ And after these things I heard a great voice (...) much
People in Heaven, saying, Alleluj^^ verse. 1. And I heard as it were, the Voice
of (...) great Multitude, and as the Voice of many W^^ters, and as the Voice of
mighty Thundrings, saying, Allelujah; for the Lord God Omnipotent reigns,
Verse. 6. That Singing that is represented to John by these kind of Noises, can
(...) signify the Singing of one single Man in (...) Congregation: and though
it is said to be, (...) at that time to such a degree, and on that occasion
extraordinarily performed, yet it makes not against ordinary Singing, which is
a Gospel-Precept (as has been proved); for as there are times of extraordinary
Prayer, so of extraordinary Praise and Singing to Jehovah. Moreover, it follows
no more that we must not sing at all, unless we have an extrordinary cause to
be merry or rejoice in God; then it does follow we may not pray at all, unless
we are afflicted, James 5. 13.

I shall now shut up this with three or four Arguments, and proceed to the next
Chapter.

Arg. 1. If it was never commanded of God, nor the Practice of his People under
the Old Testament, nor in the New, in the ordinary Worship of God* for one Man
alone to sing by himself in the public Congregation; then for any to attempt
to bring such a Practice into the Church would be a great Evil, and an absolute
piece of Will Worship, or an Innovation. But it was never the Practice of God's
People under the Old Testament, nor in the New, nor commanded of God in the
ordinary Worship of God, for one Man alone to sing by himself in the public
Congregation. Ergo, For any to attempt to bring such a Practice into the
Church, would be a great Evil, and an absolute piece of Will Worship, or an
Innovation.

The Major certainly every Man will grant, that is resolved not to add to, or
diminish from God's Word, or does believe there must be no Additions nor
Alterations to what is laid down in Christ's New Testament: for by that
Argument, if one new Practice may be admitted, others may.

As to the Minor, if any can show me in the Old or New Testament, that any one
Man in the ordinary Worship of God was allowed thus to do, I must confess my
Argument is lost; but if they cannot do that, it is unan^swerable.

Arg. 2. If singing of Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, be enjoined on, or
required of the Churches by the Holy Ghost in the New Testament; and that there
is no other way, manner, or (...) prescribed, than what was used by the S^^^ts
under the Old Testament, and by Christ and his Disciples in the New, viz. a
singing together with a melodious Voice; then that way the (...) sung under the
Old Testament, and Christ (...) his Disciples under the New, is to be our Rule
(...) Practice in Singing, and there is no other. (...) singing of Psalms,
Hymns, and Spiritual (...) is enjoined on, or required by the Holy Ghost (...)
the Churches in the New Testament, and (...) is no other way, manner or mode
prescr^^^d than what was used by the Saints under the Old Testament, and by
Christ and his Apostles ^^der the New. Ergo, To sing together with a melodious
Voice, is to be our Rule and Practice in singing, and there is no other.

No body will surely deny my Major; if any can find another way, manner or mode
prescribed, let him show it us. As to the Minor, that singing of Psalms, etc.
is enjoined, I know no body does deny it.

Arg. 3. If whatsoever was written aforetime, or given forth in the Old
Testament by the Spirit, especially which were moral Duties; nay, and given
forth afresh in the New, was, as to matter and manner, for our Instruction and
Learning; and singing of Psalms, and Hymns and Spiritual Songs, which is a
moral Duty, was given forth aforetime, nay, and it is given forth afresh in the
New; then the matter and manner of Singing, as practiced in the Old, and
practiced in the New, was for our Learning and Instruction, that we should do
the same. But whatsoever was written aforetime, or given forth in the Old
Testament by the Spirit especially, which were moral Duties, nay, and given
forth afresh in the New, as to matter and manner, was for our Instruction and
Learning; and singing of Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, which is a moral
Duty, was given forth aforetime in the Old Testament, and afresh in the New.
Ergo, Singing of Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, as to matter and manner,
as practiced in the Old Testament and in the New, was for our Learning and
Instruction, that we should so do, and practice the same.

The Major cannot be denied, the Minor is proved from that in Romans 15. 4. For
whatsoever was written aforetime, was written for our Learning, 2 Timothy 3. 16.
and from what I have said in this Treatise, wherein it is evinced, that Singing,
etc. is a moral Duty, and given forth both in the Old and New Testament.

If any object and say, that then we must sing nothing but David's Psalms, or
the Songs contained in the Old and New Testament. I answer, The Matter that
then was sung was God'^ Word, or Divine and Holy Songs, and so must the Matter
of our Songs be the Psalms of David, or the Word of Christ, i. e. such things
that are certainly Divine and Sacred, congruous with the Word of God or
spiritual Songs.

If they object about the manner used under the Law with Musical Instruments. I
answer, (...) plead for no other manner than was practiced in the New Testament
as well as in the Old; (...) under the Old we read of singing together with
united Voices without Instruments, and the same in the New: So that unless
Instruments of Music (as Organs, etc.) were used in the New Testament, they
are unlawful to be brought into the Worship of God; and in vain is it for any
to object against Singing, because Musical Instruments were used under the Old
Testament, since the one is given forth in the New, viz. singing Psalms,
without mention made of Instruments of Music, and so practiced also. But to
that Objection I purpose to give a full Answer when I come to consider of Mr.
Marlow's Book.

Arg. 4. If Christ and his Disciples never practiced, nor enjoined on the
Churches any Ordinance or Duty, but they left a sufficient Rule how such
Ordinances or Duties should be performed; and yet Christ and his Disciples did
sing, and enjoined singing of Psalms, etc. on the Churches; then they left a
sufficient Rule how singing of Psalms, etc. should be performed. But Christ and
his Disciples did practice and injoin singing of Psalms and Hymns, etc. Ergo,
Christ and his Disciples have left a sufficient Rule to show how singing of
Psalms and Hymns should be performed.

This Argument cannot be denied; therefore let our Brethren consider where the
fault lies, who do not see the way how to sing, etc. It Is said, Moses was
faithful in all God's House, as a Servant, and was careful to do every thing
according to the Pattern showed him in the Mount; but Christ, as a Son, is
faithful over his own House. Now since Singing was required of the Churches by
Christ (for what the Apostles enjoined by the Spirit, Christ enjoined) in the
New Testament, certainly he has left a sufficient Direction how it ought to be
performed, otherwise it would reflect upon his Wisdom and Faithfulness.
Strange! is Singing practiced by Christ and his Apostles, and injoined on the
Churches, and is there no certain way to know what that Singing is, nor how it
should be performed? I stand in a maze to see how confused some are in their
Minds and Sentiments about it! one saying it is only Heart-Joy; others it is no
more than to praise or give Thanks to God in Prayer; says another, it is to be
performed or done by one single Man alone in the Congregation, tho not one
Example or Precedent in all the Scripture in God's ordinary Worship for any
such Practice. O how hard is it to bring Men off from their own conceited
Opinions, or to receive a Truth they either (...) prejudiced against, or else
not willing to have it to be received as an Ordinance of God!

CHAP. XIII.
Showing what the Matter is the Saints and Churches of Christ should sing i^
Gospel Times; opening what Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs are.
ONE Objection that is brought against Singing, is this, viz. We do not know
what we should sing, and therefore do not sing in our Congregations. I must
confess, if Singing was practiced and injoined, and nothing was left in God's
Word to show us what it is we are to sing, it would be strange, and a
sufficient Plea against the practice of it; but such a thing could not stand
consistent with the Wisdom of the Spirit. But, blessed be God it is not so, as
we by his Assistance shall now further make appear: For we have, first, our
Pattern, which is Christ's practice with his Disciples, in this Case as in
others. 2dly, The Rule, which are those Precepts laid down in the New
Testament; Christ and his Disciples sung an Hymn. And be sure the Matter of it
was Spiritual, it being performed by those Sacred and Holy Persons, and in the
Sacred Worship of God, i. e. just as they had celebrated the Holy Supper. But
to speak to the Rule; see Ephesians. 5. 19. Be ye filled with the Spirit, speaking
to your selves in Psalms, and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, singing and making
melody in your Hearts to the Lord. So, Col. 3. 16. Let the Word of Christ dwell
in you richly, in all Wisdom, teaching and admonishing one another in Psalms,
and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, singing with Grace in your Hearts to the Lord.

Here you have six Things observable, or the words contain six parts.

First, The Matter to be sung in the general, viz. the Word of Christ; Let the
Word of Christ dwell in you richly in all Wisdom, teaching and admonishing one
another in Psalms, etc. singing with Grace in your Hearts.

Like as the Word of Christ ought to dwell in us richly, that we may meditate
thereon, and be able to preach it, hear it, and understand it, etc. so to sing
it. The Word of Christ is therefore positively laid down to be the Matter we
must and ought to sing in the general; for we are injoined, to have it dwell
richly in us in this place, more especially to sing it, than on any other
account.

Secondly, The Singers, that is, the Church, or Churches to whom he wrote, more
particularly the Saints and faithful in Christ at Ephesus, and at Coloss, and
in them to all other Saints and Churches of Christ to the end of the World.

Thirdly, More particularly the Matter to be sung, viz. Psalms, and Hymus, and
Spiritual Songs.

Fourthly, The Manner, or how it should be performed, i. e. with Melody, or
Spiritual Joy in the Heart, or Grace. What he calls Melody in our Heart in one
place, he calls Grace in the Heart in the other. The Tongue is the Instrument,
but it must be tuned with Grace, or the Music will not be sweet in Christ's
Ears. In Singing of Psalms, etc. (says one) a gracious Heart takes Wings, and
mounts up to God to join with the Celestial Quire: It is Grace which fills the
Heart for, and sweetens the Heart in this Duty.

Fifthly, The Master of the Chore, the Preceptor, as Mr. Wells says, viz. the
Heart; we must look to the Heart in Singing, that it is purged by the Spirit.
God is the Creator of the whole Man, and therefore will be worshipped and
praised with the whole Man. The whole Man is bought with a Price; our Tongues
as well as our Spirits are not our own; therefore we ought to glorify God in
our Bodies, and in our Spirit, which are the Lords, 1 Cor. 6. 19, 20. My Heart
is fixed, O God, my Heart is fixed: I will sing and give praise, Psalm. 57. 7.
Awake my Glory, etc. I my self will awake. What was this which David calls his
Glory? (all tell you) it was his Tongue; and in Singing and Praising of God,
the Glory of it much lies, when the Heart is filled and fixed with Grace in the
discharge of this Duty.

So in Psalm. 108. 1. O God, my Heart is fixed: I will sing, and give praise
with my Glory.

Augustine says, It is not a musical String, but a working Heart that is
harmonious. Mary sung with her Tongue, and her Heart was in her magnificent
Song. And, as says another Godly Man; When we sing Psalms, etc. let us take
heed that we have the same thing in our Mind, that we warble forth with our
Tongues, and that our Song and our Heart do not run several ways. If (says Mr.
Wells) we in Singing only offer the Calves of our Lips, it will too much
resemble the Jewish Service. Men may hear, or pray, as well as sing carnally;
therefore we should remember to do as the Apostle teaches, to sing with the
Spirit, and with the Understanding also, 1 Cor. 14. 15.

Sixthly, and lastly, The End, viz. to glorify the Lord, and lift up his
Praise. God is to be our true and only Scope, i. e. to set forth his Glory
ought to be our ultimate End, I mean, when we sing and perform all other Duties
of Religion.

Now then, since the Word of Christ is the Matter in general that ought to be
sung; it appears we are not left without Directions by the Spirit about this
Ordinance, (let Men say what they please) for as it is Christ's Word we should
and ought always to preach, and hear, so it is his Word we should and ought to
sing: And as we are not tied up by the Lord in Preaching, to do no more than
barely read the Scripture, or quote one Scripture after another, (which would
be rather Reading than Preaching) but may use other Words to edify the Church,
provided they agree with, or are congruous to the Word of Christ, or the Sacred
Scripture, (and yet we call that the Word of God which is preached, and so
indeed it is); so when that which we sing is taken out of God's Word, or is
Scripture, absolutely congruous, truly and exactly agreeing thereunto, it may
as truly be called the Word of Christ, as our Sermons are, and may be so called.

Obj. But you add words to your Hymns that are not in the Text you refer to.

So we do in Preaching; but if those words agree with the Text, it is still the
same Word, and may be opened thereby the better to the understandings of the
People. Besides, let it be considered, that we have not the Holy Scriptures in
those words in which they were written by the Penmen of the Scripture, for
they wrote the Old Testament in Hebrew words, and the New Testament in Greek
words. Also the Translators differ much in words in giving the true sense of
the Original, so that this Objection is a mere contentious Cav^^. Moreover,
there are in our Bibles (all Learned Men know) a multitude of Suppliments, or
words added, to make good the sense, the Originals being too short to express
it in our Language. Now you may as well, nay, if not with more color of reason
say, part of the Scripture is Human, and not Divine, as to call our Sacred
Hymns so: And so you may by the same Argument call our Sermons likewise. It Is
evident, as Mr. Barton observes (in his Epistle to his Book of Hymns) That
Justin Martyr, Tertullian, and many others have signified the Primitive Church
used, not only David's Psalms, but other Portions of Scripture to put in Songs
for edification. Hymns may (as he says) be plainer than Psalms, and more
suitable to Gospel-occasions, such in which Christians may truly say they do
teach and admonish one another in; such (says he) as inculcate our Duties, and
reprove our Vices, out of most piercing Passages of Holy-Scripture, and such as
may answer or suit with all Sermons, and accommodate all Occurrences, and are
no Innovations, but reduction to primitive Use and Order.

Remarkable is that passage in Eusebius concerning the Christians practice in
singing of Hymns to Christ as to God. Plinius Secundus, to clear the Christians
to Trajan, adds this, viz. Only that they held early Assemblies in Singing of
Hymns to Christ, as unto God, Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 33. Doubtless they were
compiled by some among them out of the New Testament, as the Spirit of God
might enable them, in the same manner as they did, and we do compile our
Sermons: and I see no other objection lies here against our Hymns, than lies,
or may be made against our Doctrine.

Thus as to the general Direction the Holy Ghost has given about what we should
sing, viz. the Word of Christ.

But then, Secondly, we have particular Directions as to the Matter we ought to
sing expressed in the Texts, viz. Psalms, and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs. I
know some do conclude, that all these three allude to the Book of Psalms,
because these three are the Titles, they say, of David's Psalms. Though that
were granted, that some of David's Psalms are called Hymns and Songs, yet I see
no reason that all other spiritual Hymns and Songs should be excluded.

1. Because we often find in the New Testament the Psalms of David, or Book of
Psalms mentioned, as comprehending all those Hymns and Songs contained therein,
without calling them the Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs of David, see Luke
20. 42. and 24. 44. Act. 1. 20.

Moreover this seems to exclude other Scripture-Songs, that they themselves own
may be sung, as Moses's, Deborah's, Isaiah's, Habakk^k's, Simeon's,
Zachariah's, Mary's, etc.

However, by Psalms we are assured is intended the Book of Psalms, or those
called the Psalms of David, because we read not in all the Scripture of any
called Psalms but them only; so that the Form of these are contained in God's
Word; I hope these will not be called Human^* The Holy Ghost has enjoined the
Singing of Psalms particularly, and many of the Psalms of David, are, it is
evident, pure Gospel, i. e. Prophecies and Promises that relate or refer wholly
unto Gospel Times; and diverse excellent Psalms there are, that be filled full
of the High Praises of God for Christ, and the Blessings and Privileges
Christians receive by him; tho I do not judge all the Psalms of David are so
suitable to our days, nor can be so properly sung as some others, to the
Edification of the Church. But,

I do not find any Man giving any convincing Argument, that no Hymns that are
made out of God's Word, or putting other Scripture-Songs, as the Canticles,
etc. into Verse, or proper Measure to be sung, are excluded in those words,
Psalms, and Hymns and Spiritual Songs. I am of the same Mind with those Learned
Men that Mr. Wilson in his Dictionary, and others speak of, that Psalms, Hymns
and Spiritual Songs comprehend all kinds of Spiritual Songs, whereby the
Faithful sing to the Glory of God, and the Edification of the Church, provided
they are taken out of the Word of Christ. Moreover, I have met with a Piece
written by a very Learned Man, who after he has given the Sense of some Men
about the Titles of the Psalms, and various Acceptance of the words, Psalms,
Hymns and spiritual Songs, speaks thus, Yet I must tell you by the way, that
these words in the Hebrew do not make such a precise difference: For Tehillim
is the general Title of all the Psalms; Mismor the particular Title of most
Psalms, as well as of the Psalms of Degrees: Nor do the Greek Words make such a
distinguishing difference, for a Psalm is of (...) to sing, and a Hymn of
(...), to sing Praise: And (...) Odo, called a spiritual Ode, or Song, by (...)
Translators, is of the word (...), so that it seems to me, says he, that the
Apostle uses many words to signify that all (...) Singing should be of Divine
Things, (and not vain things) to glorify God, and not to please our foolish
Fancies. But whether we distinguish the one way or the other, (...) see (says
he) the Apostles press the Duty of spiritual Singing, whether of this kind or
that, ( viz. whether Psalms of David, (...) other spiritual Hymns;) whether
called of Men of this Name, or that Name, in which Injunctions the Apostles are
so clear, that very few since the coming of Christ, that I know of, have made
scruple of the thing; and if any have of late, they never mention these places,
as if either they did not remember them, or could not answer them.

And to close this Chapter, take what worthy Mr. Wells minds in his late Sermon
about su^^ who neglect this Ordinance, either about endless Scruples or
Objections concerning the matter or manner of Singing. Let us, says he* not
disturb our selves with these groundless Objections, but let us pursue and
embrace this holy Duty, which is the very Subu^^s of Heaven. And observe what a
Reverend Person notes upon this occasion; I observe, says he, they never
thrive well who neglect or scruple singing of Psalms; they commonly begin at
this Omission, but they do not end there, but at last come to be above all
Ordinances, and so indeed without them, whose Condition is not sufficiently to
be deplored. Suppl. to Morning Exercis. p. 189.

To which let me add my Thoughts without offense; I am persuaded, for several
reasons, since this is so clear an Ordinance in God's Word, that the Baptized
Churches, who lie short of the Practice of singing Psalms, etc. will never
thrive to such a degree as our Souls long to see them, to the Honor of the
Holy God, and Credit of our sacred Profession, and Joy and Comfort of those who
are truly spiritual among us: for tho many things, as the Causes of our sad
witherings, have been inquired into; yet I fear this, and the neglect of the
Ministry, are the two chief, which are both holy Ordinances of Jesus Christ;
and yet our People, (that is, some of them) do not love to hear of either of
them.

CHAP. XIV.
Showing who ought to sing Psalm^ Hymns, and spiritual Songs; whether it ought
to be done in the public Congregation, and in a mixed Assembly or no.
IT IS strange that any should doubt, whether it be the Duty of the Church to
sing (as well as private Families or Persons) since our blessed Savior, with
his eleven Disciples, upon the closing of the holy Supper, sung together an
Hymn in that solemn Assembly; if we may not, ought not to follow them in the
Practice of Singing an Hymn from thence, what ground is there to break Bread in
our public Assemblies from that Example? This is the Institution of that
Ordinance; and, as he took Bread and blessed it, and took the Cup after the
same manner, etc. so it is said when they had done they sung an Hymn, and went
out, etc.

It Is observable it is not said, Do this in your public Assemblies: and
therefore some may say, we will break Bread, or celebrate that Ordinance in our
own private Families in an upper Chamber, as Christ and his Disciplies did, and
sing an Hymn when we have done, and so exclude public Assemblies for that part
of God's Worship. But to proceed; we read, as I have again and again showed
you, that the Apostle injoins Singing on the Churches, Ephesians. 5. 19. Col. 3. 16.

Object. But he does not bid the whole Church to sing, etc.

Answ. The Apostle injoins the Lord's Supper on the Church of the Corinthians,
1 Cor. 11. 23, 24. But some may say, he does not bid every one of them to break
Bread; how does it follow every Member ought so to do? there would be no end of
such Objections. But by this Rule, any Precept injoined on the Churches may be
restrained to a few Persons only, and so it would open a Door to Men to excuse
themselves from being concerned in other parts of Gospel-Duties and Worship:
therefore where a Duty is enjoined by the holy Spirit on the Churches, without
the least hint or intimation that it concerns only some of them, nay, and an
Ordinance in which there is the same parity of Reason, why one should be found
in it as well as another, that Duty concerns the whole Church, or every Member:
but it is so in the case of singing of Psalms, Hymns, and spiritual Songs: pray
what ground has one Man to sing from hence more than another?

Are not all equally concerned to praise God? nay, and having received equal
Mercies, Blessings and Privileges, to sing his Praises, since it is required of
all, without the least exemption of any one?

Object. But what ground is there to sing thus in the Church before or after
Sermon?

Answ. 1. As much surely as there is to pray before or after Sermon; nay, it is
evident, if we do not take our Rule to pray before and after Sermon from those
general Precepts that enjoin Prayer, then I do declare I know no Rule at all
for it in all the New Testament, for we have neither Precept nor Example in the
case, but where we read of Duties that concern only some Persons, and not the
whole Church, the Holy Ghost mentions the Persons, 1. Either by their Relations
they stand in one to another; Or, 2. Else by their Condition in the World. Or,
3. By their Office or Place they stand in.

As there are particular Duties that concern Parents, Children, Masters,
Servants, Ministers, Members: Also Kings, Subjects, rich Men, poor Men, Men in
Adversity, or Men in Prosperity, all sorts and conditions of Men.

But here this Duty comes under no such particular Consideration; but as it is
the Duty of all to hear God's Word, and to pray with united Hearts, so to sing
together with united Voices, there being no other manner or way prescribed, as
I have showed, for the discharge of that Duty or Ordinance of God.

But I would fain be resolved by my Brethren, or any other, what Ordinance of
God or Duty it is that appertains to his Worship which ought to be performed in
private, that may not be performed in public.

Take what famous Mr. Cotton of New England speaks as to the Answer of this
Objection, it is thus stated by him, viz.

Object. Scarce any Example can be given of any entire Congregation that sung
together mentioned in the Scripture.

Answ. Tho no Example could be given for it, yet it is a sufficient Warrant for
the Duty if there be a Precept; and, says he, the Precept is plain, Col. 3.
16. where the whole Church of Coloss is exhorted to have the Word of Christ
dwell in them richly, and to admonish one another in Psalms, etc. to sing with
Grace or holy Melody to the Lord. If God, says he, had reserved this Duty to
some select Choristers, he would have given some Directions in the New
Testament for their Qualification and Election; but since he speaks nothing
of any such, etc. he commands this Duty to the whole Church.

2dly, The Practice of God's Israel of old, ( i. e. Moses and the Children of
Israel) is a further Solution to this Objection; for there is an Example of
singing together; and besides, that there was a mixed Multitude with them too is
evident, who, no doubt, sung with them, having received the like Mercies they
did. See Exodus 12. 38.

In the Manuscript I have by me before cited (which seems to be wrote by a Man
of Parts and good Ability) who, speaking to this Objection, says much to the
same purpose; First, That we have a Precept which is more than a Precedent.
Secondly, That we have Precedents for it in the Old Testament. And say I, it
being no ceremonial Rite, but a moral and perpetual Duty, that in the Old
Testament is as much a Rule for us herein, as their religious reading the
Scriptures, and keeping of Days of Prayer and Fasting, and Days of
Thanksgiving: if this be not so, in vain are our People pressed and stirred up
to those Duties by the Authority of those Texts in the Old Testament, as I said
in Chap. 4. page 47.

Besides, we find it is prophesied of, that in Gospel-days, as has been showed,
Sions Watchmen, and desolate Souls, or waste places, should lift up their
Voice, and with their Voice together shall sing, Isa. 52. 7, 8. And certainly
that in Rev. 19. 1, 2, 3, 4. those Hallelujahs that shall be sung in the
Gospel-Churches at the downfall of Babylon, will be doubtless with Voices, since
it is said to be the Voice of much People, as the Voice of many Waters, and as
the Voice of mighty Thunderings.

Christ (says Mr. Cotton) and his Disciples when they received the
Lord's Supper, which was a Church-Act, they were an entire Congregation, and
they after Supper, sung an Hymn. To say that one sung it, says he, and the
others joined in Spirit, saying, Amen, has no foot-hold in the Text, it might
as well be said, they all took the Bread, they all blessed it, and gave it, in
that one did it, and all the rest joined in Spirit and consented in that, and
in the blessing of it.

But it is said [they] sung the Hynm, not he alone, yet [he] is said to give
Thanks, or to bless the Bread, etc.

It is no strain of Wit, says he, but a solid and judicious Exposition of the
fourth Chapter of the Revelation, to make it a Description of a particular
visible Church of Christ, according to the Platform and Pattern of the New
Testament; whereas the four living Creatures are four sorts of Officers, so the
twenty four Elders set forth the Brethren of the Church in respect of their
ripe Age, Gal. 4. 1, 2, 3. and twenty four in number answering to the twenty
four Orders of Priests and Levites, 1 Chronicles. 25. 9, etc. and these are all said
to join together in singing a new Song unto the Lamb. If his Exposition may not
be admitted, yet all Expositors agree, that by the four Beasts and twenty four
Elders, are meant the Church and the Officers in the Church, and then their
singing together does confirm the manner of Gospel-singing with united Voices
together in God's Worship.

Object. But what ground is there for the Church to join in singing of Psalms,
etc. with Unbelievers?

Answ. 1. Unbelievers joining with them, is one thing, and their joining with
Unbelievers, is another: And since it is a Church-Ordinance (as we have clearly
proved all along it is) what Rule or Ground has the Church to put Unbelievers
forth of their Assemblies if they knew them from others? there may be
Unbelievers in the Church, and there may be Believers out of the Church.

2. What ground has the Church to pray with Unbelievers? certainly the
Communion together in Spirit is more close and intimate than that of uniting
the Voice; so that if it be unlawful to let them sing with us, it is unlawful to
let them in their Hearts join in Prayer with us.

Must not the Children have their Bread, because Strangers will get some of it?
Besides, in the Church of Corinth, when Singing was brought in amongst them, as
well as a Doctrine, etc. the Apostle speaks of Unbelievers coming into their
Assemblies: and it is one Reason he gives why they should take heed to prevent
Confusion, and not to suffer one to bring in a Doctrine, (or many together) and
another an Interpretation, and another a Psalm, to put them all on Singing, and
so have all these Ordinances confounded together, in a disorderly and confused
manner: So 1 Cor. 14. verse. 26. compared with verse. 23.

3. If Singing be a part of natural Religion, or a moral Duty, as Prayer is,
this Objection is gone for ever: So that he that answers what we say here, will
do nothing unless he can make it appear Singing the Praises of God is a mere
positive Precept, and had never been known to be the Duty of Mankind, without
some written Law or Prescription. Are not all Creatures called upon to sing and
praise their Creator? and have not Unbelievers cause to praise God, nay, sing
his Praise for the Mercies and Blessings God does bestow upon them? Nay, have
they not cause to praise God for Christ and the Gospel? etc. What is Singing
but praising of God? And would you not have any to do this but the Saints?
Ought not all Men on Earth to pray, tho till they have Faith their Prayers are
not accepted of God?

I shall conclude this Chapter with what Mr. Sidenham has so well said to this
Objection.

Many who grant Singing to be an Ordinance (says he) among Saints, yet stumble
to sing in a promiscuous manner with others, especially because so many Psalms,
etc. are of such composition, that does not seem to concern a mixed multitude.

For opening of this, I must lay down this general Position, That Prayer and
Praises are natural Duties belonging to all Men as Men, though only the Saints
can do them best and spiritually; it is so upon all Men by the Law of Creation,
to seek to God for what they want, and to thank him for what they have: this is
due unto God, owing unto him as Creator and Benefactor; and though Singing be a
part of instituted Worship, yet it is as an addition of Order, and a regulation
of a natural Duty: And as there is no Man but is bound to pray for Mercies, so
none are exempted from praising God for Mercies, though they sing in a low^^
Tune than Saints. Thus David calls in (...) Creatures to bless and praise God,
as a natural Duty, according to their several Capacities, Psalm. 136. Psalm. 117.
Psalm. 10^ Psalm. 20. 21, 22. Praise, is the natural Duty of all, the proper Duty
of Saints, and (...) perfect Duty of Angels and glorified Souls.

Object. You will say, They cannot perf^^^ it aright.

Sol. 1. Their want of Ability does (...) discharge them from such a Duty
engrav^^ on their Consciences, from the natural respects they have to God as a
Creator; (...) perform which, God gave them full power* Let every Man do his
Duty conscientiously* he may afterward come to do it spiritually (...) though
I should lose the sense of a Duty i^ my Conscience, yet the Duty lies on my
Conscience from God's Authority, and my Relation to him.

By the same Rule, every one should abstain from performance of a Duty for
(...) of present Ability, whereas the Duty mu^^ be done, and strength expected
from Heaven, and waited for according to the divine manner of Dispensation.

2. It Is not unlawful to join in any Act with others, or to countenance them in
it, which is really their Duty as well as (...) own: I cannot sin in joining
with any one in that Act, to perform which is the Duty of another, as mine,
though he may want the present Ability.

For Duties must be measured according to the Rule, not the Ability of the
Performer. Now, it is no Duty for any Man to receive the Lord's Supper, or be a
Member of a Church in order to Communion, without he find himself in some
measure fitted by Grace, these Sealing Ordinances of the Gospel, suppose and
require some other Qualification, and are peculiar to visible Saints; but where
there is a natural Character, or an Ordinance as to the Substance of it, at
least equally concerning all, there is no Sin to join in the administration of
it: And if we consider of it warily, unregenerate Men are great sharers in the
Mercies of the Churches, besides their own particular Duty, that they may well
join with them in setting forth God's Praises. But more closely and
particularly.

1. When the Church and Saints of God are gathered together to worship him in
Singing, it is no more unlawful to sing with others that stand by and join
their Voices, than when in Prayer they stand by and give their Consent; we do
not so much join with them, as they do own God's Actings among us: It is no sin
in them to join with us in such a Duty, neither can it be any sin in us to
sing, though others very carnal will outwardly praise God with us.

2. The Carriage of the Saints in their hearty and real Expressions of Praises,
may convince others in the coldness and lowness of their Spirit, and stir them
up to some spiritual Apprehensions. Sidenham (...) Singing, page 213, 214, 215.

It Is evident the Church is not bound to worship God alone in the
Administration of the Gospel, and not suffer the People to come among them,
unless she intends to become no Church in a short time; for how shall she
increase or have Children born in her? Is not Hearing the Word of God preached,
and Public Prayer, as Sacred Ordinances of Gospel Worship, (...) Singing? Why
then may they be admitted to join with the Church in those Ordinances, (which
they are no better able to perform acceptably to God, than in Singing) and be
denied to sing? By this Rule others must not be admitted to join with the
Church in one part of Gospel Worship, you must not suffer them to join with us
in any, but even (...) the Doors upon them, and worship God alone. And should
we deny them to do this, it might also lay a Stumbling Block in their way, and
give them a just offense against the Lord's People. See more in Chap. 9. where
we have spoken further to this Objection.

CHAP. XV.
Wherein Mr. Marlow's Book, and many other Objections raised against singing of
Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, are fully and plainly answered.
THough all that are impartial, who shall read Mr. Marlow's Book against
Singing, and consider what I have already said in this Treatise, will say, He
is answered: Yet I shall now give a particular Reply to all that is any ways
material contained in it, which I have not detected and answered before.

That which he insinuates, page 3, 4. about the Weakness and Imbecility of some
Christians about their reception of this Ordinance as a dangerous thing, needs
no Reply; he would fain make his Reader think, to receive singing of Psalms,
etc. as an Ordinance, is no less than a falling away from the Truth. So clearly
(says he) manifested by the Holy Scripture, and witnessed to by the Sufferings
of the purest Churches in our Age, who have born a lively Testimony, not only
against the humane prescribed and precomposed Forms of Prayer, but against
singing David' s Psalms, and other Hymns or Songs precomposed by Man.

Answ. It Is not a falling away from Truth, to restore a lost or neglected
Ordinance of the Gospel, (as you I perceive dare not deny, but this of Singing
is); The main difference is about the Manner, or what Singing is. We say it is
going forward i^ the glorious Work of Reformation. What though some Baptized
Churches (who I do believe have attained to greater Purity in some things, than
some others) have born such a Witness against Singing of David's Psalms; is it
therefore no Ordinance of Christ? must they needs know every Truth of Christ?
Is there any Church that is yet arrived to such a perfection of Knowledge, that
they need not the discovery of any Truth but what they have received? I am
afraid some of those Churches are yet short of the Knowledge and Practice of
another Ordinance as well as this, and speak against it as against this, though
it is one of the first Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, Heb. 6. 1, 2. Are
they against the Singing of David's Psalms and Hymns, do ye say? God forbid!
since the Holy Ghost has enjoined the Churches to sing them, page 3, 4.

But to pass over this, you come to consider that Text, Ephesians. 5. 14. Speaking
to your selves in Psalms, etc.

Object. From these Words, nor the Context relating to them, is there any
W^^for a vocal Speaking; but otherwise it must be understood, a speaking to
your own Heart. These are your words.

Answ. It Is well you do not affirm this, Teaching is then a Preaching, from
Psalms, etc. in ordinary Gospel-Administration; for some there have been, and
may be are now, that assert that, (and I think we shall find you there too by
and by) however, let the Speaking be what it will that is here meant, it is
evident it is such a speaking that is used in Singing; for so the following
words explain it, which you are not willing (it may be) to cite; Singing, and
making of Melody in your Hearts to the Lord.

You then mention Col. 3. 16. I confess (say you) that Vocal Singing is here to
be understood, In Ephesians. 3. 19. it was not Vocal Singing, yet here he says,
it is a Vocal Singing.
otherwise it could not be Teaching and Admonishing to others in Word or Deed;
but yet here is nothing to prove Vocal Singing together, for Teaching and
Admonishing one another in Psalms, etc. is meant of the Ministering Brethren,
whose Work it was to teach and admonish the other Members, according to the
Gifts they had received; and none can prove any more by these words [one
another] than what must be understood from Heb. 3. 13. But exhort one another
daily, whilst it is called to day: And therefore as the word Exhortation is not
used in the Church, but in an orderly ministerial way, by one at once, etc.
must be used also according to Gospel-Rule; 1 Cor. 14. 26. How is it Brethren?
when you come together, every one of you has a Psalm, has a Doctrine, etc. be
understood of a Vocal Singing all together; for I think (...) will say, that
those words, Every one of you has, etc. were spoken of all having those
Spiritual Gifts, which cannot be though of every Minister in that Church, Verse.
28* much less of all the Members, etc. So (...) cannot be supposed, that all
the Ministering Brethren had the Gift of Singing, or (...) was any distinction
of its universality in delivery, more than of other Gifts in the (...) Text;
besides the Context speaks of single Persons that must exercise in the Church,
(...) therefore those words [every one of you] (...) mean all, etc.

Answ. First of all; I cannot but take notice how you contradict your self in
Ephesians. 5. 19. you would have the Apostle, by Teaching and Singing, to mean only
a silent Speaking in their Heart, without a Voice.

But, in Col. 3. 16. you confess, that intends a Vocal Singing: Do you think
any Man, who has the least Light or Knowledge in the Scripture can groundedly
suppose, that the Apostle does, in Ephesians. 5. 19. (in these words, Speaking to
your selves in Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, singing and making of Melody
in your Heart to the Lord. And in Col. 3. 16. in these words, Teaching and
Admonishing one another in Psalms, and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, singing with
Grace in your Hearts to the Lord) mean two different things? Surely there is
not one Man to be found of your Opinion, for all generally, with one Mouth,
affirm, the Apostle in writing to these two Churches, intends the one and the
same Practice. Nor is ^here any thing said by you to convince us to the
contrary; for though the Duty seems to be ^id down in different words, yet it
implies the same thing; speaking to your selves, and teaching and admonishing
one another, are of the (...) import on this occasion as expressed here; for
the Speaking is in Singing, and so is the Teaching and Admonishing, as the
close of the Text opens it to every understanding Man.

2. It Is observable how you seem to confound this great Duty injoined in
ordinary Worship on these two Churches, with the exercise of those
extraordinary Gifts, mentioned 1 Cor. 14. 26. which hereafter I purpose to
explain, and show the purport or main drift of the Spirit in that place in 1
Cor. 14, etc. If any Man did sing in an unknown Tongue alone, 'twas because
others were not capable to sing with him, and he from thence was not to use
such a Gift in the Church, unless there was an Interpreter to give forth that
Psalm or Hymn, that so all might sing with him, and be edified in that
Ordinance as in others.

3. In the third place, which is yet worst of all, you would have this of
Teaching and Admonishing one another in Psalms, etc. singing with Grace in your
Heart, to refer to that Heb. 3. 13. which you apply to such who had the Gift to
preach Ministerially, and to sing too by the said Gift. In answer to this, in
the first place, I thought we should not have had you to affirm, the Apostle
means, by Teaching and Admonishing here in this place, to be Preaching,
according to that (in your sense) you refer to in citing Heb. 3. 13.

Now as to the first part of your Assertion; had you read Reverend Mr. Cotton,
it might have removed this Mistake, and so prevented your pains to trouble the
Reader with such an Exposition of the Text: I find him answering an Objection,
that directly includes part of yours, in these words following.

Object. The Apostle to the Ephesians and Colossians does not say, Sing one to
another in Psalms, but speak or preach one to another; or, in other words,
Teach and admonish one another; the Psalms dwelling in their Hearts they were
to dispose them in a way of teaching and admonishing; but as for singing, he
makes no mention of that, until he came to teach them the manner of dispensing
the words of Christ unto God in one Verse, and then indeed he teaches them to
sing in the Spirit, making Melody with Grace in the Heart.

If I do not mistake you, this Objection contains part of what you say, and
pray take his Answer; I do not doubt but he gives the true sense of the place.

Answ. Such as tremble at the Word, says he, (as the framer of this Objection
professes himself to do) they should rather bow their Judgments and Practice
to Scripture Language, than bow the Sense of Scripture to their own Conceptions
against the Language of Scripture; it is one thing to speak one to another in
Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual Songs, as is done in singing, and another
thing to preach and teach one another out of the Psalms, and Hymns, and
spiritual Songs. It Is true, they were to teach and admonish one another out of
the Psalms, and the scope of Paul will teach that; but if Paul had meant that,
to wit, that they should teach and preach one to another out of the Psalms, he
would not have said, Speak ye one to another in Psalms, or with Psalms, but out
of the Psalms, for such is the Language of the Holy Ghost in expressing this
Duty; Paul is said to have expounded and testified, and persw^ded the Jews out
of the Law of Moses, and out of the Prophets, Acts 28. 23. So Philip is said to
do, begin to preach to the Eun^^h, from that Scripture in Isaiah, Act. 8. 35.
Thus Mr. Cotton.

It Is evident, my Brother, that Paul is not a speaking here to Ministers, but
to the whole Church, and he is not a laying down Directions to gifted Brethren
how they should preach and exhort one another that way, as sometimes he does,
much less about the exercise of extraordinary Gifts; but it is to injoin and
exhort the Churches to sing Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual Songs; how also
they should perform this Duty to the Honor of God and their own Comfort, in
ordinary Gospel-Administration. Dr. Roberts in his Key to the Bible, page 176.
says on these words to this purpose. But Christians should be filled with the
Spirit, not filled with Wine, but with the Spirit, and speak one to another in
Psalms, (...) Hymns, and spiritual Songs, etc. thus rejoicing with Heavenly
Melody in your Hearts to the Lord: and the latter words in both places, Ephesians. 5.
19. Col. 3. 16. are, says he, exegetical to those in the beginning of the
Verses, explaining what he means by speaking, teaching and admonishing, viz.
thus, edifying one another in singing Psalms, etc. And it is an excellent way of
speaking to themselves and to one another, when Christians sing Psalms, etc. --
therefore, says he, that speaking to themselves, and teaching one another in
Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual Songs, is (...) singing.

As to singing with a vocal Voice, you have granted it is intended by the Holy
Ghost in Col. 3. 16. which is as much as I desire. What you hint or imagine of
one singing alone has been fully answered, that never having been the Practice
of God's People in God's ordinary Worship, neither in the Old or New Testament;
and as touching singing by an extraordinary Gift, more of that anon.

And, says Mr. Sidenham, many think there can be no such use of Singing, as to
teach and admonish one another by it; but if we consider, there are many
Lessons to be learned one of another from this public Conjunction of singing
Scripture-Psalms.

1. They teach one another, and by the very Act admonish one another, to get
the same Frames these holy Men had in penning the Psalms, and in the variety
and spirituality of them to get David's Frame, in singing David's Psalms, etc.

2. It Is by this they teach one another the Unity and Harmony that is and
should be among Saints, as one Body, that their Happiness and Joys are bound up
together, and so the Misery of one is the Misery of the whole; and this is a
glorious L^sson to know their Union together, as a Body equally concerned in
the Joy or Sorrow of one another, equally interested in the Praises of God.
There is no Duty practiced in all the Gospel, that does fully express the
Communion of Saints, and represent Heaven, as the Saints singing together. The
Lord's Supper does represent the Communion of Saints very lively, but not so as
mutual singing, when all at once, not by consent only, but expressly speak the
same thing the same moment. In the Lord's Supper, the afterward they were all
one Bread, yet they all do not receive it at the same instant of time, but may
take successively the Elements; but in singing they all join perfectly at once,
to sound forth the Praises of God, as if they had but one Heart and one Voice
too. This is the perfect Emblem of Heaven, no jarring, all with one Voice and
Heart, crying Hallelujah, Hallelujah.

3. They teach one another this Lesson also, viz. with what Alacrity and
Cheerfulness they should perform all their Duties together, and how with
sweetness of Love and Joy they ought to walk together.

4. They teach one another how to carry themselves in all Conditions with a
joyful and praising frame of Spirit, etc. and it shows a Soul is not in a right
temper when he cannot sing over his Condition. To which I might add, not are
they in that sweet Concord and Union with the Church, or hearty Affection that
cannot join in one Heart and Voice with them.

5. They teach one another by singing, and admonishing one another (this way)
to avoid any thing that may hinder their Joys in Communion, and break their
Harmony in spiritual Actions; all which, and many more are great Lessons, and
are taught naturally by Saints mutual singing together, page 211, 212.

Object. If any should object, How can Unbelievers join with the Saints in
singing, if this be so?

Answ. This has been answered already: there are the like Lessons, tho not to
that degree and clearness, taught in uniting Hearts together in public Prayer
and Praises, in Prayer and in mutually joining together equally in hearing
God's Word: Nay, and all must grant, that the chiefest and nearest Communion is
that of the Heart and Spirit: If therefore you may, and do admit such you speak
of, to that Communion and Liberty with you, how dare you, or can you deny them
this? True, the Voice shows that Union that is in the Heart, or sets it forth;
but the chief Fellowship and Unity is in the Spirit, as in the last Chapter I
have showed.

Now I shall come to consider the Method or Form of your Book, or Heads you
insist upon, which are laid down in six Particulars.

I. Of the Essence of Singing, ( as you call it.) II. Of David's Psalms. III.
Of prescribed or precomposed Songs. IV. Of Women's Singing. V. Of the Order of
Singing. VI. Of Scriptural, and other Objections.
I. Of the Essence of Singing.
Thus you begin, viz. Though intelligible Singing for teaching and admonishing
others cannot be without the use of the Organical Instruments of the Voice, yet
the Essence or Being of Singing consists in an inward spiritual Exercise of the
Soul or Mind of Man. And this must be granted: for we all do own that true
Prayer may be made in our Hearts to God without the use of our Voice.

And then come and tell your Reader the Essence of Sin is in the Heart, and the
Essenc^ of other things Good and Evil, and take (...) four Pages in this kind
of nonsensical way (...) speaking, confounding the proper Acts (...) God's
Worship, nay, destroy them utterly, by starting an uncouth term, as here
applied, (...) Essence; nay, and I perceive this mighty Man of Straw you have
made and set up, you (...) at a strange manner; it is, as it were, the (...) on
which all the stress of the whole Superstructure of your newfound Contrivance
to evade God's blessed Ordinance of Singing (...) laid; so that if this be
razed, you must find another Singing in the New Testament besides this Essence
of Singing, which you say is in the Heart; and I perceive it is only that inward
joy of the Spirit that you mean by the Essence of Singing, and that to be all
the Singing you would have the Saints to use in Gospel-days. And besure if you
have missed the mark here, your Book has nothing in it of instruction. A Man
cannot be so vain as to attempt to overthrow an Act of Divine Worship, as it
has been received and practiced for many Ages amongst all the Godly generally;
but he must set up something in the room of it which he must call by that name,
since God's Word bears positive witness to such a Church-Ordinance. A
Gospel-Singing there is, as well as a Gospel-praying, preaching, etc. But
rather than it shall be that which indeed it is, as owned by the Law, and the
Prophets, Christ and his Apostles, and most wise, learned, and truly Godly
Christians, it shall be something else contrived in the darkness of your Mind.

Thus the Quakers have cast off the Holy Ordinances of Baptism, and the Lord's
Supper, and have gotten spiritual Ones (in the blind Imaginations of their
Hearts) in their (...); as you would have a Heart Singing of Psalms without the
Voice, so they have got (...) Heart-baptism without Water, and a Heartbreaking
of Bread without Bread or Wine.

The Papists, or Church of Rome, also have, by the subtilty of Satan, and pride
of their own Spirits, changed and corrupted these and other Ordinances of the
Gospel another way, (...) they have set up something in their stead, which they
call by their Names; for, first, they have that they call Baptism, but it is
not Christ's Baptism, but Rantism, with many Ceremonies added to it. They have
that they call the (...) Supper, but it is not Christ's Ordinance, but another
thing, etc. Also let me tell you, in the fear of God, you have adventured to
raze or take away Christ's Ordinance of Singing, and have invented something to
put in its room, which you call a Gospel-singing: And I am afsaid you little
think of the bitter Consequents of this Attempt of yours, and how you ^eem
hereby to ridicule (though not wittily, I have better thoughts of you) the
whole of Gospel Ordinances, by turning them into a thing you call Essence, a
Heart-service only without the Bodily Organs, and rendering your self to be but
little better in your so doing, than a mere Enthusiast; and whilst you plead
for Spiritual Worship, and cry down all Forms, you seem to overthrow all
external Acts of Religion, by intimating, that because the Heart (...) perform
one Duty at some Seasons acceptably to God, viz. Prayer without the bodily
Organs; why may not the Spirit or Heart perform Singing too? say you. And why
not, say I, Preaching the Word, Baptism, and Breaking of Bread also? The
Quakers have not only got a Spiritual or Heart-Baptism, and a Spiritual or
Heartbreaking of Bread, but an assembling together for Heart-Preaching also:
And what you say about the Essence of these Duties being in the Heart, (and how
it is the Heart or Spirit only in Duty and Ordinances that God looks at) and
from hence seek to make void Singing with the Voice, it does (as all Men may
see) strike through the Loins of all External Acts of Divine Worship, as before
showed: For as I told you in the first Chapter, the Essence of Preaching, and
every other External Duty, may as well be said to lie in the Spirit as this of
Singing Psalms and Hymns, etc. Besides, since God is so much pleased, as you
intimate, with the bare Internal Worship of the Heart, without the bodily
Organs, and with Prayer particularly, why do you not excuse the Tongue from
that Service likewise, and say, that External Expressions in Prayer, or
praising God with the Tongue, is a low formal thing, and to be rejected?

But I cannot but smile at one of your first Expressions; You say very right,
ours is an intel^gible sort of Singing. But that which you ^lead for is such,
that no Body can tell what to ^ake of; besure it is no Singing at all, as in the
first Chapter I have proved; I mean, that which you call the Essence or Being
of Singing in the Heart, or inward Joy. Brother, I have showed you, that
Singing and Preaching, etc. are Ordinances of a different Nature to that of
Prayer; Prayer may be performed in the Heart without the Tongue; but there is
no proper Singing or Preaching without the Organs of the Tongue, and therefore
all your whole Fabric is overturned with one blast: for this Error of yours,
is like that of the first Concoction; If you have got no other proper singing
of Psalms, than what we plead for and practice, nor no other can be found
warranted in God's Word, Then (...) must be the true and right Ordinance, and
manner of performance of it, likewise. Let Men but destroy the practice of an
Ordinance, as it is by so many practiced, and has been from the beginning, and
as we conceive and believe in a right manner, unless they have another Form to
present to our sight, that we may have time to compare them with God's Word, to
see which may be nearest the Rule in our Judgments, they do nothing but perplex
the World as well as us. You have presented us with one, I must confess, which
only has that Name given to it by your self, but it is not the thing, i. e. it
is no proper Singing at all.

You talk of the Essence of Sin in the Heart, as well as the Essence of Duties
being in the Heart or Spirit. What do you mean? can sin be no where but in the
Heart, because it is there? or can a thing be where its Being or Essence is
not? There may be much Evil in the Eyes; we read of Eyes full of Adultery. Nay,
and I must tell you, that the Essence or Being of Sin is in the Tongue
likewise. Pray see what the Apostle James says, In the Tongue (...) a Fire, a
World of Iniquity: so is the Tongue amongst our Members, that it defiles the
whole Body, and sets on fire the whole course of Nature, and is set on Fire
of Hell, Jam. 3. 6. Certainly the Essence of Sin is in the Tongue, as well as
in the Heart, or you are out in your term; and the Essence of Singing, some
will tell you, is wholly in the Tongue. And now since the Tongue does thus
dishonor God, (by the way) let me tell you, there is great reason it should
not be idle, but be employed to praise and sing to the Honor of God.

If by Essence of Sin, you mean the Rise, Spring, or Fountain of Sin, I say you
speak Truth, and good sense too; for it is out of the Heart that proceeds
Fornication, etc. Yet some Sins may be said, to have their proper Essence or
Being in the Life, as well as in the Heart, and may rise from a Temptation from
without also.

We will grant you likewise that the Heart is the Fountain or Spring of most
Actions, all our Duties must spring or flow from thence; i. e. the Heart by
God's Spirit, must stir us up to do them: (...) does it follow from hence, that
many of (...) Duties can be performed by the Heart or spirit without the
Tongue? Sure you will say, (...) Man can preach, though the Matter be (...) his
Mind or Head, etc. No more, say (...) can they in a proper sense be said to
sing Psalms, etc. Only one word more, and I (...) done with this. In page 9.
you speak of (...) Fields rejoicing and singing. We have ^ewed you, that there
is an improper or metaphorical Singing mentioned in the Scripture, (...) so
that Scripture and some other places are to be taken, and know that your
singing is no (...) a proper Singing, than Abel's Blood, which is said to
speak, was a proper Speaking, as I said in the first Chapter be fore.

II. Of David's Psalms.
1. You say, There was no Institution of Singing before David's Time.

Answ. We have proved Singing the Praises of God is a part of natural Religion,
and so a moral Duty in its own Nature, as Prayer is; and that the Heathen sang
the Praises of God for his goodness in Creation, that have no written Word: And
what is this then to the purpose, if we should grant that Singing was not
brought under an Institution till David's Time?

As touching what you say about the Israelites in the Wilderness, how in
trouble they did not sing, it is more than you know, for I think you will find
they were not far from the Wilderness when Moses and the Congregation sang*
Exodus 15. However our Lord Jesus and his Disciples sang when it was a sad
Wilderness^time with them, it was just the Night before our Blessed Savior was
betrayed. And Paul and Silas sung in the Wilderness of a Prison; and though the
Saints are always sorrowful, yet they are required ever-more to rejoice. All
outward Comforts of this World, are not (...) thousand part such cause of Joy
and Singing, as our spiritual Deliverance and Salvation by Christ is. Do you
think that outward Blessings here will better tend to tune our Spirits and
Tongues to sing the Praises of God, than the Love of God in Jesus Christ,
Pardon of Sin, Justification, Union, Communion, Adoption? etc. No, no, here is
the Spring of Joy, and cause of true spiritual Singing, and none can learn
David's Psalms, nor any other Scripture-Hymns or Songs thus to sing them, but
the 144000; none but such who have that new Name, that new Nature, can learn
this Song as thus to sing it, Rev. 14. 3. And let me tell you, this Singing of
the hundred and forty four thousand spoken of, was under the Reign of
Antichrist, for the seven Angels with their seven Vials came out of the Temple
afterward, who destroy Babylon.

Take what our late Annotators speak on the place. The New Song here spoken of,
is probably the same with that we met with before, chap. 5. 11. sang by the
Voice of many Angels round about the Throne, and the Beasts, and the Elders;
called a new Song, either for the excellency of it, or because sung unto God
after Christ was manifested in the Flesh. The design of it was, to declare the
worthiness of Christ, to receive Power, and Riches, and Wisdom, and Strength,
and Honor, and Blessing. A new Song, signifies a Song which praises God for
new benefits received from him. During the Reign of Antichrist, none could
learn this Song, to give Power, Riches, Wisdom, Strength, Honor, Glory, and
Blessing, but a small number redeemed through the Blood of Christ. Annot. on
Rev. 14. 3. This shows other Spiritual Songs may be sung besides David's Psalms
in Gospel-days; this was none of those.


Secondly, You say, The singing of David's Psalms, were suitable to all the
rest of the Levitical Ceremonies, and Temple-Worship, page 12, 13.

Answ. There is no doubt but the Singing of David's Psalms with Instruments of
Music, was suited to the order of the Levites and to the Temple-worship. What
then, must not we sing Psalms in the Gospel-days, with Grace in our Hearts to
the Lord? We know no Psalms, but David's Psalms, or those called the Book of
Psalms; and the holy Ghost does injoin the Gospel-Churches to sing Psalms, as
well as Hymns, and spiritual Songs. Will you take upon you to countermand God's
holy Precept? Will you say Very Tightly Bound we must not sing Psalms, when the
Churche^ are exhorted so to do? Pray, when you writ^ again, tell us what Psalms
they are the Holy Ghost there speaks of, if not them, or some o^ them called
the Psalms of David.

True, all Types, Shadows, and Ceremonies* are removed and done away; but
Singing the Praise of God was no Ceremony, but a Mora^ Duty, and performed by
the Children of Israel, before the Law of Shadows and Ceremonies was given
forth, Exodus 15. 1, 2. You may (...) well say Prayer was a Ceremony, because
the^^ were diverse ceremonial Rites used in the performance of it, particularly
that of Incense.

2. Did not Christ sing an Hymn after the Supper? Would he have left that as a
Patte^^ to us, and annexed it to such a pure Gospel-Ordinance, had it been a
Ceremony, and only belonging to the Jewish Worship? Or, would the Apostle Paul
have given, by the Authority of the Holy Ghost, such a Precept to the Church of
Coloss to sing Psalms, etc. whom (...) strives so much to take off from Jewish
Rites^ Days, and Ceremonies? Had singing of Psalms^ Hymns, and spiritual Songs
been a Jewish Ceremony, he would not have done thus. This is sufficient to
convince any sober and unbia^^e^ Person, i. e. that Singing the Praises of God
i^ a Gospel-Duty; and that it did not belong only to the Jews, in the Days of
the Old Testament. But you contradict this your self; for afterward you grant
that the Saints, when the extraordinary Gifts are given, as you suppose they
will in the thousand Years Reign, you intimate then they shall sing as we do;
or else I know not what you mean.

How shall they use a legal and Typical Rite, that only appertained to the Jews
and Levites, in that glorious state of the Church? Doubtless their Singing of
Old, with musical Instruments, was a Figure of that sweet spiritual Melody the
Saints should make from a well-tuned gracious Heart, and with united and
melodious Tongues together in the Gospel-days, as I have again and again
showed; and this therefore is not mixing Law and Gospel together, but
continuing a Gospel-Ordinance in the Church that is of Gospel-Authority, both
from Precepts and Examples, as I have proved in this Treatise: so that I have
answered your second, and third, and part of your fourth Thesis together.

Thirdly, (you say) The matter of David's Psalms and other holy Men, were
suited to particular Occasions, and Experiences, and Accidents of that day, as
may be seen by diverse of their Titles. Some Prophecies of the Sufferings of
Christ, etc. And some Places hard to be understood, so improper to be sung by
all the Church, who cannot sing them with Understanding, as well as justifying
the singing Prayers as well as Praises. Page 14.

Answ. Most of the Book of Psalms contains proper Instructions for most
Occasions the People of God can find: What was written before Time the Apostle
says was written for our Learning. All Scripture is given by inspiration of
God, and is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, and for
Instruction in Righteousness, 2 Timothy 3. 16. If all Scripture, then the Book of
the Psalms, and for instruction by Singing them too, because so required by the
Holy Spirit, Ephesians. 5. 19. Coloss. 3. 16. May you not as well say they are of no
use to us? The Book of Psalms good Men look upon as the Heart of our Sacred
Bible, and as fruitful a Book for Saints in Gospel Times as any Book in the Old
Testament; but if there be any Psalms that cannot so well be sung as some
others, God's People are at their liberty whether they will sing them or no:
however, unless you can tell us there are others called Psalms, besides these,
you say nothing, for we are required to sing Psalms. And as to those things
contained in David's Psalms that are hard to be understood, they may be opened
to the People before they are sung.

As touching singing Prayers, I have spoken to this already. Though we are
against humane Forms of Prayer, yet the Singing of David's Psalms (wherein
there are some Prayers) are of Divine Institution; and therefore it is lawful to
sing Psalms and Hymns that have some Expressions Prayer-wife in them. Our
Brethren say, praising of God in Prayer, is Singing; and indeed, if they did
not thus conclude, I am persuaded they could not satisfy their Consciences to
lie wholly short of this Duty; and therefore in their sense, singing of some
part of Prayer is lawful, or else Singing is something they do not as yet own,
nor can tell us what it is.

As to what you say in the fifth place, p. 14.

Object. That David's Psalms were limited to the Levites.

Answ. It Is nothing to your purpose, it is rather an Argument for singing Psalms
by the whole Church; for the whole Church is that spiritual Priesthood, to
offer up spiritual Sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ* 1 Pet. 2. 5.
That as the Priesthood, or Levi^^s, sung together under the Law, with
Instruments of Music, it might typify out how the whole Church should sing
spiritually with Grace in their Hearts to the Lord together under the Gospel.

You say in the next place, page 15.

Object. There is no Institution to sing David's Psalms, and that Christ nor
his Apostles ever (...) practiced. And also if the Apostles had occasion to
translate any Text out of the Hebrew (...) the Greek, they did never turn them
into Meter.

Answ. There is an Institution to sing David' s Psalms; Ephesians. 5. 19. Col. 3.
16. If there be (...) ^ther Psalms mentioned in the Scripture, besides David's
Psalms, or the Book of Psalms, and the Churches are required to sing Psalms as
well (...) Hymns; Then there is a Gospel-Institution for singing of David's
Psalms. But there are no other Psalms mentioned in the Scripture besid^^
David's Psalms, or the Book of Psalms, and the Churches are required to sing
Psalms as well as Hymns. Ergo. The singing of David's Psalms, or Psalms
contained in the Book of Psalms, is a Gospel-Institution.

That the Churches are required to sing Psalms, we have showed again and again,
Ephesians. 5. 19. If there be any other Psalms besides what are contained in the Book
of Psalms, which are so called, you must show which they be, and then we will
use those which we shall have the clearest ground to judge the Spirit of God may
intend.

As to their translating any of them into Meter, out of Hebrew into Greek, it
is remote to the Business; we know not they did translate any Scripture at all
out of Hebrew into Greek.

III. Of prescribed and precomposed Songs and Hymns.
First, (say you) If the Essence of Singing, as before is showed, consists in
an inward spiritual Exercise of the Soul or Mind of Man; and that both the
Matter and the Melody of it, proceeds from the inward Graces and Operations
of the Holy Spirit with the Word; then surely no humane prescribed Form of
Singing can be accepted of God, but that which proceeds from the Word of God,
by the Dictates and Teachings of the Holy Spirit. You mention Ephesians. 5. 18, 19.
Col. 3. 16. Page 15.

Again, page 16. Now the Essence of Singing consists of these two parts, viz.
Matter [from the Word], and Melody [by the Spirit]: So that neither the Word
nor the Spirit can be wanting; and therefore whatsoever Forms are used which
proceed not from within us, out of a Fullness and Enriching of the Word and
Spirit, cannot be Spiritual Singings.

Answ. Brother, who do you encounter with now? It Is evident this does not
concern as, you need not have taken so much time and pains to prove that which
no Body that I know denies.

But before I come to reply to that, I cannot but take notice how you hug your
former Notion of Essence of Singing; but I perceive your have found out the
Essence of Singing, is not in the Spirit alone, but it has Matter and Form too:
the Matter (you say) is God's Word; there you are right: you say, The Melody
lies in the Heart, that is partly true, but there must be something else added
to the Essence of Singing, or else you have it not; and that is the chief
thing, the only thing from whence it is called Singing, that is, a melodious
Voice, add that, and then you plead for Singing; take that away, and it is no
more than inward Joy, or Rejoicing. Singing, Mr. Caryl tells you, is an Act of
the Voice: It Is a melodious Noise, do not mistake your self in one of the most
plain and easiest Acts of the B^dily Organ, or Act of the Tongue. But to the
Business, no Hymn must be made nor composed from God's Word, it appears,
without the help and assistance of the holy Spirit. I am of your Mind.

But I hope you do not mean the miraculous or extraordinary Help or Operations
of the Spirit, because you are a speaking of the Administrations of the Gospel,
and Gospel Worship in general.

Now there are two things to be ^^^^^dered in bringing forth a Doctrine, viz.
That it is agreeable to the Word of God; he that compiles a Sermon must be sure
to see it is God's Word, i. e. congruous thereunto, and provable therefrom, or
else it is humane.

2. He must bring forth and preach it by the help and assistance of the Spirit
also, or else it may still be Human, no Divine Sermon.

So, and in like manner in compiling of an Hymn, it must be as to the matter,
the Word of Christ; Let the Word of Christ dwell in you richly, in all Wisdom,
teaching and admonishing one another in Psalms, Hymns, and spiritual Songs,
singing, etc. Col. 3. 19. See here the Direction for the matter of an Hymn or
spiritual Song, it must be in general the Word of Christ; (as it must be the
Word of Christ that is to be preached.) Even so also a^ Hymn, etc. must be (we
say) compiled out of the Word of Christ, and in singing of it there must be the
assistance of the holy Spirit. But now will you say we have not the Spirit of
Christ in composing the Hymn which is part of Christ's Word? Take heed! you are
too full of hard Words and Censures; another may, nay, and some do say so too,
we have no Rule to compose a Sermon; and I will say and testify, I know no more
Rule for a precomposed Sermon to be preached, than for a precomposed Hymn that
is to be sung, and I am satisfied I have equally in them both the like
assistance of the Spirit. Your speaking here of the Spiritualness of the Gospel
above the Law, does nothing in your case. We grant it, and say, Our Singing
differs now under the Gospel as to the Spirituality of it to that under the
Law, as much as my other Gospel-Service or Worship does.

Our Sermons are no more made for us in God's Word than our Hymns are, and we
have equal Direction in both these weighty ^^ses; and I must tell you, this way
of (...) you use is enough, if People did observe it, to overthrow all visible
Worship and Ordinances, unless we could make it appear, (...) we had the
immediate and extraordinary help of the Spirit in the discharge of them. Away,
^^ith one, with your carnal and human preaching, it is a Form invented and done
by Art, will you call this Gospel-preaching? The Apostles (...) as they were
moved by a mighty Spirit within them; you must preach by immediate inspiration
and not precomposed Sermons, or else your Sermons are formal. Thus you open a
Door for Quakerism, and throw St^^bling-blocks before the weak: I entreat you
to consider of it.

2. Doubtless what the Apostles did by an extraordinary Spirit in bringing in a
Doctrine and an Interpretation, etc. is a Rule for us in the ordinary Gifts;
for they preached and prayed, etc. by the wonderful or extraordinary Influences
of the Spirit: and because we have not those Gifts, must we not be found in
this Ordinance, viz. to sing, which is required in the New Testament; we by the
same Argument, must lay all others aside likewise, as the None-Churches have
done: from such a way of arguing as you use here, the Lord deliver us. But what
you speak on this occasion does not concern them that sing David's Psalms;
therefore if composed Hymns were not justified by God's Word as comprehended in
Hymns and spiritual Songs, Col. ^. 16. then the Book of Psalms, as our Brethren
say, are wholly intended, and then they must be sung, and them only; but we see
no reason so to believe. Eusebiw speaks of the Christians singing of Hymns to
Christ as to God, in the first Century, which shows it was the Practice of the
Church in the Primitive Times to sing other Hymns besides those in the Book of
Psalms.

As to Forms of Prayer, the Lord has left us a Form, by which we are directed
how to pray; and so he has left us his Word, and the Psalms of David, that we
may know how to compile our Hymns as well as our Sermons, by the help and
assistance of his Spirit: there is no more a Form of Preaching left, than there
is a Form of Hymns: and what tho Christians differ in their singing, they also
differ in their method or form of Preaching as much; and your Argument (say you
what you will) (...) alike against the one as against the other. But is it
unlawful to premeditate what we design to ask of God in Prayer? Have not some
in Prayer, and Fasting-days in Churches, drawn (...) several things as a Form
of those Cases (...) they agreed together to spread before the Lord, and is
this Form sinful think you? But (...) of this hereafter.

IV. Of Women's Singing.
Object. You say, Women ought not to sing in the Church, because not suffered
to speak in the Church, and also because singing is teaching.

By the way then it appears, the bare Melody in the Heart, where you say is the
Essence of Singing, that is not Singing, by your own Assertion. Thus you
destroy what you would build.

Answ. But if Women may not speak nor ^^ach in no sense in the Church, they
must not be admitted to give an account of their Conversion in the Church, or
how God was pleased to work upon their Souls: for that Practice is full of
Teaching and Instruction, and has been blessed to the Conversion of some other
Persons that have been by.

But I will be at the pains to transcribe what worthy Mr. Cotton has said to
this Objection, it appears others have brought it before you.

The second scruple about Singers is, says he, whether Women may sing as well
as Men? for in this Point there be some deal with us, as Pharaoh dealt with the
Isr^^lites^ who, tho he was at first utterly unwilling that any of them should
go to sacrifice (...) the Lord in the Wilderness, yet being (...) length
convinced that they must go, then (...) was content the Men should go, but not
(...) Women, Exodus 10. 11. So here, some that were altogether against singing
of Psalm^^ at all with lively Voices, yet being convinced that it is a Moral
Worship of God, warranted in Scripture, then if there must be a singing, one
alone must sing, not all, (...) (if all) the Men only and not the Women. He
then mentions your Objection, to which he replies.

1. One Answer, says he, may at once remove both Scruples, and withal clear
the Truth; it is apparent by the Scope and Context of both these Scriptures,
that a Woman is not permitted to speak in the Church.

(1.) By way of teaching, whether in expounding or applying Scripture; for this
the Apostle accounts an Act of Authority, which is unlawful for a Woman to
usurp over the Man, 1 Timothy 2. 13. And besides, the Woman is more subject to
Error than the Man, ver. 14. and therefore might sooner prove a Seducer, if she
became a Teacher.

(2.) Yet nevertheless in two cases it is clear a Woman may speak in the
Church. ^. In way of Subjection, when she is to give account of her Offense;
thus Peter questioned Sapphira before the Church, touching the price of Land
sold by her and her Husband, etc. and she accordingly spoke in the Church, to
give her Answer to the Question, Acts 5. 8. 2. In way of singing forth the
Praises of God together with the rest of the Congregation, for it is evident the
Apostle lays no greater restraint upon Women for silence in the Church, than
the Law put upon them before, for so himself speaks in the place alleged, 1
Cor. 14. 34. it is not permited to a Woman to speak, but to be under
Subjection, (...) also says the Law.

2. The Apostle then requires the same Subjection in the Woman which the Law
put upon them. Now it is certain, the Law, yea, the Lawgiver Moses, did permit
Miriam, and the Women in the Song of Thansgiving, to sing the Praises of God:
Sing ye to the Lord, for he has triumphed gloriously the Horse and his Rider
has he thrown into the Sea, which may be a ground sufficient to justify the
lawfulness of Women's singing together with the Men the Praises of the Lord; and
accordingly in the Primitive Churches it was the ancient Practice of Women to
sing the public Praises of the Lord, we read recorded in the Ecclesiastical
History, Socrates Chap. 18 Greek Copy, and Chap. 16. of the Latin, Theodoret's
third Book, Chap. 17.

Obj. But (say you) there is no Institution for Women's Singing.

Answ. No need; it is a Moral Duty. You may ask whether they are to praise God
as well, and demand a word of Institution for their Breaking of Bread with the
Church? for you know some demand a Proof for that.

V. Of the Order of Singing.
What need you talk of Order about Singing, or of Women's Singing, when the
Essence of it being in the Heart, is sufficient, though the Act or Thing it
self be never done.

But to proceed;

This you say we have plainly and clearly delivered to us, 1 Cor. 14. 20, to
34. How is it then, Brethren? when ye come together, every one of you has a
Psalm, has a Doctrine, has a Tongue, has an Interpretation; let all things
be done to edifying.

That which you infer from hence is, that this is the Rule for our Practice,
viz. one by one, or one after another, must speak and exercise their Gifts, and
not all together; and so he that has the Gift of a Psalm, he is singly, or
alone, by himself to sing as in Prayer and Preaching.

Answ. The Apostle directs that Church in the exercise of extraordinary Gifts.
There was, it is clear, confusion about the exercises of those Gifts in the
Church of Corinth; it seems this was their practice some times, viz. Every one
of them who had a Doctrine, and that had a Psalm, and so of the rest, would
come forth with them together. May be many Preach together who had Doctrines,
and at the same time* every one that had a Psalm, they would come forth with
their Psalm and Sing^ and so those who had the Gift of Tongues, and a Gift to
interpret, might do the like, which the Apostle shows them was Confusion; and
if they did thus, and Unbelievers come into their Assemblies at such time,
would not they say they were mad?

Now, 1. to open this place of Scripture, it will be necessary to consider what
disorderly practice it was Paul reproves them of; and no doubt it was the
Confusion before mentioned, two, three, or more, bringing forth their Doctrine
together; and others, who had other differing Gifts coming forth together with
them too, ('it is very like at the same time).

2. The Rule to regulate these Disorders. And now let this once and for ever be
noted, and well heeded, viz. That the ordinary way of the Administration of all
Gifts, and performance of all Ordinances in the Churches, must be the Rule for
the extraordinary Gifts, and performance of Ordinances.

3. Then in the third place, we must consider the manner of the performance of
Ordinances, and exercise of Gifts, according to the Nature of the Gifts and
Ordinances.

And now as to the Gift of Teaching, Interpreting, Prophesying, etc. only one
was to be the Mouth; Let the Prophets speak one by one, and let the other judge:
if any thing be revealed to him that sits by, let the first hold his peace.
To act contrary to this Rule, is Confusion; and so of some other Gifts and
Ordinances, whole Nature were in themselves the same, so they were to be done.
And now as to Singing, that being always performed with Voices together, both
in the Old Testament, and by Christ and his Disciples, and by Paul and Silas,
and so enjoined on the Churches; they who had a Psalm, that is, as I conclude,
a Psalm of David, to bring forth by an extraordinary Spirit, which might not be
the Matter of the Psalm, but the Manner of bringing it forth in an unknown
Tongue, and it may be in a Tune too that others might not understand, and so
upon both respects others could not sing with him, nor the Church be edified;
he was not so to bring forth his Psalm, unless there was an Interpreter who
might give it forth to the People, that they might sing together, as always
that Ordinance was practiced in the Public Congregation. And this appears to
be the sense of the place by Paul's own words; When I pray, I will pray with
the Spirit, and with the Understanding; that is, in a known Tongue, to my own
Understanding, and to the Understanding of others. And when I sing, I will sing
with the Spirit, and I will sing with the Understanding also: that is, If I
sing in the Church, I will not sing in an unknown Tongue, so that others cannot
understand what I sing, and so cannot sing with me. He does not mean,
doubtless, his own Understanding only, but the Understanding of others also; so
that, according to the Nature of the Ordinance, all might be edified, and all
might be comforted.

Now this being so, as I am well satisfied it is the meaning of the Spirit, what
an endless stir is here of one Man's singing alone in the exercise of an
extraordinary Gift, which cannot be proved by the Wit of Man from the Text?
much less had it been so, would it have been a Rule to the Churches in ordinary
Administrations of Christ's Ordinances. Though for several to preach together,
that would be Confusion; yet to sing together would be none, but the greater
and the more sweet Melody, as Mr. Sid^ultan ^^ws. Nor would the Unbeliever, to
hear a Congregation sing together, say, Are they not mad? because this sort of
Singing was always practiced, both among the Jews, and also among the Gentile
Nations. And so much to this Text.

And whereas you say, If any one had such a Gift, and came forth to sing alone
in the Church, (as you fancy some did in that Church) you should bless God for
so great a Presence of his Spirit among his People, page 23. I assure you, I
should charge him with introducing a Practice no where warranted in the
Scripture, and so no sign of God's Presence at all, but a mere Innovation in
God's Worship, being without Precept or Example.

VI. Objections Answered.
I am now come to your last Thesis, wherein you pretend to answer some of our
Arguments and Scriptures for Singing Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs. And if
I meet with any thing pertinent, I shall reply to it, or else pass it by as not
worthy of an Answer. And such is the first you bring, as alleged by us from
(...). 15. And the second is like to it, about (...) and Barak, as if they
together did not, could no: sing that Song, when the Holy Ghost positively says
they did. The Holy Ghost says, that Moses and the Congregation of Israel sung,
and you would fain make us believe, it was some extraordinary Ecstasy: (...) we
from thence must have Dancing too, which I have already fully answered.

Your third Reply, That the Singing that was in the Temple was extraordinary,
and so in the Apostles Time.

Answ. We deny the latter, Singing was no more performed in the Gospel-time, by
an extraordinary Spirit and Manner, than Prayer, Preaching, and all other
Ordinances; and by the Argument we have not those extraordinary (...) now to
perform one Duty, so not another.

And if we must throw one Ordinance away from thence, we must (as the
Non-Churches say) lay them all aside, and practice none at all, till we are
endowed with Power from on High, as the Apostles were, viz. to Preach,
Prophesy, and sing Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, by Inspiration, or by
the extraordinary Gifts of the Holy Ghost.

For as Singing, (it being a moral Duty as well as Prayer, so it was in the
Church of the Jews before the Glory of their Temple-Worship): so Prayer and
Preaching, being ordinary Duties, and parts of Natural Religion (as well as
brought under Divine Institution for the more orderly and spiritual performance
of them), yet in the glorious Time of the Gospel were all done by an
extraordinary Spirit, or by Miraculous Gifts; it is evident, therefore,
extraordinary Gifts in the Gospel-day, were not only suited (as you imagine) to
tune their Hearts and Tongues to sing the Praises of God only, but also to
Pray, Preach, Prophesy, and so to perform the whole of Gospel Ordinances and
Worship, which was to confirm each Ordinance in particular, and the whole of
the Christian Religion in general, Mark 16, 17, 18, 19. Heb. 2. 3, 4. And
therefore we have no more reason to lay aside or neglect Singing the Praises of
God, till those extraordinary Gifts shall return, (which we have no ground to
expect ever will) than we have to lay aside Prayer, Preaching, Baptism, the
Lord's Supper, and every other Duty and Ordinance, since Singing of Psalms,
etc. is injoined on the Churches as well as other Ordinances are.

What you say in the 27th Page, about the Winter of Afflictions, when that is
past, and the time of the Singing of Birds is come, at the appearance of
Christ's Kingdom, which will fully perfect the Glory of Temple-worship.

You mistake that Text in Cant. 2. for all Expositors generally agree, that
that Place resers to two things; first, to the coming of Christ in the Flesh,
the time of the Jewish-Church-state, or the dark and cloudy days before Christ
came, is set forth by Winter; it is known the Afflictions and Miseries of God's
People, before Christ came, was great, but then the glorious Sun arose, or the
Dayspring (...) on high visited the Earth, (Luke 1. 79.) and the longed-for
Spring came in, and then the (...) of the Turtle was heard in that and other
Lands; and the Birds of Heaven and Earth began to sing, I mean, both the
Angels, and Saints also, with Grace in their Hearts, in a most spiritual and
heavenly manner, to the Lord.

Secondly, By Winter may be meant, as they show, that time while a Soul abides
in its natural estate, and when regenerated by the Grace of God, then Winter is
past, and then the time for that Soul to sing is come; and such also then hear
the Voice of Christ, that blessed Turtle, sweetly by his Spirit, speaking peace
to their Souls.

But if, in the third place, it should also allude to the Churches final
Deliverance from all outward Afflictions in the latter Days, and so they have
an extraordinary Cause to praise God, and sing his Praises forth in those Times
for temporal Salvation; does it follow from thence we must not sing forth his
Praises till then? it is a horrible mistake, to think Saints are more to be
concerned to ^ing to the Lord for outward Blessings, and worldly Peace and
Prosperity on Earth, than for their spiritual Blessings, and Privileges
through Christ, for the redemption of their Souls from Sin and eternal Wrath;
no: For these Mercies we have infinitely more cause to sing, than for all those
great things you hint at; besides, that Song will be rather the Song of Moses,
than the Song of the Lamb; the one was for temporal Deliverance and Salvation,
the other is for spiritual and eternal Mercies. True, when that time comes when
we shall sing both those Songs together, then the Melody may be the sweeter;
but though there are extraordinary times of Prayer and Praises, yet that ought
not to hinder the Saints from praying and singing at other times.

Your Reply in the fourth place, to that in Isa. 52. 8, 9. viz. Thy Watchmen
shall lift up the Voice, with the Voice together shall they sing, is nothing to
the purpose at all: What though the word will bear their making a noise, o^
shouting, yet it is a joyful Noise, or a Noise of Singing, and a Singing with
their Voice together as a found of the great Jubilee.

And now, though you would have this place to refer to the thousand Years
Reign, yet the Apostle applies it positively to the time of the Gospel, see
Romans 10. 15. Come, the Day of Gospel Grace, Gospel Light, Gospel-Glory and
Privileges, is like the great Jubilee, when desolate Souls, who like waste
places come to be renewed, and the Church rebuilt, and Ordinances restored,
this is the time to sing, this is the chief cause of Joy and Gladness. Many Men
ignorantly apply Prophecies to the thousand Years Reign, that refer to the time
of the Gospel which began in the Apostles days: besides, there is a Doubt in
the Hearts of many Men about that thousand Years; it is a Mystery not yet
understood clearly.

No doubt, the Antitype of Solomon's Temple (say you what you please) was the
Gospel Church in the days of the Apostles, and so downward, and not the
thousand Years Reign: for the Glory of the second Temple, was a Type of the
Glory of the Church in the latter days of the World, as the best of our
Expositors have excellently opened it to be so: therefore, what you speak, page
28. makes against your self; for if the Institution of Singing which was in the
Levitical Temple-worship, was completed as to the Antitype in the Apostles
Days, as touching the beginning of it, and not as you imagine; and there is no
doubt but it is so, for when the Antitype was come, then the Shadow of Aaron's
Order, and musical Instruments, fled away, and then nothing was left but
Singing with Heart and Voice, by the Spirit, to the Lord.

Your fifth Reply is, to that of Christ and his Disciples singing of an Hymn
after the Supper, page 29. which ( you say) might be no more than giving of
Thanks, or saying Grace.

Answ. We have answered this Objection fully already; but by the way, had it
been no more than his giving of Thanks, why does the Hloly Ghost express it in
the plural Number? it is said, He took Bread, and blessed it; and he (...) the
Cup, and gave Thanks, (so some Translations render it); but now at the close
it is said, they sung an Hymn.

Besides, multitudes of Learned Men do tell you, that from the Greek word
(...), they hymned; it is truly and rightly translated into English, they sung
an Hymn.

Dr. Du Veil, who was as Learned a Man as most this present Age has in it,
says, in his literal Explanation of the Acts of the Apostles, Chap. 16. ver.
25. page 67. thus; Hymns are Songs, which contain the Praise of God. If it be
Praise, and not of God, it is not an Hymn; if it be Praise, and of God, if it
be not sung, it is not an Hymn: it must therefore, that it may be an Hymn, have
these three things, viz. 1. Praise; 2. And of God; 3. And a Song. Now this
being an Hymn our Savior and his Disciples used in praising of God, the Doctor
affirms, they sung; and so did Paul and Silas. But this is the old way of such
who ever opposed a Truth, when pinched, presently fly out upon the Translators,
it is so to be read in the Greek, etc. whereas all the World knows, that as our
Translators were able Scholars, so they were very holy and upright Men:
Besides, our Annotators, and all Expositors, generally say it is truly rendered;
and it is a bad thing unjustly to find fault with the Translators of the Holy
Bible.

To persuade your Reader, if you could, that the Disciples did not sing with
our Savior, (or they did not sing together) you bring, that Passage of
Hannah's mental praying, or speaking in her Heart, 1 Samuel 1. 11, 13. How
impertinent this is, I may leave to all. You suppose still, because there is a
Mental or Heart-praying, there is a Mental or Heart-singing also: you may,
after the same manner say, there is a Mental or Heart-preaching likewise. There
is no proper Singing, I tell you again, without the Voice.

But you think you have done it at last, from Acts 4. 24. Where it is said, The
Disciples lifted up their Voice with one accord to God; and yet did, as you
conclude, do no more than pray as we do, that is, only one was the Mouth.

Answ. 1. Some say they lifted up their Voice by an extraordinary manner, by a
miraculous Spirit that was upon them, and all uttered the same thing together
Prayer-wise.

2. Others say, they lifted up their Voice together in Singing: And I find one
great Author calling this the Apostles Song. It Is evident, the Matter they
uttered, is part of the Second Psalm.

3. Our Annotators intimate, as if all their Voices were joined together, in
saying Amen. Now there can be nothing concluded or inferred on any certainty
for your purpose from hence: If I should say, that as they prayed, for so they
did the Text says; yet when it is said they lifted up their Voice to God with
one accord, they sung the Second Psalm, it may be as probably so as any thing
else. However, I have made it appear plain, that it may be said, there is a
Praying together, (though but one is the Mouth) but there is no Singing
together, (...) but one sings, and the rest are silent, and sing not.

In your sixth place, you reply to that in Acts 16. 25. about Paul and Silas
singing Praifes, you say just nothing, page 32.

For though Hymnos is nto praise; yet, say the Learned, it is such a Praising as
is by Singing. Here I perceive you would quarrel again with the Translators:
it is plain, you are not willing to have any Singing to be in your Bible. If
there is no Singing, you should not have told us so much about the Essence of
it: don't abuse the Text, it is not said, they prayed and praised God; but, it is
said, they prayed, and sung Praises unto God. Though all Singing to God, is a
praising of him, yet all Praising is not a Singing his Praises.

Your seventh Reply, is from that in Ephesians. 5. 19. Your chief Business here is,
to show how Psalms, Hymos, and Spiritual Songs are rendered.

Pray, Brother, let you and I leave those nice Distinctions to better Scholars
than you or I pretend to be. Some do say, they refer wholly to the Titles of
the Book of Psalms; others (...) the Psalms of David, and to all Sacred Hymns
and Songs.

Besides these, 1. Here is Singing enjoined, that is evident.

2. Here is the Word of Christ prescribed, as the Matter in general to be sung.

3. Here are Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs as the Form; and this cannot be
denied, without palpable Violence offered to the Spirit.

But you would not have Old Testament Names given to New Testament Things, in
Singing, but give no reason for it; Prayer was called Prayer in the Old
Testament, and Praises called Praises, and Laws called Ordinances; and so they
are called in the New: And why not Singing calling Singing, and Psalms of David
called Psalms, and Hymns called Hymns in the New Testament, as well as in the
Old? These Cavils argue you want Matter to object against Christ's Ordinance of
Singing, as you fain would do. You intimate, as if the Holy Ghost had injoined
Singing of such Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, that no Body knows what
they be; but you think they may be known hereafter; as if we had an imperfect
Gospel, and cannot understand the Duties of it, till some extraordinary effusion
of the Spirit comes upon us. So it may be objected in other Cases, as the
Quakers do about Baptism and the Lord's Supper, who cry down our Ordinances, as
none of those the Holy Ghost gave forth, nor our Preaching neither, but they
are all spiritual Things, and must be done by a Spirit of Inspiration, page 34,
35. Nothing can be more (...), nor destructive to the Christian Religi^^, than
such arguing as you use.

Your eighth Reply, is to our proof of Sing^^ being a Moral Duty; and the
substance of (...) you say to this, is, 1. That the Wicked (...) perform Moral
Duties acceptably to God, (...) plowing of the Wicked being Sin; and wince
(...) Minds are Carnal, they cannot perform (...) which is Spiritual: And in
regard they (...) not their Sins, nor need of a Christ, they (...) no cause to
sing: Or to this effect I find (...) speaking, page 37.

Answ. Does it follow, because they cannot (...), nor praise God as they ought,
they ought (...) to pray nor praise God at all? God deli^^ them from such
Doctrine. And because (...) cannot bless God, nor sing to him for the work of
Grace on their own Hearts, or for (...) Spiritual Mercies which they have not
yet (...), ought they not to sing his Praises for (...) Works of God in
Creation, Provision, Pre^^vation, and all outward Blessings they have (...)
from him as their Creator and Bene^^ctor? Nay, may they not sing his Praises
for (...), and the Gospel, and for the Means of (...) Conversion? And why then
did David (...) upon all Men on Earth to sing and praise God?

I find you are so lift up here, as to cry out against Forms that God has
ordained to be used, (...) there are many Forms of things that are (...), and
of Divine Institution. All Spiritual Ordinances have Matter and Form; (...) is
no Prayer, (nor Sermon neither) tho never (...) Spiritual, but it has its Form.
We read of (...) Form of Doctrine, Form of sound Words: Baptism, and Breaking
of Bread, have their For^^ And if Men must attend (as helps) upon (...) Forms
of Religion, they must do nothing (...) mind wholly that which you call the
Essence (...) things within their Spirits. But what is here (...) gainsay what
we say, that this is a Moral Duty Moral Duties are perpetually obliging, (...)
must be done as well as Men are able to (...) them.

Must not all Men worship and adore the blessed God, and discharge their Duties
according to the Light and Law of God in their Consciences, as far as they may
be helped? Why (...) they suffered to hear the Gospel preached? they cannot
hear it (you may say) aright, who have not Faith, therefore must not hear at
all.

Your ninth Reply is, to that about the continual Cause Christians have to
praise God, ^ay to celebrate his Praises in the highest manne^ they are able;
and therefore (as we say) to sing his Praises in his Public Worship: This in
general you grant.

Yet you say it does not follow from thence we should so sing his Praises.

1. Because in this Life our Joys and Consolations are mixed with Sorrow and
Affliction, etc. We are in our Sackcloth State, etc.

Answ. I have answered this twice already (...) What though we have Sorrow and
Afflictions, (...) God lose his Praises therefore? As sorrow^^, (says Paul)
yet always rejoicing: Nay, (...) have cause to (...) and praise God for
Af^^ctions, and for his Presence and Help in and (...) them.

Did not Christ and his Disciples sing, just (...) the most dismal Time of
Sorrow and (...)? and Paul and Silas sung when in (...), and their Feet were in
the Stocks? And (...) not the hundred and forty four thousand (...) a new Song
under Antichrist's Reign? For (...) Expositors generally agree, that that place
(...) to that Time: And it is plain, before the (...) Angels came out of the
Temple, clothed (...) white Raiment, these sing for being (...) by Christ's
Blood from among Men^^ this we still say is the chief Cause of Singing: And
shall we be such Hypocrites, to be (...) affected with outward Blessings, than
(...) inward Spiritual and Eternal Blessings? (...) did not the Christians, in
the Time of the (...) Persecutions, when they suffered the (...) Torments Men
could invent, sing Psalms (...) Hymns unto God? This can be no more (...), than
that there were such Persecutions, since they that relate the Story of their
Sufferings, gave us an account of this their Practice. Nay, and though they
were discovered by their singing, and put to death, yet they would not decline
this sacred and sweet Duty.

Object. 2. But, secondly, you say, Every true Christian, nor the Church of
Christ in general, is able to sing Praises to God in (...) Public Worship,
because the greatest numbe^ of them have not (...) to the Faith of Assurance of
the Love of God in Christ; they are Babes, etc. page 42, 43.

Answ. And therefore may the not, (...) they not praise God? this is strange
Doctrine What is Singing to God, but to celebrate (...) Praises? and must not
weak Christians (...) this as well as strong, because they have no^ arrived to
the Faith of Assurance? alas this (...) but to fill up Paper, or the number of
Objections to no purpose, for you will not allow the strong to sing, no more
than the weak and yet in page 5. of your Book you affirm, (...) Spiritual and
Vocal Singing was used in (...) Primitive and Apostolical Church, is
undeniable^ Let me tell you, there is no Christian but may see cause to praise
God, nay, to sing his Praise, (...) the weak Ones, and those under trouble, as
well as the Strong: But no Church imposes upon every Member to sing; they who
cannot see they have cause, may forbear at such times; for tho all are called
upon to rejoice evermore, yet does God give all, at all times, ability thus to
do? such may be the temptations of some, that they cannot do it, or at leastwise
not to such a degree.

Your tenth Reply is about formal Prayer, and Singing used under the Law;
therefore you intimate as if we should say, Why may not (...) Prayer and
Singing be used under the Gospel? p. 43.

Here you tell your Reader, That the Ministers and Worship under the Law were
not so Spiritual: that Church consisted of Abraham's c^rnal Seed, ( this is all
very true thus far) so that their Instituted Worship was Formal, (...),
Ceremonial, Carnal and Typical, suitable to them; and the Design of God to make
them and their Church State (...) Type, Shadow and figure of his calling a
spiritual People into a (...) spiritual Church State, to serve him in (...)
spiritual Ordinances, in Spirit and Truth; and so you go on.

Answ. We are not a pleading for Formal prayer, nor Formal Singing, nor Formal
Preaching neither, nor for any Ceremony of the Mosaical Law, but for Spiritual
Prayer, Spiritual Singing, and Spiritual Preaching, and only for Spiritual and
Gospel Ordinances.

But let me tell you, no Body who shall read these Lines, (who does not know
you) but must and would conclude, you are against all (...) and external
Ordinances; they are Expressions like what are often sound in Quakers ^ooks, and
seem to be more directly levelled against that Carnal and Formal outward
Ordinance of Water Baptism, and Bread and Wine, (as the Quakers call them) than
against Singing; because Singing the Praises of God, is so far from being a
Carnal Ordinance, that it is that which all believe the Angels and glorified
Saints in Heaven are found exercised in; (...), and all the Saints shall be
found in to all (...). Sure you have less cause thus to (...) upon Singing
God's Praises, than against (...) outward Ordinance whatsoever you could object
against.

But I perceive what you aim at, viz. the Matter must not be precomposed;
that is the Formal Business with you. I will tell you, (...) an extraordinary
Gift of Singing was given to a Man, both in Matter and Manner, ye^ it must be a
Form to others that sing with him; for he must either write it, and so give
(...) forth to them, or else speak the words of the Hymn he has to sing, or
else how should they sing with him? So that since you would (...) none to sing
but one Man alone, it is no marvel you so oppose the Singing of the Psalm of
David, or precomposed Hymns taken (...) of the Word of Christ.

Moses, that you say sung by Inspiration, the he had the Matter of his Song
given to him immediately from God, yet did he give it ou^ by speaking or
writing to the Congregation^ else how could they have sung it with him, (...)
the Holy Ghost positively says they did? so that that was formal too with you.
Nay, (...) extraordinary Prophets first received the Word of the Lord, and may
be sometimes some considerable while before they delivered it out to the
People; nay, we find Jeremiah wrote part of his Prophecy in a Roll, was not
that a Form they could repeat the same words over again^ and sometimes did.
It Is not material whether the Form be David's Psalms, or Hymns give^ out by an
extraordinary or by an ordinary hel^ of the Spirit, if others sing with him
that ha^ it, you will, I perceive, say that it is formal^ tho it be never so
spiritual; but I deny that (...) have any Rule to expect Men should bring forth
any thing in the Worship of God by an extraordinary Spirit to be preached or
sung, but what is contained in the Word of Christ, or is taken out of the
Scripture, or agrees thereunto; because that is a perfect Rule both for Matter
and Form, in the performance of all Religious Worship, and Ordinances of the
Gospel; and that which you call carnal and formal, I say, is spiritual. The
Prayers that a Minister makes in the public Congregation may, and often do,
contain many Scripture-Expressions, (may be half his Prayer may be such) and
who shall say he does not pray spiritually? Nay, moreover, and that Prayer some
will tell you is a Form to others, which he that is the Mouth puts up, and many
times I have heard some good and godly Christians speak softly over the same
words in the Congregation. Now since all Forms are cried down by you, sure this
must needs be a (...) Crime, or a carnal and formal Practice. There is nothing,
I tell you again, without its Form: Is not the reading of God's Word a formal
thing? and yet dare you say that is no Duty to be performed in the Church? If a
formal thing, then, by your arguing, say I, it is no Duty to read the Scripture
in private neither. Now because all legal Forms are gone, must all Gospel and
Spiritual Forms go too? In all Administrations we should see to our Spirits
that they be not formal, but that with Life and Spirituality we perform every
Duty, etc. Have we not a kind of Form prescribed us by our Brethren and
Sisters, and others too when they put up their Bills, and tell us what they
would have us to ask or desire of God for them? this would run us into strange
Scruples. Must we tell them they must not put words into our Mouths, we must
pray as the Spirit moves us, and cannot tell whether we shall pray for them or
no?

Your eleventh Reply is this, viz, You intimate that we say, that Prayer under
the Gospel is an Ordinance of the same nature it was under the Law, and
therefore Singing under the Gospel may be of the same nature, etc.

To this (you say) that it is true, that private Prayer is a Duty of the same
nature under the Gospel as it was under the Law.

But their Prayers, you say, were delivered formerly with dark Shadows and
carnal Ordinances; for whilst the Priest was offering the Sacrifices, the
Priests and Levites in Songs with Instruments of Music delivered such Prayers,
and Psalms, and Praises as were appointed for the public Service of God:
Therefore (say you) whatsoever Singing has been, or still may be in
Gospel Times, may as well differ from the Old-Testament-Temple-singing.

Answ. Here you have wounded your self, and not us in the least. It appears
your Exception lies against our praying in Gospel Times as much as against our
singing from thence.

For we must not sing with united Voices, with Grace in our Hearts to the Lord,
or at leastwise the singing in such a form or manner under the Law, is no Rule
for us; because they sing not only with their Voices, but had Musical
Instruments also.

Why now I reason thus; We must not pray with our Voice in Gospel-days, or at
leastwise the Saints so praying under the Law can be no Rule for us, because
they had dark Shadows mixed with their Prayers as you affirm they had; so that
since we have the Essence of both these Duties in our Spirit, which God looks
more ^^pecially at, and we are capable to worship him acceptably without the
Verbal and Vocal Instruments of our Body, Read page 8. of Mr. Marlow's Book.
we must not with our Tongues neither pray ner sing the Praises of God: the one
follows as naturally from the Premises as the other, by which all may see the
Consequences of your Arguments against Singing.

Alas, the true matter of the case is this; If People would be rightly informed:

Vocal Prayer is God's Ordinance, and a Moral Duty as well as instituted; and
the Saints praying and keeping Days of Fasting and Prayer, and Days of
Thanksgiving under the Law, is a Rule for us: but all Shadows and Ceremonies
they used in Prayer under that Dispensation, is nailed to the Cross of Christ,
or bu^ied with him.

And so in like manner the singing the Praises of God with our Voices is God's
holy Ordinance, and a Moral Duty, (tho brought also under Institution); yet all
those Shadows and Ceremonies that they used in their singing under the
Dispensation of the Law, as Instruments of Music, etc. are nailed to the Cross
and buried with Christ, as being Ceremonial. The like might be said in respect
of Preaching then and now; for there were some things then in tha^
Administration that might be shadowing; ye^ Preaching abides God's Ordinance
for ever. (...) not in the Ministers Preaching under that Dispensation, yet
it is evident to be so in respect (...) that Maintenance God appointed his
Ministers then.

May you not say that the Ministers of Christ under the Gospel ought not to
have any Maintenance at all allowed them, or at leastwise that Law of God (that
provided for his Minister^ under that Dispensation) is no Rule for it, because
that was by Tithes, etc. which was (...) Legal Right, and abrogated by Christ?

It Is known some have drawn such an Inference: but I am glad to see our
London-Elders better instructed; for in the late Treatise, called The
Gospel Ministers Maintenance vindicated* (which is recommended to all the
Churches by them jointly) you may see, tho they gran^ Tithes did appertain to
the Mosaical Law, and that that Law is abrogated, yet they affirm the
Equitableness of that Law remains: And from hence they urge and press the Duty
of the Ministers Maintenance now in Gospel-days on our People. Take the words
as they lie in that Book, page 109.

The Lord's People ought to be as careful in the discharge of their-Duty to
Christ's Ministers now, as the Israelites were to the Levites; tho, as we have
already said, their Portion is not the Tenths of Men's Increase, nor the first
Fruits, which Law is abrogated, yet the Equity of that Law (that is a Moral
Duty) remains perpetually; as the Apostle observes, Do you not know that they
which minister about holy things, live of the things of the Temple? and they
that wait at the Altar, partake of the Altar? etc. 1 Cor. 9. 13.

Why even so it is in the case of singing the Praises of God. Under the
Mosaical Law the Lord's People used Musical Instruments in that Ordinance,
which was a Legal Rite, and is abrogated; but Singing is a Duty still: and from
hence too it appears so to be upon the very same scot of Account, viz. because
the Equity of it in all respects remains, and is the same, i. e. God deserves
equally to be praised now as then; (...) there is the same reason we should
sing his Praises now as they had. Nay, since we have received greater Grace,
greater Light, clearer Discoveries of his Will, and greater and more glorious
Blessings and Privileges than they had (we having the Substance of those
things which they had but the Shadow of) there is more reason we should sing
the Praises of God now than they had then. For now under the Gospel, the time
of singing of Birds is come, Cant. 2. 12. (...) it is to be done more
spititually (without Musical Instruments) only with our Voices together, with
Grace in our Hearts to the Lord Col. 3. 16. In like manner also Israel in their
assembling together to worship God (which also is a moral Duty) had then a
glorious external Temple to worship in, as well as Musical Instruments in their
Worship; but because (...) under the Gospel have no such glorious external
Temple, must we not meet together to worship God at all? or was their
assembling together so to do, no Rule for us to perform that great religious
Duty? it is easy to (...) Ceremonial Rites, and places then used, from moral and
perpetual Ordinances, and to show how those external Rites and Shadows are
gone, and yet that part which is moral remains forever.

The same holds good in respect of the Jewish Day of Worship, as well as to
their Place of Worship, and Music in their Worship; for there is no more
natural or moral Holiness in one day than there is in another. True a time of
Worship is moral from the fourth Commandment (nay, and so may, as some have
learnedly showed, the seventh part of Time likewise, but that Day lies in the
Breast and Power of him who is the Lord of the Sabbath, viz. Jesus Christ, who
in the New Testament has appointed the first Day of the Week, and not the
last, to be the Day of Gospel Worship for us) but the Jewish seventh Day, as
Reverend Calvin excellently has showed ( Institut. page 124, 125, 126.) was
Ceremonial.

1. Because called a Sign between God and the Children of Israel, Ezekiel. 20. 12.

2. From the nature of the Law it self, which was given forth and charged to be
kept with such strictness, that it plainly appears to appertain to the Yoke of
Bondage; they were not to kindle a Fire through all their Dwellings on their
Sabbath, nor to speak their own Words, nor think their own Thoughts: from hence
Calvin shows God discovered the absolute need and necessity of a perfect and
complete Righteousness in order to Justification and Acceptance with God, i.
e. that the Creature must be without Sin, or attain to a Cessation from the
Thoughts of Evil, which figured forth the necessity of Christ's perfect
Righteousness, and of that Spiritual Rest such who believe in him enter into.
All that are in the old Nature, or whilst they remain under the old
Covenant-state, do labor and are heavy laden, there is the six days work in
the Antitype, but when they come to Christ, believe in Christ, then they cease
from their own Works, and enter into Rest, according as Christ has promised,
Mat. 11. 28, 29. then they enter into the Antitype of the Jewish Sabbath, Heb.
4.

3. This also appears by the Nature of the Precept it self, as laid down Exodus
20. wherein all may see it seems to be a mere carnal Ordinance, like others
which were imposed on the People till the Time of Reformation, or till the
Substance came. What was it God enjoined on them, but a cessation from all
external Labor or Work? In it thou shall do no manner of Work, Thou, nor thy
Son, nor thy Daughter, (...) thy Manservant, nor thy Maidservant, nor thy
Cattle, nor the Stranger which is within thy Gates. Exodus 20. 10. Here (as this
Law was written in Tables of Stone) are no Religious Duties enjoined on that
Day, but a ceasing from bodily Labor, which fully shows the purport of it.

4. It Is called by the Apostle, (amongst other Mosaical Rites) a Shadow of
things to come, but the Body (or Substance of them) is Christ, Col. 2. 17.

And thus you may see how to exclude Ceremonial Rites used under the Law, that
were joined to Moral Duties, and yet preserve that which is Moral in them.
Doubtless though it is not our Duty to observe that Jewish Ceremony of the
Seventh-day Sabbath, which was given forth and enjoined on them, yet the Law of
the Fourth Commandment, as to a time of Worship (as before) remains to us, so
does Singing the Praises of God; but the External Place of Jewish Worship, the
Time and external Rites of their Worship, and the external Instruments of
Music then used in their Worship, went away altogether, and were buried with
Christ.

Object. Your twelfth Reply is, To that we say of precomposed Forms of
Preaching, since the extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit are ceased; (...) must
now pray and preach by its ordinary Gifts; and if we are allowed to use
precomposed Forms of Preaching, why not of (they might say) say you, Prayer and
Singing also? page 46.

Answ. You seem to state this Objection not so fair as you ought, because you
know we do not plead for such precomposed Forms of Prayer as we do of Preaching
and Singing.

But the Truth is, if there was no more to be said against using those Forms of
Prayer (that some contend for) than what you have said, they might be lawful
too. Therefore I shall trouble the Reader with a recital of what you say to
this Objection against precomposed Forms of Prayer, and Singing; and what you
say for Forms of precomposed Sermons, since you seem to be for one, and against
the other.

I do acknowledge ( say you) and assert, that we should not neglect Prayer, till
we have an Extraordinary Gift or Impulse of Spirit unto Prayer; but we should
constantly go to God as we can, not only for continuance of those Mercies we
have, but for further supplies of our inward and outward Wants, which are the
chiefest part of Prayer. But Singing proceeds from a fullness of enjoyment, and
is called a Breaking forth, and therefore requires a greater Measure of the
Holy Spirit; for we can pray for what we have not, but we should break forth
into Singing for what we have, ^therwise we mock God, and draw nigh unto him
with our Mouths, and honor him with (...) Lips, when our Hearts are far from
him, and our fear toward him taught by the Precepts of Men; and therefore when
I consider the present State and Frame of the Churches of Jesus Christ, I
wonder that so many should be for Singing, when their Hearts are so much below
Prayer; for if we should go from Saint to Saint, we should find that this is
the general Cry, I have a dead and stony Heart -- I cannot pray, I want the
Spirit. -- Now if thus it be, then where is the Spirit of Singing? Will you
lie, and express that with your Lips to God, which you have not in your Hearts?
Page 46, 47.

Answ. The substance of what you say here, is this, viz. That a greater Measure
of the Spirit of God is required in Singing, than there is required in Praying;
but you give no Reason for it. The Apostle says, When I pray, I will pray with
the Spirit; and when I sing, I will sing with the Spirit, etc. 1 Cor. 14. 15.
He does not hint, he needed greater help to do the one, than to do the other.
There is no Duty nor Ordinance of the Gospel, that can be performed acceptably
to God without the Spirit, or the gracious Influences thereof: And certainly no
Man besides Mr. Marlow will say there is more need of the Spirit in its greater
Influence in ordinary Occasions, or in common Worship to praise God, nay, to
sing his Praise, than there is to pray, and in the doing other Duties. You
mention that in Isa. 52. 38. of Breaking forth. Why is that then a Vocal
Singing? it was hinted by you (even now) to be some kind of shouting or
rejoicing, page 29. as if it was no such thing (as here you seem to grant it to
be) when you think it will serve your turn another way: But all may perceive,
by your arguing against Singing after the manner you do, (that though the
Essence in your sense be in our Spirits, and as others say, Singing is
comprehended in their Praying, i. e. when they Praise God); yet none of these
in truth is proper Singing in your judgment; for it it be, you contend against
that which all Christians say they do own and perform.

But to proceed. There may be, it is plain, an extraordinary Spirit of Prayer at
some times, and an extraordinary Influence in Preaching, and an extraordinary
Occasion to perform those Duties likewise, and so in Singiug: But must not we
therefore be found in the performance of each of these Duties at any other
time? And have not all true Christians always in themselves the chiefest cause
or ground of Singing forth the Praises of God that can be, viz. the
consideration of Redeeming and Regenerating Grace, though sometimes to such
degrees, they do not find that liveliness in their Spirits to do it? Moreover,
we ought to strive to be filled with the Spirit, that we may both Pray, Preach,
and Hear also. But sometimes we have not those fillings of the Spirit in such a
measure as at other times, yet must Pray, Preach, Hear, and Sing also; for the
Argument or Motive of Singing, (as of our other Duties,) does not lie in our
being so exactly qualified to do it, or in our extraordinary fitness for the
Duty, but in the requirement of God, it is his Ordinance, and may be our Sin if
we are not so fit to praise God as we should be, nor are no more fit to pray
and hear the Word preached.

Object. But some may object, Does not James only injoin Singing of Psalms,
when People are merry, or find great cause of inward Joy in the Lord?

Answ. No, by no means, this must not be granted: for if so, then People must
never pray but when they are afflicted. Do but read the Text, Is any among you
afflicted? let him pray. Is any merry? let him sing Psalms. Jam. 5. 13. Sure
it is the Duty of the Lord's People to pray as well when they are not afflicted,
but are in Health, and in Prospirity; it is always on fit and proper Occasions
to be done, but when afflicted more especially, then in a more than ordinary
manner to be in the Duty of Prayer. So, and in the like manner, it is our Duty
to rejoice and sing the Praises of God always, on all proper Occasions; but
when any are more then ordinarily lifted up with the Goodness of God, or filled
with the Comforts of the Holy Spirit; which is intended doubtless in that
phrase, Is any Merry? then they should in an especial manner sing Psalms, or
Hymns, of Praises to God. Also from hence we may argue, that as it is the Duty
of one afflicted Person thus by himself to pray, so when the whole Church is
afflicted, they in an especial manner should keep days of Prayer together; and
so they oftentimes do on such an account: Yet it is the Duty of the Church to
pray at other times notwithstanding. Why so it is in the case of Singing, when
the whole Church of God has received some signal Mercies in an especial
manner, they ought together to give Thanks to God, and sing his Praise; but
yet, notwithstanding, they ought to sing the Praises of God at other times, as
well as pray at other times; and nothing is in the least hinted here in this
place by the Apostle James to the contrary.

Object. But we have no Command to sing in our Public Assemblies, either
before or after Sermon, nor any Precedent that any Gospel Church did so.

Answ. You must take heed and avoid needless Questions and Contentions. We have
no Command to pray in our Public Assemblies, either before or after Sermons;
nor no Precedent that any Gospel Church did so, Must we not use that Practice
therefore? I am sure this Argument is as strong against the one as it is against
the other.

Obj. But we are commanded to pray always, and that is a very convenient time
when the Word of God is preached; every thing is sanctified by the Word of God
and Prayer.

Answ. So we are commanded to rejoice evermore, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 16. and in every
thing to give thanks to God, Phil. 4. 4, 6. And to sing his Praises, is the
highest way or manner of rejocing and giving Thanks to God we are capable of
attaining to, as it appears in all the Scripture; And also by the example of
the Holy Angels, who this way rejoice and give Thanks to God. Besides, the
Preacher may pray before he comes out of his Closet, or secretly in his Heart
when in the Pulpit, and answer those general Precepts: so that you may see what
such kind of Cavilings will bring us to. It Is evident we read of several
Sermons the Apostle Peter preached, and Paul too, and some of them in
Church Assemblies, but no more mention is made of praying before or after their
Sermons, than is of their Singing. And is it not as convenient a time when we
hear the Excellencies of Jesus Christ, and the infinite Love of God, and the
Happiness of Believers opened, then to sing and praise God, as it is a proper
Season to pray to God for a Blessing upon the Word? there is the like parity of
Reason for the one as there is for the other. If any has the advantage, it is
the Ordinance of Singing, for two Reasons; the one is a Precept, the other a
Precedent. The Precept is given us by David, containing a Prophecy of the
Gospel-days, and Gospel Church. Psalm. 100. 1. Make a joyful Noise unto the
Lord, all ye Lands: Come before his presence with Singing. So Psalm. 95. O Come
let us sing unto the Lord: let us make a joyful Noise to the Rock of our
Salvation. And, verse. 2. Let us make a joyful Noise unto him with Psalms. This
all People, i. e. the Gentile-Churches are required to do as well as others,
and to do it too when they come into the Presence of God; which (...)
Expositors say, intends our coming into God's Presence in his Public Worship.
Moreover, the Watchmen (and desolate Places, or Souls who have been like
desolate Places) says (...) Prophet, shall lift up the Voice, with the Voice
together shall they sing, Isa. 52. 7, 8. And these Watchmen are those whose
Feet are beautiful (...) the Mountains, who preach the Gospel of Peace, and
bring glad-tidings of good things.

And this very Text the Apostle applies in ge^^^al to Gospel Ministers in their
public Preaching of Christ in Christian Assemblies, see Romans 10. 15. But we
having so largely in this Treatise opened this, we shall say no more to it here.

As touching Examples, we have the Church of God, viz. Israel of old, who sung
together in Exodus 15. 1. and in many other places; (...), always generally when
they came together to worship God, as they prayed to him, so they sang Praises
to him; which we have proved is no Ceremony of Moses's Law, but a Moral Duty,
and so a Perpetual Ordinance. And in the New Testament we have the Example of
Christ himself with his Disciples, who after that part of Public Worship, viz.
celebrating the Holy Supper, sung an Hymn together. O how sad a thing is it
that Men should go about to restrain, or withhold Praises from the Lord which
are due to his holy Name, and wherein we are said to glorify him! Psalm. 50. 23.
I am persuaded they will have but little Thanks from him one day for their thus
doing.

And truly that want of God's Presence, or liveliness of Spirit, or that cause
of Complainings that are in our Churches, (of which you speak) may partly arise
from hence, i. e. from the general neglect of this great Duty, in which God of
old appeared amongst his People, like a cloud, to fill his House with his
glorious Presence, 2 Chronicles. 5. 13. owned also by God's gracious Testimony in
giving his People (...) such eminent Victories over their Enemies, 2 Chronicles. 20.
21, 22. And when they had consulted with the People, and appointed Singers unto
the Lord, that they should praise the Lord in the Beauty of Holiness, they went
out before the Army, and to say, Praise the Lord, for (...) Mercy endures for
ever. And when they began to sing and to praise, the Lord set Ambushments
against the Children of Ammon, Moab, and Mount Seir which came against Judah,
and they were smitten. Israel's Success, (says Mr. Wells) follows Israel's
Singing. If the Lord's People will be found in their Duty, they shall not want
God's Presence. To this I might add that glorious witness of his Presence in
delivering Paul and Silas out of Prison, upon their Praying and Singing Praises
to him, Act. 16. There may, it is true, be a natural Joy, or false Rapture, by
an erring Spirit: but that Joy and Presence of God we meet with in his own Way
and Ordinance, nay in the same Ordinance in which he met with his People of
old, we may be sure is to be prized, and esteemed as no natural or counterfeit
Joy, say you what you please.

If in singing Psalms, Hymns, etc. there is no other Rule or Directions given
in the New Testament differing from the Practice of the Saints before the Law,
under the Law, and in Gospel-days, performed by Christ and his Disciples; Then
no Christian has cause in the least to doubt but so we are to sing, since it is
a Duty, and enjoined on the Churches in the New Testament, Ephesians. 5. 19. Col.
3. 16. But this I have spoken largely to already likewise. See Chap. 9.

In Page 47. of your Book, you say, As to Forms of Prayer and Singing, you have
sufficiently treated of them before, and that the sufficient Gifts of the
Spirit shall continue for the Worship of God in the Gospel Church to the end of
the World; and therefore your Business here you say is, only to show that the
using a Form of Preaching, is no Example for a Form of Singing -- Because, say
you, there is reason for a Form of Preaching from God's Word, and Example of
Christ himself, who read a Text, and then preached from it; though as he was
not, so others are not limited to that, or any particular Forms; yet it is
lawful for them, and required of them to compare Spiritual Things with
Spiritual, and to give themselves to reading and meditation, and to hold fast
the form of sound Words, rightly dividing the Word of Truth -- So that where
the Scripture gives us a liberty, we may use it; but it is our Sin to take it
where it is forbidden, as you say, you have showed in a form of Prayer and
Singing.

Answ. In vain is all this: for all the Saints and Ministers of Christ in all
the World, know there is no one form of Preaching laid down in all the
Scripture.

We have no direct Precept nor Example to preach in the form of taking a Text
of Scripture, and to raise a Doctrine from it, and then Generals and
Particulars, with Application; it is left to the faithful Servants of God to
make use of such a Form or Manner as the Spirit of God may help them to, and
the best Form or Method they ought and do make use of, which they judge may most
tend to the profit of the People. That place you mention of our Savior taking
a Text, and then preaching from it, is scarcely true; however it is a greater
proof for a Form of Reading the Scripture in our Public Assemblies, than for
taking a Text to preach from it.

The Text says, He went into the Synagogue of the Jews on the Sabbath Day, and
stood up to read. And there was delivered to him the Book of the Prophet
Isaias; and when he had opened the Book, he found the place where it was
written, The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, etc. Luke 4. 17, 18. And he closed
the Book (so do not we) and gave it again to the Minister, verse. 20. And began
to say unto them, This day is this Scripture fulfilled in your Ears, verse. 21.
We read of no more he spoke unto them from that Scripture. And as touching
those general Directions you mention, of comparing spiritual Things with
Spiritual, etc. 1 Cor. 2. 13. the Apostle does not prescribe a Form of
Preaching, but shows, as our Annotators observe, how they did disclaim those
Orations of the Athenian Philosophers, using a plain and spiritual Style,
giving the naked Truths of God, without any paint of gawdery Phrase, speaking
the Oracles of God as the Oracles of God, fitting Spiritual Things to Spiritual
Persons, or opening one Scripture by another.

But certain it is, they preached by an Immediate and extraordinary Spirit or
Inspiration; And so do not we, but by an ordinary Spirit from the mediate Word,
and therefore must study, and are left to use what Method we think may be (as I
said before) most profitable for the Edification of the People: so that
although the Matter of our Sermons are God's Word, and so Divine and Sacred,
yet the Form or Method, you may as well call Formal and Human, as so to call
our Sacred Hymns, etc. God has graciously owned nevertheless this form of
Preaching, and daily does, for the conversion of many Sinners; and so he does
our way of Singing, to the comforting and refreshing the Souls of many Saints.
-- We have matter to be sung plainly expressed, viz. the Word of Christ, in
Psalms, and they are well known; and also Hymns and Spiritual Songs, which are
also easily known by such who are Spiritual, whether they be the Sacred Word of
Christ as to the Matter of them or not, as it may be known, that the Doctrine
is so which we hear preached.

As touching David's Psalms, they are formally God's Word as well as materially
so: and since we are exhorted to sing Hymns and Spiritual Songs, I ask whether
those Hymns and Spiritual Songs could be without a Form, either immediately, or
mediately precomposed by the Spirit? and whether the Spirit of God does not,
may not assist God's Servants now in precomposed Hymns, as he did of old?

Object. But may be you will say, They are not in Meter in the Scripture, but
other words are added to make them fit to be Songs, and that is humane.

Answ. We have none of the words in our own Tongue, which were originally given
forth, by the Holy Ghost; for the Holy Men of old who gave forth the
Scriptures, spoke them either in Hebrew or Greek words. And therefore some may
object our Translation of the Bible is Humane, and our Scripture not God's
Word; besides we have many humane Supplements, as I said before, added, to make
the sense good in our English Tongue: And as touching Meter, Prose and Verse is
all one, if the same Truth be contained in the Verse as is in the Prose: And if
it be equal Feet, or measured fitly to be sung, we do not matter Rhyme at all.
And so some tell you David's Psalms were left in the Original. But should we
miss it, either in the form of Preaching, or Singing the Praises of God, since
we can appeal to God we do both as nigh the Rule of the Word as we have
received Light and Understanding, Who do you think will be most excusable in
the Day of Christ, we, or such, who because they are not arrived to a
satisfaction about the Form or Manner of Preaching, or of Singing, will do
neither of them, or at leastwise wholly live in omission of the last, and yet
say they believe it is an Ordinance of Christ?

And let me tell you, to admit of this nice Exception against practicing of an
Ordinance, because we do not know the exact Form, this will run us into a
multitude of needless and frivolous Objections in the administration of other
Ordinances; one or two of which I have met withal.

As for Example. In Breaking of Bread, (says one) you ought to have but one
Loaf, because Christ's Body was but one entire Body, and the Church is said to
be but one Bread; therefore (says he) if you have many Loaves, you err, in the
form of this Ordinance; and as by you practiced, it is humane and devised. Says
another, As soon as you have broke the Bread, you must pour forth the Wine;
because so soon as Christ's Body was broke, his Blood came forth. Says a
Third, You must eat all, and let none remain; which others deny. One says, We
must eat plentifully, for Christ so bids his Friends, Cant. 5. 1. Says
another, A little quantity of Bread, and so of the Cup, will answer the Form of
the Administration.

So in the Form of Baptism, one may say, You must Baptize the Person forwards;
says another, Backwards; one may say, with a swift Motion; another may say, it
must be done with a slow Motion, and let the Person lie some time buried in the
Water, that we may have the clear Representation of the Burial of Christ. Would
not these be silly Objections? And yet these appertain to the Form of the
Administration of Christ's Ordinance. But as the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 11. 16.
If any seem contentious, we have no such Custom, nor the Church of God. We
read, the Children of Israel for a long time had lost an Ordinance, viz. that
of sitting in Booths in the Feast of Tabernacles, Nehem. 8. 14. which had not
been done from the days of Joshuah the Son of Nun, verse. 17. so that none were
then living to tell them the Form of those Booths. Suppose now that one had
said, they must be made this way, and another that way; and they should not
have agreed about the Form or Fashion of these Booths, would this have
justified some others among them to have said, We will have no Booths at all,
unless there be some extraordinary Prophet to show us the Form or Manner how
they should be made? No sure, there were none among them that we read of that
were of such a Spirit; or if there had, doubtless they would have been worthy
of Reproof: but they all, according as they found it written in the Law, which
God commanded Moses, etc. they went to work, and (...) down Olive-branches, and
Pine-branches, and Myrtle-branches, and made them Booths. Lord grant us the
like Wisdom in this great Case, about the lost, or long-neglected Ordinance
amongst us, of Singing of Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs.

Object. Singing is a piece of Art; Who can (...) if he be not taught, so that
he may do it artifically? etc. Can this be a part of Sacred Gospel Worship?

Answ. As this Objection excludes this Holy Ordinance of Christ; so it would
likewise exclude other Duties. You will not admit it, because it cannot be done
without Art. There is, I must tell you, an Art in Speaking, and no Man but has
need to learn and be in^tructed to speak as he ought, that he may not ^ender
himself ridiculous, especially when he speaks about Divine Things. How rarely
and ^egantly do some Men express themselves to ^^ify others, by improving their
natural Parts? Also there is an Art in Preaching; and all young Men, when they
begin to take upon them that Work, need instruction how to handle a Doctrine.
And so I may say in Praying too; but I have showed in this Treatise, that Men
are as apt; by natural Instincts, to sing, as they are to speak: And Paul
shows, in 1 Cor. 14. that all who have Spiritual Gifts, should use them with
all Wisdom; so that the Church, and all God's People, may be edified. If the
Trumpet gives an uncertain Sound, who shall prepare himself to the Battle? The
Method of Preaching must be learned and improved, and that well too. Some who
have great Gifts, yet cannot utter themselves in an Eloquent manner to the
profit of others, and it may be, because they are against studying the Rule or
Art of Speaking: But all the World knows the way of Singing is easily learned;
And who gave Men those Faculties of Learning? etc. Natural Gifts, as well as
Spiritual, are to be improved to the Honor of God. Is not Reading of God's
Word an Ordinance of the Gospel, and part of God's Worship? and must not People
learn to read? And is not that a piece of Art as well as Singing? can People
read unless they are learned?

It Is well if some of them who make this Objection, do not suffer their
Children to sing vain Songs, whilst they plead against singing of Psalms,
Hymns, and Spiritual Songs. But since it is so natural for all, especially in
Youth, to learn to sing, and so easily attained, ought not Parents to instruct
their Children about what they should sing, and what not, that so Art and
Nature too (as some call them) may be improved to the Honor of God? Grace
makes Natural Gifts and Arts to become Spiritual; for the very words of
gracious Persons are, or ought to be Spiritual: the more of Art Men have to
express themselves, the more useful, by the Grace of God, they are made to
others. If it had not been for Art and Learning, how should we have come to the
knowledge of the Scriptures, they being locked up from us in unknown Tongues?

Object. Some have objected against Singing, because that Gift and Manner, as
they suppose, which was used in the Primitive Time in Singing, was not
continued, and successively handed down to us.

Answ. By the same manner they might object against the Bible, and say, We
ought not to receive it, because God did not continue the Gift of Tongues in
the Church, that by virtue of those Gifts, the Old and New Testament (without
Humane Art) might be delivered to us: Nay, and against Preaching too, etc. for
those Gifts in the Apostolical manner of Preaching, was not continued nor
handed down to us; nay, what Ordinance had not lost its Primitive Form under
the Apostasy?

The Conclusion.
AND now, Brother, suffer me to make a little Improvement likewise, as well as
you; and notwithstanding your Conclusion savours of much Bitterness, I would
fain have mine end with all Sweetness: if there is any Tartness, I cannot well
help it.

First. Whereas you infer singing together of David's Psalms, or any humane
precomposed Forms, is a corrupting the pure Worship of God, in mingling Law and
Gospel, or humane and divine things together.

First, I infer, That to sing David's Psalms and Scripture-Hymns, and sacred
Songs taken out of the Word of Christ, together in the public Worship of God,
is an holy Ordinance of Christ, and not in the least to mingle Law and Gospel
together any otherwise than the Holy Ghost has done it; for Moral Duties are
the same in the Law and Gospel.

Secondly; Whereas you say, This will lead us to return from whence we came, at
a Dog to his Vomit, and as a Sow that was washed, to her wallowing in the Mire.
I say, 1. You do not write like an humble and trembling-hearted Christian, but
show too much Gall and Wormwood in your Spirit. And, 2. I say, to sing the
Psalms of David, and other sacred Scripture-Hymns and spiritual Songs, is to
build up the old waste places, and restore the ancient Paths to dwell in, and a
going forward and not backward.

Thirdly; You would, you say, have the Leaders among us seriously consider,
that are for such formal Singing (as you call it) whether they will be able to
plead at the Bar of Christ for this Practice, tho they may urge it on their
fellow-Brethren here, etc. and you put up a kind of Prayer, that God would give
us a true sight and sense of the evil Consequences of this Error (as you are
pleased to call it) that we may not cause his People to sin, but that with
sound Doctrine we may strengthen the weak Hands and feeble Knees, etc.

Answ. I must entreat you to consider, whether you will be able to give a good
account at the Bar of Jesus Christ, for endeavoring to diminish from God's
Word; nay, from Christ's New Testament,; for sure we are, singing of Psalms,
Hymns and spiritual Songs is one Ordinance found therein, which you strive to
take way, and foolishly plead only for a thing called the Essence of it,
without the Act or discharge (...) the Duty according to the nature of the
Ordinance, and so contrive a new kind of singing out of the dark Imagination of
your Heart, and add that in the stead of it, which is not understood by the
generality of Mankind, and so make us to believe (if you could) that Christ
has left an Ordinance that there is no way to come to any Certainty how it
should be performed; and hereby also lay a just occasion of Offense, or a
Stumbling Block in the way of weak Christians, to think they may practice
Ordinances acceptably to God (which requires the bodily Organs) without the
Body, and so deny the Body to glorify God, tho redeemed to that end; and expose
our Glory ( viz. our Tongue) to Reproach and Shame, and consequently rob God of
some part, nay, one great part of his glorious Praise, and his poor Church of
much sweet Comfort and Soul-Refreshment in his blessed Ordinance, as I have
showed in the first Chapter.

Moreover, consider what an account you will have to give to the Judge of the
Quick and Dead, for saying, when the Scripture says they sung, (viz. Christ
and his Disciples) they did but give Thanks, or say Grace, from the remote and
indirect Signification of the Greek Word; or else sung alone, and not his
Disciples with him. See what Reverend Mr. Cotton has said in Page 14. of his
Book, in Answer to such a kind of Objection as you make, mentioning that place
of David, Psalm. 3. 4. and Psalm. 77. 1. I cried to the Lord with my Voice: Shall
a Man detract from his meaning, and say (says Mr. Cotton) he cried to God only
with his Heart? So when David exhorts the Gentile Churches to make a joyful
Noise unto the Lord, you do detract from his meaning, when you make his meaning
to be, not that we should sing unto him with our Voice, but that we should only
make Melody to him in our Hearts? such (...) (^aith he) from the Word is alike
disallowed and accursed of God, as adding to his Word, (or otherwise, say I, a
diminishing from it.)

Object. But, says he, you object singing of Psalms with the Voice, is but a
Type of that Melody in the Heart, or to that purpose I find he speaks.

Answ. 1. No Scripture (says he) speaks of it as a Type, nor does any
Evidence of Reason declare it.

2. You might as well say, that praying with the Voice was a Type of praying
with the Heart, and so it is abolished.

3. If singing of Psalms with a loud Voice had been a typical Worship, David
would not have exhorted us to the Practice of it on the Lord's Day under the
New Testament, Psalm. 95. 1, 2, 7.

4. Christ and his Apostles would not have used it in the Lord's Supper, which
is a Feast of the New Testament; nor would Paul and Silas have used it in
Prison among the Gentiles; nor would the Apostle have enjoined it on the
Churches.

5. The Light of Nature is never wont to teach us Types and Shadows; does it
not as well teach us to praise God in singing with our Tongues in times of our
rejoicing, as to cry to God with our Voices in times of distress?

Fourthly; Whereas you would have us to consider, that if we err from the Rule
in offering Praises to God contrary to his Appointment, whether we do not
worship God in vain? I say to you, whilst we thus offer Praises to God, it
appears we worship him according to his Appointment, and so acceptable to him,
and to his Glory, and our Comfort.

Strange, ours is not right and spiritual Singing! and yet you can find no
other way according to the Rule to perform that sacred Duty and Ordinance.

Thus I have answered your Book (as well as the Lord has been pleased to help
me) according to your Request; for I was (...) by you to do it you well know
before several Witnesses: But did not I think the Name and Honor of God lay at
stake, and the Information of man^ of his dear Saints and People, in order to
the^ further Comfort and Establishment in his whol^ Mind and Will, I should not
have answered yo^ in the matter; and if you, or any body else shall see cause
to reply, I shall be ready to return an Answer, if I find it do deserve or nee^
one, if God is pleased to spare my Life, and t^ enable me in the Work.

And now one word to you, my dear Brethren and Sisters, whose Souls are
established in thi^ sweet and heavenly Ordinance.

First, Consider how universally this Ordinance has been practiced, of singing
the Praise^ of God.

1. By variety of Persons; as Kings and godly Princes, as Moses, who was a King
in Jesurun, Deuteronomy. 33. 5. David, Joshaphat, Solomon, etc. By worthy Governors,
as Nehemiah, etc. by Prophets, by the whole Congregation of God's People; by
Christ and his Apostles; by the holy Martyrs of Jesus in the Primitive Times.

2. In all places; by Moses in the Wilderness, Exodus 15. by David in the
Tabernacle, by Solomon in the Temple, by Jehoshaphat in the Camp, by Christ and
his Disciples at the holy Supper, by Paul and Sila^ in Prison.

3. In almost all Conditions; in times of Imprisonment, in Persecution and
Martyrdom.

4. By all Sexes, both Men, Women and Maidens, old Men and Children.

5. Nay, and how all Creatures in Heaven and in Earth are called upon by the
Holy Ghost to sing forth the Praises of God.

6. Consider how God has honored it with his Presence and gracious
Acceptance, 2 Chronicles. 5. 13. with Victory over Enemies, 2 Chronicles. 20. 21, 22.

7. Confirmed by Miracles, Act. 16. 25, 26.

Secondly, Consider that Singing is,

1. The Music of Nature, as Mr. Wells observes, the Trees and Woods by a
Metonymy are said to sing: And what sweet Music do the pretty Birds make in
the Air and Woods?

2. It Is the Music of Ordinances, as appears by our Savior's singing with his
Disciples at the Celebration of one of the highest and most sublime Ordinances
of the Gospel.

3. Singing is the Music and Melody of Saints.

4. It Is the Music and Melody of Angels.

5. It Is and shall be the Music and Melody of Heaven, the glorious and
glorified Saints and Angels send up their Praises this way.

But, my Brethren, be entreated to cry to God, that you may pray and sing with
the Spirit, and with Understanding also, 1 Cor. 14. 15. and with Grace in your
Hearts, labor after Holy and Heavenly Frames. We must sing with Affections;
let your joyful Noise be from the sense of God's Love in a dear Redeemer to
your own Souls. Let it be by exciting your Graces, let Faith be in exercise in
this Duty, as well as in Prayer, and under the Word. Let it be with inward Joy;
remember it is your Duty to rejoice evermore, and what then can hinder your
Singing God's Praises at any time? Let it be for Spiritual Mercies and
Blessings; chiefly, more for deliverance from your Sin, than from your
Suffering.

You have found that Singing is not only sweet and raising to the Spirit, but
also full o^ Instruction; nay, I have heard how God has blessed it to the
Conversion of some Souls, as well as to the Consolation of others. Austis is
very excellent to this purpose; Quantu^ flevi in hymnis and canticis suave
(...) Ecclesiae tuae, voces ill^ influebant (...) and eliquabatur veritas tua
in cor meum, ex ea effluebat, inde effectus pietatis; and currebant lachrymae,
and been mihi erat cum eis. How sweetly (says he) have I wept in Hymns and
Songs at the sounding of thy Church, the Voices flew into mine Ears, and thy
Truth melted into mine Heart, and from thence flew forth the Effects of
Godliness; the Tears ran down mine Eyes, and it was well with me when I was
with them. Aug. in his Preface to the Psalms, Cap. 6.

FINIS.
AN ANSWER TO Mr. Marlow's Appendix.

Wherein his Arguments to prove that Singing of Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual
Songs, was performed in the Primitive Church by a Special or an Extraordinary
Gift, and therefore not to be practiced in these Days,

Are Examined, and clearly Detected.

Also some Reflections on what he speaks on the word (...), Hymnos: And on his
undue Quotations of diverse Learned Men. By a Learned Hand.

Psalm. 119. 141. I am small and despised: yet do not I forget thy Precepts. 1
Cor. 14. 22. Wherefore Tongues are for a Sign, not to them that believe, but to
them that believe not: but Prophesying serves not for them that believe not,
but for them that believe. By B. KEACH.

London, Printed for the Author, and sold by John Hancock in Castle-Alley on
the West side of the Royal Exchange, and by the Author at his House near
Horselydown in Southwark. 1691.

To all the Saints and Churches of Jesus Christ, Christian Salutation.
Honored, and Beloved;
IT grieves me I have further occasion to trouble you after this manner: I know
not what should move Mr. Marlow to write his Appendix, just at a time when he
was told I was writing an Answer to his first Discourse: he might have had a
little Patience, and have staid till my Treatise was published, whereby he
might the better have perceived, whether what he wrote the last Year would
abide the Test or Trial of God's Word or not: This is therefore his second
Attempt in public against God's holy Ordinance of singing of Psalms, Hymns,
etc. before any body appeared visibly to oppose, or put a stop to his undue
Proceedings. For what Call he had to begin this Controversy at such an
unseasonable time, I know not; but since he has done it, certainly^ none can
see any just cause to blame me for standing up in the Defense of that Truth of
Jesus Christ, which I am so well satisfied about, and established in, and that
too as it is practiced by the Church, to whom I am related as an unworthy
Member, and above twenty Baptized Congregations besides in this Nation. Tho
before I went about it, I offered my Brethren (him or any other) a sober and
friendly Conference in the Spirit of Meekness, which I could not obtain, tho I
did not give such a public Challenge as my Brother intimates in that strange
Epistle he has wrote to me; but upon the coming forth of his Book, I was
troubled, and would have had it been discoursed in the General Assembly, but
that was not consented to; and then I told my honored and Reverend Brethren my
purpose was to give an Answer to his Book, but did not enter upon it till I was
urged by several, and particularly by Mr. Marlow himself, before diverse
Witnesses, in such kind of words as these, i. e. Answer me like a Man. Whether
he is answered like a Man, or but like a Child, is left to your Consideration,
it is done according to that Light and Ability God has been pleased to bestow
upon me.

But if he, or any of his Helpers, do see cause to reply, they must answer such
Persons who have wrote upon this Truth, like Men, and Men too of great Parts,
Learning and Piety, or let them not trouble me nor the World any more. As
touching his Epistle to the Churches, I shall take but little notice of it, nor
of that he has writ to my self, since in my Judgment, neither of them signify
much; you are Men of greater Wisdom than to be frightened out of an Ordinance,
or deterred from seeking after the Knowledge of it, with these scurrilous Names
of Error, Apostasy, Human Tradition, prelimited Forms, mischievous Error,
Carnal Forms, Carnal Worship, etc. These are hard Words, and do not bespeak a
trembling Heart, nor a humble Spirit, and better becomes a Man that pretends to
Infallibility. But what some Men want of sound Arguments, they think to make up
by hard Words and Confidence; but this will never do with you. How has our
Practice of baptizing Believers, etc. been branded with the reproachful Name of
Error? and it is very observable how some Men of far greater Parts and Ability
than my Brothers or mine, either have cried out against the Reign of Christ,
Conversion of the Gentiles, and calling of the Jews, as a gross Error, as
witness Mr. Richard Baxter particularly of late. It Is Arguments I know you look
for, and if you find those of Mr. Marlow's to prevail against what I have said,
do not regard what I have wrote in the least; for I would have your Faith (as
the Apostle speaks) to stand in the Power of God, and not in the Wisdom of M^n.
The smallness of the Number of our Churches who are in the Practice of this
Ordinance, I also know will signify nothing with you, provided it be proved to
be a Truth of Jesus Christ: What tho there was not one of our Churches that had
Light in it, it would certainly the more concern them to enquire after it. And
tho he has so coursly saluted me, etc. yet I am not concerned at it further,
than to bewail his Confidence and Ignorance, to say no worse, I know no Men in
any Age, who appeared first to vindicate a Truth, which others call an Error,
but have met with the same Usage I meet withal from our Brother; who, I hope,
is a good Man, and means well, yet is he strangely beclouded. As I have been a
Preacher up of Spiritual Worship (as he says) and that too more than thirty
Years (tho a poor and unworthy one;) so through the Grace of God, I hope shall
continue to do unto the end of my days; and it is only Spiritual Worship, you
may perceive, I plead for, in contending for singing of Psalms, Hymns, and
Spiritual Songs, none of which three can be without their special and
particular form. But must they needs be therefore carnal and humane Forms which
appertain unto them? I see it is time to stand up for the Form of Ordinances,
for the Form of Doctrine, and for the Form of sound Words; for if we must part
with singing of Psalms, Hymns, etc. from his pretended Arguments about Forms,
all external Ordinances must go as well as that of Singing: In a word, we must
give up our whole visible Profession, and wait for those extraordinary Gifts of
the Spirit that were in the Primitive Time, if we must not sing till we have
that extraordinary Gift to do it, which some had in the Apostles Days, and the
like in discharge of every Gospel-Ordinance, which were to abide in the Church
to the end of the World.

He may as well therefore say, I do but counterfeit that excellent Gift in
Preaching (when I preach) which was in the Primitive Gospel Church, as thus to
charge me in the case of our singing by the ordinary Gifts of the Spirit: Read
his Epistle to me, Append. p. 15.

It seems to me as if my Brother does not understand the nature of Moral
Duties, or natural Worship, but mistakes, and thinks natural or moral Worship
must needs be carnal, tho we never plead for the performance of any Duties that
are moral naturally in themselves, without the help and assstance of God's
Spirit, and the Graces thereof in our Hearts. Is it not part of natural
Religion and Worship, to fear God, to love God, and trust in God, and that too
with all our Hearts, and with all our Souls, and with all our Strength, and
love our Neighbors as our selves? etc. These Duties appertain to natural
Religion; yet without the divine Help and Influences of the Spirit, we can do
none of them in a right manner; no more, say I, can we pray, nor sing the
Praises of God, which are Duties comprehended in our fearing, honoring,
worshipping, and loving of him. And whereas Mr. Marlow reflects on me, as if I
singled out my self more than others in London, in pushing on this practice of
Singing. I must tell him, I have abundance of Peace in my Spirit in what I have
done therein: And if our People (I mean, the Church to whom I belong) are one
of the first Churches of our Persuasion in this City, found in the practice of
this Sacred Ordinance, I am satisfied it will be to their great Honor, (and
not to their Reproach) and that not only in succeeding Ages, but also in the
Day of Jesus Christ.

But, blessed be God, the greatest number of our worthy London-Elders are as
well satisfied in this Truth as my self, and many of their People too, and will
generally, I doubt not, in a little time get into the practice of it. Our
Reverend Brother Knowllys it is known is clear in it, and has practiced it for
some Years, though at present it is not used in his Congregation. He told me
lately, he is about to write in Vindication thereof, which he intends to
publish in a short time, if the Lord please to spare his Life.

And whereas Mr. Marlow affirms, as if I had brought Singing into our
Congregation, to the grief and trouble of many of our Members; it is false, for
it is known the Church has been in this practice near twenty Years after
Breaking of Bread, and near 14 Years on Thanksgiving-days in a mixed
Congregation. And what was done of late in bringing it in after Sermon on the
Lord's Days, was done by a regular Act of the Church in a solemn manner: And
though some of our worthy Brethren and Sisters are at present somewhat
dissatisfied with it, yet I doubt not but will in a little time see their
Mistakes, if such busy Men as he do not in an undue manner blow up Coals of
Contention amongst us.

Can any sober Christian think he has done well to publish the Private Affairs
of a Particular Church to the whole World? It seems to some as if he has hopes
there will be a Breach in the Church, upon the Account of our Singing the
Praises of God; but I hope he will find our worthy Brethre^^ understand
themselves better than to go about to impose on the Church or Consciences of
their Brethren, or to strive to pull down that which the Church and themselves
too, have been a building for so many Years. Can there be a Man so left of God
as to countenance any Persons to make a Schism in a Congragation, because they
cannot forgo a Duty they have so long been satisfied in the practice of, and so
the whole Body to submit to the Sentiments of a few Persons, as if they had
Power over our Faith? We do not say our dissatisfied Brethren shall sing with
us, or we will have no fellowship with them; no, God forbid we should impose on
their Consciences. We do not look upon Singing, etc. an Essential of Communion;
it is not for the being, but for the comfort and well-being of a Church. We have
told our Brethren (since we sing not till after our last Prayer) if they cannot
sing with us, nay, nor stay with the Church whilst we do sing, they may go
forth, and we will not be offended.

Should any countenance, through a hot and unaccountable zeal, such a Schism,
it would make strange Confusion in our Churches. And since he thus publicly
hints at this private Case amongst us, I had I thought a clear Call to open the
matter plainly as it is, to clear my self and the Church, to all who may read
his Epistle and this my Answer, for we have done nothing we have the least
cause to be ashamed of, or unable to justif^^ in the sight of God or Man.

I shall add one word to the consideration of the Brethren of our Church, I
doubt not but they will consider it.

1. If they look upon us equal in Knowledge and Uprightness toward God with
themselves, they may see we have the same ground to be offended with them in
diminishing from God's Word, as they may be with us, for adding (as possibly
they think) to God's Word.

2. And let them consider it is a horrid Evil to break the Bond of Spiritual
Union, and unawares to wound the Body of Christ.

Whose Work is it thus to do, but the Devil's? and what a reproach does it
bring upon the Truth? and how grievous is it to all truly Godly Ones, and
grateful to the Enemies of our Sacred Profession? Besides, upon such a trifle,
can it be so heinous a Crime to be found often in that Duty, which they with us
have so often and long been in the practice of, and in a mixed Assembly too,
many and many times? Besides, brought in by almost an unanimous Agreement in a
solemn Church-Meeting, there being not, above five or six that showed any
public dissent, nor they neither signifying any such dissatisfaction, i. e.
that if we sang at such Times, they could not bear it; nor do I hear they do
desire us now to decline the said practice. Love will cover a greater Fault
than this, for they may see cause to believe it is not Self-Interest, but the
Glory of God we wholly aim at^ But to return.

The truth is, I wonder any should be taken with his Book, for I never saw any
thing come out in Print upon any controvertible Truth, that has less of
Argument in it, or more of Confidence. And it is not my Thoughts alone, nor more
destruct^^ Mediums made use of to the whole of the external Parts of Religion.
Nay, one told me very lately, that one of our dissatisfied Members intimated to
him, as if our Bible was not truly or rightly-translated; and it seems to rise
from what Mr. Marlow has asserted in his Book about the word Hymnos. I feared
that would be the Effect of his Attempt, if any Body regarded what he has said
upon that account.

But, pray, what Call has he to rebuke me, after this public manner,
especially before the whole World? If I had done any thing amiss in his
Judgment in that Matter, I could wish he had had more Wisdom and Prudence, or
else left the Controversy to some more discreet and abler Pen.

I cannot forget the two Brethren that oppoposed Singing the Praises of God,
and would not comply with the Church, (though they did not separate themselves
from the Church) when first the practice of it was received amongst us near
twenty Years ago. One of them soon after brought a great Reproach upon Religion
by immoral Actions, and came to nothing; and the other sometime after turned
Quaker, and to my Face denied the Resurrection of his Body, etc.

As to that way Mr. Marlow speaks of praising of God in Prayer, without singing
of Praises, as being more suitable (as he thinks) to the ordinary Gifts of the
Spirit. I must tell him, God's Word^ our Rule; and since God does require his
People to celebrate his Praises by singing Psalms, Hymns, etc. doubtless that
suits as well with the ordinary Gifts of the Spirit, as such Gifts suit with
Prayer, Preaching, etc. And I fear one day he will not be found able to give
any good account of himself in his bold Attempt, in seeking to rob God of his
glorious Praise by singing to him, as he has enjoined us to do; nor do I fear,
but through the Help and Authority of God's Word, I shall, in the Day of
Christ, stand with Joy and Confidence before him, upon this respect, when
possibly he may be ashamed, if he has not sincere Repentence for what he has
done.

Is it not a false Assertion for him to say as he does, (in his Epistle to me)
That as to our way of Vocal Singing together^ there is neither Command nor
Example for it, either in the Old or New Testament? I shall leave it to the
Consideration of all wise and sober Men. Certainly all will conclude the Man is
strangely left of God, especially considering he builds his main Confidence
from a remote and indirect signification of a Greek Word, and yet, as I am
told, understands not that Language neither.

My Portion is, I perceive, to undergo hard Censures from Men; but it is no more
than my Blessed Master met with; and what am I that I should complain? One
said, He was a good Man: but others said, Nay, but he has a Devil, and
deceives the People. John ^. 12, 20.

The Lord increase Love among all the Saints, and a bearing and forbearing, a
gentle and Christian Spirit. We all know but in part. And O that the Lord would
be pleased to deliver Men, who profess the Gospel, from that horrid Sin of
backbiting of their Neighbors, and from that bitter and unaccountable Spirit
of Prejudice that seems to be gotten into the Hearts of some; from whence they
seem to tear the Names of their Brethren to pieces through undue Offenses.
These thnigs are matter of Lamentation, and I fear the forerunner of a dismal
Hour that is coming upon us. Cannot Christians have the Liberty of their
Consciences from their Brethren, to practice a Truth according to their Light,
without being charged and censured after this manner, with Carnal Forms, and
mischievous Error? etc. I shall not retain you longer, but desire you, whoever
you are, impartially to read and well weigh my sober Reply to my Brother's
Appendix: I am glad it came forth before all my Treatise was printed off,
though it is true it makes the Price more than I intended.

There is a Reverend and Learned Friend, who meeting with Mr. Marlow's
Appendix, finding him quoting learned Authors in an undue and unaccountable
manner, to little purpose, (which because it might possibly amuse the Unlearned
and more unwary Reader) he has, in love to this Sacred Truth, and to deliver
the Souls of Men and Women from Mistakes, made some Reflections on what he has
wrote on that account, at the close of this Reply. If the Lord please to bless
what I and my Reverend Friend have said to the further clearing up the Truth, I
shall not be troubled at my Pains nor Charge. I have been forced to repeat some
things twice or thrice, by reason of his leading me in such an unusual Path.
This is all at present,

From him who is your unworthy Brother in the Gospel and Service of Jesus
Christ, B. Keach.

AN ANSWER To Mr. Marlow's APPENDIX.
FIrst of all you tell us, That to praise God, or praising of God, is not
confined to Songs of Praise; but that there are other ways and manner of
praising of him than such melodious Singing.

Answer. We never yet asserted there was no other way or manner to praise God,
than by singing of his Praise. Nor is there a Man who affirms any such thing
that I know of; but it is one thing to own those other ways of praising of God,
and another thing for you utterly to deny this way, or the way we use in
singing his Praise.

But I must tell you, most Learned Men, nay, all that I have met with, do
conclude, the Disciples, or those Children you speak of Matthew. 21. 16. Luke 19.
37. did sing those Hosanna's to the Son of David, as I have showed in the first
Chapter of the foregoing Treatise.

I perceive you have now at last raised the Auxiliaries against this Blessed
Truth of Jesus Christ. But as a worthy Brother hinted the other day, Dr. Owen
is a pressed Man, and as forced in so, he does you no service at all, as will
appear by what follows; but more especially by what my worthy Friend has wrote
at the close of this our Answer.

The Doctor, from Heb. 2. 12. from the Greek word Hymneso se, I will hymn thee,
i. e. I will praise thee; says, (1.) what Christ will do, viz. He will sing
Praise to God. (2.) Where he will do it, i. e. in the midst of the
Congregation. The expression of both these (he says) is accommodated unto the
Declaration of God's Name, and praising of him in the Temple. The singing of
Hymns of Praise unto God in the great Congregation, was then a principal part
of '^is Worship, etc.

2. The cheerfulness and alacrity of the Spirit of Christ in this Work, he
would do it with Joy and Singing. These are the Doctor's words, as cited by
you, Appendix, page 4. And thus did Christ sing with his Disciples, in that
great Representative Church, as our Annotators call it.

Now what is this to your purpose? the Doctor tells you, that Hymneso se is
Singing Praises to God: And how do you know but Christ might also often sing in
the Temple, and in other great Congregations, though we do not read of it,
since it is said, that many other things did Jesus that are not written? Joh.
21. 25.

1. Especially considering, since it was prophesied of him, that in the great
Congregation he should sing God's Praise.

2. Because, as the Doctor observes, Singing in the Temple was one great part
of God's Worship; from whence it is not likely our Savior should neglect that
part. Moreover, he positively affirms, Christ did, with cheerfulness and joy,
give Praise to God by Singing. It Is well known Dr. Owen owned no other Singing
than what we do; he does nowhere talk of the Effence of Singing in our Spirit,
and so exclude vocal or proper Singing.

1. He acknowledges Singing, is Praising of God, so do we; and say, it is one of
the highest ways of Praising him too.

2. He intimates there are other ways of praising of God, besides Singing his
Praise; though it clearly holds forth that our Savior would praise God that
way, namely, by Singing. And you would do well to observe what our late Learned
Annotators speak upon that of Heb. 2. 12. these are are their words. Christ and
they are of one Father, (that is, the Saints are here called his Brethren) he
by Nature, and they by Grace, and from one Humane Parent, Luke 3. 23, 38. and
both of one Flesh; He solemnly sung and Praised his Father with them (say they)
at his Supper, Matthew. 26. 30. in that Representative Church, Mark 14. 26.

Yet we, as I said before, do readily grant, as the Doctor intimates, those
other ways of Praising of God, and that Prayer, the Word of ^aith, and the
Fruits of Obedience, has a tendency to the Praise of God: But if the Doctor,
and some other Learned Men, should intimate, that that Greek word Hymnos should
in a remote sense signify Praising of God without Singing: we ask, Whether any
o^ them say those ways of Praises, without Singing, is the immediate, genuine,
direct and primary signification of the word?

All your Helpers will fail you here. There are other Greek words to express
those other ways of Praise to God besides Hymnos. You are upon a dangerous
Rock; you make it you^ Business to trouble our People with the signification of
the Greek word Hymnos, a Hymn, (though you understand not that Language) just
after the same manner that the Ped^baptists do with the word Baptiz; say they,
i^ signifies washing, as well as dipping, which learned Fisher grants. But how?
Take his words, It Is (says he) so taken improperly, indirectly, collaterally,
by the by, or remotely, it so signifys, viz. a washing: But (says he) the
direct, immediate genuine and primary signification of the word Baptizo, is
Immersion, Dipping, or to dip, etc. You, it seems, take the same way to destory
the Ordinance of Singing God's Praises, as they take to destory the Ordinance
of Baptism: But this will do your business no better than that will do theirs;
Dipping is Washing, but every Washing is not Dipping. Theirs is (as Mr. Fisher
observes) an improper, remote, or indirect Baptism, that they infer from the
improper Signification of the Greek word Baptizo, and so no true Baptism it
all. So you, asserting from those Learned Men, that the Greek word Hymnos
signifies a (...) or common praising of God in Prayer: it is, say I, but an
improper, indirect and remote sort of Singing of God's Praise, that the Word
will admit of in that sense, and so no Singing at all.

If you discourse with learned Persons, they will tell you, that some Greek
words do, in an improper or remote sense, bear several Significations; but the
direct, genuine, and proper signification of the Word is Singing, or, they
sung. And now do you not think you are greatly to blame to make such a stir
upon a word you understand not, after the manner you have done, and thereby
cause Doubts to arise in the Minds of poor weak Christians about the
Translation of the Holy Bible, and render our Famous and Learned Translators
unfaithful? But I hope our People will not regard or mind what you unadvisedly
have wrote and said upon this Account. Have not the Translators, (who compared
diverse Greek Copies together,) been more faithful to give the proper, genuine
and direct signification of the Word, they hymned, they sung an Hymn, than from
the remote sense, they said Grace, or gave Thanks? We read he gave Thanks when
he took the Bread, etc. the word there in the Greek is, he Hymned. I have often
said, to sing to God in aright manner, is praising of God, but all praising of
God is not singing his Praises; therefore they that translate the word, they
praised God, speak the Truth, but they do not speak all the Truth.

But if our Savior and his Disciples did no more than in an ordinary manner
give Thanks, as we do after Supper, our Translators do affirm a false thing, to
say they sung an Hymn, as elsewhere I have more fully demonstrated; because
Singing is more, and a different thing from saying of Grace, as you hint an old
Dutch Translation reads it.

But not to muster up a multitude of learned Men, as I might do, who exactly
agree with our Translators on that word, take (once again) what Dr. Du-Veil
does affirm, (who understood, as I am informed, all the Oriental Tongues) in
his literal Explanation of the Acts of the Apostles, Acts 16. 25. (tho I quoted
him before) citing Ruff Presbyter of Aquilia, in the Title of the 72 d Psalm
says, Hymns are Songs which contain the Praise of God: If it be Praise and not
of God, it is not a Hymn; if it be Praise, and of God, if it be not sung, it is
not an Hymn; it must therefore (says he) that it may be an Hymn, have these
three things [Praise] [and of God] [and a Song]: therefore Paul and Silas,
says the Doctor, sung Praises to God for the Honor put upon them, in that
they suffered innocently for promoting the Glory of Christ. Many of the Learned
Men you quote, say Hymnos is Praise, you need not say any more to that, we all
own and grant it; but (...) also say the proper and genuine Signification of
it, is praising of God by Singing. Now this being so, you basely abuse the
Translators, (Append. p. 12.) in saying, Surely it must be granted that the
word sung and sing in those four Scriptures were imprudent Auditions to those
sacred Texts. These are your words. It Is a shame (...) Man of your Learning
should (to defend your own Fantasy) charge the faithful and renowned
Translators after this sort. These things being so, What Authority have you to
say our Savior and his Disciples did not sing? or, what (...) any (...) or
Godly Christian to believe you, if you so boldly affirm it? Therefore I, upon
good Authority, in opposition to what you say, p. 12. that therefore from the
Signification of the word Hymnos, there is a good and sacred Foundation or
Warrant for such vocal melodious singing at or after the Lord's Suppe^, seeing
the word does bear that as the direct and proper Signification of it.

And also we say that what Christ did was a Rule for us in that of Singing, as
well as in (...) the Bread and breaking it; and blessing it, and taking the
Cup, etc. Must not we sing the Praises of Christ who have the Spirit (...) in
measure, because Christ had the Spirit without measure?

And because the Primitive Gospel Church had the extraordinary Gifts of the
Spirit in Prayer, Preaching, and Singing also, must we not pray, preach, nor
sing? if we must not do one of them, we must do none of them: And therefore in
opposition to what you say, Page 13. of your Appendix, If the Practice of
Christ and the Primitive Church, does not bind us to the Observation of one
Ordinance, viz. that of Singing, it binds us to the Observation of none; it is
time to look about us, for your manner of arguing, I do declare, (as 'twas
intimated to me the other day by my Reve^^nd Brother Knowles) tends to the
overthrow of all Gospel Ordinances whatsoever; therefore I warn all my Brethren
to take heed how they hearken to you in this matter, as they tender the Glory
of God, and the Establishment of all Gospel Worship and Ordinances.

But to proceed: It Is an easy thing (for any wary Reader, who is not willing to
be deceived) to perceive the Man has a bad Cause in hand, and that he reasons
not like a wise and enlightened understanding Christian.

Which does fully appear, if we consider the false and preposterous Mediums or
Ways he takes to make out what he pretends to prove.

1. For one while he seems to assert, that the Essence of Singing, which is (he
says) in our Spirit, that will serve our turn in discharge of the Duty of
singing forth God's Praises, without employing our Tongues or bodily Organs in
it, which, as I have, again and again said, does as well exclude vocal Praying
and Preaching, etc. as Singing. See Page 8. of his first Treatise.

2. Then again at another time, because there are other ways to praise God
besides singing of his Praises, we must not sing his Praises at all. Appendix,
p. 4, 5.

3. At another time he seems to exclude all Singing out of the Bible, from an
improper Signification of a Greek word, and strives to make it out 'twas only
common Praises or Thanksgiving in Prayer. See the Epistle to me, and Appendix,
p. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

And so quarrels with the Translators of the holy Bible, as if they wanted
Skill in the Greek Tongue, or else Faithfulness in rendering the Word, they sung
an Hymn, which he tells you they should have rendered, they gave Thanks, or
said Grace. But further, to clear our Godly, Learned and Pious Translators of
the Bible; let it be considered how carefully they were in other Cases,
particularly in respect of the word Baptizo, which they never ventured to
translate Rantizo, sprinkling, to favor their own Practice, but rather chose
to leave the word in the Original Tongue, and not translate it at all, than to
give a false Signification of it.

4. But lest all these Tricks and Shi^ts should fail him, he flies to another
broken Refuge, viz. intimating that the Ordinance of Singing does not belong to
us now, but may be practiced by the Saints hereafter in the thousand Years
Reign, or seventh thousand Years of this World. Which is a very doubtful Point,
I mean, whether there will be such a thousand Years Reign or not, in his sense;
and yet this Duty lies amongst other Gospel Ordinances and Precepts given out
by the Spirit, and enjoined on the Churches, which is enough to shake the Faith
of our People in respect of other Ordinances, which they have as much reason to
say, may not belong to us, but shall be practiced in time to come, when the
Church (as the Seekers say) shall attain its first or original Purity. See Page
27. of his Discourse.

5. And lastly, like a wary and foreseeing Man, to be sure to carry his Cause,
he retires to his last Fort and Strong-hold, and affirms, That the Ordinance of
singing of Psalms, Hymns, etc. was only in the Primitive Time performed by an
extraordinary Gift; and unless we have such a Gift, we must not sing the
Praises of God now in these days.

Tho I have said enough to detect this (...) Conceit, yet since he leads me in
this Path, I must, I perceive, reply again, as I have already done, that this
Objection lies equally against Prayer, Preaching, and interpreting the
Scripture, etc. since all these Gospel-Duties and Ordinances in the Primitive
and Apostolical Days, were performed by the said extraodinary Gifts of the
Spirit.

If he could make this appear, there was no need for him to trouble us with the
Greek word, nor with any of his other Mediums he uses to exclude
Gospel-Singing; it cannot but appear by this last shift, he acknowledges that
Singing is somewhat more than that Praising of God he speaks of: But these
things betray the Man's Integrity, or rather his Weakness, and show he does not
argue, but plays the part of a Sophister, though not a cunning One, because his
Nakedness plainly appears to the meanest Capacity, through his pitiful
threadbare Covering. For if he had thought his other Mediums would have (...)
his turn, or held the Test, we should not have, I am persuaded, heard any of
this: But however, we will come to examine his pretended Arguments he brings to
prove this Affertion.

His first Argument, to prove Singing was always performed from a special Gift,
is in Appendix, page 14.

For as the Grace of (...) is the (...) of the Spirit, (says he) and (...) God
had (...) the Oil, viz. the Spirit of Joy for Mourning; so the primitive Church
had some earnest of it, and did rejoice in hope of the Glory of God; and
through the abundance of the Spirit wherewith she was baptized her Ministers
delivered the Word of God in extraordinary ways and manners, viz. by
Prophesying, T^^gues, and melodious Singing.

Answ. 1. Have not Believers now the Holy Spirit, as well as they had it then,
though not in such an extraordinary manner? And have not we the Fruit of it, i.
e. Joy, Peace, etc. in believing? Also you mistake your self, Joy does not
appertain to the Gifts of the Spirit, but it is a ^ruit of the Graces of the
Spirit. Do not the Saints now rejoice in hope of the Glory of God, as well as
they did then?

There is no such cause or ground from the Reception of Tongues, or the
extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit, (as you intimate) to sing the Praises of
God; For many (our Savior says) shall say in that Day, We have prophesied in
thy Name, and in thy Name have cast out Devils, and in thy Name have done many
wonderful Works. To whom he will say, Depart from me, I know ye not. And the
Apostle says, Though I speak with Tongues of Men and Angels, and have not
Charity, I am become as sounding Brass, or a tinkling Cymbal, 1 Cor. 13. 1.

From whence it appears that inward Joy and Peace of which you speak, as the
Cause of Singing in the Apostles Times, did not flow from that extraordinary
Gift of the Spirit, but from the saving Graces of the Spirit; either it flows
from the consideration of common or external Mercies and Blessings, wherein all
are concerned to sing the Praises of God, who gives them fruitful Seasons,
filling their Hearts with Joy and Gladness; or else it flows from those special
and internal Blessings which only concern the Saints, viz. Union with God,
Communion with God, Faith, Love, etc. Tongues were for a Sign, not for them who
believe, but for them who believe not, 1 Cor. 14. 22. Extraordinary Gifts were
to convince Unbelievers of the Truth, and not for the Joy and Comfort of such
who did believe. Men that have the Gift of Tongues, may be graceless, and so
without Christ, and perish eternally in Hell; therefore the extraordinary Gift
of the Spirit fits not, tunes not the Heart nor Tongue to sing the Praises of
God. You may as well deny the Saints may not, ought not in these our Days
rejoice in God, nay, not praise him in any other manner of ways, as well as not
fing, from this Argument you make use of here on this account.

Therefore it follows that you strangely mistake, page 15. Appendix, in
intimating, when Paul exhorts the Saints to covet after the best Gifts, he
means the extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit; for certainly those are the best
Gifts that most tend to the edification of the Church, which Tongues could not
be said to do. And in the very next words he speaks of a more excellent ways,
viz. that of Charity or Love, which refers to the Graces of the Spirit. And of
so little use were those special or extraordinary Gifts to the Church, that if
there were no Interpreter, they were to be silent, and not use them in the
Church at all who were that way gifted.

2. You confound Tongues (which did appertain to all sorts of Gifts) with
Prophecy and Singing: He that had a Doctrine, might have the Gift of Tongues to
bring it forth; so might he that had the Gift of Prophecy, and he also that had
the Gift to Interpret; and so might he also that had the extraordinary Gift to
bring forth a Psalm. And, pray, why must ordinary praising of God be now
admitted? and Preaching, Prophesying, and Interpreting the Scripture by the
ordinary Gifts of the Spirit be still allowed, and yet Singing by the same
ordinary Gifts must not be admitted? What Reason do you give for this? Is not
this to darken Counsel with words without Knowledge?

I have demonstrated, that the End of those extraordinary Gifts that were then
in the Church in the Administration of every Duty and Ordinance, was to confirm
the ordinary practice of all those Ordinances, and so to continue them in the
Church to the end of the World. And God has equally honored and confirmed
Singing of Psalms, etc. to continue, and the ^^^ctice thereof to abide, as of
any other Ordinance.

You need not therefore spend your time to prove the Apostles Prayed, Preached,
Prophesied, and also Sung by an extraordinary Gift; we acknowledge it, but say,
this is no mo^e against our Singing, than against our Praying, etc. who have
not now those special Gifts.

2. He that had a Psalm of David, might bring it forth in an unknown Tongue, as
well as he that had a Doctrine, and so not to the Edification of the Church:
For if he brought out a Psalm of David in an unknown Tongue, who could sing
with him? But if he had been to sing alone, the Melody might have refreshed
those who sung not (...) as some say they have been in hearing the French
Protestants sing, who understand not their Language. But to prevent this, the
Apostle Paul resolved when he sung, he would sing with the Spirit, and with the
Understanding also, because it is the Matter sung that is fruitful to the
Understanding: and what is the Melody without that?

Your third Reason or Argument is taken from that in Ephesians. 5. 18. Be ye filled
with the Spirit, speaking to your selves, etc.

Answ. Does not the Apostle pray that God would ^ill all the Saints with Joy
and Peace? Romans 15. 13. And pray, that they might be filled with the Fruits of
Righteousness? Now singing flows from that Joy that all the Saints ought to
labor after; and also from the Fruits of Righteousness, we have an equal need
to be filled with the Spirit, to pray, to meditate, to praise God, and to
preach and hear the Word, as well as to sing Psalms and Hymns, etc.

But you say, page 18. That the Gifts of the Holy Spirit were not given alike
to every Member of the Church.

Answ. It Is granted: But does it follow, because some had the extraordinary
Gift of the Spirit to pray, must not the others who had not those Gifts, no
more than we have them now, not pray at all? Brother, I am grieved to see how
you are deceived, and would ^eceive others: But as they who had not the
extraordinary Gift of the Spirit to pray, were, notwithstanding, to pray; so
they who had not the extraordinary or special Gift to sing, were, nevertheless,
to sing the Praises of God. What you speak, page 18. about the diversity of
Gifts, but the same Spirit, from 1 Cor. 12. is rather more against the
performance of those other D^ties and Ordinances than Singing, because Singing
is not there mentioned. But all that you say there, has been answered already;
so is what you infer from Col. 3. 16. Ephesians. 5. 19. For to think the Apostle
refers to the special Gift of Singing in those places, is of a pernicious
tendency; for you may as well say the same of all other Precepts enjoined on
the Churches, and so free us from all Gospel-Obedience for want of such Gifts.
Why must not Spiritual Songs be allowed, as well as Psalms and Hymns? What do
you mean in page 23?

Brother, you were better be silent till you can distinguish better between
Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, and the manner of the bringing of them
forth by a special Gift. A Doctrine may be as Spiritual that is precomposed, as
that which was brought forth by a special Gift; so may an Hymn, or Spiritual
Song, though it is by the ordinary Gifts or Help of the Spirit precomposed;
there cannot be an Hymn, nor Spiritual Song, without its Form; but if it be a
Spiritual Song, it has a Spiritual Form. The very word may convince yo^ of your
Error; if the Song be taken out of Christ's Spiritual and Sacred Word, the Form
is Spiritual; and if it be sung with a gracious Heart and Tongue, it is
doubtless Spiritual Worship and acceptable to God.

I shall conclude this Section of yours with one honest and plain Argument.

That Assertion or Notion against Singing the Praises of God, that has a
natural tendency in it to overthrow the practice of all Gospel Ordinances, as
well as singing the Praises of God, is a vile and pernicious Assertion or
Notion. But for a Man to assert, the Saints and People of God now in these
days, ought not to sing Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, because we have not
that special or extraordinary Gift of the Spirit to do it, has a natural
tendency in it to overthrow the practice of all Gospel Ordinances in these
days. Ergo. That Assertion is vile and pernicious.

The Major cannot be denied: the Minor I have abundantly proved in this
Treatise.

In Sect. 4. You seem to Answer what we say about Singing being a moral Duty.
Which you say, Is the refuge of some who cannot maintain their practice of
formal Singing by Gospel-Institution. Append. page 27.

Answ. You mistake; we need no Gospel-Institution, it is as clear a Precept in
these Scriptures, Ephesians. 5. 19. Col. 3. 16. as any we have in the
New Testament. But we say Singing the Praises of God is more than a mere
positive Duty.

What you further say under this Head, does but betrary your own Ignorance
about moral Precepts, and needs no Answer, I having fully explained it in this
Tre^^^e. Is it absurd and irrational for us to make the Moral Law, or Light of
Nature, a Rule to exert the Worship of God? see Append. p. 28. It Is not so much
the matter of Moral Duties, as the manner of the performance of them, that
renders them Spiritual; and for the more orderly and spiritual performance of
such Duties, that are in their own nature Moral, they are brought under
Gospel-institution, as Prayer, Preaching, and Singing the Praises of God are;
and therefore all Moral Duties must be discharged by the help of the Spirit,
and with Grace in the Heart, if accepted of God.

In page 33. of your Appendix, you repeat your former Objection against Women's
Singing in the Church, because the Apostle says, he suffered not a Woman to
teach, nor usurp Authority over the Man, but to be in silence.

So that Christ ( say you) makes it an usurpation of Authority, for a Woman to
teach, or to speak, or any ways to break her Silence in the Church.

But then (say you) it is objected, These Scriptures that forbid Women's teaching
and speaking in the Church, do intend only that they should not be the Mouth of
the Church, as in Prayer and Doctrine, etc.

To this Objection against your Exposition of these Scriptures, you give your
Answers.

1. That such a sense as this we speak of, is against the Letter of these
Texts.

2. By asserting that in Singing together, there is Teaching, Instruction and
Admonition, page 34.

Answ. This kind of arguing against Women's Singing we have all ready fully
refuted; but for the sake of our good Women, and to detect this falsity, I
shall add a word or two further in way of Reply. It Is a hard case that Women
should be debarred to speak in any sense, or any ways to Break Silence in the
Church, as you affirm through a mistake of the Text.

1. For then they must not ask a Friend how he or she does when in the
Congregation.

2. She must not be suffered to be an Evidence in the Church against any
Offender, in the case of Discipline.

3. Then she must not ask, where the Text is, if she comes too late, for that
is in some sense a speaking and breaking Silence.

4. Nor must she then say Amen at the close of Prayer, for that is a breaking
Silence.

5. Which is worst of all, she must not in the Church give an account of her
Conversion, or declare how the Lord was pleased to work upon her Heart: for I
have showed in that Act there is much instruction, nay, it is so full of
teaching to others, that what some pious Women have spoke in the Church upon
this account, God has blessed to the Conversion of Sinners, as well as it has
refreshed and sweetly comforted diverse Believers; and therefore herein you
abuse the sense of the Holy Ghost, and indeed are not, I fear, fit to be a
Teacher of others, but to learn in silence your self.

2. The way therefore to understand this as well as other Scriptures, is to
have recourse to the main drift or purport of the Spirit of God therein. And
evident it is, the main thing the Apostle drives at in both these places, or
does intend, is this viz. That Women ought not to be allowed to take part in
the ordinary Ministration of preaching the Gospel, or ministerially, or
authoritatively to preach the Word: because he that has received a just Call so
to do, may and ought to exhort and command in the Name of our Lord Jesus with
all Authority, Tit. 2. 15. and this Work therefore Women should not take upon
them, because they must be in Subjection, and not usurp Authority over the Man.
To take the bare letter of the Text, without showing the scope and drift of the
Spirit of God in it, would make sad work, as I might show from many Scriptures,
and has occasioned many abominable Errors, nay Heresies, to abound in the World.

3. As to that teaching which is in Singing, it does not lie in a Ministerial
way, and therefore not intended by the Spirit of God here; Preaching or
Teaching is not Singing, nor Singing Preaching or Teaching, though there is a
Teaching in it. You must learn better to distinguish between different Duties
and Ordinances, before you take upon you to teach others. Read what I have
before said, and also what Mr. Cotton, Sidenham, etc. have said, as you will
find it repeated in this Treatise, in respect of the Nature of Teaching and
Admonition that is in the Ordinance of Singing, and you may further see how you
miss and abuse these Scriptures: for he or she that reads the Scripture may be
said in some sense to teach, there is much teaching in it; yet sure a Woman may
be suffered to do this, as a case may present it self, both in the Church, or
at home either, in her Husbands presence, and not be deemed to usurp Authority
over him: for the Usurpation the Apostle speaks of, respects a Woman's own
Husband (if not chiefly) as well as others; and therefore if she must not sing
in the Church, so by your Argument she must not sing nor read the Scripture at
home in the presence of her Husband, because there is a kind of teaching in
both those Duties; and if she should, as you intimate, she would not only break
Silence, but usurp Authority over the Man, i. e. her Head and Husband, which is
forbid. The Lord deliver poor Women, and Men too, from such kind of Doctrine as
this.

4. It Is evident the Apostle lays no other restraint upon Women than what the
Law laid them under, they are to be silent, or it is not (says he) permitted
unto them to speak; but they are commanded to be under Obedience, as also says
the Law, 1 Cor. 14. 34. And it is as clear, they were always under the Law
suffered to sing in the Congregation as well as the Men, therefore it was not
such a Speaking or Teaching as is in Singing, that Paul intends in those
Scriptures.

5. Whereas you affirm, that Women were not admitted to pray nor prophesy in
the Church neither in the Old nor New Testament, is doubless false, as our late
Annotators well observed on 1 Cor. 14. 34. which is the very Text you mention,
take their words; This Rule must not (say they) be restrained to ordinary
prophesying: for certainly, if the Spirit of Prophesy came upon a Woman in the
Church, she might speak. Anna, who was a Prophetess in the Temple, gave Thanks
to the Lord, and spoke of him to all them that looked for the Redemption of
Israel: and I cannot tell how Philip's Daughters prophesied, if they did not
speak in the presence of many. The reason given why Women should be silent, is,
because they are commanded to be in Obedience. A Woman (say they) might say,
Amen, to the public Prayers, and also sing with the Congregation to the Honor
and Glory of God, but for her to speak in an ordinary course of Prophesy to
instruct People, etc. she is forbidden. The Apostle, says a Friend (in a
Manuscript) does not prohibit all manner of speaking, for that is directly
contrary to 1 Cor. 11. 5, 6. where Women are admitted to pray and prophesy: for
Prayer, they may say, Amen to the public Prayers of the Church: and for
Prophesy they may sing Psalms, the Apostle using the Expression according to
the Ideum of the Jews, 1 Samuel 19. 20, 21. 1 Samuel 10. 5. they shall prophesy;
and for they shall prophesy, the ^ald. Paraphras. reads, they shall sing^ and
thou shall praise with them. Vid. Wilson's Dict. Dr. Hammond's Annotat. on 1
Cor. 11. 5. and so it is used 1 Chronicles. 25. 1, 2, 3.

The Prohibition, says he, is not restrained only to Church Assemblies, but
holds good in all places, and at all times, and intends a Subjection of Women
to their Husbands, as plainly appears by comparing 1 Cor. 14. 35. with 1 Timothy
2. 12, 13. with the occasion and scope of the Text; and is of no greater
Restraint now, than lay on them under the Law, 1 Cor. 14. 34. where they were
permitted to sing.

Object. But say you, If we should say such a vocal Singing together is for a
Teaching, then where are the Hearers, if all be Teachers? etc. Appendix, p. 35.

Answ. We have showed you Singing is a distinct thing from that which is called
Teaching or Preaching, tho in Singing there is a Teaching, but chiefly we speak
to our own selves, as the Apostle exhorts, in Psalms, etc. and the matter of
the Psalm or Hymn is full of Teaching and Admonition, yet it is the Matter ^ung
which teaches, rather than the Singers may ^e said to do it: nor is it any
Contradiction to say when I teach others, yet I am thereby taught and
admonished my self.

So that if it were admitted to be a common or ordinary Teaching, which must
not be allowed, and all might be said to teach, etc. yet nevertheless all are
Hearers also, and are in a sweet manner taught, admonished and instructed in
singing the Word of Christ, in Psalms, Hymns, and spiritual Songs, as elsewhere
I have showed: Nor is it any Contradiction to say, according to the sense of
the Apostle, Women must keep silence in the Church, and yet suffer them to
sing, etc. no more than (...) contradicts their Silence, when they speak (...)
other times, which they are allowed to do.

In Sect. 6. You speak of those prophetical places of the Psalms, etc. urged by
us for Singing under the Gospel-days, where all the Earth is exhorted to sing
unto the Lord, Psalm. 96. 1. Psalm. 95. 1, 2. Psalm. 100. 1, etc.

1. This you would have refer to the preaching of the Gospel, i. e. as the
Apostles sound went ^orth into all the Earth, Romans 10. 18. confounding
Preaching and Singing together one time, and Prayer and Singing at another.

2. You would have it chiefly to refer to the seventh thousand Years of the
World, or Reig^ of Christ; hinting in your first Part as if then there shall be
a Singing, besides the Essence of it in their Spirits: but if that thousand
Years you speak of, shall be before the end of the World, or
Gospel Dispensation, pray where lie those Precepts that will authorize them in
those days to sing, and yet do not authorize, or warrant us to sing now? Shall
they have a new Bible for those Times? But if the Precepts for Singing then are
contained in our holy Scripture, and yet do not belong to us; it is good for us
to consider, whether other Precepts written therein, do not wholly refer to
those Times too, nay, all Ordinances, till the Spirit comes down in an
extraordinary manner; and so now we must throw off all Gospel-Administrations,
and turn Seekers. I am sorry to see such Stuff as this published to the World.
But what I have said or cited from the Writings of other Godly Men, in respect
of those Prophetical Psalms, and other places of Scripture that enjoin the
Gentile-Churches to sing the Praises of the Lord, I would have you and others
consider well of, before you write again.

In Sect. 7. you heap up a company of confused words to no purpose, about
premeditated Matter for Prayer, to oppose premeditated Hymns, etc. Append. page
38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, etc.

Answ. 1. The Form of Prayer Christ has left us, is a Rule for us in Prayer;
and we may premeditate what we intend to lay before the Lord, it appears from
thence; and so is the Word of Christ our general Rule, by which we must
premeditate and precompose our Spiritual Hymns and Songs.

2. But Prayer and Singing differ the one from the other; we may use other
words in Prayer than what we premeditated, as the Spirit of God may help us.
But we are limited by God's Word to sing David's Psalms, or else Hymns and
Spiritual Songs, composed out of the Word of God. Now let them be either, they
must be so many words and no more, or else none can sing with him that has the
Hymn. Now we say, the extraordinary ^nfluences for Singing, Preaching,
Interpreting, etc. are gone; therefore every Ordinance must be performed by the
ordinary Gifts and Influences of the Spirit, or else we must have none at all.

Was Singing, or any other Ordinance performed in the Gospel-Days by an
extraordinary Spirit, not performed then also, and afterward as well and as
acceptable to God by the ordinary Gifts? Show, if you can, that other
Ordinances which had such special Gifts then to attend them as well as Singing,
do notwithstanding remain Ordinances, and yet Singing of Psalms and Hymns does
not so continue.

If therefore a Man should premeditate every word of his Sermon by the
Assistance of the Spirit, who dares to say he speaks not by the Help of the
Holy Ghost, or that his Sermon is not part of Spiritual Worship? It Is no matter
whether we have our Sermons or our Hymns, mediately or immediately, composed
and brought forth, provided they be Spiritual, and done by the help of the
Spirit. But to close all, Are not David's Psalms part of Spiritual Worship? and
are not the Churches exhorted to sing them?

In Sect. 8. Appendix, page 43, 44, etc. in answer to what we say, That our
Psalms and Hymns are Spiritual, though precomposed, you say,

1. That such Forms are not Spiritual Worship, because Singin^ in the Primitive
Gospel Times, was from the special Gift of the Spirit.

2. Though ( say you) the Matter of precomposed Forms of Singing be Spiritual,
yet the Heart must be Spiritual too, or Grace and Melody must be in exercise in
performing of them: The Grace of Joy must be raised in the Soul to the height
of Melody, and so break forth; Or to that purpose you speak, page 44, 45.

Answ. 1. We need no more the special Gift in Singing, to render our Singing
Spiritual, than those special Gifts in Preaching to render our Sermons
Spiritual.

2. As to have Grace in our Hearts, not only in the Habit, but also in the
Exercise in Singing, we acknowledge it is necessary to a right performance of
it: And so it is in Prayer, Preaching, and all other Spiritual Duties of
Religion. And let me tell you, we need no greater assistance of the Spirit in
Singing, than in Praying or Rejoicing, therefore what signifies that which you
say page 45. Viz.

The least exercise of true Grace in our Hearts in Prayer, gives Essence or
Being to Prayer; so the least exercise of gracious melodious Joy, gives Essence
to inward Singing? And ( say you) as we ought not vocally to pray in the
Public Worship of God in the Church, without a sufficient Gift of the Spirit;
so also we ought not vocally to sing in the Church, unless it be by a
sufficient Gift of the Spirit. And seeing we have not such a Gift, we are not
capable of vocal Spiritual Singing. (...) we must be contented, as you intimate
in page 46. with the Essence of it in our Spirits only.

Answ. By this way of arguing you may lay Godly Christians under Temptations
about Prayer, especially in the Church, because they may plead they have not
the Gift; whereas the Grace of Prayer, viz. a broken Heart, is that which God
chiefly looks at, and so should we too. This makes no more against Singing,
than it does against Praying. And thus I must argue upon you, If I have not the
Special Gift of Singing, I must content my self with the Essence of it in my
Heart, and yet (as I have showed) the essence of it is not in the heart as it
is in the Voice; and so since if I have not the special Gift of Prayer, I must
be contented with the Essence of Prayer, only Heart-Prayer, and not pray
vocally at all.

But you intimate, that none ought to sing but such who are in the full
assurance of the Love of God. But you might as well say, none ought to rejoice
in the Lord, nor to praise him, but such only, as well as to say what you do
here against their Singing who want that assurance.

But you hint, in page 46. as if we must be satisfied with your Essence of
Singing, viz. inward joy in the Heart, till we come to the primitive perfection
of Divine Worship, etc.

Answ. We doubt not, through Grace, but we are come to such perfection of
Divine Worship, as to know what Gospel Worship is, and also that we ought not
to neglect one Ordinance more than another; because we are not arrived to the
height of Perfection. I am sure the way you would lead poor Souls in, is not to
bring them forward toward perfection ^in Worship, but to keep them back, and
hinder them in pressing on to that which some have not yet attained unto.

Moreover, your folly appears too much in calling our Singing, an Irregular way
of Worship, unless you had (...) strength of Argument to convince your Reader
what you say is true. May be, (...) you had Truth on your side, you might have
(...) like a Man: But I am satisfied, all wise Men will say, there appears
nothing less than Argument. In both parts of your Book there are many words
indeed, but little else as I can see.

If what I have said have no more strength of Argument and Scripture, and good
Sense in it for Singing of Psalms, etc. than appears in your Book against it, I
do entreat my Reader to reject what I have said, and (...) it as worth nothing;
but if it be otherwise, viz. upright, even words of Truth, O then ye Saints
receiv^ this Ordinance, and let what I have said by the assistance of God's
Spirit, be as Go^rds, and as Nails fastened by the Master of Assemblies, which
are given from one Shepherd, Prove. 12. 10, 13.

One word more to those Texts in Paul's Epistles, Ephesians. 5. 19. Col. 3. 16.
where he enjoins those Churches to admonish one another in Psalms, Hymns, and
Spiritual Songs, etc. Can any Man suppose (...) these words the Apostle exhorts
Ministers to preach, and so sing in Preaching, or to admonish one another to
pray, and so to sing in Prayer?

How absurd would it be to affirm either? Why then, say I, he can mean nothing
else but this Ordinance of Singing, etc.

Object. But say some, Did not the Lord's People of Old in their Captivity,
say, How can we sing one of the Lord's Songs in a strange Land? Psalm. 137. 4.

Answ. 1. Under that Dispensation, the Lord's People had a special and peculiar
Right to Temporal Blessings; and when they were deprived of them, and in Exile,
they might not see they had that cause to sing the Praises of God. But our
Promises and Privileges are better and more inward, and Spiritual: And
therefore under the Gospel-Days, we find the Saints sung in the midst of their
greatest Sufferings; for as ou^ Sufferings do abound in us, so our Consolation
also abounds by Christ, 2 Cor. 1. 5.

2. I know not but we nevertheless might see cause to refuse, as they did to
sing the Lord's Song, at the taunting and reproachful ^^quests of an insulting
Enemy; the Lord's People are not to do the Lord's Work at the Devil's
Instigation.

3. But blessed be God, we are not in Exil^, we are delivered like Men that
dreamed; our Liberty and Mercies are great, if we do not sin them away.

In the last place, consider how acceptable and well-pleasing to God his
Praises are in a Song; read Psalm. 69. 30. I will praise the Name of God with a
Song; and will magnify him with Thanksgiving. Vers^ 31. This also shall please
the Lord better than an Ox or Bullock that has Horns and Hoofs.

Two things you may observe from (...).

1. That to sing God's Praises, is acceptable to him.

2. That it is no Ceremonial Rite, but in it self a Moral Duty.

Sacrifices appertained to the Ceremonial Law, and though acceptable to God in
their Nature and Design, yet Moral Duties have always had the preference. He
has showed thee, O Man, what is good, ( i. e. that excells, that which God
most delights in) to do justly, love Mercy, etc. Mic. 6. 8. And this of
praising God in a Song, seems from hence to be a Duty of the same Nature; it is
not only acceptable, but very acceptable, it pleases God better than shadowy
Ordinances, or the Offering of an Ox or Bullock.

The^ few things, Brethren, I thought good to add at the Close, that you may
stick close to this Heavenly Ordinance, and not be removed by the subtle
opposition of any Men whatsoever. Remember there is no Truth of Christ but has
met with its Opposers; but though we cannot as yet agree to sing the Praises of
God together, yet let us love one another, and let not the practicing or
non-practising of this Duty (for want of Light) break our Communion one with
another, nor make a Breach in our Affections. Let us walk as we have attained;
If any be otherwise minded, God may reveal it to them, Phil. 3. 15. Let us live
holy Lives; and not sing God's Praises, and soon forget his Works; that so
though we cannot all sing together on Earth, yet may so walk to the Praise of
his Glory, that we may sing his Praises together in Heaven.

FINIS.
Some Reflections on Mr. Marlow's undue Citations of several Learned Men;
showing the genuine and proper Signification of the word Hymnos.
By another Hand.
THE Foundation of Singing Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs in the Public
Assembly of the Saints, is too firmly laid in Scripture, and in the Judgment
and Practice of Christians in general, to be shaken by the New Notions of some
few amongst us, whom I hope the Lord in his time will lead into the knowledge
of this Truth, and make them sensible of their injurous Attempts to overthrow
and remove it, particularly Mr. Marlow in his late Book and Appendix, which are
answered in the preceding Tract; and no more is intended in these few Pages,
but some short Remarks on the two first Sections of the Appendix. In the first
whereof he would not have Praising God, con^^ed to Songs of Praise, or Vocal
and Melodious Singing. For my part I know not where he will find an Antagonist
in this Point; for without Controversy it will be generally granted, that all
Creatures, according to their Natures and Capacities, are obliged to praise
their great and bountiful Creator; and the allowance hereof does not in the
least injure the Duty, which he strenuously pleads against.

As for his long Citation out of the Learned Dr. Owen on Heb. 2. 12. to me
seems very little for his purpose, for the Doctor, after he had made some
Reflections on the translation of the former part of the Verse, says, in the
rest of the words, viz. (...) (...), i. e. in the midst of the Church I will
sing Praise unto thee: the Original Heb. Psalm. 22. 24. is expressly rendered,
for though (...) be rendered simply to Praise, yet its most frequent use, when
it respects God as its Object, is to praise by Hymns or Psalms, as the Apostle
here (...), sibi hymnos canam, I will sing Hymns unto thee; or, te hymnis
celebrabo, I will praise thee with Hymns; which was the principal way of
setting forth God's Praise under the Old Testament. Here the Doctor shows the
genuine and proper signification of the word (...); and although the Doctor in
his Exposition of this place, extends the sense of the word to its utmost
latitude, that it might include all ways whereby our blessed Mediator was to
Praise the Father: yet certainly he never intende^ to exclude that particular
way principally pointed at both in the Hebrew and Greek word, which we find in
the evangelical History so directly and expressly accomplished, Mat. 26. 30.
Mark 14. 26. as were also all other things prophesied concerning him; yet I
grant that the Prophecy had not its full and complete accomplishment therein;
for the Design of Christ in the whole Administration of his Mediatorial
Kingdom, is to set forth the Praise and Glory of his Father; and every Member
of his Mystical Body should concur with him in this Work, in all the Modes
wherein it can possibly be performed; because God is to be served with all our
strength and might.

Moreover, it is evident that the Doctor never intended to undermine or
overthrow the Duty of Singing; for herein he would have opposed his own
Judgment, which he has published to the World in the account he gives of the
several parts of Gospel Worship, where he makes Singing one, though he terms it
a fond Imagination for any to think that God cannot be praised in the Church
without it; and I doubt not but that all sober Christians agree with the Doctor
therein.

I shall now pass to the second Section, and consider some parts of it, which I
was desired to take notice of. Mr. Marlow begins with the word (...), which,
whatever he pretends concerning the generality of its signification, most
properly denotes a Song of Praise; And what he cites out of the Learned
Ainsworth on Psalm. 3. to favor his Purpose, will not serve it at all; for he
there intends nothing less than a Song of Praise, which is fitly composed to be
sung, as will appear to any one who considers the whole Paragraph without
Prejudice; and this import of the word is agreeable to the common sense of
Learned Men, notwithstanding what is cited to the contrary. His first Citation
is out of Constantin's Lexicon, whence he tells us that Hymenaeus is a Nuptial
Song. And what if it be, it is altogether impertinent in the present Enquiry;
for this is a word of another Family, and descends from (...), a word well
known amongst Learned Anatomists. And if he consults any of them, he may soon
know the full meaning of it, and also the reason why Hymenaeus is used for a
Nuptial Song. This word being thus dismissed, as foreign to our present Purpose;
we may consider (...) and (...), which according to Constantine, as cited by
him, primarily and chiefly signify an Hymn or Copy of Verses, made to Praise,
and to sing such an Hymn or Verse. And as for the latter word, he says also, it
is used for saying or pronouncing such an Hymn; and the reason may be, because
saying or pronouncing is necessarily included in Singing: for Singing is but a
particular Mode of saying or pronouncing. And if it was not thus, I might say
it is the common fate of all Words to be stretched beyond their prime and most
proper Signification; and who can help it, seeing that the Wit and Fancy of
Men, are such luxuriant things, that will make bold sometimes, not only with
Words, but Persons too. The Object of an Hymn, and Hymning, according to their
usage in profane Authors, has been extended, with the like liberty, both to
Men and Things, though the primary Object was their Gods. Now I shall pass by
two or three lines of unintelligible stuff, Viz. Hymno, etiam Kateuphemismon
pro conqueror, i. e. hymno; also Kateuphemismon is put for Conqueror, to
complain, Only with this Caution to the Author, that when he makes his next
Essay to show his Scholarship in Print, he would take better care, lest he meet
with a more severe Observator. As to what he further says of the use of the
word (...), to reproach, to accuse, to complain, etc. ^ readily allow; but then
he must take notice that all this was done in Verse, composed and ^ung to these
ends; and the use of the word to these ends, does not at all prejudice its
primary signification, which is to Praise with Songs. And whatever the
quick-sighted Author thinks he sees in Constantine or Sympson concerning its
signifyng simply to Praise, for my part I can see no such thing, either in them
or other Authors, which I shall now inspect. (...) is rendered by Scapula,
Carmine celebro, ^ praise in Verse, Hymnis decanto, I sing in Hymns: and (...)
celebratio quae fit hymnis ^el carmine, i. e. praising by Hymns or Verse;
decantatio laudum, a singing of Praises, Greg. ^az. (...) is rendered by Scap.
Hymnus, Carmen, i. e. Hymn or Verse, and sometimes ^eculiarly signifies carmen
in honorem Dei, Verse composed for the honor of God. Thus we find (...). i. e.
a Hymn to the Praise of Apollo. Hymnus est cantilena conti^ens laudem Dei, i.
e. an Hymn is a Song containing the Praise of God. Minsh. The same Author
derives it from (...), which Hesych varies by (...), which properly signifies
to sing. Vid. Mart. Lex and Gl. Cyril. Isid. lib. 6. 19.

Now I shall enquire into the usage of this Word in the holy Scripture, and
shall follow his Method therein.

The first Instance which he gives as serviceable to his Design is, Psalm. 78.
63. where he supposes the LXXII Translators were not acquainted with (...), as
a Song of Praise, or Marriage-Song, which is more than he can tell; for it is
very probable they mistook the Radix (...) he grieved, or rather (...) he
lamented, for (...) and so translated (...) (...), did not lament. Of this you
see more in Musc. on the place. But such as took the Radix (...), have
translated the words otherwise, as Jun. and Trem. Non Epithalamiocelebratae
sunt, i. e. were not honored with a Wedding-Song; and to this sense the words
are rendered in six or seven Translations more. Here the Antecedent is put for
the Consequent, viz. Praising or honoring with a Nuptial-Song, for Marriage it
self. Hence appears the unskilfulness of this Author, and his Ignorance in
imposing upon his Reader.

Next he comes to Mr. L. in his Critic^ Sacra, where you will find Mr. L.
giving this sense of the word (...), that it is carnem se^ peculiariter in
honorem Dei, i. e. Verse, but peculiarly designed for the Honor of God. This
is agreeable to what was said before from other Authors. And further to confirm
this sense of the word, I might here add, Zanch. Dav^n. Beza, etc. Then he
proceeds to the word (...), which he renders Hymnum cano, I sing an Hymn; this
word is used Mat. 26. 30. Mar^ 14. 26. Acts 16. 25. Heb. 2. 12. and in all
these places is rendered by Beza (who was eminently skilled in the Greek Tongue)
after the same manner, and on Mat. 26. 30. he commends Erasmus for correcting
the vulgar Latin, in changing dicto Hymno, the (...) being said, to cum
ceci^issent Hymnum, i. e. when they had sung an Hymn. On ver. 20. he gives an
account out of Joseph^s of the Jews manner in eating the Passover, and closing
it with an Hymn, consisting of Psalm 113. and the five immediately following,
which the Jews call their Magnum Hallelujah, their great Song of Praise to God;
and it is the Opinion of many Learned Men, that Christ sang this with his
Disciples, tho Grotius thinks that Christ made another on that occasion. Now as
to the three Authors Mr. M. mentions out of Mr. L. who differ in their version
of these words, we may justly sppose that by Praises, they mean Praises in
Verse, and by saying Praises, they mean such a saying as was accompanied with
singing, otherwise their rendering may be censured as improper.

Now Mr. M. proceeds to (...) Isa. 25. 1. which is derived of (...), and in the
Conjugation Hiphil, signifies has praised, or confessed; and, as it is in
other words, the sense must be governed by the Context; and so in this place
the word (...) tho rendered by Arias Montanus, I will confess, yet if he does
not mean such a Confession as was to be made by singing the Song of Praise to
God, for his manifold Benefits bestowed upon his Church, his Version is not so
agreeable to the Context, as that of the Septuagint, who render it (...), I
will sing Praise; and the like may be said of his Version, Isa. 12. 4.

What is said in the third Paragraph, and beginning of the fourth, concerning
the rendering those words before mentioned, and some others, is of little
importance in clearing the present Controversy, seeing it is granted already
that God may be praised without Singing, tho Singing is a principal way of
setting forth the Praise of God, as Dr. Owen says. And certainly that which is
the principal way of praising God, ought not to be excluded by Christians^
neither can we think that these Translators had any design to do it, seeing
they use such words as include this as well as other ways of praising God. And
whereas Mr. M. thinks he has got clear and undeniable Evidence for his simple
praising God only, he has got none at all, unless three be not contained in
the number four, because one is. Solomon says, The wringing of the Nose brings
forth Blood; and straining the words of these Translators, may bring forth a
sense which they never intended. I see no such restrictive terms used by them,
which may reasonably be thought to restrain the Duty of Praising God to the
particular mode of this Author; but if they did intend it, I could (if the
Bounds of my Paper would admit it) produce six or seven Translators who are
generally esteemed by learned Men very accurate, who have rendered the words
for that way of praising God which is pleaded for in the foregoing Treatise.

The Author which Mr. M. cites out of Marlorate on Mat. 26. 30. pretends it is
uncertain with what words they praised God; that is, whether it was with the
common Passeover-Hymn, or some other of Christ's own, which might be more
suitable to the occasion; and whether they sang this Praise, or spoke it simply,
the following words of the Author not being well rendered by Mr. Tymme, I shall
set down, they are these, Graecum verbum laudem quidem, maxim quae Deo
debetur, includit; non autem necessario evincit, quod cecinerint, i. e. the
Greek word indeed includes Praise, chiefly that which is due to God. But
undoubtedly it does evince, that they sang, 1. From the genuine Signification
of the Original Word. And, 2. From the current of Learned Men who go this way.

To conclude; I sincerely desire that the Lord would make this Friend sensible
of the Evil and Vanity of this Attempt, to remove out of the Church this part
of Religious Worship, which has been kept up so many Ages, both under the Law,
and under the Gospel.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THere is in the Press, and will be published next Week, a Treatise Entitled,
Spiritual Melody, containing some hundred of Sacred Scripture-Hymns, chiefly on
Metaphorical Scriptures, as they lie in a Book Entitled, (...), A Key to open
Scripture Metaphors, (formerly published by this Author, with many others of
several Occasions) as they have been sung in diverse Congregations. Composed and
now published by B. Keach, at the earnest Request and Desire of several
Christian Friends. Printed for J. Hancock, and to be sold at his Shop in
Castle-Alley, on the West side of the Royal Exchange in Cornhil.

THere is almost ready for the Press, an Exposition on all the Parables, and
express Similitudes in the Four Evangelists. It will be above one hundreed
Sheets: The PROPOSALS whereof, with a Specimen, which will contain two Sermons,
(an Exemplar of the whole Work) will be on the Par abolical Saying of our
Savior in Mat. 12. 43. When the unclean Spirit is gone out of a Man, etc.
Written by the foresaid Author; and will (God willing) be published in a very
short time.


