ANIMADVERSIONS On a Pretended ACCOUNT OF DANMARK.

I think it very pertinent to take notice, that in Danmark there are no
Seditions, Mutinies, or Libels against the Government.

Acc. of Denmark, p. 246. LONDON. Printed for Tho. Bennet, at the Half Moon in
St. Paul's Churchyard, 1694.



TO Mr. M --.
SIR,
YOU have born so great a Character in the World, and have a Reputation so
universal; that I cannot but think those People, who have Fathered upon you the
Account of Danmark, lately printed, have done it only with a design to injure
you; for certainly a man of such settled Principles as you are, of thoughts so
sedate and composed, would never expose any thing to the public View, which
you would not set your Name to, and let the Account of a Country, so
considerable as Danmark, be put forth without so much as any mention of the
Licenser or Printer, like a common Pamphlet or Lampoon. Monsieur Sorbiere put
his Name to a scandalous Description of England, though he relates several
passages altogether as inconsiderable and ridiculous, as that the Describer of
Danmark tells us, p 95. That being a great Lover of Green Geese, he could get
none of the Country People; till a superstitious Old Woman told him, she had
four at his Service, imagining that otherwise the Kite would have them; or
rather otherwise being an Old Woman full of Bowels^ (as Hostesses usually are)
being afraid that the Gentleman should lose his Longing.

Besides, Sir, what Man of Sense can think, that a Gentleman of your Parts
would write so tedious a Preface, that has so lit^tle Relation to the
Description Pretended, would spend three or four Pages to persuade the World
that Liberty is easy, and Health is valuable, things that were granted by the
Authors Great^ Grandmother; would fling away four or five Pages more to
in^form the World, that thinking men may improve themselves by Conversation and
Travel. Whereas if that Author, instead of his important Scraps of Latin, as
Divisos orb Britannos. Res est Ridicula and nimis Jocosa, Catull. had given us
these two Verses of Horace. Dic mihi Musa virum, captae post tempora Trojae.
Qui mores hominum multorum vidit and Urbes.
We should have framed a greater Idea of that Advantage from Homer's Character
of Ulysses, and perhaps have found, that he improved as much by visiting the
Monster Polypheme, as any of this Authors Disciples may do, whom he would send
for Maxims as far as China and Japan, and to search for such Regulations of
Government as are fit for Modles to the most civilized Europeans, amongst the
Maneaters and savage Americans; who being great Philosophers, must in pursuance
of this Authors advice, become very excellent Tutors. Further, Sir, I am not of
opinion, that you would have our two Universities to reform their Statutes, and
direct their Studies according to some new Methods of Modern Learning; for as
their Habits are the same, which they wore in Harry the Eighth's time, and yet
are still very decent and becoming, so their old Philosophy, has likewise it is
peculiar uses; we see by experience, that such as neglect and despise the
Disputations of the Schools, who laugh at the dark Terms and Subtilties of
Aristotle, and his Nice Commentators; when they once come to writing, find the
Want of their Logic; (for that and Grammar generally revenge themselves upon
their Adversaries) they trifle instead of arguing, their Method is confused,
and when they should urge any single point, they run from one thing to another;
and their discourse is as lax and undigested, as the Preface of that Author we
are treating of.

Neither, Sir, can I imagine, that you would have the Nobility and Gentry of
any Country, commit the Education of their Children to Philosophers, and not to
Priests; and by the former have moral Virtues preached up to them, such as
Fortitude, Temperance, and Contempt of Death: their Instructors using pious
Cheats, as Elysian Fields, etc. and by those Methods even deceiving their
Hearers into Greatness; these Philosophers thus excelling the Managers of our
Modern Education. For I suppose, Sir, you are sensible of the great Benefits
that Youth receive, by being bred up under grave and religious Clergymen; for
though Tully's Offices be a very good Book, yet the Bible, in my Opinion, is a
better. Besides Morality, which Youth ought to be instructed in, they are
likewise to be taught how to be good Christians, and there is to my Knowledge
a^ eminent School in this Nation, where the Youth are not trained up, not only
to the understanding of Words and Languages, (though at the same time those are
taught there with the greatest Accuracy) where they are kept in a sense of Duty
and Obedience to their Superiors, by a certainty of future Punishments to them
that transgress, and everlasting Happiness to such as do well; where they are
constantly called upon to give a sensible and rational Account of their Faith,
I mean that contained in the Catechism, Homilies, and Thirty nine Articles of
the Church of England; where there is no day passes without their Reading a
considerable portion of the Holy Scriptures in the Original Languages: And a
better Foundation is laid for a Greatness of Mind, and Contempt of Death from
the Example of our Blessed Savior, than can be framed from any pattern amongst
the Grecian and Roman Heroes. However it comes to pass, the Author, among all
the Roman Heroes, has unfortunately p^^ch'd upon Brutus, as the true Pattern
and Model of exact Virtue: And yet in relation to the Death of Caesar, all
circumstances considered, a Youth that is bred up to a sense of Gratitude,
Honor, or Common Justice, will look upon him as ungrateful, and a base
Assassinate; and will necessarily despise him, when he sees him deserting that
Virtue which he pretended to admire; and in a sullen despair exclaiming against
it, as an empty Name. A very fine Model indeed for a Man of Quality, and which
must affect him much more when he shall find the Practices of Persons of the
like stamp in this particular founded upon Reason, Justice and Truth, and
unanimously approved of by most of the succeeding Wise men which the World has
produced. I should be glad to see a List of those Wise men, who were of his
Opinion, that I may be satisfied, whether our Author has done Justice to
Ravailliac, and some other^ Heroes of this latter Age; and that our Authors own
Name (if his Courage be equal to his Inclination) may be added to it upon
occasion.

Moreover, Sir, there are several Observations and political Maxims throughout
the whole Preface, which ^avor very much of a Commonwealth, and would not well
become any Person that has had the Honor to serve Their Majesty's, or that
heartily consult their Real Interest, or the Glory of the English Nation. For
in the first place he says, if we look backwards, It is a true Reflection, that
our late Kings half undid us, and bred us up narrow-spirited so long, till the
World had almost overlooked us, and we seldom were permitted to cast an Eye
farther than France or Holland. If Peace, Ease and Plenty could be said to undo
us, we were indeed undone; and then as for our Ignorance of the Affairs of
other Nations, we must necessarily be in a most profound one, when we had our
Ministers at Cologne, and afterward at Nimeguen, when the King of England's
Mediation was accep^ed by all the Princes then in War, and the Pretentions of
the most considerable States in Europe left to his Majesty's Arbitration. But
it seems at present we are in a better condition, and the Preface, to our
comfort, tells us, that we make a greater figure in the World than formerly,
and have a right to intermeddle in the Affairs of Europe. And here a true
Englishman may think, that something has been said to the Honor of his
Country: When alas, if he reads but the next Page (for the Author cannot write
consistently two Pages together) he will find, that we do not live up to our
Post, and maintain our Character, that we are insulted on our own Coast, our
Trade endangered, and in Apprehension every Year of an Invasion and a French
Conquest. Not in such dismal Apprehensions neither, Sir! for as our ancient
Yeomantry and Commonalty could draw the Long Bow, and handle the Brown Bill, so
their Sons will charge a Musket, or draw a Sword in defense of the public
Liberty, and the Right of Their Majesty's, against any Commonwealth's-men or
Foreigners that shall dare to invade them. The Author seems to have inserted
these Passages to show himself impartial, and to let the Danes see, that they
have no great reason to complain of ill Usage, since he is as scurrilous upon
his own Countrymen.

In the second place to come to some other of his Observations, it may very
possibly be proved in contradiction to what he has advanced, that the Jus
Divin^^^ of Kings and Princes was a Notion in the Northern Parts of the World,
long before these later Ages of Slavery; that is, before Milton ^ver wrote, or
England suffered under the Tyranny of a Commonwealth; even Passive Obedience,
however unintelligible to this Author, as stated by Reverend and Learned
Divines, though it should still be maintained by them under their present
Majesty's, would be more suitable to Sovereign Authority, and the Welfare of
these Nations, than any Doctrins since coined: For the Ecclesiastics,
established by the Laws of this Realm, are so far from having an Interest
separate from, and opposite to the Public, as our Author would insinuate, that
no Persons have defended the true Constitution of the English Government, with
greater Temper and Hazards. Now the Constitution of England, as set forth by
them is, that the King's Prerogative be kept sacred; the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal have their Authority and Honors supported; that the Privileges, as
well as Properties of the Commons, be inviolably preserved: When any of these
have been encroached upon by the other, the English Clergy have in all Ages
made a vigorous stand, and the public Liberty has been so dear to them, that
many of them have sacrificed their own Freedom to it.

Sir, I shall not trouble you much longer, only tell you, that a principal
Reason why we should not take this Book to be yours, is a Remark which may be
found in Authors that treat concerning Ambassadors (viz.) that he ought to be
no Detractor or Speaker ill of any King or State, but more especially of him or
them with whom he remains. The Reasons are plain, because Detraction is beneath
the Honor of the Prince whose Character he sustains; and then such actions
would make Ambassadors from such a Prince, be treated for the future, rather as
Spies and Enemies, than as men whose Persons are to be held sacred. We are of
Opinion, that nothing could make you swerve from this Rule; and that no
Provocation could force you to it. However, there are two things that happened
in Danmark, which to another man might give some small occasion, and are as
follow. It seems an Envoy there, who had been above three Years in the Danish
Court, where at first he was very welcome, became at last to be very
disagreeable, by boldly pretending to some Privileges, that by the Custom of
the Country are denied to every body. There is throughout all Sealand a double
Road, one is common to all People, the other called the King's Road, is
reserved to his Majesty of Danmark and A^^endants; this is shut up with several
Gates, and has great Ditches on both sides of it: The Envoy traveling one day
to Helsingor, was resolved to pass this way in his Chariot, an^ accordingly did
so, after he had broke down the Gates; which Action as it would have been a
great Misdemeanor in any Dane, so it was resented by the Court as a Rudeness in
a Foreigner.

At another time this same Envoy went to the Isle of Amack^ near Copenhagen,
where abundance of Hares are kept for the King of Danmark's Game, and that with
so much care, that any man is severely punishable who presumes to kill one of
them, unless in the King's Company; however this Gentleman was resolved to have
a Course; but in his way thither was accosted by one of the King's Huntsmen,
who desired him to send his Dogs back, otherwise he was in Duty oblige^ to
shoot them. Instead of any Reply to this, one of the Envoy's Footmen cut the
Keeper over the Head with his Sword: The Man all bloody as he was, went
presently to Count Revenklaw, great Mast^r of the Game, and made his Complaint
to him. These Actions being represented to the King, his Majesty was extremely
offended at them, and showed it by the cold Reception the Envoy afterward met
with at Court; who was likewise given to understand, that he was not very
welcome there. Upon this pretending business into Flanders, he retired thither
without any Audience of Leave, and from thence went home, where his Master
would have had him return, and perform that Ceremony; but he rather chose to
lose the Presents given upon those occasions, than visit a Court again that had
been so justly offended with him: And yet pretended to be angry, because he had
not this usual Present for Envoys, which his own Rudeness and Absence deprived
him of.

Even these things could scarce ever sour a Gentleman's temper, so far as to
make him bespatter a whole Country, as the Author of the Account of Danmark has
done; to conceal several things that would have been for the Credit of that
Nation; to set Truth in such a Light, as to appear quite different from it self
in the Relation, and to advance a great many particulars in which he may be
plainly contradicted.

I would not, Sir, believe any thing like this of you, and therefore shall
proceed with the more freedom in examining the Book it self.

The CONTENTS.
Chap. 1.
OF the Territories belonging to the King of Danmark, and their Situation. 1
Chap. 2.
Of Danmark in particular, and the Island of Sealand. 9
Chap. 3.
Of the Sound. 25
Chap. 4.
Of the other Islands and Jutland. 32
Chap. 5.
Of the rest of the King of Danmark's Countries. 40
Chap. 6.
Of their Form of Government. 56
Chap. 7.
The manner how the Kingdom of Danmark became Hereditary. 77
Chap. 8.
The Conditions, Customs, and Manners of the People. 89
Chap. 9.
Of the Revenue. 131
Chap. 10.
Of the Army, Fleet and Fortresses. 145
Chap. 11.
Of the Court. 153
Chap. 12.
The Disposition and Inclinations of the King of Danmark toward his
Neighbors. 160
Chap. 13.
The Manner of dispossessing and restoring the Duke of Holstein Gottorp. 164
Chap. 14.
The Interests of Danmark in relation to other Princes. 166
Chap. 15.
Of the Laws, Courts of Justice, etc. 167
Chap. 16.
The State of Religion, of the Clergy, and Learning, etc. 172
Conclusion.
194
Errata Typographica.
PAge 1. line 7. for situation read situation, and so in p 15, etc. p. 4. l.
11. after Blegind add and. p. 5. l. 7. for bis r. this. p. 9. l. 7. for Denmark
r. Danmark. p. 11. l. 17. for Kjerfeminde r. Kierfeminde. p. 20. l. 7. for
Frederickborg r. Fredericksborg. p. 21. l. 5. for Guidenlew r. Guldenl^w. p.
24. l. ult. for outhwark r. Southwark. p. 34. l. ^^. for Stifts-Amt r. Stifts
Amtmand. p. 35. l. 14. for Gi^^ r. Gioe. l. 24. for Stifts-Amts r.
Stifts-Amtmaend. p. 36. l. 10. for Stifts-Amts r. Stifts Amtmaend. p. 43. l.
21. for recuit r. recruit. p. 44. l. 21. for Clausten r. Clausson. p. 46. l. r.
for Tonsborg r. Tonsberg. l. 3. for Zarwick r. Larwick. l. 8. for Writers r.
Writer. p. 59. l. 18. for tell r. tells. p. 64. l. 23. for we r. ^e. p. 83. l.
7. for Nauson r. Nanson. p. 86. l. 2. for Sest^ed r. Sebested. l. 5. for Nauson
r. Nanson. l. 13. for Nauson r. Nanson. p. 90. l. 23. for Hospitaliay r.
Hospitality. p. 119. l. 17. for consumate r. cons^mmate. p. 131. l. 12. for
pursue r. pursue. p 148. l. 18. for Emperor r. Emperors. p. 150. l. 15. for
Naxkew r. Nakskow. p. 156. l. 27. for Hederig r. Hedewig. p. 158. l. 9, 10. for
Daneburg r. Danebroge. p. 164. l. 5. for Rakeburg r. Ratzeburg. p. 171. l. 16.
for iu r. in. p. 173. l. 21. for Tousson r. Tausson. p. 186. l. 11. for
Glaudius, Lyscander r. Claudius Lyscander. l. 18. for Paxous r. Parvus. p. 190.
l. 27. for Er^ticam r. Eroticum.

ANIMADVERSIONS On the Pretended Account of DANMARK In the Year 1692.
CHAP. I.
Of the Territories belonging to the King of Danmark, and their Situation.

DAnmark has always had a particular Interest with England: Our very Ancestors
came originally from one of its Provinces; it has once been our Master, and we
are now governed by Princes, whose Great-grand mother was a Daughter of it; nor
can there be any dearer Pledge of the Danish Affection to us, than that the
only Brother to its King resides amongst us, and has made us happy in a Young
Prince, who promises one day to equal the great Families from which he is
descended.

Whilst 7000 Danes are fighting for us in their Majesty's Service, it is very
ungenerous in the Author of the Account to resl^^ upon them; who if he must
have been malicious, should rather have chosen an Enemies Country for the
subject of his Satyr.

If we consider the frequent Applications that have been made, both by the
Confederates, and the French King, to have the King of Danmark declare in their
savor, we shall be apt to look upon him as a Prince that is very considerable,
and not agree with this Author, page 2. who tells us that if he were put in
balance with the King of Portugal, he would be sound lighter. This is a
Comparison no reasonable man would be guilty of making, for the Armies, Navy,
and Strength of the former, will certainly very much overpoise the latter; And
then Danmark lies so, as to be able to make use of these advantages, either to
the offending of it^ Enemies, or relief of its Friends; and though Portugal has
a good East India Trade, yet the Commodities of Danmark and Norway, especially
those that relate to Shipping, make its Trade necessary to Portugal it self,
and most other Countries in Europe.

Besides, the Kingdom of Danmark with all its Provinces is very large, insomuch
that the first words of this Authors Book are, p. 1. that if we consider the
extent of the King of Danmark's Dominions, he may with justice be reckoned
amongst the greatest Princes of Europe. For though Schone, Halland and Blegind,
by Treaty remain to the Swedes, yet I cannot allow this Author what he says
page 3. that they were the best Provinces belonging to Danmark. Nor do I really
think that he has a sufficient knowledge, which Provinces are the most
considerable; for he seems only to have been in Copenhagen and thereabouts; the
reason is, because what he speaks as to the nature and constitution of Danmark,
in relation to the fertility of the Country, or the common life of the People,
can in no manner be applied to any other part, but to Sealand only, where
Copenhagen stands, and is not above a fourth part of Danmark. Now this Island
lying under the disadvantages of a particular Law, is not in so good a
condition as the other Provinces, though that, and a great deal of Jutland, is
still better than either Halland or Blegind; though Schone be a fine Province,
yet does no way excel Fun^n, as well as other parts of Danmark. However this
Author says. p. 3. that these three Provinces are still looked upon by the
Danes with a very envious Eye; and for this reason it is reported, that the
Windows of Croneborg Castle, whose Prospect lay toward Schone, were walled up,
that so hateful an Object might not cause continual Heart-burnings. Very well,
Sir, Pray did your own Knowledge, or Experience confirm this to be a truth? (p.
2.) or did some of your sensible grave Persons, p. 2. impose this silly story
upon you? For when you was at Croneborg, you might have found, that some
Windows were indeed walled up for the Advantage of the Fortress, but not to
hinder the sight of Schone; the Situation of Croneborg being such, that now
th^se Windows are close, yet Schone must be seen from the Apartments of both
the other sides; so that to make his suggestion true, all the Rooms must be
quite darkened; and then, Sir, it would be a fit place in which you might employ
your fancy and invention in framing more such stories. Nay, this Fable is so
ridiculous, that if the King of Danmark should avoid the pretended Heart
burnings, occasioned by seeing Schone, p. 3. he must not only forbear coming to
Cron^borg, but also leave Copenhagen, and that side of Sealand opposite to
Schone, and must also choose his Residence in Jutland, or some other remote
place, where he could be free from that hateful Object.

Though indeed, were Danmark as he represents it, p. 4. (comprehending all its
Islands) no bigger than two thirds of Ireland; the loss of a Province or two
would be of a very tender concern to it. But, Sir, where People have any
Knowledge of Geography, and understand how to measure a Map, they will find
that Danmark, as it now remains, has much more ground than there is in all
Ireland. It is indeed a needless trouble that I have given my self to confute
this Remark in the Authors fourth Page, because his first has already
contradicted it to my hand.

Poor Norway falls next under his Censure, p. 4. as having a very dangerous and
unhospitable Shore; we must look for nothing there but Wrecks; for when the
Night, or a Storm, overtakes poor Mariners, the deep Sea and high R^cks, never
fail to accomplish their Ruin. And this dismal Relation may be very true, for
any thing this Author knows to the contrary. The Coast of Norway is indeed high
and rocky, but all along the same there are Ports very near to one another, so
that with a very little knowledge of that Sea, you may every where find a
Harbor behind the Rocks, and Shelter from the greatest Storms: And any
Seaman, who is acquainted with that Voyage will tell you, that he would ten
times rather venture amongst the Rocks of Norway in a Storm, than the Sands of
England: The reason is, because he may there find shelter in every place, but
here are not so many entrances between the Sands. What he says, that there is
no Anchorage for Ships, p. 4. is another proof of his exact information; for in
several places there is Anchorage half a League and more into the Sea: And
where there is no such before the Land, there is, (as has been mentioned) a
safe entrance between the Rocks to anchor there.

However the Author may have straightened the King of Danmark as to his
Dominions in Europe, yet he has given him a prodigious Fort in the East Indies,
which he calls Tranquebar; p. 6. and this is another instance of his
extraordinary Accuracy; for if it be a Fort, it is of a great many Miles extent.
The Coast indeed upon which the Danes have built, is by the Indians called
Tranquebar, but the Fort it self has never had any other name than Daneborg.

But to come to a general character of the King of Danmark's Dominions,
according to the Account, p. 6. they all lie under this great inconveniency,
that they are mightily disjoined from each other, and that to this principally
the Conquests which the Swedes have gained upon them may be ascribed.

First, The Danish Provinces are not so mightily separated, as this Gentleman
would persuade us; since a Sound of 4, 5, or 7 Leagues is the greatest distance
between any of them; only Norway indeed is further off, but then it can
maintain and desend it self.

Secondly, This pretended inconvenience is a real advantage, especially against
the Incursions of any foreign Enemy: And this truth was demonstrated in the
famous War with Sweden; for had not the signal disposition of Providence frozen
up the B^lt, to that degree as was never remembered before, nor happened since,
the Swedes could not have besieged the Capital City of that Kingdom; for the
Streams which divide the Provinces of Danmark, afford them this security, that
so long as the Royal Navy is safe, Copenhagen, which is the main strength of
that Country, can fear nothing.

CHAP. II.
Of Denmark in particular, and the Island of Sealand.

BUT to what end have we labored hitherto, in the foregoing Chapter? Let the
Country be never so large, if at the same time it be barren, the extent of it
signifies little. Sealand is that unhappy Province, whose Fertility cannot be
commended by the Author, it having no Bread Corn (p. 8.) except Rye, which he
owns to be in good quantity. I hitherto thought that when a Field was sown with
Grain, if the Crop answered the utmost expectation of its owner, the Field
might be commended for its fertility; and if upon the Authors arrival, he did
not find Wheat got ready on purpose for him, it was because Rye Bread, being
more acceptable to the Danish Nation, and agreeing better with their health and
constitution, the Farmer hoped to make a better Market of his Rye amongst his
Countrymen^ than he should do of Wheat, to fatten Green Geese or cram Capons
for his worship.

And indeed, we shall find as little reason, for his being disgusted at the air
of the Country, which he says is but indifferent, p. 8. especially in and near
Copenhagen, occasioned by frequent Fogs, and its low Situation. Any body who
has been in Sealand, must allow the air to be very good; Copenhagen has only
the inconvenience which all populous Citi^s are subject to, in not having it
quite so clear as in the Country; though the wholesomness of it appears by the
healthiness of the Inhabitants: And as to Fogs (which they are seldom troubled
with) no man ought to complain of them, who may very probably have lived in
Dublin.

He is just to the Country for six Lines, in telling us the face of the Land is
pleasant, etc. p. 9. and that there is a most excellent Port belonging to
Copenhagen; but he presently comes to himself and says, they have no other
Ports in the Kingdom; nor indeed much occasion in Sealand, since they have no
Commodities to ship from them.

Notwithstanding this Gentleman's Intelligence, there are very good Seaports
throughout all Danmark, of which I shall mention the following only, each of
them capable of harboring Vessels of 200 Tun or more; in Sealand; Corsoer,
Callundborg, Holbeck, Wordingborg, etc. In Funen; Nyborg, Assens, Kierseminde,
etc. In Jutland; Aalborg, Aarhus, Horsens, Rinkiobing, etc. In Fal^^er, Laland,
etc. Nakskow, Nykiobing, etc. too many here to enumerate. And then from Sealand
there is a considerable quantity of Corn sent every year to Norway, and the
last year but one, viz. 1692, abundance likewise was carried to Holland; the
reason why there may not be so much exported at present, as has been
heretofore, is because, contrary to what he affirms, p. 10. That the number of
the Inhabitants are not increased, The Inhabitants of Copenhagen are twice as
many as they were 20 years ago.

Corn indeed would be much scarcer, if the Kings Game were so arbitrary as he
pretends, p. 9. to make them; and those sacred things might range the Fields,
and no man dare to touch them. The Countrymen I Will assure you, Sir, are not
obliged to you for the Law you have newly made them; since they have in Danmark
hitherto had an equal liberty, as in other Countries, to disturb their
Entertainment.

Come we now to the business of their Eating, in which the Reflector seems to
be extremely curious. Some one Bur^^^ of Copenhagen has undoubtedly d^soblige^
him with an ill Dinner, which was a wonder; for their way of Eating and
Drinking is so far above Meanness, that it rather inclines to Luxury; three or
four Dishes of several Meats, is but a common Dinner for the middle People, and
generally their Supper equals it. Nay, the very Boors throughout all Danmark
and Norway, will not be satisfied, if they have not their three Meals a day,
and those commonly of warm Meat; so that when the Countryman in England is
contented with his Bread and Cheese to Supper, the Danish and Norsh Peasants
must have their Pot on the fire, or else they will go to their Feather-beds
(than which, our Author says, no man can have better, p. 88.) with great
uneasiness. It Is true Meat and Fish when salted is more acceptable to the
Danes, as well as other Northern People, and agrees better with their
constitution; and it would be a hardship instead of a delicacy to them, to have
so much fresh Meat as is customary in England. But was the Diet of the Burghers
even as hard as he describes it, yet, I am credibly informed, that the Servants
of a Public Minister there ( who shall be nameless) would have been very glad
to partake of it, since their Masters housekeeping was so far from abounding,
that they found too frequent occasions to complain openly. And whereas the
Author of the Account says, p. 10, 11. that if the Inspectors of the English
Markets should come to those of Copenhagen, they would find the Victuals had
enough to be sent only to the Prisons; those poor Servants would have been
infinitely obliged, should they in pity have commanded an Officer to stop, and
set his Basket down now and then at his Excellency's.

Their Peasants live as plentifully as in other Countries, they have good Flesh
and salt Fish, white Meats, Roots, etc. but what signifies all this (according
to our Author, p. 11.) since necessary fresh Fish is wanting? I could heartily
condole their condition, if my Tenants in Northampton and Leicestershire would
not take exception; for if they found me once so indulgent to the Peasants of
another Nation, they would certainly expect a double barrel of Colchester
Oysters by the next Carrier; and without a Cods-head, Smelts or Turbet, I might
e'ne go to plow my self for Hodge and Sawney.

But what is most admirable to me is, that there can be any thing fit to eat
throughout all Danmark, since according to this Author's description, p. 11. it
seems to be exempted from part of the common promise which God made to Noah,
and Mankind, that while the Earth remains, Seed-time and Harvest, and Cold
and Heat, and Summer and Winter, and Day and Night shall not cease, Genesis 8. 22.
For he says, p. 11. that at Copenhagen, and in all Denmark they never have
Spring, and seldom Autumn. This assertion could proceed only from such a one,
as in his preface he calls a very Traveller, or at least an ill natured and
unthinking Person, since so many People are able to confute him, as have ever
lived there but a twelvemonth. Then for those three months of June, July and
August, which he calls Summer, he has provided sufficient Plagues for them;
first the interposition of thick vapors, etc. p. 11. which upon examination,
will be found to be only Clouds in his own understanding. Secondly, his plague
of Flies, of which he has seen whole Bushels swept together in one Room, p 12.
A BushelSir! (if of Winchester measure) will hold a great many Flies: and what
makes this seem more incredible is, that Domitian the Imperial Flykiller,
though in Italy, (a very hot Country) when he had taken his half peck, thought
he had had very plentiful game.

The City of Copenhagen does not more abound in Flies, than it is on the
contrary wanting in Fish; for the Author, p. 12. never knew a Sea Town of that
consequence worse served with it; the Baltic indeed is not so well stored with
Fish, as some other Seas; but yet in Copenhagen there is Sea Fish, asCod,
Flounders, etc. brought from other places, and sold there very cheap; the
reason why it is not still cheaper, by being brought thither as it might be in
greater plenty, is because their freshwater fish is in vast quantities, and as
he says, p. 92. makes full amends, there being the best Carp, Tench, Perch and
Crawfish, that are to be found any where.

He now leads us to a Description of the City of Copenhagen, p. 12. for (it
seems) when he has done that, he shall have little more to say of any other in
the King of Danmark's Dominions, there being no other belonging to him, much
better than our Town of St. Albans. Perhaps the Gentleman did not Travel much
in the Country, and so speaks only as to his own Knowledge; but other People
who have seen more, are of Opinion, and think that Ribe, Aarhuus, Aalborg,
Odense, etc. besides several Cities in Norway, and other of the Kings
Dominions, as Bergen, Trundhiem, Christiania, Gluckstadt, Flensborg,
Hadersleben, etc. if they were allotted an Impartial Surveyor, would appear to
be much better than our Town of St. Albans, which at present stands so fair in
this Authors good graces.

But though Copenhagen is the best place belonging to the King as Danmark, Yet
it is no Ancient City, nor a very Large one, it comes nearest to Bristol, and
increases in buildings daily. p. 12. Copenhagen was founded in the twelfth
Century, Anno 1168. and as to its largeness it may most properly be compared
with Dublin, which is the second City in the King of England's Dominions. He is
just to the Port of Copenhagen, in about a Page and an half, p. 13, 14. but it
is, that he may find the greater faults with the other things that belong to
it. The Air (he says) is bad, by reason of the stink of the Channels, which are
cut through the City. p. 14. In the 8th Page he attributes the badness of the
Air to the Fogs and low Situation, but here to the Channels, which are indeed
rather an Ornament and Convenience to it, than otherwise: Heretofore there
might some small offense proceed from them, when they were in the nature of
Fleet-ditch, in London: But now, by the Order of his present Majesty, they are
cut quite through the City, the Sea going in on one side, and out at the other;
and are so very large, that a stout Man of War may ride cross the City and
round the Castle.

The Works of the Town, he says, are only of Earth and Sods, p. 14. So much the
better; Stone Walls, we know, are of no great strength against Cannons: And
when he tells us, ib. These Works are in tolerable good repair; he should in
common justice have said something of the extraordinary good order they are
kept in. The Buildings (as he describes them) ib. are generally mean, being
Cage-work; not considering, that Cagework is more in esteem there than
Plaster, as being more convenient and durable, and contrived generally so as
to appear very handsome; not but that there are abundance of very good Brick
Houses, that are built by the Citizens, as well as others more magnificent
belonging to the Nobility.

As to the public Buildings, King Christian the 4th did more than all the
succeeding Princes, (says our Author.) It is very strange, that King Christian
should do more than all his Successors put together; p. 15. which all (after
this bluster)if added together, will amount to but two only, the Father and
Son; of which the Son has augmented the Beauty of the City very considerably.
The great Objection against them all is, that they have forgot, or delayed the
building of a Palace, the Kings House of Residence being the worst in the
world, p. 15. As for new Buildings, the present King is content with the
Gardenhouse of Rosenborgh, and with the delicious Castle of Friderickborg, till
his Affairs will permit him to finish a Palace, that has been long designed to
be built by the Sea side, near the Kings New Market. In the mean time the old
Castle is acceptable enough to their Majesty's, by reason of that affection
which is naturally born to things that have been possessed, and are left by
several Ancestors; this Castle being venerable for its Antiquity, part of it
having been the first House that was built in Copenhagen. Certainly this
Palace ought to be preserved, at least, to show the Citizens how much they are
at present advanced, and to what height his Majesty has raised them; since
Subjects now are not satisfied with such Buildings and Apartments, as have
been, and are thought sufficient for the Royal Family and their Predecessors.
This signal instance should have been brought by our Author, to prove the Pride
of absolute Monarchs, and the Misery of the Danish Nation, viz. in his own
words p. 15. That several of the Noblemen, as his high Excellency Guidenlew,
the Great Admiral Juel, with others, are infinitely better lodged than the
whole Royal Family.

Had the Author been resolved to do Danmark the least favor or justice, he
might as well have spoken a little of the Curiosities that were in Copenhagen,
as without reason, have spent his time in blaming its Air, Buildings and
Fortifications. For certainly in Copenhagen a Traveller may find many things
worth his observation; the Change is none of the worst; the Arsenal one of the
best in Europe; the Canals very fine; the Round Steeple of Trinity Church,
built according to the directions of Christian Longomontan, the Disciple of
Tycho Brahe, and Professor of Mathematics in Copenhagen, is without question a
most noble piece of Curiosity, the like is not to be found elsewhere; for a
Coach and Horses may ascend to the top, and yet the height of it comes very
near that of the Monument of London. This Steeple consists of Arches, and over
the Church, which is all of Brick without any Timber, is the Library of the
University as large as the Church. But as for the University of Copenhagen he
never so much as takes any notice of it here. Politics and Satyr took up his
time so much, that he had no leisure for the Belles Letters, or gentiler
Learning, p. 255. so he gives us no Account of the Kings Library, nor of
several others belonging to the University; which as they are very considerable
for other things, so particularly for the preservation of the Antiquities of
those Northern Nations: Nor of the admirable Musaeum, belonging to the King of
Danmark, which is in the same Palace with the Royal Library, full of all the
most exquisite Raritics of Art and Nature; and which, after the learned Olaus
Wormius's death, was so considerably augmented with his famous Closet, one of
the best in the world, for the many curious Antiquities it contained, which he
bequeathed to the King, and of which the Learned World has a printed account in
a large Folio.

He speaks nothing of the Beauty, Largeness and Magnificence of the Churches
both within and without; nor of the extraordinary height of the two Steeples
belonging to the Churches of the Virgin Mary and St. Nicholas; nor of the fine
Organs, especially that of St. Mary's Church, lately made by a Danish Master;
which for its prodigious largeness is fearcely to be paralleled any where
amongst the Protestants. Neither does this curious Gentleman mention the Kings
New Market, a very fine and large place, in the middle of which stands the
Kings Statue on Horseback, very artificially cast in Lead; and is surrounded
with the finest Palaces of the Town, as Count Guldenlew's, Admiral Juel's, etc.
But most of all this Authors negligence is to be admired, that he disdains to
speak a word of the great new work on Christians-haven; which is a new City by
it self, lying on the Island of Amack, but joined to Copenhagen. This new Work
is a vast Fortification opposite to the Citadel of Copenhagen, which is
situated near the Custom-house, and Entrance of the Harbor; so that on both
sides these two Fortresses command both the Port and almost all the City round
about, and render the Fortifications of the City it self so much the stronger,
and in a manner impregnable. And in this new work of Christians-haven, two
things are very considerable. First, that all the Ground contained in the Fort
is, by incredible labor and industry, made out of the midst of the Water; and
then, that this Ground is of so considerable an extent, that a Town may be
built upon it: And it is said, that his Danish Majesty has appointed this to
be the Dewlling Place of the Jews of Copenhagen.

By these instances, (which yet are not all that are worth a man's curiosity in
Copenhagen) the impartial Reader may guess, how unjust the Author has been in
his description of this ancient and Royal City, and how far he may rely upon
the rest of his Relations of these two Northern Kingdoms and annexed Provinces:
Seeing when he pretends to describe Copenhagen, he mentions nothing of
Christians-haven; just as if he should speak of London, and forget Southwark.

CHAP. III.
Of the Sound.

THe Author says, p. 11. The two Principal things in Sealand and indeed of all
Danmark are the City of Copenhagen, and the passage of the Sound: Having done
with the City He comes to this straight, which lies between the firm land of
Schone: and the Island of Sealand.

The King of Danmark claims a Toll of all Ships that pass through it, except
the Swedes, who are exempted from it by Treaty; yet this writer, according to
the freedom which Men of his principle generally use with Crowned heads,
pretends to question the King of Danmarks title, p. 2^. and says it is slightly
grounded.

I shall not enter upon matters of State, nor pretend to give a particular
account of the Original Records that contain the Immemorial continuance, and
Succession of Claims which the Kings of Danmark have made to this Sea, and
right of Toll in it. The King, who pretends to, and enjoys this Toll, is able
enough to give reasons for it, and to maintain his pretensions. However I
cannot but remark, that there are several passages in this Chapter, which I
cannot well Imagine to have fallen from the Pen of an English man: As where he
says, The Title to the Toll is precarious, p. 23. as founded upon a breach of
Trust, it being at first only, to provide Lights for Securing the passage of
Merchants through the Sound. That it is a kind of servile acknowledgment of the
Kings Sovereignty of those Seas: p. 22. That the Title is not so firm as the
Danes could wish for; not being masters of the Land on both sides, they may
have the right, but not the Power to assert it. p. 17. For an Englishman knows
that although ^ur King is bound to protect all strangers that pass through his
narrow Seas yet his Sovereignty does not arise from thence, but because of his
Sovereignty, he is therefore bound to protect them: so the King of Danmark
being Lord of the passage of the Sound, ought to provide for the safety of such
as should Sail thorough it. His Dominion, not being founded on that, but that
being a necessary Consequence of his Dominion. In the second place,
acknowledgment has always been reckoned by English men to become due, in
Recompense of such Protection and Conveniences afforded; and therefore, our
Kings demanded Contribution for the Ships that defended the Fishing of
Foreigners. And where is the servility any more in paying a Toll to the King of
Danmark, for passing his Sound, than in that acknowledgment which all Ships,
according to the Law made by King John to maintain it, must make to those of
the King of England by striking a Flag, when they sail through his narrow Seas,
or in the paying Anchorage, or for the Lights to the Trinity house?

Thirdly, as to the Case between Sweden and Danmark, (though Danmark has no
reason to imagine there will be such a Pretension from thence, or to fear it if
there should,) it is the same with France and the English. For King Edgar and
King Knute, who was as great a defender of the sovereignty, as any of our
Princes, had their Dominions many Ages before any of their Successors laid
claim to France. And the French, notwithstanding all their Power, have not
pretended to the Sovereignty of the narrow Seas, because they live upon one of
the Coasts of them.

The Author would Insinuate further, that the English pay this Toll, through
the Connivance of King James the Is It. in prejudice of his own Subjects, who
favored the Danes upon Account of his marriage to a Daughter of that Crown, p.
22. If King James favored them upon his alliance to that Crown, our Author
should, on the same account, if he had any manners, have done so too; but
setting aside this Reflection on the memory of King James, it is certain, the
Kings of England have successively paid this Toll in the Sound, and have been
so Wise and Just, not to encroach so far upon a sovereign head, as to prescribe
him Laws what to do in such Seas, as are his unquestionable Dominions.

In the other particulars, of the Account which he gives us concerning the
Sound, he seems not to know what kind of passage it is, He says, p. 22. It is
very well known, that the passage of the Sound is not the only one to the
Baltic Sea, there being two others called the greater and lesser Belts; and
that of the greater Belt so commodious and large, that during the late Wars,
the whole Dutch Fleet chose to pass through it, and continue in it for four or
five months together: Whereas in truth the Sound is the only convenient one;
the lesser Belt is unpassable for large Ships, and the greater is so full of
Rocks and Sands, that nothing can be more dangerous. To be sure had the Dutch
found it practicable to use this passage, which is so large that it cannot
possibly be stopped with a fortress, they had done it long ago. It is very true
the Dutch Fleet did continue there for four or five months together, but it was
much against their will, for coming into it they were so endangered by Rocks,
and Storms, that they were forced to make so very flow a motion, in order to
their escape with greater safety; neither does the Author tell us what loss and
damage they received, which indeed was very considerable.

In the same page we are likewise informed, that the breadth of the Sound in
the narrowest part is four English Miles over, and every where of a sufficient
depth, so that the King of Danmark's Castles could not command the Channel,
when he was master of both sides; much less now he has but one. This Gentleman
is resolved never to measure right; for if he had, he would have learnt that
the Sound is but three English Miles broad, when it is truly measured; besides
had he asked any Skipper that usually passes that way, he would have found,
that it is so far from being every where of a sufficient depth, that on the
side of Sweden the water is so shallow, that it is impossible for a Ship to
pass, unless it be within the reach of the Castle of Croneborg.

What he delivers in the next place, p. 23. that the Spaniards may with as much
right lay claim to the Streights of Gibraltar; or, that the Swede who is now
Masier of one of the Coasts of the Sound, demand another Toll of Ships, is
altogether ridiculous. The solemn Treaties of Roschild and Lund, contain formal
protestations against any pretensions to a Double Toll; and by them to King of
Sweden has been obliged to demolish the Castle and Fortifications of
Helsingborg: Besides, it would be impossible for the Swede effectually to
demand it at Helsinborg, since that Town is so situated that no Ship is able
to come within half a League of it. Neither is it easy for any one to imagine,
how he will make out his comparison, between the Sound and the streights of
Gibraltar; since the former being commanded by a strong Castle is very narrow,
and passable only within the reach of Cannon-shot; whereas the latter is so
broad, that several Ships may pass in the middle of it, without fear of Cannon
from either side, and not commanded by any Castles belonging either to the
Moors or Spaniards.

He concludes in a great huff, p. 26. that all other petty Princes and States
pay this Toll without murmer, whilst we and the Hollanders do it, but the Danes
must have a care left we grow Angry. So it seems France and Poland, whose Ships
pass this Sound, are petty Princes and States, and the Author may think he has
Authority enough, to make a Crowned Head stand in awe of him; but to show him
the contrary, I shall proceed with my former freedom to consider, his next
Chapter, though he himself should chance to grow Angry.

CHAP. IV.
Of the other Islands, and Jutland.

IT would be tedious to the Reader to account all the contradictions that are
to be met with, in the description of these Countries. I shall begin with
Sealand, where he says, there are few Meadows, and yet no want of good Hay; p.
8. that the air is but indifferent, and yet there are no colds: p. 8, 9. That
the Cattle is lean p. 10. because their feeding, when in the house, is partly
Hay, and partly Brewers Grains and Roots, etc. p. 10. So having given an
Account of the miserable state of Sealand, he proceeds to set forth that of the
other Islands in this manner.

Funen has plenty of Corn, Hogs, Woods, etc. p. 27. and yet has nothing for the
Merchants to export but a few Horses.

As it is certain and notorious, that abundance of Corn, Bacon, and other
Commodities are sent from thence to Holland, Norway, and other places, so it is
as certain like wise that these things must go to Holland or Norway from this
Island by Land-carriage, unless the Author will give them leave to be exported.
What does he think of the Apples, which yearly are the sole Lading of several
Ships.

Their Cider, and their Mead, (which is the best in the World) is likewise
carried abroad; and more especially a sort of Wheat, called in Danish,
Boghuede, in Latin, Fagopyrus, (of which the Danes make their so much talked of
Grout, that resembles the English Hasty-Pudding) which is in very great plenty
throughout the whole Island. Now it cannot possibly enter into my head, that
the people who have Corn, Bacon, Apples, Cider, Mead, and Boghuede to be
exported, should have only a few Horses to be exported.

The chief Town is Odensee, formerly a flourishing little City, but now fallen
to decay, p. 27. It is not so flourishing now as when the King resided there,
but it is in a very good condition still. He takes no notice of several other
good Towns that are in the Island, as Nyborg, Assens, Middlefart, etc. which
are all bigger than St. Albans; I suppose that he might make his Reader imagine
that nothing but Villages were to be found in Danmark, except those few Towns
he mentions.

This Island is obliged to him for declaring the true name of its Stifts-Ampt,
or chief Governor, which is Mr. Winterfelt: whereas in Laaland and Jutland he
is mistaken in the Names; and has given us none of those in Sealand, whither
for want of Information, or other more prevailing Reasons, he can best inform
his Reader.

Laaland has met with better quarter from this Author than other places, and is
commended for its plenty of Corn; however he has forgot the great abundance of
extraordinary good Pease which grow there, and for which it is famous. I hope
it is no reflection upon Copenhagen that it is supplied with Wheat from thence,
p. 28. and it may the rather be excused, because the Dutch, in the midst of
their Plenty and Liberty, come hither for it too. So London is at present
supplied from the North, as Rome heretofore from Sicily and Egypt. He is
mistaken in the Governors name, which is Mr. Gior; and this small error is the
more to be taken notice of, because he says he resided a long time in England,
in a public Character, and so probably his name might be the better known
there.

Nor is he less mistaken in the name of another person, which if he were any
ways inquisitive he might have known; for he places Monsieur Edmund Scheel
among the Stifts Ampts of Jutland: this I suppose he does only to let his
Country men see, that they need not go so far as Danmark to find out his
errors: For Monsieur Scheel, a Person considerable for his Parts, Learning, and
the Characters he has sustained at home, and in Foreign Courts besides that of
England, where he lately rended at Envoy Extraordinary; in that very Memorial
he gave in to the King of England about this Authors account, has wrote his
Christian name Magnus, as he does without any abbreviation upon all occasions.
After having named three Stifts Ampts in Jutland, an etc. comes in for the
fourth. Which the Author upon the least inquiry, might have found to be Mr.
Mejercrone, now the King of Danmark's Envoy at the French Court. The four
principal Governments which he has not mentioned, are called Ribe, Aarhus,
Wiborg, and Aalborg.

It contradicts it felt that Jutland wants good Seaports toward the Ocean, p.
30. and yet the Hollanders transport a great quantity of Cows and Oxen from
thence; which makes it unnecessary to repeat the Sea-towns mentioned elsewhere,
besides which there are several others by the Western Islands, Silt, ^isler,
and Ro^me, near the Cities of Ribe and Tonder, where the Hollander's Smacks and
Oxen-Ships (as they call them) enter without difficulty, and so export those
Commodities; which though the writer calls Lean Cow's and Oxen, p. 3^. yet they
are not so in themselves, but only in regard of that extraordinary bigness they
grow to, when they come into the Dutch Soil. Otherwise the Cattle of Jutland,
as of most part of Denmark, is not of the smallest, though it be left in its
own Country, Nor need the Inhabitants of this plentiful Province desire any
fatter Beef, than what they can have when they please at home.

Jutland also affords Corn, not only insufficient quantity for the use of its
own people, p. 30. but in such a superabundance that all the want of Norway in
this case is yearly supplied, in the greatest measure from this Province;
neither can this choose but be a vast quantity, considering the many Populous
Sea. Towns lying all along upon the shores of that Country, Nay, in the very
Year 1692. in which this Author pretends to describe this Country, there was
such a crop reaped there, that it was upon frequent desires allowed to the
Hollanders by the King of Danmark, to export no less then 30 thousand barrels
of Corn, (each Danish barrel containing four Bushels) besides what privately
under this permission was stolen out, and all besides the necessary provisions
for Norway. Let now the Reader judge, if no more can be said of Jutland's
fertility, than that it affords Corn in sufficient quantity for the use of its
own People.

But what is the reason of this plenty, and fertility? does it proceed from the
goodness of the Soil, and the Industry of the Inhabitants? or from any Natural,
Moral, or else some Political Account? why indeed the Reason that they have so
many Oxen to sell, is because the King keeps his Court far from thence: Procul
a Jove Procul a Fulmine, p. 30. says our Author. Corn, grows in any Country,
where the Farmer is careful, and the Soil agreeable: and where the meadows
produce good grass, there will be good cattle, and this Nature will do whither
it be in Monarchys or Commonwealth.

I have reserved the Island of Amack, or Amager in Danish to conclude with,
because it is the Authors darling.

This Island, as he says, p. 28, 29. is very plentiful, and therefore commonly
called the Kitchen Garden of Copenhagen, but the Inhabitant's are not all of
them North Hollanders, there is but one Pa^ish and Village, which is called the
Hollander's Village; the rest of the people, although they wear a singular
dress, to show their primitive Extraction, yet in every thing else they are
^anes, so that their not mixing with that Nation, p. 29. is a mere fable. But
hence arises a great consternation in our Author, it is to be feared that these
North Hollanders by de^rees, will be treated ^e the other Subjects of Danmark.
My heart really bleeds, upon the contemplation of these poor North-Hollanders,
for they seem perfectly to have been trapan^'d, or as one may say, kidnapt into
Denmark. I warrant they had Letter upon Letter, Invitation upon Invitation,
before they could leave their own Country, and especially considering what they
were, persons of fashion and credit; Gardners and DairyMaids.

Now it is very hard, that a free people bred in a Commonwealth, as North
Holland is, where they lie under no Impositions, have no Excises, should be
betrayed into a Country, where there is a necessity of their paying Taxes, that
they should be reduced to powdered Beef, and stubble Geese, like common Danes;
whereas at home, in the seat of Liberty, they could have Regaled themselves and
Families, with a Red herring one day, White-herring another, and Pickledherring
a third, for greater change and delicacy.

CHAP. V.
Of the rest of the King of Danmark's Countries.

THE Author, to keep up an old custom, begins this Chapter with a
contradiction; for in Sleswick the Commodities for exportation are in no great
quantity, and yet it affords Corn, Cattle, Horses, and Wood, to its Neighbors,
over and above a sufficient store of each for its own Inhabitants.

When it is his business to describe Danmark, he runs out into an Elaborate
description of the Duke of Holstein's Residence, and sets forth the Romantic
situation of his Castle, p. 32.

It is easy to guess at the Authors Reasons for this digression. Gottorp is a
very pleasant and magnificent seat, yet in most things it is not to be compared
with the King of Danmark's Palace, Fredericksborg. The Palace may have run to
some decay, by the late troubles in Holstein; but those who told the Author
that the Improvements were pulled down and destroyed, by order, p. 33. were so
far from being sensible Informers, that they were false and malicious. Neither
does it stand with common sense, that so generous a Prince as the King of
Danmark, would give so ungenteel an order, or revenge himself upon the Palace
and Gardens, for any injury which the Master of them might have done him. And
after all, the Author found a Library, p. 33. at Gottorp, which was more than
he was pleased to do at Copenhagen.

The Holsteiners are so much this Gentleman's Friends, that he strains a point
in their favor, p. 36. viz. The Danes when they Travel abroad, choose to call
themselves Holsteiners, thinking it more honorable to be born in the consines
of the Empire than otherwise. Which in a rational man's opinion, is more
honorable? to be born in a little Duchy; (as Holstein is) and a Feif holden of
the Empire or to be a native of one of the most Ancient Kingdoms in Europe? I
cannot tell what they may do in other Countries, but when they travel in
England and converse among us, they never dissemble their Country, nor desire
to be called any otherwise than Danes.

It is to be noted, (according to this Account, p. 37.) as a great natural
defect, that the King of Danmark has not in all his Dominions one Navigable
River, for Vessels of considerable Burden. This can be no great defect in such
Islands as Danmark consists of, where there is no need of great Rivers, (as the
Thames, Humber, etc.) the Sea being on all sides so near at hand. Yet these
Islands have some Rivers proportionable enough to their bigness, as that in
Sealand, which goes up to a Town called Nested, and has formerly been capable
of carrying brave Ships. As for the Continent, Jutland has some pretty good
Rivers, but the defect which it may have in them, is abundantly recompensed by
nature, with many Friths which the Sea forms, and run far into the Country, as
that called Limesiord by Aalborg; which passes almost into the middle of
Jutland.

What he says, p. 37. concerning the design of the Danes during this war, to
establish the Toll at Gluckstadt, is rather one of his own suppositions, than
any of their real Intentions,

He complains, p. 38. of the Horses of Oldenburg, as not able to last long or
endure hard labor, whereas those that have skill in Horses, account them the
strongest of any, and they are at present generally sought after, to recuit the
Cavalry in Flanders.

Come we now to the Kingdom of Norway, of which (if we may believe this Author,
p. 38.) little can be said: Or rather in truth he should have turned it thus.
of Norway I can say but little. For certainly it is more his Ignorance of the
Country, than any want of curiosities in it: Else those Gentlemen who have
written whole Volumes concerning the description of it, have made a great
bustle about nothing.

The History of it has been set forth by several eminent Authors, as Albertus
Crantzius, and Snorre Sturleson; [whose great History of the succession and
actions of the Norway Kings written first in Islandish, and then Translated
into Danish and Swedish, in a large Quarto or Folio, is as valuable a piece of
History as any where is to be found.] Saxo Grammaticus, in his Danish Chronicle
has a great deal about Norway, as likewise Jonas Arngrim, in his Crymogaea
Islandica, and lately one Jonas Ramus a Clergyman in Norway, has put forth an
Ingenious Tract called Norwega Antiqua, and Ethnica: Peter Clauston (another of
the same Nation and Profession has writ a great Book of their Description of
that Country in the Danish Tongue, who is followed by several others, that have
discoursed of that either in general, or some of its Provinces in particular;
and most of the Danish and Suedish Historians fill up half their Books with the
Transactions and Affairs of Norway. Olaus Wormius in his Fasti Danici,
Literatura Runica and Monumenta Danica, has given us as many Rarities and
Antiquities of Norway, as he has done of Danmark. This may show the Reader,
that contrary to what this Author affirms, there is enough to be said of this
vast Kingdom. Now to show you in that little he has said of Norway, how much a
man may be mistaken: this Author has an excellent faculty at crowding a great
many errors in a little room; as for example, It is subdivided into four Stifts
Ampts, p. 38, 39. or principal Governments, viz. Dronthem, Bergen, Christiania
and Larwick. The Governors are young Guldenlew, Mr. Stockfleet, etc. So it
seems, that Norway has of late lost a Stifts Ampt, or chief Government; for the
North themselves hitherto reckoned that they had five. The names of them are
Christiania or Aggershus, Christiansand, Bergen, Trundhiem and Wardohus. As for
Larwick, which this Author would advance to be a Stifts Ampt, it is but a
County, belonging separately to his high Excellency Count Guldenlew, as
Tousborg is another belonging to Count Wedel. Truly, Sir, had we taken your
Account, Zarwick had been but a small equivalent, for Wardohus; and
Christiansand, though a principal Government, had been quite embezel'd. Little
indeed may come to be said of a Country, when a Writers will omit such
principal parts of it. When he comes to tell us who are Governors, he names
Guldenlew and Mr. Stockfleet, and passes the rest over with an etc. Sir, I
should be glad to know from you a little more of this matter, and whether this
etc. be put here for brevity sake, and to spare your Readers trouble, or else
to palliate your own ignorance? Had you named us four Governors we should have
been content, and not have been so hard as to put you upon assigning a Stifts
Ampt to the fifth Province of Norway, which never came to your knowledge.

It is a very barren Country, etc. p. 36. Norway has never pretended to be so
fertile in Corn as Danmark. However it is observable, that where the Ground is
fit to be tilled, it yields a greater Crop than the Soil of the richest
Countries. If Norway had not so many Sea Towns very populous, and full of
Strangers, the Corn growing there would be sufficient, without any Importation,
to feed its own Inhabitants. There are some districts up in Norway, as
Hedemar^en, Todten, Gulbrandsdalen, etc. which in Fertility and good Corn, do
not yield to any part of Danmark.

It will not be improper here to remark two things, which the Author formerly
advanced, in which Norway clearly convinces him to the contrary.

First, p. ^1. There is no other Town or City belonging to the King of Danmark
much better than St. Albans; whereas Norway is full of large Sea Towns, such as
Bergen, Christiania, Christiansand, Trundhiem, Frideriksstadt, etc.

Secondly, he says, p. 34. That the King of Danmark has not in all his
Dominions one Navigable River for Vessels: But in Norway are abundance of great
Rivers and Friths, running far into the Country, as Sarp near Frederickstadt,
^ramen, Lomen, Aggers-Elf near Christiania, Nideren near Trundhiem, etc. One
might have expected likewise, that one who treated of Norway should have spoken
something of the great fresh Lakes, which are every where in that Country: One
of which called Mios is a league broad, and near twenty leagues long. And I
should the rather have supposed, that he would have mentioned these Lakes,
because he seems so mightily taken with the places where the Countrymen have
good store of fresh Fish; for in these Lakes there is such abundance and
variety of Fish, that the Peasants thereabouts have enough not only to salt,
dry, and carry down to the Seaside, but likewise to eat fresh as often as they
have a mind to it.

He acknowledges there are Silver Mines in Norway, but he questions whether
they turn to account, p. 39. He needed not to have questioned it, for he might
have been informed, that they have of late years yielded more than they did
formerly, or could reasonably be expected from them. There is indeed, ( p. 36.)
an Account of the Commodities from thence exported, but he forgets the many
Furs and Skins of Mart, Zabel, Beavers, etc. which are sent from thence yearly:
As also Copper, and small Nuts, of which quantities are shipped out, and come
toward the end of Winter to London.

The beginning of the Character he gives the Norsh is very well, viz. p. 39.)
that they are a hardy, laborious and honest sort of People, and that they are
esteemed by others; yet for all this, alas! they must have their share of
Scandal too, and the vice of self conceitedness is laid to their Charge. Vincit
Amor Patriae, it seems, may be their Motto, as well as our Authors; for he
says, i^. they esteem themselves much superior to the Danes; whom they call
upbraidingly Jutes. Were such a thing true, as that the Norsh thought
themselves superior to the Danes, it might be apt to breed some discord between
them. On the contrary, no two Sister Nations can love one another better. Any
one who has been in those Northern Countries, knows that none is welcomer in
Danmark then a Norsh man, or in Norway, than a Dane: So that it is wonderful to
see two Nations not conquered one by the other, but joined by the Marriage of
Princes, agree so very well together. As for the name of Jutes, it was given
the Danes, as a spightful nickname by the Swedes in the late Wars, but the
Norsh, no more call them upbraidingly Jutes, than the Danes when they Travel
call themselves Holsteiners.

Island and Feroe he says, p. 39. are miserable Islands forCorn will not grow
there Misery consists not always in want of Corn; since they may have that from
other places, Fish and Cattle they enjoy in great abundance. We see Holland,
which is a most happy place in this Authors opinion, fetches all three of them
from Danmark and Norway. The Inhabitants of these Islands, are great player at
Chess, and our Author says, p. 40. would be worth some curious man's enquiry,
how such a Studious and Difficult game should get thus far Northward, and
become so generally used. So we see that notwithstanding their misery, they
have leisure for their Sports, and have Parts able to surmount that game, which
being difficult must require Study. This curious man need not make very far
inquiry about their playing at Chess, it is easily known from reading any of
the Northern Antiquities (which the Islandish writers abound with, and have the
most plain, simple and uncorrupted) that Chess has been the proper game of the
three Northern Nations. Now the Islanders having preserved the old Tongue and
Manners of the Goths, old Danes, Norsh and Swedes, it is no wonder they have
also kept this Gothic game, and their Ease and Plenty, together with the great
Colds in the Winter, inclining them to sedentary lives, make them follow it,
and from thence arrive to its Perfection.

As to the Kings Factories in both Guinea and the Indies, they are esteemed of
little consideration, p. 40. yet he has seen several East India Ships return
home well laden, but whether the lading were the lawful product of Trade, or
acquired by other means, will in time be worth the enquiry of those Kingdoms
and States, whose Interest it is to preserve in the Indians and Persians, a
good opinion of the honesty and fair dealing of the Europeans. I shall always
think that such Factories as send home ships well laden, are both of good worth
and consideration, and I am the more confirmed in these thoughts, because, p.
40. most of the men of Quality are the Adventurers.

The looking into the fairness of their Traffic and Merchandise may be let
alone at present; for I suppose no European Prince, will concern himself with
the affairs of Asia, so far as to engage in a War with the King of Danmark for
that reason. At least, Holland and England will very probably remain quiet,
till the world has in some measure, forgot the proceedings with the great
Mogul, and the King of Bantam.

At last, the Author comes to sum up what he has been saying, concerning the
King of Danmark's Dominions, and from what he himself has delivered, p. 41.
infers; that they produce but a moderate Plenty of Necessaries for the
Inhabitants, but few Commodities for the Merchants: However from the very worst
representation that can be given it, which is this Authors, I shall endeavor
from his own words, to evince the quite contrary.

For Sealand, p. 7, 8. has Rye in good quantity, no want of good Hay, the gra^s
short and sweet, great Number of the Lakes sufficiently stored with Fish;
Beech. wood, which is excellent for the pureness of its firings, much Game, as
Stags, Wildboars, Roebucks, etc. The face of the land is pleasant, in many
places abounding with little Hills, Woods, and ^a^es in a very agreeable
diversity. For Seaports it has that most excellent one belonging to
Copenhagen etc. One of the best in the World, etc. Funen (p. 27.) is second to
Sealand, whether its bigness or goodness of its Soil be considered, it has
Plenty of Corn, Hogs, Lakes, and Woods, and some few Horses to be exported by
the Merchants. Laaland, p. 28. is a small but plentiful Island, producing all
sorts of Corn in abundance and particularly Wheat, wherewith it supplies
Copenhagen, and all other parts of Danmark. The Hollanders buy yearly and ship
off great Quantities of Corn from thence. ^astria, Langland and Mune, are
fertile Islands, the two first export yearly some Corn; Arroe and Alsen abound
in Anniseeds, which are much used, etc. Bornholm, Sa^nsoe, p. 28. with the
other Islands nourish Cattle, and afford ^orn for the use of the Inhabitants.
Amack deserves to be particularly remembered: This little Island is, as it were,
the R^ehen Garden of Copenhagen, and supplies its Markets plentifully with all
sorts of Ro^^^ and Herbs, besides Butter, Milk, great quantities of Corn and
some Hay. Jutland (p. 29.) is a Plentiful Country, abounding more especially in
Cattle. The Hollanders transport yearly great Quantities of Corn and Oxen from
thence, to their more fertile Soil; where in a short time they grow
prodigiously. The Horses and Swine of this Country are excellent, and in great
numbers: It affords Corn in sufficient quantity for the use of its own People.

The Duchy of Sleswick ( p. 32.) is in general a very good Country, its
convenient Situation between two Seas, the Ocean and the Baltic, rendering it
considerable for Trade: Some Corn, Cattle, Horses, and wood for Fireing it
affords to its Neighbors, over and above a sufficient store of each for its
own Inhabitants. Holstein, p. 35. is a Country very Fruitful and Pleasant,
excellently well seated, for Trade, between two Seas. Stormar and Ditmarsh, p.
38. are for the most part low and Rich Countries, their Soil being fat and in
most places resembling Holland, as well in its fertility as manner of
Improvement. Oldenburg p. 37. abounds in Cattle, and has a good breed of
Horses, which are much sought after for Coaches, Delmenhorst p. 38. is pretty
well wooded.

Norway, p. 39. has Silver Mines; the Commodities which it yields sit for
exportation, are Timber of all kinds especially Firr, Stockfish, Masts for
Ships and Iron; of these it has a tolerable store. Island and Feroe, p. 39.
have good stocks of Cattle. The King of Danmark, p. 37. has Factories in
Guinea, and the East and West Indies: Several East India Ships return home to
Copenhagen well laden with the Merchandise of those Countries.

Thus I have given you from the Authors own words, the Qualities of all the
King of Danmark Dominions, only abating the malicious insinuations of the
Describer, and leave the indifferent Reader to judge, which deserves to be
thought most contemptible of, such a Country, or such a Writer.

CHAP. VI.
Of their Form of Government.

WE come now to his darling Topic, which is that about Government: In the very
beginning of which Chapter, he shows himself very ungrateful, in Reflecting
upon the Northern Countries, to whose Ancient Inhabitants (he says, p. 42.) we
are so much indebted, as to owe the Original of Parliaments.

The constitution of a Government by a Parliament is a signal Blessing, but for
the most part, those who make the greatest bluster with it, are Men who would
leave out the Principal part of it, and commit the greatest errors about it.

The word Parliament is very equivocal, and consequently there must be several
differences as to the original of it, in diverse Countries. It is very
probable, that the original of Parliaments in general, is not so much owing to
any particular Nation, as to Nature it self. And for the due and firm
constitution of the Government, as I take that to be by King, Lords, and
Commons; I look no further than the Body natural, ( viz.) that of man, the most
Divine part of the Creation; and there I find the head dignified with exceeding
Power, Command, and Honor; there are other members, which being most useful to
the principal part, are exalted to a particular preferency, and a third sort,
inferior and less useful, which through their weakness etc. seem liable to
contempt and neglect, and consequently to grievances; so it is but meet for
them to have recourse to their Superiors, to set forth their wants, and
likewise to declare their willingness, so far as in them lies, to contribute
toward the Support of the whole; and it seems not unreasonable that it should
be thus in the State, since we find St. Paul to the Corinthians, most admirably
describing it to be so in the Church; where having first made Christ the Head,
and secondly constituted Apostles, Prophets, and Teachers, he yet further in
the third place, makes every particular Christian come in for a share as a
member, That there should be no Schism in the body, but the members should have
the same care one for the other, and whether one member suffer, all the members
suffer with it, or one member be honored, all the members rejoice with it.

To take the word Parliament in this sense, it may agree to several Nations,
but else (as was before said) it is very equivocal, and differs according to
the several Countries it is found in; so that when the Author joins the
Parliaments of Poland and Great Britain together, the Reader must not imagine,
that there is any likeness or resemblance between them; for there the King has
so little Power, the Cities scarce any, and that of the Nobility is so
exorbitant, that the greatest Councils upon the most pressing necessities for
their safety against the Turks and Tartars end in nothing, if one Deputy shall
think fit to make his Protestation against it: This Parliament^ being no more
like ours than the Venetian Senate. And yet he tells us with great pomp, p. 43.
that Poland alone has preserved its Parliament, whereas every one must
acknowledge, it would be a happy Country, if it had the oppertunity to lose it.

As for all other Countries whatsoever, except that, and our own, (he tell us,
ib.) they have lost their Parliaments within this last age; This cannot be
true, for though Danmark has lost its Diet, yet Sweden retains it still, and
such a one was summoned but the last year. Spain and Portugal have the same
sort of Government, they have had this several hundred years; how can he then
say, that all Kingdoms, in this last age have lost their Parliaments? Besides,
as for Bohemia, Hungary, and the rest of the Emperors Hereditary Provinces,
although the Government is pretty absolute on the Princes side, yet there is
every where a Convocation of the States of the Country But I would fain know of
him, whether he believes there is such a place as Ratisbone, and whether he
thinks the Germans send their Deputies thither for nothing. England had indeed
been happy if this Gentleman's opinion had been true, that its Parliaments had
met with no Interruption in th^^ last age; but whatever his thoughts may be,
our Parliament was properly lost for several years together; from before the
Death of King Charles the first, till the Restoration of his Son; for it is
impossible in nature to have that assembly in its true perfection, without a
King in his full Prerogative and Splendour

Danmark has some years since, upon very important considerations, laid aside
the Assembly of the States, and given their King a greater extent of Power in
that particular, than his Predecessors formerly enjoyed: Not but that the King
did before enjoy very signal prerogatives; and throughout all the Northern
Histories it is easy to show, that strict Obedience, and an entire Submission
to their Prince, has been reigning there from immemorial times; nor has it
ever so much as been known what a Republic was: There has indeed a controversy
been started by Historians, whether in remote ages the Kingdom of Danmark has
been hereditary or elective; there are weighty Reasons for the Inheritance, at
least if custom and prescription be such, seeing Successors of the Royal
Family, have come always to the Crown: insomuch that if we look back as far as
Saxo's fabulous times, we shall always find the Son succeeding his Father, or
if the Son has been wanting, another of the same race has been made King. Upon
the Death of a Prince, the Estates constantly met together, but it was with
their Voices to confirm the next Heir, and not to elect another, of any other
Family whatsoever; for there cannot be one Instance given through all the
Danish History, where the Royal Family was excluded, and a private man, though
endowed with never so many excellent qualities, exalted to the Throne; the
example of Hiarne, recorded by Saxo, does not argue, for those times being
fabulous, the story cannot be much relied on; and it is likewise to be
observed, that it was even then supposed, that the Prince and Heir was killed
in Russia. Besides it is more improbable, because they say he was made King for
his Poetry; Poets being persons that seldom arrive at such Riches and
Preferments. It is not to be denied, but that the Danes sometimes may have
renounced their Allegiance to their King, or rebelled against him, but those
instances are extremely few, in comparison of such as may be found in the
English or other Histories. When these Facts have been committed, they have
been so far from being justified afterward, that the Danes have ever looked
upon them as their greatest misfortunes. And nothing can more evidently
demonstrate to an Englishman, that Faith which the Danes naturally bear to
their Prince, than the Hatred they have expressed against the villainous Act of
the Regicides, who committed the horrid Murder of King Charles the first. The
book called Englands Black Tribunal, being translated into their Tongue, has by
several editions, given them such a sufficient account of it, as makes them
universally detest it. In the alliance between the two Crowns, February 13,
1660. It was agreed in the 5th Article, that if any of those Regicides, were
found either in Danmark or Norway, they should presently be delivered up to the
King of England. Nay if a Dane would pretend to fix any Crime upon the English
it is th^s, you have killed your King: And as all Nations have some word or
other of Reproach, their highest passion can give an Englishman no worse than
that of Rump.

But to come yet nigher to our Authot, let us consider what rebellious sort of
People he would make the Danes; and in order to this, let us wait upon one of
our Danish Kings, from his Election to the Scaffold. It seems when a former
Prince was murdered, a King was presently chosen by the People of all sorts,
even the Boors had their voices, p. 43. They were to elect such a Person, as to
them appeared personable, valiant, affable, etc. and adorned with all other
virtues. A very peculiar method! The Boors undoubtedly were made Judges of his
Civility and Breeding, and the Citizens Wives were brought in to consider his
Person: as to his inward qualifications, it was impossible for the Mob to look
into them on the sudden, and if the former were admitted, these were thrown
into the bargain: Regard was generally had to the family of the preceding
Kings, and sometimes they pleased to choose the Eldest Son, because the
greatness of his Paternal Estate might enable him, in some degree to support
his Office. So that if the Father dyed in debt, the Son was sure to be
disinherited, but if we had kept his Estate together, then the young man might
possibly get into the Throne, and having a tolerable fortune of his own, with
that, together with some few perquisites of the Crown, he might pay his
Tradesmen, and as this Author says of the King, p. 46. might live like one of
our Modern Noblemen, upon the Revenues of his own Estate.

After the good fortune of his Promotion, if they found themselves mistaken in
their choice, and that they had advanced a cruel, vicious, tyrannical,
covetuous or wastful Person: they frequently deposed him, oftentimes banished,
sometimes destroyed him; and this either formally, by making him answer before
the representative body of the People; or if by ill practices, levying of
Soldiers, contracting of Alliances to support himself, in oppo^^tion to the
Peoples Rights, he was grown too powerful to be legally contended with, they
dispatched him without any more Ceremony, the best way they could, p. 44, 45.
We see here that there were five Crimes, for which the Kings of Danmark^ by
this Authors Laws, were to stand corrected; deposing being but a slight
punishment, that was made use of frequently; therefore we will suppose ten or a
dozen gone that way: Banishment he puts in the next degree, and that he says
they were Sentenced to oftentimes; from whence we may rationally conclude, the
Banished will amount to very near the forementioned number; the more
Incorrigible were sometimes destroyed: There Is five or six sent that way I
warrant you; others were either formally E^ecuted by the sentence of a high
Court of Justice, or dispatched without any more Ceremony the best way, for
Endeavoring to secure themselves against the Insults of their own Subjects. A
very moderate computation! And here how few Kings are left to end their days in
Peace? One would think a succession would not be much contended for, where a
Crown is tendered upon such ^icklish conditions, yet he tells us, p. 45. they
always elected a better man in his Room^ sometimes the next of Kin, sometimes
the Valiant man that had exposed himself so far, as to undertake the Expulsion,
or the Killing of the Tyrant; at other times a private Person of good
Reputation, who possibly least dreamed of such an advancement. I suppose the
next of Kin were seldom so desperate as to venture, and therefore they oftener
threw their voices away upon some private Person, who according to this Authors
description, might possibly be some honest drunken sleepy fellow, that had a
Crown dropped into his mouth as he lay yawning. But generally the Murderer was
likewise the Thief, and the Villain, who had dispatched his Prince succeeded
him; hence there arose a well ordered Government, and all men became ambitious
of Imitating their new King; the meanest Subjects duly weighing the faults of
their Superiors in their own breasts (the proper Tribunal) the Servant soon
stabs his cruel Master; the Tenant shoots his wasteful Lord, and the Son
poisons his covetous old Father, that having so done, they may by the common
Law and Justice of the Kingdom succeed in their respective Inheritances.

Having done with that Government, the loss of which he so much complains of;
we enter upon his account of the present State, and find him telling us, p. 46,
47. that about thirty two years ago, at one Instant the face of affairs was
changed, so that the Kings have ever since been absolute and arbitrary, not the
least Remnant of Liberty remaining to the Subject; the first and principal
Article in the Danish law being, that the King has the Privilege reserved to
himself to explain the Law, nay to alter and change it as he shall find good.
The consequences of this are, excessive Taxes in times of peace, little regard
being had to the occasion of them; Poverty in the Gentry, Misery in the
Peasants, and Partiality in the distribution of Justice.

The occasion of the Change of Government shall be declared in the next
Paragraph, in the mean time, any one that knows Danmark must confess, that the
King is absolute, but no further so than a Christian King of o^r own Protestant
Religion may be; wherefore amongst other of the obligations which he lies
under, are the Holy Scriptures, and the Confession of A^gsburg, as is declared
in the beginning of the Danish Law: A^ for that Law which the Author ^^livers,
it is declaratory of the Kings Authority; and since it is necessary, that a
legislative Power should be lodged somewhere, shows that it is placed in him.
Pursuant to this, the present King has compiled a Book of Laws, the Character
of which is given by our Author, p. 232, 233. That for Justice, Brevity, and
Perspicuity, they exceed all in the world. That they are grounded upon Equity,
and are all contained in one Quarto Volume, written in the Language of the
Country with so much plainness, that no man who can write and read, is so
ignorant, but he may presently understand his own Case, and plead it too if he
pleases without the assistance of Councilor Attorney. Being thus constituted,
they are so agreeable and adapted to the Danish Nation, that they continue
still the same, the King having never yet changed nor altered, much less
explained any part to the Prejudice of any particular Person whatsoever; the
execution of them throughout the whole Kingdom is with great equality and more
eminently in the High Court of Justice in Copenhagen, where the King himself is
President, and sits frequently; where, Causes are often decided in favor of
the meanest Peasant, against the greatest Favorites, who for wrongs done, have
been condemned to vast Mulcts and Penalties, as might be shown by several
instances, if it were needful, or proper to insert them.

By this Law, every man possesses his own Real, or Personal Estate, without the
least E^croachment from the King; it is true that the Subject pays Taxes, but
they are such only as Necessity requires; for Danmark being surrounded with
many potent Neighbors, who are all in Arms, it must, for its own preservation,
support a Fleet and Army, unless it could persuade them to disband their Forces.

The Taxes being for the common good, are laid equally upon all: and the Kings
Moderation in his Expenses, both as to himself and the Royal Family, being so
conspicuous, the Subject has the greater satisfaction to see what he
contributes, laid out only for his own Preservation. Notwithstanding these
Taxes the People live in Plenty, wanting nothing either for Convenience or
Pleasure.

All this they enjoy, although the Government is indeed absolute; and they with
all willingness and due obedience submit themselves to this Government, because
they are sufficiently satisfied, that this absolute Power was not given to his
Majesty of Danmark, till the necessity for it was unavoidable. The Nobility was
that part of the Danish Constitution, which first broke in upon the Symmetry of
the whole; in several Ages, and by insensible degrees, they encroached upon the
Kings Prerogative, but all along made larger progresses toward the enslaving
of the Commonalty; insomuch that all burdens and public Taxes, were imposed
upon them alone. After the War with Sweden, the Commons found themselves unable
longer to live under such oppressions; they had bravely defended their Country,
with the hazard of their Lives, and would have done so with their Fortunes, if
they had had any remaining; but these were wholly swallowed up by the Nobility,
who yet would contribute nothing toward the maintaining of a just War against
foreign Enemy and Invader. Danmark being upon the brink of Ruin, the Commons
in these circumstances, as the weaker and more oppres^ed part, fly to their
Head for succor. Neither the King alone, nor the Commons alone, nor both King
and Commons jointly, could control the Nobility so far, as to make them pay
Taxes; therefore it was necessary that all three should consent to a new
Government, so the Commons proposed it to the Lords, and both Lords and Commons
offer the King to make him absolute; which offer, if he had not accepted of,
neither himself nor the Commons could have supported the State: Supplies were
of necessity to be raised, the Commonalty could not raise them without
assistance, and there was no other way but this, to make the Nobility in some
equal measure bear their proportion.

After this alteration in the Government, the present Author would make us
believe that strange Miseries happened, and as a very astonishing one, says, p.
47. That the value of Estates, in most parts of the Kingdom is fallen three
fourths It Is true, the value of Estates did fall, but nothing near the
proportion he speaks of, the true reason was the want of Money in the
Commonalty, which had been exhausted by the War; for the Commons if they had
had wherewithal, would have been glad to buy Estates, which they were not
permitted to do before this alteration.

Then it must be considered, that before this the price of Estates was
extravagant, and far beyond the intrinsic value; for then none but a Nobleman
could purchase Lands, and if by a Mortgage, or any other occasion, Lands
happened to fall into the hands of other People, they were obliged to proffer
them to sale to the Nobility, who still purchased in Envy and Emulation of one
another. Trade and Commerce being little at that time, the Money was chiefly
laid out in buying of Estates; but since the Nobles have not the former
eagerness for buying up the Land as before; and Shipping is so much increased
of late, every one rather chooses to employ his Money that way, than to purchase
Lands at such an extravagant rate as formerly. And yet it is to be observed,
according to the Relation of a Gentleman, lately arrived out of Danmark, the
value of Land is now raised considerably; so that in a little time, it will
come to be very near equal to what it has been heretofore. For it is to be
considered, that Danmark and Norway, being since the alteration, become Masters
of a very great Trade, their Money must increase likewise. In other Reigns it
was a rarity to see some few Ships from Copenhagen. and the most considerable
Cities, go to France and Spain. Now Copenhagen alone has above 50 large Ships
that trade to France, etc. and other parts have 'em proportionably, besides
those bound for Spain, the Streights, Guinea, and the East and West Indies,
etc. And in Norway little Sea Towns that formerly had either one, or two, or no
Ships at all, but sold their Timber to the English and Dutch that came thither
(the Dutch especially, being as it were their Factors, carrying out their
Goods, and supplying them with all sorts of French and Spanish Wares, which the
Inhabitants never fetched themselves.) These very Towns, which are not one, or
two, but most Sea-towns in Norway, being in abundance all along the Seacoasts,
now send yearly to England, France and Holland, 10, 20, 30, or 40 large
Fly-boats, and Ships of other Building, as can be testified by the Merchants
who trade to those parts. With this increase of Trade, the reputation of
Danmark, in respect of its interest with other Princes of Europe, is of late
years so far advanced, as that Crown never yet made so great a figure in
Christendom, as it does at present, not even in the time of Canutus; when we
may suppose it in its greatest prosperity.

So that, although an absolute Monarchy, with the additional term of arbitrary
Power, sounds harsher in the Ears of an Englishman, than most other Nations:
His present Majesty of Danmark shows us, that even in an absolute Monarchy,
which in its own nature may be under several inconveniences in respect of the
People, and temptations of encroachment as to the Prince; yet a wise and good
King may so order his conduct, as to make his Subjects easy, and himself
glorious.

To conclude, I take this Chapter to be our Authors Masterpiece, particularly
his character of an old Danish King; it gives us the very image of the
Describers own thoughts and inclinations, and shows us what sort of King, a
Commonwealths man may perhaps condescend to make, and then how many particular
ways and means, he can find out to dispatch him.

CHAP. VII.
The Manner how the Kingdom of Danmark became Hereditary and Absolute.

IT is astonishing to consider (says our Author, p. 48.) how a free and rich
people, (for so the Danes were formerly) should be persuaded entirely to part
with their Liberties. It is more astonishing to me, to see a man write without
considering: For in what did these former Riches consist? In a Country
exhausted by the Taxes (p. 50.) or in the want of Money to discharge the
Arrears due to the Army, ( p. 49.) or in the miseries attending the War,
(ibid.) which had in a manner ruined the People? In the next place, where was
their Freedom? when the Senator Otto Craeg tells the Commons^ p. 52. they were
no other than Slaves: and these very words made them deliberate how to get rid
of such an odious Name and Character? Lastly, how were they persuaded entirely
to part with their Liberty? when they gave this power to the King, on express
purpose to gain it. For the King upon the first News of the Resolution of the
Commons, did often openly promise that he would in gratitude and recompense,
declare them all free as soon as it lay in his power, by the Gift they were
about to make him, p. 58. Which promise he performed accordingly, and put the
Commons of Danmark into the State they are at present, which is far from
Slavery.

It will be necessary here to show how all sorts of people stood in Danmark
before the alteration, which will easily make the true grounds of it appear,
and how it came to be effected with a consent so general and with so little
trouble. The King had his power curbed by the Nobility to a great measure, p.
54. and as the Kings found these encroachments, they did endeavor to prevent
them: to secure their Prerogative therefore (in the latter ages) they often
made their Sons be elected and sworn (whence they were in Danish called
Hylded:) during their life time, and have Homage done them both in Danmark and
Norway. Frederick the third, who was King at this conjuncture, had done so by
Prince Christian the present King; he was then admired by his Subjects for his
conduct and valor, p. 54. they had seen him with an admirable Patience and
Constancy bear all his Calamities: he had often exposed his person for the sake
of his Subject; and they therefore thought they could never do enough to show
their gratitude toward him.

The Nobility were very numerous and diffusive: all the lands were in their
sole possession; their estates resembled our Manors, of which they were Lords,
and took their Titles from thence, and as they increased in Wealth, and
consequently in Lands, they had additional titles from thence, and these
accrued either by Purchase, (which as has been said before, none could make but
themselves) or else by Marriages, which they always contracted among one
another; for when a Nobleman died, his pedigree was declared to the eighth
Generation upwards, both by Fathers and Mothers side to have been noble. To
them alone belonged (and does belong) the honor of a Coat of Arm's; others may
make use of Ciphers and Rebus's for distinction, but they do not deliver them
down to posterity; nor have they any farther mark of honor in them. Among
these Nobles there were twenty four persons of the chiefest Families, who
composed a standing Council, called Rigens Raad, or the Council of the Kingdom;
upon the death of one of these Counselors, his Successor had a Patent from the
King to constitute him so, but he was always approved, if not first chosen by
the Nobility. This Council had by degrees so enlarged their Authority, as to
interpose in most of the great Affairs of the Kingdom. The entire body of the
Nobility, though standing possessed of the Lands, looked upon it ( p. 50.) as
their Ancient Prerogative, to pay nothing by way of Taxes.

The rest of the people of Danmark consisted of the Clergy, the Burghers, or
Citizens, and the Peasants, who were either in the nature of ou^-Farmers, or
else the Vornede, who resembled the Villains in our Law, who were so called
quasi Villae adscripti, and so were these.

When a Diet was to meet (which it did not do of course, or at certain periods,
but upon great occasions (as doing Homage, or to raise Taxes) the Nobility
assembled together in the Palace, and sat by themselves, the King seldom
coming among them; all were summoned, and as many appeared as could with their
convenience: The Clergy and Burghers, who were sent in proportion by their
several Districts, sat in the Brewers Hall; and the Peasants, who had their
Representatives likewise, sat in some other Hall, belonging to some of the
Companies. When the Nobility had deliberated concerning a Tax, the Clergy,
Burghers and Peasants were sent for to their House, to hear what was to be laid
upon them, and not to debate the matter, or to pretend to control+'em.

This was the condition of the Kingdom, and the Danish Parliament, when the War
with Sweden was ended: And it was this Prerogative of the Nobility, that made
the other States so willing to devolve a Power upon the King, by which he could
make the Nobility pay their proportion, and either Clergyman or Citizen be able
to purchase; and so the Peasant, who before could be a Farmer only, if he could
get Money, might have license to become a Freeholder: And the Soldier was, no
doubt, likewise desirous of it, because he had a prospect then, that his
Arrears should be paid him. There being so many advantages likely to accrue to
the King, whom they acknowledged by his Valor and Conduct to deserve them; to
the whole Royal Family, and indeed to all the rest of the Danes; and no damage
toany, except that which the Nobles received in contributing toward the
defense of the Lands, which they possessed. It is not so very strange, that an
alteration should be perfected in so few days, all things not only being ripe
for, but necessity itself requiring it.

The Speech of Otto Craeg made the Commons eager to obtain this alteration,
especially being headed by their President Nauson, who was a man of Vigor. The
Superintendent Swan was at the Head of the Clergy, who were no less desirous of
it. Sestede was Prime Minister, and concurred to their intention; and several
of the Nobles themselves, who were in Court, were not displeased at it; and the
Queen, being a Woman of Spirit, thought her self bound to her Posterity to
advance it. It was night when the Commons parted from the Nobles, and that gave
them time the better to concert their resolutions. The next day they come
again, and declare their fixed design, concerning the Power which they intended
to place in his Majesty's Hands. The Nobility desired farther time to
deliberate concerning it, and to do it with greater caution and solemnity.
Finding a delay in the Nobles, and that they would not come up to equal
resolutions with them, the Commons go the same morning to the Palace, where
being introduced to the King, they tender him an Hereditary and Sovereign
Dominion. His Majesty in answer tells them of the necessity there was for the
concurrence of the Nobility, before he should be willing to accept the Power
they designed him, assuring them of his Protection, and ^ase of Grievances;
dismissing them with advice to continue their Sessions, till matters might be
brought to greater perfection. The same day Monsieur Scheel, a Senator, was to
be buried with much magnificence, and all the Nobility invited to a great
Entertainment, as is usual there upon such occasions: In the mean time the
Gates of the City were shut and whereas two or three of the Nobility had gone
out the night before, there was no opportunity left for the rest to do so. Now
being altogether upon the forementioned occasion, they began to deliberate more
seriously upon the assair, and to send news to the Court of their compliance
with the Commons, and their unanimous agreement with them; three days were
thought requisite for an intermediate space, before the Consummation of this
Ceremony, which was performed before the Castle, the King and Royal Family
being placed there in Chairs of State, and receiving the Homage of all the
Senators, Nobility, Clergy and Commons; so an affair of this consequence was
dispatched in four days, without any farther trouble than what has been related.

We must allow our Author in his Description of these proceedings to use some
of his own Ornaments, and particularly that instance of his subtle Genius to
dive into the hearts of men, which he gives us when he speaks ( p. 56.) about
the Kings seeming Reluctance, through doubt of the event, or sense of the
dishonesty, and crime of the action. Whereas the King was all along willing to
receive the profer of the Commons, but declared that he thought, the
concurrence of the Nobility necessary, that the consent might be universal. He
is very particular, as to the Sums of Money that were given, p. 74. Hannibal
Sestled had two hundred thousand Crowns: Swan the Bishop had 30000, and was
made Archbishop: The President Nauson had 20000. One might think he spoke with
the person that paid the Bills. This is a piece of secret history, which may
perhaps be revealed to Foreigners, but the Danes know nothing of it; and it
seems to carry the less probability, because Swan has an Archbishopric, and
ten thousand Crowns more than Nauson, who appears all along to have done equal
service.

Besides these three persons, the Clergy who always make sure bargains, were
the only gainers in this point, p. 74. What are their Revenues enlarged? Do
they pay no Taxes? Or what have they gained more than the Burghers? Why even
just nothing. There are no Taxes raised upon the Burghers, to which the Clergy
must not pay their Quota: And whereas before the alteration, the Clergyman
paid, as it were, no Taxes, through the connivance of the Nobility, now h^bears
an equal share with any man of any other Profession in the Kingdom.

The Commons have since experienced, that the little ^inger of an absolute
Prince, can be heavier than the loins of many Nobles. All the Citizens of
Copenhagen have by it obtained the insignificant Privilege of wearing Swords;
so that at this day, not a Cobbler or Barber stirs abroad without a Tilter by
his side, let his Purse be never so empty.

The Privilege of wearing Swords was granted to the Citizens before the
change, to encourage them to a vigorous defense of Copenhagen, when the Clergy
not only adhered to the interest of their Country, but the Burghers likewise
valiantly defended it, (p. 51.) Before that time none might wear them but the
Nobility, unless they were Soldiers, and among them a Commoner, very seldom
rose higher than a Captain. In the public calamity of their Country, all
appeared zealous for the defense of it. The Works of the Town were as good as
none, but they were raised in a little time by an incredible industry: Not only
the Students of the University appeared in Arms, and the Citizens of condition
did the same, but the meanest of the People got Scythes, and such other
instruments, to perform what was in their power, upon an occasion so absolutely
necessary. Indeed all sorts of People showed, that they were worthy to wear
their Swords, since they knew so well how to use them. After the alteration,
the Privileges granted them were far from insignificant. Several for the
benefit of Trade, etc. are fixed by a large Charter, besides the liberty to
purchase any Lands and Lordships whatsoever. They are to be burdened with no
impositions, but such as the Nobles bear; and they have the comfort (which
before they had not) to see their Children admitted to all honors, and public
offices, to employments civil and military according as they can deserve them)
equally as well as the Sons of the greatest Noblemen.

Barbers indeed in Copenhagen wear Swords, as being principal Citizens; for
they are at the same time very skilful and able Surgeons, and much respected;
but Cobblers stalking about with Tilters by their sides, are as rare a sight
there as roasted Green Geese.

When he told me ( p. 74.) the People had the Glory of forging their own
Chains. I took the Danes to be like his Savage Indians, and that they wore
Fetters and Manacles instead of other Ornaments, and that all their cold Iron
was rather employed that way, than for Tilters: For by the by, a Sword is the
foolishest instrument in the world, for a Prince to put into the hands of such
Subjects, as he designs to make absolute Slaves of.

CHAP. VIII.
The Conditions, Customs, and Temper of the People.

THis Authors Book would be very plausible, if People would oblige themselves
in the reading of one Chapter, not to remember what may have been said in
another. His eighth Chapter is long enough of it self to require the same
dispensation; for the Reader will be at a loss if he makes use of his memory,
or if he hopes, that the middle should be agreeable to the beginning, or the
end not be contradictory to them both. As he has hitherto been partial, in
representing the nature and change of the Danish Government, so it is no
wonder, if he be mistaken in the consequences he draws from thence: The
condition, customs and temper of the People, he says, are influenced by the
change of Government. Whatever alteration that may have undergone, and whatever
new Fashions may by chance, or humor be brought in, as to Clothes; yet still
the customs of the People are the same they were before: And more especially
they continue their free and merry way of living, their Hospitaliay, and their
Liberality, all which the Danes and Norsh have always looked upon as their
native qualities; these make the condition of People of all ranks to be very
far from deplorable. (p. 75.) For they know, that what he calls habitual
slavery, (ibid.) in them is nothing but a due obedience to supreme powers, not
interrupted by any Mutiny or Rebellion: His Laziness (ibid.) is in them a
contented mind, his setting them beyond hopes and fears; is their desiring not
to entrench upon the power lodged in their Prince; nor creating needless
Jealousies and Mistrusts, lest he should misuse it. For it seems, ib. the Danes
have mortified ambition, emulation, and other troublesome qualities, which
freedom begets, and which ill men may indeed admire, but common morality has
set forth to them as vices. From hence they are so far from finding themselves
in a sickly constitution, that on the contrary, they have evident and sensible
proofs, that their obedience makes the constitution of the Danish. Government
strong and vigorous; so as to be able to fling off any ill humors that may be
bred within, and to repulse any accident from without. Nay they see it not only
healthy, but gay and florid, proceeding on from strength to strength in greater
degrees, than it has done heretofore, either within their own Memories, or the
Records of their Ancestors.

And indeed the Government is so much the stronger, because the Nobility now
assist to the support of it. It is easily imagined, that the Nobles were in
some greater power before the alteration; and that they were richer, when they
contributed nothing toward the public necessities of their Country, than they
are now. However they are not diminisht, or grown so low (p. 75.) as this
Author would insinuate; that proportion which they pay to the public Taxes for
the defense of their Country, being only deducted, they are in the same
condition which they were before, and live very great and nobly on their seats
in the Country, some of which, tho ancient, are very decent, others built after
the modern Architecture: and they delighting much in Gardens, have them in very
good perfection. This is the utmost difference, that whereas formerly only the
ancient Families called Adelen, or the Nobility lived so; (because then no
others could purchase Lands) now any one of the Burgher state that can afford
it, may keep his Country Seat as well as the Nobility. What the Nobles pay in
Taxes is sufficiently repaid to several of them by the profitable Employments,
which they have in Civil Affairs; and as they help toward the maintaining of
an Army, so they reap the benefit, by being general Officers in it.

These Employments our Author complains of, as grievous, p. 78. to the
Nobility; whereas it seems much better than living at home uselessly, and it is
no more than what they do in all other Courts of Europe. Nor are the Civil
Employments so few, or of so small value, as he would make them, p 78. For
though the Long Robe has not places of such vast profit as elsewhere; yet every
Government having its Governor, and several Officers subordinate, there must
be abundance of Employments, whose names cannot be so properly expressed in the
English.

Our Author has given us a very odd account of the Nobility, and begins with
affirming, that Ancient Riches and Valor were the only Titles to Nobility
formerly in this Country: whereas not he that was Rich and Valiant, therefore
consequently became a Nobleman: but the Nobility having got all the Lands to
themselves, might easily engross the Reputation of being brave and valiant.
None, it seems, then took their Degree or Patents of Honor from the King.
First, If this were true, it could not be for the good of any Nation, where for
an encouragement to glorious Actions, there ought to be some fountain of
Honor, and the King certainly is the most proper one: but in the second place,
it is evident that as well before as after the alteration, the King of Danmark
made Noblemen, and gave Patents of Honor to them that deserved well, as can be
proved by several instances, in the Reign of Christian the IV. and Frederick
the III. (before he was made absolute) as also in the Reigns of their
Predecessors. Of late years, he says, p. 79. some few Titles of Baron and Count
and nothing higher, have been given to Favorites, who enjoy not the same
privileges by those Titles, which our Lords in England do, but content
themselves with a few airy insignificant ones. There is no necessity that the
Nobility of another Country, should in every thing correspond with that of
England; suppose the Counts and Barons in Danmark not to be just the same, are
therefore their Titles airy and insignificant? On the quite contrary, there is
no Country in Europe, where Counts and Barons have such a Preeminence, as in
Danmark. When the King there gives Shield and Helm (as they c^ll it) that is a
Noblemans Coat of Arms with a Patent of Nobility to him; then such a man is
distinguished from the common people: (and such as these only were made before
the Alteration, except some few Counts created by foreign Monarchs and Princes.
But when the King will promote a person to a degree higher, which he never
does, unless he has so great an Estate as is requisite to sustain his Honor
and Character, then he gives the Titles of Baron or Count (for Dukes there are
none in Danmark, that Title of old time, properly belonging to the Royal
Family) this Honor is far greater, and has several Privileges above the rest
of the Nobility, as may be seen in the Danish Law. And yet it may more easily
be imagined, that that honor must be so much the greater, by reason of the
rarity of such Titles, there not being twenty in the whole Kingdom.

The following paragraph, that it is only this kind of Nobility with Titles,
that have liberty to make a Will, and thereby to dispose of any Estate,
otherwise than as the Law has determined, unless such Will, in the Life of the
Testator, be approved of, and signed by the King; has more than one mistake in
it, for not only this kind, but all the Nobility, have Titles from the Lands
they possess and are Lords of; these indeed have the highest Titles of Count
and Baron, and then not only they, but all the Nobility, nay any one among the
Clergy and Citizens can make a Will; only it is to be observed, that it is
required to every such Testament from whomsoever it comes, that it be approved
and signed by the King, to render it of force and valid, that the Estate may go
otherwise than the Law has determined. Neither is it true, that the King (p.
81.) assumes to himself the power of disposing all Heirs and Heiresses of any
consideration. Sometimes the King may interpose his Mediation for the Marriage
of some of the chief Nobility, but it is far from being his usual custom, much
less does he assume any power to constrain them, or cause them, who do not
hearken to his Recommendation, to lie under the pain of his displeasure, p. 81.
which is too weighty to be born.

The Nobility being forced to endure the forementioned hardships, It is
possible, p. 81. most of the present Possessors would quit the Country, the
first opportunity, if there were not such a severe Law against alienations:
That if any one would transport himself, the third part of his Purchase Money
shall accrue to the King. This Law is not more hard, than it is unnecessary,
for there being no buying and selling of Land in Danmark, (p. 80.) the Kings
third part of Purchase Money will amount to but little; and where Estates are a
charge, (ibid.) and the Proprietors can scarce obtain the favor of the King to
be so gracious as to take their Estates from them, (p. 77.) one would fancy,
that all landed men would lay the Key under the door, and be scampering: now to
mend their condition, and to get free from Monarchy and Taxes: I would advise
them to hasten to a neighboring Commonwealth, the Seat of Liberty, where the
chief Minister of their State has not above 5001. salary, and where their
Excise and Taxes laid on their Estates, amount often to above their yearly
income. After all, the Law, a^ it is reasonable to prevent the Subject from
following his own humor to the prejudice of his native Country, so i^ does
require but a sixth part to the King, and a tenth part of the rest to the
Magistrate of the place, both which, according to my Arithmetic will not
amount to a third part, a^ is reported by our Author with his Geometrical
Exactness.

Land being worth nothing, how must the Counts and Barons do to live? Why they
are obliged by all manner of ways to keep in with the Court, as indeed all are,
who have a mind to live, and eat bread, p. 79. What then will become of the
rest of the Adelen, or native Gentry? Why military employments are mightily
covered by them, p. 81. almost as much as the civil, and for the same reason,
that the Priest's Office was among the Jews, viz. That they may eat a piece of
Bread. Bread! Bread! is the universal Cry, and our Author seems to have
borrowed his Images not from the Jews, but rather from the Egyptians, calling
upon Pharaoh toward the latter end of the seven years of Famine.

Want of Bread is not the only misfortune, for it comes attended with other
miseries; for he says, that the King of Danmark (p. 81.) imitates the French
practice in this particular, to make the Gentry poor, and render Traffic
unprofitable and dishonorable: Men of birth must live, and one half of the
Nation, by giving themselves up to Slavery, will contribute their assistance
afterward to put Chains upon the other: Yet in Danmark Natives are considered
less than Strangers, and all sorts of places civil and military are filled more
by Foreigners, than Gentlemen of the Country, etc. Were all these things true,
they would be very great evidences of a corrupt Government: But I shall beg
leave to set the Reader right as to these particulars, and the condition of the
people. The Plenty of the whole Country has been sufficiently described, and in
the midst of this, the chief Nobility enjoy the Governments of the several
Provinces, and the chief Offices of the Kingdom; the rest of the Adelen, or
Nobility, have subordinate Governments and Offices, some at Court, and others
in the Countries where they have their Seats of Residence; some Germans are in
the Court, but the native Subjects are in greater number, as the Counts
Guldenlew, Rantzow, Reventlaw, Ahlefelt, Frits; Baron Juel, Messieurs Hogh,
Moth, Harboe, Scholier, Luxdorf, and a great many more, too numerous to be here
inserted: And Natives likewise are in all the Governments throughout the
Provinces. Men of Birth breed up their Sons to several Employments, some to
civil Affairs, some to Studies, and some to Trade and Traffic, which is as
profitable and honorable there as Merchants can desire; it has all
encouragement from the King, and many of the highest rank interest themselves
in it continually. Some Gentlemen apply themselves to Arms, and endeavor that
way to be serviceable to their Country; there are abundance of these in
Commission: Foreigners there are indeed in some number, but it must be
considered, that they came thither in the late War, and took pay in Danmark,
either of their own accord, or hired out by their Princes: These are by birth
Germans, French, Scotch, Poles, Prussians, etc. Yet these very men are
naturalized, married, and settled in Danmark, and so are now to be accounted
Danes. The Inhabitants do not pay the Soldiers, nor are constantly plagued
with insolent Inmates, who Lord it where they dwell, p. 87. For the ^ane lying
under a necessity from his Neighborhood to maintain an Army at home, does it
after the manner that may be most easy to the People, which is this: Soldiers
are scattered universally all round about the Countries. The Officers there
often take Houses, and live with their Families, their Companies quartering
round about them. The Soldiers are quartered upon the Inhabitants, who are to
find them Bed, Salt, and Sour, or Vinegar. If the Landlord finds his Soldiers
disagreeable, he may hire them a Lodging elsewhere for a small matter: But the
Soldier is generally desirous to oblige his Landlord which he does by several
offices and labors that he performs for him, and is rewarded with his Diet,
which otherwise he must find for himself, so that by that means he may have the
Kings Pay clear for his Pocket. And hence it proceeds, that a Soldier comes to
be as desirous in a Family as a Servant; their Arrears are small, the Pay being
as constant, and the Discipline as exact and severe, as any where can be, both
for Officers and Soldiers. Strangers find themselves so well entertained in
Danmark and Norway, that it is no wonder they flock thither: Great Civility,
Courtesies and Hospitality are shown toward them, which if our Author will
have to be a fault, is certainly one upon the best natured side. A man would
hardly have thought to have found any People in Danmark, according to our
Author's Description) that could get out of it: Much less to have found
Strangers there, and that persons, honored by being born within the Confines
of the Empire, or Poles who have Parliaments, would vent^re thither. But I see
at last, that there is in Danmark something worth getting, and leaving one's
own Country to become Master of.

Come we now to an unexpected paragraph, and which is beyond all credibility;
by what has been said before, one would have thought the Danes went on foot at
least, if they did not go barefoot, when on a sudden ( p. 83.) he acquaints us
with their Expensiveness in Retinue, Clothes, etc. and of a prodigality not
only in the Gentry, whose condition is more easy, but likewise in the Burgher
and Peasant. It is not denied, but that the Danes have always been, and are now
inclined to a handsome way of living, and to the free enjoyment of what they
are lawfully possessed of. It is the generousness, p. 83. of their temper and
nature which makes them do it, and not our Author's reasons, viz. the
difficulty of procuring a comfortable subsistence, and the little security of
enjoying what shall be acquired through industry; the sense, that they live but
from hand to mouth, making them live to day, as the Poet advises, not knowing
but what they now have, may be taken from them to morrow. They all know the
quite contrary; and whatever the Poet may say, they are certain the Law says,
that what they have to day, shall not be taken from them to morrow: As for
their spending prodigally, because they come by it difficultly, Sancho may
teach him, that it is rather, lightly come, lightly go; and I look upon this
Proverb to be as true as his Assertion: Being in a merry humor, and in with
his Poets, he gives us a bit of Latin, Torva Leaena Lupum sequitur, Lupus ipse
Capellam,
Florentem Cytisum sequitur lasciva Capella.


The admirable application, and the use he makes of his Learning, (according to
his modern Education) as he gives it us is this: p. 84. That the Gentleman
spends presently on himself, and pleasures all that he can get, for fear his
Money be taken from him by Taxes, before he has eaten or drank for it: The
Peasant as soon as he gets a Rixdoller lays it out in Brandy, lest his Landlord
should hear of it, and take it from him. Thus Torva Leaena, etc. Little could
Virgil imagine when he wrote those Verses, that future ages would make
Florentem Cytisum be by interpretation a Brandy Bottle. Pray^ Sir, to be
serious, do they in Danmark first search for what a man has by him, and then
lay on the Taxes? or rather as in other Countries, proportion them to his way
of living, his estate and employments? What man in England would set up his
Coach to avoid the Poll Tax, by which he is to pay five pound more for keeping
it?

Come we now to the Merchant and Burgher, these he says, p. 84. subsist purely
upon credit, there being very few that can be called rich, or worth a hundred
thousand Rixdollars. Less than a hundred thousand Rixdollars by far^ will give
a man the denomination o^ ^ich in Danmark or Norway; an Esta^e of 10, ^0, or 50
thousand will be called Riches there, for we must consider, that a Rixdollar
will go every way farther there, than a pound sterling in England. Nay the
Author himself, p. 103. when he is to show the grievous^^ss of the Taxes
affirms, that a Rixdollar, considering the scarcity of Money, ought to be
computed to go farther than three Crowns with us. And at this rate there are
not so few wealthy men as he would persuade us. That Trade should be managed by
Credit is no wonder, it is punctual Payment which maintains it, and their
Credit would soon be lost, if they had not wherewithal to pay their Creditors.

Manufactures have been endeavored to be introduced, not so much with a design
of benefitting the public, p. 85. as private Courtiers and great men, who were
the Undertakers; but in a little time all came to nothing. For it is a sure
Rule, Trade will not be forced, where proper^y is not secured. It is apparent
from h^nce, that Trade is not discouraged in Danmark, p. 81. since by his
Confes^^^on, Courtier^ and great men become Undertakers: It is certain,
likewise that in Danmark several Manufactures have succeeded very well, others
indeed have no^ had the same success, not because property is not secured, but
because they can have the same Commodities cheaper from Holland, Spain or
England. The making Silks, and Drinking Glasses, (though these latter are made
in great perfection in Copenhagen) did not turn to account, because there is no
property in Danmark! Should you, Sir, take Sir Robert Viners House in
Lombardstreet, and set up a Manufacture for the making Tacks at three pence a
thousand, and employ about 500 Smiths to furnish London with 'em, and this
project should not turn to one per cent. must I attribute this misfortune to
the unsecureness of the English property, or rather to the discretion of the
Ironmongers, who can have them about II d. in the Shilling cheaper, if they
will but send to Brumigham. Who thinks his Estate to have the worse title,
because he sees People daily fling their Money away in Stock-jobbing?

There being an impossibility of having Manufactures introduced into Danmark,
p. 84. trading Towns and Villages are all fallen to decay. Kioge once a
flourishing little Seaport Town, lent Christian IV. two hundred thousand
Rixdollars, but upon occasion of the late Poll Tax the Collectors were forced
to take Featherbeds, Brass, Pewter, etc. in lieu of Money. That trading Towns
should fall to decay, when Trade increases will scarce gain belief. As for
Kioge, that Town lying within four Leagues of Copenhagen, it is no wonder if the
Trade is in some measure decreased, since the flourishing of that City: We have
this Authors word for it, that Kioge raised so much money in four and twenty
hours time. Two hundred thousand Rixdollars (and those (as was said before)
equivalent to English pounds) is a good round sum for a little Town to lend in
a days time; they lent so much then, that it is no great wonder they have no
great plenty now: However it was no such great sight in England (even in King
Charles's time) to see a sturdy fray, between a Collector of Chimney-money, and
an Old Woman in behalf of her Porridge Pot, and battered Pewter Dish, the only
Ornament of her Cupboard. And yet I suppose, the Author does not take us to
have been undone then, though such an instance (which he has only by hearsay,
p. 85.) is enough to prove all the Danes to be ruined.

If this be the Case of the Gentleman and Burgher, what can be expected to be
that of the poor Peasant? p. 86. What indeed? In Sealand they are all as
absolute Slaves, as the Negroes are in Barbados, but with this difference,
that their fare is not so good. For indeed every body knows, that there is
great care taken by the Planter, throughout all the West Indies, to provide
dainties for their Negroes, which consist of Pork very seldom, and Potato's
always. The Author is to b^ excused for his mistakes in this paragraph, because
they cannot so easily be rectified without the Danish Law, which I suppose he
never consulted. It must be known that from immemorial time in Sealand, there
has been a Law about Vornede, as they are called in Danmark, that is Vassals;
the ^^^ whereof is, that a Boor born upon a Landlord's Land, is obliged to stay
there, and not to leave his Service, except he is freed by his Landlord. But
first, what he says, that neither they, nor their Posterity to all Generations,
can leave the Land to which they belong, p. 86. is far from being true: for the
Landlord may make them free when he pleases, which is often practiced: Or they
may obtain their freedom for a small sum of money, which is done commonly. Or
if it happens, that a Vassal comes away, and stays ten years in a City, or
twenty in the Country any where, without his Landlords ground, he is free from
his claim. Secondly, That Gentlemen count their Riches by their stocks of
Boors, as here with us byour stocks of Cattle, p. 86. is of the same stamp: As
we say, such a Gentleman has so many Tenants, by which we mean so many Farms;
so throughout all Danmark they say, he has so many Boors, not that he has many
head of Boors, as we would say of Cattle. Thirdly, That in case of Purchase,
they are sold as belonging to the Freehold, just as Timber Trees. In England,
when a Manor is sold, all the services due to the Manor are sold with it; and
it is no otherwise in Danmark. Further the Landlord cannot go, for the Law
says, the Landlord may make his Vassal free, but he must by no means sell him
to another; if the Vassal be sold, then he is free, both from him that sold and
bought him. Neither, fourthly, Do the Boors with all that belongs to them,
appertain to the Proprietor of the Land. For such a Vassal owes nothing more to
his Landlord, than that he shall stay on his Land, till his Ground, and pay him
his Rent; which when it is done, reasonably the Landlord can require nothing
more of him; so that this Law of Vassals in Sealand, was principally
introduced, that the Landlords might not want Tenants. These Vassals may be
transplanted from one Farm to another. The Vornede are only in Sealand, and the
King would have given them freedom there, since the Alteration, but that he was
showed there would have been several inconveniences attending it. As to the
condition of the Country People throughout the rest of Danmark and Norway, it
is just like that of the Farmers in England, paying their Rent and Due to the
Landlord, or leaving his Farm when they cannot agree together. They do indeed
^^arter Soldiers, but it is in the manner before described. And they are bound
to furnish Horses and Wagons for the Kings Baggage and Retinue when he
travels. These are provided by an Officer in the nature of our Constable, who
takes care, that there shall be an equal share for every Peasant throughout
Sealand and other Provinces, where the King of Danmark travels; so that it does
not come to the same Boors turn above once a year; for not only they that live
near the Road, but those likewise who lie farther off, must attend in their
order. This seemed to our Author to be the greatest hardship imposed on these
poor Peasants. He has seen 'em so beaten and abused by Lacqueys, that it has
often moved his pity and indignation to see it, p. 90. Tender hearted
Gentleman! There was no Provocation on the Boors side I warrant you! They are
generally better bred than to give ill language! If you were so touched with
this, how would your Pity, Sir, have been moved, had you seen a Dane's head
broke in a violent Passion, because he could not leta Draw-bride down soon
enough, or had you seen one of the Kings Huntsmen cut over the pate by a
Footman? Men may talk of Barbados and Negroes, but the Danes are never used so
much like Slaves, as when they meet with some sort of Envoys.

According to the account hitherto of People in all stations, one would imagine
the Beggars to be innumerable; but it seems, that you will scarce see a Beggar
in the streets of Copenhagen, except before some Burghers door, who that day
gives Alms to the poor of his Parish. For all the poor People of a Parish go
about one day to one, another to another Citizen, ^ho knows his day when he is
to give them M^at or Money, both for Di^ner and Supper. If any other Beggar is
seen in the street, an Officer carries him immediately to Prison or Punishment.

After what has been said, concerning the state of all sorts of persons, even
to the mean^st, who do not appear to want acomfortable subsistence; what man
will not presently agree with the Author, when he says, Danmark at present is
but competently peopled, p. 88. Vexation of Spirit, ill Diet and Poverty being
great obstructions to Procrea^ion; and the Peasants, who before used to have a
large piece of Plate or two, Gold Rings, Silver Spoons, etc. not having them
now, or indeed any other utensil of value, unless it be Featherbeds, whereof
there are better, and in greater plenty than in any place he ever saw. I should
have imagined Featherbeds to have been as proli^ick a piece of Furniture, as
Gold Rings and Silver Porringers.

However the People have continued much about the same number for these two or
three hundred years: As to the Multitudes that have been there heretofore, this
may be observed, that since from all the three Northern Kingdoms, Danmark,
Norway and Sweden, and the adjacent Provinces, near the Elbe and Weser, so many
swarms went out so often to conquer and inhabit other more fertile and Southern
Countries, it is probable at last so great deductions might exhaust the number;
as Saxo Grammaticus in his eighth Book, in the Life of King S^io says, that
when the Lombards went out of Danmark, in the great famine and dearth that
reigned then, the Kingdom was so deserted, that great Woods and Forests grew up
in ma^y places, where before had been fertile ground; and to this day, the
signs of the Plough are to be seen among the Trees. Another great reason is
attributed to the Plague, called the Black Death, that ravaged all the Northern
Kingdoms, in the year 1348. when so many died, that scarce the tenth man was
left to till the ground.

Our Author gives another reason, why they are not so numerous as formerly, for
discontent kills 'em, and it is usual to have them die of a Slatch, which is an
Apoplexy proceeding from trouble of mind. The Falling Sickness is more common
in the Northern Kingdoms than with us, but not to that degree that our Author
talks of, ( p. 90.) And their Apoplexies are not half so ^atal, as they have
been in England, within these few years. It Is scarce reconcilable, that people
should die in such number for discontent, whom in the beginning of the Chapter,
he describes, p. 75. as taken up with a dull pleasure of being careless and
insensible.

Let us proceed to the description of their Diet, in which the Reader may
e^p^ct exactness, seeing our Author all along seems to have been a good
Trencher-man; Their Tables are usually well furnished with Dishes, yet he
cannot commend their cheer, p 92. Other Englishmen have mightily commended
their Cheer, and never complained of the Leanness of their Meat: The truth is,
the Danes like it the better for not being very fat; the greatest fault which
they and other strangers find with the English Meat is, that it is too fat,
which disagrees with most of 'em. This may be one reason, and perhaps a better
than that of Properly not being secure, why they have not been over diligent to
Introduce the Fa^ning of Tame Fowl, it being an Art not known to above two or
three in Copenhagen. And yet Fat Capons were in Danmark and Norway long before
any Englishman brought in the Cramming Manufacture, p. 92. Beef and Veal, p.
42. he allows them: Wether Mutton is scarce, and seldom good; not so scarce or
bad, though not in such plenty, or so fat as in England; Wild Ducks taste as
well as in England; Plovers they have, but do not care for, but Snipes and
other Sea Fowl in abundance, through all Danmark. According to him here are no
wild Pheasants, Woodcocks, Rabbits, or Fallow Deer, Red Deer being the Kings
game, not to be bought for money. What game is permitted by Law to be sold in
our English Markets? Wild Pheasants are not there as yet, but the Prince Royal
having a Nursery of tame ones near Copenhagen, and they increasing
prodigiously, it is thought they will soon grow wild and common. Their
Woodcocks called Agerhons are most delicious in Danmark. They have all sorts of
Venison in plenty and perfection, nor is it kept so strictly for the Kings own
use, but that it is very often to be had among any people of Fashion: For the
King's Huntsmen have great privileges in this case: and most of the Nobility
and Gentry having their Game in the Country, can communicate enough of all
sorts to their ^riends. Rabbits the Danes have, but they do not care for them,
they not being so good as in England; but Hares are plenty, and the Author says
good, p. 92. As likewise their Bacon excellent. As to their Fish I have spoke
before. Their Butter is very good, and they have Melons, Grapes, Peaches, and
all sorts of Sallads in great perfection. However in general, their way of
Cookery would hardly be pleasing to an Englishman, p92, 93. The ^anes generally
roast and boil their Meat more than the English. If you call their's
over-roasted, they would say yours was raw; but this might easily be adjusted:
Their Broaths and Soops are extraordinary, I fancy, together with them, a man
might contrive a Good Dinner, and a Desert out of what has been mentioned.

To Consumate the Entertainment, The Liquors are Rhenish-wine, Cherry-Brandy,
and all sorts of French Wine, p. 93. The Fair Sex do not refuse them; in such a
quantity as is agreeable to their health, and becoming their Sex and Modesty.
The men are fond of them, p. 93. more addicted to drinking perhaps than is
necessary: But for these Twenty years last past that Humor has declined, and
does in some measure continue to do so daily.

There are some few other Customs of the Danish Nation, which He represents
after his fashion, and so concludes.

Their Marriages are usually preceeded by Contracts, p 94. and there is some
Interval between that and the Wedding, according to the conditions of the
Persons: What he says concerning three, four, or more years, before they
proceed to a Public Wedding by the Minister, p. 94. is to introduce his
following Scandal upon the young People: That often the young Couple grow
better acquainted, before such formalities are dispatched. There are no such
long Intervals, or very seldom at least: Besides there is such a strictness in
Danmark, about marrying, that no Minister dare marry any that is not of his own
Parish, which prevents several Inconveniences: And there can be no greater
shame than it is in Danmark for a New married Woman to be brought to bed before
her time.

If we will believe him the Gentry give Portions with their Daughters, p. 94. I
must confess, I had rather believe the Danes themselves, who assure me that no
body in Danmark, gives any portion in Money with his Daughter, except the
Wedding Dinner, Clothes, and Household Stuff. But in requital for this the
Daughters have a share of the Estate, when their Parents die. For it is to be
remarkt that every Brother has an equal share of the Patrimony, the youngest
as well as the eldest, and each Sister has half as much as any Brother. When a
Parent would dispose of his Estate otherwise by Will, it must (as has been said
before) be signed by the King in his Life time, which, in truth is no other,
than that he must have a new Law to disinherit any of his Children.

Sumptuous Burials and Monuments, (he says) are much in request with the
Nobility, p. 94. The King has some years since by a particular Law, retrenched
much of the former Luxury and Magnificence of the great Peoples Burials; so
that they now are moderate, and yet very proper and decent. The common People
are mean spirited, p. 94. yet in the foregoing page, they were proud and vain;
which two sorts of qualities seldom meet together. If they have any fault it is
a quite contrary one, which is that of being too much inclined to sight upon
the least word, and too slight provocations: Besides, they must always be
acknowledged to be desirous, rather to confer than receive obligations, which a
mean Spirit never does. The Swedes, who are as brave a Nation, as any in the
world, have sufficiently tried their courage: and in all their Engagements,
that they have had in the present King and Queens of England's Service, they
have behaved themselves like men. The defense, which the common People made for
their Country, and Amack in particular, deserves not only to be encouraged with
Privileges, but to have so excellent a Poem, as that of Amagria vindicata,
written by Borrichius, to continue the memory of their valor down to posterity.

What Tradesmen he may have met with, it is impossible to know; and what notion
he may have of being cheated: But whereas he says, p. 95. the common people are
inclined to gross Cheating; they have the general reputation with other men of
being fair Dealers. First, An Old superstitious woman would not sell him any
Green Geese. This silly story (as he relates it, p. 95, 96.) gives him a more
lively Idea of the temper of the common people, than any description he could
make; and in mine it raises a much brighter Image of the Author: Especially
when he proceeds to tell me, that in their Markets they will ask the same Price
for stinking meat as for fresh; for lean as for fat, if it be of a Kind, p, 97.
We'll suppose the Butchers so mad as to do so: But how came he to know this
curiosity? did he cheapen lean meat, and stinking meat? Some frugal people go
toward the latter end of a Market to buy the refuse cheap, perhaps our Author
did so too, and makes his Complaint in Print, because he was disappointed of a
penny worth.

Where he lays it down, as a sure way not to obtain, to seem to value, and to
ask importunately, p, 90. It is that way which I would advise no man to follow,
for certainly the Danes are not such Fools as to keep their Wares, when they
find the Buyer so forward as to overvalue them.

No Lodgings in Copenhagen for strangers. In Taverns one must be content to Eat
and Drink in a public Room, p. 97. It is so in all Germany; but in Copenhagen
persons may have Tables or Rooms to themselves when bespoke, and no stranger
need, or does want convenient Lodgings, both in public and private houses.

Their Seasons of Jollity are very scarce, p. 97. Persons of Fashion have their
Diversions at seasonable Times, as Music, Comedies, Retreats into the Country
in Summer, as well as their Sleds in the Winter. Whereas he says, they content
themselves with running at the Goose on Shrove tuesday, p. 97. One would think
that Men of Quality ran at this Goose, but it is only a pastime of his beloved
Boors of Amack, and performed by them: only sometimes, because of the odd
frolicks of these Peasants, persons of better Character condescend to be their
Spectators.

Perhaps it may be thought too nice for him to remark, That no body presumes to
go in a Sled till the King and Court has begun, that the King passes over a new
Bridge the first; and that the Clocks of Copenhagen strike the hours after the
Court Clock, p. 97. If these Remarks were but as True, as they are Nice, they
would be admirable; but as soon as the Snow comes every one Presumes to use his
Sled, the Diversion of it indeed is become more fashionable, when the King and
Court have done it one night through Copenhagen. As for new Bridges, some of
them might drop down again without any Passage over them, if no one were to go
till the King had done it: In the mean time our Au^hor must provide Ferries for
the Passengers; the Clocks of Copenhag^n must be the most complaisant in the
world; otherwise if some traitorous Clocks should chance to go to fast, they
might make an exception to a rule so universal. I like this Account our Author
gives us of Precedence in such ridiculous matters most extremely, because
having been searching according to his advice among the Barbarians, I find
something like it at the Savage Court of Monomotapa, where the Emperor having
Dined, Commands a Trumpet to be sounded, to give notice to the rest of the
Princes of the World, that they may go to Dinner.

The Language he says, is very ungrateful, and like the Irish in its whining
complaining tone, p. 98. He may be as free with the Irish as he pleases; But
the Danes and Norsh speak more like the English in their accent than any other
People, and therefore these two Nations most easily learn, to read, speak and
understand one another Languages upon occasion. There is a great agreement
between their Monosyllables, (p. 98.) which being generally the particles, and
strength, or sinews of a Language, show that the English has not only
incorporated the old Saxon but the Danish likewise, to bring it to its present
perfection. At Court High Dutch and French are much used, and also Italian:
Though Conversation often passes in these, yet if any should boast that he
could not speak Danish, p. 98. he would render himself ridiculous: and an
Englishman might think him not worthy to eat Danish Bread: and indeed with
reason, for among the living Tongues, there is none that for its abundance, the
propriety of the Expression, the fitness and agreeableness to Poetry and
Numbers, can pretend to surpass it.

I shall finish the Remarks upon this Chapter with a recapitulation of what the
Author has delivered in it. Was ever any man so Planet-struck as this Writer,
to pronounce a People the most miserable in one Page, and to sill the next with
the Grandeur and Equipage (p. 83.) of the Gentry, the plenty of their Tables
(p. 92.) Their retreats for pleasure in fruitful and delightsom Gardens, (p.
92.) at the same time declaring that the Burghers, Servants, and even Peasants
have change of Lining and are neat and cleanly (93.) What Country can boast of
more than Plenty and Neatness?

He begins with telling us, that in former times when the Nobility and Gentry
were the same thing (p. 76.) That is, during the times that the Nobles had an
excess of Power (p. 76.) in their hands, they lived in great Affluence and
Prosperity, ibid. which he takes much pains to describe, and every body will
easily be induced to believe. Then the Commons were willing in a great measure
to be directed by them. (ibid.) that is, because they depended on them (ibid.)
were forced like Slaves (p. 52.) to truckle to them whither they would or no.
But in process of time the Liberties of the whole Country were lost, p. 76. By
which alteration the Nobles were reduced to some bounds, and the Commons
delivered from a Tyrannical Aristocracy, p. 73. This change forsooth creates in
them all a kind of laziness and idle d^spondency, setting them beyond hopes and
fears; insomuch that even the Nobility are now desirous (p. 78.) to procure
Employments Civil, (Strange!) and Military (Wonderful!) Civil, I suppose,
without hopes, and Military without fears.

Under these Circumstances it is easily imagined the present condition of such a
People in all ranks is most deplorable, (p. 75.) Their Nobility and Gentry sunk
very low, and diminishing daily both in number and credit, (p. 76.) they are
forced to live meanly and obscurely in some corner of their ruinous Palaces;
and patiently endure their Poverty at home; their Spirits (for there was not so
much as a Song or Tune made in three years, p. 96.) as well as Estates, grown
so mean, that you would scarce believe 'em to be Gentlemen by their Discourse
and Garb.

The truth of all which foregoing Assertions, is seen in nothing more plainly
than in what he fully delivers to us, concerning the extravagant expenses which
the Danes are at in Coaches, Retinue, ^loaths, etc. p. 83. They ride abroad, it
seems, poor Gentlemen! in their Coaches with great E^^ipage, to show how
patiently they endure their Poverty in some obscure corner of their ruinous
Palaces. They go so very sine in their Dress, after the French Mode, (p. 93.)
and are so prodigal in their Clothes, p. 83. that, you would scarce believe 'em
to be Gentlemen by their Garb. Their Tables are so well furnished with Dishes,
p. 92. and their Gardens afford them Fruit in so great perfection, that they
are forced to seek Employments^ that they may eat a piece of bread, p 81. p.
79. But if they have a mind to carouse, or be excessive in their Drinking, they
have Rhenish, and French Wines, p. 93. to do it with; and upon a merry bout,
even a Boor can drop a Rixdollar, for a chirupping dose of Brandy, p. 84. And
though he has neither Plate nor Silver Spoon in his Cottage. (p. 88.) yet can
be as merry as a Prince, and has clean Linen, (p. 93. poor Slave, p. 86. and a
good F^ather-bed, (p. 88.) poor Negro! p. 86. to go home and lie down on.

To conclude, When any of the Gentry dye, they leave such Estates behind them,
as that their Children think themselves obliged to make Costly Burials, and
raise Sumptuous Monuments, p. 94 to their Memory.

Such is their Misery when Living, such their Ignominy when Dead.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Revenue.

LEt us in this Chapter follow the Authors advice, p. 102. and Measure Hercules
by his Foot. If what has gone before does not suffice, let us at least from
hence take the height of his fancy, and the level of his understanding.

He does indeed throughout the whole pursue his first design, which is to
multiply the Taxes, and yet afterward to lessen the Revenue; with what Art he
does it, and with what respect to Truth, the following Instances may convince
the Reader.

Consumption, or Excise upon things consumable, is the first Tax he mentions,
p. 100. The Danes perhaps took their pattern for this from Holland. But here
the Author to multiply the Taxes makes three of one; for the says ( ibid.)
There are besides smaller Ta^es, as thirdly upon Marriages, where every couple
marrying pay so much for their ^icence, according to their Qualities; this is
pretty ^^gh, and comes in some Cases to 30 or 40 Rixdollars. This is only a
branch of the consumption, where it is decreed, that every couple that marries
shall pay a small matter to the King; no^ is this pretty high, for i^ seldom
amounts among the Common People higher than from half a Rixdollar to a whole
one; but paying for Licenses for Marriage is quite another thing. People of
Quality that will not have the public Banes thrice proclaimed in the Churches,
and besides desire to be married at home in their Houses privately, buy
Licenses and commonly pay 10 Rixdollars for them. That Tax for Brewing,
Grinding, etc. is nothing else but the Consumption paid by Brewers or Millers.

Poll Money, he says, p 101. is sometimes raised twice a year. This is more
than the Danes know of (or if it might have happened is extremely rare) and in
raising this Tax more proportion is observed in Danmark^ between the substance
of one and another, than any wh^re else, wherefore it is very far from truth,
that it is only guessed at.

Fortification Tax, or Money raised for, or upon pretense of ma^ing
Forti^^cations, p. 101. was never raised but once, which was three years ago;
nor was it done then upon pretense, but expended upon the Fortifications of
Croneborg, Rensborg, etc. and then to ease the Subject, the Pole Tax was not
gathered that Year. Marriage Tax for a Daughter of Danmark is raised upon
occasion^ (as in ^th^r places^ but that under this Name, occasion is taken to
raise more than the Portion, is more than any one can pretend to demonstrate.

Trade-Money, p. 101. where every Tradesman is taxed for the exercising his
Trade, and moreover obliged to quarter Soldiers, is a Tax never heard of,
except what a Tradesman pays to his Company in the Cities, where he begins to
exercise his Trade, and this is very unjustly called a Tax to the King; and
then he is obliged to quarter Soldiers, not as a Tradesman, but a Burgher.

Ground Rent, he says, p. 102. is paid for all Houses in Copenhagen, or any
other Towns in Danmark; which are taxed by the King when he pleases. This is
called Byskat, or Town-Tax, and is contributed toward the City Stock, and is a
very small matter, nothing near 4 per Cent. as he afterward ( p. 103.) would
persuade us. In the other Cities of Danmark, this Tax was never known to be
paid to the King, but in Copenhagen such a thing may have happened once,
instead of another Tax which then ceased.

We come next to six very edifying Pages, viz. p. 103, 104, 105, 106, 107, 108.
where any one that is curious may know the Excise upon Mustard seed, Eggs,
Tripe and Coleworts; also upon Eels, Soap and Herrings; which sheet of his Book
can be no where more acceptable, nor of greater use, than for the more careful
Preservation of those Commodities, when they are to be carried from
Leaden Hall, or Newgate Market.

Public Mills, it seems there are, (p. 109.) where all the Inhabitants of
Copenhagen are bound to grind, and to pay the Sums abovementioned for
grinding. There are such Mills, but they cause no new Tax; and what is paid for
grinding there, is as cheap, as it would be done any where else, they being
appointed only, that so the Consumption Tax may not be avoided.

Having gone a second time over his Taxes, and given an account o^ some that
had never been, and others that have seldom been, he comes at last, p. 113. to
one that had like to have been: For if the Kings only ^aughter had been married
to the Elector of Saxony, as she was about ^o be, a Tax had certainly been
levied. Perhaps there might! in the mean time what does this Tax do here?
Especially when (in the very next words) ^e supposes that by this, an English
Reader, has taken a Sur^eit of his account of Taxes: For if he must have
surfeited us, it might have been with something to the purpose. I confess no
Tax the Danes lie under, surfeits me half so much, as the having paid three
Shillings for such a Narrative.

After all that he has said, it is easily imagined, that a Fleet and Army
cannot be maintained without Taxes, which are raised either upon Land, by
Poll-money or Excise. His present Majesty has with great Wisdom, caused a
v^luation of all Houses in Cities, and an admeasurement of all ^ands in the
Country, p. 110. from whence every man pays in proportion to his Estate, and
each Farm is taxed higher or lower, according to the Fertility of the Land.
Seasonableness of the Year, or Ability of the Landlord, p^101. so there is an
e^uality of the Taxes, and the manner of Taxing, p. 247. This makes the People
both willing and able to bear them; and as the contrary, ( viz.) unequal
Taxation, was the cause of the Alteration of the Government, so this is the
Preservation of it.

Were Danmark in a profound Peace, as the Author imagins ( p. 114. then he
might have cried out with some reason, Pax servientibus gravior est, quam
liberis bellum. But when the greatest Princes of Europe are in Arms, during the
Noise and Tumult of War, the Peace of Danmark cannot be so profound. And I
believe that it is no ill Maxim for a Neuter Prince, to take care, whilst his
Neighbors are in War, that the Conqueror shall not be able to hurt him.
Danmark endeavors to do this, and accordingly keeps up a Fleet and Army; so
that if a War should happen, he need not be in suspense, whether his Subjects
could possibly bear a greater Burden, p. 110. for there would not be a
necessity for much more toward maintaining them; and then besides the
disciplining of the men, there would be all that charge s^ved, which attends
upon the Levying of new Soldiers.

From this account of Taxes, the Author brings us to a Catalogue of other
Miseries, The number of trading Ships is decreased, and does not come up to
what it did within these 30 years, p. 116. and the foreign Trade of Norway is
considerably diminisht, since their late Quarrel with the Dutch, p. 115.
whereas in truth, the Trade never was greater than it is now, and the Dutch can
so little be supplied with their Wooden Commodities from Sweden, that they are
glad to refix their Commerce with Norway again.

He gives us, p. 117. his computation of the Ships that Trade thither, and that
pass the Sound yearly, but I never liked his computations, because I have
before found him wrong in his Arithmetic; and at present there is a difference
that I cannot easily reconcile: In his Chapter of the Sound (p. 23, 24, 25.) he
recites a Letter from a very Understanding Person, March 31st, 1691. which
gives him to understand, that since the Peace with Sweden, the Sound has not
yielded above 80000 Rixdollars per annum, and the last Year past, it did not
reach to full 7^000. Now if I should have believed his understanding Friend,
what a mistake I might have run into: For when the Author himself comes to give
us his opinion of it, p. 115. he says, that in the years 1690 and 1691, it
amounted not to much more than 65000 Rixdollars, at which rate we may judge it
likely to continue. Seeing this disagreement between him and his understanding
Friend, what credit can we Strangers give to the Letter of Advice, when there
are at Least 4000 Rixdollars in the account between'em; which he will not take
his Friends word for.

There is another branch of the Kings Revenue, p 117. which is least
considerable, and arises from the Rents of the Crown Lands, and confiseated
Estates. The latter are in the Kings hands, either upon account of Forfeiture
for Treason and other crimes, or by reason of Debt, and Non-payment of Taxes;
but notwithstanding this addition of Lands, the King is so far from being the
richer, that he is the poorer for it. And were the thing true, that Estates
fell into the Crown rather than pay Taxes, it would be great pity that the King
should receive no advantage by them; but such Surrenders are as imaginary, as
his Confiscations for Treason and other crimes: For Danmark is that happy
Country, where, according to his own words, p. 139. You never hear of any
Person guilty of the crime of Treason against the King; there are no Clippers
and Coyners, no Robbers upon the Highway, nor House-breakers. So that if he,
being an exact Arithmetician, will put together the Rents of Estates given to
the King, rather than pay Taxes; the Rents of Estates confiscated for Treason,
Rents of Estates forfeited for Coining, Robbing and House breaking, to the
Money arising to his Majesty, from the Tax which might have been, p. 113. the
Sum total will probably be just nothing.

But farther, as for this sort of Land, it generally turns to Forest, and
contributes to his Diversion, though little to his Purse, p. 113. It is a sign
his Purse needs no supply, when he can afford so much ground for his Diversion.
And then the Royal Palaces run to decay, ib. And so they do in all Countries,
when the Prince is better pleased with another Situation. As for several of
the King of Danmark's Palaces, they are old uncouth Buildings, used by former
Kings, disused now, and therefore not kept in so good order as Fredericksborg,
Jagersborg, and others, where the King passes some part of the Year

The Author it seems has met with another understanding Person, p. 119. who has
informed him in several things, as first, that it is very difficult to make any
rational computation of the running Cash of these Kingdoms, ib. or indeed of
any Kingdom besides these; and so his Labor might have been superseded;
certainly it is but very l^ttle, and not near the hundredth part of that of
England, ib. When he is able to give a Rational Computation of the Running Cash
of England, then it will be time enough to guess what proportion that of
Danmark may bear to it; but till I find that understanding Persons agree in the
computation of that of my own Country, I shall despair of finding them exact,
as to that of another. If they have no Cash by them, and are indebted over head
and ears to their Creditors at Amsterdam and Hamborough, ib. how comes it to
pass, that the Danish Merchants have so good Credit in both those Cities, and
how come they to have it in London? But the Officers of the Army transport
their Money to other Countries: This may be true in some very few instances;
but for the most part these Officers are Danes, or married and settled in
Danmark as has before been intimated. That few, or none of the Ministers of
State purchase any Lands, p. 118. is as true as other of his Remarks, for there
is no public Minister, be he Dane, or not, that has not one, two, or more
Seats, with Lands appertaining to them in the Country. That these Kingdoms
consume more of Foreign Commodities, than their own Product can countervail,
ib. cannot certainly be said of Norway, nor of several Provinces of Danmark, as
Jutland, Laaland, etc. and any person who has the least knowledge of their
Traffic, will easily confute this Aslertion. As for the running of Brass Money
amongst the common People, it is as Farthings amongst us: Their Silver Coin is
very good, in respect of several other Nations, although not equal to Sterling;
but whether the goodness of Coin be a way to preserve Running Cash in a
Kingdom, may perhaps hereafter come to be considered by the English.

Under these circumstances, I cannot think this understanding Person a
competent Judge of the Running Cash of Danmark, any more than I take the Author
to be of the King of Danmark's Revenue, though he is so very particular as to
make it, Two Millions, two hundred twenty two thousand Rixdollars, p. 122. and
I am the more confirmed in this opinion, because the Taxes not being every year
the same, the Revenue received by several Officers, and no account given but to
the King himself, the calculation of the Revenue can hardly be made by those,
who are most employed in these Affairs at the Court, much less by a Foreigner.

To conclude with Norway, the Revenue of the Southern part amounts to between
five and six hundred thousand Rixdollars, and of the Northern to between two
and three hundred thousand, and so the Total may be communibus annis 800000
Rixdollars, so says the Author, p. 117. But when he comes to sum up the whole
Revenue, p. 121^ there all the Revenue of Norway^ comes but to 700000
Rixdollars. Were their Losses in Danmark to be so great, the Natives, p. 120.
might well think that it was impossible for the Taxes to continue, and wish for
an Invader, since they have little or no property to lose. For you were
pleased, Sir, to drop four thousand Rixdollars in the Customs of the Sound; and
here you defalk a hundred thousand Rixdollars more: Might I advise, whatever
Foreigners may be preferred in the Danish Court, you should never come into the
Treasury, if you can make up your Accounts no better.

CHAP. X.
Of the Army, Fleet and Fortresses.

THE Author begins this Chapter with bewailing the Misery of Danmark, that the
Revenue is expended upon a standing Army, and upon the maintaining of a Fleet
and Fortresses: And if Danmark had not sufficient reasons for the maintenance
of all these, they would have just cause to complain.

But it seems it is the King of France, that Great Master of the Art of
Reigning, that has instructed the Court of Danmark, p. 123. and the King is his
Pupil, p. 124. and in pursuance to such a character he has taught him, the
pernicious secret of making one part of the People both the Bridle and Scourge
to the other. This is not so great a secret, but that it has been known and
practiced in all Ages and Countries; that when one part of a Nation is factious
and mutinous, the more honest and sober part should bridle them, and if part of
a Nation rebel, the other that is for quietness should endeavor to scourge and
correct them. But God be thanked, Danmark has no occasion for an Army upon
these accounts, nor necessity of going to France for such a Ma^im. In the next
place, France has taught him to raise more Men than his Country can maintain,
p. 124. Very well! And then his own Prudence teaches him to disband such as he
thinks unnecessary or burdensome to him, as he has done several times. But the
great thing that he has taught him is, that Soldiers are the only true Riches,
p. 125, 126, 127. The thing that the Author would here reflect upon is, that
the German Princes often receive Money, before they will send their Troops into
a Foreign Service; and hence he would infer, that at present Soldiers are
grown as saleable Ware, as Sheep and Oxen, p. 125. What a strange Country this
must be, where the Soldiers are Sheep and Oxen! and the Peasants Timber Trees,
p. 86. But the King of Danmark esteems his Soldiers to be his Wealth, only as
he can make them serviceable to his Allies, or as they preserve his Subjects
from any foreign attempts, and so are the causes of Quiet, and consequently of
true Riches.

Yet, whatever the matter is, it happens, p. 127. that the Pupil improves but
ill upon the example which the French King has set him. The Toad may emulate
the Ox and swell, but he shall sooner burst than equal him, p. 127. Truly a
very decent similitude for a couple of Crowned Heads: I find the Author
mightily taken with these kind of Animals, for, p. 232. speaking with reference
to, and commendation of the Laws of Danmark, p. 232. he says, there is no Plant
or Insect how venomous or mean soever, but is good for something; upon which a
Friend of mine observed, that there may be a creature in the world, that has as
much Venom and Malice as any Vermin, and yet be good for nothing.

It were to be wished, that there could be a Remedy found for keeping up so
great a number of Soldiers, as are at present in Europe. But his own words (p.
126.) That none of the Kings or Princes, though endowed with a more peaceable
spirit and better judgment than the rest, dares lead the Dance and disarm, for
fear of his armed Neighbors: E^cuse not only the King of Danmark, but those
other Kings, whom he obliquely would blame upon this occasion.

To give a List of the Danish Officers would be too nice, and is continually
variable; however the King of Danmark may be said to have above twenty thousand
men in pay, besides those that are in the Emperor and the King of Englands
Service. I have before given an account of the Soldiery, only I must add this
farther, that when he says, the Troopers are maintained by their Peasants, p.
135. The Reader must know, that there are particular Peasants living on Lands
in the Country, that are appropriated to this use; so that such a Peasant as
contributes to the maintaining of th^se Troopers pays the less, both Rent and
Taxes. That these Troopers are none of the best Soldiers, p. 135. is reported
by this Author because he confesses, they are generally Natives, ibid. Yet King
William has judged far better of the three Regiments of Horse that he had from
Danmark, the half part of which behaved themselves so well in the Battle of
^anden (for the other half was with the Duke of Wirtemberg) that his Majesty
was pleased to compliment their Colonels particularly, upon the Bravery and
Valor of their Troops.

The Author gives us a reason ( p. 135.) why there are not more Natives in the
Army; because the Landlords, whose Slaves they are, can hinder them from
entering into the Kings Service, and remand them if any should offer so to do.
This is true only of the Vornede, whose condition has heretofore been
described: But it is an apparent proof, that the King of Danmark is not so
arbitrary as he would make him, and that the Danes have not entirely lost their
Property; since they have such an Authority, as to be able to deny their King
the taking men from their Farms, though they are to be employed in the Service
of their Country.

As for the French Officers, which he says are in the Army, the most part of
them are such as have been forced to leave their Country for the sake of
Religion; and Danmark thinks it a Duty and Honor to be able to grant them
Protection.

In his Account of the Fortifications, p. 143. instead of saying that Naxkew is
of no defense, he might have said, that Nakskow is a good Fortress, which it
showed in the War with Sweden, when it longer resisted the Enemy than most of
the other Towns: He speaks as slightly of the Fortifications of Copenhagen in
this place, p. 144. as he did before; although that, and not Rensburg, p. 144.
is the most considerable place for strength, that the King of Danmark has.
Neither is Nyborg so much out of repair; nor Fridericks-hall, which is the
strongest place in Norway by natural situation, so much commanded by the
neighboring Hill as he would insinuate.

In the Account of the Fleet, which he makes to consist of but two and thirty
Ships, p. 141. he has omitted several; and as to what he says, that it was
never set to Sea thus equipt, (p. 142.) The late Wars with Sweden may
sufficiently confute him, and yet the King of Danmark had much fewer Ships
then, than he has at present. The Danes and Norsh are very good Seamen: The
Dutch are mightily desirous of them, and consequently have several in their
Service; yet not so but that they would return upon occasion; and indeed all
the ^eamen are so ready to be employed in the Kings Service, that there is no
need of pressing to man the Fleet: To make this the more easy, the Sea Officers
are kept in pay during a Peace, as well as in time of War; and so are the
Seamen, who have a Salary, and are employed in the Bremer Holm, in working upon
all Materials necessary for the Naval Service. As for the Sea Provision of the
Danes, which he says is very bad; the contrary will easily be evinced, by any
that have experience of it. The Mutiny of the Seamen, p. 38. and the besieging
the King in his Palace, p. 139. is a mere story, for in Danmark are no
Mutineers, p. 246. But it may have happened, that the Seamens Wives may have
had Complaints to the Lords of the Admiralty; now the Admiralty being opposite
to the Castle, their flocking thither, perhaps to this overcurious Gentleman,
who is troubled with several active qualities which Liberty and Freedom beget
p. 75. and has his Head always full of Commo^ions, may have seemed to have been
a Mutiny.

CHAP. XI.
Of the Court.

TO give Characters of living Princes, and public Ministers of State, must be
a thing very difficult: It is not easy for the man, who would make 'em to set
aside passion or partiality, and men's tempers, humors, inclinations and
interests daily, nay hourly varying, it is hard to fix a lasting character upon
a man, till we see the whole Thread and Tenor of his Life and Actions: This is
one reason why I don't defer so much to the characters which the Author gives
in this Chapter; besides when I have found him mistaken in his Account and
Description of things, which are sensible and permanent, I shall be much more
cautious how I trust him as to his notions of men, who are mutable and various
especially when he would make his search into the recesses of their mind, and
there discover their very thoughts and sincerity, p. 168. For if the Authors
Conversation be like his Writing, a man might be very free and open in his
temper, and yet appear reserved to him; for it is the opinion taken of the Man
which makes one disclose himself to him: And I am the more confirmed in not
relying upon these characters, because in the same Chapter, when he is to give
us an account of so considerable a Court, he tells us things so very
ridiculous: As that I must go for an Idea of the Danish Court to some English
Nobleman, p. 159. methinks the Horse and Foot Guards, and Trabands, the Kettle
Drums the Trumpets, which are in perfection, and being ranged in a large place
before the Palace, proclaim aloud the very minute when he sits down to Table,
declare to me that there is some difference. That few or no Gentlemen that have
no Employments come to Court, p. 159. I cannot imagine whither men should go, or
where they should sooner pay their attendance, for the obtaining Preferment, if
they have any hopes, or merits to deserve it. That the Kings Children,
Domestic and Foreign Ministers, Officers of the Army and Household, who appear
in the Antichamber and Bedchamber, seldom amount to above the number of
twenty or thirty, p. 159. I cannot think the number seldom to exceed thirty,
when the Royal Family is so numerous as to make seven of them; and methinks
Courtesy, Duty or Interest at least, might bring four and twenty more to make
above thirty. That there is a plentiful Table, but the Meat is dressed after
their own manner, p. 158. Ridiculous! Is not the King of Spain's dressed after
his own manner? There are abundance more of the like particulars, which I shall
omit, only this one, where he says, That King Frederick had once the thoughts
of making the present Count Guldenlew, King of Norway, which has been remembered
to his Prejudice, p. 155. For it is what was never heard of in Danmark; nor
could that thought have been consistent with such a Kings great Wisdom. I must
for these reasons, beg the Authors pardon, if I do not give an entire belief to
his characters; and the Readers, for my not giving any of the same persons my
self: But with a very short description of the Court conclude this Chapter.

The King of Danmark's great and royal Qualities make him be universally
beloved by his People; and the Queen by her goodness, obliges them to the same
affection, and makes her difference in opinion from them scarce discernable.
Frederick, the Prince Royal, in his late Travels, wherever he came appeared
accomplished and very gracious; and at home he is admired, for having such a
temper as will follow his Father's example, and pursue his designs for the Ease
and Prosperity of his Subjects. Prince Christian has all the Vigor and Gayety
of Youth; and the two younger Princes Charles and William, give great hopes,
agreeable to their respective Ages: And the Princess Sophia Hederig, has all
that Beauty and Sweetness, which will one day render some young Prince happy.
The Ministers of State who compose the Council, as Guldenlew, Reventlaw, etc.
are Persons of Honor and Fidelity to their Master, by whose advice affairs are
so managed, that he has Love at home, and Honor abroad. Though the Court has
not all that Luxury, which may be in some more Southern Climates, yet there is
Decency and a sufficient Grandeur: Nor is it strange, that a warlike Prince and
Nation should express their Magnificence by things suitable, as the Attendance
of Horse and Foot Guards, Kettle-drums and Trumpets; and consequently that the
Kings Diversion should be the reviewing of his Troops, or Hunting in its proper
season, as an exercise becoming a Soldier. These occasion frequent removals of
the Court; which can go no where to a finer place than Fredericksborg, which,
tho it be not built after the modern Architecture, yet may be esteemed one of
the pleasantest Palaces in Europe. The Ladies likewise have their Diversions,
not only in the Hunting of Deer and Swans, but the nicer ones of their Sleds,
Music, Masquerades and Comedies. To increase the Grandeur of the Court, the
King has two Orders of Knighthood: The first being that of the Elephant, is
given only to Foreign Princes, or Subjects of the highest Deserts and
Qualities. The other, which is the Order of Daneburg, was instituted long ago,
but not as our Author says, by one King Dan, who saw a White Cross with Red
Edges descend from Heaven, and thereupon instituted the Order, p. 178. For King
Waldemar II. fighting against the Listanders in the Year 1219, saw, or
pretended to see, this Banner descend from Heaven, which was followed by a
great Victory; and in remembrance of this, the Order of Daneborg was
instituted. This was laid aside a great while, but revived by his present
Majesty. The Knights are inferior to those of the Elephant; yet they are both
fewer in number, p. 179. and greater in Honor by far than the Baronets in
England.

As to the Rank and Precedence of all great Officers and other persons, the
Author has given us an Ordonnance in French concerning it, which was published
in 1680. It is true that his Account is to represent Danmark, as it stood in
1692. However it is strange, that so curious and exact a man should have no
correspondence there from 92 till 94, when his Book was published; for then he
might have known, that by a new Ordonnance dated 11th of February, 1693. this
old Ordonnance of our Authors is altered in abundance of particulars, so that
he has nine whole Pages of his Book, that, by his negligence, are entirely good
for nothing.

CHAP. XII.
The Disposition and Inclinations of the King of Danmark toward his Neighbors.

THis Chapter seems to labor under the same difficulties with the former, for
as we see the Interests of Princes are changeable, so are their Inclinations;
upon which reason I shall leave him to dive into the Hearts of Men, and the
Cabinets of Princes, and only see whither his Matter of Fact be absolutely
true: For that being the Foundation, according as that appears, we shall be
able to give our opinion of his Superstructure.

First, As this Author is a mighty Lover of Seditions within a Kingdom, so he
is of Animosities and Quarrels without: Therefore his Presage is very common
and often repeated, That there will be a fresh War between Danmark and Sweden:
But on the contrary, they rather grow greater Friends every day than other, nor
has there been a stricter Alliance between those Crowns than is at present,
which has been lately renewed by solemn Treaties.

Secondly, Whenever (says he) we please to caress the one at the expense of the
other, this seeming Knot will discover the weakness of the contexture, and
probably dissolve of it self, p. 192. These two Princes are not to be supposed
to break solemn Oaths and Treaties for a little interest, that may be proffered
them by England and Holland: And we saw this last year, when the Danes stopped
the Dutch Ships in the Sound the Swede, although never so much carest, could
not be prevailed with to go off from the King of Danmark's Interest, or take
any other party, but contributed what he could, to procure a satisfaction for
his Confederate.

Thirdly, That the Alliance by the King of Sweden's having married the others
Sister, is not of any moment toward a good Corresp ^ndence, p. 192. is not
altogether so certain, for this Queen whilst she lived, was the greatest Tie
between these two Nations: She was the delight of them both, and that not
without reason, for she had all the Accomplishments of Piety, Wisdom, Goodness,
and all other Virtues: So that Sweden loves Danmark for nothing more than the
having received from thence a Queen, for whom they had so great a Veneration.

Fourthly, He wrongs the King of Sweden when he says, p. 193. That he showed
coldness and indifference enough t^ his Queen: He a virtuous Prince, ibid. and
she an accomplished Princess, ibid. and yet coldness and indifference! What is
this but a Contradiction? But the matter of fact is this, that never a greater
Love and Esteem could be had for a Queen, than this King had for his; which was
manifest y enough shown by the deep Afiliation her Death threw him into, so
that he would scarce admit of Consolation; and Sweden never heard of such a
Sumptuousness and Magnificence, as that wherewith her Burial was accompanied.

Fifthly, Whatever he ominates concerning the Swedes avoiding a further
Matrimonial Tie with Danmark, p. 193. Yet it is true, that the general report
of the World is, concerning a double Marriage between the Prince Royal of
Danmark, and the Princess of Sweden; as also between the Prince Royal of
Sweden, and the Princess of Danmark: If so, where is this Gentleman's assurance
of the impossibility of a further Matrimonial Tie; or the certainty of the
Prince of Holstein's being contracted to the Princess of Sweden, whom he falsely
cal's, p. 193. the only Daughter of the King of Sweden; this King having two
Princesses living, by the lately deceased Queen.

Sixthly, As the Author is pretty near in guessing, that the King of Danmark
would not sit down with the Duke of Zell's thrusting himself into the Duchy of
Saxe Lawenburg; so he is out of the way, when he says, that the King of Sweden
would uphold the Lunenburg Family, though secretly: For the Swede was one of
the chief Mediators that made the Duke of Zell demolish Ra^eburg last year, and
give the King of Danmark the satisfaction which he desired.

Seventhly, When he says, that the Duke of Holstein has, by the Sister of the
King of Danmark, issue a very hopeful Prince; one should think he has no more
issue than this only Son; whereas the Duke of Holstein has several Children of
both Sexes.

CHAP. XIII.
The Manner of Dispossessing and Restoring the Duke of Holstein Gottorp.

ANY one who reads this, and the foregoing Chapter will see, the Authors
partiality for the Duke of Holstein: He seems to have undertaken his Cause, and
to display it in all its best Colors and Brightness. It were an easy thing, in
answer to all this, to transcribe the King of Danmark's Manifesto upon this
occasion, which those who are curious may consult if they please, it having
been spread about all Germany. But I shall avoid meddling with any
Justification of the King of Danmark upon this Account: The reason is, because
there is at present an entire Reconciliation between the King and his
Brother-in law the Duke; and last year they met together with great Friendship
in Holstein. Now Reconciliation clears up a thousand things, which Distru^^,
Jealousy, or Misunderstanding may have cast before one: What here^ofore may
have seemed unkind or unjust, then will appear to have been necessary; but
especially upon the renewing of Friendship, there should be no Justification of
former Proceedings made by either Party; for such Justification shows as if the
breach were not thoroughly repaired, and will give a handle for future disputes
and difficulties: Since no reconcilement will be perfect, but such as carries
along with it an entire oblivion of past differences, and all their
circumstances.

CHAP. XIV.
The Interests of Danmark in Relation to other Princes.

I Shall be very short in relation to this Chapter, because it is of the same
nature with the former.

What he says of Danmark, that it resembles a Monster that is all Head and no
Body, all Soldiers and no Subjects, p. 224. has been sufficiently confuted.
However, if I were to have a Monster, I would rather have one that is all Head
and no Body, than such a one as he would make, which is all Body and no Head.

Neither am I of opinion, that Danmark bears no greater proportion to France,
than the little Republic of St. Marino does to Venice; and that Danmark is the
least and poorest Kingdom in Europe, p. 225. for as to its poverty I have given
him an account, and as to the Littleness of this Kingdom, I must a second time
make bold with the first words of his Book against him; That if we consider the
Extent of the King of Danmark's Dominions, he may with Justice be reckoned
among the greatest Princes in Europe.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the Laws, Courts of Justice, etc.

THE Danes are sprung from the Goths, who have always been a most warlike
Nation; they have left no Northern People free from their Incursions at least,
if not their Conquests; and extended them from Island to the warmer Climates of
Spain and Italy, and the burning Shores of Africa. [ Krantzius in Dani^. Lib.
1. etc. Meursius Hist. Dan. Lib. 2, 3. Isaac Pontanus Rer. Dan.] And have the
honor never to have submitted to the Roman Empire, nor to have any just
pretenses made from thence of Superiority or Dominion over them Their
Historians affirm, that they have had a continued Succession of Princes from a
thousand and forty Years before Christ; who have continually governed them They
have always been ruled by their own Laws, without foreign impositions. These
Laws and Customs were so agreeable to the Northern People, that Roger Hoveden,
in his Annals of Hen. 2d. of England says, that when William the Conqueror was
to give Laws to the English, he made the greatest use of the Danish Laws to
that purpose from the Love he bore to the Danes, from whom the Normans took
their Original. Under the forementioned Laws and Customs the Danes lived: which
they might possibly explain or improve by the Civil or Roman Law (that Pontanus
Lib 6. says they made use of and which the Governors of their Monasteries
understood and studied, having learnt them in the Universities of France and
Italy, Georg. Lorich. in addit. ad cons. poster. n. 92. Helmold. Lib. 3. Chron.
Slavorum. c. 5. King Waldemar in the Year of Christ one thousand two hundred
thirty two, collected the Statutes of his Predecessors, which with the ancient
Customs of the Danes and Cimbers, he reduced into writing; and adding several
others together, with the Consent of the States, he made an entire Body of the
Danish Law [ Pontanus Lib 6. Duck de Authoritate juris civilis.] Yet this was
but for one Province, for formerly each Province, Jutland, Sealand, etc. had
their own particular Laws differing from one another. And indeed, since his
present Majesty's Collection and Reformation of the Laws, the Danish and Norsh
Law is still distinguished, so that there is just such another Volume
comprehending the Norsh Law, as that of the Danish; but there is no difference,
except in such things where the nature and situation of Norway require another
Regulation than Danmark. In Norway likewise is another high Court of Justice,
where the Viceroy is resident, to which all Causes may come by Appeal. But if
the Parties be not contented with the Decision of that Court, they have a
further Appeal to the highest Court in Copenhagen.

Holstein is ruled by the Imperial Law, as a Fire of the Empire, and there is
at Copenhagen two Chanceries; the Danish for Danmark and Norway, the German for
Holstein, and the other German Provinces belonging to the King of Danmark.

He has said nothing of the Ecclesiastical Courts in Danmark, which are in
every Diocese, where the Bishop is Resident, and several of the chief of the
Clergy are his Assistants, and the Governor of the Province always present on
the Kings behalf.

These Ecclesiastical Courts are proper for all the Clergy, but if the Cases
are of little importance, they are first judged by the Praepositus (who is like
our Rural Deans) and some of the eldest Ministers in his District, which may be
called an Inferior Court; but in both these nothing is judged but things of
Ecclesiastical Nature.

In Copenhagen there is a Consistory, where the Rector Magnisicus (chosen every
year out of the Professors, and like the Vice-chancellors at Oxford and
Cambridge) is President, and most of the Professors his Assistants; in this
Court all things relating to the University are debated.

As for his politic comparison of the Trap to kill Vermin in Dovc-houses, p.
239. and his nice Description of the Headsman and Kennel-raker, I shall only
tell the Reader that they are false, and so leave them to our Authors further
Reflection.

CHAP. XVI.
The State of Religion, of the Clergy, and Learning, etc.

WE must not expect great Accuracy in what he says of the Reformation of
Danmark, neither as to the Time, nor the King that then reigned. For not only
Frederick the First, p. 249. but his Cousin Chrisliern the Second, favored
Luthers Doctrine; and both he and his Queen, who was Sister to Charles V. died
in that Profession. Frederick, who succeeded his Nephew, in the year 1524. by a
Public Edict enjoined, that no body in his Kingdoms or Provinces, under the
Forfeiture of Life and Goods, should do the other any hurt, either Papist or
Lutheran; but every one should so behave himself in his Religion as he would
answer it before God Almighty with a good Conscience: At the same time
seriously commanding, that the People should be well informed in the Doctrine
of the Gospel, that the Romish Abuses might be the sooner extirpated. This he
repeated in the Diet of Odensee, A. D. 1527. and more was not done by this King
till his death, which happened, A.D. 1533. saving that he himself adhered to
the Protestant Religion, and favored both that and its Preachers, wherever he
could in his whole Dominions. But Popery was tolerated however, nay as yet
carried the Sway, by the great Oppositions and Power of the Bishops. This
appeared in the Diet which was called upon the Death of Frederick, in which
Diet one of the chief Lutheran Preachers, Mr. John Tousson, had been oppressed
by the Power of the Bishops, if the Citizens of Copenhagen, who adhered firmly
to the Protestant Religion, had not rescued him with force of Arms; from whence
we see, that though Frederick the First brought it in, yet he did not establish
so generally Luthers Doctrine in his Dominions, as we are told by this Author,
p. 249.

Afterward King Christian III. finding great opposition from the Popish Party,
with much trouble, and not without effusion of blood, having besieged
Copenhagen a whole year, and at last forced it to surrender by Famine, began to
establish the Reformation with vigor; for the seven Popish Bishops were
suddenly surprised and imprisoned by the King, and after having been publicly
before the Diet of the Kingdom, accused and convicted of many enormous crimes,
were all deposed, and seven other Superintendants, or Protestant Bishops,
afterward consecrated in their places The King was crowned by Dr. John
Bugenhagen, who had been a Fellow Laborer with Luther in the work of the
Reformation; and in the year 1539. in the Diet of Odensee, the last hand was
set to the Reformation, and it was wholly and universally introduced and
settled in Danmark, as it is at this day.

Now I leave the Reader to judge of the great Accuracy of our Author, when he
says, that Frederick the First established Luther's Doctrine about 150 years
ago, (p. 235.) First, 150 years ago, Frederick the First had been dead for
above nine years, and next it was his Son Christian the Third, who established
the Protestant Religion, in the year 1539.

There is a Union and Harmony of Religion throughout the whole Kingdom, and
this our Author says, p. 251. Cuts off occasion of Rebellion and Mutiny. It Is
very reasonable it should! and a sign that the Clergy do their duty in
preaching such due obedience as the Gospel enjoins; and the People show their
sense of Religion in being directed by them: not that the Priests depend
entirely upon the Crown, as this Author intimates, p. 251. any more than the
rest of the King of Danmark's Subjects; nor the People absolutely governed by
the Priests, ibid. with a blind obedience, any further than Scripture and
Reason obliges them.

The Clergy have full Scope given them to be as bigoted as they please, ib. I
know not what he means by their being bigoted, unless it is, that they are
zealous in teaching their People the Doctrines of Salvation, and resisting Vice
and Scandal in their peculiar Churches, as they ought to be; perhaps this
Author would not have them trouble their heads much about Religion, nor be
zealous for any one in particular; but content themselves with an idle
Despondency, and skepticism concerning all.

That the Clergy have no common Charity for any that differ from them in
opinion, except the Church of England, ( p. 251.) is a proposition very boldly
advanced, against a body of men, in whom Charity ought always to be
conspicuous; and for a Defense against this Charge, they appeal to those
numerous French Protestants who have fled to them for Relief, to whom at
present they allow a Church for their public Worship, though there has been no
example before, since the Reformation, and the Law is directly against it. They
confess that they cannot join in Communion with them, because they differ as to
the real Presence in the Sacrament, and in the point of absolute
Predestination, which they take to be essential; for it is the Doctrine of
Reprobation, which has been the greatest stumbling block between them and the
Calvinists; but the Lutherans, seeing the great Moderation of the Church of
England, both in that particular, and in the other of the Real Presence, they
have always had a great veneration for it, and could be very desirous, that
their Doctrines, especially that concerning the Sacrament, were but rightly
understood, so as to come to a Union with it; for it is a general mistake in
England, to call the notion of the Lutheran Protestants concerning the
Sacrament, Consubstantiation, p. 252. for no such word is used amongst them;
their notion amounts to this, that they believe steadfastly a real and true
Presence of the Body and Blood of Christ in the Sacrament, in a manner
ineffable, which our Savior himself is best able both to know and do; whereas
Consubst antiation would imply something more natural and material.

Did Princes think it worth their while to promote this Union, our Author is
confident, p. 252. that the business of Consubstantiation would make no
difference. It would be of wonderful consequence, if Princes should really
promote this Union between Churches so considerable; and no better work could
be performed in this turbulent and divided State of the Church of Christ: For
who knows but this Union might draw another of more consequence after it,
between all the rest who call themselves Protestants, and those more strictly
so, viz. of the Confession of Ansburg, who first gave us that name, which we so
much glory in; and what a fatal blow this would be to Popery, any rational man
will easily imagine.

For the Church of Danmark is far from deserving the Character this Author
gives it, p. 252. That the Calvinist is ^^^ed by them as much as the Papist,
and the reason they give is, because he is against absolute Monarchy, and has a
resisting Principle. They will confess they do not like his resisting
Principle, and this makes a greater distance between them. However, they think
it not agreeable to common Charity, to hate either Calvinist or Papist: As to
their Errors, they think the Papists to have several that are fundamental, and
more in number than the Calvinist whom they have a respect for, as having
jointly protested against the Antichrist of Rome. The Church of Danmark think
themselves likewise wronged, when he says, p. 253. That they keep the Mob in
awe by Confession, which they retain of the Romish Church, as well as
Crucifixes and other Ceremonies. For their Confession is far from the Auricular
Confession, and Enumeration of all sins made by the Papists: For they retain
only that Confession used in the Primitive Church, and which other Protestants
wish for: For by that, the Minister can excite and exhort the Communicants to a
right Penitence; and there, as our Exhortation to the Communion tells us of the
Church of England, The Penitent may open his grief to a discreet and sober
Minister of God's word, that he may receive the benefit of Absolution together
with Ghostly Council and advice, to the quieting of his Conscience, and
avoiding of all scruple and doubtfulness. In like manner the Danes have
Crucifixes, and other Historical Pictures out of the Bible in their Churches,
but they are far from making any idol ^^^ous or superstitious use of them. They
use them as Ornaments and Remembrances only; nor do they think, because a
Papist adores a Crucifix, that a Lutheran must consequently be so afraid of one
as not to endure to look upon it. So likewise is it to be understood of the
other Ceremonies, which they have kept, not from the Romish Church, but
innocent Ceremonies which the Romish Church have abused, they have made a right
use of, and are here in the same case with the Church of England.

He says, that the Splendour and Revenues of the Church of England, are the
principal Virtues they admire in us, p. 252. The Church of England has lost so
much of its Revenues, as that it is not at present to be envied for them.
Besides, I never found Splendour or Revenues recounted as Virtues in Aristotle's
Ethics. But I have found Prudence, Fortitude, etc. among the Virtues, and for
these the Danish Church may admire it; but more especially for its purity in
Doctrine, and its well ordered Government and Discipline.

It is true that the Church of England has better Revenues than that of
Danmark, for at the Reformation, the King and States laid almost all the
Ecclesiastical Revenues to the Crown, which at that very time Luther complained
of to King Christian the Third. However, the Ecclesiastics in Danmark are in
no low condition, for they live very well, and honorably as any Gentleman can
define. Every Minister lives in his Pa^ish, and has one, two, three or more
neighboring Churches under his Care, which if he cannot take care of alone, he
does it by one, or more Assistants, called Chaplains, which resemble our
English Deacons. He tells us, p. 251. That the Clergy are entirely dependant
upon the Crown, as if their Salary was wholly given them by the King. But
afterward it seems, p. 252 and 253. The best subsistence of the Priests, is
the voluntary Benevolence of the Mob. So that their flattery of the Court, p.
252. ought, if this were true, to be turned into a Flattery of the Mob, whose
Vices notwithstanding, as well as those of Persons of the highest Quality, they
reprehend with great freedom; Ibid. And yet their Churches are much frequented,
p. 91. As to the subsistence of the Ministers in Danmark, it is partly certain,
as Tithes, etc. as in England, partly uncertain, as Offerings at the three
great Festivals in the Year; Marriages, Burials, etc. and they are very
liberally provided for, without cultivating the Mobs good Opinion, p. 253.

As the Inferior Clergy are thus provided for, so are the Superior, such as the
Bishops, Professors of Divinity, etc. to a greater degree. Concerning these he
tells us, p 153. That there are Six Superintendants in Danmark, who take it
very kindly to be called Bishops, and my Lord, viz. One in Sealand, One in
Funen, Four in Jutland, and Four in Norway. These have no Temporalities, keep
no Ecclesiastical Courts, have no Cathedrals with Prebends, etc. but are only
Primi inter pares; having the rank above the inferior Clergy of the Province.
1. When he enumerated the Bishops, he might have mentioned those two more who
were in ^^^nd. 2. That the Danish Bishops should take it kindly to be called My
Lord, is a very curious remark, they have not so often occasion to converse
with Englishmen, and the Danish Tongue has no word that properly answers to the
English words, My Lord. Then they have no reason to refuse being called
Bishops, since the King calls them so in the Danish Law, and they have all
Episcopal Jurisdiction. It is true that in Danmark at the Reformation, none of
the P^pish Bishops (as many in Sweden did) would embrace it; but all, because
of their errors, were deposed, and then the new Superintendents, according to
Luthers institution in Germany, were ordained by Dr. Bugenhagen, from
Wittenberg. And they did, as their Successors at present do, use and exercise
in ecclesiastical things the same Power and Jurisdiction, that any Bishop does
in England or Sweden. 3. If by Temporalities he means Baronies, the Danish
Bishops have none of them. But that they have Ecclesiastical Courts is certain,
and an account has before been given of them. 4. Though Canons, Prebends and
Subdeans, are not as in England, yet in each Cathedral Church (for such there
is in every Diocese) the Bishop has four, five, or more of the chief Clergy for
his Assistants in the Chapter, and they are called Canonici, or Capitulares. 5.
In Honor the Bishops may be only Primi inter pares, but in Jurisdiction there
is a very great Subordination, so far as to suspend and depose, which sets them
far beyond an Equality. 6. That most of these understand English, and draw the
very best of their Divinity out of English Books; and those who have studied in
Oxford are more valued than others, p. 254. are expressions that savor a
little of vanity. They do indeed esteem our Divines, and especially their
Sermons; but the way to be respected more by them, is not to value our selves
too much.

As to their Learning he says, at present it is there at a very low ebb. But to
show the contrary, I shall name some of those great men in all Sciences, which
have been eminent for their Learning, and name some of those who preserve the
succession. In Divinity, who in the learned world does not know Hemmingius,
Resenius both Father and Son, Brochmand, Winstrup, Swaningius, Wandalinus the
Elder, Bagerus, Noldius, Bircherodius, etc. In Physic, who are more famous
than Thomas Bartholinus, Joh. Rhodius so renowned in Italy, Nic. Stenonius the
great Anatomist, Simon Paulli no less an Herbalist, Olaus and Wilhelmus
Wormius, and Borrichius, who was excellent for his Chemistry. In the Law, there
have been eminent men, as Petrus Resenius, Cosmus Bornemand, Claudius Plumius,
etc. As to the Mathematics, Tycho Brahe was followed very successfully by his
Scholar Longomontanus and Geo. Hilarious, etc. In Philosophy and Philology, few
have excelled the great Borrichius, and besides him Bartholus Bartholinus,
Arnoldus Rhumannus and others; nor does Danmark want Historians, as Wormius,
Petrus Resenius, Vitus Beringius, Claudius, Lyscander, and the lately deceased
young Gentleman Thomas Bartholinus. As for Poetry, it began in the Danish
Language with the Proverbial Rhimes of Lollius, and the Satyrs of Scanus, and
the Eclogues of Virgil, turned into the Danish Language by Petrus Parous
Ripensis, and by the Translation of the Psalms of Du Bartas by Christianus
Arreboe; but its perfection increased with the Rules given by Corvinus in his
Heptachordum, and his Rythmologia Danica; by Severinus Pauli Gothlandus in his
Prosodia Vernacula, and several other Authors. Severinus Torchillius with the
beauty and sweetness of his style, advanced this improvement; whereas Bording
did the same by his strength and majesty, and Johannes Wilhelmus as much with
his Hexameron, in which there appeared a decent and becoming gravity: These
were followed by Kingo, Sehested, Matthias Wormius, Andreas Claudianus,
Lundius, Gernerus and others, whose works may promise them Fame and
Immortality. The Ladies come in likewise for their share in this glory, Tycho
Brahe's Sister, and especially Dorothea Engelbrechtia, may contend with the
famous Poetresses of the Ancients. The Lady Brigitta Tot has translated Seneca
the Philosopher into the Danish Tongue, with all the Elegancy any Language is
capable of; to show, that the ruggidest Philosophy of the Stoics must submit,
when the Fair Sex is pleased to conquer. It would be too tedious to enumerate
all the Danish Poets, who have writ from Hiarne and Saxo Grammaticus, down to
this time. Borrichius has done it, and given their Characters in a very pretty
dissertation; and Fredericus Rostgaard, an ingenious young Gentleman, has made
a Collection of six of them, printed in 2 Duodecimo Volumes in Leyden, in 1693.
Albertius Hopnerus, and Aagardus, have their beauties, but Vitus Beringius has
a peculiar easiness, and his Masque of the Rape of the Sabins, writ in several
sorts of Latin Verse, has much variety, and must have given great diversion in
the representation of it. Harderus at writing Epigrams has a great Quickness of
Wit; and the English, among whom he lived some years, are particularly obliged
to him for his ingenious Verses, made in commendation of their Language. As for
Borrichius it is enough to say, that his Poetry equals his other performances.

There are still living and flourishing in Danmark Wandalinus the Son, Masius,
Caspar Bartholinus, Oligerus and Janus Jacobaeus, Olaus Romerus, Paul
Vindingius, John Brunsmannus, and many others, who deserve no less praise than
the deceased if their Modesty would permit it to be given them.

Their Learning is preserved and cultivated among them, by their Public
Examinations, Disputations and Lectures in all Arts and Sciences: And their
want of Printed Translations, shows their very great improvement, for the Danes
generally understanding Latin, English, French, Italian, and German Languages,
have no occasion for them, and yet in the public Library there are abundance
of Translations of all sorts, of both Ancient and Modern Authors. Printing is
indeed much dearer than in Holland and Germany, which is the reason why the
Atlas Danicus of Petrus Resenius lies fairly written in the Library; the
Nobility and Gentry have likewise their Libaries in very good order, and there
is nothing that I can find wanting, but Satirical Pamphlets, and Seditious
Libels.

The Author says, there is no invention here, or tolerable imitation of what is
brought in to them by Strangers, p. 255. But I cannot believe it, when I hear
that Thom. Bartholinus has found the Vasa Lymphatica, as his Son Caspar still
living, has done one Ductus Salivalis, and Borrichius, found several new ways
in Chemistry: That the round Steeple of Longomontanus, is a great piece of
Ingenuity and Architecture, as likewise the Bremer Holm, and the great work on
Christians-haven. We have several Ornaments of the City of London, carved by a
Danish Master. And whosoever will not believe their skill in Music, may be
convinced of the contrary by the Harp of Signior Arnoldo.

But what need I speak far there of the Danes, the very Islanders, whose Country
was the Thule of the Ancients, are not without their Learning. Their Law-Book
in their own Language, has several things conformable to the great wisdom of
the Imperial Laws, as Angrimus tells us, Konung: Sagurne contains their
History. Edda and Scalda gives an account of their ancient Philosophy and
Poetry, shows the Art and Fable of the one, and the Misery of the other. They
have likewise Chronology from 740 to 1295. Nor are they wanting in the more
refined Arts of Poetry and Comedy, as may appear by the Drama Eroticam, and the
Verses made in the Islandish Tongue, about the beginning of this Century, upon
Christian Friis the Chancellor of Danmark. Runolphus Jonas having studied the
Islandish Language, found it so full, proper, and expressive of the Latin,
especially the Thoughts and Beauties of Virgil and Horace, that he thought
himself bound in justice to compose a Grammar for the more easy attaining of
it, which he printed, and has been since reprinted at Oxford, with Dr Hicks's
Saxon Grammar. But to go yet farther, even Greenland has its Annals; and the
parts which are farthest North are not without some pretensions to the Belles
Lettres.

When he comes to the University of Copenhagen, he compares it, p. 253. with
these of England, which may exceed it; however in respect of other foreign
Universities it yields to few, either for its Buildings, Revenues or Students.
The Auditories, Colleges and other Edifices belonging to this University, are
as good and substantial as any Houses, except the Palaces in Copenhagen; and
the Professors have fine and convenient Houses allotted for their Residence.
The Revenues likewise are considerable both for the maintaining of Scholars
that study at home, or travel abroad. There are several Colleges as that called
Collegium Regium built by King Christian IV. where a hundred Students have
their Lodgings, to which belongs another house called Communitas Regia, where
as many have their diet, and during their meals have frequent exercises.

There is also Collegium Walkendorp^ianum founded by a Danish Nobleman, and
Collegium Medicaeum founded by Dr. Borrichius, splendidly endowed for sixteen
Fellows in each of them. There are several Exhibitions likewise for Scholars,
some to reside and some to travel, which they call Stipendia, as Stipendium
Frisianum, Scheelianum, Winstrupianum, Hopnerianum, etc.

With these Assistances the University flourishes, and it receives
encouragement from his Majesty, who was particularly pleased to be present at
an Act performed upon his Birth day, in the year, (91) when the Rector, Dr
Oligerus Jacobaeus, made him a Speech to thank him; for some favors conferred
upon the University. For since Pliny and Pacatus his time Panegyricks have been
thought due to good Princes, and if a King will do great things, he must pardon
his Subjects when gratitude makes them eloquent in the relation of them.

There was formerly another University at Sora; but, p. 256. The King had
occasion for its Revenues, and in its stead there is only a small Grammar
School erected. It was ruined by the Swedes in the late Wars, and pillaged of
its Libraries, and all things else that belonged to it; so that the King of
Danmark has thought fit to let it be a School only, and in its room has erected
an Academy in Copenhagen, where young Gentlemen and Persons of Quality learn
Riding and several Exercises, as well as other Sciences. This has its
Professors, and was solemnly inaugurated upon the Kings Birth day, in 1692.

The Provisions for the poor are regular and considerable. Hospitals there are
in every City very good and sufficient; nor shall he show many examples of such
as have been diverted to other Uses, p. 257. and especially not public ones.

The Author concludes this Chapter with a very great Encomium of the Danish
People, p. 257 where every one keeps the ordinary beaten road of sense, and you
see no Madmen, natural Fools, fanciful Folks or Enthusiasts; for these are the
People that generally create uneasiness and disturbances; and I will assure the
Author, that ever since I first read his Book, when I have been troubled with a
fanciful Fool, that I could not in good manners get rid of, I have often wished
my self in Danmark.

The Conclusion.
THe Authors Conclusion is a Panegyric upon Popery, France and Turkey.

Popery has this to say for it self, That it is not the only Religion that
intr^^^ces Slavery; for he is persuaded that other Religions, and particularly
the Lutheran, succeed as effectually in this ^^^^^. p. 25^. Besides Popery has
a farther Plea, That King James's attempt to bring it into England was the
principal thing, which rescued our Liberties from being swallowed up, p. 259.
But the third thing excellent in it is, because the dependence which the Romish
Clergy have on the Church of Rome causes often a clashing of Interests, and
derogates from the entire Obedience the Subject owes to the Prince, p. 260. So
that whereas he says, p. 136. Popery has been the Darling of many Monarchs,
upon the account of introducing Slavery: It is this Authors Darling because it
raises Wars and Tumults.

France is put next into the Scale with Danmark, and made to outweigh it,
because that Kings Subjects are better treated, and there is a Name of a
Parliament at Paris, and a formal demand of a Benevolence, which they have not
the power to deny, p. 261. But the true reason is, because the King of France,
having quarrelled with the Court of Rome, his Clergy (if he were reduced to a
lower Ebb) might produce divisions and disturbances, ib. So in this Authors
opinion, France is happier than Danmark, because there is greater probability
that it may lie under the misfortunes of a Civil War.

Then comes Turkey, which has suffered by some Writers, but he says, will scarce
seem to deserve it, if compared with Danmark; for the Turks have con^uered the
Christians, and have a sort of barbarous right to use them ill: Yet they never
persecute them upon Account of ^onscience: They suffer them for the most part
to inhabit their own Lands; it is true the propriety of all Lands is in the
Grand Seignior, but whether it be not better to be only a Farmer at an ea^e
Rent, than to have the name of a Proprietor without a comfortaable subsistence,
he leaves the Reader to judge, p. 262. The Alcoran or Turkish Law declares the
barbarous right which our Author mentions in these words: When you meet with
Infidels cut off their heads, kill them, take them Prisoners, bind them, till
either you think fit to give them Liberty, or they pay their Ransom. Sir Paul
Rycaut is an Author of credit, who describes to us that sort of toleration
which the Turks give the Christian Religion: They know they cannot force Men's
Wills and Consciences, nor captivate their Minds as well as Bodies: But what
means may be used to render them contemptible, to make 'em poor, their Lives
uncomfortable, and the Interest of their Religion weak and despicable, are
practiced with diverse Arts and Tyranny; their toleration of Christianity is
rather to afflict and persecute it, than any grant of favor and dispensation.
The Grand Seignior may take their Estates from them if he pleases whilst they
live; and all People know, there is no such thing, as Inheritance of Land in
Turkey, at their Death. Let therefore the Reader judge, what Christian would not
rather live in Turkey, than enjoy the free use of the Protestant Religion, and
have his property secur^d inviolably to himself and Heirs, as he may do in
Danmark.

Children are indeed in Turkey forced away from their poor Christian Parents,
but says the Author, it is for their worldly profit, and so bating the point of
Religion, it is a far less mischief, to deprive Parents of their Children, than
to leave a charge upon their hands, after having taken away the possibility of
nourishing and educating them, p. 263. I profess upon reading this Paragraph, I
enquired how many Children were starved every week in Copenhagen; and whither
there were not greater quantities that died for want throughout all Sealand; I
asked whither there were not abundance of famished Infants, that their Parents
would be glad to part with for Skeletons, upon reasonable terms: But being
resolved, that there was Pap and Milk-porridge, and the like, in those places;
and that the Children when they cried, had as much Bread and Butter as is usual
in other Countries. I resolved with my self, that my Children should rather go
to Danmark, with all its inconveniences, than be circumcised or made Eunuchs,
upon the hopes of coming one day to be Caimacan, or Grand Vizier. I wonder
most, how our Author ever came to like Turkey, since I do not find, that he has
any hopes or assurances from the Mufti, that any Rebellion shall be raised
there speedily.

Come we now to the grand Query, Whither matters are like to last at the same
rate they are now at, in Danmark? p. 264. Our Author would willingly have it
resolved in the Negative; and gives important reasons why it should be so: And
more important why it should not be so. Let us see his self-encounter at pro
and con, and the mighty tumults and bustles raised in our Authors fallacious
Judgment, p. 264.

First, That natural Love of Liberty, eminent in the ancient Goths and Vandals,
persuade, him to think of a change, ib. But alas the Love of Liberty [which was
that of Knight ^rrantry, and Rambling to seek their Fortunes in foreign
Countries] being now quite extinct in the North, they find sufficient
conveniences at home, where Obedience to their Prince secures their Ease, and
is preferred by them, before those brisk Traverses (as he calls them) which
commotions would occasion, p. 267. So Love of Liberty might do something, but
that Duty prevails. Well, but again, may not the freshness and newness of this
alteration of their condition, produce an alteration in the Government? p. 265.
Why, truly no, because he finds it to have little or no influence upon the
people, who are wonderfully well pleased both with one and the other. So that if
the Father should propose any methods of change to his Son, he would not be
heard by him with patience, p^ 268. Bu^^ however to try again: What should
hinder the Swedes, who have their Eye upon Danmark from introducing Liberty? p.
266. Why truly they use their own Subjects so ill, and there is such a ^^^t
hatred betwixt these two Nations, that the Danes are resolved to keep them out
as long as they are able, p. 2^8. The last hope then is in the numerousness of
the Royal Family, for there being four Princes it will be rare if Concord be
maintained among them all, p. 266. And thence something in favor of Liberty
might arise. It Is a thousand pities that matters should not be brought to this
pass: But such is the Wickedness of this cursed Soil, that those Jealousies,
which use to reign in the Families of Princes, are not so common nor fatal in
these parts, as elsewhere, p. 270. Besides there is a terrible thing, called
Unity of Religion, p. 268. which spoils all manner of hopes, and cuts away the
very root of Sedition. So then the sum of the grand controversy amounts to
this, That the Government of Danmark might be shaken, were it not supported by
a firm security from foreign attempts, by a mutual concord in the Royal Family;
by the Ease, Content, Loyalty and Religion of the Subject; in a word, by all
the Blessings and Cements which make Governments happy, and consequently will
render this of Danmark fixed and durable. Since nothing hitherto will do the
work, what if this Author could get his Account translated into the Danish
Tongue, might not that, when published, have so blessed an effect, as to
occasion a change, not only in their Condition, but also in their Masters? Why
truly whatever his aim may have been nearer home, and though it has been
printed in English, yet he has not persuaded his Countrymen to endeavor an
alteration in either of theirs. So that if the present State of both Kingdoms
be fixed and durable, then his Book (poor Gentleman!) has lost its design, and
he his labor.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and sold by Tho, Bennet, at the Half Moon in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
FOLIO's
Athenae Oxonienses: Or an exact History of all the Writers and Bishops who
have had their Education in the University of Oxford; from 1500. to the end of
1690. Representing the Birth, Fortunes, Preferments, and Death of all those
Authors and Prelates; the great Accidents of their Lives; with the Fate and
Character of their Writings. The Work being so Complete, that no Writer of Note
of this Nation, for near two hundred years past, is omitted. In Two Volumes.

A New Historical Relation of the Kingdom of Siam, by Monsieur de la Loubere,
Envoy Extraordinary from the French King, to the King of Siam, in the Years
1687, 1688. Wherein a full and curious Account is given of their Natural
History, as also of their Arithmetic and other Mathematick Learning^ In two
Tomes. Illustrated with Sculptures. Done out of French. By A. P. Fellow of the
Royal Society.

The Works of Mr. Abraham Cowley. The Eighth Edition. To which is added, The
Cutter of Colemanstreer. Never before Printed in any Edition of his Works.

Sir William D'avenants Works,

Dr. Pocock's Commentary on the Prophets Joel, Micah, Malachi and Hosea.

Voyages and Adventures of Ferdinand Pinto; who was five times Shipwrakt,
sixteen times sold, and thirteen times made a Slave, in AEthiopia, China. etc.
Written by himself. The Second Edition, 1693.

Quarto's.
A Critical History of the Text, and Versions of the New Testament; wherein is
firmly Established the Truth of those Acts on which the Foundation of Christian
Religion is laid: In Two Parts. By Father Simon, of the O^atory. Together with
a ^^^u^ation of such Passages as seem contrary to the Doctrine and Practice of
the Church of England.

The Works of the Learned: Or an Historical Account, and Impartial Judgment, of
the Books newly Printed, both Foreign and Domestic: Together with the State of
Learning in the World. By J. de la Crose, a late Author of the Universal
Bibliotheques, The first Volume is finished with complete Indexes.

A Sermon before the King and Queen. By the Right Reverend the Lord Bishop of
Worcester.

The Bishop of Ch^^ter's Charge to his Clergy at at his Primary Visitution, May
5. 1691. and his Sermon before the King and Queen, 1694.

Five Sermons before the King and Queen. By Dr. M^ggot Dean of Winchester,

Two Sermons. One before the Honorable House of Commons, on a Thanksgiving, in
November, 1691^ The other before the King and Queen in November, 1692. By Dr.
Jane Dean of Gloucester.

Three Sermons. One on a Thanksgiving, the two others before the King and
Queen. By Dr. Talbot Dean of Worcester.

Mr. Atterbury's Sermon before the Queen at White^all, May 29. 1693.

Dr. Resbury's three Sermons before the Queen.

A Discourse ^ent to the Late King James, to persuade ^^^ to embrace the
Protestant Religion. By Sam. Parker, late Lord Bishop of Oxon. To which are
perfixed two Letters; the first from Sir Lionel Jenkins, on the same Subject;
the second from the said Bishop, with the Discourse; All Printed from the
Original Manuscripts.

The Plagiary Exposed, or an old Answer to a newly revived Calumny, against the
Memory of King Charles the first, under the Title of Colonel Ludlows Letter. By
Mr. Butler, Author of Hudibras. Never brfore Printed.

A short Defense of the Orders of the Church of England. By Mr. Luke Milbourn.

The first Book of Virgill's AEneis. Made English by Mr. Luke Milbourn.

The Reasons of Mr. Bayes's Changing his Religion. In Three Parts. By Mr. Tho.
Brown.

Novus Reformator Vapulans: Or the Welsh Levite tossed in a Blanket. In a
Dialogue between Hick -- of Colch. Da -- J -- s, and the Ghost of William Pryn.
Written by Mr. Tho. Brown.

An Account of the Proceedings of the Right Reverend the Lord Bishop of Exeter,
in his Visitation of Exeter College. The Second Edition. To which is added the
Censure of the University of Oxford on the Naked Gospel.

A Defense of the said Proceedings, with an Answer to, first, The Case of
Exeter College Vindicated. Secondly, The Account Examined.

A Vindication of Mr. James Colmer, M. B. and Fellow of Exeter College, from
the Calumnles of several late Pamphlets: to which are annexed, the Authentic
Copies of the Affidavits relating to that Affair.

Popish Treachery: or, a short and new Account of the horrid Cruelties
exercised on the Protestants in France; being a true Prospect of what is to be
expected from the most solemn Promises of Roman Catholic Princes: In a Letter
from a Gentleman of that Nation to one in England.

Certain Considerations for the Establishment of the Church of England, By the
Lord Bacon. Now published with a new Preface.

A Letter to a Lord, in Answer to a late Pamphle^ Ent^^uled, An Enquiry into
the Causes of the present Fears and Dangers of the Government: in a Discourse
between a Lord Lieutenant and one of his Deputies.

A Sermon at the Funeral of John Melford, Esquire by Mr. Easton.

A Practical Discourse concerning Divine Providence, in Relation to National
Judgments.

A Defense of the Church of England from the Charge of Schism and Herefie, as
laid against it by the Vindication of the Deprived Bishops.

The Indecency and Unlawfulness of Baptizing Children in private, without
Necessity, and with the Public Form. By Martin Strong M.A. and Vicar of
Yeovill in Somerset.

Mr. Blackburns Sermon before the Queen.

Octavo's and Twelves.
TWenty four Sermons Preached upon several Occasions, by R. South, D.D. Six of
them never before Printed. in 2 Vol.

Sermons and Discourses upon several Occasions, by G. Stradling, D.D. late Dean
of Chicester, Never before Printed: together with an Account of the Author.

The Meditations of Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, the Roman Emperor: Translated
out of Greek into English, with Notes by Dr. Casaubon. To this Edition is
added, the Life of the said Emperor; with an Account of Stoic Philosophy; as
also Remarks on the Meditations. All newly Written by the Famous Monsieur, and
Madam Dacier.

Mr. Waller's Poems complete, in two Parts.

Sir John Denham's Poems.

Crashaws Poems; containing, Stepts to the Temple. The Delight of the Muse,
etc. Third Edition,

The Faithful Shepherd; with an Addition of diverse other Poems. The Second
Edition. By the Right Hono^^able. Sir Richard Fanshaw.

The History of Henry IV. Surnamed the Great, The Second Edition. Witten in
French by the Bishop of Rodes, and made English by J.D.

Memoirs of the Court of Spain. Written by an Ingenious French Lady, and
Englished by Mr. Tho. Brown.

Hudibras Complete.

Scarroons Novels.

Love Letters between a Nobleman and his Sister, 2 parts Complete.

Bona's Guide to Eternity, Englished by Sir Roger Lestrange.

Memoirs of the Court of France, by the Author of the Court of Spain.

Some Motives and Incentives to the Love of God pathetically discoursed of in a
letter to a Friend: by the Honouaable Robert Boil. The Seventh Edition much
Corrected.

Arist. Hist. LXXII. Interpret. accessere veterum Testamonia de eorumversione,
e Theatro Sheldonian.

Dr. Busby's Greek Grammar.

The Life of that most Illustrious Prince, Charles V. la^e Duke of Lorrain and
Bar. Generalissimo of the Imperial Armies. Written Originally in French, and
made English.

The Morals of Confusius, a Chinese Philosopher; who flourished above 500 Years
before the coming of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

A Voyage to the World of Cartesius: Written Originally in French, and now
Translated into English by T. Tailor of Magd. Coll. in Oxford.

Academy of Sciences; being a short and easy Introduction to the Knowledge of
the Liberal Arts and Sciences; with the Names of such Authors of Note as have
written on every particular Science. By D. Abercromby, M. D.

Homeri ^liad^s ^iber primus, in qua ^irgularum v^^^^ s^gnifica^i^nes,
compositiones ac derivationes annota^^^tur, dialecti clare and distinct
exponuntur, etc. Opera and Studio Geog. Sylvan. Par. Med. Editio secunda.
Twelves.

The Art of Practical Measuring easily performed by a Two foot Rule, which
slides two Foot, and and which is the best Measure of round Timber the common
way; as also the true Measure of Round, Square, or other Timber, of Stone,
Boards, Glass, Paving, Painting, Wa^nscot, etc. Gauging of Casks and Gauging
and Inching of Tuns; containing brief Instructions in Decimal Arithmetic; the
best way of using the Logar^thms, according to Mr. Tou^^ey: the Use of the
Diagonal Scale of 10^ parts in a quarter of an Inch; applied to Gunter's Chain.
And lastly, some useful Directions in Dyalling, not hitherto published, By
Henry Coggshall Gent. Twelves.

A method and order of Practice to be prepared for Death and Judgment. By the
Author of the method of private Devotion.

Plays, by the Honorable Sir Robert Howard.

Five Plays in one Volume. in Folio, viz. The Indian Queen, Surprizal,
Committee, Vestal Virgin, and the Duke of Lerma.

By Mr. Dryden and others.
Villian. Quarto. Rambling Justice. Love in a Wood. She would if She could: All
for Love. The Assignation. Aurange Zebe. Indian Emperor. Wild Gallant.
Rival-Ladies. Hamlet Prince of Denmark. Macbeth. Epsom Wells. The Emperor of
the Moon. by Mrs. B^^n. The Rape; or, The Innocent Impost^rs. by Mr. Br^ddy.
FINIS.

