vt. vmbra: Sic. vitae:

English. fe.
portrait of Richard Kirby (?)

VATES ASTROLOGICUS: OR, ENGLAND'S Astrological Prophet, Fortelling what is
likely to befall GREAT BRITAIN and IRELAND, Particularly the Great and Famous
CITY of LONDON: AS ALSO France, Holland, Spain, Germany, Poland, Italy, Sicily,
Apalia, Bohemia, Turkey, and indeed all Europe, but more especially the Sea of
Rome, for Twenty Years together, beginning March 10. 1683, and ending March 10.
1702.

LIKEWISE Astrological Judgments of the Effects of that famous Triple
Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, being thrice repeated in that Regal Sign
Leo, the great Dignities of the Sun and Jupiter.

ALSO Some Remarks upon the Eclipses, and more especially upon that great and
famous visible Eclipse of the Sun, July 2. 1684.

WITH Twenty Years Predictions from some of the most eminent Mutual Aspects of
the Planets, and Eclipses of the Luminaries, and Annual Revolutions of the Sun.

Here are also many Hieroglyphics representing the future State and Changes of
the World.

To which is added a Treatise of the PESTILENCE, both for the Prevention and
Cure thereof.

By Richard Kirby, Student in Astrology and Physic.

Coeli ennarant Dei fortis, and opus manuum ejus indicat expansum eorum, Psalm
19.1. The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows his handy
works, etc. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Malthus, and are to be sold at his Shop
at the Sun in the Poultry, 1683.

Catastrophe Mundi: Or, Merlin Revived, in a Discourse of Prophecies and
Predictions, and their Remarkable Accomplishment. With Mr. Lilly's
Hieroglyphics exactly cut; and Notes and Observations thereon. As also a
Collection of all the ancient (reputed) Prophecies that are Extant, touching
the Grand Revolutions like to happen in these latter Ages. By a Learned Pen. To
be Sold by Thomas Malthus at the Sun in the Poultrey.

TO THE IMPARTIAL and UNDERSTANDING READER.
DEar Countrymen, if the time now present, and those I see approaching, make
me the doleful Messenger of more Misfortunes, the indifferent Reader will, I
hope, excuse me, for Truth is Truth, and a Horse is a Horse, if I may so call
it; no profit has induced me to put Ink in Pen, and Pen to Paper; nor no
desire of Fame by publishing a Work of this Nature, which of it self is so
contrary to the Opinions of most Men; besides, many will despise this Work for
my meanness, and want of Education, being my self no Collegian of either
University; it is not set forth with Eloquence, our Art denying us that Luster,
but Truth is Eloquence, and Eloquence is Truth; no ignorant Man's envy do I care
for, I have hitherto lived, and shall still, so long as the Divine Providence
is over me; but I could wish no man would carp at the Subject I write of; yet
since it is easier to Carp than to Copy, let them Carp that will; but let none
mistake my meaning, in this Subject: When I write this Planet, or that
Constellation did, or does such a thing; I mean the influence of that, or that
Planet is such, or such, according to Natural Causes, it inclines, God
permitting, to such or such Acts, etc. Let Man live merely as a Natural Man
without spark of Grace, the influence then predominates, but where Grace rules,
the Stars obey, this I mean in Men's Qualities: The general good do I aim at,
and that men fore-knowing the Evils to come, might more patiently abide them,
and with less trouble of mind receive them; it is probable this may procure me
many Enemies, because its of Astrology, but why it should I know not; if they
are both Christians and Protestants, so am I: Do these Honor their King, I do,
whom God Preserve, and send him many a happy and prosperous day to live. Let my
willingness to serve my King and Country bury my failings, I write Cordially;
Scotland and England shall in full measure of time ruin the greatest Enemies
of the Protestants, and make them flee like Chaff before the Wind: God is now
doing a great Work, his Glistering Signs affrighten our Enemies, for their
horrid Plots against us, he shakes his Darts over them, and inclines to punish
them with a sharp Sword. The great God of Heaven has been exceeding merciful
unto us in delivering our Nation from total Ruin, and we may truly say, Si
deus nobiscum, quis contra nos. He uses in all sublunary affairs fit means and
proper instruments to perform what he intends, against which there is no
resisting.

Rich. Kirby.
Fullham, February the 10th 1683.
ERRATA.
PAge the 1. line 2. for nibil read nihil. p. 2. l. 31. r. Swedeland and
Piemont, l. 39. r. their. p. 3. l. 23. r. aerial. p. 5. l. 24. r. Persons, l.
25. and he in Sextil. p. 8. l. 24. r. Judgment. p. 9. l. 17. r. anima, l. 39.
r. the Influence. p. 10. l. 35. r. Celestial. p. 11. l. 44. r. discovered for
detected. p. 12. l. 1. r. Scheme, l. 23. r. watery. p. 13. l. 2. this good will.
p. 15. l. 14. r. but agunt, l. 27. r. Sixth. p. 17. l. 27. r. to the. p. 18. l.
11. r. Mars. p. 21. l. 20. r. Prince does frown, l. 23 r. aerial. p. 24. l. 19.
r. Celestial. p. 25. l. 13. r. Celestial, l. 21. r. Celestial. p. 26. l 15.
r. Carolstade. p. 28. l. 43. r. Countries under Virgo be invaded. p. 30. l. 5.
r. and England. p. 33. l. 9. r. the Common. p. 34. l. 11. r. which is March, l.
10. Saturn ^^pp^s. p. 38. l. 34. r. first. p. 39. l. 30. dele er. p. 40. l. 2.
r. their third and last.

















England's Astrological-Prophet.
Time. Long. Apog. Nibil est tam occ^ltem quod non sit detegendum: Nothing is
so secret but it shall be known and revealed, etc. Epoche. s. d. m. s. s. d. m.
s. Year 1600. 9. 20. 55. 23- 3. 5. 44. 8. 80. 36. 16. 1. 22. 10. 2. 11. 29. 31.
20. 2. 4. Febr. 1. 28. 9. 11. 10 Days 8. 7. 53. 7. Hours 28. 51. 45. Min. 13.
32. Mid. Long. 11. 27- 57. 34 3. 7. 8 32. Apog. sub. 3. 7. 8. 32. Anom. Res. 8.
20. 49. 02. Equa ad. 00. 2. 2. 26. place is 00 00 00 00 Vi. z. in 00 00 00

The FIGURE follows, etc.

, ad and, and,, Sol in Aries, March the 10th, 8 Hours 11 Min mane, Londini,
Lat. 51 degrees 32, 1683


In this Figure of the Sun's ingress into Aries, common and fixed Signs possess
the Angles, viz. the Ascendent and Mid-heaven, and Jupiter with that glorious
Lamp of Heaven, the Sun, rules, and has power in the North and West Angles;
Mercury, Lord of the ascendent is in the sign of the twelfth, the mansion of
Sorrow and Affliction, and there retrograde and combust of the Sun; and the
Moon is in the eight in her Detriment, in square of the Sun and Mercury:
Therefore I fear but little of good can be expected this half year; the vulgar
and common people are still dejected, and make great Complaint for the Want of
Trade, and Moneys, and all such things as are necessary for their Supportment:
and besides, the Moon in the 8. does certainly show, that a great many people
must yield to pale Death this year, who will not be denied by the Princes of
the Earth when their time is come: But the Moon being the Earth's attendant,
and but a secondary Planet, cannot signify such grand alterations in the World
as the primary and superior Planets do; especially when they happen to be
conjoined together, as here they are in the angle of the Earth, and there
opposed by Venus from the 10th, which shows, that many Fears and Troubles
shall fall upon men, and that their Hearts and Minds shall be possessed with
Jealousies and strange Apprehensions, and that not without just cause; for you
must note, that Saturn and Jupiter in the fourth, retrograde, shows some secret
Plot and Design a hatching; but let the Contrivers thereof look to it, for it
will be most happily and timely discovered; for it was never known that ever
Women were good Counsel-keepers. Therefore I judge, that Venus in the 10th, in
Conjunction with the Dragon's Tail, and being in opposition to Saturn and
Jupiter, shows some Woman or Women shall discover the Villainies of this
Plotting Council, etc. And besides, it signifies a Dark Obscure Air,
Earthquakes, and Destruction to the Fruits both of the Trees and Earth. Also;
it signifies Povorty and Indigency; also a Scarceness of Fruits and Provisions,
great Mischiefs, Cold in the extremity, grievour Fears, Anxieties, Terrors and
Troubles, much Want and Scarcity of the Fruits of the Earth, and a superfluity
of Evils, Torments and Grievances, incident to those places under the signs Leo
and Aquarius, which be Rome, Italy, Cicily, Bohemia, Turkey, Phenicia or
Chaldea; for Satura and Jupiter da^ts their Evil Influence mostly into the
Courts of Prince, and will show their dire Effects to those Countries and
Regions which are under the signs Leo and Aquarius, as Tartary, Muscovia,
Sweedland, Piedmount, Hamborough, Breem, Trent, Bavaria and Salizburgh. And
further, you must note, such Positions as these, do always denote Strife,
Trouble and Confusion amongst the Grandees of Europe, with many Informations
against great Persons in the Courts of Princes, and those which are of the
highest Degree and Quality: besides, I judge this has been a long time a
contriving, since this Opposition is made from fixed signs and angles, etc. Now
Saturn is in a sign wherein he has no essential Dignities, which shows, that
ancient people shall desert their Habitaaions, and be drawn out of one place
into another, it may be out of they own natural soil; for here is no loss than
four of the Planets retrograde, which motion shows those places under the signs
Ares, Leo, Libra and Aquarius to be in a strange kind of posture at the time of
this ingress. But at the latter end of March, and the beginning of April, the
t^o superiors become both direct, by which motion they meet in conjunction in
May, at which time I fear much Treachery, with Tumults and Commotion of Arms in
many places of Europe: for, take this for an approved Aphorism, that when any
of the superiors, viz. Saturn, Jupiter or Mars, are in conjunction, or any
other malevolent Configuration one of another, there happens great and manifest
Alterations in this Elementary World, with Alterations of Laws, Customs,
Kingdoms and Empires: Therefore Rome prepare thy self to entertain Showers of
Judgment; for a Plague is threatened unto thee; and I am apt to believe, this is
thy declining Age; for the Lord has declared in the 6th Chapter of Ezekiel,
and the 3d Verse, Behold I, even I, will bring a Sword upon you, and I will
destroy your high places: Verse 4. And your Altars shall be desolate, and your
Images of the Sun shall be broken; and I will cast down your slain Men before
your Idols: Verse the 11th, For they shall fall by the Sword, by the Famine,
and by the Pestilence: Verse the 13th, And you shall know that I am the Lord,
when their slain Men shall be among their Idols: Verse the 14th, So will I
stretch mine Hand upon them, and make their Land waste and desolate, from the
Wilderness unto Diblath, in all their Habitations; and they shall know that I
am the Lord.

I had almost forgot Cauda in the 10th, in that humane sign Aquarius; which
shows, that Rulers, Great Men and Landlords shall be very Injurious and
Tyrannical over their Subjects, Servants and Tenants, and shall afflict, tax
and grind their Faces beyond common humanity and honesty; and Tradesmen will
devise ways in their Trades to cozen and cheat their Neighbors; and the Chief
Rulers shall have Crosses and Troubles, and perhaps some of their Honors
ecclipsed; and still all this shall be carried on by a cloak and show of
Friendship, and that by some She Counsel: and all these things will fall in
particular upon those places which are under the signs Leo and Aquarius;
perhaps Tartaria, Muscovia, Aethiopia, Media, Italy, Damasco, Bohemia and Rome
in particular.

England! I could say something to thee too, but it is no great matter whether
I do or not, since thou do not care for hearing it.

Now, as to the Diseases this half year, they are many, and are signified by
Mars in the 6th, in Libra, and Venus lady thereof, who is posited in the tenth
in Aquarius, both a rial signs; thus Venus being opposed by Saturn and Jupiter,
who are with two notable fixed Stars of the nature of Saturn and Mars, then by
consequence it must be Pains or Swellings in the Legs and Knees, occasioned
from some cold cause, with violent Pains in the Head and Heart, also
Afflictions in the Reins and Kidneys either by Stone or Gravel lodged in those
parts, and consequently pains in the Bladder, with a hot Urin; nay in this Case
we may expect the French Pox to be very frequent, and chiefly to those Persons
which are of the Nature of Mars and Venus; and besides, we may justly fear the
Plague, or some other Epidemical Disease equivolent, too near approaching; for
Mars in Librae signifies Diseases occasioned by Corruption of Blood through
Chollar, as the Pestilence, Burning Feavours, Tertian and Quotidian Agues,
Megrim, Carbuncles and Plague Sores; Burnings, Scaldings, Ringworms, ^listers,
Yellow Jaundise, Bloody Flux, Fistula's, Shingles, Calentu^es, Small Pox,
Meazles, and all Diseases of Chollar. Let no man think that I predict these
things positively; for the Heavens show only natural Inclinations, not positive
Actions; therefore, if we bend our Wills to serve the true God, and strive to
taste of the Cup of Repentance, we need not to fear but that the Lord will
remove the bitter Cup far from us, which he has so long forewarned us of, as
has been plainly seen by our mortal Eyes, as by Three Suns, Ships and Armies
Fighting in the Air, likewise two Dreadful Comets, Fiery Darts, and great
Meetings of the supetiour Stars, besides many Ecclipses of the Sun and Moon,
some of them being Total, and near Centural too.

IN the next place, I shall proceed to the Judgment of the Autumnal half year,
which this year begins September 12-14 Hours; 58 Minutes past Noon, as may be
seen by the Calculation at large.

Time. Long. Apog. Epoch. s. d. m. s. s. d. m. s. Years 1600. 9. 20. 55. 2. 3.
5. 44. 8. 80. 36. 16. 1. 22. 10. 2. 11. 29. 31. 20. 2. 4. August. 7. 29. 30. 44
41. Days 11. 10. 50. 32. Hours 15. 36. 57. Min. 44. 1. 48. Mid. lodge 6. 2. 3.
0. 3. 7. 9. 3. Apo. sub. 3. 7. 9. 3. Anom. Res. 2. 24. 53. 57. equa sub. 0. 2.
3. 0. place. 6. 0. 0. 0. Viz. in 0. 0. 0.

The FIGURE follows.

ad and,, ad and September. 13. 2. hou. 58 min. mane, 1683: Lat. 51. 32. Londini.


A judicious Eye may perceive by this Position, that all things at the present
seem to be at a stand, and yet many close and secret Designs are hatching, if
not P^ots contriving; for all the angles are fixed, and the Planets themselves
subterranean, and no less than five of them much debilitated: Jupiter is in his
detriment, and Venus in her fall, and both squared by Mars, who is in
opposition to Gemini, London's Ascendent, which portends much Sorrow and
Affliction to the people in general* as well in England, as in foreign parts.
But what these Changes shall be, I am not able to divine; therefore I shall
leave it to swift-winged Time to unfold the Mystery: Yet to wind the strings a
little higher, and that without Injury to Astrology or any man's Opinion, I
conclude, that the Actions and Affairs of States and Kingdoms will be eminent
and considerable in many places of Europe, chiefly in Spain, Rome, Italy,
Holland, France, Hungary and Bohemia, and in many more places too tedious for
me here to relate. This position threatens them with Wars, Bloodshed, Mutanies,
Commotions of Arms, and with many strange and unnatural Diseases, etc. Besides,
I perceive Mars to be Lord of the 9th, which is the House of Religion, which
seems unto me as if he had a mind to turn Preacher; a pretty Fellow to make a
Parish Priest on? And besides, Saturn in the ascendant, just leaving the sign
Leo, and entering into Virgo; the great Dignity of Mercury, does inform me that
the great Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter does begin to operate, yet but very
Slowly, for within some few months Saturn becomes Retrograde and so enters into
Leo again, therefore I do believe we shall not see its effects in a full
measure until the year 1686. yet I do fear the plague or some other epidemical
distemper long ere that time. God of his mercy divert his Judgments and send
them far from us, even to the Remote parts of the earth, for Saturn in the
ascendant does much trouble, perplex and disturb the hearts of many persons
with Terrors and fears, but the moon having dignities in the Eleventh, and she
defluxing from a sextil of Saturn and applying to a sextil of Jupiter and Venus
does show that many will labor to secure themselves and their Friends too; and
truly their labor will be very great, for the Moon is in her fall, and in that
Treacherous sign Scorpio, which makes me much to Fear, that many of them will
be but pretended Friends. And to conclude, Mercury being disposer of Jupiter
and Venus, and he sextil of Mars, does show many Pamphlets and Libels shall be
dispersed Abroad, on purpose to Disturb and Perplex the Hearts and Minds of
good honest well meaning Persons, who do strive to Settle and Compose all
former Difference, but let those ill confused Agents look to it, for the Devil
never brings them into a Praemunire, but he leaves them there to work their own
Redemption. And so I shall proceed to the consideration of the Ecclipses this
year. Thus three times will the Glorious Lamps of Heaven be deprived of their
Light, viz. Once the Sun and Twice the Moon, the first is of the Sun on January
the 17th, near three a Clock Afternoon Visible, it falls in the first face of
Aquary, it causes public Sorrow and Sadness: The second is of the Moon on
the first of February, about three Afternoon Invisible, it falls in the last
face of Leo: This incites the People and Armies, to new Actions and Attempts of
War. The third and last Eclipse is likewise of the Moon, which falls on July
the 28th; at eight a Clock in the Morning Invisible, this falls in the second
face of Aquary, which portends much hurt both to the Fruits and Seeds of the
Earth; and that perticularly to those Places under the Lunations Ecclipsed;
which you may read at large in my very good friend Mr. Cooleys Clavis of
Astrology, page the 92, and 93, etc.

And so I shall proceed, to the consideration of the figure of the Suns ingress
into Aries, for the year 1684. beginning March the 9th, 1 hour 57 minutes past
noon, as it does appear by this following Calculation.

Time. Long. Apog. By the Rodolphin Tables, etc. Epoch. s. d. m. s. s. d. m. s.
Years 1600. 9. 20. 55. 2. 3. 5. 44. 8. 80. 36. 16. 1. 22. 10. 3. 11. 29. 17.
00. 3. 4. February 1. 28. 9. 11. 10. Days 9. 8. 52. 15. Hours 2. 4. 56. Min.
59. 2. 26. Mid. lodge. 11. 27. 57. 27. 3. 7. 9. 33. Apo. sub. 3. 7. 9. 33. Anom.
Res. 2. 20. 47. 53. equa ad. 0. 2. 2. 33. place. 6. 0. 0. 0. Viz. in 0. 0. 0.

The FIGURE follows.

ad and, ad, March the 9th, 1 hours, 57 mi. past noon, 51. 32.


The Angles of this figure are all fixed, and Saturn is in the ascendant
Retrograde with a notable fixed Star, viz. Corleonis, and applies to a time of
Mars, by his Retrograde motion who is posited in the 9th, in Conjunction with
Venus, who is Ruler of the Mid-heaven, upon which position I Judge his Holiness
feels himself begin to Decline, yea, both he and his whole Dominions; for
Saturns long transit through the sign Leo, besides his t^iple Conjunction with
Jupiter in the same, makes him begin to look about him, and he finds it the
best way to make Friends with his neighboring Nations, as England, France,
Germany, Polonia, Denmark, Palestine, Naples, Syria, Burgundy, and many more
places which are under the sign Aries, as may be seen by his application to the
time of Mars in this figure, but all this will not do; for Saturns continuance
almost three years in the sign Leo, will show it is di^e effects to those places
under that Constellation and it is opposite sign Aquary, therefore Rome once more
I forewarn thee, to prepare thy self to entertain sho^^s of Judgment, for thou
have taken delight in spilling of Blood; and now ere long thou may live to
drink it, for as thou have been a Persecutor of the People of God, in due time
thou may and must look to be called to an Account. And besides, Saturn in
the ascendant, with Corleonis, and there weak and much debilitated, Denotes
mischief and trouble to People in their proper Persons, also strange
Infirmities, with many Vexations and Misfortunes, and that particular to those
Places under the signs Leo and Aquary, which you may read in Mr. Coleys Clavis
of Astrology, page the 92 etc. Therefore I shall forbear reciting any
particular place, but proceed in further consideration of the figure, as thus,
Jupiter in the second according to the Rules of Art, does promise increase of
fortune to the People in General, and that they should Enjoy the Fruits of the
Earth, and Reap their Crops in due season, and my reason is this, because
Jupiter is in Virgo, a sign of the Earthly Triplicity, but considering Jupiter
is in his Detriment, and Mercury much Debilitated, who is his disposer, and
applies to his Opposition, Mercury being Lord of the 11th likewise, Therefore I
Judge that many Persons who are put in place of great Trust, and though they be
counted worth Thousands, will turn Bankrupts, and so Deprive and Defraud the
Widow and the Fatherless of their proper Rights: But considering the Moon is a
general Significator of the common People, and she posited in the Mid-heaven in
her Exaltation, and no ways Impedited but in sextil of Mercury, and applying to
a trine of Jupiter, Therefore I Judge that we in England shall be in a Good and
Prosperous Condition, and Enjoy our Libertys, and that we should be in good
Esteem and Credit with our Superiors and Governors; but I must tell you by
the way, that Cauda in the sixth, and Saturn Lord thereof in the Ascendant, does
foreshow Strange and Unwholesom Ai^, which may cause many Prodigious Diseases
both to Man and Beast, as Violent afflictions at the Heart, Weakness in the
Knees, Pains in the Back, Melancholy Fears and Grief, a Decay or Consumption in
the Reins and Inward parts, also Corruption of the Blood, Black Jaundis,
Palsy, Vain fears, Gouts of all sorts, and many Strange and Unheard of
Distempers: Neither shall we be free from many Open Enemies, striving to Oppose
and Disturb the Government, with many strange Reports from several parts beyond
the Seas, as may be seen in the Figure. Mars in the 9th, shows dangers in
Travail both by Sea and Land, as sudden Shipwracks, occasioned by several
Storms and Tempests, and many of our Ships Plundered by Py^ats; for Carden
says, if Mars be posited in a fie^y sign, great heat follows Burning of
Houses, with great Lightnings and Wars; Example that great Fire in Wapping, in
82. Which was Predicted by me in my Almanac the same Year; at which time Mars
was in Aries, as here he is now. But I judge much of this Evil will be abated
this Year; for the Sun and Venus Beautifies the Ninth house, as much as Mars
deforms it, therefore hope the best. And besides Venus ties the sword of Mars
from doing much damage, though she be in her Detriment; for Venus is Venus
still, let her be where she will: Yet Venus and the Sun in the 9th, Usually
shows Men of Religious orders, to Flight and Remove from one place and house to
another: And again I am apt to believe, that Men shall Dream true Dreams; and
perform many long Journeys with Safety, and Profit, and Gain thereby; and that
they should be lovers of the Law both of God and Man: and esteem of all good
Learning, and strive to be Virtuous: And besides Soldiers should be very
Succesful, and perform many notable Exploits, and overcome their Enemies, and
gain good Esteem and Honor thereby. And my reason is this, because Mars is so
Strong in his own Essential Dignities, and so well supported by Venus, etc. In
the next place I shall give you an account of the Luminaries Ecclipsed this
Year: Four times will the Heavenly Lamps be deprived of their Glorious Light
viz. twice the Sun and as often the Moon; the first will be an Eclipse of the
Sun, which falls on the sixth day of January, about six at night Invisible, it
falls in the last face of Capricorn: it denotes Famine and Tumultary motions of
Princes. The second Eclipse is of the Moon, and it falls on June the
seventeenth, at three of the clock in the Morning, in the first face of
Capricorn, and Visible; this denotes Suggestions among Men, and Untimely Death
or Mischief to some Illustrious and Noble Man. The third will be an Eclipse of
the Sun, on July the second, about three of the clock Afternoon, Visible to us
in England, and almost Total, for above two thirds of the Suns body will be
darkened, it falls in the last face of Cancer, this denotes Sedicious
Hidropical Diseases, and causes Pestilent and grievous Mortalities, and
causes Winds and alterations of the Weather, which much troubles the Air; it
also dries up Rivers and Fountains, likewise it denotes the Death of some
great Person or Ruler. The fourth and last Eclipse is of the Moonr it falls on
the eleventh day of December, at eleven at night Visible, it happens in the
first face of Cancer, this causes Wars and Innundations or Overflowing of the
Sea banks, etc. In Mr. Cooleys Clavis of Astrology, you may find what places
are most likely to Suffer and Feel the effects of these Ecclipses, which is
Scotland, Holland, Burgundy, Saxony, Granado, Zeland, Prusia, Hasia, Macedonia,
Oxford, Guant, etc.

JJudgment Upon That great and Famous Eclipse of the Sun, 1684, Wednesday, 2d
July 2 hours 40 minutes afternoon, at which Time, about two thirds of the Suns
body will be darkened from our sight etc.

The Sun Ecclipsed July the 2d, 2 Hours 40 past noon, 1684. and,, ad, etc.


The Sun and Moon have obtained the Administration or Ruling of the Heavens,
the Sun is Lord of all Elementary Virtue, and the Moon by Virtue of the
glorious Sun, is Mistress of Generation, Increase or Decrease. Hence A^bumasor
says, that by the Sun and Moon Life is Infused into all things; by him so many
glorious Lamps of Heaven do shine, by him the Elements stand, the Winds blow,
the Plants flourish, living Creatures have sense: Which therefore Orpheus calls
the Enlivening Eyes of the Heavens, the Sun gives light to all things of it
self, and gives it Plentifully to all things, not only in the Heaven and Air,
but Earth and Deep, he produces the Day here and the Night there, here it is
fair Weather, by and by Thunder, Storms and Lightning, he passes into Waters,
then into Hail, being ever one and the same Artifict, of six hundred Arts, he
paints the Clouds with Azure color, Clothes the tops of the Mountains with
Gold, what ever Creatures are either in the Heavens or in the Earth, all of
them do love the Sun riseing, Nature being Guide: It is the property of all
Living Creatures to rejoice with the Light and Refreshment of the Sun;
whatsoever Good we have, as Jamblicus says, we have it from the Sun alone, or
from it through other things, therefore it is called Fons vitae the Fountain of
Life, or lux Mundi the Light of the World, or Oculus Mundi the Eye of the
World, or Anama Mundi the Soul of the World: Hence therefore many of the
Platonists placed the Soul of the World chiefly in the Sun, and Heraclitus
calls the Sun the Fountain of Celestial light, and hence the Ancient
Naturalist called the Sun the very heart of Heaven, so it sends forth its rays
on all sides, as it were a Spirit through all things, distributing Life Sense
and Motion to the very Universe, and it sits as King in the middle of the other
Planets, excelling all in Light Greatness and Fairness; Enlightening all,
distributing Virtue to them to dispose Inferior Bodies, and Regulating and
Disposing of their Motions, so that from thence their motions, are Daily or
Nightly Southern or Northern, Oriential or Occidential, Direct or Retrograde,
and as it does by its Light drive away all the Darkness of the Night, so also
all Powers of Darkness, which we read of in Job, as soon as Morning appears
they think of the Shadow of Death: Thus the Sun is the very Author of seasons,
from whence, Day and Year, Cold and Heat, and all other Qualities of Seasons,
as Ptolomy says, when the Sun comes unto the place of any Star, it stirs up
the power thereof, so as with Mars heat, with Saturn cold; and it disposes
even the spirit and mind of man; from hence its said by Homer, and approved by
Aristole, that there are in the mind such like motions, as the Sun the Prince
and Moderator of the Planets, every day brings to us: Therefore shall we then
say, or be so Innocent of the Heavenly Ordinances, as to deny this great
Luminary any Influence upon Humane and Mundene Affairs, or to be so stupid, as
to think that when this great Light is obscured from us, that there is nothing
thereby signified unto Mortal Men?

God Created the two great Lights, viz. the Sun and Moon for Signs and Seasons,
therefore the Moon has a certain natural Mutability, whereby she easily
Cummunicates unto us, the sense of other Stars, etc.

Now let us come to the intended Subject, viz an Eclipse of the Sun, which is
very great; whence we may ex^ect as great Accidents or Effects to follow: Such
a face of Heaven has not been seen since the Creation. All the Planets are in
the 9th house, viz, four in Cancer with Caput, and three in Virgo: Jupiter has
great dignities in Cancer, and here is no less then four Planets beholds him,
by a sextil Aspect from the same; Sure this must show some notable Work
Impending concerning Religion: But before I shall pass my Judgment at length
upon this vast Eclipse of the Sun; I shall consider three things.

First, unto what Region, Kingdom, City or People, the effects of this Eclipse
shall appertain.

Secondly, The Time when the Effects shall begin, and how long Time the Events
of this Eclipse shall continue?

Thirdly, What events may be expected from the Eclipse, etc.

Now in regard this Eclipse is made in Cancer, therefore I shall judge its
effects to fall upon Scotland, Granado, Burgundy, Holland, Zeland, Prusia,
Numidia, Africa, Bithinia, Calchis, Carthage, Constantinople, Tunis, Venice,
Genoa, Lucas-pisa, Millain, Vincentia, Berne, York, St. Andrews in Scotland,
Lubeck, Magdeburg, Wittenburg, Gorlick, Macedonia, Illyria, Thracia, Bosina,
Albania, Oxford, Guant, India, etc.

The next thing we have to consider, is the time when this Eclipse will begin
to Opperate, and how long the effects may continue: now in regard it is made in
the ninth Angle: Therefore I judge the effects will begin about eight months
from the time of the Eclipse, and will Continue two Years, or thereabouts, etc.

The Third and last thing is, what the effects or event of this Eclipse may
be, as thus considering the sign where this great defect of the Sun does
happen, to be one of the Cardinal signs, and our summer Solstice: Therefore it
signifies alteration of Air, and of Offices, or Places, or Government, it
likewise presages a Rot or Consumption of the vulgar sort of People, with
Rumors, Seditiors, and expectations of Wars, Destruction of Fish and
Water-soul, great Innundations and overflowings of the Sea Banks, it likewise
procures a Rotteness or Corruption in the Fruits when they are gathered,
occasioning Surfeits and Sicknesses to such as eat them, as Hydropical
Diseases, which may cause Petulent and grievous Mortalities, it likewise
foreshews the Diseases of France, Naples, Spain, and England, and indeed all
the World; Let them that are inclined to Venery have a care, again it foreshews
Sea fights, Long and Dangerous Navigations, with strange kind of Storms and
Tempests at Sea, and much Loss to the Generous and Industrious Merchant, with
thundering Noises and Uproars about Religion, as well at Home as Abroad, and
that by all sorts of People from the Highest to the Lowest Degree; for so many
Planets in the 9th, in Conjunction in Cancer, and all in sextil to Jupiter, who
is exalted therein; can intimate no Less then Great and Fierce disputes about
Religious matters, besides Mercurys application to the body of Mars, by a
retrograde motion, who suddenly transits the degree of the Eclipse, shows that
many strange kind of Paper conflicts shall be dispersed abroad, on purpose to
incite Men to Quarrel, for here is a Violent Storm Impending, and Woe to those
People in Europe, on whom it does fall; for as a blow with a stick stirs up the
madness of a Dog which before lay Asleep, so does the Coelistial Harmony
disclose Virtues lying in the Elements, and stirs them up, strengthens them,
and makes them manifest, and as I may say, produces that into Act, which
before was only in Power. And thus to conclude I judge, that Mars's sudden
transit through the Degree of the Eclipse, will cause extraordinary sultry
blasts, and great heat, hot pestilent Winds, pestiferous and infectious
Thunder, Lightnings, Whirlewinds, immesurable Droughts, with strong kind of
Weather, and variety of it; and besides, men will be inclined to Arms, and to
violate National Leagues, Deceitful under the species of Religion; for Mars
hastes to a Sextil of Jupiter, who is a natural significator thereof; besides,
Jupiter, Venus, Mars and Mercury are much debilitated in the Figure of this
Eclipse, which much verifieth our Judgment, according to this following
Aphorism, Notabiliter infortunantur, planeta, per retrogradationem,
combustionem, peregrinationem, detrimentum, and casum: Planets are extremely
made unfortunate when they are either Retrograde, Combust, Perogrine in their
Detriment or Fall. By how much the more this Aphorism is verified in our
present Eclipse, and Vernal Ingress, by so much more the greater Evils may be
expected; for in our Vernal Ingress Saturn was peregrine in his detriment and
retrograde, and in the Figure of our Eclipse we have Mars in his fall, from
hence we may expect one Mischief upon the neck of another; and in regard this
Eclipse does happen in a watery sign, viz. Cancer, the great Dignities of the
Moon and Jupiter, it may denote much Contention upon Water or the Seas, about
the Right of Fishing, either of our own Nation, the Hollander, or some other
Northern People; as also, in regard Jupiter has significations of Laws, and
Rights and Privileges political, there may be doubted much Controversy to
arise about the Privileges of Fishing; but in regard Jupiter is in sextil to
this Eclipse, therefore I judge the Dred will be more than the Harm, as to
that, although there will not want sufficient Endeavors to the contrary: but
since Jupiter is Ruler of the Law, which is grounded upon pure Reason, and of
it self is the most equal and most just Law, that ever did appear in any
Nation, giving every man his Right, and Trial by his Equals; herein we allow no
Abuse: and so I shall conclude with the Poet, -- As in great Haste.
What makes the Golden Stars to march so Fast?
What makes the Moon sometimes to mask her Face?
The Sun also, as if in some Disgrace?


You that have Eyes to see the Stars, and strange Signs in the Heavens, have
more Reason to cry out with Admiration than Dyonisius Areopagita, who seeing
the strange Eclipse of the Sun and Moon at the instant Hour of our Savior's
Passion, said, Aut Deus natura patitur aut mundi, machina dissoluitur: Either
the God of Nature suffers, or else the Frame of the World is dissolved. So much
from the great Eye of Heaven, etc.

IN the next place I shall proceed to Judgment upon the Scheme of the Sun's
Ingress into Ares, commencing March the 9th, 1685. 7 hours, 42 minutes past
noon; as may be seen by the following Calculation, by the Rudolphin Tables, etc.

Time. Long. Apog. Epoch. s. d. m. s. s. d. m. s. Years 1600. 9. 20. 55. 2. 3.
5. 44. 8. 80. 36. 16. 1. 22. 10. 4. 1. 49. 4. 7. February 1. 28. 9. 11 10.
Days 8. 7. 53. 7. Hours 8. 19. 43. Min. 48. 1. 58. Mid. lodge 11. 27 57. 27 3.
7. 10. 35. Apo. sub. 3. 7. 9. 33. Anom. Res. 8. 20. 46. 55. equa ad. 0. 2. 2.
3^. place. 0. 0. 0. 0. Viz. in 0. 0. 0.


The Warlike Planet Mars does make a tedious transit through the Sign Sagitarius
this year, viz. complete seven months; Sagitarius is the great Dignities of
Jupiter: I hope the Soldier does not intend to turn Preacher; Mars is all for
pulling down Religion, and not for promoting it. Men of desperate Fortune, have
base and unlucky Designs. Let Mars command the needy Soldier, and Saturn the
superstitious Sectary Count yman. Look for an End of our Troubles at Dooms Day.
Oh! who can endure this factious Crew of Raschals, who pretend Religion and
Conscience, and yet neither Fear God, nor Honor their King: But I shall leave
them, till their Hypocrisy is detected, and the measure of their Iniquity at
the height; but I hope we shall not suffer them long in their Designs, God
being on our sides.

Here follows the Sheme of the Sun's Ingress into Ares.

ad, and and ad, and, ad, ad and, lat. 51. 31.


In this figure all the Angles are moveable, Jupiter Angular in the ascending
part of Heaven, and Venus is in her exaltation, in conjunction with Mercury,
and in strong Reception with Jupiter by house, which significations according
to the rules of Art, shows that we should enjoy both Peace and Plenty, and that
the People should be succesful in all their Undertakings and Enterprises; and
that they should be fortunate on every side, Healthful in their Bodies, and that
they should be lovers of the law both of God and Man, and that they should be
desirous to search after many divine Mysteries, and that those which belong to
Theology and the Law should be had in great and high esteem, as Judges,
Counselors, and Men of all sorts of Religious Orders, so you must note Jupiter
signifies, all Judges, Counselors, all Ecclesiastical Men, both Priest and
Levites, Chancellors, Lawers, or those that follow the Law, from the Highest to
the Lowest, all Scholars and Studdents in general, and in this figure of the
Suns ingress, he does in part signify the common People, therefore their
conditions should be very Prosperous, Good and Happy, dureing this spring
Quarter: but in regard the Moon is thus Afflicted by the body of disaffected
Saturn; Therefore I shall judge the condition of the common People to be but
very Mean and Ordinary; yet the position of Jupiter in the ascendant, in an
aireal sign, shows a pleasant Spring, with a temperate Air, and very healthful
to the People in general, and besides Venus being in her exaltation and in the
5th house; shows advantage unto Women, and that they shall generally be free
from Infirmities and Mischiefs, they shall love and delight in the society of
their Husbands: Shall be Fruitful and easily conceive and bring Forth, the
People shall generally Thrive and be Prosperous, shall delight themselves in
Recreations, Sports, Feastings, Mirth and Jollities, and all Pleasures
whatsoever; and because Venus is in a watery sign, it shows plenty of Fish, and
Rain in due season; but in regard Venus applies to a square of Mars in the
second; I judge much of this will be abated. Now in the next place I shall say
something concerning the position of Saturn in the eleventh; near the body of
the Moon, she being Lady of the tenth, and he within few degrees of the square
of Mars, who is lord of the 7th, it being the 10th from the Medium Coeli, such
positions as these do oftentimes destroy Leagues and Friendship between Kingdom
and Kingdom; and it is much to be feared, there will not want strange and
strong endeavors to set us at odds with some other Nation or Nations, or they
with us; but the Heavens show only Natural Inclinations, not Positive actions.
Saturn is unfortunately placed in the eleventh, which signifies that his cold
and evil Influence, will spread it self over the whole Kingdom, under the sign
of his position, and that the King or chief Ruler of that Kingdom or People,
should remove his Habitation from one house to another, do little good, and yet
will lay or impose heavy Taxes or Impositions upon the People, and shall not
perform what is Just in their Esteem: Now this position is in Virgo, therefore
it relates perticularly to Lions, Paris, Basil, Corinthia, Achaia, Greece,
Crete, Babylon, Assyria, Jerusalem, Gallia; the Dukedom of Athens, is hereby
threatened with some kind of Penury, or Want, or Scarcity in their Provisions:
Mercury is ruler of the 9th house, and Venus is lady of the ascendant, and they
apply to a square of Mars, and to an opposition of disaffected Saturn in the
11th house, the 9th house signifies Religion, and all affairs appertaining to
the Church, whence we may rationally conclude, this is the antecedent or
forerunner of many Divisions, high Contentions, much Discord, and in all
probability may cause Wars, Bloodshed, and commotions of Arms in many places
of Europe, as Spain, Morocco, Mesina, Toledo, Mutina, for Mars in Sagitarius
applies to the square of Saturn, which denotes many Thefts, Murders, Rapines,
Robberys, and Cozening and Cheating of one another, those also that are
entrusted with Moneys or Goods of any ones, shall be False and Deceitful, and
the People generally shall be driven to want, and be perplexed with Taxations
and Tributes, and those in particular under the sign Virgo and Sagitarius, Mars
may well signify the male contented Soldier, and Saturn the melancholy
Countryman. And in many Countries there will be much Heart-burning between the
Martialist and the plain Countryman, with much Fraud, Lying, Deceit, Juggling,
and strange Controversies may arise, with high Contentions and much Discord,
with sharp Conflicts, managed by different Judgments or Opinions, and my
reason is this, Venus and Mercury are in conjunction in the house of Jupiter,
and are applying to square of Mars in Sagitarius, and likewise to the
opposition of Saturn, who is in the dignities of Mercury Lord of the 9th:
Besides Jupiter and Venus are in reception by house, Jupiter being a
significator of Religion, but much of this evil will be abated, for the Sun
applys to a trine of Mars, the Sun being in part Lord of the 10: Therefore I
judge some wise Prince will labor to take up the matter.

IN the next place I shall proceed to the consideration of the Summer Quarter,
which begins June the 10th, 10 hours, 43 minutes past noon, as will be made
appear by the calculation at large.

Time. Long. Apog. This following Calculation according to all the rest, is
done by the Rudolphin Tables: the best extant in my opinion, let all men enjoy
theirs likewise, etc. Epoche. s. d. m. s. s. d. m. s. Years 1600 9. 20. 55. ^3.
3. 5. 44. 8. 80. 36. 16. 1. 22. 10 4. 1. 49. 4. 7. May 4. 28. 49. 58. 29. Days
9. 8. 52. 15. Hours 11. 27. 6. Min. 38. 1 3^. Mid. Long. 2. 29. 44. 21. 3. 7.
10. 54. Apog. sub. 3. 7. 10. 54. Anom. Res. 11. 22. 33. 27. Equa ad 00. 00 15.
40 place 00 00 00

The FIGURE follows, etc.

ad and ad and ad, Lat. 51. 32. Londini, 1685.


In this figure the angles are partly fixed and partly moveable, and the
Planets all indifferent well seated Mars excepted; who is posited in the 9th
retrograd which shows many ^igh disputes still concerning Religion, both at
home and abroad; besides many losses to the generous and industrious Merchant,
from several parts beyond the Sea, as Spain, Dalmatia, Hungary, etc. Aquarius
ascends, the Moon is posited therein, and in trine of Venus and Mercury who are
in conjunction with the Dragons head, in Gemini, Londons Ascendant: The Moon is
likewise hasting to a trine of the Sun, and Venus to his conjunction, besides
Saturn, Venus, Mercury, and the Moon are in reception with each other. The Sun
is likewise going to a sextile of Saturn, which in my opinion portends nothing
but Peace and Tranquillity to us, especially to London, the Motropolitan City of
England, yet notwithstanding there will be strange kind of endeavors used to
set us at varience amongst our selves, and that by a factious crew of Villains,
who make it their business to disturb and oppose the Government, as does appear
by the figure, for no sooner then the Moon is parted from the trine of the Sun,
but she meets with the square of Mars, who opposes Gemini. But agunt non
cogunt, the heavens incline, and not compel, therefore let us pray to God, to
direct the hearts of all those which sit at the stern of Government, and let us
sit down in peace and be contented with what God has given us; for we enjoy
that which many Nations would be glad to see, for that tripple conjunction of
Saturn and Jupiter in Leo, does cause tranquilitys to us in England, when many
other Nations do labor under its dire effects. Thus goes fortunes wheel
about, while one is a getting up, another is going down, some are for one
interest and some for another. Spain I pity thy condition, for thou who wast
formerly the mistress of the World, art now become Sick and Faint, and thy
relief is weak; seek out for a ^ood Physician in time, for thy strength decays,
and has done ever since the year 1683. a time fresh in memory, etc. Here are
several mysteries in this figure, if I durst unfold them; but for sear of
giving an offense I shall pass them by, and give you an account of what
diseases are most likely to happen this Quarter, etc.

Thus the Moon is lady of the six, and posited in the ascendant in Aquary,
which foreshews Surfeits, Rheum in the Eyes, Worms, Rotten Coughs, Convu^^ion,
Dropsies in the Legs, Measles, and many more cold watery Humors, which has
infected the Blood, and in all probability the Smallpox, because the Moon
applies to a square of Mars in Sagitarius; hold, I had almost forgot Jupiter in
Libra, who is lord of the 10th, 11th, and Intercepted sign in the ascendant,
which shows great love and unity between the Superiors and Commons of this
land, yet still complaint for the want of trade and monys and that not only by
the common People, but by those of the highest Degree and Quality, as may be
seen by Cauda in the 11: which in my opinion causes great expense and loss of
Estate, to those belonging to the Church or Church Livings, etc.

IN the next place I shall give you some small judgment upon the figure of the
Suns entrance into Libra, which commences this year September the 12th, 2
hours, 31 minutes past noon, as the following Calculation does express, etc.

Time. Long. Apog. Epoch. s. d. m. s. s. d. m. s. Years 1600. 9. 20. 55. 2. 3.
5. 44. 8. 80. 36. 16. 1. 22. 10. 4. 1. 49. 4. 7. August 7. 29. 30. 44 41. Days
11. 10. 50. 32. Hours 3. 7. 24. Min. 17. 42. Mid long 6. 2. 2. 50. 3. 7. 11. 6.
Apo. sub. 3. 7. 11. 6. Anom. Res. 2. 24. 51. 41. equa sub. 0. 2. 2. 50. place.
6. 0. 0. 0. Viz. in 0. 0. 0.

The FIGURE follows.

ad and, ad ad, and ad lat. 51 32, Londi.


In this scheme of the Suns ingress into Libra, Saturn and Mars rules the first
and tenth, and Venus and the Moon, the 4th and 7th: All the planets are above
the Earth, and the Moon and Venus are in their own houses: Mars in his
exaltation in the sign ascending, and Saturn lord thereof in Virgo, in the 8th;
in reception with his disposer; besides here are no less then three planets in
conjunction in Libra, with part of fortune in the 9th, viz. Jupiter, Venus, and
Mercury, and the Moon applying to a square of them all: This Position shows
some high dispute concerning Religion, which now is in its Zenith of Power and
Glory; and does Flourish like a flourishing Bough, which never fades; and now,
and not till now, our Land begins to Thrive and Prosper after many a hot
dispute. And now the People begin to take delight in themselves, and Love and
Obey their Superiors. It likewise shows great Profit and Advantage to the
Industrious Merchant, from several parts beyond the Seas; and probable the
arrival of some Embassodour from foreign parts, or at leastwise great news
from the remote parts, etc. Besides the people should thrive, by removeing from
on Place or House to another; and men should love and delight in the Law both
of God and Man, Moral and Divine; and should esteem of all good learning, and
strive to be virtuous, they should likewise be desirous of each others Society,
and delight in all honest and good Learning, and apply their minds to find out
hidden Secrets and Mysteries, and should perform money long Journeys with safety
and pleasure, etc. This position does likewise show a healthful Air, with
great profit by small Cattle, and Servants, who will prove true and trusty to
their Masters: Besides the Moon in the 7th, shows that many Marriages should be
performed this Quarter, and those very Eminent; and Men should be fortunate in
Women, and Gain and Profit much by them: But the lord of the ascendant in the
8th, who is old Saturn; shows that many ancient People shall make their exit
out of the World this Quarter. And the square of the Sun to Mars who is lord of
the 10th, does show the death of some great martial Person, who lives in great
splendour, but cannot deny Death when he comes. For Sol is lord of the 8th, and
is posited therein and in his fall: Therefore Mars lay by thy sword, and yield
to that Messenger, for it is appointed all men once must Die, etc.

And thus I proceed to the judgment of the Winter Quarter, which happens
December. the 10th, 14 hours, 11 minutes past Noon, as it is explained by this
following Calculation.

Time. Long. Apog. Epoch. s. d. m. s. s. d. m. s. Years 1600. 9. 20. 55. 2. 3.
5. 44. 8. 80. 36. 16. 1. 22. 10. 4. 1. 49. 4. 7. November. 10. 29. 12. 22. 56.
Days 9. 8. 52. 15. Hours 15. 36. 57. Min. 6. 15. Mid. long 9. 0. 15. 17. 3. 7.
11. 21. Apo. sub. 3. 7. 11. 21. Anom. Res. 5. 23. 3. 56. equa sub. 0. 0. 15.
17. place. 9. 0. 0. 0. Viz. in 0. 0. 0.

The FIGURE follows.

, ad and,, and ad, Lat. 51. 3^. Londini,


The angles of this figure are all common, and all the Planets are Sub^errane,
and Mercury is lord of the two principle angles, viz, the Ascendant and
Mid-heaven, and Jupiter is ruler of the north and west Angles. Saturn is
unfortunately placed in the ascendant, and in square of the Sun and Mercury
lord thereof, this gives ^ay for the conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter to
spread its effects all over the universe, and besides here are many plotting
counsels on foot, still contriveing how and which way they may bring their
wicked designs to pass, for Mercury is lord of the ascendant, and the Sun of
the 12th, and they are seperateting from the square of disaffected Saturn, who
is naturally evil and corrupt, Self ended, Covetous, and Malicious, one who
has been an underground worker this many years, in contriveing damned Plots,
to the ruin and subvertion of Nations: But since Mercury is in sextil to Mars,
and hasts to a sextil of Jupiter, who is in strong reception with Mars by
house, and because the Sun hasts to a trine of Mars and Jupiter, and Mars
likewise is applying to a trine of Jupiter himself, and the Moon defluxing from
a trine of Venus, and applying to a sextil of the Sun, and a trine of Mars, and
asextil of Mercury. Therefore I judge that many will labor to secure
themselves and their friends too, as well the Martialist, as the Gown-man.
Therefore look to it Preacher, stand fast Soldiers, since you are about to
unite, and maintain your principals, and have at their seminaries by ghess, for
Venus goes to a square of Jupiter, and Mars to an opposition of Saturn, etc.
The Moon is fortunate in the second, Therefore she promises that men shall
gain and profit, and abound in riches, having plenty of all things, but Saturn
in the ascendant who is lord of the 6th, denotes mischief and troubles to the
people in their proper persons, also many strange infirmities and vexations, to
those under the signs Virgo and Pisces, as you may read in Mr. Lillys Christian
Astrology, page the 96 and 99, etc.

In the next place, I shall give you an account of the Lunations Ecclipsed this
Year, as thus, once the Sun and twice the Moon, the first will be of the Moon,
on the sixth day of June, at six at night Invisible, it falls in the last face
of Sagitarius, it signifies a Plague, Consumption, and great evils to afflict
mankind more then ordinary. The second will be an eclipse of the Sun, on June
the 21th at eight a clock at night, Invisible, it happens in the first face of
Cancer, this signifies a disturbed Air, and strange kind of weather, it
likewise enclines men to Arms, and to violate National Leagues, Deceitfully
under the species of Religion. The third and last is an eclipse of the Moon,
which falls on the 30th of Novem. at eleven at night, it will be Visible total
and centrall, it is celibrated in the second face of Gemini, London's
ascendant, it stirs up Dissensions, Strifes, Seditions amongst those we call
Priests, and all manner of Merchants and Mechanics of every order, or any
quality that is amongst them, deadly hatred, contempt of Laws, neglect of Piety
and holy Dutys does also follow, with much Piracy at sea, and Murders, many
fruitless Treatys and many turbulent Petitions, presented by the people to
their Superiors. All these things will happen to those places under the signs
Gemini, Cancer, and Sagitarius, as Spain, Holland, Scotland, Hungary, Celtica,
Thirronia, Narbon, Colonia, Granado, Burgundy, Zeland, Venice, Genoa, York,
Flanders, Brabant, Sardinia, Arminia, Bruges, Hasford, Montz; London thou may
feel a little too, etc.

IN the next place I shall proceed to the consideration of the figure of the
Suns ingress into Aries, which happens this year, march the 9th, 13 hours, 39
minutes past noon, as it does appear by the calculation at large, etc.

Time. Long Apog. Epoche. s. d. m. s. s. d. m. s. Years 1600 9. 20. 55. 23- 3.
5. 44. 8. 80. 36. 16. 1. 22. 10 5. 11 29 47. 29. 5. 8. Febr 1. 28. 9. 11. 1.
Days 8. 7. 5. 7. Hours 14. 34. 20. Min. 41. 1 41. Mid. Long. 11. 27. 57. 27.
3. 7. 11. 3^. Apog. sub. 3 7. 11. 36. Anom. Res. 8. 20. 45. 51. Equa ad 00 02
02. 3^. place. 00 00 00 00 Viz. 1^ 00 00 00

The FIGURE follows, etc.

March the 10th, 39 past 1 in the morni^g 1686, etc., and ad lat. 51 52,


In this figure of the Suns ingress into Ares, the Angles are moveable and
common, Jupiter and Venus rules the first and tenth, and Mars and Mercury rules
the fourth and seventh. The Moon seperates from a sextil of the Sun, and a
square of Venus, and hasts to a square of Mars, who is posited in Taurus his
detriment, the Moon signifies the common people in general, and Venus women
both Noble and Ignoble, Mars soldiers, Jupiter divinity and law and in part
the common people, being he is lord of the ascendant. No^ in regard the Moon is
so much afflicted by the malevolent square of Mars, who applies to an
opposition of Jupiter in the 11th retrograd, therefore I conceive much loss and
damage to happen to Persons of Dignity and Renown, or such as are employed in
place of great trust, as well those belonging to the Clergy and Law, as the
common People: And since these malevolent configurations are made from fixed
signs. I judge these wicked designs has been a long time a contriving, for
like as a match does lie and smother a long time before it comes to the Train,
even so the sparks of envy lie a long time in the hearts of evil and wicked
Persons, before they break forth, etc. and besides this position threatens our
greater sort of Cattle, with some kind of mortality, which may suppress and
destroy many of them, etc. Mercury is lord of the 9th, and in sextil of Venus,
and Mars hasts to a trine of Jupiter, and an opposition of Saturn, Mercury is
poor and peregrine, yet nimble and full of Eloquence from him all ingenious and
learned Persons were named. The Sun signifies Kings, Princes, and Magistrates,
and he in opposition of disaffed Saturn in the 9th, who signifies Popes, Monks,
Friars, Jesuits, and all Jewish ceremonys; this shows some notable and high
dispute, amongst the grandees of Europe; in and about Religion or Religious
matters, and many of those belonging to the long Robe, found guilty of what is
laid to their charge; yet how fair and seemingly things seem to be carried on,
for friendship and mutual agreement, and yet how many fraudulent designs are in
agitation, near these times; Articles, Covenants and Leagues, controverted in
those Countries, especially subject unto those signs Saturn and Mars are in,
from hence no good can be expected, because both these planets are of Evil
signification to mankind. Saturn denotes Scarcity, Poverty, Penury, Wants, and
Mundene Impoverishments in the common Man's purse, as well as in his Superiors.
likewise many great losses to the Generous and Industrious Merchants,
occasioned by violent storms and tempests, and the retrogradation of Jupiter in
the 11th, in that treacherous sign Scorpio, acquaints great Princes of much
falseness in their allies, much treachery in many of their pretended friends,
Servants, Counselors, Officers in command, both by Sea and Land, besides
these positions signify many needless consultations and debates, also
contradictory Counsels and Disputes, whence little or nothing of good can be
expected to the Public, as will appear in a short time, for turbulent Spirits
will show themselves active to purpose, and that in Ireland, Sweedland,
Polonia, Russia, Nants, Persia, Babylon, Jerusalem, Lions, Paris, Basil,
Greece, Creet, and Assiria. Venus is lady of the 10th, and she applies to the
body of Mars in Taurus her own house, but before she comes to a partial
conjunction, she becomes retrograd.

Then let none trust Fortune, but follow reason,
For oftentimes we see in trust is Treason,
For where the People Hate, and where the Prince Frown,
What Might builds up Discention soon pulls down.
In the next place I shall consider what Diseases are most likely to happen
this half Year, and so I shall conclude. Thus considering the Cusp of the 6th,
to be an arial sign, and Mercury lord thereof, posited in Pisces a watery sign,
and Jupiter lord of the ascendant, being posited in a watery sign. Therefore I
judge that the Diseases this half year, will proceed from Blood and Water,
which may cause the Measles, Smallpox, Pains in the Head, with Weakness in
the Legs and Feet, Gonorrhea, with many violent distempers in the Veins, etc.

In the next place I shall proceed to the consideration of the Autumnal half
year, commenceing septem. the 12th, 1686. 8 hours, 24 minutes past noon, as it
does appear by this following calculation at large, etc.

Time. Long. Apog. Epoche. s. d. m. s. s. d. m. s. Years 1600 9. 20. 55. ^3. 3.
5. 44. 8. 80. 36. 16 1. 22. 10 5. 11 29 47. 29.. 5. 8. August 7. 29. ^0. 11.
41. Days 9. 10. 50. 32. Hours 9. 22. ^^ Min. 10. ^5. Mid. Long.. 6 2. 3. 0. 3.
7. 12 7. Apog. sub. 3. 7. 12. 7 Anom. Res. 2. 24. 50. 53. Equa ad 00. 02. 02.
33. place 6 00 00 00 Viz. in 00 00 00

The FIGURE follows, etc.

, ad and, ad, ad and, and ad, September the 12^h, 8 hours, 24 minutes past
noon, 1686.


The Angles of this figure are partly fixed and partly common, and all the
Planets subteranean, Mercury and Saturn rules the first and tenth, and the Sun
and Jupiter the fou^th and seventh, the City sign ascends, let the figure be
set by any tables extent, bold daring Mars is in square to the same, and he is
lord of the 12th; what more mischievous Plots a contriving still against our
Metropolitan City? Oh how uncertain and unstable the national affairs of this
World at present are? especially those either of active, or rich Princes, any
person though of mean capacity, may perceive by the application of the Sun and
Mercury to the body of Saturn, the actions and consultations of Princes will be
very eminent and considerable this half year; which may cause some fude amongst
them, and in all probability incite them to attempts of War; for Mars his
sudden application to the sextil of Jupiter in Scorpio, shows some treacherous
designs in counsels, which can intimate no less, and besides Mars applies to
the body of Saturn, a notable conjunction in earnest, it is of ill influence
upon all Persons and Places concerned therein; as Austria, Livonia, Caspia,
Thusia, Seres, Sundgavia, Bastrina, Delphinat, Alsatia, Sabandia, Lisbone,
Cajetam, Spiers, Franckfoord, Laudem, France, Germany, Burgundy, Denmark,
Palestine, Polonia, Florence, Sweeden and England, By this position the winds
should blow high, threatening many losses, some by Pyracy, others by Shipwracks,
and the high ways of our Nation pestered with Thieves, from which occasions,
we here of strange Murders, and unusual Robberys, out of houses, in houses in
the western and northern Roads of England, with fearful Divisions, and many
Tumults, much Tergiversation in Counsels, much Treason, high ranting
Pamphlets, dispersing the seeds of Treason; inviting to the Murder of
Magistrates, Plotting, and eminent Martial-men found guilty thereof, yet the
state of England stands firm, and our Foundation rests firm unshaken, but have
we our share in sad news or unwellcome Intelligence? Between this and the close
of the Year, the Aust^ian Cedars shake, some Princes begin to decline. Saturn
is entered into Libra, he entered Libra too in 1657. at which time the Emperor
of Germany departed this life, a sober Prince and of grear Majesty. Therefore I
judge the affliction of Saturn this year 1686. does foreshew that some
Honorable Person of the Austrian Blood, may in the circuit of the year end his
days, near upon that tract of land, or in that country where even he dyed, etc.
The Moon is in sextil of the Sun, and adds to a sextil of Saturn, and Caput is
near the cusp of the ascendant, and Mercury lord thereof applies to the body of
Saturn, who receives him like a noble soul in his exaltation. Saturn is lord of
the 10th, such significations as these shows great unity and love Between the
Superiors and Commons of this Land, yet there is much repining amongst the
common and vulgar sort of People, for such things as are necessary for their
supportment, for Mercury is retrograd and the Moon is near Cauda Draconis, and
is hasting to an opposition of the degrees ascending, etc.

Now the next thing to be considered is what diseases are likely to happen this
half year, as thus, Libra desending on the 6th, and Venus lady thereof posited
in Leo, intimates diseases of Blood and Choler, and Jupiter in the 6th in
Scorpio a watery sign, shows diseases of Blood and Phlegm, and Saturn the Sun
and Mercury in the sign of the 6th, shows diseases of Blood and Melancholy,
thus all things being considered and well weighed in the balance of reason, I
judge that the diseases of this half year will be of compound humors, yet
Blood will most abound, and that to be much corrupted and disordered, whence
may arise many strange kind of Agues and Feavours, likewise Dropsies,
Consumption stoppage of Urine, weakness in the Reins, and afflictions in the
Longs, whence many strange kind of Coughs proceed, etc.

In the next place I shall give you an account of the luminaries ecclipsed this
year; and so I shall conclude, as thus, there is but one eclipse only, and
that is of the Moon, and it falls on the 19th of november, at eleven a clock at
night, and is well worthy the observation of the Ingenious Sons of Urania, it
happens in the first face of the Coelistial-Twinns, near Occulus Tauri, it
begins in the 10th house, and ends in the 9th, Mercury and Jupiter besiege the
Sun, and the ecclipsed Moon is opposed by them all, and that from as violent
fixed Stars as she her self is near; which according to the Doctrine of the
Ancients, threateneth Incursions and Rapines of Enemies, likewise the death of
some Noble and Illustrious Woman, besides many solicitations of Private and
Public things, if not frequent motion of Armies in many places of Europe, etc.

So much for predictions upon the Annual revolutions of the Sun, and Ecclipses
only.

In the next place I shall give you a word or two concerning that tripple
Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, which happened 1682. and 1683. in that regal
sign Leo, it being the great dignitys of the Sun and Jupiter, it was ushered in
by two new Stars which appeared in 1680. and 1682. just such a one as the first
was seen before our Saviors Birth, at which time there was a great conjunction
of Saturn and Jupiter in Pisces, as it does appear by the Rudolphin Tables: it
was in Caesar Augustus his Reign, in whose time the Sybillians were very expert
in the knowledge of this Noble and Heavenly Science; for one Sybillia
Triburtina told the Emperor, that it pointed out a Child born of a Virgin,
which should be greater then he, therefore she exhorted him to worship him, etc.

Histories, Ancient Writers, and Common Experience in former Ages testifies
unto us, that these Signs in the Heaven, as appearance of Comets and Meetings
of the Superior Stars are the assured forerunners of the sterility of the
Earth, Pestilence, Famine, War, alterations of Kingdoms, States and Empires,
Laws and Customs, Winds, Earthquakes, Inundations, extreme Heat and Drought,
grievous Diseases and Infirmities, and such like horrid Evils, likewise Anxiety
and Trouble, Treasons, Treacheries, and the Death of Kings, Nobles, Princes,
Emperors and Powers; who knows but that these unusual Apparitions and Meetings
of the Superior Stars may be the forerunners of the Catastrophe of Rome, for
it can pretend nothing but Tranquillity to us in England, since it is in Trine
to Aries our Ascendant; yet violent and raging Diseases must certainly be
expected, from which I pray Good Lord deliver us, etc.

The Configurations of those Glorious Celestial Bodies, are like Seeds
scattered in the vast Field of Time; and if so, it is a wonder if some of them
do not appear and grow up to Maturity; for most Men do know, and will readily
acknowledge, Superiors do influence and govern Inferiors; and there is an
appointed time and season for every thing under the Sun: Nay, it were
Ridiculous for us to think that the Lodestone should have so much affinity
with the Iron, and the Stars of Heaven should have no affinity with their
fellow Nature below; for even as the Iron receives the Virtue of the
Lodestone, so does our Bodies receive the Good and Evil Influence of those
Celestial and Heavenly Messengers: Therefore I conceive the genuine sense of
this present Conjunction is, That Men's Intentions and Actions will generally
and wholly incline to settle or unsettle the Laws and Constitutions, Customs
and Privileges of Nations; for the Conjunctional Returns of the Superior
Planets into the Fiery Trigon, have always been attended with many notable and
memorable Changes both in Church and State, and very great Actions and
Alterations in Kingdoms and Countries, almost Universally all over the World:
The first Restitution of this Trigon, after the Creation of the World, was in
the days of Enoch, who walked with God, and lived 365 years, for which space of
time was the Church of God preserved: The second at the Universal Deluge, at
which time the whole World was destroyed. Then Noah was a Preserver of the
Church of God in the Ark: The third in the time of Moses, and the Children of
Israel, at which time the People of God were delivered from the Egyptian
Slavery: The fourth in the Monarchy of the Medes and Solomon's Glory, who
builded a Temple for the People of God: The fifth in our Blessed Saviors time,
and the Roman Empire, Caesar Augustus, in whose Days and Reign our Savior
Christ was born, who came upon the Earth to Redeem Mankind: The sixth Return
was in the time of Charles the Great, who caused a flourishing state of the
Church of God: And now this seventh Return into the Fiery Trigon, which is a
Sabattical Return, has a most singular Mystery in it, and promises something
of more signal moment to the World, than other Conjunctions do, etc.

The Signs afflicted by the Infortunes in this Conjunction are Leo, Virgo, and
Libra, the opposite Sign to the Conjunction is Aquarius, and those Signs in
square are Taurus and Scorpio: The Sign of the Conjunction designeth Rome,
Italy, Sicily, Bohemia, Turkey, Togata, Apalie, Emilia, Sabina, Phenicia,
Chaldea, Orchinia, Dalmatia, Syracusa, Rouvenna, Cremona, Confluant, Prague,
Liniz, Crinifium, wherein shall be much Dissolation, Famine, Tumults, and
Uproars, etc. this Conjunction will afford much Distraction, Discontent,
Sorrow, Commotions of Armies, Wars, Bloodshed, and Pennury to many more
Nations and Cities, which are under the opposite Sign Aquarius, as Amazonia,
Sarmatia, Tartary, Valachia, Muscovia, Sweedeland, Westphalia, Mosellpiomont,
Bavaria, Ethiopia, Oxiana, Sogdiana, Media, Arabia the Desert Hamburrough,
Breme, Mountserat, Pisarum, Trent, Salizburgh, Ingolstade, etc. Norway under
the Danish Government must be sensible of this great Conjunction too, for it is
Subject to the Sign Scorpio. Flanders, I pity thee, and that Honorable House
of Austria, for in time you will want both Friends and Support, for the
Conjunction Influence designs a greater blow than thou have had already: here
are many more Kingdoms, Cities, and Corporations which must look to feel the
dire effects of this Conjunction, as Russia, Polonia, Lorrain, Campaine,
Helvetia, Rhetia, Franconia, Parthia, Persia, Ireland, Cyclades, Towns of Asia;
Bononia, Sona, Mantua, Taurentum, Panorma in Sicily, Peruvium, Caput, Histriae,
Brixi, Zurich, Lucerna, Nants, Herbibolis, Carastade, Posuania, Leipsig,
Genasa, Novograde, Melagony, Comagena, Cappadocia, Algiers, Valentiani, Spain,
Forum, Pestorium, Taruisum, Julium, Fess, Gethulia, Catalonia, all these places
are threatened with strange kind of Alterations in their Government, perhaps
Wars, Famine, Dissolution, Plague, Pestilence, Mutinies, Commotions of Armies,
Plots, Treasons, Treacheries, Massacres, Rebellion, and such like horrid Evils;
for Armies shall run like Lightning over a great man, Countries of Europe, and
will afflict Christendom with the Sword more than ordinary; nay, they will
bring more under subjection within the space of ten years, than any Armies have
done for twice ten years last past; there will be many and unexpected
Slaughters, Imprisonments, Banishments, Captivities; great Slaughters and
Damages amongst the Navies at Sea also, etc. London, I should not forget thee
too, for I am afraid that thou will suffer some kind of Catastrophe e're long,
from which I pray God deliver thee, for it has been observed that the Planet
Saturn never passes through the Sign Leo, but he by his Evil Influence leaves
some considerable Impression upon the City of London; but what this Conjunction
of Saturn and Jupiter in Leo may produce, let us patiently wait to see the
event; for Sickness I dread, and those most dangerous, from which let us pray,
Libera nos Domine, Good Lord deliver us, for in 1625 Saturn was in Leo, at
which time a great Plague began in London, which caused the Parliament to
remove to Oxford; and truly I do fear another great Plague in London, e're
Saturn has passed the Sign Leo, 1683, and this the more, because Mars was in
Conjunction with Jupiter on the 8th of September, in Leo, and on the 12th day
of the said Month Mars was in Conjunction with Saturn, in Leo, and on the 9th
of October, and 30th of January, Saturn and Jupiter were in Conjunction in Leo,
and in May, 1683, they make their last Conjunction in Leo, near the Degree of
the Conjunction of Saturn and Mars the September before; all these things being
considered, makes me conjecture that we shall have another Plague e're 84,
which God divert.

But in case we should escape a Plague this year, and the year 84, then will
England be the most happy Nation under the Sun, etc.

The next thing I have to deliver to the World, is by what manner of means
every Nation, City, and People is like to suffer under this Conjunction.

But since it is impossible to get the true time of any Conjunction of the two
Superiors, viz. Saturn and Jupiter: Therefore I shall deliver my Judgment
according to the best of my Reason.

As thus, Suppose we place Aries upon the Ascendant, then will this Conjuction
fall in the Fifth House, which is opposite to the Eleventh, and in square to
the Second and Eighth. Aries is the Ascendant of England, France, Germany,
Polonia, Burgundy, Denmark, etc.

Now the Second House represents the substance of the Common People, as
Household Stuff, Moneys, Plate, Jewels, Corn, and is the proper Personal Estate
of any Man: it also signifies the Countries, or Commonwealths Magazine, or
Ammunition; it likewise represents their Allies and Supports, or whatsoever is
Assistant to them: Now, in regard this Conjunction falls in square to the
Second House, therefore I Judge there will be a great decay in Trade, as Buying
and Selling, and but little appearance of increasing Estates, but sudden
undoing and impoverishment of many a Man, as well the Yeoman, and hard
laboring Farmer, as the Curious Industrious Mechanic; nay, I cannot perceive
but that the whole Commonalty is threatened with much deceit in their Allies and
Supports, whereby they may want both Ammunition and Moneys to maintain their
Principles, and that in France, Germany, Polonia, etc. Now since the Eighth
House is opposite to the Second, and does represent the Inheritance of the
Dead, and the Death of Mankind in general, and is the House of Sadness, and
does also denote the Estates and Fortunes of our public Enemies; and because
this Conjunction falls in square to the same, therefore I predict according to
Natural Causes, that many violent and sudden Deaths will happen to the common
sort of People, and that from as violent and raging Diseases; and besides it
denotes, that the Estates and Inheritances of many a Man shall be violently
wrested from them by those which have Power and bear Rule over them, etc.

The Fifth House denotes Messengers or Agents for Republique Ambassadors,
likewise Playing, Gaming, Drinking, Revelling, Joy, Pleasures, Gifts; it also
signifies Children, and Women with Child, etc.

Now in regard this Conjunction is made in the Fifth House, therefore I judge
much Damage to happen to the People, through their Agents, Messengers, or
Ambassadors, and all such things signified by the Fifth House, as Drinking and
Revelling, which may cause Surfeits, and the like; for Saturn Corrupts the
Blood by Melancholy, and Mars by Choler; it also denotes many Abortions and
strange kind of Monstrous Births, with much Trouble and Affliction to Children
and Women with Child, etc.

Now because the Fifth House is in Opposition to the Eleventh; it signifying
the Associates, Counselors, Allies, Treasure, Ammunition, Soldiery, and indeed
all that is assistant to those in Power, from which we may Conjecture that the
Princes of the Earth should grow very Ambitious, and shall waste their Estates
by War, and not only so, but be Cheated by their Allies, Counselors,
Soldiery, Servants, and Favorites, etc.

Again, suppose we place Taurus upon the Ascendant, then will the Conjunction
happen in the Fourth House, which is in opposition to the Tenth, and in square
to the First and Seventh; Taurus is the Ascendant of Russia, Swedeland,
Lorrain, ^^^^^onia, Persia, Ireland, etc.

(...) by Consequence these places must be threatened with Plague, Pestilence,
Famine and Wars, also much trouble and vexation in their Government; if the
Tenth House represents all those in Authority, viz. Kings, Princes,
Magistrates, Governors of Towns, Forts, Cities, Corporations, viz. Captains,
Majors, Colonels, Bailiffs, Justices of the Peace, all these shall find great
troubles and vexations in their Government, Offices and Places of Trust, it is
probable some of them may exercise Tyranny upon those they bear Rule over, by
which means they may cause their Subjects to take up Arms against them, and
that in Russia, Polonia, the great, Swedeland, Parthia, Helvetia, Ireland, etc.

The Ascendant signifies the state of the Common People, and how it shall go
with them, well or ill, etc.

The Seventh House signifies Women, War, Contention, Public Enemies, etc.

Now, because both these Houses are squared by this Conjunction, therefore I
judge much public Sorrow and Affliction to happen to the People in general
belonging to all those places under Taurus, it may be both Plague and Famine,
since this Conjunction is made in their Fourth House; for Saturn, as to Natural
things, portends great want and scarcity, destruction of Cattle, Corn, Fruits,
unwholesome Airs, Cold, Cloudy, Foggy, Dark, Misty Weather, Famine and
Mortality, and also tedious Frosts, with long Winters; he also threatens many
with long and tedious Infirmities and Diseases, as Quartan Agues, Consumption
in the Reins, ill and noisome Vapors; from whence proceeds Plagues, Hectic
Fevers, and the like, etc.

But if we place Gemini on the Ascendant, then will this Conjunction be in the
Third House, which opposes the Ninth, and squares the Sixth and Twelfth: Then
must all those places under Gemini suffer much for Religions sake, and shall
have long and dangerous Navigations; small success in their Inland Journeys,
little Love and Unity between Neighbors and Relations, also loss of Cattle,
both great and small, ill Servants, long Imprisonments; much whispering amongst
a parcel of malicious Rascals, who seek private Revenges, etc.

Now if we make Cancer ascending, then shall this Conjunction be made in the
Second House, which is in square to the Fifth and Eleventh, and in opposition
to the Eighth; then must all those places under Cancer, to wit, Scotland,
Holland, Granada, Burgundy, Zeland, etc. suffer loss of Life and Fortune, their
own Friends shall prove deceitful to them; yea, their neighbor Nations will
prove unfaithful to them, as well as their own Ambassadors, Messengers,
Agents, and Trustees, etc.

But if we place Leo upon the Ascendant, then shall this Conjunction fall
therein, the Ascendant opposes the Seventh, and looks a squint upon the Tenth
and Fourth: Rome is under Leo, so is Italy, Gallia, Cicily, Aphalia, Bohemia,
Turkey, etc. most of these places will suffer Devastation, if not a Final
Catastrophe; their Princes shall be brought very low, and that through their
own Pride and Ambition; they will also suffer both Fire, Plague, Pestilence,
Wars and Famine, etc.

Now suppose we place Virgo upon the Ascendant, then will the Conjunction
happen in the Twelfth, which is opposite to the Sixth, and in square to the
Third and Ninth. The Twelfth House is the House of Enmity: What shall any of
those Countries be invaded by the means of some private Enemies? Yea, whilst
they are a quarrelling at home about Religion, some other Nation will steal on
them unawares; they shall likewise have many great Sea Fights, and receive
great loss and damage thereby: Virgo designs the Dukedom of Athens,
Mesopotamia, Babylon, Achaia, Greece, Creet, Carinthia, Arthefina, Assyria,
Gallia, Comata, Rhone, Croatia, Silesia, etc. These Countries will also have
great destruction amongst their Cattle, to wit, both great and small, etc.

But if we place Libra on the Ascendant, then will the Conjunction be in the
Eleventh House; the Eleventh House is in square to the Second and Eighth, and
opposes the Fifth; Libra is the Ascendant of Austria, Alsatia, Livonia,
Sabaudia, etc. These places are like to suffer through the unfaithfulness of
their Friends, Servants, Favorites, Councils, Agents, Messengers, and
Ambassadors; also want of Provision, both of Men, Moneys, and Ammunition, and
all such things which are necessary for their Supportment; they are also
threatened with great slaughter of a number of Men, as well by the Sword, as by
violent and raging Diseases, etc.

Thus you see if we place the Signs upon the Ascendent by Succession, we shall
find by what means every Nation, Kingdom, City, and People, is like to suffer
under the Influence of this Conjunction, etc.

Astrological Judgments for the Year 1683.
IN this year of 1683, we have no less than 3 Eclipses of the Sun and Moon in
Leo and Aquarius, January the 17. O Eclipsed visible in.

January the 30..

February 1. Eclipsed invisible in.

May 2..

July 28. Eclipsed invisible in.


besides 2 Conjunctions of the Superiors, Saturn and Jupiter, who meet with
many Oppositions of the lesser Planets, before the time of their second
Conjunction on January the 30th, which does declare the unsettled Condition of
the Vulgar and Common People, and that they dread some great Troubles or
Calamity too near approaching; but whethether it be Plague, Pestilence, Wars,
or Famine, I shall give swift winged Time leave to discover the truth thereof:
In the beginning of May Saturn and Jupiter make their last Conjunction in that
Regal Sign Leo, but some few days before they meet with a square of the Sun
from Taurus, therefore whatever Great Person of Europe has Leo ascending at
his Birth, shall suffer Troubles with loss of Honor; nay, Kings and Princes
shall also find many troubles and vexations in their Government, and Governors
of Towns, Forts and Cities shall receive much Loss and Damage, and in all
probability many of them may be called to an account by their Superiors, and
those in particular which abode in those places under Taurus, Scorpio, Leo, and
Aquarius, as Rome, Alsatia, Spain, Hungary, Austria, Dalmatia, Macedonia,
Greece, Gaunt, Flanders, Brandenburgh, Muscovia, Albania, these places are also
threatened with Fires, Wars, Famine, Plague, Pestilence, Rebellion, or such like
Calamities, etc. Oxford, Holland, Hungary, and the Turk himself is much herein
concerned; and besides, Italy mones, and Spain does cry, and London fears the
Pestilence, from which, I pray Good Lord deliver us this year, and for ever
more, faxit Deus, Amen, etc. Mars his long Trancite through the Sign Libra,
does now threaten the Noble Austrian Family with many Afflictions, for the
Princes of Germany will be unfaithful to him, which may cause the Death of many
of the Inhabitants: those places which are under Aries will be great Sufferers
too, as Burgundy, Denmark, France, Germany, Polonia, England; if I am not
mistaken in my Judgment, we shall hear of some Destruction amongst the Natives
in France, and that some kind of Massacre, if not timely prevented; But blessed
are those which dye in the Lord, for they rest from their Labor. Oh the
Condition of the common People! they shall suffer many Troubles and Calamities
in that Country, yea, in the very middle thereof, but before they will endure
it long they will join together and cause a Rebellion, then woe to those which
blowed the Fire of Destruction, for they are taken in the Flame themselves, etc.

Astrological Judgments for the Year 1684.
January the 6th. Eclips. invisible in.

January the 3. from and.

June 17. Eclipsed visible in.

July the 2. Eclips. visible in.

October 3. Ecclipsed,

December. 11. in. visible.


HEre is an Opposition of Saturn and Mars on January the 3d, from Virgo and
Pisces; and there is also a notable Conjunction of those two Malefacts on the
3d of October, in 13 Degrees of Virgo, and is in square to the Conjunctions of
Saturn and Jupiter, 1603, and 1663, therefore whatever Prince of Europe has
about 13 Degrees of Virgo ascending at his Birth must yield to pale Death this
year, for he will not be denied by the Princes of the Earth, when their time is
come. The King of France will go near to have his Honor Eclipsed this year,
for this Conjunction happens in the Mid-heaven of his Nativity; this
Conjunction likewise threatens Babylon, Assyria, Gallia, Carinthia, the
Dukedom of Athens, Mesopotamia, Hirusalem, Achaia, Greece, Creet, Lions, Paris
and Basil with Mutinies, Tumults, Wars, Commotions of Armies, Treacheries, and
strange Rebellion: Spain I pity thy condition, for thou art like to have great
losses, both by Sea and Land; and besides in many more Countries there will be
great slaughter of Men where there is frequent motions of Armies, especially in
France; for I fear some kind of Bloody Massacre there, amongst the poor
Natives, etc. There is no less than four Eclipses this year, and three of them
visible; they fall in Cancer and Capricorn. Now the Ancients tell us that
Eclipses in Capricorn, are the Forerunners of the sterility of the Earth, and
the Tumultuary motions of Princes, and that in those places under the Sign
Capricorn; it likewise signifies, that some Great and Eminent Person shall
depart this Life in a terrible and deplorable Condition, and that Men shall be
given to slander and betray one another; and those Eclipses in Cancer excite
men's minds to quarrel and new attempts of War, with Treachery and Sedition;
also thundering noises and uproars in and about Religion, they also threaten the
Small Pox, Consumption, Dropsies, with violent pains in the Stomach, and that
to those persons and places subject to the Signs Cancer and Capricorn, etc.

Astrological Judgments for the Year 1685.
NOw the late Conjuction of Saturn and Mars begins to opperate to purpose; June
the 6. Eclipsed invisible in.

June the 21, Eclipsed visible in.

November the 30, Eclips. visible and total in Londons Sign.


therefore the King of France, if he be alive, may expect to be driven from his
own Confines or abode, and that by his own Subjects, if not, it is probable he
may come to some sudden and unexpected Destruction, either by Poison, or by
some other means equivolent, etc. Here is no less than 3 Eclipses this year,
between those glorious Lamps of Heaven, that is one of the Sun, and two of the
Moon: The first is a Lunar Eclipse, and falls in Sagitarius; therefore Hungary,
Morovia, Dalmatia, Sclavonia and Spain seek out for a good Physician, for you
are threatened with a Plague, or some other violent Distempers equivolent; the
two last Eclipses are made in Gemini and Cancer; the Second which is of the Sun
in Cancer, is of no great signification, since it is invisible and very small;
yet Men will be apt to Cheat and Cozen one another, and that under the pretense
and species of Religion; besides this Eclipse may cause various Winds and
alterations of Weather, whereby the Air will be much troubled, and that in
Burgundy, Holland, Scotland, Granado, Africa, Constantinople, Tunis, Venice,
and Genoa; but the Third and last Eclipse of the Moon in Gemini is of more
eminent signification to those places under the sign of the Eclipse, and I fear
they will feel its dire effects; the Eclipse it self is made in the Mid-heaven,
and Virgo ascends, as may be seen by this following Figure, etc.

November the 30th, 1685, 11 hours P. M. Eclipsed visible and total, Lat. 51
degr. 3, Londini.


Mercury rules both the Houses, and he is in his detriment with Cauda, and
Combust of the Sun; now if the Tenth House does represent all those in
Authority, whether they be Kings, Princes, or Magistrates, then they must
expect to find some sudden noises or motions of Arms within the bounds of their
Government, and particular in those places under the Signs Gemini and Virgo
where Armies are, yet there will be a quick dispatch made of those differences,
and the Land of Virgo will go near to have it; Saturn beholds Mercury, the Sun,
and place of the Eclipse by an envious Quadrat, and Mercury himself, who is
Lord of the Eclipse, beholds the defect by an Opposition, which seems unto me,
as if all places under the Signs Virgo and Pisces, Gemini and Sagitarius were
in Election to be up in Arms against a great and potent Enemy. Now those places
under the Signs nominated are Portugal, Normandy in France, Hungary, Spain,
Dalmatia, Moravia, Coratia, Babylon, Scla^^onia, Sardinia, Sweedland, Brabant,
Lumbardy, England, Wertenburgh that Dukedom, Hircania, Armenia, Celtica, and
the Dukedom of Athens, etc. Swedeland about this time is inclinable to peace,
and I think it the best of their play, for if they slip such an opportunity, as
they are likely to have, they will repent it when it is too late: The Austrian
Family suffers detriment through and by the means of the Hungarians. The
Muscovites seem to be in a good prosperous Condition, but the Tartar threatens
Europe either with Fire or Sword, or both: They aim, but they miss their mark,
etc.

Astrological Judgments for the Year 1686.
January the 20. from and.

October 23, in.

November the 19, Eclipsed visible in.

December the 23. in and.


THis year begins with an Opposition of Saturn and Mars, from Virgo and Pisces;
and about October the 23d, those two Malefacts meet in Conjunction in Libra:
Now let those Jesuitical Tribe of Priests, and Conclave of Cardinals look to
it, for they shall dearly pay for their Treacherous Villainous actions; for
their Monasteries shall be dissolved, and they themselves destroyed, or else
taken Captives: The Noble Austrian Family is also in much danger of falling
into the Hands of a strong and potent Enemy, therefore is threatened with
Devastation; neither does it go well with Holland, Scotlaad, Livonia,
Delphinate, Alsatia, Bastrina, Oesim, Thusia, Seres, Thebaida, Lisbone,
Cajetam, Laudam, Spiers, and Frankford, for Holland is threatened with many
losses, and Scotland will not be much behind hand, but Austria, Alsatia,
Livonia, and several more places in Germany are threatened with Fire and Sword,
and such like Calamities: The French are also a little fearful, and that not
without just cause; for they cannot promise themselves Security, etc. In this
year we have only one Eclipse, and that of the Moon, it falls in the first Face
of Gemini, on the 19th day of November, at eleven of the Clock at Night, to
which time I have Erected this following Scheme.

Eclipsed November the 19th, 1686, at 11 hours P. M. die Lat. 51 degr. 3,
Londini.


This Eclipse begins in the Tenth House, and ends in the Ninth Angle; the Sun's
besieged between the Bodies of Jupiter and Mercury, and all three oppose the
Eclipsed Moon, and that from as violent fixed Stars as she her self is near,
for she is with oculus Tauri, and they with Cor Scorpi and Caput Herculis;
Mercury is Lord of the Ascendant, and in part Ruler of the Mid-heaven: Jupiter
is Lord of the 7th, and in part Ruler of the Fourth, strong in his own House,
and in Quartile to the Degree ascending: London thou art much concerned in this
Eclipse, let thy Magistrates therefore look to it, and see that they do nothing
of Injustice, for if they do they must expect to pay for their folly; for the
the Common People will expect to have Justice done them; therefore those which
act to the contrary, may Repent when it is too late, etc. Mercury, Lord of thy
Ascendant being Combust, and in his Detriment, shows that thou should have but
bad Trading this year, but if thou do but consider the Condition of many more
Countries and Places in Europe, thou would think thy self happy, since thy
Foundation stands firm and unshaken, when others are invaded, and that by a
cloak and show of Friendship, etc. London thou must expect to have many
Ambassadors this year 1686, to the Governor of thy Kingdom, for Saturn Lord
of the Fifth in this Figure, is in Sextile to Mercury, Lord of the Ascendant
and place Eclipsed, and is likewise in Sextile to Jupiter and the Sun, and in
Trine to the Eclipsed Moon in thy Ascendent: This Eclipse also denotes
Incursions of Armies into those Countries and Places under Gemini, Virgo,
Sagitarius, and Pisces, as Flanders, Brabant, Sardinia, Lumbardy, Marmarica,
Martiania, Spain, Dalmatia, Sclavonia, Hungary, Moravia, Misnia, Achaia,
Greece, Creet, Croatia, Carinthia, Mesopotamia, Babylon, Normandy, Galatia,
Portugal, Cicilia, and many more places which you may read of in Mr. Coley's
Clavis of Astrology, page 91, 92, 93, etc. Many of these places is also
threatened with Famine and great Mortalities, as will plainly appear before the
Sun has gone another Revolution; and to conclude, about the 23d day of
December, there happens a Sextile between Saturn and Jupiter, from Libra and
Sagitarius, both in their own essential Dignities, which shows a strong
inclination amongst the Princes of Europe, for a Confirmation of Peace and
Unity in many Places and Countries; but by reason Saturn has lately passed the
place of his Conjunction with Mars, therefore I fear it will be hardly
accomplished as yet in all places, although it will in some: The Sun never
shines always in one place, etc.

Astrological Judgments for the Year 1687.
February the 16 in.

May the 1, Eclipsed visible in England, it happens in amongst the Pleiades.

October the 26, Eclipsed invisible in.


ON the 16 day of February here is a Conjunction with Mars and Jupiter in
Sagitarius, and in the Figure of the Sun's Revolution, March the 9th, about 20
Hours post Meridian, Mars and Saturn applies to a square of each other, and
that from their own Exaltations; and besides Saturn receives no less than three
Oppositions, and those by Venus, Mercury, and the Sun, and Mars two Quartils by
Mercury and the Sun, and all from Aries; such Positions as these do afflict all
those places subject to the Signs Aries, Libra, and Capricorn, with Wars and
Commotions of Armies: The Subjects in many places will be apt to Rebel against
their Superiors, and that in France, if I mistake not; which if they do, the
Romish Party will come off by the lee, for their Universal destruction is
drawing on, and then they will repent their being so cruel and barbarous to
those innocent and harmless Protestants: Saturn in Libra, squared by Mars,
shows the Sword still to be in action in many places under the Sign Libra, as
Caspia, Alsatia, Bastrina, Thebaida, Livonia, Sabandia, Austria, Antwerp,
Delphinat, Oesim, Trogloditica, Lisbone, Friburgh, Franckford, and those under
Capricorn must look to feel a little too, e're Mars pass through that Sign, etc.

In this year we have but two Eclipses, and those both of the Sun, the one in
Taurus, and the other in Scorpio: The First falls on May the first, about a
quarter of an hour after Noon, to which time I have erected this following
Scheme.

Eclipsed May the 1st, 1687, 1, P. M. Latitud. 51 degr. 3, Londini, etc.


Now in regard the Eclipsed Sun is Lord of the Twelfth, therefore I judge it to
be the forerunner both of Plague, Pestilence and Famine, mortalitly in and
amongst Oxen, Bulls, Cows, and Horses, and that in Russia, Polonia, Swedeland,
Lorrain, Campania, Helvetia, Rhetia, Franconia, Parthia, Persia, Ireland,
Cyclades, the Islands Cyprus, the Sea Towns of Asia the less, Bononia, Sona,
Mantua, Tarentum, etc. for Taurus is an Earthy Sign, and represents all such
kind of Cattle: The Second Eclipse is of the Sun also, and falls in that
Treacherous Sign Scorpio, which shows some sudden mischief will fall upon some
King, whose mind is averse to War; and if the King of France be now living,
tell him, I give him warning to provide for a change, for the thread of his
Life has spun out its full length: For this last Eclipse of the Sun in
Scorpio, who was giver of life at his Birth, falls upon the very Degree of his
Horroscope, etc. I judge also that this Eclipse will cause Warlike Tumults,
Murders, Treasons, Treacheries, Plots, Dissentions, Captivities, and all
underhand practices, and my Reason is this, because it is made in the
ascending part of Heaven, and that particular to those Persons under Taurus,
Scorpio, Leo and Aquarius.

Astrological Judgments for the Year 1688.
January the 23, from and

March the 11, from and.

April the 5, Eclipsed invisible in.

April the 20, Eclipsed invisible in.

July 22,.

Eclipsed in invisible, September the 29.

October 14, Eclipsed visible in November the 7, in.


THis year begins with an Opposition of Saturn and Mars, from Aries and Libra;
and on the 11th day of March following Saturn and Jupiter make their first
square Aspect from Libra and Capricorn, and the second Quadrat of Saturn and
Jupiter falls from Libra and Capricorn: There is likewise a notable Conjunction
of Saturn and Mars, on the 7th day of December, in that treacherous Sign
Scorpio; and we have no less than four Eclipses of the Luminaries this year,
viz. Two of the Sun, and two of the Moon, but none visible, only the last
defect of the Sun in Scorpio, and that falls in the very same Degree of the
Conjunction of Saturn and Mars, which happens on the 7th day of November
following; from all these Configurations we may rationally judge, that Italy,
with that noble House of Austria, are great sufferers; for Italy mourns to
think of the troubles she has and is to undergo: The noble Austrians are much
afflicted by the Position of Saturn in Libra: Oh shall that Prince be always
troubled and perplexed by the Jesuitical Tribe, who would lead him to his own
Destruction, just as a Sheep is led to the Slaughter? No, no, here is an
Eclipse of the Sun in Scorpio, and presently after a Conjunction between the
two Malefacts, viz. Saturn and Mars in the very Degree thereof, therefore look
to it TOM Jesuit, for as thou have dug a Pit for another, thou must even look
to fall into it thy self, for Mars is Lord of the Ascendant, and the Eclipse it
self is made therein; therefore we can expect nothing but Wars and Tumults,
Treacheries, Mutanies, Massacres, Rebellion, and that I fear in Ireland. The
Turk will also be much afflicted with foreign losses; nay, not only so, but he
shall suffer many broyls at home, and the Pope himself must look about him, for
Mars is clearly for nothing but downright blows, whereby he knocks all former
Treaties on the Head, causing Hatred, Plots, Captivities, Slaughters,
Treacheries, whereby nothing but confusion follows, and that in Norway,
Bavaria, Metagony, Cappadocia, Fess, Catalonia, Togata, Gallia, Bohemia, Italy,
Turkey, Swedeland, Polonia, Russia, Ireland, Rome, and all places under Taurus,
Scorpio, Leo, and Aquarius, must look to suffer and feel the dire effects of
this Eclipse, besides there are many places that are like to suffer by the
former, for an Eclipse of the Moon in the last Face of Libra, is the
forerunner of the Death of some Noble and Illustrious Men under the Sign of
the Eclipse, also those Eclipses of the Sun and Moon in the second Faces of
Taurus and Aries, do prenote, innumerable Difficulties, and many Discommodities
to Travelers, and to such as bear Children many Abortions, and Births not
natural, or Monsters are produced, likewise Pestilence, and Fatality in most
Diseases, few fall sick that escape, and that in those places under the Signs
wherein the Eclipses happen, etc.

Astrological Judgments for the Year 1689.
ON the 4th day of January Saturn and Jupiter make their last square from
Scorpio and Aquarius, January 4,,.

March 25, Eclipsed visible in

July 7,.

September 1^, Eclipsed in, invisible.

September 22,,.


and here is likewise an Opposition between Saturn and Mars, from Taurus and
Scorpio: On the 22d day of September we have likewise a Trine of Saturn and
Jupiter; on July, the 7th, from Libra and Aquarius, we have also two Eclipses
of the Moon, the one in Aries, and the other in Libra, therefore were it not
for the square of Saturn and Jupiter, and the opposition of Saturn and Mars, we
might expect to see a mitigation of sorrow, nay, probable an end of our
troubles in this World; for the Eclipse of the Moon, in the second Face of
Libra denotes a rot amongst petty Foggers, Informers, Catchpoles, Trepanners,
and such like Cattle, for they shall all suffer for their former Roguery, for
the Sun in Aries promises many particular blessings to the Land of England,
but the opposition of Saturn and Mars from Taurus and Scorpio threatens great
Afflictions to Ireland, Swedeland, and Norway Russia, and Polonia; and all
those Countries under Taurus and Scorpio are much herein concerned, for
Hamburgh and Denmark are fearful, Wars in Swedeland and Norway, uproars in
Ireland, and the Algiers Ships taken and destroyed, and their men made
Captives: Now Austria, Alsatia, Livonia, and Sabaudia, begin to repent their
former losses, etc.

Astrological Judgments for the Year 1690.
IN this present year 1690, February the 28, Eclipsed in, invisible.

March the 8, from and.

March the 14, Eclipsed in, invisible.

August the 24, Eclipsed in invisible.

September 8, Eclipsed in, visible.

November the 20, in Scorpio.


we have no less than four Eclipses of the Luminaries, besides a Trine of
Saturn and Jupiter, in Scorpio and Pisces, and also a notable Conjunction of
Saturn and Mars in Scorpio, from which Configurations we may rationally predict
an universal change, for all Europe is up in Arms: Oh Italy, what dangers and
troubles art thou like to undergo! for thou can expect nothing but mischief
to fall upon thee, for those unspeakable Villainies thou have been Guilty of: Oh
the strange mischiefs, Plots and Treacheries there are in the minds of Men!
This Conjunction falls in square to the Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter,
1682: Now Italy and Rome, where are all thy Princes with their Jesuitical
Tribe? what unlooked and unhoped for Deaths are some of them like to endure!
for Mars threatens them with Wars, Commotions, Insurrections, Massacres,
Persecutions, and Murders, But England be thou content, for thy Condition is
better than any, since thou injoyest both Peace, and Tranquillity, God continue
it; but Ireland is full of Troubles and Vexations, and besides here is a longer
time of Sufferings appointed for that place, and indeed many more are threatened
with Wars, Sedition, Cruelty, Furiousness, and Inhumanity of Soldiers, and that
from the Eclipse of the Sun, in the last Face of Pisces, which influenceth over
Garamentes, Portugal, Calabriana, Galatia, Cilicia, Lydia, Normandy, etc. The
Eclipse of the Moon in Libra, provokes furious and tempestuous storms of Hail
to happen in several places under the Sign Libra; and the Eclipse of the Sun in
the second Face of Virgo does threaten those places under the said
Constellation with Famine, Pestilence, Seditions, and great Droughts, hindering
the plentiful Crops of Summer Corn; here are also threatened many Robberies by
Land, and Pyracies and Troubles by Sea, and that from the Eclipse of the Moon
in the last Face of Pisces; now what places Virgo and Pisces does represent,
you may find in Mr. Coley's Clavis of Astrology, as I have declared several
times already, etc.

Astrological Judgments for the Year 1691.
February 18, Eclipsed invisible in.

July the 25, from and.

August the 13, Eclipsed visible in.


WE have only two Eclipses this year, and they both of the Sun, the one being in
Pisces, and the other in Virgo; we have also a very remarkable Opposition
between the two Malefacts, viz. Saturn and Mars, from Taurus and Scorpio, and
it happens in the very degree of their last Conjunction: Therefore from these
Configurations, I judge that this will be a year of great action, and that in
Russia, Swedeland, Polonia, Lorraine, Parthia, Campania, Franconia, Norway,
Bavaria, Cappadocia, Catalonia: Ireland still continues in Troubles, and
suffers great losses: Swedeland now begins to repent their meddling with War,
but Russia, and they too, are both involved into that trouble, which they
themselves know not which way to get out: Oh what perplexity is there! for Mars
in this Opposition being amongst the Pleiades, and Saturn in Opposition to that
turbulent Constellation, whose effects will not only be seen in the Air, but
also in the Actions and Passions of Humane kind; therefore all those Countries
under the Signs Taurus and Scorpio must look to feel some severe Correction,
etc. Likewise the Eclipse of the Sun, in the first Face of Pisces, will have
some secret influence over Cilicia, Calabriana, Portugal, Galatia, Normandy,
Phasunia, Nasamonia in Libia, Garamentes in Lydia, etc. But the Eclipse of the
Sun in the Face of Virgo, will show its dire Effects in Achaia, Greece, Creet,
Carinthia, Mesopotamia, Babylon, Assyria, Basil, Lions, and Paris in
particular, because of their wicked Designs against the poor Protestant Party:
Oh what Consultations have they against those innocent Souls, how they may cut
them off either by Massacre, or some other means, but I hope they will make
good the old Proverb: He that builds a Gallows for another, may chance to be
hanged thereon himself, etc. This Eclipse of the Sun in the first Face of Virgo
argues the grievous Calamity and death of some certain King, in the Confines of
Virgo, and the first Eclipse of the Sun in Pisces, brings sadness and anxiety
to those we call Priests, and Religious Houses, and all this to happen to those
places under Virgo and Pisces, etc. The Trine of Saturn and Jupiter in Scorpion
and Pisces last year, did cause a great many worthy Persons to endeavor a
Reconciliation of those differences amongst some Nations; and in all
probability there might be Leagues and Articles made between some Princes of
Europe, but if there were, I judge it was to wage War against some other Nation
or Nations, for the next year, 1692, Saturn and Jupiter make two Oppositions
from Gemini and Sagitarius, etc. England be thou content, for thou rests upon a
Rock, and thy Foundation stands unshaken, and this shall suffice for the year
1691, etc.

Astrological Judgments for the Year 1692.
IN this year we have no less than two Oppositions between Saturn and Jupiter,
February the 6, Eclipsed invisible in.

June the 12, from and.

August the 2, Eclipsed visible in 20 degr..

November the 29, in.

December the 3, from and.

December the 27, Eclipsed visible in.

January the 23, Eclipsed invisible in.

July the 17, Eclipsed, visible in.


from Gemini and Sagitarius: There is likewise a famous Conjunction of Saturn
and Mars; and no less than five Eclipses of the Luminaries, viz. Three of the
Sun, and two of the Moon: The second Eclipse of the Sun, which happens on the
second day of August, falls in the very Degree of the first Conjunction of
Saturn and Jupiter, 1682, in October; likewise the first Eclipse of the Moon,
falls in the very Degree of the Third Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in May
1683; now Italy and Spain, how are you afflicted? If you have scarcity of
Grain, and your People dye for want of Bread, pray think of me, for now the
triple Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in 1682 and 83, begins to opperate to
purpose; therefore if there be ever a Pope now, he must dye, he cannot avoid
it, but in what Nature time will best discover; and besides the People in those
Countries will be apt to Rebel against their Governors, for the Eclipse of the
Sun in Leo, declares damage to Kings; nay, both Death and Banishment; it may
be you want a Reason, concerning the Peoples Rebelling against their
Superiors; well, you shall not want for a satisfaction; Saturn and Mars are in
Conjunction nearer the place of the new Star which appeared in 1604, and they
are both in Opposition to Jupiter, such prodigious Conjunctions and Aspects as
these, produce none but Rebels, and such kind of Treacherous Villains, etc.
Moravia, Misnia, Sardinia, Lumbardy, Flanders, Brabant, Armenia, Martiania,
Dalmatia, Hungary, Moravia, Sclavonia, Gallia, Togata, Sicily, Aphalia,
Bohemia, Phenesia, Emilia, Chaldea, Rome, Damasco, Prague, Confluant, Sarmatia,
Tartary, the great Mosel, Piemont, Media, Swedeland, Turkey, all these places
are much concerned this year; England and France are much concerned herein
also, but France is more concerned than England, for they are full of
tribulation, they drink deep of the Cup of Affliction: the Hungarians, and the
East part of Germany, begin to look blew upon it, for they fear a Famine, and
Rome it self begins to quake, etc.

Astrological Judgments for the Year 1693.
January the 11, Eclipsed visible in.

April the 22, from and.

July the 6, Eclipsed invisible in.

June 23, Eclipsed visible in, and great.

July 31, from and.

December 16, Eclipsed in invisible.


ON the 22d day of April Saturn and Jupiter make their Opposition from Gemini
and Sagitarius, and there is also a remarkable Opposition between Saturn and
Mars from the same Signs, and we have no less than four Eclipses between the
Sun and Moon this year, from which Configurations we may rationally Judge of
many strange Actions and Calamities, which is likely to happen in several
places of Europe; as thus, Spain is still a loser: Oh what a Distraction is
there! and not only there, but in many more places besides; for Bohemia,
Sycily, Togata, and some part of the Turks Dominions, is threatened with Penury,
that is, with scarcity of Grain, and other Provision: Rome is also much
concerned herein, and if they have a Plague this year, let them think of me,
for there is a bitter Potion prepared for that City; therefore Tom. Jesuit
prepare thy self for a change; nay, the Pope himself also, Hungary, Dalmatia,
Moravia, Misnia, Sclavonia, Celtica, Chaldea, Phenicia, Orchinia, Damasco,
Siracusa, and Rouenna do also lament, and well they may, for their Afflictions
are great; Holland, Scotland, Granado, Burgundy, Zeland, Prusia, Numidia, and
indeed all Cities under Aries, Libra, Cancer, and Capricorn, are much herein
concerned; Holland is threatened with many Diseases, and sudden Deaths to the
meaner sort of People: Scotland, Granado, and Burgundy are also threatened with
Mortality: The City Gemini must also expect to have a share of this years
Transactions, perhaps some of her Magistrates brought to Justice for their
former Villainies, and in all probability some secret Plots may be discovered,
and the chief Actors thereof brought to severe punishment: London is under the
Government of Gemini, so is Flanders too; that Land is like to suffer extremely
by their own Folly, etc.

Astrological Judgments for the Year 1694.
January the 1, Eclipsed invisible in.

June the 10, Eclipsed visible in.

June the 26, Eclipsed visible in.

December the 6, Eclipsed invisible in.

December the 10, in.


IN this year 1694 we have only four Eclipses between those glorious Lamps of
Heaven, viz. Two of the Sun, and as many of the Moon; we have likewise a
notable Conjunction of Saturn and Mars, which falls in Opposition to the
visible Eclipse of the Sun, which happens June the 10th, in the first Face of
Cancer; therefore all places under the Influence of Cancer, Sagitarius, and
Capricorn, must expect many Troubles, Vexations and Calamities in this year
1694. Now Muscovy have a care, or else some potent Enemy will invade thee, and
bring greater Calamities upon thee, than thou have had heretofore, the Sweed
and Tartars are also up in Arms, and if the Sweed be invaded tell him it is his
own fault, because I gave him timely warning before: the Danes aim, but to
small purpose: Scotland, Holland, Granado, and Burgundy must look to taste of
the bitter Cup: The Turk also grows very potent, and still increases his
Dominions, and Constantinople fears the Pestilence: Zeland, Prusia, Venice,
Genoa, Lucas, Pisa, Bernyork, Macedonia, Thracia, Albania, Saxony, Spain,
Dalmatia, Hungary, and Ireland must look to partake of this years Transactions:
Oxford also must look to taste of this year, for here is a violent storm
impending, and woe to that City whenever it falls, for the Comet appeared in
Capricorn, her Sign, etc. Also the Eclipses of the Sun and Moon in the first
and third Faces of Cancer denote many Diseases to the Female Sex, and also
sudden miserable and unexpected Deaths unto many: they also incline Men's minds
to Arms, and to violate National Leagues deceitfully, under the pretenses of
Religion: They also cause a disturbed Air, and stir up strange kind of Weather,
and variety of it, and that in those Countries under the Sign Cancer; but those
Eclipses of the Sun and Moon, in the second Faces of Sagitarius and Capricorn,
portend the Death, or much Destruction unto such Cattle as naturally bray, and
of the bigger sort of any such Beasts as are useful for Man, they also denote
Incursions of Armies into Neighbor Countries, Captivities, frequent uproars in
the Soldiery, and that to all places under the Signs Sagitarius and Capricorn,
etc.

Astrological Judgments for the Year 1695.
I Shall judge the State and Condition of this year from the Configurations of
the Planets, May the 18, Eclipsed invisible in.

June the 1, Eclips. visib. in.

Aug. 12, from and.

August the 23, from and.

November the 10, Eclipsed visible in.

November the 25, Eclipsed invisible in.


and Eclipses of the Luminaries, which are as follows; as thus, We have a
notable Opposition between Saturn and Mars, from Cancer and Capricorn, it falls
the 12th of August, and on the 23d day of the same Month we have a Trine of and
from and; besides, we have no less than four Eclipses this year, two of the
Sun, and as many of the Moon: The first Eclipse of the Sun falls in Gemini,
London's Ascendant, and the last Eclipse of the Sun falls in Sagitarius; it is
made in the second House, it threatens Spain with Destruction amongst their
Cattle, both great and small; it also denotes many Robberies and inhumane
Murders in that Country, with strange kind of Outrages in Hungary, Dalmatia,
Moravia, Sclavonia, Misnia, Celtica, and in all places under Sagitarius; but
the Eclipse of the Sun in Gemini, which is made in the Eighth House, bodes
mortality to great Persons, and that in Flanders, Brabant, Sardinia, Hircania,
Armenia, and in London too; and because Mars is Lord of the Ascendant, and
posited in Taurus, in Opposition to the same, therefore I judge we may expect
to hear of popular Insurrections in those places under the Sign Gemini; Mars in
Taurus shows some troubles more than ordinary upon the Land of Ireland; and the
visible Eclipse of the Moon in the last Face of Taurus, will leave some notable
Impression upon that Land: Also, besides, from these Configurations, we may
Rationally Judge, the Swede is still up in Arms against that Great and Potent
Enemy the Tartar; and if I mistake not, they both afflict Muscovy and Poland,
who will do a great deal of mischief to his Neighbor Nations, if not timely
prevented: Holland, Scotland, Burgundy, Granado, Zeland, Numidia, Africa,
Calchis, Carthage, Constantinople, Venice, Tunis, York, Macedonia, Illiria,
Thracia, Bofnia, Albania, Bulgaria, Saxony, Hassia, Oxford, India, are also
threatened with many Vexations and Troubles in their Government, and that by
reason of the Opposition of Saturn and Mars from Cancer and Capricorn; and to
Conclude, I judge the Trine of Saturn and Jupiter in Virgo and Capricorn, will
cause many Meetings and Treaties for a Reconcilation of Peace to many places of
Europe, but this is but a Lightning before Death; for the Conjunction of Saturn
and Mars in Capricorn, December the 16th, Impedites their good Endeavors, and
so destroys their Happiness, etc.

Astrological Judgments for the Year 1696.
February the 21, from and.

May the 6, Eclipsed visible and total in.

July the 5, from and.

October the 29, Eclipsed visible and total in.

December the 16, in 27 degrees of.


WE have no less than two Trines this year between Saturn and Jupiter, from
Virgo and Capricorn, Saturn being in Capricorn, and Jupiter in Virgo; Oh,
strong will be the endeavors of the European Princes for an Universal Peace,
throughout the whole Earth, and most People will have a strong Confidence of
the Conclusion thereof; but the weakness of Jupiter in Virgo, shows that it
will not be accomplished as yet, for suddenly after Saturn and Mars meet in
Conjunction in Capricorn, and so destroys all former hopes and promises in a
moment, and so hinders the good endeavors of Saturn, and instead of enjoying
peace and quietness, they fall together by the Ears; for Mars is all for Wars
and Bloodshed, and not for Peace and Friendship, etc. In the next place we
shall consider those two great and famous Eclipses of the Moon in Taurus and
Scorpio; as thus, The Eclipse of the Moon in Scorpio, declares many Seditions,
Murders, and all manner of wretchedness succeds, Mankind oppressed with
abundance of obnoxious Diseases, and these generally in Norway, Bavaria,
Metagony, Comogena, Cappadocia, Idumea, Mauritania, Fess, Gethulia, Catalonia,
etc. But the Eclipse of the Moon in Taurus threatens the Death of some Queen
this year, in some Country under the Influence of Taurus; Ireland is also very
violent to those poor English which inhabit that Country: Oh the
Treacherousness of those Villains, will they never forbear to do mischief; but
let them know that hard is their Fate, for they are threatened with thin Crops
of Corn, which will be destroyed either by Famine, or a Rebellious sort of
People: Holland is also threatened with much Damage, by the Seas overflowing
its accustomed Bounds, they are also threatened with loss of many Ships abroad,
and that by violent Storms and Tempests: The Muscovites are still disturbed,
and know not when they shall rest in peace: The Turk keeps his Sword drawn, and
the Tartarians are not returned home as yet, neither is Swedeland satisfied,
nor Poland contented, but England rests upon a Rock, and her Foundation stands
unshaken, etc.

That which is fixed upon a Rock, I am sure will last
Until the late Evening of the World be past, etc.
Astrological Judgments for the Year 1697.
IN this year we have no less than three Eclipses of the Sun and Moon, May the
10, Eclipsed invisible in.

May 25, Eclipsed invisible in.

August 27, from and.

September 14, from and.

October 19, Eclipsed visible in.


likewise a famous Opposition between those two Malefacts, viz. Saturn and Mars
in Leo and Aquarius: We have also a square of Saturn and Jupiter, from Scorpio
and Aquarius, from which Configurations, I judge Holland, Scotland, Ireland,
Burgundy, Granado, and Russia will endure a longer time of Sorrow and
Affliction, yet they are not alone, for hard is the Fate of that potent place
Italy, for the square of Saturn and Jupiter does cause her to feel the dire
effects of their triple Conjunction in Leo, to purpose; for the Turk still
gains ground upon her, and thereby inlarges his own Dominions: The Tartars are
also afflicted by the Polanders, and Muscovia, Sycily, Apalia, Bohemia, Emilia,
Sabinia, Phenicia, Bulgaria, Saxony, Gaunt, Oxford, Mosel, Piemont, Sarmatia,
all these places have a potent Enemy to deal withal, neither are their
sufferings alone, for several more places under Taurus are like to suffer
Pennury, that is, want of Provision; for the Luminaries Eclipsed in the first
Face of Taurus, is sufficiently hurtful to the Corn upon the Earth, and great
Cattle, for they are hereby threatened with many prodigious Diseases, which will
generally rage amongst them; these Eclipses do also afflict such as are
Negotiators, Sollicitors, Agents, or are generally employed in Men's Affairs, or
in the Public; they also compel Men to undertake unnecessary businesses, and
bring to naught all Factions undertaken by the former sort of People, etc.

Astrological Judgments for the Year School.
IN this year we have only two Eclipses, March 31, Eclipsed invisible in.

May the 24, in 20 degr. of and.

September 23, Eclipsed invisible in.

December 22, in.


and those both of the Sun, and not visible, but we have a remarkable
Conjunction of Saturn and Mars in Aquarius, and also two square Aspects between
Saturn and Jupiter, from Scorpio and Aquarius, Saturn being in Opposition, and
Jupiter in Quartile to the very Degree of their great Conjunction, 1682, from
which Configurations I may rationally judge, that this is like to be a year of
much action, and especially to Italy, for that is threatened with no less than
Confusion, and a total subversion of the Triple Crown also, although it may not
be fully completed this year, yet those which live to see this time, will see
a great say set to it; for when some wise Princes are in Consultation how to
conclude of Peace, War like a Thunderbolt suddenly breaks out, and the Pope
hereby thinking to benefit himself, or his Church, by Incroachment, indangers
his Papacy, and almost, if not quite, Confounds his Primacy, and Consumes his
Patrimony; this year seems to be the time of his down-lying, etc. The Sea will
also swell with great Navies of Ships, and thereby causing many great
Sea Fights, and in all probability England may have a hand in it too, if it has
it will come off victorious, to their great Honor and Glory, and then the
Roman Clergy shall run up and down from place to place, and find no shelter,
yea the whole Conclave of Cardinals shall tremble and shake for fear, etc.

The power of France is also brought very low, even as low as Pharaohs lean
kine, for the late Wars has destroyed many thousands of the poor Inhabitants,
and that by the means of the Roman Clergy, and the pride of an insulting
Governor: Ireland and Holland has also drank deep of the Cup of Affliction;
and Englands Foundation stands firm and unshaken, God continue it, etc.

The Eclipse of the Sun in the last Face of Aries, destroys the lesser Cattle,
as Hogs, Sheep, Goats, Conies, Hares, and is the forerunner of Lamentation,
Woes, and Mourning unto mortal men, or most sorts of Men, and the death of some
Noble Woman; but the Eclipse of the Sun in the Second Face of Libra, portends
the Death of some Eminent Prince, or King, or Noble Man, and for breach of
Customs stirs up Sedition, and designs a Famine: Those places under Aries and
Libra, are most likely to suffer and feel the Effects of these Eclipses, etc.

Astrological Judgments for the Year 1699.
January the 14, in.

March 5, Eclipsed visible in.

March 21, Eclipsed visible in.

August ^0, Eclipsed visible in.

September 13, Eclipsed visible and great,.

September 13, from and.

October the 10, from and.


THis year we have four Eclipses of the Luminaries, viz, two of the Sun, and as
many of the Moon: The second Eclipse of the Sun will be visible and bigger than
any Eclipse that has been seen in England this fifty years, it falls in the
beginning of Libra, on the 13th day of September, about eleven of the Clock
before Noon, at which time there will be an Opposition between Saturn and Mars
from Leo and Aquarius, that will aggravate the Effects thereof to purpose;
therefore I judge great will be the actions of this year, and that for a
settlement of Peace throughout the whole World, for we have no less than two
Sextiles of Saturn and Jupiter, from Sagitarius and Aquarius, each Planet
possessing his own House, the one beginning the year, and the other ending the
year, but before there is a perfect Conclusion made, all Nations will be
troubled with Rumors of Wars, every Region preparing Armies, Traffic
prohibited both by Sea and Land: The main Sea shall hugely swell with mighty
Tempests, so that the Sea in many places shall overflow its accustomed Bounds,
causing violent Inundations in many Countries; also terrible Sea Fights this
year, such as has not been before, occasioning the Water to look more Red than
the Red Sea, so great a Drought, and so great a want of Water will appear in
many places, that multitudes of People will dye in many places for mere want of
Water; great Plagues and Mortality also cover many places of the Earth, and so
destroy Mankind; there will also appear such noisome swarms of Fowls and Flies
that will devour the Corn upon the Ground, causing great Famine and Dearth of
Corn in many Nations of Europe, and suddenly after unexpectedly appears a great
Conqueror, the World being filled with the Fame of this Man, who suddenly,
like Augustus, gives Peace unto the whole Earth, etc.

Astrological Judgments for the Year 1700.
IN this year we have only two Eclipses of the Moon, February the 28, Eclipsed
visible in.

August the 18, Eclipsed invisible in.

December the 29, in.


the one in Virgo, and the other in Pisces, likewise a Conjunction of Saturn
and Mars on the 29th of December, in Pisces, the great Dignities of Jupiter,
from which Configurations, I judge there will be no great matter of business in
Agitation this year, only every Nation will be endeavoring to settle it self,
for all Princes have a strong inclination for Peace, and the continuance
thereof; for most Princes will make Leagues more firm and strict than formerly;
here will be almost a new World, for our Farmers now take pleasure in their
Husbandry; the Merchants has prosperous Returns, and the Mechanics quick
Trading, every Man repairs his former losses; and soon after follows the
destruction of Rome, with the downfall of the Pope: England be thou content,
and return God the due praise for the many Blessings he affords thee annually;
for the late Sextil of Saturn and Jupiter in their own proper Houses, does
promise Peace and Tranquillity to thee, and indeed all the World: Now old men
live their full years, and our Youth grow up to Men's Estates, etc, Yet I must
tell you by the way, that these Eclipses of the Moon in Virgo and Pisces, with
the Conjunction of Saturn and Mars also, will leave some notable impression
upon those places under the Signs wherein they happen, and what those Effects
will be, I shall leave you to examine Mr. Lilly's Annus Tenebrosus, Printed
1652.

Astrological Judgments for the Year 1701.
IN this year we have no less than four Eclipses of the Luminaries, January the
28, Eclipsed in visible in.

February the 11, Eclipsed visible in.

July the 2, Eclipsed visible in and great.

August the 7, Eclipsed invisible in.

October the 2, from and.


viz. two of the Sun and as many of the Moon; we have also an Opposition
between Saturn and Mars from Virgo and Pisces: The first Eclipse of the Sun is
in the second Face of Aquarius: The second Eclipse of the Sun falls in the
second Face of Leo; but the first Eclipse of the Moon falls in the first Face
of Virgo; and the second Eclipse of the Moon, happens in the last Face of
Aquarius, but what they portend, or are the forerunners of, that I shall leave
to Astrologers to determine when the time comes: For I am apt to believe that
some Nations will not see an end of their Troubles till Doomsday, etc.
Therefore let no Man think himself happy, until the day of his Death, etc.
According to the Rudolphin Tables in Mr. Coley's Clavis of Astrology: The next
Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter will fall in May 1702, in that Equinoctial
Sign Aries, the Ascendant of England.

Readers, in this my Astrological Judgment for 20 years, I have considered
every year the Figure of the Suns Revolution, as well as the Configurations of
the Superior Planets and Eclipses, etc.

Nemo sine crimine vivit. That Man never breathed yet, nor never shall,
That did all well, and had no fault at all.
Here follows a Treatise of the Pestibence, both for Prevention and Cure
thereof, etc.
IN the first place, let such as would avoid this Disease, avoid the fear
thereof, for fear changes the Blood into the Nature of the thing feared, the
Imagination ruling the Spirits Natural, etc. Secondly, Let the Body be kept
soluble, if it be not so Naturally, take a Scruple of Pillalae Ruffi
Pestilentialis, at Night when you go to Bed, etc. Thirdly, And if the Body be
full of Blood, bleed so much as strength and age will permit, etc. Fourthly,
Take a Spoonful of Vinegar of Squills, three or four times a day, viz. at ten
of the Clock in the Morning, and just after Dinner, and at four in the
Afternoon, and likewise after Supper. Fifthly, Take the quantity of a Hazel-Nut
of Methridate, it is thus made; gather half a handful of green Rue, any Sunday
morning a little after Sunrising, then take six blew Figs, and six Walnuts,
and forty Juniper Berries, and a little Bay Salt, beat these altogether into an
Electuary. Sixthly, Let all Passions and Perturbations of mind be avoided, and
likewise all violent motions; and likewise, I shall advise all those which love
their Healths to avoid the drinking of Wine and strong Drink, for all such
things as these inflame the Blood. Seventhly, Let all People keep their Houses
pure and clean, for a foul House is like soft Wax, sitting to receive any
impression; also let there be a good Fire kept therein; and let your Diet be of
good Juice, quick of digestion, and be sure you eat those things which are
sharp with your Meats, as Vinegar, Verjuice, Oranges, Juice of Lemmons, and
Citrons, or Pomgranets, let all Fruits be avoided, except such as are sower;
let not the Stomach be overcharged with excess of Meat or Drink, and in Summer
time let the Blood be cooled with cool Herbs, as Endive, Lettuce, Purslain,
Succory; and let your Drink be Whey clarified with them; let your smells be of
L^udanum Storax, Calamitis, Camphire, Cinnamon, Nutmegs, Wood of Aloes, Liquid
Storax, etc. Lastly, These things being taken inwardly are preventional and
resist the Diseases, viz. Angelica Roots, Zodoary, Bolearmeniack, Terra limina,
Methridate, Treacle, Tormentil, and Petasitis Roots, and Citron Pills; thus
much for Prevention.

In the next place I come to Provision for it when prevention is too late; and
first of all, that Provision may be timely, I begin with the Signs of one
Infected, which are 12: The first is when the outward Members be cold, and the
inward Members burning hot: the second is heaviness, weariness, sloth, and
indisposition of the whole Body, and difficulty in breathing: the third is pain
and heaviness in the Head: the fourth is carefulness of mind, and sadness: the
fifth is a mavelous inclination to sleep for the most part, for sometimes
watching and raving vex them: the sixth is the flowing of the Eyes: the seventh
is the loss of appetite: the eighth is immoderate thirst, and often vomiting:
the ninth is bitterness, and dryness of the Mouth: the tenth is the pulse is
swift, small, and deep: the eleventh is the Urine for the most part thick and
stinking: the twelfth and most certain sign of all is, if there appear risings
behind the Ears, under the Arm-holes, or in the Groins, without any manifest
cause known, or, and if Carbuncles arise suddenly in any other Member, these
when they rise shows Naturh is strong and able, because it thrusts the venom
from it; in the beginning of the Sickness, nay, many times before the Body
feels it self sick; now these risings appearing in any place, show which of the
Vitals is most afflicted with the Disease; for if they appear about the Ears,
the Brain is most annoyed, by reason that is the purging place of the Brain; if
the rising appear under the Arms, then the Heart is the part afflicted, for
that is the purging place of the Heart; but and if it appear in the Groin, the
Liver is most infected, for the Groin is the purging place thereof; but if no
rising appear at all, it fore-shews Nature to be weak, and not able to expel
and thrust forth the Venom; but when those spots appear that are called
Tokens, they shall show that the whole Body Universally is Corrupted, etc. If
you feel your self infected first upon a full Stomach, take a Vomit presently;
also in the beginning of the Disease, let the Diseased Person Blood on that
side that the rising appears, as if it should happen in the Neck, bleed in the
Cephalica on that Arm, viz. if it be on the right side, bleed the right Arm, if
on the left side, bleed the left Arm, if the rising appear under the Arm, bleed
in the Basilica of the Arm on that side the rising appears, but if it appear in
the Groin, breathe a Vein in the Ancles of the side it appears on, but if none
at all appear, consider which parts are most grieved with Pains and Aches, and
proceed in Blood-letting, according to the former Rules; Sweating also is a
very Sovereign remedy, which you may effect by some such Medicines as these,
viz. Methridate, Venice-Treacle, Mathiolus his great Antidote,
Black-Cherry-Water, Serpentary Roots, Electuarium de Ovo, the Blood being
cooled with this or the like Juleps, and let him or her drink no other Drink:
take Hartshorn and Ivory, of each one Ounce and a half; of the flowers of
Violets, Burrage, Bugloss, Clove-gilly-flowers, Rosemary, and Marigolds, of
each two Drams; of the Roots of Petasitis, and Zedoary, of each three Drams; of
the Roots of Scorzonera, one Ounce, boil them all in a Pottle of Water until it
comes to a Quart, and when it is almost boiled, add to it Saffron and
Chochaneal, of each ten Grains, then strain it, and add to it Syrrup of
Violets, Clove-gilly-flowers, and Melessaphylli fernelii, of each one Ounce,
Oil of Sulphur, 12 Drops, let this be drank so often as the sick is a dry; if
the Diseased be astringent, keep the Body soluble with Clysters, and let them
be refreshed and strengthened with Cordials; and if they sleep not, provoke
sleep with Diascordium, but have a care of Opiates in the beginning of the
Disease; if they vomit much, as some do vomit up all they do eat and drink,
stay it with Spirit of Mint, or bake a Toast very well, then dip it in Wine
Vinegar, chew a little of this while it is hot, and hold the rest to your Nose,
and it will close up the mouth of the Stomach; and if any swelling do rise,
consider first whether it be likely to brake or not, that you may know by its
lying deep in the Flesh and looking white, it is not likely to break, you must
then anoint it with Oil of Lillies, or Oil of Camomell; but if it rise to a
Head, and look Red, and lie not deep in the Flesh, it will break, then take a
young Pidgeon, pull off the Feathers from the tail, and hold her bare Fundament
to the swelling, and it will draw out all the Venom; some lay Venice Treacle
to it, for Venice Treacle draws the Venom to it, but sometimes the swelling
falls down again, and is black, this shows great danger of Life, and that comes
through cold taken; therefore you must be very careful, and see that you do not
take cold in this Disease, for it is very dangerous; but when it is too late to
prevent; the Remedy thereof, presently take a Pidgeon, and with a sharp Knife,
slit her through the breast to the Back, break her open and apply her yet alive
to the place, if this do no good, apply a cupping Glass to the place, for a
desperate Disease must have a desperate Cure; for what is it that a Man will
not do to save his Life, so long as there is hopes, when the sore is broken,
apply a Milliot Plaster to it, and tent it with Linimentum Arcei, and make no
great haste to heal it up: Lastly, And if Tokens appear, which by most people
is affirmed and firmly belived, to be an infallible sign of Death, let the
Person so infected be let Blood, and when you have so done, give such Physic
as shall be thought fit by an able Physician, for the cleansing of the Body
from all ill humors, and let the sick have such Cordials as shall cool the
Blood and strengthen Nature; then see, through the providence of God, whether
Nature will not be able to rout the Disease. Another Remedy for those that have
the Tokens, which is somewhat more desperate than the former, as thus, whilst
natural heat remains, wrap up the sick Person in a Blanket wet in cold Water,
and that will cause a violent Sweat, and thereby purges out the Corruption from
the Blood, etc. For a Plague Sore Boil, or Carbuncle, Bay Salt dried, and
beaten into fine Powder, and well incorporated with the yolks of Eggs, makes an
excellent Plaster, being spread upon Leather: This also is an excellent remedy
for the Plague, take Ivy Berries when they are Ripe, and dry them, then take
half a Dram of the Powder of them in Plantain-Water, and sweat upon it:
another, if a piece of Angle-Gold be put into Juice of Lemmons, and after 24
hours taken out again, and a little Angelica Root in powder put into it, and
drunk by such as have the Plague, cures to admiration, but you must gather the
Angelica on a Sunday just as the Sun rises, because it is a Herb of the Sun;
and the Gold should be put in at the same time, etc. So much for the Prevention
and Cure of the Pestilence, etc.

But if Nature frown, the Case is hard,
And if Art want, the matter all is marred.
Do not we know that the Learned Physician giving a Medicine to his sick
Patient, expects not that it should immediately operate, some hours he
allows for the Medicines operation: God is our Physician, the Heavens his
storehouse, or Shop, the Sun, Moon, and Stars his Instrumental Medicines and
Drugs, their motion, his time he gives in operation: If Physic work not, as
the Learned Doctor conceives it ought to do, (aliquid latet) there is an
obstruction he little thought of: Therefore if I mistake or fail in these my
Prognostics, perhaps the Great Jehovah has reserved the Honor for some more
worthy and deserving person than I am, therefore blinds my Senses, or else
permits me not to see, or foretell what those Heavenly Messengers are the
forerunners of, etc.

FINIS.

