King William's TOLERATION: BEING AN EXPLANATION OF THAT Liberty of Religion,
Which may be Expected from His Majesty's Declaration.

WITH A BILL FOR Comprehension and Indulgence, Drawn up in Order to an Act of
Parliament.

LICENSED, March the 25. 1689, James Fraser.

LONDON: Printed for Robert Hayhurst, at the Axe, in Little Britain, 1689,

Toleration Explained.
SINCE it has pleased his present Gracious Majesty, William the Third, in his
Declaration, upon his Coming into the Kingdom, to signify, That this
Expedition was intended for no other design, but to have a free Parliament, and
to have That (as more especially expressing his mind) for the making such Laws,
as may Establish a good Agreement between the Church of England, and all
Protestant Dissenters; as also for the Covering of all such, who will live
peaceably under the Government, as becomes good Subjects, from all Persecution
upon the account of their Religion: I cannot but think it a very seasonable and
acceptable piece of Service, to make some little larger Explanation upon these
Words; which carry in them the full Purport of these two things, which we call
Comprehension and Indulgence; and which no Wise man but will see (if they be
drawn up into such a Bill, as they ought, and pass the Houses) are the true
means to the Settlement, and Happiness of the Nation.

I shall present the Explanation; Then offer such a Bill; And make some
Animadversion on it; and that is the Business of this Paper.

For the first of these, in this Achievement then, or Design (full of all
Princely Wisdom, Honesty, and Goodness) there is a Double interest to be
distinguished, and weighed; That of Religion it self, and that of the Nation.

The Advance of Religion does consist much in the Unity of its Professors, both
in Opinion and Practice; to be of one Mind, and one Heart, and one Way (in
Discipline and Worship) so far as may be according to the Scriptures.

The Advance of the Nation does lie in the Freedom and Flourishing of Trade,
and ingrafting the whole Body into the Common Benefit, and Dependence on the
Government.

The One of these calls for an Established Order and Agreement: the Other
bespeaks an Indulgence, and the fullest Liberty of Conscience that is but
Tolerable.

For while People are in danger of suffering about Religion, they dare not
launch into Trade, but keep their Money, as knowing not into what Streights
they may be driven: and when, in reference to their Sect and Party, they are
held under Severity, it is easy for those who are designing Heads, to Mould
them into Wrath and Faction; which, without that occasion, would melt and
dissolve it self into bare dissent of Opinion, peaceably rejoicing under the
Enjoyment of an equal Protection.

The King is concerned as Supreme Governor, and as Christian Governor. As he
is King, he is to seek the Welfare of the Nation; as he is Christian, the
Flourishing of Religion.

The Protestant Religion is particularly his interest, not only as embarked
with Holland, and his Allies; but as this Kingdom does lie in Balance still
with its Neighbor Nations.

The Judgment now of some has been for a Comprehending Act, which might take
in those that are for our Parochial Churches, that the Laws then might be more
severely Executed upon all those that separate from Them, in order to their
Reduction: But the Judgment of some others is for a Free and Equal Act of Crace
to all indifferently, whether Separatists or Others, abhorring Comprehension,
as more dangerous to them upon that account mentioned, than all the Acts that
have passed.

Neither of these judge up to the full interest of the King and Kingdom, as is
proposed. It becomes not him, whose Principles will admit him to own our
Parochial Churches, and enjoy a Living, to be willing to have his Brethren,
that cannot, to be given up to Persecution. And it becomes not the Separatist,
if he may not enjoy his Conscience, to repine and envy another for reaping any
farther Emolument, seeing both of them (supposing the latter may do so) will
have as much at the Bottom, as can be in their Capacities desired of either.

It is an Act therefore of a Mixed Complexion, providing both Comprehension and
Indulgence, for the different Parties, that must serve the Nation.

There are Two forts of the Protestant Dissenters. One that owns the
Established Ministry, and our Parish Congregations, and are in a Capacity of
Union upon that account, desiring it heartily upon such considerations only, as
may but satisfy their Consciences in the Matter: The Other that owns not our
Churches, and so are incapable of a Conjunction, who do not, and cannot desire,
or seek it.

For the One, that which is to be proposed, is a farther Latitude in the
present Constituted Order, that such may be received; and this we call
Comprehension. For the Other, there is indeed nothing can be done to bring
those in, and join them with us in Parochial Union; yet is there this to be
propounded, That we bear with them, and not let any one that lives peaceably be
Persecuted for his Conscience; and this we call Indulgence.

If the Presbyterian now may be Comprehended, he will be satisfied to act in
his Ministry, without any endeavoring the alteration of Episcopacy, any
otherwise than as conducive to advance that Comprehension. If the
Congregationalist be Indulged, he will be satisfied, though he be not
Comprehended; for That he cannot come up to: And so shall there be no
Disobligation put on any but all be pleased, and enjoy the Benefit of such a
Bill.

Let but the Stakes for Comprehension be set wide enough, to take in all who
can own, and come into the Public Liturgy, (which are far the greater Weight
of the Nation) and when the Countenance of Authority, and all State-Emoluments
are cast into one Scale; and nothing but Labor and Conscience put in the
other, the Men that Conform not, being let alone to come to themselves, without
Persecution to inflame them, or Preferment to encourage them, (especially if
one Expedient be used, that is, some other Bill be preferred against
Pluralities, to let in the Comprehended to something, that such as come in may
find it really better to them, to be a Priest to a Tribe, than a Levite to a
Family,) we need not doubt, but Time, the Mistress of the Wise and the Unwise,
will discover the peaceable Fruit of such Counsels.

Thus much for the Design and Explanation of it. Now for the Second thing, A
Bill to comprize the Contents, and to prevent all malignant and insufficient
Endeavors of any Person or Party, to shorten, or widen that Liberty of
Religion, more than is meet, or charitable to their Brethren, on one side or
the other, which we may expect from our King and Queen, and present Parliament,
for the accomplishment of His Majesty's Royal Words, so well tempered with
Benignity and Wisdom, in his Declaration at first mentioned, and unto which the
Nation may undoubtedly trust: I shall need nothing, but to Re-print a Bill,
which any one may find who please, (that no Body may take Exceptions thereupon)
in a certain bound Book, called, The Samaritan, set forth in the Year, 1682.
being the result of much Agitation in the House of Commons, for Ease and
Mitigation to the Disenters so long ago, and put together by consent of such
that knew best their own Grievances in this manner, to lie by, and serve such
an Occasion.

The Bill for Comprehension and Indulgence.
WHEREAS The Peace of the State is highly concerned in the Peace of the Church;
therefore, at all Times, but especially in this Conjuncture, it is most
Necessary to be preserved. In Order therefore to remove Differences, and
Dissatisfactions, which may arise among Protestants: BE IT ENACTED, by the
King's most Excellent Majesty, by, and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, and
by the Authority of the same, THAT if any Person shall (without making any
Interpretation of his own, unless it be such as shall be allowed by his
Diocesan, which if it be Orthodox he shall do) Subscribe and Declare his
Assent, and Consent unto, and Approbation of the Articles of Religion,
mentioned in the Statute made in the 13th. Year of the Late Queen Elizabeth;
except only, the 34th. 35th. and 36th. Articles; and also, except these Words
in the 20th. Article, viz. The Church has Power to decree Rites and
Ceremonies, and Authority in Controversies of Faith; in like manner, as he is
already obliged to Subscribe and Declare his Assent and Consent unto, and
Approbation of all the said 39. Articles: Every such Person shall be as capable
of Taking any Degree, in either University, or being ordained Priest or Deacon,
or of being collated, admitted, or put into, and to hold and enjoy any
Ecclesiastical Benefice, or Promotion, as if the said Person had Subscribed and
Declared his Assent and Consent unto, and Approbation of all the said Articles
of Religion.

AND be it further Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That every Person
Ordained, between the Year of our Lord, 1644. and the First of May, in the
Year, 1660. according to the Form of Ordination, used by laying on of Hands by
the Presbytery, shall be as capable of any Ecclesiastical Benefice or
Promotion, as if he had been Ordained, according to the Form of Making and
Ordaining Priests and Deacons in the Church of England. And that every Person
Ordained only by Presbyters, since the Year of our Lord 1660. shall not be
admitted to any Benefice, unless he receive a Second Imposition of Hands from
some Bishop, to recommend him to the Grace of God, for the Work or Exercise of
his Office, in the Place or Charge unto which he is Called; and the Bishop
shall frame (...) Words accordingly.

AND WHEREAS, by a Statute made in the 13th. and 14th. Year of his Late
Majesty's Reign, Entitled, An Act for the Uniformity of the Public Prayer,
and Administration of the Sacraments, and other Rites and Ceremonies; and for
Establishing the Form of Ordaining and Consecrating Bishops, Priests and
Deacons, in the Church of England, there are Two Declarations imposed upon
several Persons, and in such manner as is there Specified:

BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, by the Authority aforesaid, That no Person, that shall
hereafter be presented, or collated, or put into any Ecclesiastical Benefice,
or Promotion, shall declare his unfeigned Assent and Consent to the Use of all
things contained, and prescribed in the Book of Common Prayer; nor make and
subscribe the other Declaration or Acknowledgment, viz. (I. A. B. Do declare,
That it is not Lawful to take up Arms against the King* etc.) according to the
Forms in the said Act, in the 13th. and 14th. Year of his Majesty's Reign,
directed and appointed: But that both the said Declarations shall be wholly
omitted; any thing in the aforesaid Statute to the contrary, notwithstanding.

AND be it further Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That no Person shall
hereafter be capable of being collated, admitted, or put into any
Ecclesiastical Benefice, or Promotion, before such time as the said Person
shall have taken the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance before the Bishop of the
Diocese (who is hereby empowered to administer the same) and shall also make and
subscribe the Declaration, mentioned in an Act of Parliament, made in the 30th.
Year of the Reign of King Charles the II. Entitled, An Act to prevent Papists
from Sitting in either House of Parliament: And the Name of every Person, so
taking the Oath, and making and subscribing the Declaration aforesaid, shall be
enrolled, with the Day and Time of his taking the same, in Rolls to be kept by
the respective Bishops of each Diocese, for that purpose.

AND be it further Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That no Person shall
hereafter be obliged to take the Oath of Canonical Obedience, or to make the
Subscription required by the Canons, or to go to the Bishops for a License to
Preach, being already Lawfully Ordained; any Statute or Custom to the contrary,
notwithstanding.

AND be it further Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That from henceforth,
no Person wear a Surplice, during the Time of Reading Common Prayer, or
Preaching, or performing any Religious Worship, in any Church or Chapel
whatsoever; except only in the Chapel of the Kings Majesty, and all Cathedral
Churches of this Realm of England, and Dominion of Wales.

AND be it further Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That from henceforth no
Minister, or other Ecclesiastical Person, shall be obliged or compelled to use
the Sign of the Cross in Baptism; or any Parent obliged to have his Child
Christened by the Minister of the Parish, if the said Minister will not use, or
omit the Sign of the Cross, according to the desire of the Parents; who in that
Case may procure some other Minister to do it. Nor shall the Child of any
Person be refused Baptism, for want of any Godfathers, and Godmothers, so
long as the Parent is present to fill their place.

AND be it further Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That no Minister, or
Ecclesiastical Person, that shall officiate in the Administration of the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, shall refuse it to any person, that desires to
be admitted to the same, although such person shall not use the gesture of
Kneeling in the Act of receiving, nor come up to the Comunion-Table; but shall
go to such convenient place of the Church, where such Person is; and there give
it him in some other decent gesture, of Ordinary use in the Reformed Churches.
Nor shall any Minister be troubled for the withholding his own Act, in
delivery of the Sacrament, from any whom he judges Notoriously Unworthy, or
unfit for it: Nor for Suspending his Reading the Sentence of Excommunication,
against any of his Parish, until he be satisfied in the Case, that his Crime
deserves it.

And to the intent, that Uniformity may (so far as it is needful, and so far as
it can) be still Maintained, be it Enacted moreover, by the Authority
aforesaid, That every Parson, Vicar, and Lecturer, shall conform to the Liturgy
of the Church, in the Ordinary Lord's Day Service, Reading the same by himself,
or Assistant, as by Law it is Established: Reserving a Necessary, and Just
Liberty for his Conscience, in any Matter or Words, which himself esteems
unlawful (and so to him it is Sin) and also for Prudence, in the whole
management, to Act with respect to Time, Place and Circumstances so as appears
most conducive to Edification. And as long as the main Body of the Service
appointed, is there Read, and the substance of the Offices be there Performed,
he shall not be Punishable for any breach otherwise of the Acts of Uniformity;
any thing in the said Statutes to the contrary notwithstanding.

AND for as much as there are some Ministers of a good Life, that cannot
(according to their Judgments) allow of our Parochial Churches, nor the Book of
Liturgy; but do choose to Worship God, and Jesus Christ, in the way of their
Gathered, and Separate Congregations; and crave the Protection, and Clemency of
the King, upon their Allegiance as other Subjects:

BE it Enacted furthermore, by the Authority aforesaid, That for the Happiness,
and quiet of the Realm, and the Reduction of these Men, by other means, than
those that have hitherto proved Unsuccessful, All Prosecution of the Penal
Laws, against the Nonconformists, of every sort that profess the Protestant
Religion, be suspended, until, by a further Act of Parliament, those that are
fit to be Tolerated, and the Intolerable shall be distinguished; and such Order
be taken as is necessary, to the Settling a firm and lasting Union in the
Nation.

Thus much for the First, and Second thing, the Design and Bill; now for the
Third, some little Animadversions upon it. I must confess my self One, that am
concerned, and that have been so still, when Parliaments Sat, both in my Mind,
and my Endeavors to the utmost, for Peace and Union in the Church; which is
the cause that this Bill, thus produced, was put and left upon Record, on
purpose in that Book mentioned, for some future Parliament to use it self, or
to take Measure by, for making another, if they would fit the Nonconformists
General Case, and accomplish the End designed. And now am I afraid at my Heart,
lest when we have such an opportunity, as we never had really before, when
King, and Queen, and Parliament, and the whole People are for Uniting the
Protestants, as our Interest, against the danger of the Papists from abroad,
and at home, there should be some Obstruction yet put to this Accommodation,
which is so forward and hopeful; either through the Machinations of some close
Enemies, by such Methods as we cannot discern, and so cannot prevent; or
through the shortness of true Friends, who for want of knowing perfectly what
it is the Nonconformist must have, may be over-seen, or over-reacht, and sit
down with something less than will serve the turn; and for that Reason have I
gathered together, and do put forth this Paper, though not without much
Reluctance; because I know well, that some men will be ready to say, Who are
you? and what have you to do with these Matters, which belong to the
Parliament? But I say, They do belong to me, and are the Concern of every Body;
and if, for lack of a little intimation at first, the Nonconformist should come
to have their Consciences choakt, and be deprived of their Liberty at last,
those Men of all other, that now would stave me back, and reprove me for
meddling, might more deservedly be the First to upbraid us all, and say, Why did
you not look better to it, when it was Time? You may thank your selves; it was
through your own negligence, that you had not what you would, at such a Season.

Be it known therefore, (or remembered) that there being two Bills in the House
of Commons upon the Anvil, in Charles the Second's time; the One of them for
Comprehension, the Other for Indulgence; (the Titles were otherwise worded, but
the Intent such): The Bill for Indulgence was so well attended by an
industrious Member of the House, that nothing was wanting to the Completing of
it; but the Bill for Comprehension, being drawn up by Gentlemen that did not,
and could not fully understand the Scruples of the Nonconformists, was both
imperfect and neglected: Only one Person, without door, having procured a Copy,
and finding it so; did by applying himself to several Members about it, get
something to be changed, or put into it, at the Committee; and afterward (with
Consent, and Assistance of some of his Brethren) improve and perfect it,
against the Sitting of the Parliament at Oxford; but they sitting not, it was
thought good to put it as a Memorial into that Book, and for that end, as is
mentioned.

When I say, now, this Bill was perfected; as I mean it only in regard to the
Contents, leaving the Words to be formed better, as a Parliament pleased; so by
this Perfection, I mean not such a Measure, as all those Condescentions, or
Allowances, sit to to be made to the Dissenter, may not Exceed (for there is
the Service Book may be Revised, and every thing in it, that gives occasion of
stumbling to any, may be changed, and there are other things may be expected at
this time, which could not rationally heretofore): but such a Measure, as they
must not fall short of, without rendering the Bill insignificant. For if there
be ten Thorns in the Nonconformists Foot, and the Bishops pull out Nine of
them, and leave the Tenth, he cannot go along with them for that One only.
There are some few Additions therefore inserted in this Bill, which were not
put into it by the Committee at that time; the Reasons whereof will appear in
their own Light; Excepting Two of them, which I will therefore speak something
about, the One being concerning the Subscription of the Articles, the Other
concerning Orders.

I will begin with that concerning Orders. In the late Times, when the Bishops
were down, many were Ordained by Presbyters, and the Parliament was willing to
allow those Orders, as good in a Case of Necessity: But there being Others
ordained since the return of the Bishops, there was no Provision made for such
in the Bill. As for these Persons therefore, that ^e neglect of the Bishops may
be countenanced, here is the Proposal of such a Laying on of their Hands, which
may be lawfully received. For there is Ordinatio ad Ossicium, and Reordinatio
ad Exeritium particulare may consist together. An Ordination to the Office, or
Ministry it self, is not to be repeated. He that is once ordained to That,
whether by Presbyters, or Bishops, cannot receive the Spiritual Power (or
Character,) or be made Ministers, Again: But there is a Laying on of Hands to
the Work of that Office, in regard to a new Charge, as Paul and Barnabas, who
were Ministers before, are yet separated to that peculiar Work, unto which the
Holy Ghost called them (Acts 13.) By the Laying on of the Hands of those at
Antioch, and such an Ordination as this, being capable to be used more than
once, is the Remedy applied therefore to these Persons in the Bill, as the only
medium for Resolution of this Difficulty.

For the Other matter concerning the Subscription to the Churches Articles, I
have something more than this, to say about it. Whosoever have read a Book,
called, A part of Register, wherein there is a relation of several things, in
reference to the Nonconformists in Q. Elizabeth's Days, they will find, that
nothing was then so grievous to them, as the Subscriptions of those Times, and
the Subscription to these Articles was one; which gives me Affliction to
consider, how by the Contexture of both those Bills, before named, and like
now, to be revived, and be two again, the Nonconformist Ministers whole Freedom
from Prosecution of the Law against him, is made to depend upon his Subscribing
the Articles of Religion; A bottom I must say, more narrow, more servile, and
less ingenuous, than might be wished. For what man of a free Judgment can
Subscribe to the 39. or 36. Articles, which himself has not drawn up, without
a Liberty of his own interpretation? Indeed, if that were a thing lawful, upon
the reading the Articles, to frame a Sense of ones own, and Subscribe it in
that sense; nothing would be more easy, than such a Subscription: But when the
Impositions of our Superiors must conscientiously be taken in the Sense of the
Imposers, or else we do but prevaricate, are false, or perjurious in the sight
of God: there is nothing almost under Heaven, that a Man should be more tender
of, than this business of Subscribing. The doubtfulness of many about the
Ceremonies, is not to be compared to a Conviction of Conscience that a Man must
not Subscribe to any point of Doctrine, which he believes untrue; and I must
needs add, that Except the Declaring and Swearing, that it is not lawful to
take Arms against those that are Commissionated by the King, upon any cause,
there is no part of Conformity more hard to my Genius, than this Subscription.
It is an unfortunate thing therefore, that, when Assent and Consent to the
Liturgy, is found a thing so truly grievous to all, as to be judged necessary
to be taken away; this Assent and Consent yet, and Approbation of the Articles,
should be thought no Grievance to any Body. Especially, when in One, the
Conformist has a Shift, or Salvo, that he Subscribes but to the Use: but in
the Other, there is no Shift, no Salvo at all, nothing but downright
Hypocrisy and False-hood; when a Man comes and professes his Assent and
Consent to, and Approbation of, those Articles in the Churches Sense, but does
understand them to be true, only in his own. I know indeed, that in the Opinion
of many, some of our more eminent Divines, the Subscribing the Articles is to
be taken for nothing but a Respect to the Church, and an Engagement, that they
will not Preach against them: But these Men, how worthy, or how conscientious
they be otherwise, must be told, that in this they show no Conscience; for I
would know from any such Man, in what Dictionary I shall find, that Assent and
Consent to an Article and Approbation of it, is no more than I will not Preach
against it. And what Imposition after that shall hold him, who can get leave of
his Conscience to make such an Evasion? Besides that, to promise I will never
Preach or Write against these Articles, if I believe the Church mistaken in the
Doctrine of any of them, is really to me a harder Task, than to Subscribe them;
in as much as to tell one Lie, is not so grievous as to tell a great many;
which as often as I break my Promise, I must be doing.

The Question therefore here arises upon this, What the Parliament should do
about this Subscription, seeing it is a Grievance undoubtedly, and ought to be
Redressed? Now there are Four ways may be proposed; Either the removing it, or
changing it, or providing a Salve against it; or that, which is least, letting
this little Addition stand, and be allowed That which is put into the Bill, for
that end.

For the first Way, I must needs say, That that is the easiest; and it is a
common Saying, The first is best. And what does hinder, but this Assent and
Consent to the Articles may be taken away, as well as Assent and Consent to the
Book of Common Prayer? Here are the same crooked^ss's to stick in our Throats,
and why should not both Declarations fare alike? Why, is it not enoug^ for a
Man to profess his Belief of the Scripture, and of the Apostles Creed, and to
take the Test against Popery, to qualify him for the benefit of any Bill of
this kind?

For the Second Way, which I suppose to be the most likely to take Effect, is
this. Let these Declarations of our Assent and Consent to, and Approbation of
the Articles, which we are required now to Subscribe, be turned into a
Declaration of That which the more ingenuous of our Conformists do say, is all
their meaning in their Subscribing of them; and that Expedient may do the
business. We must not Subscribe to such Words as these, with the Reservation of
a less Meaning, That is Equivocation; but we may Subscribe to such Words as
signify only that Meaning, instead of these which signify more, and be at
ease in our Subscription. I A. B. do declare, That I do bear that due Respect
to the Church of England, and her Book of Articles, as an Instrument of
Concord; That I will not Seditiously or Schismatically, I will not directly or
expressly Preach or Write against any of them, to the Breach of Charity, or
making disturbance among Christians. There are some such Words as these must be
put in, for consequentially and reductively, or before we are aware innocently,
and sometime necessarily, in regard to some point of Doctrine, which we think
in their Sense contrary to Scripture; we must and shall Preach against them,
and yet our Promise must not be broken. I will, to avoid Scruple, quite as to
my self, and for the fuller satisfaction to my Conformist Brethren, and to
acquit my Conscience before all sorts of Men, make this Declaration of my own
Accord. That I do from my Heart give my Consent to the Reformation of Religion,
which was made by the Church of England in her Doctrine, and her Worship: I do
esteem those Persons, that are made Ministers by her Book of Orders, to be
lawful Ministers, and our Parochial Congregations to be true Christian
Churches, consisting of Pasture and People, who have a Fundamental Authority
from Christ, of Teaching and Ruling them according to his Institution; I do
submit to her Government, as under the King: And I do receive her Articles and
Homilies, as Books full of wholesome Truth, and good Instructions, Instrumental
to Concord; and that They contain in them all things necessary to Salvation.

For the Third Way, It is that, which, if I might choose, I should prefer
before any, as most agreeable to my Spirit (for the sake of other Encumbrances
like this): and my Proposal shall be the putting into the Bill (or such Bills)
a Clause for the saving a Man's Conscience, though he do Subscribe, and submit
to such Injunctions as these are; and that Clause which I would offer upon this
account, should be to this purpose, committing the Words (here and before) if
they offend, to the amendment of the Lawyers. -- And forasmuch as all
Impositions are to be taken in the Sense of the Imposers, unless some provision
of Liberty, Allowance, or Exception be made for the Taker to do otherwise, it
is hereby declared, That this Subscription (Assent, Consent, Approbation) is
not imposed, or to be impoted on any in the very Sense and Meaning of the
Compilers of the Articles or Imposers (whereof a Man can never be sure, and
hardly so much persuaded of sometimes, as to act in Faith) but in a Rational
Construction (agreeable to the Holy Scripture) of the Subscribers own, or of
some judicious Expositor; that is, in the Terms of the School, not in the
Authentic, but a Doctrinal Interpretation.

For the Fourth and Last Way, which is That I take in this Bill, in regard to
the Passing it with the less Notice (for it is brought-in, as the Reader may
see, in a Parenthesis); I must confess it to be some thing coincident with the
third, but more confined; consisting in a Liberty of a Man's own Sense, for
such as scruple at any Article, but so as to bring his Explication to the
Bishop, that if it be Heretical, he may reject him; if Orthodox, receive him:
and so a due Regard be had to the Consciences of such Persons, and yet the
Church not neglected upon that Account.

By this way of Providing against the Scruples of the more Considerate, about
this momentous piece of Conformity, the Subscription to the Articles, (when the
Provision only of the Exception of Three of them will be too short) we must not
understand this Bill to be drawn up so, because this way is best; but upon
Supposition, that neither of the other Proposals would be granted, and also,
because this Bill is no new Bill now, but Produced: This is a Bill Printed Six
or Seven Years since; and at that time, this way was that only which could be
thought on (and in this manner to be brought in) as more likely to be Passed.

Howbeit, the Scene now being altered, I cannot tell but one of the other ways
may pass sooner; and this I am sure, that some Condescension herein, appears
more and more necessary from that Consideration which is yet farther to be
pressed, the difficulty (I mean) at bottom, which lies here. The Articles of
the Church must be taken in the Sense of the Church. The Parliament indeed
imposes the Subscription; but is not the Imposer in whose Sense the Articles
must be taken, because it enjoins them as the Churches Articles, that is all
one as enjoining them to be taken in her Sense; and that Church is the Church
in Q. Elizabeth's Days, when the Articles were compiled and enjoined at first.
And hereupon, I will offer one Instance; and suppose a Man to scruple the 11th.
Article, which tells us, That we are justified by Faith only. I do here believe
in my Conscience, that the Sense wherein the Church then understood This, must
be the Sense of our First Reformers, and that is by Faith taken Objective, in
sensu Correlativo, not as a Work, but an Instrument; which in short is, in such
a Sense (which Divines know) as excludes all Works, Evangelical as well as
Legal, from Justification. I will suppose now, that the Man comes to the
Bishop, and says, He can not subscribe this Article in the Churches Sense,
because he verily believes this to be her Sense; and that to be inconsistent
with St. James, who says directly to the contrary, That by Works a Man is
Justified, and not by Faith only: and therefore desires he may subscribe in his
own Sense, which he is ready to tender, viz. That by Faith he understands
Christianity, or the becoming a Christian; and that by Faith only, he
understands St. Paul's Faith without Works, that is, Faith without the Works of
the Law, or without being Circumcised, and living according to the Laws; and so
he gives in the Sense of St. Paul, for the Sense of the Article; That a Man is
not justified by living according to the Law, but living according to the
Gospel only. I would ask now, Whether there be not reason here, both that such
a Man should not be excluded for this scruple; and that there should be License
provided by some such Clause in the Bill, for the Bishops to admit him upon
this Explanation; Especially, seeing the Reconciliation of St. James and St.
Paul, is thereby made so clear, as it must tempt his Acceptance.

As for the Roman Catholics at last, I will not baulk my Opinion. The King
(while Prince of Orange) has expressly said in his Declaration, that he Excepts
not the Papists, And I need not refrain my constant Thoughts. I am one my self,
be sure, that am not for Popery, but must distinguish between the danger of it
when it is in Dominion, (that is Uppermost by Law or Force) and where it is in
Subjugation: I very much dread the One, I am very gentle toward the Other. In
order to this, I must be against the Permission of Factors for a Foreign
Jurisdiction; yet should not murmur, if the Sanguinary Laws (whereby such a
Crime is made, as Treason, to be capital) were repealed. Again, I am one not
for the Mass, and a general open tolerating its Votaries in the Public
Assemblies; because all Protestants judge it Idolatry, and that open Idolatry is
not to be tolerated, where it can be helped: But for the private peaceable
Recusant, that enjoys his Religion to himself, and meddles not with other
Folks, his Case is the same (I judge) with the Dissenters; and I am still for
our doing to them, as we would have had them do unto us but a while ago, sin
only excepted. Yet not altogether with the Idolater, for then must ye needs go
out of the World.

I have no more to say now, but some little about the turning the Two Bills (as
they were formerly in the House) into One, which is done by the Print from
whence I took it; the Reason whereof, I suppose, was the tediousness of the
Bill for Indulgence; which providing for the Case of so many, and something or
other being like to be omitted, it seemed more easy, and more safe, to wrap up
all these Cases together, in the security of a general Suspension of the Penal
Laws about Religion, until a Parliament come that can have leisure, by a
Committee or Appointment of Two or Three Sedulous Lawyers, that are fit for the
Work, and willing to attend it, to look over all the Statutes that concern
Religion, for the finding out every thing that is hard, and fit to be Repealed,
whether it be the whole Act, (or the Act at Oxford) or part of it (as the
Uniformity Act) to the end, that those Parts and Clauses (if over grievous but
to the Papists themselves) being duly considered, and Matters thoroughly
adjusted, an Act may be drawn up, that should be a Repealing Act, to deliver us
from such Burdens altogether; and that were the most Effectual Indulgence, or
best way to it, that is imaginable: And as for Comprehension then, which is a
matter of more Curiosity, Debate and Counsel, It were well that this Bill here
proposed, might be brought in, and past for a Staying Act, or Interim of
Pacification, until a Trial of the Comprehended; some Consults of the
Comprehended and Indulged; a Convocation of the Conformists, with part of the
Comprehended chosen into that Convocation; a Revisal of the Churches Liturgy,
their Book of Orders, their Articles, their Homilies, their Canons, with other
such preliminary matters pre-ordered, may Administer the Advantage to a more
complete Act, and better Establishment, than can be expected at this Season. I
will conclude with what is apt at present; Comprehension without Indulgence
destroys the Separatist, that is both the Papists and Sectaries. Indulgence
without Comprehension depopulates the Church. Comprehension with Indulgence
Unites the Protestants, secures the Church of England, and gives Ease and
Safety to all People.

ADVERTISEMENT.
ALthough there was so much Care taken of the Bill of Indulgence (as I have
said Page 10.) when drawn up, that nothing needful should be left out; yet am I
told very newly, That there is one Clause in the Act of Uniformity, making
Dissenters liable to pay 100 l. for administering the Sacrament, escaped their
Remembrance; and that it is good therefore some general Words, providing a
Covering for them from all Danger, by Common and Statute Law unknown, as well
as from the Penalties of the Law enumerated, were added to the Bill.

THE POSTSCRIPT.
BEfore I sent the foregoing Sheets to the Press, I understood that the Bill
for Indulgence was brought into the House of Lords; and knowing the Contexture
long since, it made me speak so much of the Subscription to the Articles, as I
have done. Since then I have seen the Bill for Comprehension, which is brought
in There likewise. And though I cannot but in Gratitude take notice of the
Candor in it, that the Subscription to the Articles is waved there; yet do I
find Two things in it, which the Nonconformists will stick at, so that if they
be not mended, the Bill is like to do no Good.

One of these things like to stick, is this Declaration: I A. B. do approve of
the Doctrine, Worship, and Government of the Church of England, as by Law
Established, etc. The Government here intended, includes the Hierarchy, with
its Officers and Offices, Lay-Chancellours, Officials --, and I know not what
more we must Subscribe to, when we say, we approve of this Government. And when
the 36th. Article of the Church is excepted from our Subscription in the Bill
of Indulgence, as known to have been so grievous to the Nonconformists, from
Queen Elizabeth's days until now, in regard to the Archbishops and Bishops,
though it says only, that the Book for their Consecration has in it nothing
Superstitious and Ungodly (which it may not have, though in something otherwise
we may not approve it,) I wonder it should not come to be thought, that such
words would not down with our Nonconformists, I approve of this Government;
Especially when some of the most Grave of them, have took the Covenant for its
Extirpation. I shall therefore humbly beseech the House of Lords, if it be not
too late, or if it be, the House of Commons, that if such a Declaration must be
imposed, some such words as these may be substituted in its room: I A. B. do
heartily approve of the Reformation made by the Church of England, in her
Doctrine and Worship: I shall submit to her Government, so far as I can with a
good Conscience: And I receive her Articles, as conducive to Concord, and
containing in them all things necessary to Salvation.

The Other Thing like to stick, is the Business of Reordination, in regard to
those that have been ordained only by Presbyters; and it is to be noted, that
there is a Device offered in this Bill, for Reconciling the Bishop and
Presbyter, by giving Satisfaction to Both: The Bishop challenges a sole Right
of giving Orders, from the Canons of the Apostles, (as they are called) and
from Councils and Fathers, (even Jerome himself) down to the Reformation: And
the Ministers ordained by Presbyters plead the Custom of the Reformed Churches,
and their Authority from Christ; accounting, that the Spiritual Power comes not
by the Hands which are laid on him, whether of Bishop or Presbyter, (and
therefore says Hooker, We breath not on the Ordained, as Christ did) but flows
immediately (the Conditions being put) from Christ's Institution. If the Bishop
part with this Privilege, he degrades himself of the Power the Church has
given him; and if the Minister recedes from his former Orders, he departs from
the Authority Christ has given him. To reconcile both, this is the Device. The
Bishop shall acknowledge the Person ordained by Presbyters, to be a Minister
already, whose Ministerial Acts have been and are valid, as the Acts of any
other Minister; and that he ordains him not therefore to the Office, which he
has already, but admits him to the Exercise of his Ministry in the Church of
England, and consequently to the Emoluments that may arise to him upon that
Account. The Man was, and is, and must be a Minister of Christ before; but he
is no Legal Minister, or not to be accounted, reputed, held to all Intents and
Purposes a Minister of the Church of England, till he has received Imposition
of Hands from a Bishop. He is a Minister before, in foro Dei, but not till then
a Minister in foro Ecclesiae Anglicanae. As a Man, who is a Graduate, or made
Doctor beyond Sea, and comes to London; he is, and must be acknowledged a true
Doctor; but he shall not have Liberty to Practice, till admitted into our
College of Physicians.

I must confess my self partial in my respect to this Device; for I suppose it
derived from Dr. Wilkins's credit into this Bill; and I know from whence, and
upon what account, he received it. I will therefore say thus much for it; That
if this Device, may be owned, and acknowledged for what it is, that is, a New
Thing, or a New Institution in the Church, for which an Office should be made,
and no trick put on the Nonconformists by it: As I see no cause then, why such
an Ecclesiastical Institution, being necessary for Peace-sake, might not be
Made; so do I apprehend no unlawfulness in the submitting to it. If any ill be
in it, it must lie on the part of the Bishop, who brings in a Thing into the
English Church, which I confess I never read of in Antiquity, and which I
believe is not to be found in Christendom; For a Minister of England is not
Re-ordained by the French, or by the Dutch, to make him a Minister of the
French or Dutch Church, though it might be otherwise here, because the Reason
for it before mentioned, is not there as here: But as to the part of the
Submitter, the evil of Reordination lying only in the Vacating our first
Ministry, which is Sacrilege, and here being no such matter, so long as our
former Ministry is publicly professed by the man himself, and Bishop, and
whole Church, there can be no Evil (I say) in a second Imposition of Hands, as
thus used only, unless you will say, it is a breach of the Third Commandment, a
taking an Ordinance of God in Vain; when there is here no Ordinance of God at
all, but an Humane Institution for so good an end as Peace in the Church; which
being made the Qualification of a person, for the use of his Ministry in
public, and the enjoyment of a Living, Who is the man that will say, it is
done in vain? Nevertheless, if this Device should happily pass Both Houses
(which being a New Thing, and presented bare faced, will rather be called a
Monster, and turned out of Doors) two things must be advised.

One is, That in the administering such an Institution, Instead of these words,
the Bishop is appointed to use, Take thou Authority to Exercise thy Ministry in
the Church of England (whereat the Nonconformist Minister having his
Ministerial Authority already, will Scruple) it is better these be used:
Receive thou Admittance, by the Imposition of my Hands, to the Exercise of thy
Ministry, in the Church of England, and in any Church in my Diocese where thou
shall be called.

The Other is, That the administrating such an humane Ordinance as this, in
order to Union, may not be called Reordination, which is a Name so odious in
the Church in all Ages; but as it is a New Thing, and ought to have a New
Office appointed for it; so it should have a New Name also. Let a Constitution
or Canon be made for it, and an Office or Form to administer it, and let it be
called Cannonical Admission.

And now I have said thus much, This is not the thing wherein I am concerned in
my Bill. To be ordained to the Office of a Minister, does make a Man, in common
account, a Minister of the Universal Church; and a Minister of the Church
Universal, must be a Minister in her Church of England, and of France, and of
Holland, and of every Country; and the Imposition of Hands, to make a Man a
Minister in the Church of England, who was a Minister in every one before, is a
New Thing, (I have said) and perhaps will be thought an Odd Thing too: But to
make a Man, who is a Minister already of the Universal Church, ^o be the
Minister of such a particular place, that was not their particular Minister
before, is no New Thing, nor Odd Thing. And if every Person, not Episcopally
ordained already, shall be bound to go to his Bishop, when he has such a Call,
for his Blessing, with Imposition of Hands in reference to such a Place, that
is, to pray for God's Blessing or Assistance of him, to fulfill that Work;
there can be nothing of Scruple or doubt about the Lawfulness of his so doing.
Only I will suppose an Office here to be made, as I have said before, and in a
Prayer fitted to the Case, the Person being on his knees, and the Bishop
reading over him, I would instead of those words before prescribed, have these
only brought in, -- Whom by this Imposition of my Hands, we recommend to the
Grace of God, for the Work unto which he is called.

One thing yet I must take notice of, That in the Bill for Comprehension in
Charles's time, it came to be allowed at the Committee, that the Ordination of
those that were ordained only by Presbyters, from 1644. to 1660. should be held
good (though Others were left to be Re-ordained); and I cannot but be Sorry,
that a thing so small, so equitable as that (when there was no Bishops to go to
for Orders) should be with drawn; Seeing the Testimony of an English Parliament
to the Validity of Presbyterian Orders, in honor to the Reformed Churches
abroad, were some considerable Attainment.

FINIS.

