A Second Admonition TO THE Dissenting Inhabitants Of the Diocese of DERRY,
CONCERNING, Mr. J. Boyse's Vindication of his Remarks on a Discourse Concerning
The Inventions of Men IN THE Worship of GOD. With an APPENDIX Containing an
Answer to Mr. B's Objections against the Sign of the Cross.

By WILLIAM Lord Bishop of Derry.

London, Printed for R. Clavel at the Peacock in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1696.

Heads of the Discourse.
CHAP. I. Matters of Fact.
Sect. I. THE Numbers of those that Neglect all Public Worship on the Lord's
Day. p. 3. II. The frequency of Sacraments. p. 11 III. The Number of
Communicants. p. 20 IV. The Directory a hindrance to Communions. p. 24 V. Mr.
B's Excuses for few Communions Examined. p. 27 VI. The Reading the Scriptures.
p. 38 VII. The Mysteries of Religion. p. 44 VIII. The Catechism. p. 54 IX.
Bodily Worship. p. 59 X. The Practice of Reverence by Dissenters. p. 75 XI. The
Praises of God. p. 77 XII. The Rule of Human Prudence. p. 79 XIII. The 3d, 4th
and 5th Canons. p. 97 XIV. Mr. B's Demands. p. 99 XV. Mr. Sq. p. 107 XVI.
Personal Vindication. p. 112
CHAP. II. Of the Reasoning part of Mr. B's Book.
Sect. I. MR. B's stating the Case as to purity of Worship and Discipline. p.
126 II. Mr. B's Partiality p. 138
APPENDIX. Containing an Answer to Mr. B's Objections against the Sign of the
Cross.
Sect. I. THE proper Method to discover the true Nature of Sacraments as Signs.
p. 159 II. That Sacraments are primarily Signs of God's Grace, and not of our
duty. 171 III. That the Scriptures Warrant us to use other Signs that are not
Sacraments for the several uses assigned by Mr. B. to Sacraments. 201 IV. Of
Representing Signs. 208 V. Of Obliging Signs. 221 VI. Of Distinguishing Signs.
240 VII. That the Cross is such a Sign as the Scriptures Warrant. 251
Conclusion. 274
A SECOND ADMONITION TO THE Dissenting Inhabitants Of the Diocese of DERRY,
Concerning Mr. J. Boyse his Vindication of his Remarks on a late Discourse of
William Lord Bishop of DERRY, CONCERNING The Inventions of Men, in the Worship
of GOD.
CHAP. I. Concerning Matters of Fact.
I. I Thought it necessary in a former Admonition to give you some account of
my design in my Book concerning The Inventions of Men in the Worship of God, in
order to enable you to pass a judgment on Mr. Boyse's Remarks on it: He has
thought himself concerned to write a Vindication of them; And though I do not
suppose it very necessary, I shall give you a few Reflections on it.

It consists of Matters of Fact and Reasonings. I shall say a little to each of
them, and leave you to judge of it. And I pray most heartily to God that it
would please him to direct you. The matter is of great moment, since it
concerns the Worship of God; and (whatever Mr. Boyse would suggest) the true
point is, Whether about Nine in Ten of you shall Worship God publicly any
where on the Lord's Day, or stay at home? If I can prevail with you to come to
the Established Worship, you may easily and conveniently Worship God in your
Parish Churches every Lords* Day, or oftener; and receive the Lord's Supper four
times every Year, at least, and oftener if you desire it. But if I cannot
persuade you to this, about Nine in Ten of you must stay at Home, as you have
done for many Years, and perhaps not have a fit opportunity of Communicating
afforded you once in Seven Years.

Sect. I. Concerning the Numbers of those that neglect all Public Worship on
the Lord's Day.
THis then shall be the First Matter of Fact, of which I shall endeavor to
make you sensible, since Mr. Boyse questions it, and jests at my concern about
it, Vind. p. 2. The account he opposes to it is in these words, That in the
Parish of Templemore, alias Derry, there are two Meetings, in which there will
be found above 2400 who ordinarily Worship God every Lord's Day -- the least
Congregation amongst you are ordinarily 600, and some above a thousand that do
Worship God every Lord's Day, so that where Ministers are settled you do not
know of one in twenty that do not ordinarily attend Public Worship. This
account he says he has from your Ministers: You will easily be Judges of the
truth of it; and therefore I desire you to consider,

II. First, That even in Derry there are Congregations much less than 600, and
seldom in Burt above 400 or 500; and that those two Meeting Houses, tho the
largest, will not hold 1200 to Hear. I sent to count, and am assured both have
not a thousand ordinarily.

2dly, I desire you to remember, that though these Meeting Houses are both in the
Parish of Derry, yet the Inhabitants of 11 Parishes depend on them, who have no
nearer, or more convenient Meetings to go to: That is to say, Fanthen,
Desertegny, Clonmany, Coldagh, Clonca, Donagh, Movill, Clandermot, part of
Faughanvale, part of Cumber, and part of Donaghedey; a District in length from
Malin to Donaghedey Church, about 33 Miles; and in breadth, from the Church of
Faughanvale to the lower end of Inch, about 14 Miles: In which there are 14
Churches and Chapels; and in which 12 Conformable Clergymen continually
Officiate, Preaching in the Morning, and Catechizing, for about one half of the
Year, in the Afternoons, with an Explanation of some heads of the Catechism:
This scope of ground is well Inhabited; and if I mistake not, is near as big as
the County of Dublin, and contains, at least, one fourth part of the whole
Diocese; and if there be in the Parish of Templemore of your persuasion 2400 as
Mr. Boyse intimates, and I do believe there are, there can hardly be less in
the other 11 Parishes than 4 times as many, and then in all about 12000 depend
on these two Meeting Houses; Of which I doubt, if a thousand attend Public
Worship on one Lord's Day with another: And if we allow 1200 as Mr Boyse
suggests, yet it does not mend the matter; for it is still but a tenth part of
the whole.

III. Your next Meeting is yet in a worse condition, for there depends on it
Tamlaghfinlagan alias Ballykilly, Drumchose, Aughanlow, Balteagh, Dongevin,
Banagher, part of Cumber, part of Faughanvale, and of Tamlanghard; a District
containing some of the richest and best planted Parishes in the County of
Londonderry, and in length, from the point of Magilligan to the further part of
Banagher, at least 20 Miles, and in breadth from the Church of Faughanvale to
the utmost part of Balteagh or Drumchose about 14. Yet here the Meeting House
will not contain, as I am informed, above 400.

The like may be said of the Meeting of Aghadowy; upon which there depend the
Parishes of Aghadowy, Kilrea, Desertoghill, Erregill, part of Macosquin, part
of Tamlaghocrielly, and the Chapel of Fagevy in length from the old Church of
Camus, to the most distant parts of Tamlaghocrielly 13 or 14 Miles; and from
the Ban River to the most distant parts of Desertoghill, about 10 or 12. The
like might be showed of Magh^ra, Ardstra and Donaghmore; and there needs no
more to prove the truth of this than to consult the Maps of the Counties.

IV Let me add, that even these are not constantly supplied; for the Ministers,
what on account of assisting their Neighbor Ministers at Sacraments, what on
account of their visiting other parts of the Kingdom; and what on account of
their private Affairs, do frequently miss and disappoint their People; Insomuch
that in Ardstra, for Example, their Minister has been absent at least 7 or 8
Months. If then we lay these things together, and take one Meeting and one
Sunday with another, I think my Computation was very modest, when I
conjectured, that hardly one in ten of you Worshipped God any where on the
Lord's Day.

V. But because I would have as little dispute with Mr. Boyse as possible, I
will take his own Computation, and allow,

1st, That there are 9 Meeting Houses in the Diocese; tho really for the last 2
Years there has been only 8, and for the last 7 or 8 Months, only 7

2dly, I will allow that there are 700 at each Meeting (Mr. Boyse says 600
ordinarily, and some above 1000) though really take one Sunday, and one Meeting
with another, there are not 300.

3dly, I will allow that there are but 30 thousand Dissenters in the Diocese;
tho really there are more. And now let us see how many Worship God on the Lords
day; and how many profane it by staying at home, according to Mr. Boyse's own
account: And it is thus; Nine times 700 make 6300, the Number of Worshipers;
which taken out of 30000, there remains 23700 that stay at home and attend no
Worship at all. Perhaps half as many as Worship God in all the Dissenters
Meetings in Ireland. A thing that deserves a serious Consideration and Concern;
and tho Mr. B. seems to make light of it, ( Vind. p. 2.) yet sure to use my
endeavors to persuade these 23000 to attend their Parish Churches, rather than
to stay at home on the Lords day, was my duty as a Christian Bishop and
Pastor; And how Mr. B. will Answer to God, that he has contributed to hinder
my Endeavors, tho he professes he did not design it, I leave it to our Common
Judge and Master.

VI. Neither Mr. Boyse nor your Ministers could be ignorant of this, since it
arises clearly from their own Compuration. And I leave you to judge, whether it
looks not like amusing the World, and serving a Party to publish such an
Account as he and they have done: For to tell us of two Meeting Houses in one
Parish, when indeed there are only those two in one quarter of the Diocese, I
am sure looks like such a Design. Yet this has been your case for many years
past, and is like to be in a great measure for many to come: For when can you
expect Ten Ministers more than you have in the District of Derry and Burt? And
yet these would be rather of the fewest to accommodate each place with a
Meeting at a due distance: When can you expect Seven instead of one in the
District of Ballykelly; or Six in the District of Aghadowy, and proportionally
in the rest?

VII. I desire you to observe, that Mr. B. p. 26. declares, That it was not his
design to hinder you from joining with the Established Church in our ordinary
Lord's Day Service, and Expressly declares his own Opinion for the Lawfulness of
it: I hope your own Ministers are of the same Opinion, since he professes p.
24. That he had a just call to write his Remarks, and that from the Dissenting
Ministers of this Diocese: And Three of them, by their Certificates, seem to
approve of his Performances. If then it be their Opinion, that it is lawful for
you to join in Our Public Worship, at least when you cannot go to your own
Meetings, and that you had better do so than stay at home, especially where the
Established Ministers are sober, able, orthodox and diligent, as those of this
Diocese I presume generally are; I desire you to call to mind whether your
Ministers have declared their opinion to you in this point or no. If they have,
consider how you will answer your neglect of God's Public Worship so long, at
the last day, when it shall appear you might lawfully have joined in it.

But if your Ministers have not made any such Declaration of their Opinion in
this point, tho they know it to be Lawful, judge with your selves, whether they
have discharged the Office of Faithful Guides to you, in revealing to you the
whole will of God, as they ought to have done; since they have suffered for
many Years, and yet do suffer about Nine in Ten of you to stay at home on the
Lord's day, and join in no Public Service of God, rather than join in the
Worship, Praises, Prayers and Sacraments Celebrated in your own Parish
Churches, or hear the Scriptures Read, and the great Mysteries of the Kingdom
of Heaven opened to you by such Ministers as you cannot but in your Conscience
acknowledge, and many of you have acknowledged, to be equal to your own in
Piety, Learning, Diligence and Industry, and who would have been eminent
amongst you, if they had been of your Party.

I conceive the resolution of this Question to be of great Moment to you, and a
great step to our Peace and Union; and therefore you ought every one of you to
require your Ministers direct and positive Resolution in it: By which you will
perceive, whether your Guides are of one mind in this weighty Affair; and if
they be, you will consider how you came to be ignorant of it, as your Practice and
Profession declare you are, and where the fault is to be laid. I the rather
press this, because I know that several are willing and desirous to frequent
the public Worship, but dare not, fearing the malice and hatred of their
Neghbours, who treat them as Apostates that do so, and contrive their Ruin.

The truth is, Your Ministers have Preached you into a Dislike of the
Established Worship, they have represented it as Mr. Craighead proves the
Kneeling at the Sacrament a breach of the Second Commandment, because the Signs
have Coadoration with Christ, partaking of the same Worship; p. 113. And, The
Second Commandment stands in our way, discharging Religious Worship designedly
before any Creature; p. 143.
Idolatrous, and by these means they have entirely separated you from us, as to
all public Worship, and have got you to depend on themselves: And now when
they have you, they are not able to supply you, but have dealt with you as the
false Mother did with the Child before Sol^mon, they would rather you should
not worship God at all, than with us. But whether this looks like Zeal for
God's Worship, I must leave it with you to judge: As for my self, I hope I
shall not be reputed (I am sure I shall not become) your Enemy, because I tell
you the Truth; And shall apply the words of St. Paul, Gal. 4. 17. To you and
your Teachers, They zealously affect you, but not well, they would Exclude you,
or rather Us, (as in the Margin of your Bibles) that you may affect their.

Sect. II. Concerning Frequency of Sacraments.
I. BUt, Secondly, Because the Frequency of your Sacraments (which is the next
greatest Matter of Fact) has a great dependence on this Last; I shall consider
it next, and compare my Assertions with Mr. Boyse's, and engage you to judge
who comes nearest the Truth.

My words at which Mr. Boyse takes so great Exception are these, Dis. Chap. 5.
Sect. 3. N. 3. When People were relaxed from the particular and certain Rules
of our Church by the first breaking off of those of your Persuasion from us,
the Lord's Supper was laid aside wholly for several Years by some Congregations.

I appeal to you, whether it is not yet reckoned a great thing among you, if
once in a Year or two a Communion be Celebrated in one of your Meetings, nay,
among some of you it is omitted for several Years -- By the best enquiry I
could make, I could not compute that one in ten that go to your Meetings ever
Receive through the whole course of their Lives -- I should be glad to find that
I were mistaken in this Computation.

Mr. B. denies every one of these, with many hard words; and asserts, p. 136.
That it is Universally usual in every Meeting where an Ordained Minister is, to
have the Lord's Supper Administered once a Year, and twice in the larger Towns.

To convince the World of the Truth of what I said, and of Mr. Boyse's mistake,
I laid down the account I received of this Matter, and found that the Sacrament
was Administered but about Nine times in Seven Years in all the Meeting Houses
of the Diocese before the writing of my Admonition, which was May 1694, as
appears from the date of it: Mr. B. is very ill pleased with my Computation,
and alleges, that a very particular enquiry has been made. ( Vind. p. 16.) The
Account of which he sums up in these words, The Year 88 falling within the
Compass of the Seven Years mentioned by the Bishop, you had it in that Seven
Years 22 or 23 times. If it had been thus, it is very little to the purpose,
since even so it does not amount to once a Year in every Meeting where there
was an Ordained Minister. But Mr. Boyse might have observed that Eight of these
were Celebrated amongst you last Summer, since my Admonition; that is, at Burt,
Strabane, Donaghmore, Ardstra, Ballykelly, Aughadowy, Maghera, and Derry. This
Last appears by the Derry Certificate it self to have been July 22, 1694, near
three Months after my Admonition was Written; which shows, that he includes the
Sacraments of Summer 1694. There remains then confessedly but about 14; and I
do not think it material to contend about five Sacraments in a whole Diocese in
Seven Years.

II. But Secondly, Mr. B. is so far from showing any mistake in what I
asserted, that I think he has furnished me with a sufficient proof of it, for
he affirms, p. 16. That after a very particular Enquiry, he finds in the Years
87 and 88. The Sacrament was administered in Derry twice, in Donagheede twice,
in Drumrah twice, in Ardstra twice, in Urny twice, in Donaghmore twice, in
Lifford once, in Clandermot once. These then are all the Sacraments, that your
ministers on a particular Enquiry could find Administered in these two Years in
this Diocese: and indeed, I perceive they took great pains in the Enquiry,
sending Quaeries about to this purpose; It appears then, that in other Meetings
in this Diocese there was none Administered in those two Years; and of such as
had Ordained Ministers, there was these following:

1 Burt. Mr. Ferguson their present Minister. No Sacrament in 1687 or 88.

They had before, Mr. Grahms, Mr. Haunton, Mr. Haliday; These Officiated about
20 Years, and had but three Sacraments that I can find.

2 Ballykelly. Mr. Crook their present Minister, has served above 30 Years. No
Sacrament in 87 or 88.

When or how often before, not known.

3 Aughadowy. Mr. Boyd their present Minister, for above 30 Years. No Sacrament
in 87 or 88.

Nor can I find when, or how often before.

4 Tamlaghocricly. Mr. Gilchrest for many Years before the Troubles. No
Sacrament in 87 or 88.

Nor any before, that I can find.

5 Macosquin. Mr. Lowry before the Troubles. No Sacrament in 87 or 88.

Before him, they had Mr. Boyd, Mr. Wilson, Mr. Eliot; but no Sacrament for 16
Years that I can find.

6 Maghera. Mr. Kilpatrick who officiated above 20 Years. No Sacrament in 87 or
88.

The Sacrament Administered Seven or Eight times, and no more in those 20 Years
that I can find.

7 Dumboe. Mr. Wilson, till the troubles and four Years before. No Sacrament in
his time.

Mr. Blair before, no Sacrament two Years before he died; I cannot find how
many before.

8 Strabane. Mr. Wilson before the troubles for 20 Years. No Sacrament in 87 or
88.

But one or two at the most in his time, as I can find.


Here you may observe, that Eight Meetings in this Diocese for the Years 87 and
88, had no Sacrament at all; of the rest some had one, some had two, as is
alleged; which to shorten the dispute, I will take for granted; since this is
sufficient to prove, that it is a great matter if a Sacrament be Administered in
one of your Meetings in a Year or two, which was my Assertion. And I have been
so far from wronging you in it, that it appears, after the most strict Enquiry,
that none had above one in a Year; in which number, Mr. B. reckons six; two had
but one in two Years, and Eight Meetings had none at all in these two Years.

But Secondly, How they behaved themselves before those two Years, appears
sufficiently from the Account I have added; and if there should happen to have
been twice more Sacraments than I have an Account of, yet it would not excuse
your Ministers from a very Criminal Neglect, and fully justifies my Assertion,
That the Sacrament is often omitted for several Years together in some of your
Meetings, and in some places for ten Years or more: In which Number, are
Tamlaugh o Crilly, Macosquin and Strabane, the second best Town in the Diocese.

Thirdly, It shows what you are to judge of Mr. B's Assertion, p. 14. That it
is Universally usual in every Meeting where an Ordained Minister is settled, to
have the Lord's Supper Administered constantly once a Year; Here are eight had
none in two years, and I doubt whether it has been a constant Custom in any one
Meeting to have it once a year; at least I have seen no Voucher for it.

III. As to his asserting Your having the Lord's Supper administered constantly
twice a Year in the larger Towns, I have told you in my Admonition, p. 153,
That I can call only three such in this part of the Country, that is
Londonderry and Strabane, in this Diocese, and Colrain in the border of it.
Now, as to Londonderry, it has had this Sacrament administered but twice in Six
or Seven Years, and Colrain but once in that time. And as to Strabane, though it,
as well as the other, had a settled Minister in it, before, and some time since
the Troubles, yet I am informed from good hands, that in Six and twenty Years
the Lord's Supper has been Administered but twice in it. The point then here is,
whether the holy Sacrament was Administered twice yearly in larger Towns, in
which number these three are; and if it was not, then Mr. B. is mistaken. As to
what I asserted of Colraine and Strabane, I find no doubt made; but he produces
a Certificate from Derry, in which it is said, that the Sacrament was
administered May 87, April 88, July 91, July 92, July 93, and July 94. And the
Certifiers desire, that this may be compared with the passage I have above
cited out of the Admonition, p. 153. And Mr. B. adds, p. 23. That he hopes I
will either yield this Point, or produce as credible Vouchers as these. But I
take this to be a full Voucher for what I there asserted, and a Demonstration
that Mr. Boyse was mistaken, when he affirmed, that the Sacrament was
constantly Administered twice a Year in larger Towns, Rem. p. 136. This was the
Point in question, and Mr. Boyse's Voucher is positive against him in it. I
say, that in six or seven Years (that is from May 1688, till May 1694, when my
Admonition was written) the Sacrament was Administered twice at Derry, (in which
the Certificate says three times) twice in six and twenty Years in Strabane,
and once in Colraine in seven. All the Contradiction then between this Passage
and the Certificate is concerning one time in Derry, that is 1691, the Account
of the other Towns being unquestionable. Now, supposing my Informers mistaken
in this one time, I think it is very little to the purpose: Here is an Account
of about Forty Years, and the Informers, as is pretended, missed one Sacrament;
whereas Mr. Boyse's Informers mistook about fifty in sixty, to make the whole
come up to two a Year, as appears from this Certificate. But after all, I am
not satisfied that there is any Mistake at all in my Account in this one
Sacrament in dispute, and can produce good Reasons for my believing so, if it
were worth the while. However, I desire the Oath that the Certifiers offer
about the truth of their Certificate in all the parts of it, since it carries a
manifest sign of some tampering in it, being dated Sept. 25. 1694. and signed
by Alexander Lecky, Mayor elect, who yet, as every body may know, was not
elected Mayor till November following. Upon the whole, if Mr. B. had produced a
Voucher, that the Sacrament was administered twice a Year in each of these
Towns, it had been something to the purpose; but as it is now, it makes
directly against him. I am sorry that I am forced to take notice of these
little things that are not to the Cause; for if instead of five Communions in
seven Years (according to Mr. B's Account) you had had fourteen in such a
Congregation as Derry, I should still reckon you very Negligent, and to have
violated the Scripture-Rule in an unexcusable manner.

Sect. III. Concerning the Number of Communicants.
I. THE second thing I affirmed concerning this Sacrament was, That by the best
enquiry I could make I could not compute that one in ten that go to your
Meetings ever Receive through the whole course of their Lives: In opposition to
this, he affirms, That by the best Computation your Ministers can make, there
is not one in ten, rather in twenty or thirty, that do not Receive, except such
as are with* held for want of competent Knowledge, or on the account of
Scandal; Rem. p. 137. There is a great difference between these two Assertions:
I say one in ten, Mr. Boyse and Your Ministers say nine in ten, nay, nineteen
in twenty, or nine and twenty in thirty. Either they or I must be widely
mistaken, and which of us come nearest the truth will appear on Examination of
the Proofs which Mr. B. himself produces. In his Vindication, p. 19. he
asserts, That the Ordinary Hearers in the two Meetings of Derry and Burt are
about 2400 -- That we may compute about 1600 Communicants in both. Now, though me
allow a considerable deduction out of this number for Strangers, that may be
supposed to have Received, yet the number of Communicants belonging to those
two Congregations, compared with that part of their Hearers that are of Age to
Receive, will sufficiently demonstrate, that the Bishop's Computation, that not
one in ten Receive, must be very wide from truth.

II. Now, to this I reply, First, That Mr. B. has produced no Voucher of the
number of Communicants in your Meetings before my Book and Admonition, these
two Sacraments of which he speaks being last summer, one of them after the
writing of my Admonition, and the other after it was published; and I hope I
contributed to the Numerousness of them.

But Secondly, Now your Ministers have used their utmost Endeavors, and
brought as many as they could to Communicate, let us examine whether Mr. B. or
I come nearest truth, in order to discover it. I desire you to remember two
Assertions of Mr. B's; the first, Remarks, p. 136. Wherever the Sacrament is
Administered, it is usual for two thirds of the Congregation to be Strangers. --
And it is usual for most of the Members of the Neighboring Parishes to
frequent it. Secondly, p. 137. That those that Communicate once, do it
ordinarily on all following occasions. If then we take away two thirds from
1600, there remains 534; the proportion of 2400 belonging to these two Meetings
that ever Communicated at once; which is not one in four; and is much nearer my
computation than that of Mr. B's or your Ministers: and which is alone
sufficient to show that I considered the matter better than they.

But Thirdly, I desire you to observe, that the 2400 are supposed to be of the
Parish of Derry, and there is no account of the other eleven Parishes that
depend on these two Meeting Houses; the not mentioning of which gives the
matter a quite different face from what it really ought to have; and being
considered, after all, I see no reason to alter my conjecture of one in ten.
And this will appear from the following suppositions, which I think much nearer
truth than Mr. B's. First, I suppose that one fourth of those that received at
Derry received also at Burt; and on the other hand, one fourth of those at Burt
came to Derry, other wise it could not be true what he now asserts, Vind. p.
17. That the most devout and serious of you Communicate four or five times a
Year. Secondly, I suppose, that those made up another fourth, who came out of
(...) and Ray Meetings, nearer Burt than Derry, though in Rapho Diocese, and out
of Letterkenny, Strabane, Lifford, Donaghmore, Ballikelly, Rapho, and Colraine,
and other remote parts, from every one of which there came some to Derry, and I
believe to Burt; and then there remains 800 Communicants belonging to the
twelve Parishes that I have showed depend on these two Meeting Houses, which is
not a tenth part of them.

Fourthly, Let me observe, that most other Meeting Houses are in worse
circumstances than these, as I have already showed; in Ballikelly there was no
Sacrament confessedly from summer 1686 till 1693, that is for seven years, and
then, as I was informed, there were not 400 Communicants: Nor do I see any
thing yet to oblige me to a ter my account; but let it be 800, if we allow two
thirds of these to be strangers, according to Mr. B's assertion, there remain
268 Communicants in that District, in which there are five or six thousand
People. The like may be showed of Aghadowy, Maghera, and others; All which
considered, I think I spoke modestly, when I said one in ten.

III. But to comply with Mr. B. as much as I can, I will take his own
informations, and examine this matter by them.

He mentions only one Sacrament celebrated in each Meeting House amongst you
this Year; there are but eight in the Diocese, but I will allow ten Sacraments.

Secondly, He pleads for 1600 at two Sacraments in Derry and Burt; I will allow
proportionally for each of the rest; though really some had not 400. The Number
then of Communicants in the Diocese were this Year 8000, and those in effect
are all that ever Communicated: For he affirms (as I already observed) that
those that Communicate once, do it ordinarily on all following occasions. Of
these two thirds were Strangers by his own Confession; that is, such as came
from other Parishes or Diocesses, where they were likewise Communicants: From
whence it follows, that only 2666 distinct Persons Communicated; which is not
one in ten of thirty thousand, (the Number of those of your Persuasion in this
Diocese.)

Sect. IV. The Directory a hindrance to Communions.
I. THere remains now my third Assertion to be examined, that after the
Establishing your Government, the Lord's Supper was laid aside wholly for
several Years: this indeed I reckoned as an Effect of your Directory, as you
may see in my Book, Chap. 5. Sect. 3.. N. 3. And to make it good, I will put
you in mind that it orders, That how often the Lord's Supper shall be
Celebrated, may be determined by the Ministers and other Church Governors. By
other Church Governors, the Assembly tells us in their Humble Advice, etc. are
meant Officers commonly called Elders. From which it follows, that where there
are no such Elders, the People must want the comfort of this Sacrament; and the
Parliament refusing the Erection of such Elders in every Parish, the body of
the People of England were kept from the Lord's Supper for many Years;
insomuch, that in the Year 1649, I find Ministers meeting together to determine
this Question, Whether there were any Course warranted by the Word of God,
wherein Ministers might proceed to the Administration of this Sacrament, as
their Case then stood. I find ten of these Ministers met at Taunton, and wrote
a Letter, dated June 13. 1649, on this subject, to Mr. Henry Jeanes of Chedzoy,
desiring him, that He would be pleased to take the Question into serious
Consideration, and give his thoughts of it: And say they, We are the rather
inclined to desire your particular Resolution therein, because we understand
that you have Administered that Sacrament, and therefore doubt not but you have
some way satisfied your self therein. Upon this Mr. Jeans wrote a Piece,
published 1650, entitled, The Want of Church Government no Warrant for a total
omission of the Lord's Supper: or, A Debate of that Question which has so
wonderfully perplexed many, both Ministers and People, whether or no -- the
Lord's Supper may be lawfully administered in -- a Church destitute of Ruling
Elders. He intimates, p. 5. that they had omitted it five, six, or seven years
together, and might for the whole space of the remainder of their days: for,
says he, to suppose that we shall never live to see the Church of God here in
England settled in a Presbyterian way, is a supposition of that which is neither
impossible nor improbable.

II. From this you may observe to what a miserable condition your Directory had
brought the People of England, as to the participation of this Institution of
Christ.

I do believe Mr. Jeans's Book might do good, and bring some ^o do what it
seems he alone had ventured to do in those parts, even to administer the Lord's
Supper; yet many continued in the omission of it, as appears by the testimony
of Dr. Causabon, who lived at that time, and has this passage in his
Vindication of the Lord's Prayer, published 1660, ( p. 55.) Public Catechizing
so necessary to uphold Christianity among Men, though not so pleasing to itching
Ears, as ordinary Preaching is: The use of the Sacraments, which in diverse
Parishes were formerly duly Administered, are now scarce known or named. Mr.
Boyse may give him hard words for this, as he gives me, but the thing is too
notorious to be denied And when it was thus in Oxford, where Dr. Owen had the
Government, and in Dublin till the Restoration, you may imagine how it fared
with Country Parishes; whereas therefore Mr. B. would throw this practice of
rare or no Communions peculiarly on you; it is manifest, that you have only
followed the President set you in England and Ireland, by the body of
Dissenters in their Prosperity; and they are concerned in it as well as you,
though I did not address my self to them.

Sect. V. Mr. Boyse's Excuses for few Communions Examined.
I. IT remains to Consider some things that Mr. B. offers, that seem to
extenuate or excuse your Ministers, us to their rare Communions. The first is,
Rem. p. 137. That Ministers of particular Congregations prepare their own
People for it, by visiting ^em round, Examining every particular Member anew,
about their spiritual estate, and making due Enquiry about their Conversation;
all which takes up a considerable time. Now to this I answer, that it is the
Duty of Ministers to enquire concerning the spiritual estate of their People,
when it may be conveniently done; but there is no Obligation on them to examine
Men anew before every Sacrament: The Scripture says, Let a man examine himself,
and so let him eat. Your Directory requires no such Examination; nor is it
agreeable to the sense of your own Party; as appears from the Vindication of
the Presbyterial Government, by the London Ministers 1649, who own ( p. 59.)
this Examination or Profession is not required every time a Man comes to the
Sacrament, but only at their first admission; and a complete Member is, by
virtue of his first admission, freed from all After-examination, except in Case
of Scandal. For your Ministers therefore, on pretense of their extraordinary
pains in Examining, to Celebrate the Lord's Supper but once in the year, is,
plainly to prefer their own tradition to the Command of God, that requires
frequent Celebration of this Sacrament.

II. But secondly, Mr. B. alleges, that you were Persecuted, and that made you
have the Sacrament so seldom: This he alleges for Strabane (Vind. p. 17.) but
I answer,

First, That Persecution is no Reason for omitting the Lord's Supper, any more
than for omitting Sermons; whilst your Ministers could not get opportunity to
Preach, they might be excused for omission of this Sacrament; but it is full as
easy to draw People together to receive the Sacrament, as to hear a Sermon;
and to Administer it to them, as to Preach twice or once a day. If we will be
content with the plainness and simplicity with which Christ instituted it; and
accordingly we find the first Christians, in the deepest Persecutions, were as
constant in the one as in the other, and thought the receiving it then most
necessary to fortify their Members with Resolution to endure Torments and
Martyrdom. From whence it is manifest your Ministers have a Notion of this
Sacrament different from the Primitive Martyrs.

But Secondly, I desire you to consider your manner of Administering this
Sacrament, concerning which Mr. B. tells us, ( Remarks, p. 137.) that amongst
you Every Parish having usually but one Minister, it is requisite the Ministers
of neighboring Parishes should assist them on that occasion; and consequently
they usually bring their People along with them. I may add, that there are
often four or five Ministers at your Sacraments, and sometimes 4 or 5000
People, when only 400 receive: you have likewise usually a Sermon some day
before, and the day after. I confess, Persecution is an effectual means to
hinder the Celebration of the Lord's Supper in this fashion; for no Government
that is jealous of a People, will suffer them to meet or continue together in
this manner. But I desire you to remember, that Christ never required these
things at your hands, and therefore your omitting the Lord's Supper, because
you were not permitted thus to celebrate it, is another instance of your
Ministers making void the Commands of God by their own tradition.

Lastly, I believe some of your Ministers might be hindered from public
Preaching and Sacraments, for some short time, that is, whilst some of your
Brethren were in Arms against the Government at Pentland-hills and
Bothwell-bridge, against whom they never made any public Declaration or
Address that I can learn; but that this continued for any considerable time, or
that the inspection was so strict that they might not have Administered the
Lord's Supper as our Savior instituted it, does not appear, nor is pretended.
And it is manifest, that this is only a Pretense, since they were no less
negligent in the year 1687 and 88, when they had their full liberty.

III. A third thing offered by Mr. B. is, Vind. p. 15, that I know well enough,
that for two Years of the seven, at least, both the Ministers and People were
scattered, and had no opportunity of Celebrating the Institution.

I must profess, that I neither know, nor have heard of any such dispersion of
the People or Ministers, as to hinder you from an Opportunity of Celebrating
this Sacrament for two years. The Irish Army came into this Diocese about April
1689, and left it in August following; during which time some of your Ministers
were in Derry, and some in Scotland. The People in the Country were then, and
for a considerable time after, in a miserable condition, and plundered of what
they had; but there were still great numbers of them, and in their
Circumstances being deprived of Worldly Comforts, they needed, and I hope were
prepared for spiritual: But your Ministers did not afford it to them as they
ought to have done; and this I do still make an aggravation of their
Negligence, though Mr. B. makes it an Argument of Imprudence in me to do so: But
I desire you to consider the Case, and judge. Mr. Crook returned after the
Siege to Ballikelly, where there was still a large Congregation; yet as he had
been Negligent for two years or longer before, so he continued unawakened by
God's Judgments in the same Negligence, till Summer 1693. Mr. Boyd had the same
Opportunity at Aghadowy, and yet shared in the same Guilt. Mr. Ferguson
returned soon after the Siege, to his Congregation at Burt, yet had no
Sacrament till Summer 1692. Mr. Craghead returned soon likewise to his
Congregation at Donaghmore, and after removed to Derry, and yet had no
Sacrament till Summer 91, as is confessed at large in the Derry Certificate; so
far were these from going about and Administering to their Afflicted and
desolate Neighbors, that they starved their own Flocks, and kept them from
this Food of Life. And this they did not only after the Siege, till I came to
this place, but in it at that time when continual Deaths before their Eyes
ought to have awakened them to more Devotion.

III. Mr. B. alleges, Vind. p. 16. That the Conformists there ought to have a
share in this reproof: For those that he has desired to enquire upon the place
could not learn that they Administered it more than the other. I have enquired
of this matter, and am assured by those that Received at that time, that this
Holy Sacrament was Administered Monthly in the Cathedral, as was usual, that
eleven Clergymen received it together, and that toward the latter end, when
Wine grew scarce, Dr. Walker reserved a proportion for the Sacrament, and when
he apprehended it would not hold out, he declared, That rather than not
Celebrate he would mix it. A Practice much more allowable than omitting it:
Besides the public Administration, it was frequently Administered to the sick;
And as to the Clergy that remained in the Diocese they behaved themselves
worthy of their Character, Traveling on foot many Miles to visit the Sick,
Baptize and Preach; And as soon as they could procure Wine (which was not to be
had till after the Siege was raised) Administered the Lord's Supper, which so
many as were not chased by the Enemy from their Cures, had done the Easter
before, and did again Christmas after.

IV. But now I must tell you that Recrimination, if true, is a plain Confession
of Guilt, and a sign of a desperate Cause; It may be very proper for a man that
has Authority, and is called to it by his Duty, as I take my self to be, to
reprove what he finds amiss amongst those that he conceives to belong to his
Inspection. But for any one to go about to defend the Guilty by recriminating,
is to harden and encourage them in their sins, by finding them out Examples and
Presidents for their wickedness, and is in effect to tell them, what they are
too apt of themselves to offer as an excuse for the worst of Practices, that
others are as ill as they. Surely Examples fortify most of the World in Sin,
and I am heartily sorry that any one of Credit should point out this way of
recrimination to harden them by it. He is very guilty that has no way to clear
himself but by blackening another; and when that is done, without truth, as the
case is here, it is a grief to a good Man to think that serving a Party should
Influence any to do it.

V. But Mr. B. gives me very hard words ( Vind. p. 15.) for looking back no
further than my own time in my account of Sacraments administered in the
Established Church; whereas I give an account of yours for seven Years. If I
had for 30, I do not see any harm in it; but the truth was, that many Ministers
were dead, and I could not meet with any that readily could inform me. But to
satisfy you, that I had no design in this, I will not give you the best Account
I can get for these three Years that are omitted. Though I suppose all are not
come yet to my knowledge.

In the Year 1688 the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper was Administered in the
Cathedral, 12 times. In the Parish Churches, 83 times. In the Cathedral, in the
Year 1689, 12 times. In the Parish Churches, 41 times. In the year 1690, in the
Cathedral, 12 times. In the Parish Churches, 39 times. In all, 199
And now I do not see what advantage it was to me to have omitted this, or why
Mr. B. should express such resentment at it. St Paul cautions us against Evil
Surmisings, 1 Timothy 6. 4. And whether the imputing this to Disingenuity in me be
of that sort, I leave you to judge, if you compare the two years of the
Troubles, there is 104 of ours to none among you.

VI. The last excuse Mr. B. makes for your Ministers, is their Sickness; this
he alleges in behalf of Mr. Wilson for Strabane, Mr. Rowat for L^fford, and
Mr. Crook for Ballykelly; but this is no excuse: These were as negligent when
well, as sick; and none of them was a year without Preaching several Sundays
twice. And it is full as easy to Administer the Sacrament to two or three
hundred, as to Preach a Sermon. It is usual for 3 or 4 of your Ministers to
assist at Neighboring Sacraments, and one assistant would have prevented any
disappointment of the People, which Mr. B. says ( Vin. p. 16.) happened twice at
Balindret. Ministers that are infirm may very lawfully omit one of their
Sermons on the Lords Day, and Administer the Sacrament in lieu of it; In which
Case there is no hardship on them, since the People give it to one another
amongst you, without any blessing at the delivery to each: Neither does your
Directory require the Minister to make any Exhortation whilst the People are
receiving, nor after they have received, only says, he may in a few words put
them in mind, etc. And therefore whilst your Ministers make two Sermons a day,
and yet pretend disability for Administering the Lord's Supper, we must reckon
this another instance of your making void the Commands of God by your own
Tradition. A Sermon that justles out the Sacrament, is a Human Invention, as
much as Alms that hinder a Man from relieving his Parent, Mark 7. 11.

VII. These are all the excuses that Mr. B. seem to have made for you, and I
doubt they will appear very slender in the eyes of God, when he calls your
Teachers to an account for their Stewardship in dispersing the Mysteries of
God. It had been much more proper methinks for a Christian Minister to have
reproved you for your negligence, than to have denied plain Matter of Fact, and
pleaded such Excuses.

Mr. B. does both in his Remarks and Vindication, object to us the Diocese of
Down and Conor; I think he has little reason to do it to Me: But I must now
tell you, that the neglects there were neither so Universal, nor unexcusable as
these of your Ministers have been in this particular; and had you been in
Chancery, Michaelmas Term last, you would have heard as much said for the most
negligent there, as Mr. B. has written for your Ministers: which only shows,
that Money and interest will find colors for every thing. But the negligence
of your Ministers sufficiently shows the want of Discipline amongst them; and
that the Inspection of a Bishop would do them no harm: And I hope this
Admonition will not hurt you, nor them. I shall think I have done a good work,
and thank God for it, if I can awaken you to more care for the future; and
reckon that the nearer you come to the Scripture-Rule, the nearer you will come
to us, and there will be the more hopes of an Union, which I shall always
heartily endeavor.

Sect. VI. Concerning the Reading the Scriptures.
I. THE third Matter of Fact in dispute between Mr. B. and Me, is concerning
your Reading the Holy Scriptures. The words he excepts against are these (
Disc. Chap. 3. S. 3. N. 3.) but the most sad and deplorable defect of your
performances of this Duty is your casting out the Word of God from most of your
Public Assemblies, directly contrary to God's Institution and Ordinance for
the Instruction of his Church, insomuch that in many of your Meetings, setting
aside a Verse or two for a Text or Quotation, at the discretion of the
Minister, the voice of God is never publicly heard amongst them -- And in all
the Meetings in the North of Ireland in a whole Year perhaps there is not so
much Scripture Read, as in one day in our Church -- And it is a sad thing that a
man may go to most meetings, many years, and never hear One entire Chapter read
in them.

The things Asserted here, are,

First, That the Reading of the Word of God, as God Instituted and Ordained it
for the Instruction of his Church, is cast out of most of your Meetings. I
showed, that God ordered his Word to be read Regularly and in Order* and that
this Reading of it is cast out not only of most of your Meetings, but out of
all of them, there not being one of them that yet appears to have read either
Testament through in 30 Years before the writing of my Discourse, or indeed
ever that I can learn: And therefore till I see good Vouchers that the Word of
God has been thus Read, I think there can be no question of the Truth of this
Fact. It is not only the manner of Reading is here in Dispute, and denied by
me, but the thing it self, of which we can never be sure without the Manner be
settled; for when there is a certain method for Reading the Word of God, as in
our Church, we can be sure that it is Read: But this is so far otherwise with
you, that no man that ever I yet met with, or could have an account of, could
vouch that he heard so much of the Bible read in your Meetings in his whole
Life as is read in the Cathedral of Derry every Year, and in many other
Churches; and ought by our Rules to be in all. Now when a Man has been a Hearer
50 years in your Meetings, and cannot affirm, that ever he heard two entire
Books of the Bible read in them, I reckon that the Word of God, as God requires
it for the Instruction of his Church is cast out of those Meetings, and that
they act directly contrary to his Command. Therefore except Mr. B. produce
Vouchers, that in most of your Meetings, the whole Word of God, or the most
material parts of it, have been read in a competent time, he will never acquit
them before God or impartial Men, of this fault: If the Books that have been
Read, and the time be specified, the Truth will then appear; but without this I
shall look on any general assertion as a subterfuge, and a declining the light.

II. The Second thing asserted by me, is, That in many of your Meetings, seting
aside a verse or two for a Text or Quotation, at the Discretion of the
Minister, the Voice of God is never heard. This is owned by Mr. B. to be true,
in effect, as to the Winter-Quarter in most of your Meetings ( Rem. p. 92.) but
how far this Winter-Quarter is stretched, wants being cleared; for some have
stretched it very far: And as to those that he affirms now to Lecture in Winter
in this Diocese, I desire to know how long they have thus Lectured. Last Winter
I believe they did, but I must see a good Voucher before I believe that either
all of them Lectured any part of every Year before, or all but one, constantly
in the winter.

Secondly, You have Meetings in the Afternoons, as well as in the mornings, and
the Scriptures ought to be read in them, but in these you have only a Text and
Quotations; and therefore what I affirmed, is true, not only of many of your
Meetings, but of one half of them all.

III. The Third thing opposed by Mr. B. is, That perhaps in all the Meetings in
the North there is not so much Scripture read as in our Church in one day. To
prove this, I took Mr. B's own Concessions ( Rem. p. 92.) and according to
them, showed, that there was really four times more Scripture Read in our
Church in one Day than in all the Meetings in the North in a Year. But he seems
not willing to stand to these Concessions, and farther excepts ( Vind. p. 9.)
that eleven Psalms which I reckon as Chapters read for Instruction, were Forms
of Thanksgiving. But I answer, That these agree very well together; the Apostle
having Commanded us to Teach and Admonish one another in them at the same time
we speak or sing them; as appears from Ephesians. 5. 19. and Col. 3. 16. And indeed
it is manifest that the Psalms were written for Public Instruction, as well as
for Public Thanksgivings and Prayers: Twelve of them bear the Title For
Instruction before them, as most of them are called Prayers, Psalm. 72. 20. etc.

Thirdly, He will have Two Chapters allowed for Quotations in your Sermons
every day; but I particularly excepted Quotations from the account. And quoting
Scripture is not Reading it, nor is that the way God appointed his Word to be
Read, Deuteronomy. 31. 10. Nor did the People of God so Read it: Nor does your
Directory prescribe this as Reading but Preaching. Lastly, no body knows what
or how many these are, or how they are applied; all these depending on the
Discretion of Your Ministers: But after all, he makes his Computation, and
concludes, that in a whole Year there is near as much Read in your Meetings as
in two Days in our Church; for says he ( Vind. p. 10.) In the Nine Meetings of
this Diocese there are Read in a year 1287 Chapters; of which 936 are
Quotations: and in one day in our Church but 714 which is a little more than
half what is Read in those Nine Meetings in the whole Year. This is truly his
Conclusion; and I value your time more, than to dispute about it, and therefore
let it stand so.

IV. The last thing I asserted in this matter was, That a man might go to most
Meetings many Years, and never hear one entire Chapter Read in them: What has
been done may be done; and I have met with several that have thus frequented
Meetings several Years, and could not say they had heard an entire Chapter Read
at a time: I sent one to enquire, and he returned an account only of six Verses
read for a Text to the Lecture; and I have been informed, that usually no more
were read. And therefore whereas Mr. B. asserts ( Rem. p. 92.) that usually a
whole Chapter was read; this may be true, since my Book; but that it was
otherwise before, is Notorious. But when it appears what Books have been Read
in each Meeting every Year before, 'twill be easy to judge how much has been
read each Lord's Day; and without this, it is impossible to judge exactly of it;
and till I see particular Evidence to the contrary, I must suppose that what
happened in these times when I sent to enquire, was what was usual. Upon the
whole, the slight you put on the Word of God, by throwing it out of your
Meetings, when you cannot have time to put your own Glosses on it, your
allowing two hours to your Sermons, and not ten Minuits to the Reading God's
Word, are faults that Mr. B. may endeavor to palliate, but will never solidly
justify. The true way to answer them is to mend them, and I am heartily glad to
hear that you have made some progress that way, though far from what is requisite.

Sect. VII. Concerning the Mysteries of Religion.
I. A Fourth Matter of Fact denied by Mr. B. is, That a man may frequent your
Meetings all his life, and yet have no security, or hardly possibility of
Learning from your public Teaching, all the great Mysteries of his Religion.

I laid before you in my former Admonition, p. 17. the excellent Method our
Church had taken to secure the Public Teaching of all the great Mysteries of
Christianity to all her Members, by appointing a certain time in the Year for
each of them; whereas there is no such Rule or Order for your Ministers: And
whereas Mr. B. asserted there was an obligation put on you by the Directory to
teach all those mysteries, I showed he was mistaken; and he now contends (
Vind. p. 12.) that you need none besides the Scriptures: which is (as I showed
in my Admon. p. 20.) a very great defect since the Scriptures require we should
have such a Rule besides.

II. Secondly, I showed, that I had examined and put it to many of your
persuasion, whether they ever heard any of your Ministers that professedly made
a whole discourse on the Trinity, Conception, Nativity, Resurrection or
Ascension of our Savior; or on his sending down the Holy Ghost: And I did, and
do profess, that I never met one Man that could satisfy me in it, or assure me,
that his Minister had done it: And I concluded from hence, that it was a most
dangerous matter to leave these things to men's choice.

III* To this Mr. B. replies, Vind. 11. that I overlooked the plain Evidence,
nay, the Demonstration he produced against the truth of this charge in these
words, That your people are in Public Teachings yearly Catechized, in which
Exercise all the Mysteries of the Christian Religion are Explained to them. But
I answer,

First, That I did not overlook this, but particularly answered it, where I
thought most proper, Admon. p. 23. and showed that there is no Rule in Your
Directory, that requires your Ministers to examine either Privately or
Publicly; so that their performances in this point are merely Voluntary, and
therefore their Hearers can have no security by this.

Secondly, I added, that your Directory does exclude Catechizing from being any
part of God's Public Worship; either Ordinary or Extraordinary; as appears
from the preface to it, which proposes it as rules for all parts of Public
Worship; and likewise from the Title, which pretends the same: And yet the book
says not one word concerning Catechizing, but excludes it by excluding our
Common Prayer Book, that requires it as a part of public Worship: so that
amongst you, whatever Mr. B. pretends, Catechizing is No Public Teaching, nor
are your people, by any rule that I know amongst you, obliged to attend it in
public; and this I reckon as another inexcusable defect of your Directory.

Thirdly, Your way of Catechizing is not sufficient for this purpose. Mr. B.
describes your manner of Catechizing thus, Rem. p. 85. They divide their
Parishes into so many Districts, and accordingly for every District once a
Year, they Publicly appoint the time and place when they intend to Catechize
them, and accordingly go through the whole Catechism with 'em. I will add the
account I had of this matter from good hands. The Dissenters practice in
instructing and Examining the Younger sort, is in this manner. The Minister has
a Meeting for this purpose in six several places in this Parish, and Examins
once a Year in each place. His Method is to take four or five heads of their
Catechism, and to ask questions concerning them, and expound them; according to
which method, if they took the Catechism in Order, which yet I do not find they
do, the Minister would be at least ten Years in going over the whole of it in
one place.

Let us suppose then a man constantly to attend Catechizing in his District,
once a Year, yet it is impossible the Minister should teach him all the
Mysteries of our Religion sufficiently, at one time; and if he take one Mystery
at once, which is as much as he can do, if he explain it as he ought, you see
what it comes to: He has no security of hearing them all explained at any time,
your Ministers not being bound to any method; and if they should bind
themselves to one, yet so many years are required to go through them, that a man
has no security to live so long. But further, I find that Catechizing is
generaly amongst you only in Order to a Sacrament, and whilst there are no
Sacraments Administered, there is usually no public Catechizing; and then
Judge in what condition those places were that wanted Sacraments, for Seven,
Ten, or more years. And perhaps to avoid the trouble of examining, was the very
reason that there were none Celebrated, as Mr. B. himself partly confesses. The
truth is, this seems to me a mere pretense set up to excuse your Ministers for
their Negligence in Preaching the Gospel; that is, the greatest, the highest,
and most necessary parts of it; it being plain, that a man may remain ignorant
of them all his life, notwithstanding your public Teaching, whatever Mr. B.
pretends to the contrary.

IV. But Secondly, He objects, that your Ministers most frequently insist on
the particular mysteries of the Christian Religion (Vind. p. 12) and quotes a
passage from one of them, affirming it and taxing me most severely for
asserting the contrary. But I Answer, These are but general Affirmations of the
Persons accused, without any particular proof. I told you in my Admonition, p.
18. That the Greatest Mysteries of the Gospel, are the Conception, Birth,
Passion, Resurrection, Ascension, and final coming of our Savior to judge the
quick and dead; the Doctrine of the Trinity, in whose Name we are Baptized, and
the descent of the Holy Ghost. Let me add to these, though they are included in
them, the manifestation of our Savior to the Gentile World, which the
Scriptures reckon a great Mystery, the Communion of Saints in one Catholic
Church, and the Doctrine of Repentance and Forgiveness of Sins. Each of these
are, and ought to be at least once, or twice a Year solemnly and professedly
taught in our Church, at their proper and appointed times, and in the
Explanation of our Catechism: so that we are sure that at least we shall hear
them so often. Now to know whether Your Ministers or Ours preach the Gospel
most Diligently, Faithfully and Expressly: it is not sufficient to say in
general that you do it often, but we must know how often each Minister has
solemnly, professedly, and in a full discourse explained and enforced each of
these Mysteries.

V. For Secondly, it is not sufficient for one to pretend that by the by, and
on occasion they have touched these Mysteries; for they are of that nature and
moment, that people ought to be taught, that these, and none else, are the
peculiar Mysteries of the Gospel; that all other Knowledge or Preaching is of
little value in respect of teaching these; and the Ministers that teach them
plainly, diligently, and solidly, are the true Preachers of the Gospel; and
those that preach them slightly and seldom, are unfaithful Stewards. That each
of them is of that consequence, that to explain them, prove them from
Scripture, enforce them, and press and show the Benefits and Effects of them,
requires frequent and particular set Discourses upon them; and the least that
can be expected is, that they be handled once every Year solemnly, fully, and
professedly.

And here let me desire you to recollect your Memory, and consider, whether you
have heard each of these treated thus before my Book appeared: if you did, you
have reason to think your Ministers preached in earnest the Gospel to you; but
if they omitted any of these, if they did not give you at least one Sermon on
each of these great Articles in a competent time, they omitted so much of the
Gospel, and were unfaithful Stewards of the Mysteries committed to them, and
must be judged so if they continue in this Neglect. I shall be glad if they
amend it, but am sure the Order in Our Church provides better against it.

VI. We hear Complaints every day as if the Gospel were not preached in Our
Church; we are reproached as if we taught little but Morality; and Mr. B. talks
of Desolate Congregations amongst us. Now, while these Mysteries are Solemnly,
Constantly, Solidly, and Professedly taught at least once a Year in every one
of our Churches, bating Accidents of Sickness, etc. Judge with your selves how
unjustly we are accused, and what ill terms I should have received, if I had
charged you with such a Crime, when your Innocence was so demonstrable: But
till you produce as plain, certain, and obligatory a Rule for the teaching of
them, as I have done amongst us, you can never be so secure of learning them
from your Ministers public Teaching as we are. I must profess again that I
have put it to many of you my self, and have got others to do the same, and
could never be assured that they heard one Discourse professedly on the
Trinity, Conception, Nativity, Resurrection, or Ascension of our Savior, or
his sending down the Holy Ghost; much less one or two every Year, as it is with
us. And till Mr. B. produce Vouchers of the times and places, I shall believe
those that have been thus put to it, would have told a thing so remarkable, and
in which the Honor of their Ministers is so much concerned, if they could have
done it with truth.

VII. Fifthly, Those people that have for many years complained, that Christ
and the Gospel was not preached amongst us, may justly be suspected not to
understand what the Gospel is: And whilst they accused us of preaching nothing
but Morality, I am afraid that they reckon these Mysteries, and our pressing
the necessity of a good Life from them, only dead and moral preaching, and that
they expect some greater and more spiritual Mysteries from us: But if any
pretend to such, they are unfaithful Teachers, and fall under the Apostle's
Censure, Gal. 1. 8.

VIII. Lastly, Let me say one word to you of our own Communion. You see (my
Brethren) what an excellent Order our Church has established to secure your
being taught all the Mysteries of the Gospel, by appointing a peculiar time of
the year for teaching each of the principal of them: This way of keeping the
great Works and Mercies of God in memory, is what Nature teaches us as the most
effectual method, and it is also approved by Presidents in both the Old and New
Testament, and is of such force, that Experience shows us that this one Rule,
well observed, has been the principal means of preserving Christianity in the
worst of Times, and under the most barbarous Tyranny and Persecution of the Dr.
Smith, in his present State of the Greek Church, owns, That he admired whence
it came that so few of the Eastern Christians were proselited to Mahometism,
considering their Circumstances, and concludes, p. 14. Praesens satis edoctus
tandem dedici, etc. At last being on the place, I learnt that the solemn
Observation of Festivals and Fasts, by God's assistance, prevented the whole
East from falling entirely from the Christian Faith; chiefly, if not only by
means of these the Christian Religion triumphs over so many most cruel
Contrivances* being secured and fenced by this as by a holy Charm against the
poison of Mahometism; for by the return of these Feasts, which are celebrated
with great Crowds, with an holy Emulation, The History of the Birth, Death, and
Resurrection of Christ, and the rest of the Mysteries that make up the sum of
our Religion, are brought to their memory, etc. And he observes, that the
History of the Apostles and Martyrs, with the Courage and Patience represented
in the days of their commemoration is that which arms them with Courage to
endure all the Cruelties and Persecutions of the Turks.

Sir Paul Ricaut speaking of the Constancy of the Greeks in the Christian
Religion, has these words, p. 15. If any Art or Policy can be said to have
place over the Affections of the People, none seems more efficacious than the
strict observation of their Fasts and Feasts of their Church, by which the
People are taught, as in a visible Catechism, the History of Christianity, more
(I dare say) than by their ill-composed Sermons, or repetition of the
Scriptures in the vulgar Tongue; for being severely imposed, and observed with
much Solemnity, they affect the Vulgar with an air of something Divine.


Turks; and therefore let me entreat you, as you love your Savior, and expect
a share in the Happiness of his Kingdom, that you would diligently observe
those times appointed by the Church for the instructing you in the Mysteries of
his Kingdom; whilst you do so, you are sure that you will be fed with the true
Bread of Life, the old and substantial Articles of your Faith, that are able to
save your Souls, and will not be led away with every Wind of Doctrine, or new
coined Mysteries of great Pretenders: Therefore let neither the Abuses or
Arguments of your Adversaries discourage you, nor much less Covetousness or
Laziness divert your attendance: And remember, if at any time your Ministers do
not teach them, it is contrary to the Order of our Church, and proceeds
generally from your Non-attendance, and then you only are guilty of the Neglect.

Sect. VIII. Concerning the Catechism.
I. A Fifth Matter of Fact denied by Mr. B. is, That hardly one in ten get your
Catechism by heart, nor one in five hundred retain it. This I proved by my own
Experience, and can by the Testimony of many Witnesses that were present at the
Trials, to which Mr. B. replies, Vind. p. 13. That this is to be imputed to the
sullenness, or the bashfulness of those I examined. But I found no such thing
as bashfulness in them; and as to sullenness, many of them were under
obligations to me, being my Tenants, or otherwise obnoxious; and they generally
endeavored to answer, but could not remember either the Words or Matter. I got
several to make the same Experiment, and they returned me the like account.

II. Mr. B. alleges that there are in the Parish of Derry two Meetings, And in
those two Congregations 600 can give a good account of, and repeat the
Assembly's Catechism. To this I reply,

First, That this trial is since my book, and does not come home to the time of
which I speak: I am glad if so many can do this, and believe my Book
contributed to it.

Secondly, There are in those Meetings 2400 Hearers in their Rolls, and then
after all their Labor and pains, only one in four has gotten it.

Thirdly, There are many in this Parish that do not enter themselves in your
Books, and yet go to your Meetings and no where else; there is no account of
these, who are the most ignorant.

Fourthly, Here is no account of the whole District that depends on these
Meetings, of which 600 is not the tenth, if the twentieth part.

Fifthly, A Catechism is chiefly designed for the ignorant, and such as cannot
read; and here is no Voucher that one such has it, and they generally speaking
are never like to get it; so that Your Catechism is useless to those to whom it
is most necessary.

Sixthly, Here is no assurance how many of these will retain it for any
considerable time: An Experiment has been made of this, and a Man of good
Natural parts has not been able to retain it a Month after Examination: I am
sure some Eminent Persons of your Persuasion could not give an Account of it
sometime before I Published my Book. I accidentally discoursed four or five of
them about repairing a burying place, and proved to them, that it was a duty so
to do, from that question in your Catechism, What benefits do Believers receive
from Christ at death? To which the answer is, that The souls of Believers are
at their death made perfect in holiness, and do immediately pass into Glory,
and their Bodies being still United to Christ do rest in their Graves till the
Resurrection. Therefore to expose their Bodies to Dogs or Swine, or any other
Indignity, is to affront Christ to whom they are United. They seemed surprised
at this; and as I understood afterward, did not believe me till they went and
consulted the Catechism: From whence I concluded, that they did not know, or
believe the Doctrine thereof; much less remember the words, which indeed I did
not expect from them.

Lastly, I do not believe your Ministers can certainly tell who have the
Catechism, and who have not. The Questions they ask are so few of each, and so
confined to one head (as I am informed) that perhaps there are very few for
whom they could vouch on such Examinations: And often the Persons guess
beforehand in what place of the Catechism they shall be Examined, and prepare
for it. Upon the whole, I am afraid my conclusion is too near a Truth; and I am
confirmed in it by experiments every day: In which I do not expect the
repeating the Catechism, but the Lords-Prayer and Ten Commandments and Belief,
which many either never learned, or have forgotten. These then are not rash or
mistaken Accusations, as Mr. B. alleges ( p. 11.) but the effect of Trial and
Certainty. I can very well distinguish between silence and ignorance, whatever
Mr. B. suggests. All that he alleges to justify his pretenses, is ( Vind. p.
2) That Any one that considers the Genius of that people, and their particular
dissatisfaction with his Lordship, will be easily inclined to believe this to
be the genuin account of the matter. I do believe your Ministers whom I have
reproved, are angry at me; and some (I am informed) in this Country pray
against me by Name in their Pulpits; and those join with them that are deep in
your Interests, as it is a Faction, rather than a Religion. But I thank God, I
do not find any such dissatisfaction as Mr. B. would have the world believe. On
the contrary, I find great respect from the Pious and Humble; and many have
been so far from Sullenness, when I have discoursed them, that they have even
with tears bewailed their ignorance. So that I do not find all the Endeavors
that have been used, or the Misrepresentations spread either by Mr. B. or your
leading men have been able to hinder, in a great measure, the effect of my
Book; and even they that are most angry at it, are forced for very shame to
mend several things; and some have had their Eyes opened by it; and do not only
frequent their Parish Churches, but Communicate in them.

These are all the Matters of Fact of which I took Notice in my Admonition, and
you see (without troubling my self with any other Informations than those Mr.
B. has Published) the truth sufficiently appears in every particular: Yet he is
not content with these, but renews several others which I passed over, either
as not material, or so apparently true on my part, that they needed no
Justification: Yet since he has insisted on them again, I will take Notice of
the most material.

Sect. IX. Concerning Bodily Worship.
I. SIxthly, Therefore he reckons it as a mistake in Matter of Fact, that I
affirm, that The Directory Excludes all Bodily Worship; These he quotes as my
words, Dis. p. 128. and Vind. p. 23. Though these are not the very words I used,
yet I will show there is no mistake in them.

First, Then the Composers of the Dirictory own no Worship of the Body, as
requisite in the Service of God; nor do they require any either in general, or
particular; and for this, I urge not only their omitting it in general, but
their leaving it out in these particular places; where if they had believed it
a Duty, they could not without the greatest unfaithfulness have passed it over.
If any place of Scripture require Bodily Worship, certainly the First or Second
Commandment must do it; and Mr. B. owns ( R^m. p. 107.) that in the Second
Command, These External marks of our Inward Reverence, when we offer up our
Prayers and Thanksgivings, are required by God. But if you look into your
Larger or Shorter Catechism, the Assembly owns no such Duties to be required in
those mandments, or so much as hints at them: Nay, in the particular and large
Catalogue of Sins Forbidden in them, there is not so much as Irreverence in
Public Worship mentioned. Look likewise into the Confession of Faith, Chap. 1.
where Religious Worship is handled, and there is not the least mention made of
Bodily Adoration, though that only be called Worship in Scripture; as I showed
Dis. Chap. 4. Sect. 1. N. 6. and I do not find that it is denied: Therefore if
the Assembly thought it still to be a Christian Duty to Worship God with the
Body, it was great unfaithfulness in them to omit it in all the places they
treat of Religious Worship in their Directory, Catechism and Confession of
Faith.

II. Secondly, They positively forbid it in one place where it was most proper,
that is, in our first appearance in Gods peculiar presence in the Public
Assemblies. To this Mr. B. answers ( Rem. p. 108.) That this Order was only
Levelled against the Custom of Bowing toward the Altar: Which is a plain
mistake, for it forbids All Adoration or Bowing themselves toward one place or
other; therefore not only toward the Altar.

He alleges Secondly, Rem. p. 109. That the Assembly forbid Bowing should be
used by the People as they entered the Church, because they supposed such
External Adoration should be only used, when some part of Public Worship was
to be performed. But I answer, They supposed in this, that which neither they
or Mr. B. have proved from Scripture, or I believe ever will be proved; since
Adoration is to be used in the Congregation, not only to signify our joining
with them in Public Prayers or Praises, but likewise to declare that we come
into the Assembly as Worshipers, not Spectators, and to stir up and prepare
our hearts to meet our God: Every good Man comes there with a design to appear
in God's presence, and with expectation to receive a Blessing from him in the
answer of his Prayers; and ought to have his heart affected with this, when he
enters especially. And though no Public Worship is performed by the Minister at
that time; yet he that enters ought to acknowledge by Adoration his Belief of
God's presence amongst a People met to Worship him, and exert an act of
submission in his mind, and certify it with his Body, and join some short
Prayer or Ejaculation with it: And when I see a Man who comes into an Assembly
thus prostrating his Body, and lifting up his hands and eyes to Heaven, to
suppose that this is separated from A mental Act of Worship, is as uncharitable
as Eli's censure of Hanna, when she thus prayed privately in the Tabernacle.
And therefore it is very unreasonable which Mr. B. requires ( Re. p. 107.) That
I should prove Mere Bowing the Knee, etc. When there is no other part of
Worship offered, neither Vocal nor Mental, is yet made in Scripture a part of
Worship. Since I suppose Bowing our Knees in a Public Assembly is a sign of
our sense of God's presence, and our inward submission to him, which it
signifies and testifies to all present, though no other part of Public Worship
is at that time performed by the Minister. Without this Inward sense, it is
Hypocrisy, not Worship; And so are all our Praises and Prayers when separated
from this Mental Devotion, being only parts of Worship as they signify our
sense of God's Excellency, and our desires to be assisted by him: And if Bowing
the Knee, etc. signify our Submission and sense of God's Sovereignty, as
Universally, Certainly, and Explicitly, as Praises do our sense of his
Excellencies; the one is as proper a part of external Worship as the other. And
indeed only bending the Body is called Worship in Scripture, as I showed in my
Book; and it would seem to me, by Mr. B's denying it to be a proper part of
Worship, that he will not allow the Scripture to call things by their proper
names, but will set up his Reasons against the Letter of it; as I have observed
him often to do. To conclude, That the Assemblies of Christians are places for
secret Prayers of each apart (when they do not interfere with any Public
Office, as well as for Public) appears from the whole tenor of the Scripture,
and the constant practice of the Churches of God Ancient and Reformed. And that
those secret Prayers ought to be offered with Adoration, as well as the
Public, is likewise manifest. And therefore the Directory, by forbidding
Adoration at our first coming into Church, has excluded it where it was most
proper.

III. But Thirdly, I take it for granted, that when an Old Law or Rule is laid
aside, and a new substituted in the place of it, all things contained in the
Old repealed Law or Order are laid aside, which are not contained and again
enjoined in the New. By which Rule the Directory does plainly exclude all
Bodily Worship: For in the Preface to it, we are told: that They resolve to lay
aside the former Liturgy, with the many Rites and Ceremonies formerly used in
the Worship of God, and have agreed on this following Directory for all the
parts of Public Worship at Ordinary and Extraordinary Times. Here then the
Liturgy, with all the Rites and Ceremonies used formerly in the Worship of God
are laid aside; not only our Praises, Prayers, etc. are excluded, but all the
Rites and Ceremonies with which they were performed, such as Kneeling,
Standing, etc. And instead of these, we are obliged to no more than is ordered
in the Directory. Prayers, Praises, etc. are there indeed Ordered, and the way
of performing them prescribed, but not a word of Bodily Worship; and therefore
it is plainly excluded among the other Rites and Ceremonies that are laid aside.

IV. All that Mr. B. alleges, to prove that this Bodily Adoration is required
by the Directory, is, ( Rem. p. 109.) That it requires such as come into the
Congregation after Public Worship is begun, Not to betake themselves to their
private Devotions, but Reverently to compose themselves to join with the
Assembly in that Ordinance of God that is then in hand; which can import no
less than putting themselves into a bodily posture, most suitable to that
Ordinance. But I answer, This passage imports no such thing; the Assembly has
no where explained Reverence in this sense, or given the least reason to
believe that they thought one posture more suitable to one Ordinance than
another, except Sitting at the Lords Supper; which posture they seem to approve
through the whole Service; for they require those that come in To take their
Seats or Places; which in common acceptance is to sit down, and they never
require them to rise. It was therefore incumbent on Mr. B. to prove that by
Joining Reverently in Prayers or Thanksgiving (for Example) is meant Standing
or Kneeling at them, or else this is no Vindication of the Directory.

But Secondly, We are not left to guess what is meant by Joining Reverently in
the Ordinance then in hand; The Sentence immediately going before explains it,
where the Assembly tells how the people are to Join in Public Worship, even by
forbearing to read any thing -- Abstaining from private Whisperings,
Conferences, Salutations, or doing Reverence to any Persons -- From all gazing,
sleeping, and other indecent behavior which may disturb the Minister or People
--. This is the way they are to join in the Service of God. But not one word of
putting themselves into a Bodily Posture most suitable to the Ordinance that is
in hand. It is plain therefore, as I said before, that they excluded these when
they laid aside the many Rites and Ceremonies used formerly in the Worship of
God, and never restored them.

V. Let me add further, That Reverence and Worship are very different things:
We ought to behave our selves Reverently to all our Betters, and at all times:
But Worship is peculiarly to our Superiors, who have power over us. And as the
things are different, so there are different outward Acts that express them,
and neither Your Directory, Confession of Faith, or Catechism, or any other
Authentic Rule that I know of amongst you, require any one visible Act
peculiar to Worship in Your Assemblies. Nor do I see by what Authority your
Ministers can exact it from their People, where they pretend to Conform to the
Directory; nor can it be pretended that the Composers of it forgot this: For it
is manifest that they remembered it so far as to forbid all Adoration, where it
was most proper, that is at our coming into the Assembly, and never require nor
allow it any where after.

VI. Thirdly, What I have said concerning the sense of the Assembly that
Composed your Directory, is agreeable to the Notion Dr. Twiss their Chairman
had of this Matter; as appears from his Letter directed to Mr. Mede, dated July
27. 1635. It Is the 59 in the Collection: In which he gives this censure of
Bodily Worship, The Lord requires the true Worshippers should Worship him in
Spirit and Truth in distinction from Worshipping him either at Jerusalem, or in
the Mount the Woman spoke of; but as to the outward gestures, I doubt I shall
prove a Novice as long as I breath, and we affect not to make Ostentation of
our Devotion in the face of the World; the rather because thereby we draw upon
our selves the censure of Hypocrisy: And sometimes if a Man lift up his eyes he
is censured as a P. I confess there is no outward gesture of Devotion which may
not be as handsomely performed by as carnal a heart as breaths. And in his
thirteenth Letter, being the seventieth in the forementioned Collection, he
adds, And as for outward Complements, nothing more pleases a Natural Man in
Religious Worship, and he finds himself apt enough in it, yea, far more apt
than he who knowing and considering that God is a Spirit, and they that Worship
him must Worship him in Spirit, are most careful for the performance thereof;
Whereupon while their Minds are intent they find themselves not so free for
outward Complements; the care whereof is apt to cause avocation and disturbance
in that unum necessarium. Hence in the same Letter he blames himself for being
prevailed with to rise up at the solemn Glory given to the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, and commends one that could never be persuaded to it.

Thus you see how the Prolocutor of the Assembly ridicules Outward Worship,
under the Names of Outward Postures and Complements. You find himself likewise
alleging, in opposition to it, our Saviors Command of Worshipping in Spirit,
Jo. 4. 24* And the very same Arguments that I mentioned, and Answered in my
Discourse, Chap. 4. Sect. 3. Plainly intimating withal, that it is a piece of
Ostentation to use these Acts of Bodily Worship, a sign of a carnal heart to be
pleased with them; and to neglect them, a sign of an Heart intent on God's
Spiritual Service. Yet Mr. B. gives me very hard words for Answering these
Arguments, alleging ( Rem. p. 125.) That he never heard any Dissenter allege
such trifling Reasons, -- -- That I framed them my self; and intimates, that
few can be of so Sottish an Opinion: And yet you see the Chairman of Your
Assembly offered these Reasons, and Mr. Mede answered them Sixty Years ago, as
trifling and sottish as they are in Mr. B's Account: And perhaps his declaring
himself of these, and other as odd Opinions, was one reason made the Parliament
name him for Chairman. I wish he had not influenced them to lay aside all
Bodily Worship in the Service of God.

VII. Fourthly, The Directory excludes Bodily Worship by imposing Sitting at
the whole Office of the Administration of the Holy Sacrament, even at those
Prayers and Thanksgivings that are most properly Christian, and peculiar to the
complete Members of Christ's Church. The words of the Directory are these; The
Table being decently covered, and so conveniently placed, that the Communicants
may sit about it, or at it, the Minister is to begin the action, with
sanctifying and blessing the Elements. Here you see the Communicants are to sit
about the Table, or at it, whilst the Minister begins the Blessing and
Thanksgiving. Mr. B. replies two things to this ( Rem. p. 113.) First, That
Sitting during the time of receiving the Elements, is supposed, though not
enjoined by the Directory. But Supposing in this Case is Enjoining; otherwise
our Liturgy does not enjoin Kneeling in the Act of Receiving: For the words of
it are, That the Minister shall deliver the Elements to the People, into their
hands, all meekly kneeling. This (according to Mr. B.) only Supposes the People
to Kneel, but does not enjoin it; but it is manifest, that in these Cases to
suppose that People Sit or Stand, is equivalent to Imposing, because if they do
not sit or stand, they do not conform to the Order.

But Secondly, He alleges, That this imports No more, than that the Table must
be placed, that the Communicants may sit about it, but that they must actually
sit during the Blessing or Thanksgiving, is no where affirmed, much less
imposed. But I answer, It is as much supposed, and consequently enjoined, that
they should sit during the whole Action, as during the Receiving: That they
must sit sometime is plain; the Question is, when? All indifferent Persons will
understand it to be at that time where it is mentioned; that is, before the
Minister begin the Action. And the whole Directory supposes both Minister and
People in the same posture throughout, and gives no Order for altering it when
they come to distribution or receiving; which they would in all reason have
done, if they had meant that they should Bless and give Thanks in one posture,
and receive in another.

Let me add, That the President and Practice they had before them was contrary
to Mr. B's Interpretation; I mean the Church of Scotland: The Doctrine,
Worship, Discipline, and Government of which they had sworn to preserve in
their Covenant. Now, in the Liturgy of that Church, which is plainly their
Precedent in this part of the Directory, (as any one will see by comparing
them) the Order is conceived thus; The Exhortation ended, the Minister comes
down from the Pulpit, and sits at the Table, every Man and Woman likewise
taking their Places as occasion best serves; then he takes Bread, and gives
Thanks; And after all, the Action thus ended, the People sing the 103 Psalm, or
some other of Thanksgiving; which ended, one of the Blessings before* mentioned
is recited, and so they rise from the Table. Here is Sitting enjoined
throughout. Thus you have understood the Directory hitherto; And thus your
People have practiced to this day: And in this the Assembly were sworn to
preserve you. And this I did say, and must say, hardens you against Reverence
in the other parts of the Worship of God. For if Sitting be a suitable posture
for offering up the most solemn Prayers, Thanksgiving, and Praises to God, and
such as are peculiar to Our Religion, as Christians, they certainly are
suitable to all others. And yet this the Church of Scotland and Assembly have
determined to be suitable. And therefore Mr. B. is very unreasonable, when he
asserts, ( Vind. p. 31.) That He is no more obliged to defend any particular
Persons in that posture, that indulge it out of Sloth, than I am to defend the
toying or laughing that is too often used in our Church. This he repeats out of
his Remarks, but the case is not parallel.

For First, We have particular Canons against all such Behavior, namely, the
Seventh, that forbids Any Person to be otherwise at such times busied, than in
quiet attendance to hear, mark, and understand that which is read, etc. And the
88th, which requires the Churchwardens, etc. to see, That none walk, talk, or
stand idle in the Church-Yord, or Porch; much more in the Church. And the 91st
has these words; They shall also see, that in every meeting of the Congregation
Peace be well kept; and that none behave themselves rudely, or disorderly in
the Church. And to that end they shall warn the people, that they bring not
with them to the Church, Dogs, Hawks with bells, or Children which are not so
nurtured, as they can be kept quiet in their Seats, without running up and
down. Neither shall they suffer any person to disturb the Service or Sermon,
either by untimely ringing of Bells, or by walking, talking, laughing, or any
other noise, which may hinder the Minister, or offend the People. And the Names
of all such as offend in this kind, they shall truly and personally present in
the Ordinary's Visitations. Till he show as express a Rule against Sitting at
Prayers in the Directory, he and all that own that Directory are concerned in
this charge.

But Secondly, It is very uncharitable, and without Ground, to insinuate, That
Toying or Luighing is as universally practiced with us, as Sitting with you. I
have been in more Churches than Mr. B. and I must profess, that I have
generally observed the People behave themselves with reverence and devotion;
and I do not believe that any Church in the Kingdom can be justly charged with
Irreverence of this kind, any more than your Meetings, except perhaps one; and
that is not because those that do it there are not admonished of their Duty,
but because they are too big to be Corrected.

I have not said this to encourage you in your Irreverence, but to show you the
Unreasonableness of it, and to convince you of the Weakness or Unfaithfulness
of the Guides your Party followed when they left our Church, of whom your
Advocate is ashamed, and whom he would fain excuse by denying plain Matters of
Fact: As for me, I do assure you I should be much better pleased to find I was
mistaken in your Principles and Practices, then that the whole Body of you
should be guilty of such an Irregularity; and therefore, if I had observed that
you had reformed effectually these Abuses, I should not have troubled my self
with a Vindication; for my design was not to Accuse, but Reform you: yet I
thank God my Endeavors have not altogether proved unsuccessful upon you, even
in this point.

VIII. Mr. B. affirms ( Rem. p. 111.) That your Ministers frequently in their
Discourses to their People recommend Standing or Kneeling in their public
Prayers; and p. 112, That they have faithfully declared to their people their
dislike of Sitting. Now, pray let me give you this easy Test to distinguish
your Faithful Ministers from the Unfaithful; Those of them that have frequently
and heartily reproved you for Sitting at your public Prayers, before my Book
appeared, count them in this point Faithful Ministers of the Gospel; and those
that have not done so, reckon them, as they truly are, Unfaithful and conniving
Shepherds. And take heed how you trust them in other cases. I thank God for it,
that by all I can learn, my Book has done more to reform this Unseemly
Practice, as Mr. B. himself calls it, ( Rem. p. 112.) amongst you than all your
Ministers these 50 years; and plainly shows, that they need some inspection to
mind them of their Duty.

Sect. X. Concerning the Practice of Bodily Reverence by Dissenters.
1. A Seventh Matter of Fact with which Mr. B. anew charges me, ( Vind. p. 23.)
is, That I affirm, that the Dissenters are Taught, that external postures of
Bodily Worship may in no case be practiced: for which he quotes my Discourse,
p. 137. I wish that Mr. B. while he taxes me for Accusing you Unjustly, and
misrepresenting you, were careful of avoiding such dealings toward others. If
you look into the place quoted, you will neither find the Words nor Sense of
what he alleges against me; my Words are, That in case of Necessity we think
our Outward Performances may be lawfully omitted; but you are Taught, that in
no case they may be lawfully practiced: You are Taught rather to stay at home,
and not to Worship God at all publicly, than to conform in Outward Gestures or
Circumstances. In which words it is plain, First, That I address my self to you
in particular, and not to Dissenters in general, as he represents me. Secondly,
It is evident I spoke here of the Outward Gestures and Circumstances to which
our Church requires you to conform, in order to join in her public Worship;
and not of all External Postures of Bodily Worship: And it is too sad a Truth,
that above Twenty thousand of you in this Diocese refrain, and have refrained
every Lord's day from all Public Worship for many Years, rather than join in
these; and that you have counted our Standing, Kneeling, etc. idolatrous
heretofore, appears not only from your Practice and Profession, but from your
Authors. Witness the Reasons for which the Service Book urged upon Scotland,
ought to be refused, printed 1638, in which -- the Third Reason is, because it
has a number of Popish, Superstitious, and Idolatrous Ceremonies; amongst
which are reckoned, the Priest's Standing, Kneeling, Turning to the People, and
the Peoples Standing at Gospels, at Gloria Patri, etc. Creeds, their Answering
the Minister, and many suchlike, in number above Fifty.

These unchristian and unjust Censures are still in many of your Minds, and for
ought I find, they are the chief Objections you have against our Service; and I
beseech God in his Mercy to grant, that either my Reasons, or Mr. B's
Concessions, may remove them, so that we may hear no more from you of the
Idolatry, Superstition or Popery of our Ministers Kneeling at their Prayers, or
standing at their Blessings; or of our Peoples Kneeling at their Confessions of
Sins, at their Prayers and Communions, or Standing at their Praises,
Thanksgivings, Professions of Faith, and other parts of our Service, that
require a more solemn attention and concern.

Sect. XI. Concerning the Praises of God.
1. I Shall add an Eighth Matter of Fact, that has relation to the same Affair,
and that is concerning your praising God; Mr. B. alleges ( Vind. p. 23.) these
as my words, and puts them, as such, in Italian Characters, That You have no
other way of Praising God, but by singing a Verse or two of a Psalm. And quotes
my Discourse, p. 24, for them; but if you look into the place, you will find
that these are neither my words nor sense: I am there only comparing your use
of Psalms and Hymns in the Praises of God, with ours; and I observed that our
Church praises God every day with five or six Psalms, besides other Hymns -- --
Whereas You only praise him in a piece of a Psalm of a few Verses. A thing so
notoriously true, that without perverting the words, it is impossible to find
any Exception against them.

He objects indeed, That your Directory prescribes Extemporary Thanksgivings,
and spends many Pages in his Remarks about them. But I answer, Thanksgivings
and Praises are different things, though they commonly go together; and your
Extempory Thanksgivings are reckoned in your Directory under the Head of
Prayers: The Title under which they are prescribed, is that of public Prayer
after Sermon: The Rule is, The Sermon being ended, the Minister shall give
Thanks, etc. And then the Prayer ended, let a Psalm be sung. I had no intention
to deny these, but reckoned them, as your Directory does, with your Prayers:
Which gives no other Rule for the Praises of God, but under the head of singing
Psalms; the words there are, It is the Duty of Christians to praise God by
singing of Psalms; the only Rule for the Praises of God in the whole Directory.
Properly speaking, Psalms and Hymns are the Scripture way of praising God, though
in a large sense we praise him by our Confessions of Sins and Faith; and by our
Prayers, as well as by our Thanksgivings.

Sect. XII. Concerning the Rule of Human Prudence.
1. A Ninth Matter of Fact is, concerning the Rule of Human Prudence, that we
find, Rem. p. 7, and 9, he charges me, Vind. p. 28, with Mistaking that Rule,
and supposing that he denied that God had given us any particular Directions at
all in reference to the Modes of Worship. But I must declare I neither did, nor
intended to ascribe any such Opinion to him; I knew very well, that he owned
many such, but he positively affirmed, Rem. p. 7. That though God has commanded
public Prayer, Praise, Hearing, Celebration of the Lord's Supper, etc. yet at
what time or place we shall assemble in, in what order these parts of Worship
shall be performed, what particular devout posture we shall use among several
equally expressive of our religious Reverence, what Translation of the Bible,
or Version of the Psalms we shall choose, what portion of the Scripture shall be
Read, Explained, and Applied, what Utensils shall be employed in the
celebration of the Sacraments; and a multitude of such Circumstances, and Modes
of that kind, are left to Human determination; only therein the general Rules
of Scripture must be regarded. Now, though Mr. B. in other Matters allows
particular Directions for the Modes of Worship, as he calls them; yet it is
plain in these of Time, Place, Postures, Translations, Order and Circumstances,
he allows no particular Directions in Scripture, by which we are obliged, but
only General Rules. Against this I Argued in my Admonition, and showed that God
had not only given us General Rules for these Matters, but likewise many
particular Directions and Examples concerning each of them; indeed so many,
that if we diligently attend, and mind the Consequences of them, and apply them
to like Cases, we may have sufficient direction from Scripture to Order our
Worship in each of these respects, and that it is a great Presumption to lay
aside these particular Directions and Examples, and to substitute other in
their stead, because our own Prudence judges them more for Edification.

II. As for Example, The New Testament shows us, that there was a Translation
of the Psalms in Prose, and it does not appear that either our Savior or his
Apostles used any other Translation, or the Church of God for 1500 Years: But
Mr. B. tells us, Vind. p. 29. That the Command which obliges Christian Churches
to sing Psalms, necessarily obliges us to turn 'em in such sort of Meter and
Verse as will best accommodate them to be sung by the People. Now, this I say,
is directly to set up the Determination of our own Prudence against
Scripture-Precedent, and to accuse Christ, his Apostles and the Church of God,
of not having done that which the Command of God obliged them necessarily to
do; since it does not appear that they ever Translated the Psalms into any sort
of Verse to accommodate the People; but plainly supposed they might sing them
very well in Prose, as they found them Translated to their hands by the Seventy
Interpreters. They are in no better Meter in the Greek, Latin, Syriack, or in
any other ancient Translation used by the Church of God, than in the
Common Prayer Book. Yet the generality of those that used these Translations
were not excluded from Singing them according to God's Command, nor are they
with us: And indeed if people were not prejudiced against them by such false
reasonings as Mr. B. offers, it is easier to sing them, and understand them
when sung by others, in our way (which is the Ancient Christian Method) than
when sung according to the New Meter Tunes.

As to the Original Hebrew Psalms, I knew very well that Learned Men had
disputed much about them: That some have endeavored to find Measure in them,
others Rhyme; but after all, they come generally to that result which gave you,
Dis. Chap. 1. Sect. 1. N. 3. That it is evident they are poetical, but the
poetry of them consists rather in the style or manner of expression than in any
certain measures or verses. And the same is observed in the Hymns and Songs of
the New Testament; Such as those of Zacharias, and the blessed Virgin: Which
are plainly Poetical Composures, and as much Hymns as any of David's Psalms,
and as fit to be sung. And more particularly those two Songs which the Church
is represented Singing in the Rev. Chap. 9. and Chap. 15. which are as much
Verse in the English as in the Original.

He alleges indeed, Vind. p. 29. That the Psalms of David were wrote in such*
sort of Meter and Verse as was then used. But this is more than any one knows,
and no ways concern us, since the Translation of them, which we find under the
New Testament, and the Hymns and Songs Recorded in it, are not in that sort of
Verse or Meter, or Poetry that was then used in the World, but in such as we
find in the Old Testament; and such as our Church still retains in our Hymns
and Psalms: Nor has she ever allowed by any Public Act the Meter Psalms; much
less that they should justle out the Scripture-way of using them in Prose.

III. Secondly, The Scripture directs us to use all the ways of offering up
Psalms to God that were then common.

First, By Singing them together; So did Moses and the Children of Israel, Ex.
15.

Secondly, By Courses; So did the Priests and Levites, Ezra 3. 11.

Thirdly, By a select Choire; So was the custom in the Temple.

Fourthly, By one's Singing, and the rest joining with him in their minds, and
attending for their Edification and Comfort. So the Prophets did that had
inspired Psalms, 1 Cor. 14. 26. For it is not conceiveable how the Congregation
could join their Voices in a Psalm that was either inspired in the place, or
brought prepared by the Prophet, since we all agree that there was no Reading a
line, as with us, and then Singing it.

Fifthly, By speaking or reciting Psalms, Hymns and Spiritual Songs.

Sixthly, By plain Singing them. And

Seventhly, By playing to them; So Ephesians. 5. 19. Speaking to your selves in
Psalms and Hymns and Spiritual Songs* Singing and making Melody in your Heart
to the Lord. The word we render making melody, is literally (as I have formerly
observed) Singing or playing to an Instrument: And these three, Speaking,
Singing, and Playing, are literally the ways men used their Hymns, Poems, and
Songs: And the Apostle directs us to use our Psalms all these ways, as we have
occasion; adding, that we must use them to the Lord only, and with grace in our
Hearts.

These are the Precedents and Directions the Scriptures give us for the use of
our Psalms; and our Church retains them all on occasions. And to pretend that
all or any of these are impractical, disorderly, or contrary to Edification, I
take to be a great presumption; and this I suppose to be your Case, and Mr. B's.

He asserts, Rem. p. 13. That the New Testament recommends no other use of
Psalms but Singing, and quotes, Ephesians. 5. 19. to prove it; whereas the very
Letter of the place recommends Speaking them, and Playing to them, as well as
Singing them. And so Protestant Interpreters, both our own and Strangers,
understand it.

Thirdly, You and he have laid aside all these ways Precedented in Scripture,
and substituted instead of them one that is not yet a hundred year old,
peculiar to these Countries, and not commonly used in other Singing; I mean
reading a line, and the people Singing it after; which Mr. B. confesses,
Remarks p. 28. to be indeed A defect, but such as we must be forced to
condescend to, unless we could prevail with all our People to get Psalm Books,
and learn to read, or to commit 'em to memory: As if all the poor Christians in
the Apostles time had had Psalm-Books; or could have read; or had the Psalms by
heart; or as if our Neighbor Reformed Churches were in a better Case in this
point than we: But this is plainly to suppose that the Apostles and and the
Church of God were ignorant of this necessary means of Edifying the People till
a few years ago; and that the Scripture failed to give us Direction what we are
to do with the Psalms when the people want Books, cannot read, or have them not
by heart: Which has ever been the Case of many since they were first Sung. But
the same Scripture that commands us to do all things for Edification, commands
us likewise to use the Psalms as I have showed, and never prescribes or
mentions the defective way used by you; and therefore we may be sure Singing
the Psalms by a Choir, Reading them by Courses, and Playing to them are not
contrary to Edification: And to oppose the Determinations of Human Prudence to
these particular Precedents, is to make the Word of God of none effect by your
Tradition: And is what I blame in You and Mr. B. as Teaching your own
Inventions. I positively declared that I did not condemn Singing Meter - Psalms
as unlawful, but only your casting out the Prose entirely in your public
praises of God, and preferring the Meter merely on the strength of our own
prudential Determinations; as more edifying and fitter for a Congregation. This
I took to be a preferring your own Reason, or Tradition, to the Word of God.

IV. The same I say concerning Extemporary Prayer: I never denied but
Extemporary Prayers may be lawful, nay, necessary on Extraordinary Occasions,
when a man has not a Form ready, or time to Compose one. I granted, that in
this case, we may depend on the assistance of God's Spirit, as in all other
cases of Necessity; or at least hope for pardon, of course, to our Infirmities.

But I showed, Dis. Chap. 2. Sect. 3. N. 3. That God had Commanded Forms of
Prayer, both to Priests and People, in the Old and New Testament: That the
Church of the Jews use a Form of Prayer in their Public Ordinary Service; that
the Psalms of David are a Collection of such Forms, and so are called, Psalm.
72. 20. And it does not appear, that any other public Prayers were ordinarily
used in the Temple; and that we have many Precedents of such. I add now, that
such Prayers are sufficient to express all our Desires to God on Ordinary
public Occasions, which are constantly the same; and if any thing
Extraordinary happen, the Church may provide a Form for it, it being
unreasonable that it should be left to every private Minister to impose what
Confession or Petitions he pleases on the people; or at least in such a solemn
affair as uttering to God the Sense of a Nation, or even of a Congregation, a
Minister ought to reduce what he intends to say into Form, and consider it well
beforehand, that he may be sure that the Words are fit and proper for the
Public, as well as the Matter.

I showed further, That there is no Promise in Scripture to furnish us with
Words without this care; and, that the Spirit of Prayer promised in Scripture
does not include any such Gift either to Minister or People: And therefore to
lay aside Prayers by a Form, in our Ordinary public Occasions (which are still
the same) is plainly to prefer our own Inventions to Scriptureprecedents, and
our prudential Application of a General Rule, to the method prescribed in
several particular cases under that General Rule by God himself. I grant,
Praying Extemporarily, and Prayer by a Form, are different ways of Worshipping
God, or Modes, to use Mr. B's phrase, (who commonly, in these cases, shelters
himself in some new difficult Word, which many of you do not understand.) But,
I say, We have only precedents for one of these ways in Scripture, in
performing of public Prayers in an Ordinary Settled Congregation; and therefore
for you to lay aside this way (as you do in your most public and ordinary
Addresses) for Extemporary Prayers, is to prefer your own Wisdom to God's. If
the thing it self had been feasible, the method of Answering this Argument
against Extemporary Prayer was easy; nor was there any need of that long
Discourse you find in Mr. B's Remarks, or the hard Words he gives me about it.
The whole difficulty incumbent on him, was to show some Command of God in
Scripture, requiring us to Worship or Pray to him in a Conceived, or
Unpremeditated, or Free-Prayer, as he calls it; or some Example in a Settled
Ordinary Congregation, where it was practiced. Till he do this, his Arguments
for the Usefulness of such Prayers, and for their Necessity, drawn from their
being more Moving and more Edifying than Forms, are only opposing his own
Experience to the Precedents of Holy Scripture; And it seems to me, that only
the itching Ears of people who love Novelty and Variety give ground for such
Surmises: But these are Vices against which they ought to be cautioned, not to
be cherished and encouraged in them, as Mr. B. does, Rem. p. 163. since they
are apt to cheat men with a false Devotion, and are not necessary to a true
one; of which, had Mr. B. been thoroughly sensible, I conceive he would not have
given me such very hard words for interpreting an Itching Ear, to be an Ear
that loves them; or affirmed (as he does, Rem. p. 101.) That no Expositor
before me ever dreamed of such a sense of them. I wish he would consult a few
more Expositors before he peremptorily determine concerning the sense of
Scriptures: He might have found Estius, Al^pide, and Galvin, noted
Commentators, concur in this sense with me, and the Context, as well as the
Words, where they are used, enforce it, 2 Timothy 43. For the time will come, when
they will not endure sound Doctrine; but after their own Lusts, heap up to
themselves Teachers having itching Ears. Which words plainly give two Reasons
that move people to heap up Teachers to themselves, their Lusts and their
Itching Ears; but Mr. B. would persuade us, that the Apostle meant only one of
them; whereas the Experience of all Ages has found, that the desire* of Novelty
and Variety has made Men ready to entertain Fables and False Doctrines, as well
as their Wanton Fancies, or Various Inolinations, as he alleges: If by Wanton
Fancies he meant any thing else than a Fancy that loves Novelty and Variety,
and if the same be meant by it, then he had no reason to abuse me for a whole
Page together, for interpreting the words in that sense, since he himself does
the same.

M. B. I confess, offers some Scripture Precedents for Extemporary Prayer in
public, Rem. p. 36. namely Solomon's, 1 King*s 8. 22. Asa's, 2 Chronicles. 14. 11.
Jehosophat's, 2 Chronicles. 20. 5. Hezekia's, Isa. 36. 15, 16. Ezra's, Chap. 9. 5.
Nehemiah's, Chap. 9. 5. But these are not to the purpose; they are all of them
on Extraordinary occasions, and in Extraordinary Assemblies, in which it is
granted, that Extemporary Prayers may be necessary. Secondly, They are
generally the particular Prayers of the men that offered them, and not of the
Assembly; such is Solomon's, Hezekiah's, and Ezra's. Thirdly, It does not
appear but they were all Forms written and prepared beforehand. I take it for
granted, That the Confession in Neh. 9. was so, for eight Levites repeated it,
the people standing; as appears by the fifth Verse, Then the Levites, Jeshua
and Cadmiel, Bani, Hashabniah, Sherebijah, Hodijah, Shebaniah, said, Stand up
and bless the Lord your God for ever and ever. And so they go on with the
Confession, and it is like the People joined their Voices also, for they used
to join in the Blessings and Praises of God; to do which, the Levites now
invite them: And in the latter end of the Confession it is said, V. 18. Because
of all this, We make a sure Covenant, and Write it. This Confession is then
plainly the Preface to that Covenant, and therefore these are no clear
Instances (as he alleges) or Precedents for Extemporary Prayers in an Ordinary
Settled Congregation; much less is there any Command for such: Whereas the
Precedents for Forms of Prayer are express, and the Command to use the Lord's
Prayer in particular, literal, Luke 11. 2. When you pray, say, Our Father; to
which Mr. B's Interpretation is a Contradiction; When you pray you need not say
Our Father, etc. either in Ordinary public Addresses to God, or Occasional.

V. Let me observe further, that though Mr. B. gives me such hard words for not
distinguishing between the Spirit of Prayer and the Grift, Rem. p. 60. yet he
does not bring one place of Scripture where they are distinguished: It was
directly my business, to show, That there was no such Ordinary Gift, without
the help of Forms, necessary or promised, either to the Children of God, or
(which is the same thing, as Mr. B. now states it, Rem. p. 59.) to all
Ministers or private Christians, In the diligent use of such helps as they are
furnished with, and frequent exercising themselves in this excellent Duty. This
is a point so material, that we ought to have plain Scripture for it, and a
clear promise that God will give this Gift to us on all occasions ordinary and
extraordinary, without the help of Forms, if we use the means, endeavor it
heartily, and exercise our selves in it. But Mr. B. has not produced one
particular, much less clear promise to this purpose; only he argues the
Conveniences of it from general Rules, which signify nothing when duly
examined; neither ought to be put in the balance with our Savior's Command and
Scripture* Precedents: And therefore I had good reason to suppose that Mr. B.
set up his Rule of Human Prudence to the exclusion of any particular Rule or
Precedent in Scripture in these Duties he mentioned: Nay, I had good Warrant to
believe, that he allows a dispensing Power even against express Scripture-Rules
and Precedents, when his Human Prudence judges them contrary to Edification: He
asserts this positively in the matter of Ordination, and I had reason to
believe the same as to matter of Worship. Says he, Reflect. p. 37. Positive
Precepts must always yield to Moral, and Matters of mere Order to the end of
the Duty ordered: and the former must never be pleaded against the latter. This
I take to be a dangerous Position; for it is in effect to say, that all the
particular Rules in Scripture about the Worship of God, and Discipline of his
Church, cease to be Obligatory on any party of Men that think them contrary to
Edification: Whereas we ought to suppose, that they never are contrary to it,
and therefore are never to be laid aside; and that though they seem to us to be
contrary, yet they are not, but are some way misapplied; which is to be amended
without Dispensing with them. Thus I may be assured, that praying to God by a
Form is very edifying, because I find Precedents for doing so in Scripture; and
I ought to look on it as a very corrupt Human Prudence, that suggests the
contrary. And herein, as I take it, lies the principal difference between Mr.
B. and Me, concerning this Rule; I argue, that Forms of Prayer, singing
Prose-Psalms, etc. are edifying, because I find them used in Scripture; he
argues, That they ought not to be generally used, because his Human Prudence
and Observation finds them contrary to Edification. I must leave you to judge
which of us pay the greatest deference to the holy Scripture, or have the
greatest opinion of our own Prudence.

VI. To conclude this Head, I will deal easily with Mr. B. and allow him the
Interpretation of his Rule which he now gives; and though he says, That only the
general Rules must be regarded, yet I will allow he did not intend to exclude
particular Directions; and I will take the Rule as Mr. Baxter has it, from
whence I suppose Mr. B. took it, in these words; (Conformity stated, p. 13.) We
never held, that the Scripture is a particular Rule, commanding every Accident
and Circumstance about God's Worship (but only a general Rule requiring all to
be done in Love and Peace, and to Edification, and decently, etc.) in those
Circumstances which must be some way determined, and God has left to variable
Human Determinations, such as are Time, Place, Utensils, Translations,
Sections, Metres, Tunes, Methods and Words in Preaching and Prayer, Habits,
Gestures, and many suchlike. This Rule is laid down in the Name of all your
party, and I hope you will stand by it; for it not only justifies our
Holy Days* Communion Table, Rails, Habits, Desks, Pulpit and Fonts, as I showed
in my Admonitton, but also our Office for the Dead; for we have a general Rule
in Scripture to pray always, more especially when we meet with any loss, or
cause of sorrow: And I suppose our Human Prudence does determine, that the
death of a Friend is a very sensible loss; that the time of his burial is a
very proper time for Prayer; and his Grave, where we take our last farewell of
him, is a very proper place to express our hope of his Resurrection, and to
thank God for that hope; which is the sum of that Office of our Church. The
same may be said for the Thanksgiving of Women after Childbirth, and indeed
for every other Office appointed by our Church; and every practice even of our
reading the Apocrypha, and Standing at the Gospel; the one being a gesture
within the very Letter of the Rule, and as the Prudence of the Church has
judged for many Ages, very edifying; and the other full as warrantable as your
Ministers Reading the Covenant and Acknowledgment of Sins, which they were
ordered to do two Lord's days, October. 6. 1648. Nay, it justifies that which we
are no ways obliged to justify, though Mr. B. often objects it to us, that is,
Bowing toward the East, or Altar, it being no Rule of our Church, or universal
practice; For God has in general commanded us to worship him with our Bodies;
and it is very convenient, decent, and solemn, that the whole Congregation
should bow one way, without meeting each others Faces. If therefore Human
Prudence determine, that this gesture shall be used at certain times, and that
it shall be toward the East or Communion Table, it only does what the Rule
impowers, and it fully justifies it.

The same may be said of bowing the Head at the Name of Jesus, which yet is not
required of you, there being no Rule for it in the Church of Ireland; and the
same is obvious of all these other things Mr. B. excepts against, Vind. p. 28.

Sect. XIII. Concerning the Third, Fourth, and Fifth Canons.
1. ATenth Matter of Fact is his adding and taking away from our Third, Fourth,
and Fifth Canons. He professes that he cannot imagine wherein he has added to
them, Vind. p. 33. For the determination of this I desire you to Consult the
Remarks, p. 179. and there you will find him affirming that our Fifth and Third
Canon Excommunicate ipso facto all that are guilty of the Crimes mentioned in
them; and intimates the same concerning the Fourth: But he has added these
words ipso facto out of his own head, or by inconsiderately transcribing Mr.
Baxter, who indeed quotes the Third, Fourth and Fifth English Canons; but the
Irish Canons which Mr. B. here quotes, treat of different matters, and have no
such words in them; and yet these words are so material, that he founds his
principal Arguments against these Canons on them; alleging it ( Rem. p. 180.)
as a great absurdity that they Excommunicate without any other Admonition than
what the Canons themselves give; and that they peremptorily cut off from Christ
without presonal warning; and p. 146. That all are denounced Excommunicated who
affirm or maintain the Doctrines condemned in those Canons. Whereas those
Canons neither denounce any Excommunicated, nor Excommunicate any ipso facto;
and though the Crimes be very grievous, such as Preaching against the Established
Worship in the Common Prayer Book; condemning our Orders, unchurching our
Congregations; separating from us as profane; and setting up Altar against
Altar; yet the Canons do not empower the Bishops to Excommunicate Persons so
guilty till they be Cited, Admonished, the Fact proved, and they persist
impenitently in their Errors: Whereas if they were Excommunicated ipso facto
(as Mr. B. alleges) there needed only Citation and a proof of the Fact, and a
Declaration of the Sentence.

Sect. XIV. Concerning His Demands.
1. BUT Eleventhly, As Mr. B. denies, that he has added to our Canons, so he
likewise asserts, Vind. p. 33. That he has reviewed all the demands he has made
in his Remarks, and can see no unjust representation in them. I do not think it
proper to trouble you with an Examination of all those. I will only put you in
mind that I hinted at some of them in my Admonition, p 49. as in the fifth,
where he represents us absolving the Uncensured; which is a very unjust
representation: For the Absolution of the sick is not the absolving of the
Uncensured, but of one that by, A special Confession of some weighty* matter
that troubles his Conscience has submitted himself to the censure and judgment
of a Minister.

Secondly, In the seventh demand he censures our Canons in the matter of such
as are to be Ordained as very desective; which is a very unjust representation,
they being as strict as the Apostles, 1 Timothy 3. and in such a degree, that if
duly observed, no insufficient person can be admitted into Orders.

I will add two or three more, for I cannot go through all.

II. Thirdly, Therefore in his second demand, p. 171. he represents the
Authority of Bishops to be so devolved on their Chancellours, as to be out of
their one hands; and humbly desires they would endeavor to recover the
spiritual part of it. This is an unjust representation, and shows he does not
understand our Constitution, or practice; for, First, In many Cases the Bishop
cannot devolve his Power on his Chancellor, but must act himself. Secondly,
The Chancellour's Power does not exclude the Bishops in any case. On the
contrary, he is only his Substitute when absent, and his Assistant when
present: The Bishop may when he pleases sit in his own Courts, and when he
pleases admit what Clergymen he thinks proper to assist him, and dispose of
all things according to the Canons; He may reserve a cause to his own Hearing;
pass sentence in it according to his own Judgment; and dismiss or suspend it;
and in every step act independently of his Chancellor. It is true, he cannot
in some Cases dispose of the Chancellor, or Registers Fees; to which (being a
Lay-perquisite) the Common Law intitles them; and it is not the Churches fault
that we cannot reform it. But from this it sufficiently appears that to
represent our Jurisdiction as out of our hands is very unjust.

And here let me take notice of a most unjust Reflection Mr. B. has cast on the
Jurisdiction of this Diocese, in particular: He asserts, p 157. That you have
very little hopes of Reformation of Manners, from either the Persons that
compose those C^urts, or from the manner of their proceedings; and hopes that I
should not expect that you should turn Informers, to bring Grist to our Mills.
And intimates, That we only draw people in there to make a Prey of them. These
are every one most unjust Representations; and I dare appeal to the several
hundreds I have had in my Court, since I came to this Diocese, for the truth of
what I assert: I can answer for my self and all the Officers of the Court, and
dare affirm that none of them ever made a Prey of any. I shall only give the
Chancellours account of this matter, and desire Mr. B. to try if he can produce
one instance to the contrary.

My Lord, after all the tenderness of your Lordships Ecclesiastical Courts, I
am surpised to find that Mr. B. (in his Book against you) speaks to your
Lordship of such Courts as bring contempt on the censures of the Church,
decreeing 'em on frivolous causes, in a rash and precipitant manner, making 'em
an Engine to squeeze the Purses of men, rather than reform their Manners, p.
155. as hunting for Prey, and on that score drawing men into their clutches, p.
156. as scandalously managed: The censures of the Church prostituted to so vile
a purpose as that of filthy lucre, and that thereby the Temple of God is turned
into a House of Merchandise, p. 171. This, in a Book so full of harsh
innuendo's may make some Readers believe that the Accounts he has from hence
(of which he sometimes speaks) give him ground to talk at this rate. And seeing
these things are said to the Bishop of Derry, and the Reformation of them
desired, those who are strangers to your Lordships Courts, and your Diocese,
may be inclined to believe that the Jurisdiction here is managed by such
Harpy's as he has described; for what Courts can your Lordship reform but your
own? and why is this objected to your Lordship unless you are supposed to be
guilty? Therefore as far as this may be understood to relate to your Lordships
Diocese (concerning which, properly, all the Dispute is) I shall beg leave of
your Lordship to offer this short answer to it. I have never heard that any
Judge of the Consistory of Derry since June 1691, when I came first into this
Diocese, received any Fees but what came through my hands; for I attended
constantly on the Courts since that time (as Surrogate the first year, and
Chancellor the two last) to your Lordships knowledge, who was duly present at
them when you were in Town. Now during these three Years there are, or have
been, about 200 Persons (reputed of that Persuasion that Mr. B. seems to
vindicate) proceeded against in the Ecclesiastical Courts of Derry, presented
by the Churchwardens, for Fornication, Adultery, Incest, etc. From all which,
there has not been taken for the Judges Fees to the value of Ten Pounds. The
last Fifteen Months I resided in my Parish, Seven miles distant from the Court,
yet attended without any Surrogate, lest I should be obliged to grant the full
Fees to others which I remit often my self; so that my many necessary Journeys,
my neglect of my own private Concerns, my staying many Nights and Weeks from my
own Dwelling, being considered, any reasonable person may compute my Gains. I
shall not enter into any Invidious comparison between this Management and the
times of Presbitery or Independency; but supposing that my Brethren may justify
their Courts in the same manner, if the Scene of the present Dispute were not
laid in this See: I shall content my self with this, That all men may hence
discern, whether our Courts have deserved the severe Intimations
beforementioned, or whether Mr. B's. friends here, have been devoured as a
prey, etc. -- --

Ballychelaghan June 6 1694. My Lord, your Lordships, etc. Robert Gourney.


To conclude, I dare affirm, that all the Officers of the Court of Derry, have
not had Forty Pound Fees from all the several hundred Criminals that have been
in it since I came into the Diocese; so far have they been from Oppressing or
Squeezing any: And yet I am not satisfied that this Mildness is commendable,
for I find the greater part so lost to all sense of Goodness, and so
exceedingly sordid in their Temper, that they had rather do Penance both at
Meeting and Church than pay a few Shilings; and perhaps on such people, the
fear of paying a little Money, would work a greater Reformation, and awaken
them more than all other Endeavors.

III. Fourthly, He represents Ministers in his Sixth Demand, p. 173. as
deprived of their Pastoral Power that belongs to them, and Wishes that Bishops
would exercise their Authority in concurrence with their Presbyters; and
another of your Ministers represents Bishops as the sole Pastors of the whole
Diocese, Mr. Craghead p. 145. Now all these are Misrepresentations. For First.
There are many acts of Episcopal Power and Authority which a Bishop connot
exercise without the concurrence of his Presbyters. Secondly, There is not one
act belonging to a Congregation, except confirming the Baptized (which has ever
been peculiar to Bishops) but a Presbyter, with the consent of his Bishop, may
exercise it. Thirdly, A Presbyter has as much power in the matter of
Excommunication as any Presbyterian Minister, since he can reprove, rebuke,
exhort and suspend from the Sacrament; which is all that any of them can do.
And whereas Mr. B. alleges that he must turn Informer against such as he
suspends, in the Spiritual Courts, where they are sure to be put to great
Charges. This is another Misrepresentation; For there is no such necessity of
putting into the Court such Offenders, except their Sins be public; or if they
should be put into it, that they should be put to much Charges, except they
continue impenitent, and then it is necessary they should pay the Fees of the
Office, which are very small, whatever Mr. B. suggests, and it is the Offenders
own fault, if they be otherwise who make them so by their obstinacy: To
conclude, a Presbyter must act in dependence and with consent of his Bishop in
many things, but this does not hinder him from being a Pastor, jointly with
his Bishop of the whole Diocese, and particularly in his own Cure.

IV. Let me Observe further, That neither Presbyterians or Independents can
with any reason Object this to our Presbyters; for every Presbyterian Minister
depends on his Brethren in these acts. And can neither Excommunicate or perform
any other Proper Act of Government, that concerns the whole Church, without
consent of a Synod; and if his depending on a Synod in these Acts, does not
hinder him from esteeming himself a Pastor, why should a Presbyter with us not
count himself a Pastor, since he has as much power alone as your Ministers,
and as much in Conjunction with his Bishop, as yours have with a Synod? and
especially when it is considered that the presence and consent of a Bishop is
easier had than that of a Synod; and the Bishop is obliged by known Rules and
Laws to concur in those things that are reasonable, whereas generally your
Matters are Arbitrary and depend on the major Votes.

As to the Congregational Ministers, They in these Acts depend on the consent
of their own Congregations, in whom (according to them) the power of the Keys
is Originally seated; and they cannot Excommunicate any without consent of
their People, which is more opposite to the nature of a Pastor, than acting
with the consent of a Bishop, and in Subordination to him; and indeed such
Ministers are rather mere Servants, than Pastors of their People: In this
point therefore, Mr. B. has made a very unjust Representation of our Principles
and Practice.

Sect. XV. Concerning Mr. Sq.
1. THE last Matter of Fact, of which I shall take notice, concerns a person
rejected from Orders in our Church, and now a Preacher of your Party. Mr. B.
affirms, that your Ministers declare, that they know of no such Person, and
says, That if I mean Mr. Sq. he declares he was never examined, as to his
Learning, by us; and that most that know him, think, that if I reject all
those, of my Clergy, that are not Mr. Sq' s. superiors in Learning, I must
exclude a great many of those that are now in this Diocese.

You see how he necessitates me to give an account of this affair. This
Gentleman whom I did not name, out of the great respect I had to his Relations,
soon after the Troubles, procured Mr. Robert Gage, of this Diocese, to present
him to the then Bishop of Rapho, for the Order of a Deacon; the Bishop,
according to the 31st Canon, demanded a Certificate of his Degree, good Life
and Conversation under the College Seal; but that he neither had, nor could
procure; whereupon, the Bishop refused him. After I came to this place he
applied himself to me, both in person and by his friends; but I refused him and
them, till such time as he was publicly Examined according to the Canons: In
the mean while I discoursed him several times, and found him unfit as to his
Learning, yet would not discourage him, but advised him to such Books as I
thought most fit and necessary for him: When the time drew near, that I
intended to have an Ordination, he Petitioned to be admitted to the Public
Examination which was to precede it; I read the petition written in his own
Hand, but the Latin so false and improper, that it appeared by it, he was not
Master of the Grammar, much less of the Latin Tongue. I consulted some of the
Clergy about him, and came to a resolution not to admit him; but to do it in
the softest way I could; I discoursed him again, showed him his Defects, and
that it would Expose him to be Examined publicly, especially at the same time,
when others were to be Examined of Parts and Learning, and therefore advised
him to delay till some other time, and till he could get a Certificate from the
College, without which I could not regularly Ordain him: He seemed
Discontented, and the next thing I heard, was, that the Sunday after he went to
the Meeting, and declared against the Church. This is the Truth of the matter,
and I must declare, that I never admitted any, to any Order, Benefice or
Curacy, in this Diocese, who were not by many Degrees his Superiors in
Learning, Parts and Steadiness of Thoughts; and as to those that were Preferred
in the Diocese before my coming to it, I suppose that Mr. Sq. himself will have
more Modesty than to compare himself with them: I must add, that he is not the
only person has served me at this rate.

II. And from this you may observe.

First, That no people are more impatient of Discipline, than such as would
persuade the World that they are the Great Patrons of it, and most Zealous for
it. This Gentleman, that is now joined with you, for purer Ordinances and
Discipline, was so disgusted by the strictness of ours, that he left our Church.

Secondly, You may observe, that some people are resolved to be Ministers at
any rate, and when those that have the Keys of the Church will not admit them,
they leap over the Wall.

Thirdly, You see by this how much Men advance their Reputation and Interest,
by being of a Party. Here is a Gentleman that had so little Reputation amongst
us, for learning and sufficiency, that he was not thought fit to be a Deacon,
by two Bishops, and several Clergy Men; And yet by joining with you, most of
your Party that knew him in Dublin, where they are best able to judge, prefer
him to many of the Clergy of this Diocese. So unjust and partial are Men in
their Judgments where their Party is concerned; and thus it has been since
Divisions were first in the Church: St. Paul hints at it, 2 Cor. 10. 12. And
Tertullian speaks to it in point, above 1400 Years ago, in his Book De
Prescriptionibus, where he observes of those that divided from the Church, that
they Ordained, Apost at as nostros ut gloria eos obligent, quia veritate non
possunt. Nus^ quam facilius proficitur quam in Castris Rebellium. 'Twere too
severe to Translate these words; but the meaning is, that so a Man left the
Church, he might have Reputation and Orders easily amongst the divided Parties.

Fourthly, You may observe, that it is not always Conviction of Conscience
brings Men to your Party; Here in the beginning of the week a Gentleman gave in
a Petition in his own hand writing, and was earnest to be admitted into Orders;
and being put off, next Sunday he declares himself of Your Party against the
Church. He must have great Charity, that will suppose this to proceed from mere
Conviction of Conscience.

Fifthly, You may observe, how unfit Judges the People are of the Ability and
Qualifications of Men for the Ministry, and how easy it is to deceive and
impose on them, in which I have had Experience in three or four other Cases.

Sixthly, This shows the misery, and mischief of Parties in the Church, and how
impracticable they render Discipline. I have taken what care I could to obviate
this; and have refused to admit some that were driven out of Scotland by the
fury of the Rabble, till they brought a Certificate from their Adversaries, of
their Lives and Conversations; and that they had no other Exception against
them, except their not complying with the Church Government there Established.
Whether your Party take the same Measures, they know best that admitted Mr. Sq.
to Preach.

Sect. XVI. Personal Vindication.
I. THere is one thing further that I am obliged to take Notice of, rather
indeed to comply with the suggestions of my Friends, than that I judge it
necessary, or so much as convenient. It concerns my own Person, and not the
Cause; and I reckon where* ever a man that pretends to answer a Book meddles
with the Person or Personal Affairs of his Adversary, it is a plain Confession
that he has the worst of the Argument, and that he is forced to make up with
Slight and Art what is wanting in point of Reason. Yet this Mr. B. has done in
several places of his Remarks, and has employed most of those Arts that popular
Lawyers make use of to carry their Clients Cause at the Bar, but are very
improper to be used by the Advocates of Truth, who ought to have no view but
the Glory of God, the Advancement of his true Worship, and the Peace and Unity
of his Church. I am conscious to my self, that I had no other aim in the
writing my Book; and I hope I may say that the deep concern I had for the due
Observation of the Worship of God, and the danger of such as neglect it, did
influence every Sentence in it. I had before me the great Obligation that lay
on me as a Pastor and Father in the Church; even the great and solemn Oath of
God, made in my Ordination. I remembered that the truest Evidences of the
presence of the Spirit of Christ, and hardest to be counterfeited, are
Gentleness, Goodness and Meekness; and I called to mind that a tender Father
would not reprove his erring Children, nor a Man treat his Friend with
Bitterness, Pride, Scoffing or Lightness. That a Pastor has no less reason for
bowels of compassion toward his straying Sheep, than a Father toward his
Children: That a Christian was as deeply obliged to Meekness toward his erring
Brother, as any Man toward his dearest Friend. And though that Brother be
mistaken in his Judgment, and alienated in his Affections to the highest
degree, even to Railing and Madness, yet the injured person ought still to
treat him with the same gentleness and tenderness, and look on all those
Extravagancies as the effects of a Spiritual Fever, which to a Mind truly
affected with the love of Christ, are as little provoking as the ravings
occasioned by a natural one, and much more to be pitied.

II. These were the Considerations I had before me, and the Measures I took in
writing my Book, and I hope in God they shall always remain with me, and
influence my words and actions; and, I thank God, they yield me a comfort and
satisfaction above all that the World can afford me.

But this was very different from what many of your Party expected; they
measured me not from what I am, or from what I do and say, but from the
Representations some of themselves had made of me. 'Twas from these that a
rumor went abroad whilst my Book was in the Press, that I was publishing a
most furious Book full of bitterness and railing; and that I would now discover
what a passionate angry Man I was: This went current; But when my Book appeared
I thank God it was of a different sort, and and very much surprised those whose
interest it was to represent me and it otherwise; and by all I can learn,
nothing displeased them more than the Seriousness, Charity and Civility with
which it was Written.

III. Mr. B. seems to be sensible that this gives my Book some advantage, and
takes great care to prevent it; Sometimes he makes slight of it, sometimes
endeavors to expose it as ridiculous: But his greatest endeavor is to
persuade you that it is not real and sincere in me. To make this appear
probable he produces several Arguments both in his Preface, and in his Remarks.
In the last he insists on one, p. 157. on which he thinks fit to enlarge again
in his Vindication ( p. 25) It Is taken from a Clause in the Leases of the Sea
of Derry, whereby the Tenants are obliged not to set to Mass-Priests, or
Dissenting Ministers: This he thinks will excuse all the hard words he gives
me, and prove me guilty of unfair dealing; but this is to censure Actions
before he knows the reason of them, as I suppose every body may observe; and
since it concerns only my own Person, I did not think it necessary to make any
Apology for it; and I assure you my tenderness to you, and indeed to our common
Christianity, obliged me rather to suffer the reproach, as I have done in many
other Cases, than to Publish those things of which I apprehended the common
Enemies of our Religion might make advantage. And had not the importunity and
persuasions of my Friends, to whose Judgments I have a Deference, required it
now from me, no provocations of my Answerers should have done it. However I
shall endeavor to give an account of this matter in the least offensive way I
can; and if any thing seem hard in it, the blame must be justly theirs who gave
the occasion.

IV. I find this Clause verbatim (so far as relates to Popish Priests) in the
oldest Leases of this See of Derry; in which there has been, since the
Reformation, a succession of Wise, Learned, and Pious Men, my Predecessors. Dr.
Montgomery, Dr. Babington, Dr. Downam, Dr. Bramhall, Dr. Wild, Dr. Mossom, Dr.
Ward, and Dr. Hopkins, were Men generally famous for their Works yet remaining,
and for their Eminent Service they did to the Church of God. These found it
necessary to put this Clause into their Leases (at the first making of them) or
to continue it, in as many as were renewed. So far therefore this is no new
Clause; it being (as I have said) in the oldest Leases of the Sea, and put in
by Wise and Good Men, for good Reasons.

I found the same Reasons not only to continue it, but to extend it to all
Teachers Dissenting from the Church; and should have thought my self answerable
to my Successors, if whilst the Reasons were as good, I had departed from the
wise Conduct of my Predecessors. That the Reasons are as good, will appear from
what follows.

My Predecessors found that their Tenants lived easily as to Rents, and freest
of any from Exactions or Oppressions, and that this made, as it still makes,
those that are averse to the Office and Revenues of a Protestant Bishop, yet
desirous to be their Tenants: That the Popish Priests especially found their
Advantage in living under them, both to their Temporal and Spiritual Interest;
for they had such influence on their own Party, that none of them durst come in
competition with them, in taking their Farms; and so they had them at what rate
they pleased, and (where they had such influence) the Protestants durst not
take them; by which means they were able to keep them waste, if they could not
get them to themselves; which I have effectually found in a Farm where one of
them had crept in. And as to their Spiritual Interest, it was no ill Policy to
secure those places where the Bishop had greatest influence. I am sure these
things are true of your Ministers; and these, or the like Motives, so far
prevailed on them, that before the Troubles they had at least one half of their
Meetings on the Church Lands.

Again, no one would willingly have a Tenant that looks on him as an Usurper,
or is sworn to Extirpate him as soon as he can; this was a good reason to
refuse Popish Priests for Tenants, and holds no less against such of your
Teachers as adhere to the solemn League and Covenant.

I must mind you also, That Coshering and Exacting on Tenants by way of Meat
and Lodging, is against the Laws of this Kingdom; and the Popish Priests lived
by such ways, but were not near so oppressive to their Neighbors as your
Meetings are: Your Sacraments especially are attended with a most oppressive
Coshering; and so it is, and must be, where Four or Five thousand meet together
from distant places, and stay several days. And indeed, none that live near the
Meeting House can call their Meat or Drink, or Grass, or Houses their own,
during these times; or dare refuse them to those Cosherers, if they would live
quietly. And here I must declare, That I had private Information from several
of my Tenants of this Oppression; and they were heartily glad when they found I
had contrived a way to ease them, though they durst not publicly own it.

There is a further Reason, and that is, That Men whose avowed Principle it is
to tolerate no body, when they have power, ought not to pretend to the same
Favor with other People that are moderate. This is a just Exception against
Popish Priests; and for ought yet appears, it is no less against your Teachers,
some of which seem to be of as persecuting a Spirit as they; and have so far
influenced the most zealous of their Hearers, that they already persecute, as
far as they have Power, those that Dissent from them; insomuch that (as I
observed before) some that are heartily desirous to come to Church, dare not,
for fear of being undone by their Neighbors.

And no Wonder it should be so, since you are taught in your very Catechism to
Oppose all False Worship; See larger Catechism, Q* What is required, and what
is forbidden in the 2d Commandment
and, according to each ones Place and Calling, to remove it. And Tolerating a
False Religion is reckoned, in express terms, a Breach of the Second
Commandment. A Clause very unfit for a Catechism, that ought to contain only
the Principles of our Holy and Meek Religion, and which I do not find in the
Catechism of the Council of Trent, notwithstanding the persecuting Spirit of
that Church; and indeed, it is not only a wicked, but an imprudent thing to
impose on all Christians the necessity of either persecuting all their
Neighbors that are mistaken in Matters of Religion, or violating their own
Consciences; which sufficiently shows the Spirit of those that composed your
Catechism, and discovers the Principle that makes you so uneasy to your
Neighbors; which Principle your Teachers still refuse to Renounce.

These, I suppose, are sufficient to show, That there is neither Rashness nor
Uncharitableness in this Clause of my Leases, which has now been three times
objected to me in print, twice by Mr. B. and once by Mr. Craghead; as if it
were indeed of moment, or any thing to the Subject of my Book. But this makes
it plain, that the Business of the Answerers was, to Answer my Book by
prejudicing People against my Person; a certain sign, that they wrote for a
Party rather than Truth.

After all, I must profess to you, and have always declared, that it never was
my intention by that Clause to hinder any one to live under me that was
peaceable, and of whose Honesty, as a Tenant, I could have any reasonable
Security, of what Persuasion soever he was; but I thought it but reasonable to
reserve to my self and my Successors a Liberty to make a difference between
moderate honest Men, whom one may suppose to be lead by Conscience, and others
that appear to be acted by other Motives; which shall always be the Rule of my
Proceedings.

There is a further matter under this Head which Mr. B. objects to me ( Vind.
p. 25.) in these words, We like not the gentle Language of Writs de Excom. Cap.
By which he would insinuate some very hard or unfair Dealing in me. A few words
will clear it; I never procured more than one or two of these Writs to be
executed, and that against a Person who refused to stand for Sidesman (being
duly elected by his Parish) or to find another for it, which the very Act of
Toleration in England requires to be done; and the Government on full
Consideration of the Matter, found I had reason in it; and the Person
confessed, that he would never have contended it (as indeed he neither had, nor
could have any scruple) had not his Minister, Mr. Crook, engaged to bring him
off, if he stood it out; which I am able to prove. But Mr. B. makes no scruple
to Censure his Governors, before whom this matter was adjudged, and pronounce
concerning things of which it is manifest he had no due Information.

Having thus examined the principal Matters of Fact, I must observe, that Mr.
B. (who makes himself your Advocate) in the end of his Vindication ( p. 55.)
takes it for granted, that the Matters of Fact with which I charged you, and
for the truth of which I appealed to your own Knowledge and Consciences, were
false; and alleges it as the greatest provocation given you, that I appealed
to your selves as Evidences for what you certainly know to be untrue. I do not
find any sufficient ground for his asserting this in your behalf; I have
conversed with many of you since the writing of my Book and Admonition, before
many Witnesses, and could never meet with any of you that could deny any One
Matter of Fact in them. And as to the Vouchers that Mr. B. has produced to
disprove what I said, they are so far from justifying what he asserted, as to
your practice, or contradicting what I charged on you, that the truth of his
Assertions depends still on his own Credit. But whatever effect his endeavors
to palliate the Matters with which I tax you may have on Strangers, they can
never make you think otherwise of them than what you know.

And I am sure you cannot but know, (what I have been now necessitated to prove
in the foregoing Chapter) that the main and most considerable Matters which I
charged on you were true; That your Communions have been scandalously
infrequent; That your Public Worship of God was generally performed by you
sitting, which I reckon irreverent; That you had no Orderly Public Reading of
the Scriptures, nor any Practice^ that could properly be called Reading them;
That you have no Order or Rule of teaching the Great Mysteries of our Religion
in your Sermons or Set Discourses; which certainly do deserve such Set
Discourses, if any thing can deserve them.

I am conscious to my self, and have God for my Witness, that I had no Design
in what I have published of your Faults in the Worship of God, but to
endeavor, according to my Duty, your Amendment of them, (of which could I have
made you sensible in a private way, you should not have been told so
publicly.) And it had been a very ridiculous Undertaking for me, as I often
have observed before, to put the stress of your Reforming them (which I most
seriously coveted and desired) upon your Knowledge of the Truth of them, if I
had not been sure that you did sufficiently know it; nay, had I not understood
it from the Mouths and Confession of Many of you.

But the Truth is, these things are so Notorious, even from the Defense which
your Advocate and his Certifiers would make for you, that I had, and still
have, all Reason to Appeal to your own Consciences for the Truth of them, and
to hope for the desired Success of my Writings in your Amendment of them* from
the Undeniable Evidence of this Truth in your selves; which Success, I thank
God, I have already in some measure found, and do beseech Him still to increase.

CHAP. II. Of the Reasoning Part of Mr. B's Book.
Sect. I. Mr. B's stating the Case between You and Us, as to Purity of Worship
and Discipline.
I. I Proceed now to some Observations on the Reasoning Part of Mr. B's Book;
and the first thing I shall take Notice of, is his Stating the Difference
between You and Us. Vindic. p. 33. we have these words; Where there are in a
Kingdom Two Parties, or Bodies of Protestants, in one of which both the Worship
and Discipline of Christ is more fully restored to its Primitive Simplicity and
Purity; in the other, there are some Defects and Corruptions left in their
Worship, and Discipline almost entirely neglected, or perverted and abused; I
think every considerate Christian should prefer the stated Communion of that
Party, in which necessary Reformation has made a happier Progress. I confess, I
am partly of Mr. B's Opinion; and think, for this very reason you ought to
embrace the Communion of Our Church, as of that in which both Worship and
Discipline is more fully restored to its Primitive Simplicity and Purity; for I
do not know one thing in which You have the advantage of Us; as will appear on
Examination of these Particulars.

II. First, In Discipline you have nothing to boast of, since you have no
Authentic Rule concerning it at all; as I showed in my Admonition. And when
Proposals were made concerning it, they were rejected by a Parliament of your
own Party with great Abhorrence; We cannot, say they in their Declaration 1646,
consent to the granting of an Arbitrary and Unlimited, Power and Jurisdiction
to near Ten thousand Judicatories to be Erected within this Kingdom, and this
demanded in a way inconsistent with the Fundamentals of Government, excluding
the Power of Parliaments. The Question then between Your Discipline and Ours,
is, Whether it is better to have no Rules, but mere Arbitrary Power in Ten
thousand Judicatories, to exercise a Discipline inconsistent with the
Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, and the Power of Parliaments; or to have
certain and determinate Rules for the Exercise of it; such as our Canons and
Rubricks, which are very consistent with the Constitution of the Kingdom, and
would certainly reform the World if executed; and nothing hinders their
execution (that I know) but Your Separation. I cannot reckon it a Happy
Progress in Reformation, as Mr. B. does, to throw down a well-establish'd
Discipline founded on good Authority, and with good Rules, and Establish
nothing in the place of it. It Is not Purity of Discipline to make it Arbitrary,
and have no Rules at all. And yet I am afraid many are for reforming Faith as
You have reformed Discipline.

III. Secondly, in your Church* Constitution, you are not yet agreed; and we do
not know what you would have. I observed that Mr. B's sense of these things is
much different from yours; both as to the Rules and Manner of Proceeding in
your Judicatories insomuch as you are not yet agreed who shall have the power
of the Keys, Whether a single Congregation, or a Presbytery ( Adm. p. 47.) To
make you a little sensible of this, I will compare Mr. B. and his Parties
Sentiments with Yours.

First then, You own generally, That a National Church is of Divine
institution; but Mr. B. and his Party declare, ( Reflect. p. 4.) That such a
National Church is not of Divine Institution, and is indeed only A Combination
of Churches, as united under one Civil Sovereign; its true Notion lies not in
any Combination purely Ecclesiastical and Intrinsical, but Civil and
Extrinsical.

Secondly, You hold, that many particular Congregations may be under one
Presbyterial Government. Mr. B. and his Party, That no particular Church shall
be subordinate to another, -- and, That none of them, their Officer or Officers
shall Exercise any power, or have any Superiority over any other Church, or
their Officers. Heads of Agreement, p. 11.

You hold, That it is agreeable to the Word of God, that there be a
Subordination of Congregational. Classical, Provincial, and National
Assemblies, for the Government of the Church. Mr. B. and his Party, That
Church-Councils are not for Government, but for Unity; not as being in Order of
Government over the several Bishops. Reflect. p. 58. and Heads of Agreement, p.
10.

Thirdly, You hold that Excommunication is a shutting the Kingdom of Heaven
against impenitent Sinners. But with Mr* B. and his Party, Excommunication it
self, in their respective Churches is no other than a declaring such scandalous
Members as are irreconcilable, to be incapable of Communion with them in things
peculiar to the visible Relievers. (Pref. to the Heads of Agreement) In which
sense any two Men may Excommunicate a third. It requires no Power at all to
declare a Man incapable of Communion with me, but only Judgment; and so there
is an end of Church Governors and Censures.

Fourthly, You hold, That those that are Ordained ought not to be Ordained
again; but Mr. B. and his Party teach, That if any hold, in case of the Removal
of one formerly Ordained, to a new Station or Pastoral Charge, there ought to
be a like solemn Recommending him and his Labors to the Grace and Blessing of
God: No different Sentiments or Practice herein, shall be any occasion of
Contention or Breach of Communion amongst you.

Fifthly, You hold, That Ruling Elders are of Divine Right, and your
Constitution, so far as appears to us, is founded on them; but Mr. B. and his
Party declare, that whereas diverse are of Opinion, that there is also the
Office of Ruling Elders -- and others think otherwise: They agree that this
makes no Breach among them. Heads of Agreement, p. 13.

Sixthly, You hold, That the Ruling Officers of a particular Congregation, have
only power to suspend from the Lord's Table, and that Casting out belongs to
the Presbytery. But Mr. B. and his Party hold, That each particular Church has
Authority from Christ, for Exercising Government, and of enjoying all the
Ordinances of Worship within it self. Heads of Agreement, p. 4.

All these are material Differences, and concern the Being of a Government, and
in all of them you differ from Mr. B. and his Party, and only in one of them
from us, that is, in the Fifth, and then judge what Progress it is in
Reformation, to separate from a National Constitution, to join with such that
do not so much as pretend to it.

IV. Thirdly, Your Purity, that should invite Men to join with you, does not
consist in Doctrine; for in this, confessedly, you have no Advantage of us; for
these very Heads of Agreement acknowledge it sufficient, as to Soundness of
Judgment in Matters of Faith, to own the Doctrinal part of those commonly
called, The Articles of the Church of England; which we all Subscribe. You then
have made no Progress in this Point.

Fourthly, As to Preaching the Gospel, which is a necessary Mark of the Purity
of a Church, it is manifest, You come short of Us* the great Mysteries thereof
being neither so Diligently, so Constantly, so Regularly, or so Universally
taught by your Ministers, as in our Church, nor so Good and Obliging Rules for
doing so: So that Men that would hear them taught in this manner, ought to join
with us; as I have already showed.

Fifthly, As to the Administering the Sacraments, which is another necessary
Mark of the Purity of a Church: Your Ministers have been Notoriously Defective;
they have let many dye without Baptism, that had a Title to it; and have been
no less Negligent in Administering the Lord's Supper, insomuch, that not one of
them have done their Duty this thirty Years, in Administering it often, as
Christ requires. Therefore those of you that would partake frequently of this
Sacrament, must join with our Church.

Sixthly, As to Holiness of Life, you have no Advantage over us, being no
better than your Neighbors; and if you take away such as are not of us, as a
Church, but as we are the Governing Party, and who will always Join themselves
to that which is so, I doubt whether you be so good. There needs no more to
convince you of this, than to consider, that Mercy, Justice and Truth are
counted by our Savior to be the great things of the Law; and you will not find
that the Protestants in the North of Ireland, of which You are the greatest
part, are more noted for these than the Protestants in other parts of the
Kingdom; which sufficiently shows, that whatever you pretend, your Discipline
has no great effect; of which other Demonstrations might be given; it may seem
in Speculation an Advantage, as the Auricular Confession of the Papists, but
has hitherto produced as little effect.

Seventhly, As to the Lives and Conversations of Your Ministers, You have no
reason to boast, till we see their Interest separated from their Engagements to
Sobriety; and till they have undergone such a Scrutiny as the Clergy of Down
and Connor did; that is, till they be tried by above 300 Oaths, as the Clergy
there were, if we reckon the Churchwardens and other Witnesses. And as to
their Tempers, I do not find that they are more Mortified, more Humble, have a
less Opinion of themselves, or command their Passions better than other People;
and for the proof of this, I appeal not only to those of this Diocese, but to
the most eminent, most celebrated, and leading Men that have been of Your
Party: Consult their Writings, and you will not find more Meekness, Humility,
or Charity in them, nor less Passion, Bitterness, and Gall, than in their
Adversaries: Witness the first and second Admonition in Queen Elizabeth's time,
Mr. Cartwright's Writings, Mr. Rutherford, Mr. Baxter, Mr. Alsop, and if you
please, Mr. Boyse's. Now, we are told by St. James, chap. 1. 26. If any man
among you seem to be Religious, and bridle not his Tongue, but deceives his
own heart, that man's Religion is vain; much more if he bridle not his Pen.
There will be peevish, passionate, and railing Writers of all Parties; but Men
that are truly Holy will hardly be provoked to any degree of these Vices, and
ought never to be trusted as Guides, if they are.

IV. Lastly, As to your Worship, you have no perfect Rule for it; for Mr. B.
has given up your Directory as imperfect in several particulars of great
moment, and left it to your own Discretion to mend it, Vind. p. 35. I think I
have proved it to be not only imperfect, but in one Particular, that it
confessedly teaches contrary to Scripture, and believe I have showed, and can
show, that it does the same in several others. This seems to me to be the state
of the Case between You and Us; and I have as good reason to suppose it thus,
as Mr. B. has to suppose that the Worship and Discipline of Christ is more
fully restored to its Primitive Purity and Simplicity amongst You than Us: For
which, I think, there is no pretense.

V. Mr. B. alleges, ( Vind. p. 32.) That the Abuses contained in his thirteen
Demands, Rem. p. 170, are the chief Obstacles to a happy Union among us, which
has been so long the Earnest Desire of all good men. But this does no ways
appear to be true, since no men Labored more earnestly to remove some of them
than Papists, and those of no Religion, who are willing to destroy our National
Constitution, as being a Curb and Barrier against them; and when they can once
effect that, they know well enough how to hinder the Settlement of any other.
As appeared fully by the Long Parliament, that took down our Government, but
never Established another; and as to their being the chief Obstacle to our
Union, consider whether we were nearer an Union when they were removed; on the
contrary, Sects and Divisions grew more in Four years, than in Fourscore
before; Witness Mr. Edwards Gangrena, p. 125, 143. and throughout: and this
amongst Persons counted Religious; and therefore Mr. B. before we take his
Word, must give us good assurance, that the removal of them will not open a
Door to all Heresies, Strange Opinions, Fearful Divisions, Looseness of Life
and Manners, as it did then; and as the weakening of them has done of late.
Some of those he calls Abuses, when truly represented, rather seem to us the
Barriers against Division, than Obstacles of Union. What is really amiss is not
in our Constitution, but in some Restraints the Common Law puts on us; and it
is a Question whether it be safer to remove them. The Lawyers and the
Parliament say no, when we have labored for it. And none more fierce to press
their continuance than those of your Party. However, these are no more to be
imputed to us, than the great Grievance of Impropriations; or your Ministers
not having the Tithes and Churches, is to be imputed to them. But, to deal
ingenuously, all this is not to the Matter; the great Task incumbent on Mr. B.
is, to show a Precedent in Scripture of two Parties, such as he describes,
where, on pretense of purer Discipline, one of them gathered a Congregation of
Christians in the same place, distinct and separate from others, who Worshipped
God in true Faith and Holiness. This I did put to him in my Admonition, p. 48,
and he has given it no Answer, though the most Material thing in it, and Decisive
of the Question; and without which you will never Justify your selves by
Scripture, for absenting your selves from our Assemblies for Worship, much less
your sending out Emissaries to draw off others. There was the same Reason for
Forming such Parties in the Apostle's time as now; some indeed did it upon
mighty Pretenses to the Spirit, and to Purity, speaking great Swelling Words of
Vanity, and having Men's Persons in Admiration. But St. Jude tells us, that
those who Separated themselves were Sensual, having not the Spirit. And Mr.
Edwards observes the same of many of your great Professors, that first formed
the Separation. There is nothing more easy or more deceitful than great
Pretenses to Purity, and Men truly humble and good seldom insist on them, as
being deeply sensible of their own Imperfections, and ready to believe better
of others than themselves: 'Twere much more to the purpose for us to join in
the Common Worship of God, and in joint and continual Prayers together, That
God would give us Mortified, Humble, and Pure Hearts, than to pretend Purity of
Parties, and to stand by our selves, and with those in Isa. Chap. 65. 5. Cry,
Come not near me, for I am holier than thou. Divisions are a Work of the Flesh,
1 Cor. 3. 3. and the great Insuperable Obstacle to Discipline. I pray God to
make you sensible of this, and to send down a Spirit of Unity, Peace, and
Purity upon us.

Sect. II. Mr. B's Partiality.
I. IN the Second place, let me put you in mind, that Mr B. does not observe
that Golden Rule of doing as he would be done unto; for he takes the Liberty to
put the most favorable Construction he pleases on his own words, and expects
we should admit them: But on ours, he puts the worst he can, and is
dissatisfied that we will not own them. Of which I will only give you a few
Instances.

II. First, He affirms, Rem. p. 136. That the generality of you, as he is
assured, do Communicate four or five times a year. This he interprets ( Vind.
p. 17.) only of the most devout and serious; which is very different from the
Generality; since if One do it, the words may be true in the sense he gives of
them; but I have allowed (as you see before) One in Four, of your Communicants
to be thus devout and serious.

III. Secondly, He affirmed, (...) 136. That all of you have the opportunity of
Communicating 10, 12, or 15 times a Year, if you will take the advantage of
receiving it, as often as it is administered within a few Miles of your
respective Habitations: This he interprets, Vind. p. 19. To be Estimated from
those parts, where the main Body of Dissenters are to be found -- and p. 19.
That he is not obliged to prove it concerning every particular one in the
Remotest parts of the Province of Ulster. As if the Diocese of Ardmagh,
Clogher, Rapho, Derry, Drummore, with a considerable part of the Diocese of
Down and Connor, were more in the Remote parts of Ulster than Antrim,
Carrickfergus, Glenarm, and the other places he mentions: But I fully showed in
my Admonition that there is no Congregation in the Diocese of Derry, nor, I
believe, in any of the other places named, in which the people may Communicate
ten times a year without Riding 40 Miles: which is very unreasonable to expect,
let them take what advantage they will. Nor had I any intention to consine you
to one Diocese, as Mr. B. would insinuate, Vind. p. 18. I mean honestly and
plainly in what I say, and never designed to help out a Cause by Equivocations.

And as to those places Mr. B. has mentioned, they are all in a Nook or Corner;
as may be seen by the Mapp; and yet by his own Confession it requires 24 Miles
Riding to attend them, and sometimes 30; which are not a few Miles for the
Generality of Country People; being an unreasonable Charge, and impracticable
by many, especially by Women and Servants, who have as good a title to the
Lord's Supper, and are often as serious and devout as the Masters of Families.
This contrivance therefore of sending People from their Parish Churches, no
ways answers, either in point of Convenience or Order, to the frequent
Administration of that Sacrament in every Parish, nor is Equivalent to it, as
he suggests p. 32.

IV. Thirdly, Whereas he asserts ( Rem. p. 13.) That it is Universally usual in
every Meeting where an Ordained Minister is settled, to have the Lords Supper
Administered -- twice in the larger Towns, every Year. He now tell us Vind. p.
17, That the twice a Year in the Larger Towns was intended, and is true of
Belfast, Carrickfergus and Antrim: As if Lisburn, Colerain and Londonderry were
not larger Towns then Antrim; and as if Strabane, Newry, Ballymenagh,
Ballymony, Ardmagh, Dungannon, Downpatrick, and many others were not in an
equal rank with it. And yet he has not produced any Voucher, that this practice
has been constant in these very three Towns, or how long. These, and many such,
are the favorable Interpretations he allows himself.

V. But then, as to us he is resolved to put what sense on our words he
pleases, and oblige us to stand by it. Thus he will needs know my design in
publishing my Book better than my self, and oblige me to design it for the
generality of Dissenters in England, as well as in Ireland ( Vind. p. 6.) Though
the whole scope of it, the Addresses in it, my Management of the Impression,
and the very Title I sent with it to the Press [ For the use of this Diocess]
(though lost there, as the Printer must acknowledge, and another substituted in
place of it, without my knowledge) sufficiently declare the contrary.

VI. Secondly, He will pretend to know the design of our Church's using the
Cross in Baptism, better than all her Sons from the Learned Hooker to this day;
as you may see, Vind. p. 44.

VII. Thirdly, Our Church in her Catechism in answer to that question, What is
required of Persons to be Baptized? determines, that Repentance and Faith are
required. Mr. B. (after Mr. Baxter) puts a very absurd sense on these words,
and then disputes against them; alleging that by Repentance and Faith is meant
present Faith and Repentance, Vind p. 35. directly against the Catechism, which
requires only present Faith and Repentance in those that are capable of them.

But of Children who have a right to Baptism, and are not capable at present of
actual Faith, etc. She accepts a rational Presumption, that they will believe,
when capable, and an Engagement made by the Parents and Congregation, under
whose power they are, solemnly declared by their Proxies and Vouchers, the
Godfathers and Godmothers; It shows a mighty Prejudice against the Established
Church, and a delight to find fault in those that insist on such forced and
disowned Construction of our words; if we should deal thus with the Holy
Scripture, it would expose even them.

VIII. Fourthly, Whereas I quote your Directory* for a certain Position, Chap.
2. Sect. 3. N. 2. meaning thereby, that Book which commonly goes under that
Name among You, and whose words one of your own Ministers, Mr. Craghead, quotes
as the Express words of the Directory, p. 45. Mr. B. will oblige me to mean The
Directory made by the Assembly of Divines, for Public Worship: Whereas I meant
not that part of the Book, but the Directions, which are your Directory for
Private Worship, as the other for the Public; and which being bound together
with the other, and with the Directory for Ordination of Ministers, and other
pieces, do all commonly pass under the Name of the Directory, and are so quoted
by one of your own Ministers, as I have already showed: Yet this he imputes to
me as a very unpardonable mistake, and repeats it again in his Vind. p. 23. I
suppose every Body sees this is nothing to the matter, whether that Position I
quoted was in the Directory for Public Worship, or in the Directions for
Private; since both are owned and received by you to whom I wrote: Therefore
for Mr. B. to insist on it a second time, plainly shows that his business is
with the Person, not the Cause; and that he writes for a Party, not the Truth;
otherwise he would not offer a matter the second time that is nothing to the
purpose, and for which there was no ground, besides his being unacquainted with
the terms used among you.

IX. Fifthly, Whereas I laid it down as a thing that would be granted me by
you, that all ways of Worship are displeasing to God, That are not expressly
contained in Scripture, or Warranted by Examples of Holy Men mentioned therein:
Mr. B. misrepresents my sense ( Vind. p. 30.) as if I had intended by this Rule
to exclude such things as may be deduced by clear consequence or parity of
Reason from them. Now I desire you to compare this Rule with your Catechism,
and you will find it expressed there in these words, The Second Commandment
forbids the Worshipping of God by Images, or any other way not appointed in
his Word. And in your Confession of Faith ( Chap. 21. N. 1.) thus: The
acceptable way of Worshipping the true God is instituted by himself, and so
limited to his own revealed Will, that he may not be Worshipped according to the
imaginations and devises of Men, or the suggestions of Satan, under any visible
Representations, or any other way not prescribed in the Holy Scripture. This
Rule is stricter, and needs greater Limitations than the words of my Book. For,
First, Here is no Allowance for things Warranted by Scripture, though not
prescribed, as many things are. Secondly, There is no Authority given to the
Examples of Holy Men in Scripture, which are sufficient to warrant a Religious
practice in Gods Worship, though they do not amount to an appointment or
prescription, and are not always obligatory. In short, your Catechism and
Confession of Faith, if we take them according to the Letter, make all ways of
Worship unacceptable and unlawful that are not prescribed and appointed in
Scripture. Whereas my Rule allows Examples and Precedents of Holy Men to be a
sufficient Warrant. I supposed (and I think with reason) that you understood
this Rule in your own Catechism and Confession of Faith, with due Limitations;
and therefore had no reason to suspect, but you would understand it with the
same Limitations in my Book, it being a manifest partiality to except against
it when used by me, and yet allow of it (though expressed with less caution) in
your Catechism and Confession of Faith, which yet ought to be more exact in
wording a Rule, than is necessary in a private Man's Writings. Of this
partiality Mr. B. is guilty, and plainly discovers by it, that he has one Rule
for interpreting the words of his own Party, and another for interpreting those
of his Adversary.

But Secondly, I desire you to observe, That in my whole Book I never used this
Rule, otherwise than with those Limitations that I have now expressed; nor has
Mr. B. produced one instance wherein I did otherwise: As for Example, I tax you
with bringing in the Inventions of Men into the Service of God, in your Use of
the Psalms; not for singing the Meetre Psalms, for that I allow lawful; but for
introducing them without necessity, to the exclusion of the Prose Psalms, for
Singing of which we have Scripture-Warrant and Example. I taxed you likewise
with introducing a Human Invention into the Worship of God, in your Expounding
Scripture; not that Expositions of Scripture are unlawful, but to make them
necessary every time the Scripture is read, is Literally such an invention; and
so is likewise your excluding the Regular and Orderly Reading the Word of God,
as he has appointed for the Edification of his Church, to make room for your
Lectures; of both which, you have been guilty these Fifty Years last past. I
past the same Censure on your Extemporary Prayers; not that I condemned them in
all Cases, but because on the account of them, you had turned the Lord's
Prayer, prescribed in God's Word, and the Use of Forms in the Ordinary Prayers
of the Assembly (which is the Scripture way of Praying on such Occasions) out
of your Meetings: Whereas it is manifestly a Teaching for Doctrine the
Commandments of Men, to Teach, as you do, that Praying extemporary is more
acceptable to God, or more edifying, than Praying by a Form; there not being
the least color in Scripture for such a Doctrine. I might show the like in
every place of my Book, where I used this Rule, either in proving the Orders of
our Church, or in disproving yours; so that Mr. B. had no reason to find fault
with it.

But Thirdly, The Rule needs not these Limitations, it being agreed by all
sober Interpreters, That whatever can be deduced from Scriptures by Clear
Consequence or Parity of Reason, is sufficiently warranted by them, though not
expressly contained in them; so there was no necessity to explain the Rule,
though I was willing to avoid the Exceptions even of the Captious; and there
fore put in the Explication you find in my Second Edition.

Fourthly; Mr. B. excepts against my using the Phrase of Ways of Worship, and
alleges I used it frequently to signify Circumstanti^^ Modes of it, Vind. p.
30. But I Answer* That I used the Phrase with which you were acquainted,
whereas I believe few of you ever heard of Circumstantial Modes of Worship
before; and I used it in the Sense you generally do, when you ask for Scripture
to warrant our using the Psalms by way of Answering, our using Forms of Prayer,
our singing with Instrumental Music, our joining our Voices in some Prayers,
our Receiving the Sacrament in a Worshipping posture, and the other particulars
against which you except in our Public Service* and I showed these Ways are
not only warranted, but prescribed for the most part in Scripture: Whereas
those Ways you have introduced in the place of them, have neither Command or
Precedent in Scripture. If these that I have named in our Service and yours, be
Circumstantial Modes, they are the chief and greatest Exceptions that I ever
found any of you make against joining with us; and they are the great matter of
Reformation set forth in your Directory, though Mr. B. seems to make light of
them.

From the whole, I think it appears, That Mr. B. has both perverted and
misapplyed my Rule; and yet on this perverted sense of my Words, are founded
most of his Arguments against our public Worship.

X. Lastly, This Method of sixing Principles upon me, and then writing a Book
to Confute them, is not new with Mr. B. He did it once before at a very
unseasonable time, and still persists in Taxing me with his own Consequences,
as if I indeed owned them. Thus, Vind. p. 25. he charges me with passing a
Vertual Sentence of Damnation publicly upon you, by Denying you to be a part
of the Catholic Church; and this he puts in Italian Letters, as if they were
my Words; but there are no such Words in any Book I have yet written, nor any
just Ground to fix such a Sentence on me; the whole Mystery of this, so far as
I know it, is thus. Mr. Man^y, formerly Dean of Derry, on his turning Papist,
published his Motives which prevailed with him to do so: To these I wrote an
Answer, in the Year 1687, by which, I thank God, the Protestant Cause lost
nothing, and it was so well approved, that it was Twice Reprinted in England:
But Mr. B. could not digest it, and therefore wrote Reflections on it; and the
greatest Exception he has against it, is, that I say in it, That I meant by the
Catholic Church, the whole Body of Men professing the Religion of Christ, and
living under their Lawful Governors. From which Words, Mr. B. draws many
strange and absurd Consequences, alleging that they Un-Church all Dissenters,
all foreign Churches, and render the Relation of all true Christians to our
Blessed Lord (as his Members) as questionable as the Title of the Pastor under
whom they live; with many other absurd Inferences contrary to the Literal
Assertions of my Book; which therefore he would persuade us contradicts it
self: But the World knew me too well, to need being troubled with a
Justification; and though I had prepared one, my Friends assured me it was
unnecessary to publish it, and I still am of the same opinion.

XI. For I must let you know, that I said no more in those Words than the
generality of Protestants said before me. Some in the same Words, and the rest
in effect and meaning, even those of your party not excepted: For I take it for
a general Principle of Protestants, That the Preaching of the Word of God, and
due Administration of the Sacraments are the true Marks of the Catholic
Church; and that a lawful Ministry is necessary to these, insomuch, that your
own Confession of Faith tells us, That neither Sacrament may be dispensed by
any, but by a Minister lawfully Ordained, Chap. 27. and Chap. 28. That the
Outward Element in Baptism, is Water, wherewith the Party is to be Baptized, in
the Name, etc. by a Minister of the Gospel lawfully called thereunto: And the
Confession of the Church of Scotland has declared, Chap. 23. That Sacraments be
rightly Ministrate we judge two things requisite, The one, that they be
Ministrate by Lawful Ministers. -- The other, That they be Ministrate in such
Elements, and in such sort as God has appointed, or else we affirm that they
cease to be the right Sacraments of Christ.

You see then from the Declaration of your own Party, that a lawful Ministry is
required to the due Administration of the Sacraments, and without such
Administration there can be no true Church; and a Man that is not duly
Baptized, is not yet a visible Member of the Catholic Church, though he may
belong to it. From these it were easy (if one would imitate Mr. B's way of
Reasoning) to draw the same Consequences as he does from my Words, indeed
worse; and to argue that these Positions make every Man's Baptism as uncertain,
as the Ordination of the Minister that Baptized him; and that every Church is
as uncertain of her being a True Church, as of the Lawful Calling of her
Ministers: And all those Questions Mr. B. starts concerning the Lawful Calling
of Ministers and Governors, will come in here as properly as he brings them
against me; but whoever should draw such Consequences from these Principles,
which are common to most Reformed Churches, would be as unjust to them as Mr.
B. is to me.

For in this, the sincere will and endeavor is accepted, both by God and Man,
for the deed; and therefore neither the Assembly of Divines, nor the Church of
Scotland intended to make void the Baptism of those, who out of the sincerity
and simplicity of their hearts received it from such as they supposed lawfully
called Ministers, but were not; neither did I ever intend to exclude from the
Catholic Church, such as either out of weakness of Judgment, submitted
themselves to Pastors whom they believed lawful; or out of necessity (when they
could not get others to officiate to them) submitted to such as they found
settled. And this I showed to be my Sense from St. Augustint's Words, quoted at
large in the Sixth Page of my Answer to Mr. Manby, of which Mr. B. never took
any notice when he made all his Consequences for me, though there needed no more
to destroy them all.

XII. But I must now tell you, that this is no comfort to such, as out of
Interest or Passion, divide the Church, and heap up to themselves Teachers
according to their own Lusts; nor to such as knowingly, or out of wilful
negligence join themselves to such: These I take to be the Heretics St. Paul
commands us to reject after the first and second Admonition, and they are
Self-condemned; for the Church can condemn them no otherwise, but by casting
them out by Excommunication, and they have thus condemned themselves already by
their separation; and I see no reason any one has to be displeased at these
Principles, except he be conscious, that out of Interest or Passion he has
divided the Church, as I am afraid many are, or think it a small matter to make
such Divisions: Or Lastly, is indifferent whether his Minister is lawfully
called or no, as indeed too many are, who are not much concerned how a man came
by his Ordination, so he preach to their mind. But I suppose the best way to
deal with a Papist, will be to assert not only the Lawfulness, but Regularity
of our Ministry, and I thank God, we have done it effectually; if Mr. B. could
have done as much for his Party, he needed not have gratified Papists (though his
Party at that time were caressed by them) in endeavoring to Answer a Book,
grounded on Principles, which they could not Reply to, as appeared by the
event. But this has always been the Method of those that separated from the
Church; so Tertullian tells us, De Prescriptionibus. Cum hoc sit Negotium
illis, non ethnicos convertendi, sed nostros evertendi; hanc magis Gloriam
captant, si stantibus ruinam, non si jacentibus elevationem operantur, etc. The
Sense of which is, That those Separatists made it their Business to oppose and
draw off the Members of the Church, and set up their Petty Sects, but did not
join against the common Enemy.

XIII. I must put you in mind, that there are some Men espouse a Party, and
resolve to make themselves the Champions of it; and when they want direct
Proofs against their Adversaries, they draw strange and absurd Consequences
from their Opinions: And though they know very well, that those to whom they
ascribe them, detest these consequences as much as themselves, yet they set
them up, as if they were really held by those to whom they impute them; and
endeavor by strains of Rhetoric, and vehement Interrogations, to render them
odious: This may take with such as are heated with Faction, and love Books for
ill Language and Violence; but understanding Men know such Treatment to be only
an Artifice to keep up the Spirit of a Party, and make a show of Reason where
direct Proofs are wanting: And that it is really a giving up a Cause to fly to
these Arts, and therefore they deserve no Consideration. Neither should I have
troubled the World or my Self, to tell you, that I hold none of the absurd
Consequences Mr. B. fixes on me, or that they do not follow from any principle
of mine, had not one of your Ministers, that ought to have had more Integrity
and Justice, improved this Calumny on Mr. B's Authority so far as to affirm,
that I Held, and Published, that such as you belong not to the Catholic Church
-- being without Christ, having no hope, and without God in the world: All
which he puts in the Italian Letters, as if they were my Words, (Mr. Craighead
p. 147.) Whereas I never either in Words or Writings used such Barbarous
Expressions, or past such an Unchristian Censure on any Man, much less on any
Body of Men that professed to believe in Christ. But I can heartily forgive
him, and wish him no more harm than that he may be sensible he has wronged me
in at least an hundred particulars besides this.

I do not think it necessary, at present, to take any further Notice of his
Book: This is sufficient to show how truly he has represented Matter of Fact,
so far as he concurs with Mr. B. And as to his Reasoning Part I am content any
one that reads my Book should read his; and judge whether he has either truly
represented my Sense, or Answered my Arguments. I am well pleased that you have
it in print, since by comparing it with Mr. B's, you may plainly see that your
Advocates are not yet agreed on what Principles to defend your Cause; there
hardly being greater difference in Principles between the Answers and my Book,
than between the two Answers themselves. But the greatest advantage that I
expect by it, is, That it will be a means to discover to Posterity how far the
Learning and Sincerity of your Teachers were agreeable to their Reputation and
Profession; and what sort of Men have been followed by those that separate from
Our Church.

THE APPENDIX. CONTAINING An Answer to Mr. B's Objections against the Sign of
the Cross.
Sect. I. Of the proper Method to discover the true Nature of Sacraments as
Signs.
I. MR. B. in his Remarks on my Discourse to you Concerning the Inventions of
Men in the Worship of God, has given me many hard words, for not treating of
the Cross in Baptism (as I have observed in my Admonition, where also I have
given my Reasons for not doing it, since it did not belong to the ordinary part
of Worship, which I only engaged to handle, p. 55.) imputing it to want of
Candor and Ingenuity. And though I had given him no occasion for it, yet he
resolved to bring in this Dispute about it; because (as he alleges) it most
directly concerns this Charge of Human Inventions in the Worship of God, Rem.
p. 463. And that here The Dissenters particularly used to fix their Charge of
Human Inventions against us. This then seemed to me the most direct and
strongest Objection you had to prove your Charge against us; and in which Mr.
B. put most Confidence; so that if this failed, and had no force, the rest must
fall in course. And therefore I considered It only, and I believe in such a way
as is fully satisfactory to all that Impartially read what I have said, and
what Mr. B. has Answered: And though I might well let it rest on that foot, yet
there being several things in Mr. B's Answer that tend to mislead your
Judgments in greater matters than the Sign of the Cross, I have thought it
requisite to give it a new and distinct Consideration.

The Sign of the Cross indeed I allow to be of no great weight in it self; but
if we consider that the condemning the Use of it is in effect to Condemn the
Universal Church, that has used it from the Apostles time, that to make such
Signs unlawful, when God has not made them so by any Command, is to add a
Doctrine of our own to the Gospel, a great Superstition, and a Breach, on our
Christian Liberty. And Lastly, That the false Reasonings brought to oppose it
are of such ill consequence, that if they are not detected and exposed, there
is hardly any thing in a Church can be safe from such Cavils, but the same sort
of Arguments will reach to the most approved Practices. If these things, I say,
be considered, this Dispute about the Cross will not appear of so little moment
as some may imagine; nor will it be safe for the Governors of Our Church to
comply with the Teachers of such Doctrines, lest they betray the Purity of the
Gospel, by allowing the Doctrines of Men, that would make that unlawful in it
self which God has left indifferent. We can very well join in Communion with a
Church that does not use the Sign of the Cross, as the Apostles did with such
as kept the Jewish Ceremonies, and abstained from certain Meats: But when any
come to impose this on our Consciences, as forbidden by God, we must in such
Cases imitate St. Paul, who refused to give place by Subjection, no, not for an
hour, Gal. 2. 5. We reckon it a Liberty and Privilege of the Church of God, and
of all her Members, to signify the Sense and Devotion of their Minds toward
God in such becoming Actions and Words as Universal Custom has made significant
of our Thoughts and Passions in such Cases; as I have already proved in my
former Admonition, p. 68. and shall further prove in this. And for any one to
teach this to be unlawful, is to deprive us of a Privilege God has vouchsafed
to us, to impose on our Liberty, and to teach such Doctrines as St. Paul
condemned for Doctrines of Devils, 1 Timothy 4. 12. For Forbidding to Marry, and
to abstain from Meats, are there reckoned such Doctrines, because they make
that unlawful in it self that God has allowed; and he has no less allowed us to
express the Devotions of our Minds by significant Actions, than he has allowed
us to feed our selves by all kind of wholesome Meats. And therefore they that
condemn the one as unlawful, are equally Superstitious with those that then
condemned the other.

II. To proceed then, I desire you to remember that I undertook two things in
my Admonition: First, To show that Mr. B's Arguments against the use of the
Cross were of no force: And secondly, That it was warranted by Holy Scripture.
I showed you, that his great Objection against it was, that we make it A New
Human Sacrament, and that then it must be A Human Invention. But, in order to
satisfy you that we ascribed nothing of a Sacramental Nature to it, I
observed, that three things were necessary to make up a Sacrament: First, An
Outward visible Sign instituted by God, signifying some spiritual Grace or
Benefit which we expect from him. Secondly, An Obligation on God by some
promise of this to grant us that spiritual Grace or Benefit when we duly use
the visible sign. Thirdly, A Penalty on us when we do not use it. I showed you,
that we ascribed none of these to the Cross in Baptism, and consequently, that
it has nothing of a Sacrament in it.

For it must be considered, that the word Sacrament is no Scripture-word, but
the Church has taken it up to express some peculiar Institutions, Rites, or
Signs which we find appointed by God; and the true way to know whether we
ascribe any thing of a Sacramental nature to any sign, is to consider the
nature of those Signs which we all agree to call Sacraments, and to observe
diligently and impartially wherein they agree amongst themselves, and differ
from all other signs. I examined this as carefully as I could, and found that
they all agreed in those three things which I have before mentioned; and that
they differed from all other Signs peculiarly in this one thing, That they
obliged God, by his Promise upon the due use of these Signs, to give us the
Grace or Spiritual Benefit signified by them. It is this Promise annexed to
these Sacraments that makes them so valuable and precious to us, above all
other Signs, and without it they would be mere Ceremonies, and might be omitted
or supplied on very Ordinary Terms: Whereas now nothing but Necessity can
excuse us from the use of them, if we would enjoy the Promises of God annexed
to them. Mr. B. in his Vindication does not deny the three things which I have
named to be necessary to a Sacrament, nor does he think himself obliged to
prove that we ascribe any of them to the Cross; but he alleges, that the
account I have given of Sacraments, is very Lame and Defective, omitting
several Considerable Uses of them, which were the chief strength of his
Arguments against the Cross, ( Vind. p. 37.) And ( p. 38.) he adds, That these
sacred Rites that are appointed by God, both in our first public Entrance into
the Covenant, and our public Renewal of it at the Lord's Table, are designed
for several Uses, and principally for the three following.

1. As Representing Signs for Instruction concerning the Privileges and Duties
of the Covenant, and our Guilt and Polution, etc.

2. As Obliging Signs to Confirm and Ratify the Covenant entered into, and
this both on God's part, p. 39. and from us to God, p. 40.

3. As Distinguishing Signs or Badges of our Profession, and the Relations we
thereby are invested in; which afterward he explains by Baptism, being a Mark
and Character of those that belong to that one Visible Body or Church, of which
Christ is the Lord and Head; and opposes it to that one Internal Baptism,
which he calls the certain mark of belonging to one invisible Church, p. 43.
The meaning of which Words is not easily comprehended, since he does not
explain whether he means by a certain Mark of belonging to an Invisible Church,
an outward and visible Mark, or how internal Baptism can be such a Mark;
whereas I think the generality of such as have written Considerately of these
Matters, have made the external Baptism a Sign and a Mean of the internal, and
of our Union not only to the visible, but likewise to the invisible Church when
duly received; and only such as have in some measure imbibed the Socinian
Doctrines have explained Baptism as a Mark of Union to the Visible Church, in
exclusion to the invisible.

These are the Uses for which he tells us Sacraments are designed. And, p. 44.
adds, That the Cross is set up for several Sacramental Uses, even the like as
Baptism and the Lord's Supper are appointed for (except that one use of their
being Obliging Signs on God's part to ratify his Promises.) And from thence
infers, ( p. 45.) That the Cross is hereby made as much a Sacrament as Men can
make a Sign of their own.

III. This would indeed have been a good Inference, if he had proved, that the
Uses he has named (so far as they differ from the three parts of a Sacrament
before laid down by me) do not belong to any other Signs warranted in
Scripture, but only to the Sacraments. But he has not in the least attempted
it; and it would be in vain, for I shall show, beyond exception, that all the
Uses which he has named of Sacraments (so far as they can be applied to the
Cross) are common to many other Signs Warranted by Scripture; and not at all
peculiar to Sacraments; for the Cross cannot be made a Sacrament (not a Human
Sacrament it self, which is indeed no Sacrament, but a noise of Words to amuse
common People with, and affright them) but by being set up for such Uses as are
so peculiar to the Sacraments, that they belong to them only, and not to any
other Scriptural Signs whatsoever.

That which has led Mr. B. into this mistaken way of Reasoning, is, That he
considered what he conceives the Two Sacraments agree with another in, and in
what they differ from one another; Vind. p. 38. But then quite forgot to
consider wherein they differ from all other Scriptural Signs, which if he had
done, he would have found that they do not differ from other Signs in any of
the uses which he has named, except that of obliging God by his Promise to
confer some spiritual Grace.

He that would know what a Man is, must not only consider wherein all Men
agree, but likewise wherein they differ from other Creatures. All Men agree in
Life and Motion, but if any one would conclude from thence, that whatever has
Life (as for example, all Beasts have) is a Man, would be looked on as a very
ill Reasoner; and yet this is Mr. B's Method. He found both the Sacraments
agree in being designed for Representing, Obliging and Distinguishing Signs of
the Duties, Privileges, and Relations of the New Covenant, whence he calls them
Federal Rites, and spends several Pages to prove them designed for these Uses,
and from thence would conclude, that every Sign that represents, obliges, and
distinguishes, must be a Sacrament, from the instance of the Sign of the Cross;
but with as little Reason as it would be concluded in the former Case, that
whatever had Life and Motion is a Man.

IV. Before I proceed further to the consideration of these Uses, I must
caution you, first, That I do not pretend to understand all the Designs of God
in instituting Sacraments; for they are Mysteries, and God has no where told
us, that he has discovered all his Purposes in them. If we reflect on the
Passover, the great Sacrament of the Old Testament, we shall not find that God
did Explicitly discover the main design of it to the Jews, which was to
signify and apply the Death of Christ to such as celebrated it; and, Who can
be sure that there is not a hidden and mystical design in Baptism and the
Lord's Supper, of which we are not aware, and of which, at least, we have not a
clear and explicit Notion? This Consideration ought to make us diligent in the
use of them, and modestly cautious in our discourses and explanations of them.

Secondly, It Is easy to observe, that Mr. B. has not expressed the Uses of
Sacraments in the Language of Scripture, but in that of the late Systems of
Divinity and interested Writers; and seems rather to have regard in them to
some late Notions and Prejudices, particularly of the Socinians, than to the
Ancient Doctrine of the Church, collected from the Word of God.

And indeed, if it were not that I hope I may contribute something to clear the
Notions of Sacraments to Vulgar Capacities, and convince them of the Necessity
of frequenting them, which I find the Socinian Notions (too much encouraged by
some) have very much shaken, I should think what I have before said alone
sufficient to Answer Mr. B's whole Discourse concerning them, and to show it to
be of no force.

But whilst Men are made to look on Sacraments as primarily designed to bind us
to our Duty to God, and not rather as Pledges and Conveyances of his Grace to
us, they are apt to be deterred, by having their Duty set before them in so
strong, and the Grace to perform it in so weak a Light; whereas if Men look on
them principally, as Tenders of Grace and Assistance to perform their Duty
better and more easily than they did before, and consider this as the proper
and peculiar effect of them, as Sacraments, and that which distinguishes them
from all other Signs (as I have and shall prove it is) this will encourage them
to come to them cheerfully, and bind themselves readily to that Duty which they
here hope for Grace to discharge; in which hopes God will not deceive them. But
Mr. B. has so ordered the matter, that he has perverted most of those
Scriptures that give us this hope and assurance, to a quite different purpose;
so that in the relation I stand toward you, I am obliged to instruct you in
the orthodox sense of them, and vindicate them from the Socinian glosses he
thus puts on them.

I proceed therefore, first, to show you, That the Sacraments are primarily
signs of God's Grace, and not properly of our Duty, though they imply it. This I
think necessary to do, to make you understand the true nature of Sacraments;
for otherwise I must let you know it is not necessary to the point in dispute
about the Sign of the Cross; for whether the Sacraments are immediately signs
of our Duty or no, it is plain (as I shall show you in the Second place) That
the Scripture warrants us to use other signs of our Duty besides them. And (in
the Third place) That the Cross is such a sign as the Scriptures warrant.

Sect. II. That the Sacraments are Primarily Signs from God to us of his Grace;
and not properly of our Duty, either as required by God, or professed by us, though
they imply it.
I. THIS is plainly the Doctrine of our Church in her Catechism and Articles:
In the first She teaches, That a Sacrament is an Outward and Visible Sign of an
Inward and Spiritual Grace given unto us by God, restraining the Sign to this
Grace of God. And in her Articles she declares, That Sacraments be not only
badges or tokens of Christians Profession, but rather they be certain sure
Witnesses and Effectual Signs of Grace and God's good will toward us, by which
he does work invisible in us, Art. 25. And again, Baptism is not only a sign of
Profession and Mark of difference whereby Christian Men are discerned from
others that be not Christened, but it is also a sign of Regeneration or new
birth, whereby as by an Instrument, they that receive Baptism rightly are
grafted into the Church, etc. Art. 27. And further, The Supper of the Lord is
not only a sign of the love that Christians ought to have amengst themselves
one to another, but rather it is a Sacrament of our Redemption by Christ's
Death; insomuch that to such as rightly, worthily, and with Faith receive the
same: The Bread which we break is a partaking of the Body of Christ, etc. Art.
28. In all which places, our Church makes the Grace of God (effectually
Communicated to us in the due use of the Sacraments) to be properly and
principally signified by them. To these Articles I suppose you do assent, they
being approved by the Heads of Agreement, which Mr. B. asserts to be the Common
Principles wherein both the Presbyterian and Congregational Divines are agreed,
Rem. p. 142.

II. Besides this Authority of our Church, I think most Divines that have
written to purpose on this Subject, distinguish between the things signified by
a Sacramental Sign: The things pre*required in us to the use of it, and the
Benefits, Consequents, and Effects of it. Thus in the Lord's Supper the things
properly and immediately signified are the Body and Blood of Christ, which are
therein communicated to us. The things prerequired in us are, to Examine our
selves, to have a lively sense of God's Mercy in Christ; to have a thankful
remembrance of his Death, and be in Charity with all men. These are the Wedding
Garments to make us acceptable Guests at this Feast. Lastly, the Benefit or
Effect of this Sacrament is, The refreshing our Souls by the Body and Blood of
Christ, as our Bodies are by the Bread and Wine. I might instance the same in
the other Sacrament of Baptism, but an Example will make it plainer for both.

We will suppose then a King grants a Pardon to a Rebel under the Great Seal.
Now, the Great Seal, in this case, signifies (as every body knows) the King's
Favor and Grace to the Person to whom it is granted; this is the direct proper
and immediate signification of it. But it is supposed or pre-required that the
person so favored is willing to accept of the Pardon granted by it, and that
he is resolved to be a faithful Subject for the future. The Consequent of this
Pardon is, that he who has it shall enjoy his Liberty, Estate and Life, as
formerly.

Now, if any should argue from this, that the Great Seal is a sign of our
Submission and Allegiance, and of the enjoyment of our Liberty, Property, etc.
it would be in effect the same as if they should say, that a red Sky at Evening
in Harvest (which properly signifies a fair day to follow) is a sign of the
Obligations which Husbandmen lie under to employ their diligence in the season
offered, to preserve the Fruits of the Earth, and of full Barns and increase of
Wealth; because these are all Antecedents or Consequents of the fair day, which
such a Sky properly and immediately signifies.

III. Mr. B. in opposition to this Doctrine, takes some pains to prove the
Sacraments designed to represent our Duty to us, and to signify our Obligation
to perform it, and applies several places of Scripture to this intent. But I
desire you to observe, that the thing Mr. B. ought to prove, is, that they are
Signs from us to God: for though they represent our Duty to us, they may still be
Signs from God to us, signifying his Will requiring us to perform such Duties,
and not from us to God, signifying our Intention and Resolution to perform
them: for it is necessary carefully to distinguish between God's signifying his
Will to us by certain signs, which require or represent our Duty, and our
professing Obedience to him in such significant Actions as are proper to
express it. The former, God does in many Types and Signs in the Old and New
Testament, besides the Sacraments, which signify them only by Consequence and
Implication not directly; and the latter we do in every Act of Outward Devotion
such as Bowing, Kneeling, Standing, putting on Sackcloth, etc. all which
represent our Duty, and are professions of our Intentions to perform it.

Though therefore Mr. B. should prove by Scripture that the Sacraments represent
our Duty as required by God, yet it were nothing against me, except he prove it
to be proper and peculiar to Sacraments to represent our Duty as professed by us,
to the Exclusion of all other Signs.

However, though I need not take Notice of the Scriptures he produces to this
purpose, they not being to the point in hand, yet because they are all
perverted from their true and genuine sense I think my self obliged to
Vindicate them from his false glosses, and shall with them likewise consider
his other Arguments on this Head.

The first is, John 3. 5. Except a Man be born of the Water and the Holy Ghost
he cannot enter the Kingdom of Heaven. This he produces, Vind. 38. to prove
that Washing with Water is by its Resemblance Instructive to us concerning the
Privileges and Duties of the Covenant we enter into. But here is nothing
concerning Instruction; but the plain and litteral meaning of the place is,
That Baptism represents to us the Will of God to give us a New Birth by Water
and the Holy Ghost. The Water does not only Instruct us in the Necessity of the
Regenerating and purifying Virtue of the Holy Spirit, as he seems to suggest,
but when duly used, it carries that Virtue along with it.

The second place produced by him, to prove the Water in Baptism to be an
Instructing Sign concerning our Duty and Privileges, is, Tit. 3. 5. He saved
us by the Washing of Regeneration and Renewing of the Holy Ghost. This fully
proves that it is God's Institution, that we should be saved by Water and the
Holy Ghost in Baptism: if Mr. B. thinks that we are only Instructed in that
Privilege by the Water in Baptism, as he seems to do, he contradicts the very
Letter of the Holy Scripture, which says we are saved by it, and he seems to be
influenced in this point with Socinian Notions.

The third place is Acts 22. 16. Arise, be Baptized, and wash away thy sins.
This he produces to prove that Baptism is Designed to Instruct us concerning
our guilt as well as pollution, and the necessity of our being cleansed from it
by the laver of our Mediators Blood. But sure the place proves quite another
thing; not only that we are Instructed by Baptism concerning the necessity of
being Cleansed, but that we are actually Cleansed and Washed in our Mediator's
Blood by it, and have our Sins then, and not before, forgiven us: So the
Scriptures frequently Teach us, and so the Church has ever understood it: it is
not for any Merit of our Faith or Repentance that our Sins are forgiven us, and
therefore God may as Justly, and has as positively made Baptism a condition of
our Pardon when it may be had, as either of them. Christ may apply the Virtue
of his Blood to us on what terms he Pleases, and since he has made Baptism a
Condition, the meaness of the thing ought to be no Exception, any more than the
washing in Jordan was a just Exception to Naaman the Syrian. We are therefore
as much regenerated by Baptism, Cleansed, Saved and Pardoned by it, as Naaman
was Cured of his Leprosy by Washing in Jordan: And can no more be partakers of
these benefits without it, when we may have it, then he could without the
other. It is therefore of very ill consequence to interpret these places of
bare Instruction, and I hope Mr. B. will not say he meant so to interpret them
as to Exclude the real force and efficacy.

The fourth place is, John 6. 53. 54. Who so eats my flesh, and drinks my Blood
has Eternal Life -- For my Flesh is Meat indeed* and my Blood is Drink indeed.
This he produces to prove, that in the Lords Supper There is not only a
Commemorative Representation of the Death of Christ, but also an Instructive
Representation of our spiritual Communion with him in his Body and Blood. And
of Those Duties -- by which we are said (...) Eat his Flesh and Drink his
Blood, Vind. p. 39. But there is no color for such a gloss. The Place speaks
of feeding by Faith on the Flesh and Blood of Christ* either in or out of the
Sacrament.

It Is certain and confessed by the Church of God, that there is a peculiar
Feeding on the Body and Blood of Christ by worthy Receivers in the Sacrament of
the Lord's Supper; and that there is not only a Commemorative and Instructive
Representation of them as Mr. B. alleges, but a real and true Communion of
them; your Confession of Faith uses the Words Really and Indeed, Chap. 29. and
therefore i^ is great perverting of those Words of St John to interpret them of
such Commemorative and Instructive Representation only, and a ready way to
bring in the Socinian Notions of Sacraments.

The Fifth place, Vind. p. 39. is, Romans 6. 3, 4, 5. So many of us as were
Baptized into Christ, were Baptized into his Death, therefore we are Buried
with him by Baptism unto Death: that like as Christ was Raised up from the Dead
by the Glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in Newness of Life. He
alleges ( Vind. p. 39.) That dying unto Sin, and walking in Newness of Life is
not signified as the Benefit Conferred by God (as I suppose) but rather as the
Duty required from us. And to the same purpose he quotes Coloss 2. 12. Buried
with him in Baptism, wherein also you are risen with him -- and you being dead
in your sins, and the uncircomcision of your flesh has he quickened together
with him, having forgiven you all trespasses. It is manifest from the plain
Words of these places, that the Apostle here shows what God has done for us,
and from thence infers what we owe to him: He has mortified Sin in us by
Baptism, he has buried us with Christ, he has forgiven us all Trespasses, he
has quickened us together with him as he raised Christ, and given us a New Life
by his Holy Spirit; let any one judge whether these are Benefits we receive
from God, as I affirm, or rather Duties required from us, as Mr. B. alleges.
Every one of these (as the Church of God has ever Taught, and as the generality
of Christians, except Pelagians of old, and Socinians of late, have professed
to believe) are Acts of God's efficacion Spirit upon us, and not Duties
required of us, though they infer Duties to be performed by us. We cannot quicken
our selves, or kill Sin in us till the Spirit of God deliver us from the Body
of Death* and quicken us by a new Principle, and then, when he has given us a
New Life it is (as the Apostle infers) our Duty to walk in the Newness of that
Life This is plainly the Apostles Reasoning* Romans 6. for after he has showed
wh^^ God has done for us, in giving us h^^ Grace to mortify our Lusts, and to
enliven us with Christ, he concludes, V. 12 Let not therefore Sin reign in your
Morta^ Body, that you should obey it in the Lu^^ thereof.

The Sixth place he produces is, 1 Cor 6. 11. But ye are Washed, but ye are
Sanctified, but ye are Justified, in the Name of the Lord Jesus. He alleges,
th^^ that these Expressions refer to Baptism which is true: but, that it is our
Duty to Wash, to Sanctify, to Justify our selves rather than receive them as
Benefits from God, is not to be allowed. These are acts of God's Spirit upon
us; in Baptism we expect and receive them from him, and when we have received
them, it is then our Duty to employ the Grace he has bestowed on us, lest we
receive it in vain; and this obligation to improve the Talent God has given us
in Baptism, is a clear Consequence from his having so freely given it to us.

The Seventh place Mr. B. urges to prove, that Baptism is a Sign from us to
God, of our Obligations to the Duties of his Covenant, is, 1. Pet. 3. 25.
Baptism does also now save us (not the putting away of the filth of the flesh,
but the answer of a good Conscience toward God.) I think this is so far from
proving what Mr. B. produces it for, that it proves the direct contrary. Our
Savior tells us, that he who Believes and is Baptized shall be saved; that is,
Faith and Baptism are the means or conditions of our Salvation; Baptism is
God's Act by his Ministers, and Faith is ours (that is, the Act of it, tho the
Gift and Grace be his) but except we perform our part, Baptism will do us no
service; nor ought the Ministers, who are the dispensers of God's Favors, to
admit us to it, till we satisfy them some other way of our Sincerity, than
merely by our demanding Baptism* Therefore the Apostles required a solemn
profession of Faith, Repentance and Obedience from such as were to be Baptized,
and Obliged them to answer such Questions as the Church has ever put to those
that came to Baptism, till your Directory threw them out. Now, this clearly
proves, that Baptism does not directly and immediately signify our Duty or
Obligation to God, since another Rite was added to signify, that even a solemn
Profession of our Faith and Resolution, that we would forsake the Devil and his
Works, believe in God, and keep his Commandments, expressed by solemn Answers
to several Questions. These Answers bind and oblige us to our Duty to God,
before we can be Baptized; and then comes Baptism, which is God's act, by which
he pardons our Sins and Adopts us as Sons; or as our Church expresses it,
grants us A death unto Sin, and a new birth unto Righteousness. And the not
observing this, seems to me the reason of that great Omission in your
Directory, of which I took notice, Admonition, p. 56. That No express Covenant
is Ordered to be made in the Name of the Child Baptized, either by the Parent
or any else. For the Authors of the Directory having determined, that
Sacraments are Instituted Solemnly to engage Church Members Into the Service of
God in Christ ( Confession of Faith, Chap. 27.) it will follow on Mr. B'S
Principles (which seem in this point to be the same with theirs) that it is
unlawful to demand another Engagement of those that are to be Baptized, or,
that they should by another Rite, that is, by Solemnly Answering certain
Questions, dedicate themselves to the Service of Christ; because as he Argues (
Vind. p. 52.) It is a needless doing that over again by a Rite of our own
devising, which is sufficiently done by a Rite of Christ's Institution. And
therefore the Directory only Orders the Minister, before Baptism, to Use some
words of Instruction touching the Institution, Nature and Ends of this
Sacrament; But does not require any Profession or Engagement from those that
are to be Baptized, or in their Name, or any answer signifying their consent,
vow or resolution to believe and serve Christ, quite contrary to St. Peter, who
tells us in effect, That Baptism will not save us without this Answer of a good
Conscience. I think this one place is sufficient to show us, that we are
obliged by other means than mere accepting the Sign of Baptism, and that the
thing that directly binds our Duty on us, is, our solemn Profession of our
Faith and Duty, which we must signify by such signs and means as are proper to
signify our sincerity in other Cases; And, that Baptism does not signify those,
but supposes them; the whole design of that being to entitle us to God's Grace
and Favors, upon supposition that we are qualified for them. Mr. B. indeed
objects, That Baptism is the Solemnizing a mutual Covenant between the blessed
God on the one part, and us on the other; and therefore it is first a Sign from
us to God, of our consent to the proper terms of his Covenant, before it can be
a Sign from him to us of our Interest in those benefits. If this were so, then
there needed no other Sign of our consent besides the use of Baptism* (...) St.
Peter shows us the contrary, that we are to signify our consent by other means,
even by a Solemn Profession, and taking on us expressly those Obligations that
are the proposed Conditions of the Covenant; and when we have bound our selves
by this Rite and Solemn Profession, and declared our consent to those Terms,
then, and not before, we are admitted to Baptism for the Remission of Sins.

8thly. He further argues from St. Mark 1. 4. where Baptism is called the
Baptism of Repentance for the Remission of Sins: That it is, First, A Sign of
our Repentance toward God, before it can be a Sign from him of the Remission
of Sins, p. 41. But the meaning is plainly, that John Preached Remission of
Sins by Baptism on Condition Men repented: And the Question is here, whether
Baptism signified that the Men Repented, or that God would forgive the Penitent
when Baptized; If the last be the meaning, then it is a Sign altogether from
God to us; But if the First, then it is indeed a Sign from Men to God. But that
it cannot be so, is clear, because Repentance was first to be signified by
other Signs, such as Confession of Sins, promise of Amendment, etc. before the
Persons were to be Baptized, and therefore Baptism did not signify, but suppose
Repentance. I do own there is a Covenant made between us and God in Baptism: We
promise Faith and Obedience, and signify them by a Solemn Profession, and other
Signs: God gives us his Spirit for Remission of Sins, and a new Birth; and this
is signified by Baptism, which is the Sign and Means that Conveys them.

9thly. He produces, Gal. 5. 3. Every Man that is Circumcised is a Debtor to
the whole Law, Vind. p. 42. I answer, That every Man that accepts the King's
Pardon and Protection under the Great Seal, is obliged to be a good Subject,
and keep the Laws; yet it does not follow, as I have already showed, that the
King's great Seal is a Sign from us to the King, but solely from him to us.

10thly. He argues ( Vind p. 41.) That Baptism was called a Sacrament because
it was reckoned (like the Military Oath of the Roman Soldiers) as a solemn
listing of the Person Baptized into the Service and Warfare of Christ. To this
I answer, First, That the same Persons that call Baptism and the Lord's Supper
Sacraments on this Account, do likewise call several other Rites Sacraments;
And therefore, in their Opinion, to bind and oblige our selves to our Duty was
not peculiar to those Signs, which we now only call Sacraments. Secondly, I own
there is such an Oath made at Baptism, which binds and obliges us to be
Faithful; and thereupon we are admitted by Baptism into the Number and
Privileges of Christ's Soldiers: But Baptism signifies God's act admitting us,
not ours, any other way than by Consequence and Supposition: And therefore we
may make many such Vows beside what we make at Baptism, and signify them by
such Signs as are proper, without any offense; if we should do it by Writing
and Sealing it were no harm; which* would both be binding and obliging Signs on
our parts, yet no Sacraments, or sinful human Inventions, any more than the
Cross.

11thly, He argues, p. 42. That Sacrifices were Covenanting Rites, and quotes,
Psalm. 50. 5. Gather my Saints together, those that have made a Covenant with me
by Sacrifice. To which I answer, There were two things in Sacrifices: First,
The offering of them to God as a Sign of our Homage and Duty, which we owe him,
as we pay Tribute to the King; And this was the Offerers Act, and fully
signified his Duty. And then there was God's admitting the Offerer to feed on
them after they were made his; and this was God's Act and a Sign of his Favor
and Reconciliation to the Person.

Therefore Sacrifices were Signs of our Duty to God, as well as of his Favor
to us; but the case is otherwise in Baptism and the Lord's Supper; the offering
that reconciles us to God, was made by Christ, not by us; and we are reconciled
by virtue of that: And the Sacraments do only apply to us the Washing or
Propitiation of Christ's Blood, and feed us as reconciled Guests on his Body;
and therefore are wholly Signs from God to us, and other Signs are necessary on
our part to signify our Duty. And therefore the Primitive Christians brought
Meat and Drink for a common Feast at the Lord's Supper, to signify the
sincerity of their Love, and Testify it to the World; and we do yet Offer part
of our Substance, for the Relief of God's Servants at this Sacrament: both
which are Signs as well as Instances of our Duty; and plainly show, that our
Duty is not so signified in the Sacraments, but other Signs are necessary on
our part. And if a man who came to demand Baptism, should, as a Sign and Token
of his Resolution to renounce the Devil, the World and Flesh, give a large
Portion of his Substance to some Charitable use, it were very lawful for him to
use this Sign, and no affront to Baptism, as if it were not sufficient to
signify our Duty and Obligation to God: And such an Act would be a very
acceptable Sacrifice to him.

12thly, He urges, Acts 2. 38. Then Peter said unto them, Repent, and be
Baptized every one of you in the Name of Christ, for the remission of Sins, and
ye shall receive the Holy Ghost, for the Promise is unto you and to your
Children. Whence he infers, That they were by Baptism first to profess their
Repentance toward God, and Faith in our Lord Jesus, and then receive the
promised Benefit, Remission of Sins, Vind. p. 41. But here is not one word of
professing Repentance by Baptism, nor can any such thing be inferred from the
Words; but on the contrary, they prove that the Sins of the Penitents are
remitted by Baptism, and they entitled to the promise of the Holy Ghost; the
granting both which are Acts of God's Favor bestowed on us in Baptism. If
Baptism were designed to profess or signify our Repentance directly, there
needed no other Profession or Signs of Repentance, according to Mr. B. because
the Sign appointed by God would be sufficient; but no Minister ought to Baptize
any, till by a solemn Profession before, and other Signs and Tokens, they
satisfy him in some measure of the sincerity of their Faith and Repentance, as
I have already showed.

13thly, He alleges our Saviors Command to Baptize, Mat. 28. v. 19. Go ye
therefore and Teach all Nations, Baptising them, etc. This Command he says (
Vind. p. 41.) plainly implies that one great use of Baptism, was to be a solemn
Bond upon them, to the Duty of that Christan Profession they had embraced, and
the Baptising them, In the Name of the Father, etc. has been always supposed to
imply a solemn Dedication of them by this Sacred Rite to the Faith, Worship and
Service of the Blessed Trinity. But I answer, That the plain meaning of these
words is, that Christ gives his Apostles power to admit Disciples by Baptism,
into the Privilege of being Taught by the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, as their
Master and Lawgiver. The Question is, whether Baptism signifies God's
admitting us to this Privilege, or our choosing him for our Lord and Master:
That is, whether it signifies God's Act or ours. I think it easy to determine
this Question, since it is manifest, that Faith and Repentance, which include
our Submitting our selves to God, are Qualifications required to Baptism, and
the person that demands it must satisfy the Ministers of the Sacraments, that
he is sincere in his Submission by such Signs and Profession of Repentance, and
of Faith, as are proper to signify them, before they ought to admit him. I own
Baptism is a Bond, and dedicates us to God's Service; but it is a Bond laid on
us by God, who requires Faith and Repentance of those that are Baptized, and
sets them apart and Consecrates them to his peculiar Service, and to the
Privileges that attend and are promised to such.

14thly, He produces, 1. Tim. 2. 19. Nevertheless the Foundation (or Covenant)
of God stands sure, having this Seal, (on God's part) the Lord knows them that
are his, and (this Seal on our part, as he alleges) Let him that names the
Name of Christ depart from iniquity. From whence he infers, As the Covenant is
mutual, so the external Rite is intended to ratify our Restipulation as well as
Gods promise. But I answer, This place proves, that the Covenant of God
requires, on our part, a Duty, to depart from iniquity, as well as it includes
a Promise that God knows who are his (that is, will Own, Protect and Reward
them) but that the Sacraments are our Seals to this Covenant, cannot be
inferred from thence: The Covenant it self is a mere Favor and Grace
vouchsafed us by God, and we must take it in nature of a Grant from him, on
what Conditions and under what Seal he pleases; and accordingly he has put the
Sacraments (the Seals thereof) into the hands of his Ministers, who are his
Officers (or as we may call them, his Chancellors) to dispense his Pardon and
Favors to those that are qualified for them. Our business is therefore, to
qualify our selves, and then apply to his Officers, that are duly appointed by
him for the Seals of our Pardon; and we are to satisfy them by proper Signs of
our Sincerity, before they ought to seal this pardon to us. The Sacraments
therefore are God's Seals, not ours, dispensed by his lawful appointed
Officers, not by our Deputies or Ministers, which do indeed imply and suppose a
Duty from us, but are not immediately appointed to Signify that Duty, or that
we resolve or engage to perform it, but that God will accept of us if we do,
and to do which accordingly, they lay the strictest Obligations on us, by way
of Consequence.

Lastly, He urges my own words against me. That I allow in my Discourse, p. 4.
That in the Sacraments We not only express our dependence on God for his Grace,
but likewise oblige and bind our selves to serve him. Now (says he) How this
can be true without making the Sacramental Rite a Sign from us to God, of that
obligation to his Service, I cannot comprehend.

In Answer to this, when I say, That we express our Dependence on God for his
Grace in the Sacraments, and oblige our selves to serve him, I mean that our
coming to the Sacraments is an effect of our Faith and Dependence on God, and a
Declaration to the World that we resolve to serve him, as he has required those
to do who expect he should fulfill the promises that he has made to worthy
Receivers: But that therefore the Sacraments are properly or purposely or
principally Instituted to signify these acts of ours, does no ways follow; or
that it is proper to Sacraments as such to do so: And there needs no more to
convince any reasonable Man of this, but to remember that we do express this
Dependence on God, and Obligation to serve him by every act of Worship, as well
as by the Sacraments; And therefore this use can be no ways peculiar to them:
And for any to confound the things Pre-required on our part to our use of the
Sacraments, or the effects and Benefits of them, with what is directly and
properly Signified by the Signs, is very unreasonable, and a sign that the
Person, who does so, either does not understand their Nature, or has a mind to
keep up a Dispute. Mr. B. may allege this is New, but it is plainly the
Doctrine of our Church, as I have showed, and is founded on Reason and
Scripture.

Suppose from the instance I have before given, any should Argue that the Great
Seal is a Sign from us of submitting to the King, and of Obedience to him; and
that therefore to show our Obedience or Gratitude to the King by any other
Sign, were Treason and a taking on us to counterfeit the Kings Seal; would not
such a Man be looked on as a very unreasonable Disputant? And yet this I take
to be exactly the Case between Mr. B. and Me: We both agree (I suppose) that
Sacraments are Signs of some Inward and Spiritual Grace, which only God can
give us; and that he has promised these to us in the due use of the Sacraments.
But then it is pre-supposed and required, that we use them duly, and be
qualified as God requires; From whence Mr. B. infers, that the Sacraments
signify those Qualifications and Dispositions in us that they pre-suppose and
require: And therefore to signify them by any other Signs, is to make a New
Human Sacrament, which is in effect to counterfeit the Broad Seal of Heaven.
But I say, that to do this is no more to make a Human Sacrament, than to
signify by such other Signs as are usual and proper to express such
Dispositions of mind in other Cases, my acceptance of the Kings Pardon, and my
Resolution to Acknowledge his Mercy to me in granting it, is to make a New
Pardon for my Self, or to counterfeit the King's Seal. From whence you may see
how We express our Dependence on God for his Grace, and oblige our selves to
serve him in the Sacraments, without making the Sacramental Rite properly or
primarily a Sign from us to God, much less principally or peculiarly; which is
the only thing would do Mr. B's Cause any service in this Case. For if other
Signs signify these, as well as the Sacraments, it is plain they do not belong
to the Sacraments, as such; and I have already showed, that the Sacraments were
not designed properly or principally for this end; nor are they sufficient for
it, since God has thought fit to appoint other Signs for this purpose, and
Warranted us to use such words and actions beside them as by general custom are
proper. And I can see no more harm in using other Signs, besides the
Sacramental, to express our Duty and Acknowledgments to God when we Celebrate
them, than in using other words than Christ appointed in the Institution. The
Argument is full as strong against the use of the one as of the other; For if
the Sacramental Signs be sufficient to this purpose, the words are likewise
sufficient. And then to add New words of our own to the same purpose for which
God appointed the words of Institution, is as much to accuse his Institution of
Imperfection, as to add New Signs. Yet I suppose it is no harm to add such
words as may make Receivers understand the Nature and Uses of these Mysteries;
or express their Faith and sense of God's favor, and the gratitude they have
for it. And then, I suppose, there is as little harm in expressing the same by
such Signs as common Custom has made significant thereof as by Words; Both
being Warranted by God in Scripture. And whereas Mr. B. alleges ( Vind. p.
46.) That it belongs to God alone to appoint the Religious Rites, whereby we
bind our selves to his Service as to the Supreme Magistrate to appoint the
Ceremonies used in our taking the Oath of Allegiance: I answer, That it belongs
much more to the Supreme Magistrate to prescribe the words of the Oath, than
the Ceremonies: And it is much more Penal to add or take away from the words of
the Oath, or to change them, than to add to the Ceremonies prescribed in taking
it; for that is often no fault at all, and therefore to add to the words of
Institution any of our own, will be more Penal than to add to the Ceremonies.
This whole Objection therefore about a Human Sacrament, is a mere amusement of
Words: For if a Human Sacrament signify any thing that is Criminal, it must
signify our pretending a Divine Institution for a Rite of our own Contriveing,
and assigning a Divine effect to it: This is indeed to counterfeit God's Seal,
and a great Sin. But to signify our Duty to God by a Rite that properly
expresses it, is no more to be called a Human Sacrament than Writing a
profession of Loyalty to the King, or entering into a Recognizance for our good
Behavior, and Sealing it with our own Seal, is a counterfeiting of His.

And whereas Mr. B. alleges, Vind. p. 43. That to make a Sign a Seal on our
part, is to make it a part of Religious Worship and a Sinful Human Invention. I
answer, That we ought to distinguish between the proper Acts or Parts of Divine
Worship, and the Manner or Means of Expressing those Acts: only God can appoint
a proper Act or Part of Worship, but the Manner or Means of Expressing it, is
often left to us, and is to be determined by our present Circumstances. Thus
appearing in God's Presence with Reverence, Humility and Submission is an Act
of Worship directly required by the Holy Scriptures, but to Express this
Humility and Submission by Uncovering our Heads, is not particularly there
required: but inasmuch as universal Custom amongst us (for it is otherwise in
other places of the World) has made this an Expression of this disposition of
our Minds, when we appear before our Superiors, therefore we use it in our
appearance before God, without making it a proper part of Worship or a Human
Sacrament. And so on the same account, God requires that Women should appear
before him with Modesty, and a due sense of their inferiority to Men, as I
showed in my Discourse, chap. 4. sect. 2. p. 2. And inasmuch as universal
Custom had, in the Apostles time, made a Veil a mark of Women's subjection to
Men, and it was immodest for them to appear unveiled in public places,
therefore the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11. requires, that they be veiled in the
Christian Assemblies; which yet did not make this Veiling themselves a part of
Divine Worship, nor a Sacrament; and therefore, amongst us, where this Custom
does not obtain, the Veiling of Women in the Church is laid aside: and by
parity of Reason, confessing Christ Crucified, and Glorying in his Suffering on
the Cross, is a part of Worship, which universal Custom of all Churches and
Ages has taught us to Express by making the Sign of the Cross: But Expressing
this Act of Worship by this Means, and in this Manner, does no more make it a
part of Divine Worship, or a Human Sacrament, or a sealing the Covenant on our
part, than Expressing our Reverence and Submission, by Uncovering the Head (or
Feet where that is customary) makes those parts of Divine Worship, or Veiling
Women, to signify their Modesty and Subjection, makes it a Human Sacrament. I
might add many other like Instances from Scripture, but shall content my self
with one, which we find, 2 Kin. 19. v. 14. where Hezekiah receives a Letter
full of Blasphemies against God; upon the receipt of this Letter he went up into
the House of God, and spread it before the Lord. And with this significant
Action offers up his Prayer to God. It is the Custom for persons that have
received a Threatening Letter, that reflecteth on their Lord or Friend, to carry
it to him who is concerned, and lay it before him, as an effectual means to
stir him up to Justify himself, and to Protect those that depend on him; and
doing so is a Sign of Fidelity and Dependence in the person that thus makes the
Application: Therefore Hezekiah spread the Letter before the Lord, thereby
Expressing his Faith, Trust, and Resignation to God, which are proper Acts of
Worship, and particularly required at our Hands, but to do this by spreading a
Letter, is no where particularly commanded, yet it was accepted by God.
Hezekiah's doing it, was no introduction of any Invention of Men into God's
Worship; nor was it a Human Sacrament; yet it was used to the same purpose that
we use the Sign of the Cross, which signifies no more than our Faith, Trust and
Dependence on a Crucified Savior, and a Resignation to his Service; which is
all that is meant in the 30th Canon of the Church of England, by our dedication
to God. Hezekiah therefore did as much dedicate himself to God's service by
spreading the Letter before God, as we do by making the Sign of the Cross: and
the one is as well Warranted as the other, and is as far from being a Sacrament.

Sect. III. That the Scriptures warrant us to use other Signs that are not
Sacraments, for the several uses ascribed to Sacraments by Mr. B. so far as the
Sign of the Cross is concerned in those uses.
I. BEfore I proceed to the direct proof of this, I must observe, that the
Words wherein Mr. B. expresses the uses and ends of Sacraments, are not clear
or certain, but admit of several Senses; in some of which they express indeed
the proper uses of Sacraments; but in others, only those uses that belong to
other Signs, as well as to Sacraments: And therefore it will be necessary to
consider apart each of these uses laid down by him, which he reduces to three
General Heads, namely, Representing, Obliging, and Distinguishing, and to
explain to you the several Senses of which they are capable.

After this, I shall prove, that the Sign of the Cross is not a Representing,
Obliging, or Distinguishing Sign, in any of those Senses which express the
proper uses of Sacraments, and that in those Senses in which the Cross is a
Representing, Obliging, or Distinguishing Sign the Scriptures Warrant other
Signs, that are not Sacraments, for the same uses.

Signs then, I say, may be called Representing, Obliging, and Distinguishing
upon several accounts, and in several senses, particularly in these following.

First, A Sign may be called a Representing Sign, because it signifies to us
God's conferring on us, and conveying to us, certain Graces, Favors, or
Privileges, represented to us in and by the Sign. So the King's Charter to a
Corporation, signifies the King's Pleasure, that they should enjoy certain
Privileges and Immunities. Mr. B. owns this sense of Representing Signs, when
he says, that Sacraments are Representing Signs for Instruction in the
Privileges of the New Covenant. That is, (as I suppose the words are intended
to mean) that Sacraments represent to us, or instruct us, that it is the will
and pleasure of God that we should enjoy those Privileges.

2dly, A Sign may be called Representing, because it signifies God's Pleasure
and Command concerning some Duties set forth and represented by the Sign, which
God would have us perform. Thus the King's Charter does not only signify the
Privileges and Immunities granted to a City, but likewise the Offices and
Duties the King requires from such as enjoy those Privileges. And this sense of
Representing Signs is owned by Mr. B. in (what I suppose he means by)
Sacraments being Instructive in the Duties of the New Covenant; which Duties
imply our natural Guilt, Pollution, and Weakness, and the necessity of being
cleansed from them.

3dly, A Sign may be called Representing, because it signifies our Desire,
Purpose, and Resolution to accept the Grace, Favor, and Privileges God has
promised us, and to perform the Duties he has imposed upon us, together with
our Gratitude and Sense of his Favors. Thus a City honored with a Charter may
declare its Acceptance and Sense of its Prince's Favors, by putting that
Charter in a rich Case, carrying it in Procession when they receive it;
likewise by Addresses, Bonefires, Ringing of Bells, Illuminations, and such
other Actions as usually represent the Grateful Affections and Resolutions of
our Minds: And it is to be observed, that though these Signs representing the
Duty and Gratitude of the persons thus Favored, be not required in the
Charter, nay, though Oaths or other Declarations of their acceptance be
particularly specified in it, yet no Prince ever takes ill at their Subjects
hands these voluntary Signs, representing the Duty, Gratitude, and Acceptance
of his Favors. I do not find Mr. B. takes notice of this sense of Representing
Signs, but it is a sense very obvious, and must be allowed of by all.

4thly, Signs may be called Obliging, because they Oblige God by his Promise to
give us, when we duly use them, the Grace, Benefit or Privileges signified by
them; and such Signs as represent God's Will to confer Grace on us in the first
sense of Representing Signs, are Obliging Signs in this sense; that is, they
Oblige God to give the Grace represented in them: so that Obliging and
Representing Signs in this sense are in effect the same, and run into one
another; and in this sense Sacraments, as is owned both by Mr. B. and me, are
peculiarly Representing and Obliging Signs.

5thly, A Sign may be called Obliging, because it declares God's Will to us, by
signifying, that he requires certain Duties and Returns from us; which
Declaration of God's Will by Words or Signs, obliges us to perform those
Duties. And Signs that represent in the second sense the Duties required by
God, are Obliging from God to us in this sense; for whatever Sign instructs us
by representing any thing to us as our Duty, does likewise oblige us to perform
it; so that Obliging Signs, in this sense, are the same with Representing, and
need not be distinguished.

6thly, A Sign may be called Obliging, because it declares our Intention,
Resolution, and Promise to perform what is required of us in our Covenant with
God; and Signs that represent, in the third sense, our acceptance of God's
Grace, and resolution to perform our Duty, are also thus obliging, and are
properly Signs from us to God; the same are likewise ratifying and dedicating
on our part; which is owned by Mr. B. p. 45. where he tells us, That to Oblige
and Bind our selves to serve God, is the same thing as to Dedicate our selves
to his service: And indeed, a Sign can be no otherwise Ratifying and Dedicating
on our part, than as it signifies and declares our Resolution and Promise to
perform the Duties we owe to God.

7thly, A Sign may be called Distinguishing, because it signifies and conveys
to us some Privilege and Benefit which effectually distinguishes us from the
rest of the World, and obliges others to own us as so privileged. Thus the
King's Patent to a Nobleman distinguishes him, and obliges others to take
notice of him. And thus the regenerating Principle of Grace, conveyed to us in
Baptism, makes an effectual distinction of Christians from other Men; and the
Privileges conveyed to us thereby, oblige all other Christians to own us as
Fellow Members and Heirs of the same Hope with themselves. Hence Signs
Representing Graces conferred by God (in the first sense) or Obliging on God's
part (in the fourth sense) are likewise peculiarly Distinguishing Badges and
Signs of our Christianity in this last sense.

8thly, Lastly, A Sign may be called Distinguishing, because we thereby
testify, profess, and declare to the World, that we Claim and Own the
Privileges and Chararacters that God has bestowed on us: And thus every
Christian Duty we perform, every Profession we make of our Faith, either by
Words or Actions, are Distinguishing Badges and Signs of our Christianity,
peculiarly such Signs as represent our Duty, or Gratitude in the third sense,
or obliges us to perform it, in the fifth sense are thus likewise
Distinguishing.

From all which it is manifest, First, That Mr. B. has expressed the uses and
Ends of Sacraments in a very confused and uncertain manner; to Represent,
Oblige, and Distinguish being in effect the same, and running into one another;
and yet each of them containing very different uses under them that ought
carefully to be distinguished; so that he has made a distinction where there
was no necessity for it, and omitted to distinguish where it was necessary.

Secondly, You must observe, that Representing Signs in the first and second
sense (that is, as they represent either Benefits conferred on us by God, or
Duties imposed on us by him) Obliging Signs in the fourth and fifth sense (that
is, as they signify God's obliging himself by his Promise, or us by his
Command) and lastly, Distinguishing Signs in the seventh sense (as they
signify Privileges bestowed on us by God) are all of them Signs from God to
us, not from us to God.

Thirdly, Only Representing Signs in the third sense, Obliging in the sixth,
and Distinguishing in the eighth, (that is, as they represent our Resolutions,
Promises, and Professions, and as they bind and distinguish us by them) are
Signs from us to God; and it will appear on examination, that the Sign of the
Cross is only concerned in these last uses, and that the Scriptures Warrant
other Signs, that are not Sacraments, for them.

Sect. IV. Of Representing Signs.
AS to the first Sense of Representing Signs, that is, as they signify to us
God's conferring on us and conveying to us certain Graces or Privileges
represented to us in and by them. I desire you to take notice that this is the
first thing that I showed in my Admonition, ( p. 56) to be necessary to a
Sacrament; that is, An outward and visible Sign, instituted by God, of some
inward and spiritual Grace or Benefit which we expect from him.

I showed you likewise ( p. 178.) That the Cross is not used by us to signify
any Grace or Benefit communicated to us from God: And this is the universal
Sense of All that have undertaken the Defense of it in our Church; but Mr. B.
from some Conjectures of his own, undertakes to prove, that we mean by it, that
which we profess and declare not to mean. Thus, Vind. p. 44. he thinks there is
just ground to conclude the contrary from the words of the Thirtieth Canon of
England, which acknowledges, that the Holy Ghost by the mouth of the Apostles
did honor the name of the Cross so far, that under it he comprehended not only
Christ Crucified, but the Force, Effect and Merit of his Death and Passion,
with all Comforts, Fruits, and Promises we receive or expect thereby. From
whence he concludes, that with us the Cross must be an External Sign to signify
the same things which the Holy Ghost had Honored the name of the Cross to
signify.

But I answer, that none of the Expounders of our Canons, or Defenders of the
Sign of the Cross have thus interpreted this Canon; nay, on the contrary, they
have given it a quite different sense, as he himself owns in this very place,
where he Quotes the Author of the Case relating to the Cross in Baptism,
explaining the Canon in another Sense. Now for Mr. B. to put a Sense on the
Words of our Canon, and make an Inference from them which none of us own, but
Protest against, is to set up an Adversary purposely that he may confute him;
and such Proceedings are looked on by all impartial Men as the effects of
Prejudice and Engagement to a Party.

Nay, not only the Divines of our Church Protest against his Inference from
this Canon, but the very Canon it self makes a quite contrary Inference,
concluding from the Scriptures signifying by the name of the Cross, Christ and
his Benefits; that the Primitive Christians used the Sign of it, not to signify
these Benefits as communicated to us by God, but to Testify thereby that they
were not ashamed of it, but owned him for their God and Savior, who suffered
the Death of the Cross for them, and Signed their Children with it, when
Christened, to Dedicate them by that Badge to his Service whose Benefits
bestowed on them in Baptism, the name of the Cross did Represent. The use then
of the Cross according to the Canon is not, as Mr. B. would infer, to signify
an Act of God toward us, to confer any Benefit on us, or require any Duty of
us, but to signify and represent our own Act, whereby we Resolve, Promise and
Bind our selves not to be ashamed of a Crucified Savior, or his Benefits
purchased by his Cross, and signified to us under that Name in Scripture; And
not only our Church but all other Christians from the Apostles time, have for
this reason looked on making the Sign of the Cross, as a very fit Instance and
Declaration of their Glorying in Christ's Sufferings, and Readiness to follow
him in them; which is an effectual Dedication of our selves to his Service,
though we do not think it a fit External Sign to signify God's Communicating to
us the Graces or Benefits of the New Covenant, because that being an Act of
God, ought only to be Represented and Conveyed to us by Signs particularly
Instituted by him, whereas our Glorying in his Sufferings, and Dedicating our
selves to follow him in them, being Acts of ours, may lawfully be signified by
such Signs as Universal Custom has made proper; as will appear more at large in
this Discourse; What I have said being sufficient to show, that the Cross is no
Representing Sign in this sense.

II. 2dly, As to the second sort of Representing Signs, which signify and
discover to us God's Pleasure and Command concerning some Duties set forth and
represented by them, which Duties God would have us perform. Let me observe,
that the Cross is no more a Representing Sign with us in this sense than the
former, since we do not use it to signify or declare God's Will to us, that we
should perform any Duty, but only our own Resolution, and Purpose to perform
those Duties, that God himself has signified under the Name of the Cross in
Scripture, and that we shall not be ashamed to confess Him, that was Crucified
on it: This is manifest from the very words of our Office, in which the Sign of
the Cross is used only as a Token that hereafter the Baptized Person shall not
be ashamed to confess the Faith of Christ Crucified, and manfully to fight
under his Banner against Sin, the World and the Devil, and to continue Christ's
Faithful Soldier and Servant unto his lives end, This is the only use our
Church makes of the Sign of the Cross; and you see plainly that it is here made
only a Token of our owning a Crucified Savior, and an Instance that we are not
ashamed of his Cross and Sufferings: And indeed it is as plain an Instance of
our not being thus ashamed, and of our resolution to follow him, in taking up
our Cross and engaging in his Warfare and service, as giving an Alms is an
Instance of Charity. But here is nothing of God's declaring or signifying his
will to us by this sign, that we should perform these Duties, or any intimation
that we use it to this purpose.

And yet if we did use it, it would not give it any thing of a Sacramental
nature, much less make it a Human Sacrament, for it is no peculiar, much less
Principal use of Sacraments to represent Gods Pleasure to us, that we should
perform certain Duties, since we find many Signs used in Scripture to this
purpose that are no Sacraments. I shall content my self with two Instances,
amongst many, The First is that of the Sabbath Day, Ezekiel. 20. 12. Moreover I
gave them my Sabbaths to be a Sign between me and them, that they might know
me, that I am the Lord that sanctifies them. Here the Sabbath Day is described
as a Covenanting Sign between God and his People, representing to them, and
Instructing them from God in their Duty to know the Lord that Sanctified them.
We have another Example, Exodus 19. 10. Go unto the people, and sanctify them to
day, and to morrow, and let them wash their clothes. This Washing their Clothes
was certainly a Rite or Sign Representing to them from the Lord, the inward
Purity required of them, and instructing them that it was God's Will that they
should approach him with Holiness, and yet I suppose neither this nor the
former were properly Sacraments; and indeed Mr. B. owns, p. 39. That all barely
Instructive Signs are not Sacramental or Federal ones. I add, that from these
Instances it appears, that all Instructive Signs, though Federal or Covenanting
are not Sacramental, and therefore Mr. B. had no reason to Tax me as he does in
the same place, for Omitting this Use in my Account of Sacraments, since my
design was only to mention those Uses that are peculiar to Sacraments; and it
is manifest by his own Confession, that this is not so peculiar to them.

III. 3dly, The same must be said concerning Signs that Represent and Signify
our Desire, Purpose and Resolution, to accept the Grace, Favor and Privileges
God has Promised us, and to perform the Duties he has Imposed on us, together
with our Gratitude and Sense of his Favors. To Represent in this Sense is not
peculiar to Sacraments, much less a Principal Use of them, nor has Mr. B.
produced one place of Scripture to prove this to be such a Peculiar Use. On the
contrary, we have many Example, in Scripture, where other Signs are recommended
to us for this purpose: Thus we find the Reubenites and Gadites and half Tribe
of Manasses building an Altar, Josh. 22. 10. without any particular Command
from God, as sufficiently appears from the whole Affair. The design of this
Altar was not for Sacrifices; but v. 22. that it might be (say they) a Witness
between us and you, and our Generations after us, that we may do the Service of
the Lord before him, with our Burnt-Offerings, and with our Sacrifices, and
with our Peace Offerings, that your Children may not say to our Children in
time to come, Ye have no part in the Lord. Here we have an Altar set up as a
Sign, Testimony and Memorial, Representing and Testifying that these People did
Desire, Resolve and Purpose to Serve God according to his Commands, and that
they claimed a Share and Interest in his Favors and Service: Yet this
Declarative Sign of their Steadfast Intentions to Serve God and perform the
Duties he required of them, was not Sacramental; though it was not for
Burnt-Offerings, yet it was the Pattern of the Altar of the Lord, v. 28. and
Represented their Claim to that Altar, together with their Resolution to
perform their Duty at it; and surely this is more like a Sacrament than using
the Sign of the Cross to testify, that we claim an Interest in it, and are not
ashamed of it: For the Cross was the Altar on which our Sacrifice was offered,
and we may as lawfully make the Pattern of it to testify and claim our Right in
the Sacrifice that was offered on it, as the Reubenites made the pattern of the
Altar of the Lord to testify and claim their right to the Sacrifices offered on
it. Every Impartial Considerer will see that the Case is Exactly Parallel as to
this point.

I might Instance in many other such Signs in the Old Testament if it were
necessary; but I shall add one or two out of the New. First, it was a Duty
required of all Men to acknowledge and Recognize our Savior as the Messiah and
King of Israel. If we look into the 21st Chapter of St. Matthew, we may observe
that the Multitude did acknowledge him as such, and expressed their acceptance
of him, their Resolution to submit to him, and thankfulness for his favors, by
such Signs as were usual on such Occasions. It was the Custom to receive great
Kings and Princes with solemn Acclamations, to strew the way when they Entered
into any place with Branches and Garments: Therefore the Multitude did thus own
our Savior to be the Messiah and King of Israel, and their desire to submit to
him. And that not only by Acclamations and joining their Voices in their
Praises and Thanksgivings, but likewise (in the eighth Verse) They spread their
Garments in the way, and others cut down Branches from the Trees, and strewed
them in the way; which though not required by our Savior, that we can find, were
accepted, as well as their Hosanna's; yet these Representing Signs, though direct
Acknowledgments and Declarations of their Accepting our Savior as their King,
and of their submitting to him, had nothing of Sacraments in them: And
therefore the Sign of the Cross, though it Represent to the World that we own a
Crucified Christ, and that we resolve not to be ashamed of him, has nothing in
it of a Sacramental nature, any more than the Branches and Garments strewed in
his way.

A Second Instance in the New Testament shall be the Kiss of Charity. I showed
you in my Admonition, p. 74. That it is a special duty to lay aside all Hatred,
and to be in Charity with one another when we come to the Lord's Supper; and
that this duty was signified by a Holy Kiss, whereby the Communicants
represented their Desire, Purpose and Resolution to perform this duty: This is
home to the Point, and exactly parallel to the Cross in Baptism; and if the one
be a Sacrament, the other is likewise. The same may be said of the Feast of
Charity.

Mr. B. Answered three things to this, Vind. p. 52. First, That he does not see
that this was a Religious Rite at all: But this is directly contrary to
Scripture; the word Religious is never applied to Rites or Places in it, but
that which we call Religious is there called Holy, and the Scripture gives this
Title to the Kiss, here mentioned in three places, calling it a Holy Kiss, to
distinguish it as well from the Civil as Profane, Romans 16. 16. 1 Cor. 19. 20.
2. Cor. 13. 12. and in the fourth place where it is used, 1 Pet. 5. 14. it is
called a Kiss of Charity. I suppose the Difference between Civil and Religious
Signs consists in this; that one sort of these signifies Civil matters, and the
other Religious: Now this Sign was used in the Christian Assemblies to Signify,
Declare and Testify the Grace of Charity, which is the Sum and Perfection of
our Religion, there are not clearer Proofs that Baptism is a Religious Sign,
than these; and you may judge with your selves what it is that hinders Mr. B.
from seeing it.

But 2dly, He objects ( Vind. p. 52.) that this was a Real expression of their
mutual Charity; This I own to be true, and do believe that every Sign made
significant by general Custom, when used as it should be, is a real Expression
and Instance of the thing it signifies; so making the Sign of the Cross is a
real Expression and Instance of our Glorying in Christ, as much as Kissing one
another is of our mutual Charity; the same thing that made the one so, made
likewise the other, that is, universal Custom.

3dly, He objects, That it is reasonable to suppose that it had a temporary
Institution. I own, it is not only reasonable to suppose this, but certain that
it had, since it is Four times Commanded in Scripture; but this is so far from
preventing the Holy Kiss from being a Sacrament, that it should the rather be
one because it had this Institution. This I look on as a demonstration, that a
Sign that merely Represents our Desire, Resolution and purpose, to perform a
certain Duty, though Commanded in Scripture, has nothing of a Sacramental nature
in it; and therefore the Cross is not a Sacrament, nor has it any thing of a
Sacramental use by Representing our Duty to confess Christ Crucified.

Let me further observe, that the Church of God has laid aside this Teaching
and Representing Sign, though Instutited in Scripture, and Practiced for many
Years; and therefore must be supposed to have Authority to Institute others of
the like nature in the Celebration of the Sacraments, since the same Authority
is necessary to Abrogate as to Institute any Religious Action or Representing
Sign.

And this is no more, in effect, than I find owned by some of the most Eminent
Men of your party; so Mr. Bowls, in his Pastor Evangelicus, Lib. 3. Cap. 1.
Potest Ecclesia sive Signa sive Media statuere, etc. The Church has Power to
appoint both Signs and Means, by which Men may Testify their Pious Affections
before others, whilst they Celebrate Divine Worship. Provided these Signs be
such as the instinct of Nature does suggest, or be taken from what is Customary
in Life, according to the difference of Nations, and have nothing of Scandal in
them, for these Signs are only declarative, which, so far as I know are granted
to be Lawful by all. Amongst these he reckons Rending the Garments, Covering
the Head with Ashes, Pouring out Waters, 1 Samuel 7. 5. for a token of
Repentance, writing and sealing the Covenant when renewed, the Feasts of
Charity, the holy Kiss and Veiling Women; and he might as well have reckoned
the Sign of the Cross, as a Token of our not being ashamed of Christ Crucified,
for this is a declarative Sign of our pious Affections, as well as any of the
other; it is warranted by general Custom, as well as they are, and it is only
declarative, for we ascribe no Virtue or Efficacy to it, but declare against
its having any such Virtue in express terms, in the Thirtieth Canon, which
enjoins it.

And whereas Mr. B. alleges, that we use it to Bind and Dedicate our selves to
God's service, and as a Distinguishing Badge of our Christian Profession, p.
48. I doubt not but it will appear in the next Sections, that every one of
those declarative Signs mentioned by Mr. Bowls, do Bind and Dedicate to God's
service those that use them, as much as the Sign of the Cross, and are
purposely designed to Distinguish the pious and devout Worshipers of God, as
well as to express their devout Affections before Men; and that therefore Mr.
B's insisting on the Crosses being a Dedicating Sign, or a Distinguishing
Badge, to prove it a Sacrament, is no more than a Playing with Words, and
Amusing the Reader, by endeavoring to fix that Doctrine on us under Equivocal
Terms which we utterly deny. And the only Question here will be, Whether we or
Mr. B. know our Doctrine best; if our Church, if our Divines may be believed,
the Cross is only a declarative Sign of our pious Affections, not to be Ashamed
of Christ Crucified, etc. But if you believe Mr. B. it is something more that
makes it a Sacrament. But this belongs more properly to the next section of
Obliging Signs; and I shall proceed to consider those.

Sect. V. Concerning Obliging Signs.
I. BUT Fourthly, A Sign may be called Obliging, because it obliges God by his
Promise to give us the spiritual Grace or Benefit signified by it, when we duly
use it: This was the second thing I observed necessary to make up a Sacrament.
I told you in my Admonition, p. 65. That this is the very thing that
constitutes a Sign to be a Sacrament, and distinguishes it from all other
Signs; and this being wanting, though a Sign had all other things like a
Sacrament, yet it would no more be a Sacrament, than an Image that in every
thing resembled a Man, but wanted a Soul, would be a Man. Mr. B. owns, that
this is necessary to a Sacrament, and does not pretend, that we ascribe this
use to the Sign of the Cross; and therefore I may dismiss this point as agreed.

However, I think it necessary here to observe, That when God has given a Man
power to confer any Favor or Benefit on another, though he has not appointed any
Sign by which that person is to confer it, yet the Scripture warrants him to
use such Signs as are proper in the conveying it. Thus our Savior, Mark 3. 15.
gave his Disciples power to heal sickness, but did not, that appears, order
them to use any Sign in the performance of it; yet Mark 6. 13. we find they
used Oil, a symbol of Joy and Health. They anointed with Oil many that were
Sick, and Healed them. They used also the Signs of sending Handkerchiefs and
Aprons to the same purpose: so likewise our Savior gave his Disciples power to
bestow the Holy Ghost, but ordered no Sign; yet we find the Apostles used the
common sign of Blessing: so Act. 8. 17. Then laid they their Hands on them, and
they received the Holy Ghost. Lastly, Our Savior gave his Apostles power to
ordain Governors in the Church, but appointed no Sign for it; yet they used
the common Sign employed in these Cases, Acts 13. 3. When they had Fasted and
Prayed, they laid their Hands on them, and sent them away. There are several
other such Signs in Scripture, which are not Sacraments; because, though a
spiritual Benefit or Gift be conferred with the use of them, yet it is not by
virtue of any Promise annexed to the use of the Signs themselves, as it is in
Baptism and the Lord's Supper, but by virtue of the General Command to those
Authorized Persons to confer those Benefits or Graces, in the conferring of
which, these Signs are no Means or Conditions, nor have they any other part
besides that of being Solemnities of the Action, and signifying the Persons
Intention to exercise the Power that God has given him, at the time when he
uses them; and this is carefully to be observed, otherwise we shall easily be
mistaken in the Nature of Sacraments, and imagine things to be so that really
are not.

II. Fifthly, A Sign may be called Obliging, because it is a Declaration from
God of his Will, That he requires certain Duties and Returns from us, which are
signified and represented to us in the Sign, which Declaration obliges us to
perform those Duties, and make those Returns.

I have showed already in the second Particular, That only God can appoint
these Signs, and that such declarative Signs of God's Will, where they have no
Promise annexed of some spiritual Grace or Benefit, are not Sacraments, though
they are Obligations on us from God. I must add, That the Sign of the Cross is
not used by our Church to any such purpose; as appears sufficiently from what I
have said before on the second particular use of Signs as Representative.

III. Sixthly, A Sign may be called Obliging, because it declares our
Intention, Resolution, and Promise to perform the duties God requires of us in
our Covenant with him; a Sign that is thus Obliging, is likewise a Ratifying
and Dedicating Sign on our part, and is owned to be the same by Mr. B's Vind.
p. 45. For we cannot be said to ratify our Covenant with God, or dedicate our
selves to him by a Sign, for any other Reason, but because it declares and
signifies our Resolution and Promise to perform our Covenant with him.

We do own, That the Sign of the Cross is an Obliging, Ratifying, and
Dedicating Sign in this sense; that is, it declares and signifies our
Resolution and Promise to perform all the Duties God requires of us in our
Covenant, not to be ashamed of Christ Crucified, but manfully to sight under
his Banner against Sin, the Devil, and the World. The great stress of Mr. B's
Argument to prove the Cross an Human Sacrament, seems to consist in this; as
appears from what he says p. 45. where the whole force of his Argument against
the Cross depends on our making it a Rite, whereby we Oblige and Bind our
selves to serve God: But, in order to clear the matter, I will show, that an
Obliging, Ratifying, Dedicating Sign in this sense, has nothing of a
Sacramental Nature in it; but that we may make use of such Signs to this
purpose as common Universal Custom has made proper. This I will show, First,
from Scripture; and, Secondly, from your own Practice, and then shall make
appear, that the use of the Sign of the Cross is altogether of this sort.

IV. 1. For the proof of this from Scripture, I appeal to the Jewish Church
after the Captivity. The Jews had been guilty of many breaches of God's
Covenant made with their Fathers; and there was great necessity to renew it on
their part, and accordingly we find they applied themselves to do it, with
Fasting, with Sackcloaths and Earth upon them. Neh. 9. 1. and after a solemn
humiliation and confession they renew their Covenant with God, and declare
their Resolution and Promise to keep it, by such methods as were usual to
oblige men in other cases; that is, first by an Oath, Neh. Chap. 10. 29. They
entered into a Curse and into an Oath to walk in God's law, which was given by
Moses.

2. They Bind, Engage, and Oblige themselves by certain usual Signs; never,
that we can find prescribed by God, that is, by writing and sealing the
Covenant, Neh. 9. 3, 8. We make a sure Covenant, and write it, and our Princes,
Levites, and Priests seal unto it. Now, to make a Covenant with God, the same
that Circumcision entered them into, even to walk in God's law which was given
by Moses, was certainly to oblige, engage and dedicate themselves to God's
service. Mr. B. himself alleges, Vind. p. 42. That Circumcision was an
external Bond on those that received it, to observe that Law; yet
notwithstanding this Bond of Circumcision and their renewing the same
Obligation in the Passover, these Jews added new Bonds to their Covenant, and
made use of new Signs to engage and oblige themselves to keep it, and to
ratify and confirm it on their part.

It cannot be denied but Signing and Sealing are outward Signs, and their use
is to ratify and confirm that to which the Name and Seal is put, and to oblige
the Persons to perform what they promise in it; if therefore these be peculiar
and principal uses of Sacraments, it clearly follows that these Jews, by using
these Signs, made two Sacraments (for ought appears, out of their own Head):
But if God commanded them, then here are two Signs, obliging, confirming, and
ratifying the Covenant they entered into, of divine Institution, and then they
must be divine Sacraments, which no body ever yet pretended that I have heard
of. The truth then is, that to renew our Covenant with God, to declare our
Resolution, Purpose and Promise to obey God's Laws, and keep his Covenant,
either by such Words or Signs as universal Custom has made expressive of such a
Promise, etc. are alike lawful, and the one has no more of a Sacramental nature
in it than the other.

V. I shall add one Instance more out of the New Testament, and that is, laying
on of Hands, a Sign used in Blessing, from the Patriarchs to this day: Fathers
used it in blessing their Children, Priests in blessing not only the People,
but likewise in blessing Persons and Offerings dedicated to God, but more
particularly it is used in that solemn Blessing to which our Church directs us
in our Catechism, under the title of being Confirmed by the Bishop. For the
understanding of which you must observe*

1. That the Apostles, who had commission to Teach and Baptize, did, upon their
Converts declaring their conviction of our Savior's being the Messiah or
Christ, immediately Baptize them, though they were not particularly instructed in
all the parts and duties of the Religion they embraced; as appears sufficiently
from the second of the Acts, where in one day 3000 were Converted, and the same
day Baptized: as appears v. 41. Then they that gladly received his words were
Baptized; and the same day there were added to them about 3000 Souls. It is not
to be supposed thot all these could be fully instructed in all the necessary
Articles of their Faith, but it was sufficient that in general they believed in
Christ, and were willing to learn his Doctrine as opportunity offered: The same
appears in Baptizing the Jailer and his Family, Acts 16. and on several other
occasions. This is one Ground of Baptizing the Children of the Faithful with
us, because it is supposed that God, according to his Promise, will in Baptism
give a Principle of Faith to such: which, together with the influence of their
Parents on them, and of the society whereof they are members, will dispose them
to learn the Principles of their Religion as soon as they are capable; so that
there is a radical Faith, and presumed willingness, though not an actual.

2. At the beginning of Christianity the Converts were many, and the Teachers
few; and it would have too much confined them, if they had been obliged to
teach every Convert in the ordinary methods of Learning; and therefore God gave
the Apostles an extraordinary power to confer the Holy Ghost not only led those
that received it into all truth, but likewise enabled them to teach others;
which appears from several places of Scripture, particularly from Acts 8. and
19. 6. When Paul had laid his hands on them, the Holy Ghost came up in them,
and they spoke with Tongues and Prophesied.

3. When the number of Teachers were sufficiently multiplied, this
extraordinary manner of teaching Converts, and enabling them to teach others
was not necessary; not but the Holy Ghost is still the true Teacher of his
Church, insomuch, as without his influence, no Man can attain such a degree of
Knowledge as to save his own Soul, or instruct others; all true Knowledge then
is still from him, but it is not without our own industry, or study, or the
assistance of those that Christ has commissioned to Teach us in an ordinary way.

4. Such as were Baptized immediately after their Conversion before full
instruction, or in their infancy, when particularly and explicitly instructed,
were brought before the Church, and there made a solemn Recognition of their
Faith, and declared their Resolution to adhere to it; whereupon the Bishop, or
chief Governor of the Church laid his hands on them, Blessed them, Prayed for
their continuance in Grace and Knowledge, and admitted them as competently
instructed Members; by this they were taught and assured, that the Grace and
Knowledge they had, was from the Holy Spirit; and that the increase and
continuance of it must be Expected from him.

5. This laying on of hands is reckoned a principle of our Religion, Heb. 6. 2.
and joined with Baptism.

That this is the true meaning of the Place, will appear, not only from the
Practice of the Church of God, that has continued the use of this Sign from the
Apostles time to this day, but likewise from the best Interpreters of all sorts
and Ages; amongst the Ancients, St. Chrysostom, St. Augustine, and
Theophylact, thus interpret it; amongst the Romanists, The ordinary Gloss,
Lyra, and many others; amongst the Reformers, Calvin, Beza, and Di^dati; and
the Assemblies Notes, which I hope will weigh somewhat with you; Amongst the
Socinians Crellius; so that, one would think that all Parties were agreed in it.

Mr. B. indeed gives me very hard words for reckoning this a principle of
Christianity, though I have the express Letter of Scripture for doing so; and in
his Remark, p. 88. interprets Baptisms, and laying on of Hands of the Jewish
Washings and Sacrifices, directly contrary to the Apostles Profession, who in
the first verse declares, that he intends to leave these Principles here named,
and to pass on to perfection; whereas he is so far from leaving, those Jewish
Washings and Sacrifices, that he passes on to them, and spends a good part of
his Discourse on them, as may be seen in the 9. and 10. chapters; and indeed,
the applying Jewish Types to the passages in the New Testament which they
prefigured, was a Doctrine not for Beginners, but as in Chap. 5. 14. for those
that by reason of use have their senses exercised to discern both Good and
Evil: when the Lords Supper was thought too great a Mystery to teach such
Beginners, and therefore is not mentioned amongst these Elements, no wonder if
the Types of the Law which were much more obscure were thought Improper.

But to proceed, we have here laying on of hands reckoned a Principle of
Christianity, and judged by all parties a proper Sign to be used, when Persons
Baptized in their infancy, or before full instruction, come to Ratify and
Confirm with their own Mouths their Baptismal Covenant, and to promise a
faithful observance of it to the end; in which sense it is plainly an obliging
Sign on our part, as much as a Seal is to a Bond; and hence it has been called
a Seal from the very Apostles time, as may be seen in Clemens Alex. that lived
near them, and many others of the Ancients, yet it is no Sacrament; neither
has it any more of a Sacramental nature in it, than laying on hands in
Ordination.

Besides this Ratification and Obligation on our part, it is used by our Church
to Certify those that ratify and renew their Covenant, of Gods favor and
gracious goodness to them, yet this does not make it a Sacrament, since the
Ministers of God by virtue of the Keys, have Power to certify all such as in
earnest consent to Gods Covenant at all times, of Gods favor and gracious
acceptance of them, and may especially on such solemn occasions as this of
their public Recognition of their Baptismal Covenant, or on their public
Reconciliation after Penance, certify them of it by proper Signs, (suppose by
a kiss as well) as by words, and such Signs signify only their intention at
that time, to exert the general Power God has given them, as I showed before in
Anointing the Sick, laying on hands for the extraordinary Gifts of the Holy
Ghost, and for Ordination; which have nothing of a Sacramental nature in them,
because no Promise obliging God is annexed to them.

VI. Having thus showed from Scripture, that we may make use of such Signs to
oblige our selves to Ratify and Confirm our Covenant with God, as general
Custom has made proper; I come in the second place, to show the same from your
own practice. And this I shall make appear from two Instances; The first, is
that of the solemn League and Covenant, The precedent which your Party took for
this, was the Jews renewing their Covenant with God, Neh. 10. And the General
Assembly of Scotland in their acknowledgement of public Sins, call it the Oath
and Covenant which they made with God, and the Covenant and Cause of God; and
indeed it obliged them to all the Duties we owe to God and Man; which is as
large as our Baptismal Covenant. Into this Covenant with God they entered, not
only by Words but Signs also, and bound themselves to the performance of it;
first by Subscribing it which is one Sign, as in the Act of the general
assembly; Act 6. 1648. secondly by standing up at it; thirdly by lifting up
their Hands; so the House of Commons took it, Sep. 22. 1641. and by swearing
thereunto, did worship the great Name of God, and Testify so much outwardly by
lifting up their hands, and subscribed their Names to it. Lastly, the
Parliament ordered, Feb. 2. 1641. that the whole Kingdom should take it
standing, their right hand bare, and lift up; all these were plainly federal
Rites, and did declare and signify the Intention, Purpose, and Vow of the
takers to perform this Covenant with God, and consequently were Obliging,
Ratifying, and Confirming Signs on their part, and I doubt not but many thought
they did therein Dedicate themselves anew to Gods service; for as I have
already showed, a Sign, that signifies our vow and promise to serve God is a
dedicating Sign; if therefore the Sign of the Cross be a Sacrament, because it
is a Token that we shall not be ashamed to Confess Christ Crucified, and that
we resolve to serve him to our Lives end, then all these were plainly
Sacraments, for they were Tokens of the same thing in the Estimation of those
that used them.

I shall add one instance more, and that is, giving persons names in Baptism;
this as I observed in my admonition, p. 7, 2, signifies our giving up our Names
to Christ and engaging to be his Servants; and therefore these Names are a
lasting badge and token to us through our whole lives, of our dedication to
Christ's service, and an obligation on us to behave our selves accordingly.

To this Mr. B. replies two things; First, Vind. p. 53. that all this is
suggested by my own fancy, without any ground, for you know of no other use of
this Practice in Baptism, than that the Persons Baptized may be notifyed to the
Congregation.

To this I answer; First, that it does not come home to the Point, since it
does not determine whether it be Lawful to use this Sign of giving a Name to
the purposes I have mentioned; if it be lawful so to use it, no matter whether
you use it so or no; for it is still an unanswerable argument that an obliging
Sign as such has nothing of a Sacrament in it.

2. It is plain the Scriptures direct us to this use of giving Names, as well
as the general custom of the world; for we plainly find names given to signify
that those who receive them, were either admitted as Servants, Sons, or
Privileged Persons; and in all these Cases their Names were obligatory Badges.
To this purpose a name was constantly given by the Jewish Church at
Circumcision, and by the Christian at Baptism; and that Name in the Primitive
Church was entered in the Diptycks or Church Roll; they were called by it to
receive the Holy Communion, and when cut off from the Church, their Names were
blotted out of these Sacred Tables or Rolls; and therefore their Names given
them in Baptism, were effectual obligations and badges of their profession.

3. I do not find any Authentic declaration of your Party against this use of
Names, nor any Authority Mr. B. has to declare your sense in the matter: Your
Directory orders a Name to be given at Baptism, which shows the Authors thought
it material, and not merely a civil thing; for the design of the Directory is
to order the worship of God, and there was no reason for them to appoint a
civil Ceremony in so material a part of Gods worship as Baptism is; Mr. B.
says, that it is, that the Person may be Notifyed to the Congregation; that is,
that they may distinguish him to be the Person that was Baptized: Now that
which distinguishes and makes it known through his whole Life, that he is a
member of Christ, is surely a badge of his profession, and obliges him to do
nothing unworthy of it. You call the Name you receive at Baptism your Christian
Name* and as your Surnames show your Family, so your Christian Names show your
Profession. I may add to this, that some of your party have been very nice in
giving Names, and have called their Children by such Names as they thought
would most likely put them in mind of their Duty to God, and oblige them to
perform it; thus some called their Children, Grace, Charity, Prudence,
Faithful, Praise God: to what purpose, but to be a Badge, Token, Memorial, and
Obligation to them to practice these Graces? Lastly, the Notes of the Assembly
on Genesis 17. 5. Observe on God's giving Abraham a Name, that some take the
giving of a new Name to note a Sacramental Renovation in the new sense of
Circumcision, which now was first added to the Covenant, and thence has it
been the Practice of such as profess Religion, to give Names to their Children
at their Circumcision; upon which they pass no censure. And Mr. Ainsworth (for
whom I suppose you likewise have a value) has this Observation on it: Abraham
is the first Man in the World whose Name is changed of God: And it signified a
change of Estate, and a renewing with increase of Grace from God; therefore
this is after mentioned, as one of his Favors; Neh. 9. 7. So Jacob's Name is
made new, Genesis 32. 28. and all true Christians, Esaias 62. 2. Rev. 2. 17. So that
what I said concerning giving of a Name to your Children, and particularly
God's giving one to Abraham, is not suggested by my own Fancy, as Mr. B.
alleges: I wish he would adhere to the literal sense of Scripture, and the
best Commentators, as I am assured I endeavor to do.

But secondly he objects, that if this were true, then this is a Scriptural
Warrant for giving Names to Children at Baptism, as a token of their admission
into Gods Family, Vind. p. 53. and then it is a Ceremony of Gods own
appointment. To which I answer, that this is a full proof that a Sign appointed
by God to signify our admission into his Family, of giving up our names to
him, and engaging to be his Servants, is no Sacrament; and then it follows,
that it is so far from being a principal use of a Sacrament to be a binding
Sign only, that on the contrary it is no proper or peculiar use of it at all;
but common to other Signs; and then our using the Sign of the Cross for an
obliging Sign on our parts is not to ascribe any thing of a Sacramental nature
to it.

From the whole, I suppose it fully appears both from Scripture and your own
practice, that we may use some other Signs besides the Sacraments to Oblige,
Ratify, and Confirm our Covenant with God, and bind our selves to his service,
and that our doing so does not make those Signs Humane Sacraments.

And I desire you to remember that the whole design of our using the Sign of
the Cross is, only to declare and testify to the World, that we look on our
selves as persons thus Bound, obliged and dedicated to Gods service, and that
we are resolved not to decline that Service, or be ashamed of it, for any
danger or infamy that may attend it; though it should expose us, as it did our
Savior, to the painful and shameful death of the Cross.

To Bind, Oblige and Dedicate our selves to Gods service are properly acts of
our minds: all that outward Signs can do, is to declare and express these
inward Acts; and surely there cannot be any outward Action that more properly
or naturally does declare our resolution and purpose to dedicate our selves to
the service of a Crucified Savior than making the Sign of the Cross: if then
it be lawful, as I have proved both from Scripture and your own practice, to
express and declare these Acts of our minds by other Signs than the Sacraments,
our using the Sign of the Cross to this purpose can never make it a new
Sacrament, or unlawful.

Sect. VI. Concerning Distinguishing Signs.
I. I Shall now proceed to the Third sort of Signs which Mr. B. mentions, which
he calls Distinguishing. I have showed you, That these may be of two Sorts, and
come under the Seventh and Eighth Considerations of Signs, as I have laid them
down, Sect. 3. of this Appendix.

The Seventh is, That a Sign may be called Distinguishing, because it signifies
and conveys to us some Privilege or Benefit which effectually distinguishes us
from the rest of the World, and obliges others to own us as so privileged. Thus
the King's Patent to a Nobleman distinguishes him, and obliges others to take
notice of him. And thus the Regenerating Principle of Grace, conveyed to us in
Baptism, makes an effectual distinction of Christians from other Men; and the
Privileges conveyed to us thereby oblige all other Christians to own us as
Fellow Members and Heirs of the same Hope with themselves: And thus the Lords
Supper does likewise distinguish us, by communicating to us the Body and Blood
of our Savior, by which our Union with Christ is preserved and increased, and
the Graces and Privileges received in Baptism are renewed, strengthened and
confirmed to us.

I grant therefore, that the Sacraments are Distinguishing Signs in this sense,
and this use of them is plainly contained under the first thing that I showed
to be necessary to make them up, that is, an outward and visible Sign
instituted by God, signifying some spiritual Grace or Benefit which we expect
from Him. Such an inward and spiritual Grace or Benefit granted to us in the
Sacraments does indeed Distinguish us from all others, and entitle us to the
Privileges of Children; and the Sacraments are Conveyances and Badges of that
Grace or Privilege, as much as the King's Patent is of Nobility, or laying on
his Sword is of Knighthood. To make a Distinguishing Sign in this sense were
indeed to make a Sacrament; and we readily own, that God only can appoint Signs
to make one Man thus differ from another, or bestow such Badges on them: But
our Church has fully declared, that the sign of the Cross is not any such
Badge: And therefore Mr. B. is very unjust to us, when he affirms ( Vind. p.
45.) that being Crossed, we as truly (according to the Established Church) wear
the Livery of Christ as by being Baptized: a Calumny without ground or
pretense. In Baptism our Church, according to the Scriptures, teaches us, that
we put on Christ; that is, lay aside our Sins and Lusts, and become Partakers
of the Divine Nature, 1 Pet. 14. whereby we are privileged as Sons of God; this
is the true Badge and Distinction of Christians; but our Church never said any
such thing of the Cross, and therefore to say that we as truly wear the Livery
of Christ by being Crossed, as by Baptism; or that the Cross is as effectually
made the common Symbol or Tessera of our Discipleship, as Baptism; are most
grievous Calumnies. I beseech God to pardon those that endeavor to keep up a
Party against us by such Accusations, and to turn their Hearts.

II. But then, Eighthly, a Sign may be called Distinguishing, because we
thereby declare, testify and profess to the World that we claim and own the
Privileges and Characters that God has been pleased to bestow on us as
Christians. And thus indeed the sign of the Cross is a Badge and Token of our
Christianity. But then, this is no proper or peculiar, much less principal use
of the Sacraments; our keeping the Lords Day, our appearing in a Christian
Assembly, our Kneeling, uncovering our Head, our Fasting on public occasions,
our Standing at our Confession of Faith, are all of them Badges, and Tokens in
this sense of our being Christians, as well as the sign of the Cross; and are
all of them warranted by the Scripture. The same may be said, as I have already
showed, of our Christian Names, and of many other Signs used among us, and
precedented in Scripture.

Particularly, That of your giving Tickets to those that are to Communicate,
concerning which I showed you, ( Admon. p. 7.) that it was an Outward and
Visible Sign: And Secondly, That it signified your Right and Claim to the
Lord's Supper and Communion of Saints; which is a spiritual Grace or Privilege.
Thirdly, That it was a Badge and Token, whereby Privileged Members were
distinguished: And Fourthly, a sort of necessary Term of Communion.

To this Mr. B. replies, ( Vind. p. 53.) 1. That a Ticket with you is a Sign of
nothing more, than that the Person that brought it was allowed to Communicate
at that time. To which I Answer, That to be allowed to Communicate at any time
is a great Grace and Privilege; and therefore this Ticket is plainly a Badge of
a Man's Aptitude, Privilege, and Title to the Membership of Christ; and a
Declaration from the Minister who gave it to him, that he thinks him entitled
to it at that time; and to declare who is fit and unfit, who shall be admitted
or not admitted, is a Spiritual Act, and belongs to the Power of the Keys: And
this is a clear Proof that we may signify our sense of Spiritual Things, even
in particular Duties, by Signs as well as Words when they are proper.

Secondly, He Objects, that this is no Badge; because many may be Members that
have no Tickets at present, because they do not at present Receive; but even to
distinguish Persons at present fit to Receive from others that are not, is to
make it a Badge in a very weighty matter.

Thirdly, He argues, That a Man's having a Ticket would not secure his
Admission, if he were not known to be a Member of that, or some other
Congregation. This indeed shows, that it is no infallible Mark; a Man may steal
this Badge, or come dishonestly by it, and when that is discovered, he shall be
secluded; But in the mean time it is a Badge that gains a Man Admittance
without any Question, if it be not discovered to be counterfeit: It is
therefore a Livery of Christ's Privileged Members at that time; though if it be
known, that any has stolen this Livery, he shall not be Owned or Admitted to
Christ's Table by it. It cannot therefore be denied, but it is a sort of
external Wedding Garment

Fourthly, He argues, that it is no necessary term of Communion, since no man
that is a Noted Member of that or any other Congregation, shall be refused,
though he have no Ticket; but many are not Noted Members, and it is a necessary
term of Communion to them. But suppose a Man Refused and Condemned it as an
Human Invention, and Human Sacrament, and all those that used it as Idolaters,
and Superstitious, and would set up another Communion if you did not lay it
aside, would you disuse it to gratify such a man? This is really the case
between you and us; I leave you to judge what you would think of such an
unreasonable person.

But, Fifthly, Mr. B. alleges ( Vind. p. 45) in such multitudes as Receive,
this or some such Expedient is necessary to distinguish Communicants from mere
Spectators; to which I answer, that then some other Badges and distinguishing
Signs may be necessary besides the Sacraments, and therefore it is no use
peculiar or proper to them to be Badges or Signs of our Profession, and the
relations we thereby are invested in, as he contends; for sure to be admitted
as Communicants, is a relation wherein we are invested by our Profession; yet
you see we may invent a Sign to distinguish this Relation and those that have a
Title to it.

But I must put you in mind, that there is no necessity for this Badge, except
what is criminal, and of your own making: If every Minister would administer
the Holy Sacrament frequently in his own Congregation, (as he ought to do)
there needed none of these Multitudes or Crowdings that are at your Sacraments,
to which People come thirty or forty miles, as the Papists go on Pilgrimages at
certain times to their Jubilees or celebrated Saints, and which are the
occasion (as it generally happens in such Crowds) of Looseness and
Intemperance, and a great hinderance to Devotion, by crowding such Families as
live near the place where the Celebration is, whereby both the Guests and
Families are hindered from that Quiet and Retirement, which seem very necessary
to true Devotion at such times.

Lastly, he Objects, That this can be no Badge, or like to the Cross, except
this perilous Ticket had a Cross on it, or the persons that brought it were
ordered to wear it on their Breasts or Foreheads, as a Sign whereby they
publicly profess their remembrance of and renewed dedication of themselves to
the service of a Crucified Savior, as the adult Members of his Church; Vind.
p. 54. I cannot believe Mr. B. means here, that the adult Members of our Church
are ordered to wear Crosses on their Breasts or Forehead, to profess their
Remembrance of, and Renewed Dedication to the Service of Christ, there being no
such Order or Practice amongst us.

But, when all is done, I see no great difference between bringing a Ticket in
my hand to profess, that I intend, and have a Title, to participate of the Body
and Blood of a Crucified Savior: Which is your use of a Ticket: And carrying a
Cross on my Forehead (if there were any such Custom or Order) to profess and
show, that I am not ashamed of him, and intend to persevere in his service. Nor
do I see that a King, who carries it in his Banner when he Fights for the
Preservation of his Religion and Subjects against Infidels, makes it a
Sacrament, more than you do your Ticket; which is another Name for a Badge.

To conclude this Point, It is very observable in what manner Mr. B. treats it,
and me in effect, for producing it. It Is, I confess (says he) a very dangerous
Ceremony, in which he has found out abundance of very strange and mysterious
significations. -- If all these wonderful Spiritual Significations assigned to
this Poor Ticket, etc. p. 53, and 54. If indeed this perilous Ticket had had a
Cross upon it, etc. By these and several other Scoffing Expressions he
endeavors to expose the mention of this thing, and my Argument from it for the
Use of the Cross, as matters too slight and inconsiderable to be Offered, or to
have any Words made about them; and yet does not consider how momentous he
thinks it, to make so many Words about the Sign of the Cross, which in it self,
and in our Use and Application of it, is not of greater moment, or so like a
Sacrament as your Ticket; this seems to me a very great Instance of the power
of Partiality and Prejudice; for the wonderful Spiritual Significations (as Mr.
B. is pleased to call them) Assigned by me to your Ticket, are in effect no
more than upon examination he owns to belong to it, and pleads to be necessary
for the decent and orderly Celebration of the Lord's Supper; and therefore are
more Justly Assigned to it by me than those which he Assigns to our use of the
Cross. And there is this difference, that we disown those Significations which
he would Affix to the Cross, whereas he cannot deny those that I Assign to your
use of a Ticket; as I have already showed.

And this gives me occasion to put you in mind of a Book printed 1607* written
by one Parker, with great seriousness, and a great show of Learning, with
several thousand Quotations; and in it he charges the Cross with the breach of
all the Commandments, and has Chapters under these several titles; The Murder
of the Cross, The Adultery of the Cross, The Wrong of the Cross, The Slander of
the Cross, The Concupiscence of the Cross. I think every one of them is as well
founded as Mr. B's Charge of its being a Human Sacrament; and I doubt not, but
when Faction is a little cooled, and Men allow themselves to think, it will
appear full as unreasonable as Mr. Parker's Charges do to all impartial Men.

And were Men so disposed, they might make as great a stir about this Ticket,
and pretend as Just Cause for a Schism from you, on account of it, as you do
from us, on account of the Sign of the Cross; for a very little thing has
always served factious Men for an opportunity of disturbing the Peace of the
Church.

Upon the whole, I think it fully appears, that both Scripture and your own
Practice warrant us to use other Signs, which are not Sacraments, for the uses
ascribed to Sacraments by Mr. B. so far as the Sign of the Cross is concerned
in those uses: and I hope, that what I have said concerning Representing,
Obliging, and Distinguishing Signs, may help to give you a clear Notion of the
true uses of Sacraments, which Mr. B. has rather Obscured than Explained, by
expressing them in such words as are no way proper or clear, but of a very
uncertain and ambiguous signification.

Sect. VII. Concerning the Crosses being Warranted by Scripture.
I. HAving thus Justified the Use of the Cross from Mr. B's Charge of being a
Humane Sacrament, I shall now consider what he has said against its being
warranted by Scripture. I showed in my Admonition, That

1st, We are Obliged to express the inward Reverence and Sense of our Minds
concerning God, by some outward Means.

2dly, That the Scriptures Command us to express those inward thoughts and
sense of our Minds, by Actions as well as Words, where it may properly be done.

3dly, That the Scriptures teach us to express our thoughts and sense
concerning Religious Matters in such Words and Actions, as on other serious
Occasions serve to express the like sense and disposition of our Minds.

4thly, That Glorying in the Sufferings of Christ, and professing our selves
ready to follow him, even to the most ignominious Death on the Cross, is a Duty
incumbent on us by Scripture.

5thly, That it is very proper at Baptism to make this Profession.

6thly, That we are not only Warranted to do it by Words, but likewise by
Actions.

7thly, That making the Sign of the Cross is an Action which Universal Custom
in all Ages and Churches since the Apostle's time has applied to this purpose.

These I proved by Scripture and Reason, and he that would confute me, must
prove it unlawful to express the particular Duties we undertake in the
Sacraments, by Actions that are by general Custom expressive of these Duties.

II. To all these Mr. B. makes several Replies. I shall first consider his
Replies, and then proceed further to confirm my own Proofs.

First then, he argues, This does not reach the main Uses of the Cross, which I
was concerned to Defend; that is, its being a Dedicating and Distinguishing
Badge; For this, says he, pretends to prove no more, than that it is an
instructive Sign, to signify or express this particular Duty of Glorying in
the Sufferings of Christ, Vind. p. 40.

I have observed, that when Mr. B. is to answer an Argument of Force, he often
puts it off with an unscriptural hard Word or a Jest. Thus, when I showed the
reasonableness of directing all our Praises expressly to the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, whom we equally are obliged to Glorify, he turns it off with a
Jest, Rem. p. 22. calling it A Wonderful Knack of turning the Psalms of David
into Christian Hymns. And yet it does so effectually answer that end, that no
Jew or Socinian will join in them when so used. So when I urged a plain and
literal Proof of Scripture, to show that the People may join their Voices in
the public Prayers of the Church, as plain as any is for their joining in
singing Psalms, Acts 4. 24. They lift up their Voice with one accord, and said,
etc. This he tells us, Rem. p. 50. proves no more than a consent of their
Minds, contrary to the Letter of Scripture, which assures us, that they lift up
their Voices and said, as well as consented in their Minds. Yet he offers only
a Scoff for his contradicting Scripture, alleging, Rem. p. 51. That it brings
in a confused Noise in a Christian Assembly, too like a Dover-Court, where it is
said all speak and none hear. The like might be showed of his use of difficult
unscriptural Expressions. Thus when I proved beyond contradiction, that only
bowing the Body, or suchlike Gestures, are called Worship in Scripture, he
puts it off, by telling us, that these devout postures are more properly an
Adjunct of Worship, than a part of it; and that they are not a distinct Duty
from Prayer and Praises, etc. Rem. p. 100. directly contrary to Scripture that
Enjoins them severally. Thus, to prove the Cross unlawful in Baptism, he tells
us, Rem. p. 6. That it is a stated Appendage* of a part of Divine Worship, and
all such Rites are unlawful: Which are very fit Words to amuse Ignorant People,
but of no use to determine the Controversy. And I take this before us to be of
the same nature; for it is not easy to understand what* is meant by an
Instructive Sign. Signs as well as Words are designed to express the Thoughts,
the Intentions, the Dispositions and Passions of our Minds; and when we Kneel,
for example, at our Prayers, it does not only instruct and teach us, that it is
our Duty to submit to God, but it declares, that we actually do it, and our
Resolution to continue in it, and is a motive and means to humble our own
Minds, and invite others to do the like; and so it is an Obliging,
Distinguishing, and Moving Sign, as well as an Instructive. The like may be
said of our Standing at the Profession of our Faith, which does not only
instruct us in our Duty, that we are to believe those Articles, but likewise
declares, that we do actually consent to them, and oblige our selves to
continue in them, and would have all others to do the like; and so is not only
an Instructing Sign, but likewise a Distinguishing, Professing, Dedicating and
Moving Sign: for it Answers plainly all these purposes, and yet is commended by
Mr. Baxter in his Infant Baptism, chap. 6. Obj. 1. The like may be said of the
Cross; It does not only instruct us, that it is our Duty to confess Christ
Crucified, and to become his Servants, but it signifies, that we actually do
so, and consequently signifies our obliging our selves to it; and
distinguishes those that do it: All which my Arguments plainly reach.

III. But Secondly, Mr. B. objects, Vind. p. 50. That he cannot grant, that the
Scriptures warrant our expressing the sense of our Minds in all Religious
things or matters by significant Actions; because the particular Duties we owe
to God are almost Numberless; Neither do the Scriptures warrant us to contrive
distinct Significant Actions, to express each distinct part of our inward
Worship.

To this I answer, 1st, That I expressly declared ( Admon. p. 68.) that we are
not to invent new Words or Actions, to signify our submission and thankfulness
to God, but are to use such as the general Custom of our Country has made
significant in the like cases: And therefore, if any distinct parts of our Duty
to God have no particular Actions to express them made significant by General
Custom, we need not to invent new ones, but content our selves with Words, or
the application of such general significant Actions as may infer the particular
Duty we are about to express.

2dly, The general Heads of our Duty are few, and most of them have such Grave
and Solemn Actions appropriated to them, as not only instruct us in the Nature
of them, but likewise move and influence our Minds to perform them with
Seriousness, engage us to that performance, and distinguish the Serious from
the Negligent and Irreverent. And that it is lawful, not only to use such to
express inward Worship in General, but likewise the particular Duties of it, I
have sufficiently proved in my Admonition p. 68. 69, 70. though Mr. B. alleges
the contrary without Answering my Arguments; and I shall now further enforce
them.

1st. Expressing our Submission and Subjection to God is a particular Duty, and
this is expressed by Kneeling, which by universal custom signifies it; for we
Kneel only to our Superiors, and to those to whom we owe Submission: Kneeling
does not signify Reverence, or Humility in General, but that particular
Reverence and Humility that is accompanied with Subjection.

2dly, To profess our Faith and Acknowledgments to God, is a particular Duty,
therefore at our Confession of Faith and Praises we stand; for standing at the
Reading and Declaring any thing does peculiarly signify an Assent to it; and
therefore it was prescribed at your taking your Covenant.

3dly, Subscribing and Sealing a thing, is by Universal Custom a Sign of
Ratifying and Confirming what is so Sealed, and of our Binding our selves by
it; therefore as I have already showed, the Jews after the Captivity Writ and
Sealed their Covenant with God.

4thly, Deep sorrow and contrition for Sin is a particular Duty, and this we
find in Scripture signified by Rending the Garments and Beating the Body.

5thly, Acknowledgment of our own Vileness, Corruption, and Unworthiness, is a
particular Duty; and this we find in Scripture signified, Neh. 9. 1. With
Fasting, with Sackcloth, and Earth upon them; these did not express inward
Worship in General, nor were they mere bodily Gestures, as Mr. B. alleges, but
were Signs of particular Duties.

6thly, Rejoicing in the great Deliverances and Mercies vouchsafed us by God,
is a particular Religious Duty; and this we find signified by Singing,
Feasting, Dancing, sending Portions to Friends, and White-Garments; which do
not signify merely inward Worship in General, nor are they bodily Gestures
only; but Affecting, Moving, and Distinguishing Signs.

7thly, Condescension to serve one another in the meanest Offices of Charity,
is a particular Duty; and this our Savior signified to us by washing his
Disciples Feet; which was not only an instance of our Saviors Humility, as Mr.
B. alleges, but a Sign to Teach and Move his Disciples to do the like.

8thly, To lay aside all hatred and malice, and to be in perfect Charity with
one another, when we come to the Holy Sacrament, is a particular Duty: and this
is signified by a Holy Kiss in Scripture, as I have already showed; the same is
true of the Feast of Charity, tho Mr. B. excepts against it as well as against
the kiss of Charity, alleging that it is no religious rite at all, but rather
a real Expression of their mutual Charity; Vind. p. 5. 2. but I answer, that
its being performed publicly in the Congregation and in the midst of divine
offices sufficiently shows that it was Religious; and its being a real
expression of Charity is so far from hindering it from being a Sign, that it
proves it to be one; there is no surer Sign of Charity than real Expressions
and instances of it; effects are the surest Signs of causes; If we should
appoint such a Feast now to be celebrated in Church with the Sacrament, none
would doubt its being a Religious rite, and perhaps some would call it an
Imposition.

9thly, To be buried to Sin is a particular privilege of Baptism, and infers,
a Duty, which was signified by dipping under Water; to this Mr. B. answers,
first, that it is not certain the Apostles words, Romans 6. 4. refer to the
dipping under Water; but to this I reply, it is certain, that generally the
Primitive Christians used this way, though in particular cases they dispensed
with it; as we do with the use of the Cross: secondly, it is certain the best
Interpreters do thus understand this place, with which concur your Assemblys
Notes, who tell us that in this Phrase the Apostles seems to allude to the
Ancient manner of Baptism, which was to dip the Parties Baptized, and as it
were to bury them under the Water for a while, and then to draw them out and
lift them up, to represent the Burial of the Old Man and our Resurrection to
newness of Life; nor is there any other Just reason of the Phrase to be given,
and therefore Mr. B's doubt concerning the certainty of it without any reason
(for he gives none for his doubting) is in all probability to be attributed to
his prejudice: for if this be true, it entirely ruins his notion of humane
Sacraments; since here is a Representing, Obliging, and Distinguishing Sign
added to Baptism: which is all the Exception he has against the Cross.

But secondly, he alleges that I ought to prove, that the Christians of that
Age had Arbitrarily and without warrant from Christ or his Apostles set it up;
but I think it sufficient for me to show that it was set up, and that it is a
Rite distinct from Baptism; both which are apparent; it is incumbent on Mr. B.
to show where Christ or his Apostles instituted it. It Is manifest, that it is
not in the first institution by our Savior, for that requires only washing
with Water, which may be performed either by dipping or pouring on water; This
then is a Rite Superadded to Baptism of a representing and obliging nature, and
so interpreted by St. Paul himself: therefore all such Rites are not
Sacraments, or unlawful: It is manifest St. Paul approved the Rite, but there
is no evidence of its Divine Institution; and therefore the Church has made no
scruple to lay it aside, and that without any absolute necessity; for the
warming Water for Baptism used in some Places to this day, might prevent the
inconveniency of a cold Country; which is all Mr. B. alleges for disusing it;
Vind. p. 52. but could not excuse us, if this were part of the institution.

10thly, To change our condition in Baptism, from the power of Sin to Holiness,
from Sons of Wrath to Sons of God, is a special Privilege; and to live
accordingly, a Duty. Now, this was signified by the change of Clothes, when
Persons were Baptized; and to this, as I showed in my Admonition, the Apostle
alludes, Gal. 3. 27. For as many of you as have been Baptized into Christ, have
put on Christ; to this Mr. B. Answers as to the former, that it is not certain,
the Apostle alludes to this Custom; but here again, I have the best
interpreters thus Expounding it; I have the Practice of the Church of God using
this Rite from the Apostles time, I have the necessity of the thing to prove it
was done in their time, for Dipping in Water could not be without putting off,
or change of Clothes, and there is no other Reason given of the Phrase; and
therefore Mr. B's Doubt without reason, is of no moment in such a Case; he may
justly be suspected to doubt out of Prejudice that must lose his Cause, if the
thing prove true that he doubts of.

But 2dly, he argues, that if the Apostles expression refers to these two Rites
as used to these purposes, it will be more reasonable to conclude that they are
part of the ordinance of Baptism, and consequently to be still retained and
used by us, Vind. p. 52. I think it much more reasonable to suppose that Mr. B.
is mistaken in his account of Sacraments, than to suppose either of these Rites
were part of the ordinance of Baptism, or that we are obliged to retain or use
them; we have the ordinance delivered to us twice in Scripture, and neither of
these rites are mentioned in it, and therefore they are no part of it; They
were certainly used in Baptism in the Apostles time, and to those purposes I
have mentioned; and the Consequence is, that Mr. B's. charge is groundless that
would make such Rites humane Sacraments and unlawful; and approaches near to
the Doctrine that makes that unlawful which God has not made so, 1 Timothy 4. 1,
2, 3.

11thly, To reject a person from the means of Grace is a religious Act, and
belongs to the power of the Keys; Now the Scriptures warrant us to do this, by
shaking off the dust of our feet, which does not signify our duty in general,
but in particular, our detestation and abhorrence of the Obstinacy of the
persons, against whom we use it, or rather indeed, Gods rejecting them; and it
no more makes Confirmation a Sacrament, because in it we assure the Persons
Confirmed of Gods favor by laying on of hands, than it made shaking off the
dust from the feet a Sacrament, because it was used to assure the persons
against whom it was done of Gods rejecting them from his grace, and the like
may be said of the Sign of the Cross.

12thly, To receive a penitent member into the Society of a Church is a
particular and Religious Duty; Now this the Church of Scotland Orders to be
done not only by words, but Signs also; So in the first book of Discipline in
the order for public offenders, The Minister ought to exhort the Kirk to
receive that penitent brother in their favors -- and in Sign of their Consent,
the elders and chief men in the Kirk shall take the penitent by the hand, and
one or two in the name of the rest shall kiss and embrace him with reverence
and gravity, as a member of Christ Jesus: From which it appears, that this
Church (for which I suppose you have a value) thinks that it is lawful to
express our thoughts about religious things by Signs as well as Words; And I do
not see but taking by the hand, kissing and embracing a Man in token that he is
admitted as a reconciled member of Jesus Christ, is every whit as much a
Sacrament as Signing him with the Sign of the Cross, in token that he shall not
be ashamed to confess Christ Crucified.

13thly, To confess and acknowledge our scandalous sins to God and his Church,
is a particular Religious Duty and a part of worship; Now the Church of
Scotland in the form of Excommunication in Knoxes Liturgy, orders a murderer
to confess his Crime thus, He shall stand three several Sundays in a place
before the Church-door, bare footed and bare Headed, clothed in base and
abjected Apparel, having the same Weapon which he used in the Murder, or the
like, bloody in his Hand, and in conceived Words shall say, etc. Undoubtedly,
they that Ordered this, made no Question, but we might express the sense of our
Minds in Religious Matters, by Signs as well as Words. These were not to
express inward Worship in general, nor are they mere bodily Gestures, but
symbolick Signs and Badges of Repentance. Mr. B. may think himself unconcerned
in these two last instances, but I believe you will not.

IV. His third Objection against my Proof of Scriptures Warranting the use of
the sign of the Cross, is, That the same Argument will serve as well to
Justify many other Rites which the Romish Church has added to Baptism, and the
other parts of God's Worship; Vind. p. 48. Now, to this I Answer,

1st, That it was incumbent on Mr. B. in this Point (as I told you in my
Admonition) to prove by Scripture, that it is unlawful to signify or express
the particular Duties we undertake in the Sacraments, by Actions that are by
general Custom expressive of those Duties, and to answer the Scriptures I
produced; but he has not produced one single Instance from Scripture, where
such Signs or Expressions of a particular Duty are condemned, merely because
they thus signified or expressed it: Which I take to be a plain Consession that
he wants direct Proofs, and till he produce some such Scripture Proof, he
cannot acquit himself of teaching that to be unlawful which God has not made
so, the Sin of those that forbad Meats and Marriage, 1 Timothy 4.

2dly, To condemn a thing for imagined Consequences, without direct Proof, is a
very uncertain and (which is worse) a very dangerous Method: for it lays a
Snare in the way of the Weak: A Man that knows that the Church of God has used
the Sign of the Cross since the Apostle's time universally; that the Church of
England and Ireland approve of it, together with the Protestant Churches of
Sweden, Denmark, and the Lutheran Churches of Germany, and sees what can be
said for it, will not easily be persuaded that it is unlawful; and when he
hears Protestants affirm, that the many Rites which the Romish Church has
added, may as well be Justified, and that the first Reformers seem to be
unreasonable in rejecting them (as Mr. B. alleges, Vind. p. 49.) he will be
apt to conclude, that there is no great harm in them; and I doubt not but the
imprudent drawing such consequences has actually reconciled many to Popery, and
some to Atheism; and therefore a man that loves his Religion will be very
sparing of Drawing them; for he will consider, if he have direct or Scripture
Proof for a thing, they are needless; and if he have no direct or Scripture
proof for his Tenent, he has reason to suspect the truth of it: For, I suppose,
every ill thing is forbidden in Scripture, and may be Condemned from thence: As
for the drawing Consequences, they may serve to render a Tenent Odious, but
rarely serve to satisfy a reasonable Man without direct Proof.

3dly, The Advocates of the Church of Rome are deeply concerned to defend their
own Worship, and have produced all the Arguments they could against us; and yet
I think, I may say, have failed in them all; and I do not believe Mr. B. will
pretend to manage them better than they have done; though this be not the first
time he has lent them his Assistance, with what design I will not judge: But
this consideration alone were sufficient to excuse me from answering this
Argument.

Yet, lest it should really have that influence on weak Minds, that such
Arguments sometimes have in the mouths of pretended Friends or professed
Enemies, to make them have a better Opinion of the Roman Rites than they
deserve, I will endeavor to give you a true account of this matter, that you
may see what Rites we condemn in the Romish Church. I think this due to the
justification of our Reformers, reflected on by Mr. B. as unreasonable.

1st Then, We condemn such Rites and Ceremonies as signify any peculiar
presence or power of God to be in any place or thing where he has not promised
it; because it is not in the power of man to dispose of God's Influence or
Presence, or to tie them to any Action, Thing or Place without his own Act:
Upon this account the Heathen Images, Temples and Altars were all unlawful; and
so are those of the Papists, if we take them as they pass in the Estimation of
the Vulgar.

2dly, We condemn all Representations of any glorious Being, in order to
worship it, as being against the Second Commandment expressly.

3dly, We reject all such Signs as pretend to carry any supernatural efficacy
or virtue with them; because all such efficacy and virtue must proceed from
God, and we ought not to presume that he will communicate them to Signs or
Rites, except we have his Promise for it; and on this account we judge the
Popish Holy Water, Oil, Spittle, Crossing, etc. to be superstitious.

4thly, Such Rites as by their number or quality engage the Thoughts, and
divert them from attention on God's Service, such are the many Crossings (two
hundred, if I remember right, in one Office) Bowings, Kneelings, Kissings, and
frequent motions from one place to another in the Mass.

5thly, Such Signs as are not easily understood, Dark and Dumb Ceremonies, as
our Church calls them; whose design and signification are not easily
comprehended by the People: such are the many Vestments of the Popish Priests,
the Furniture of their Altars, the Lights, Oil, and Salt in their Baptism, etc.

6thly, Such as neither present universal Custom or Nature have made proper and
significant of the things they are designed to express; or if formerly they
have been significant, are now antiquated, having lost their signification by
time, as words do, (the Custom that made them significant being changed) as it
has happened to putting off the Shoes at our coming into the House of God,
covering the Head, the Kiss and Feasts of Charity, the dipping in Baptism, and
changing the Clothing, the continuance of which we count burdensome and
superfluous.

7thly, Such as are not proper to influence Men's Minds, and engage them to
perform the Office they are about with more seriousness and attention; or, as
our Church expresses it, that are not apt to stir up the dull Minds of Men by
some notable signification: such are many Gestures of the Priests in the Mass,
and many other Ceremonies of the Roman Church.

8thly, Such as pretend to propitiate or reconcile us unto God, because that
can only be done by means of his own appointment; on this account we reject
Agnus Dei, the Pilgrimages, Processions, Whippings, and Fasts of the Papists,
that are performed with Opinion of Merit.

9thly, Such as have been abused and perverted to superstitious uses, and
cannot be separated from them; on this account chiefly we have laid aside the
common use of Crossing: Not but we believe it was Piously and Prudently used by
the Primitive Christians, as an Instance, Expression, and Badge of their
Profession amongst Heathens and Infidels; but it was so abused, and the Opinion
of Efficacy and Virtue in it to drive away Devils, and to produce other
Spiritual Effects, so rooted in the Minds of Men concerning it, that there was
no probability of taking away the abuse of it whilst the thing remained: And
besides, the common use of it does now no more amongst us signify our common
Christianity, but is become the peculiar Badge of a Papist, and so has lost its
primitive signification.

To conclude, we condemn only those Rites of the Roman Church against which we
have these Exceptions, or the like, (as where they want Gravity or Decency) and
we are able to Justify our Exceptions by Reason and Scripture; but we never
condemned any Rite of that Church, as Mr. B. does the Sign of the Cross in
Baptism, either first, because it Represented to us our Duty, and instructed us
in it. Or,

2dly, Because it signified our purpose, resolution, or vows to serve God, that
is our Obligation or Dedication to his Service. Or,

3dly, Because it distinguished Christians from Heathens, Worshippers from
spectators, or the devout Worshippers from the negligent.

On the contrary, we think these to be proper* and allowed Scripture uses of
outward signs in Gods Worship; and it were a just exception against any of
them, if they did not serve to some of these purposes. Mr. B. may call such
signs foolish Inventions, etc. as he seems to do, Vind, p. 51. and charge the
Church of God for using them; but we ought to be modest in such censures, and
remember the danger of calling our Brother fool, as we are taught by our
Savior, Matt. 5. 22. we never used such Objections against Popery, from our
first Controvertists to this Day; and this alone may convince you that Mr. B's.
Principles are not the common Principles of Protestants. And it is a great
disservice to our cause (which we have maintained, thanks be to God, with
success, without the assistance of Mr. B. his party or Principles) to tell the
World that we used such Arguments as these.

VI. Lastly, he objects that the multiplicity of these Rites (or in the Bp's
language significant actions) had almost eaten out the vitals of Religion,
Vind. p. 51. But I answer,

1st, That we do not plead for the multiplicity of them, but for such as are
decent, proper and edifying, and which universal custom has made significant,
not such as Men's fancies can invent; to admit some of the first sort in
Religion, does no more open a Door to our Fancies, than admitting such Words as
general custom has made significant to express our desires, gives us Liberty to
invent new ones never heard of before, or to introduce the Artisices of Men's
Wisdom into our divine Discourse; which have done as much mischief as
significant Actions, and are expressly forbidden.

2dly, The significant Actions our Church uses are far from a multiplicity,
they are indeed fewer than we find used in the New Testament, and if we have
erred on either hand, which I hope we have not, it is not in the multiplicity,
but rather in the fewness of them.

3dly, They are with us so far from eating out the bowels of Religion, that on
the contrary, the little care Men have of using such, has destroyed the sense
of Religion in a great many, and induced them to make no distinction between
Good and Evil, Sacred and Profane, in many cases.

4thly, The multiplicity of words which are signs to the ear, are as apt to eat
out the bowels of Religion, as the multiplicity of significant Actions, and our
Savior gives us an express caution against them, Matt. 6. 7. the like we have
Eccles 5. 2. so that the whole Dispute seems to me, to be between the Eye and
the Ear, which shall be gratified; and excess in either, have had too much the
same Effect. Too many visible Signs are apt to eat out the heart of Religion,
and make it degenerate into Show; and too many words which are audible Signs,
are apt to have the like effect, and make Religion degenerate into Talk; of
both which, the Church of God has had equal Experience, and are both equally to
be avoided.

CONCLUSION.
THus I have examined all that Mr. B. has Objected against our Worship, from
the instance of the Sign of the Cross; and proved it to be no Human Invention,
but warranted by Scripture, according to the Rules laid down in my first
Discourse to you, for the determining what are Human Inventions in the Worship
of God.

Mr. B. Indeed would persuade you, that by those Rules he has retorted upon me
my own Arguments against your Worship; and alleges (Vind. p. 55.) It Is
strange, that (except that of Crossing) I have not so much as endeavored to
vindicate any one practice of the Established Church, from my own Arguments
retorted on me. But I Answer, first, that to retort Arguments is generally,
only a shift of Disputants when the Arguments pinch them, and they want fair
and direct Answers, and seldom are either justly or convincingly applied: and
therefore weigh little with such as seek only Truth, and not the service of a
Party. And indeed Mr. B's. were of such a nature that I durst well trust them
with indifferent Readers, the meaning of them being only this; if the
Dissenters Worship be mixed with Human Inventions, that of the Established
Church is guilty of the same fault, which is a method to blacken both, but to
defend neither; and may help to open your Eyes, and let you see that the
Arguments formerly brought by your Advocates against our Worship, are equally
conclusive against your own in this point; and therefore you are as much
obliged to Answer them as we are. And I desire you to observe that Mr. B. has
no way Answered them on your part, but by flying to his Rule of Humane
Prudence, which I do not find you do generally approve, and therefore, even
according to your own Opinion, he has not cleared you from the charge of Humane
Invention which I brought against your Worship.

But 2dly, I have showed you plainly (in the 2d Chap. Sect. 2. N. 9. of this
2d. Admonition) that he has perverted the sense of that Rule I laid down
concerning things Contained in and Warranted by the Word of God; and on that
perverted sense, he has founded all those retorted Arguments which he alleges,
I did not Answer. But having explained that Rule in my 2d Edition, so as he can
find no exception to it, it was a sufficient Answer to all his Arguments.

3dly, I knew that the sense of my Words, before I so explained them, could not
but be manifest to every indifferent, and understanding Reader; and therefore,
while with Reason and Justice, I disowned the sense he would put upon my words
in that Rule, I thought, and still think, that I needed not trouble you any
farther with answering particularly the Arguments which he has Retorted on that
perverted Sense. Men's thoughts are generally coherent, though their words do not
always seem to be so; hence it happens sometimes that they may be wrested, and
in these Disputes a Man who endeavors to make a show of Reasoning for his
Party, catches at some ambiguous or doubtful Expression of his Adversary, and
by putting an ill sense on it, which he knows will not be owned, he fills a
Book in showing that the Arguments make against him who produces them; and
this is what Mr. B. calls Retortion, and is another Artifice of those that
write for a Party to amuse the World, and which I take Mr. B. to have practiced
very much in all that he has yet written; but whilst a Man takes this course,
there is nothing written with such accuracy, but he may make it contradict it
self; Even the holy Scriptures not excepted.

I therefore thought it sufficient for me to Answer your great and principal
Objection, which is this of our using the Sign of the Cross; since this is the
most direct and strongest proof you pretend to bring of Humane Invention in our
Worship. In it Mr. B. tells us, that all Dissenters agree, that it does
directly concern the charge of Humane Inventions; and that here Dissenters used
to fix their charge: To examine all your other Arguments, in which you do not
agree as in this, were both endless and needless; for if this, where you used
to fix your charge, fail you, it is plain you are on an ill Foundation. I have
insisted on that objection, which is your strength against our Worship, and am
sure, from what I have said, you have good Reason, 1st, To suspect Mr. B's
surmises concerning me in other things, who supposes that I did not mention the
Cross, because I could not defend it. 2dly, To doubt the firmness of this
ground, where, Mr. B. says, you all fix your charge.

And now I must earnestly Admonish and Warn you to look into your own Hearts,
and put it home to your Consciences, whether these pretenses will bear you up
at the last and great Day, when you shall be called to account for your neglect
of the public Worship of God, while you might have had opportunity of
frequenting Ours: And if, upon enquiry, you find Faction or Carnalness to be at
the bottom, and Idolatry or Humane Sacraments to be only pretenses (as I think
they can be no more than pretenses, to those that impartially Read these
Papers) you may conclude they will sink at that Day from being Pleas before the
great searcher of Hearts. You and I must come to this Trial, and* 'twill then
appear, whether I that have used my utmost endeavors to bring you to the
public Worship of God, or Mr. B. who scoffs at my concern, and Zeal for that
Worship, and for your attendance at it, have approved our selves most to our
great Master.

Mr. B. as I observed before, owns it Lawful for you to come to our ordinary
Lords day Service when you have none else to go to; and he had acted both an
Ingenuous and Christian part, had he endeavored as diligently and zealously to
persuade you to do this, as he has been eager to put this stumbling block of
the Cross in your way against our Worship, (at least from thence to confirm and
increase your Prejudice against it) but as he has managed it, he has given
ground to suspect, that his zeal is answerable to his endeavors, which are
apparently much greater for his Party, than our common Christianity.

I entreat you therefore seriously to consider of these things, as of what you
must one Day give an account. And to believe, that I have not made all these
words about the Sign of the Cross for its own sake, but rather to remove, if
possible, that Principle out of your Minds, by which you are obliged to look on
all such Signs as unlawful; for this Principle duly pursued, must prove a
stumbling block, and occasion of perpetual Divisions to the end of the World,
in all Societies of Men where it is embraced. I have endeavored to show you,
that it is a Principle unwarranted by Scripture; it is the Spring and
Seed-plot, at least the precence of our present Divisions; and is sufficient,
if allowed, to Justify a separation from any Church, that either is, or has
been in the World, since there is not one Party of Men, that pretend to be a
Church, but have Signs, that are as much Representing, Obliging, and
Distinguishing, as we desire to make the Sign of the Cross. Even the Quakers
keeping on their Hats, as a matter of Conscience, and using Thou and Thee in
conversation, are to them as much Instructive, Obliging and Distinguishing
Signs as the Cross is to us; nor can it secure you to refrain from such Signs
as others use, for even that Abstinence is also an Instructive, Obliging and
Distinguishing Sign, especially to such as make it a matter of Conscience; and
so it is impossible to avoid using such Badges. If therefore People should
quarrel against all Signs on the same score as Mr. B. does against the Sign of
the Cross, they may quarrel on to the end of the World, and there can never be
any settled Union: And unless such Principles be removed from the Minds of
wellmeaning People, 'twill be impossible to Unite them in any Established
Church or Order, or to hinder Divisions from springing up, if they were so
united, since Evil-minded Men would never want as plausible Matter to amuse and
dissettle them, as the Sign of the Cross is pretended to be.

And I was the more willing to take some pains in this Affair, because I have
some hope that what I have said may help to persuade you to put a greater value
on Sacraments, and to understand their Nature, Efficacy and Necessity when they
may be had, better than, I am afraid, many of you do.

I have no more to add, but to assure you, that what I write is with a Design
to do you Good, and to satisfy my own Mind in the conscientious discharge of
my Duty and Office as a Pastor amongst you; I have endeavored to do this both
by Words and Writing, and all other means in my power; I shall by God's help
persevere in them, and leave the success to Him. I beseech him, of his great
Mercy, to take away all Obstinacy, Partiality, Error, and Prejudice from all
Men, especially from those under my Care; and to endow us all with a Spirit of
Meekness, Charity, Patience and Humility, that we may Love one another, and
unite in the Praises and Worship of our common Lord and Savior, the Lord Jesus
Christ. This is, and ever shall be, the Prayer of

Londonderry, March 13. 1695. Your Loving Pastor, WILL. DERRY.

BOOKS Printed for and Sold by R. Clavel, at the Peacock in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
THE Church History cleared from the Roman Forgeries and Corruptions found in
the Councils and Baronius: In Four Parts. From the beginning of Christianity to
the end of the Fifth General Council, 553. By Tho. Comber D. D. Dean of Durham.

Aristophanis Comaediae Duae Plutus and Nubes, cum Scholis Graecis Antiquis.
Quibus adjiciuntur Noctae quaedam simul cum Gemino Indice. In usum Studiosa
Juventutis.

A Daily Office for the Sick; compiled out of the Holy Scriptures and the
Liturgy of our Church; with occasional Prayers, Meditations and Directions.

The Catechisms of the Church, with Proofs from the New Testament, and some
additional Questions and Answers, divided into twelve Sections, by Z. I* D. D.
Author of the Book lately published, entitled, A daily Office for the Sick,
with Directions, etc.

A Church Catechism, with a brief and easy Explanation thereof, for the help
of the meanest Capacities and weakest Memories, in order to the establishing
them in the Religion of the Church of England. By T. C. Dean of Durham.

The Pantheon, representing the Fabulous Histories of the Heathen Gods, and
most illustrious Heroes; in a short, plain, and familiar Method, by way of
Dialogue, for the Use of Schools. Written by Fra. Pomey, of the Society of
Jesus, Author of the French and Latin Dictionary, for the use of the Dauphin.

Q. Horatii Flacci Opera; interpretatione and Notis illustravit Ludovicus
Desprez Cardinalitius Socius ac Rhetor Emeritus, Jussu Christianissimi Regis,
in usum Serenissimi Delphini, ac Serenissimorum Principum Burgundiae, Andium,
Biturigum. Huic Editioni accessere Vita Horatii, cum Dacerii Notis ejusdem
Chronolegia Horatiana, and Praefatio de Satira Romana.


