Mr. BLOUNT's Oracles of Reason, Examined and Answered, In Nine SECTIONS.

IN WHICH His many Heterodox Opinions are Refuted, the Holy Scriptures and
Revealed Religion are Asserted, AGAINST Deism and Atheism.

By JOSIAH KING, M.A. And Chaplain to the Right Honorable JAMES Earl of
ANGLESEY.

EXETER: Printed by S. Darker, for Philip Bishop, Bookseller, over against the
Guild Hall, Exon, and are to be Sold by the Booksellers of London and
Westminster. School.

To the Right Reverend Father in God, JONATHAN, Lord Bishop of Exon.
May it please your Lordship,
I Have been for some time in debate with my self, whether I should presume to
prefix your Lordship's Great Name before this Treatise. That which at last
weighed down the Scales with me, was that of Varius Geminus in Seneca.

Caesar qui apud te audent dicere, magnitudinem tuam ignorant, qui non audent
Humanitatem.

The principle Motive which I had for Publishing the same under your Lordship's
Name and Protection, (besides the Testification of my bounden Duty, as being a
Presbyter of your Diocese) owes its Original to your Lordship's great Zeal for
the Truth; and your great Auersion from those monstrous and Atheistical
Opinions, which are now so common among us.

Neither can I in the least doubt of your Lordship's gracious Acceptance;
provided that the Matter contained in the Book, makes good (as I hope it does)
its Title.

What other Motives I might truly have, with Respect to your Lordship's good
Government, and the great Happiness that we of your Clergy enjoy under the same
(as things generally known) I willingly pretermit, least I may seem too prolix
and troublesome. That excellent Saying of Lipsius, having made a deep
Impression on my Mind: Breves Sermones apud Daeum saepe, apud magnos viros
semper grati and accepti sunt.

May it Please your Lordship, I am, Your most Humble, And most Obedient
Servant, JOSIAH KING.

A PREFACE TO THE Reader.
ABout three or four Years since, when these Oracles of Reason appeared in the
World, and made so great a Noise, I were desired by a Minister in the Diocese
of Exon, to read them; and to conceive in Writing, what I thought most blamable
in them: which Request I complied with; not intending then to be concerned with
this Controversy in public; as all will believe that know the constant
Avocations of a Parochial Charge.

Neither did I then doubt, but that a set, and formal Answer, would long ago
have been made to Mr. Blount's Book, but it proves otherwise: upon which
account I were desired, upon an accidental Discourse, to publish this my
Answer, which I have now done; not with a design to answer every thing in the
Book, but to answer the greatest, and most remarkable Difficulties; and to
obviate the principal Design of the Author, in opposing revealed Religion.

Pliny observes in the Dedication of his natural History to Vespasian, that the
Greeks were wont to inscribe their Books with the Titles of the Muses,
Honeycombs, the Horn of Amatthea, Pandects, and the like vain Titles, to
insinuate with the Reader. The same course Mr. Blount has taken, who calls his
Book, The Oracles of Reason: but it is not the Title I am offended with; he
subver^s the Title himself, when p. 87. he says, That humane Reason is like a
Pitcher with two Ears, and that it may be taken on either side.

That which gives Offense, is the Impiety contained in it; as, when p. 17. he
says, It Is evident that the Five Books of Moses were written by another Hand
after his decease. And p. 58. That he can evince from sacred Oracles, that the
fall of Angels was before the Creation of the World. And p. 89. That a Mediator
derogates as much from the Mercy of God, as an Image does from his
Spirituality. And p. 162. That they were mean Persons that called our Lord the
Son of David; and that it was the Mob who cried Hosanna, when he made his
Cavalcade upon an Asinego. And many the like Expressions, which are to be
treated of in their places.

If he uses our Lord thus, we of the Clergy can expect no other Treatment from
him; to whom he objects so much Ignorance, and nicknames us Quicunque Men, and
Canonical Gamesters, p 97. and 136.

I do not design to trouble my Reader with a long Ppeface; wherefore I shall
briefly acquaint him what I have performed in this Book, which I have divided
into Nine Sections for Methods sake, and to avoid that Confusion Mr. Blount is
guilty of, as his book sufficiently proves.

The first Section is of the Mosaic History, and Divine Miracles; where I have
manifested his Vanity, in appealing to the Testimony of the Fathers; and have
defended the Divine Miracles from his subtle Objections, and sly Insinuations.
Mr. Blount is a true Follower of the Author of the Preadamites; who makes use
of this Method for weakening the Authority of the Scripture; and suggests his
Difficulties without a flat denial, that his Reader may be ensnared unawares. I
have also stated the Mosaic Year, a thing of no common Observation, and of good
Use in these Controversies, and proved it to be a perfect soler Year.

The second Section is of Paradise; in which I have defended the literal Sense,
and discovered his mistaking the Question; and his fathering on Moses (p. 36)
that which he never writ, viz. That four Rivers proceeded from one and the same
Fountainhead in Eden: Where is also discovered the Falsehood of Celsus and our
Deists, concerning the ancient Jewish and Christian Interpreters of Genesis.

The third Section is of the Original of things; in which the difficulty
concerning the Creation of Angels is discussed; as also their Corporiety; which
( p. 59.) he falsely declares to be the Opinion of the Catholic Church. We have
also shown, that some Particulars are omitted in the Mosaic History of the
Creation, and the Reason thereof; from whence Mr. Blount can receive no
Advantage. Lastly we have subjoyned an Apology for St. Austin's Error.

The fourth Section is of the modern Brachmins; in which we show how difficult
it is to comprehend his Design; that his Arguments are of little Force. And his
contradiction in saying ( p. 87.) that Deism is a good manuring of a Man's
Conscience, if sorted with Christianity.

The fifth Section concerns the Deist's Religion. We have made it evident how
uncertain this Natural Religion is by the Practice of Nations. And that what he
adds of the Imitation of God, destroys his own Supposition. We have referred
the Rewards and Punishments of another Life to be considered in another
Section. And whereas he takes it for granted, that the Deist is no Idolater, we
have proved the contrary: and that the same reason which exempts the Deists
from that imputation, will exempt Romanists, Reformed, Socinian, Mohammedan, etc.

The sixth Section concerns the Arians, Trinitarians, and Councils. In th^s
Section it will appear how perverse he represents the Affairs of those times.
P. 98. He makes the Arians to be Mounters of Constantine to the Throne;
although if they had then a being, yet they made no Figure in the World. He
fully tells us, that the Arians appealed for trial to the Fathers; that they
were condemned at Nice by a Party, and by the Artifice of the Emperor. Where he
also gives us a monstrous Account of the Number of the Bishops there assembled.
And p. 99. he affirms, that the Arians had not Freedom to dispute their Cause.
He represents the Arian Councils of Ariminum very Erroneously, He manifests his
Malignity when he accuses the Trinitarians of Ignorance; and for Proof, cites a
Canon of the Church; and p. 103. he gives many Instances of the same: where we
have proved that there is no such Canon, as far as a Negative is capable of
being proved. And we have discovered his disingenuity in not mentioning Du
Ranckin, from whom he borrowed all his Materials; word for word.

The seventh Section, is of the Immortality of the soul, and of the Original of
the Jews. In this Section, the necessity of revealed Religion is proved from
the insufficiency of Philosophical Reasons to this purpose. As also with
relation to a future State. Which, as Mr. Blount confesses, p. 118. has so
much ruffled and entangled men's Minds. The principal philosophic Reason is
examined and refell'd: From whence it will be evident, that the Scriptures
alone give a satisfactory Account of those things. Sir Henry Savil's
translating Tacitus, and omiting the Original of the Jews, is here defended.
Institution of Divine Worship, proved to be before Moses and Abraham: As also,
that Moses and the Israelites did not learn Circumcision from the Egyptians;
and that our Author in this Method, followed Celsus and Julian.

The eighth Section; of marrying two Sisters, Judaism, Christianity,
Millenaries. In which, the Scriptures brought to prove it unlawful are
defended. The Nature of Penal Laws in this case, makes more against our Deists,
then for him; his Error proceeds from neglecting the Hebrew, and following the
Greek Translation. The Apostolic Canon in this case considered; Dr. Hammond's
Mistake discovered, about a Woman's leaving her Husband, and marrying again. As
also, Mr. Blount's Abuse of the Council of Eliberis; where we are necessitated
to speak on something concerning Excommunication, the Churches great Censure.
Grotius, his Error in his Inference from the Apostolic Canon, reproved; and his
Collection from the Council of Eliberis, proved unwarrantable. St. Basil's
Epistle to Diadorus in this case, is considered: Mr. Blount's great Falsehood
and Abuse of the civil Law in this case, is laid open; the Sects of the Jews,
and the case of the Messiah, is rightly stated; Mr. Blount's manner of Arguing
is reprehended. We have defended the Prophecy of Daniel in this case; and have
shown the Original of the Millinaries.

The ninth Section; of Augury, Origin of Good and Evil, plurality of Worlds,
Ocellus Lucanus, etc.

From his account of Augury, I have collected the Necessity of revealed
Religion; discovered his mistake of Christian Processions. If what Varenius,
concerning whole Nations being Atheistical, affirms, be true, the most learned
Dr. Stilling fleet seems to be under some mistake. Varenius, his Assertion
argues the Necessity of revealed Religion; the Chinensian and Egyptian account
of time, proved to be vain and ridiculous; as also, the Chaldean, the main
Props of our Author's Hypothesis; the Origin of Good and Evil not to be known
by natural Religion. If Mr. Blount's Supposition be granted, concerning the
Persians, the Deist must be an Idolater: his reason for plurality of worlds
refuted: the principal Arguments of Ocellus Lucanus refell'd, his Age examined;
with some uncommon Observations relating to him; and our Author's great Vanity,
in making him cotemporary with, or ancienter then Moses, exposed. Mr. Blount's
great Argument for a double Creation, out of the first and second Chapters of
Genesis enquired into, and proved ineffectual. From hence we may see the
reason, why in his 5th Page, he propounds it as a Difficulty, how distinct
pieces of the World should be Peopled, as America, and the like, without a
miracle; and of Mathusalem's being the longest llv'd of all Adam's Posterity:
because in his Hypothesis of two distinct Originals of mankind, they have an
easy Solution; although they have a truer, and a much easier one in ours. This
method of his, is indeed allowable in Philosophy, which varies according to
every new Phenomenon, but has no place in matters of Religion.

His Disingenuity, in relation to Cicero, reproved; the Difference between
Ocellus and the Chaldeans, is observed.

There are many other Matters contained in this Book, which for Brevities sake
I have omited, but are perspicuously treated of, and I hope, to the Readers
satisfaction.

Two things remain, which I think fit to acquaint my Reader with: one is, that
these Oracles are many of them transcribed out of modern Authors, of whom I
have taken no Notice, but require all at Mr. Blount's Hands, he being the
Person that gave them the Title of Oracles: neither take I any Notice of others
concerned, he being the chief Architect.

The other is, that these Controversies depending much on Authority, I am
necessitated to make frequent appeals to Greek and Latin Authors; whom, for the
Benefit of some Readers, I have translated into English; where, if I have not
kept my self strictly to the Words, yet I have taken all care not to deviate
from tne true sense.

Lastly, As in all Duty bound, I humbly submit the censure of what I have
written, to my Superiors in the Cnurch of England.

Farewell.
Mr. BLOUNT's Oracles of Reason, Examined and Answered, In Nine SECTIONS, etc.
SECT. I. Of the Mosaic Creation, and the Divine Miracles.
MR. Blount, Page the Second, says, That many Fathers of the Church have
concluded, that the whole Mosaic Creation seems to have been but a pious
Allegory.
ANSWER.
It is worth observing, that although the Author of these pretended Oracles of
Reason has little regard for the Holy Scriptures; and without all
peradventure, less for the Fathers of the Church: yet upon all Occasions he
makes use of their Authorities, and frequently quotes them.

Upon reading this Imputation, and his fastening such a Charge upon many Fathers
of the Church, I forthwith consulted Mr. Dally of the Use of the Fathers, Book
the second, Chapter three and fourth; where he treats professedly of the
Fathers Errors; and I find nothing there that favors this bold Assertion. On
the contrary, I find an Expression of Dally's from the unanimous Consent of the
Fathers; which if it be true, this of the Oracle must necessarily be false.

None of the ancient Fathers can be charged with this Mistake; if Origin (his
Interpreters I take not into the Number) and perhaps St. Ambrose, be excepted.

St. Ambrose, Chap. 2. of Paradise, speaks not of above One that was of this
Opinion; and the Margent refers us to Origin. Whereas had it been true what
these Oracles suggests p. 49. That in the first Ages of the Christian Church,
the more candid Interpreters deviated from the literal reading of Moses's
History; St. Ambrose could not have been supposed to have passed it over in
silence.

But whatever the Sentiments of these two Fathers were; this is certain, that
the allegorizing Method, and the cabbalistick Strain, so much used by Origin,
was condemned in the fifth General Council; as Photius informs us in his
Epistle to Michael Prince of Bulgaria. The fifth General Council (...),
condemned and anathematised Origin; and that for this reason, because this his
allegorizing Method would introduce into the Church Pagan Fables and Greek
Muthology. And thus we see how Mr. Blount's many Fathers are dwindled into Two.
The Principle censured by the Universal Church; and St. Ambrose has so
compiled his Hexameron, that he seems rather to have followed the Opinion of
Hippolytus and Basil, then that of Origin.

Page 3. There are in Scripture, Stories that do exceed the Fables of the
Poets; and to a captious Reader, sound like Garagantua or Bevis.
ANSWER.
Who can with Patience hear God's Word to be so vilified? a Lucian, a Celsus,
or a Julian, could not have more depreciated the Scriptures by any profane
Comparison. Lipsius in his Political Monitions and Examples tells us, that
there was one Ochi^us who was wont to say, That Moses and Christus fuerunt
insignes Impostores qui genus humanum seduxerant: That Moses and Christ were
famous Impostors, and deceivers of Mankind. These few Lines of our Author seem
not to be much inferior in Blasphemy. He tells us p. 6. That the Devil
dissuaded his belief from the Miracle of the brazen Serpent. And p. 7. That the
Devil made him query where the Miracle of the Manna was in the Days of Moses. I
think without breach of Charity it may be presumed, that the Devil persuaded
him thus reproachfully to derogate from holy Writ. Neither will his salvo
subjoyned from the Influence of the little Finger of the Almighty, make a
sufficient Compensation for so great a Crime.

Page 4. I could show a Catalogue of Doubts never yet imagined nor questioned
as I know of; I can read the History of the Pigeon that was sent out of the
Ark, and not question how she found out her Male, where Lazarus 's Soul was,
before he was raised from the Dead, nor raise a Law Case, whether his Heir
might lawfully detain his Inheritance bequeathed to him by his Death; and he,
though restored to Life, have no Plea nor Ti^^e to his former Possessions.
ANSWER.
I profess I am ashamed to trouble my Reader with such Impertinence; yet I hope
I may be excused, because the Repetition of these Whimfeys serve to declare
what a Trisler our Deist is; and that he wants solid Reasons to impugn the holy
Scriptures. Suetonius in the Life of Tiberius Caesar, Chap. 70. says, That
Tiberius was want to exercise Grammarians with these Questions: Quae matter
Hecubae? quod Achillis nomen inter virgins fuisser? Quid sirenes cantare sunt
solite? Who was the Mother of Hecuba? What was Achilies's Name when under
disguise he was conversant with the Virgins? What Songs were the Sirens wont to
sing? Which Doubts Suetonius there calls, and deservedly too, Historia
fabularis usque ad ineptias atque derisum. Fabulous History, and such as ought
to be despised and laughed at. This Censure is applicable to these Doubts; and
to use his own Words, p. 4. are fantastic Queries and Atoms in Divinity.

Page 5. How all Kinds of Creatures, not only in their own Bulks, but with a
competency of Foo^ and Sustenance might be preserved in one A^k, and within the
extent of Three hundred Cubits, will not appear very feasible.
ANSWER.
This Difficulty puzzled Celsus too; who as Origin says p 191. called the Ark by
way of contempt, (...); a Bauble and Scarecrow for Children. It Is not strange,
that Celsus should thus calumniate, who being an Epicurean Philosopher, and a
great Friend of Lucian's, had without Controversy with the rest of that Heard,
a great Aversion to the clear and perspicuous Mathematics.

Plutarch tells us in his Book against the Epicureans, That they accounted
those Sciences amongst the Number of them, which contaminated a Man's Mind: and
that they wonderfully magnified Apolles, for that he had kept his Mind pure
from these Pollutions. Some Knowledge of which is yet requisite for the
understanding the Dimensions of the Ark; as Gerhard Vossius shows in his
seventh Chapter of the Mathematical Sciences, p. 30. and to that purpose cites
St. Austin. And Gassendus in his Inaugu^^l Orations, has this Expression, Et
cum paires caeteros, tum speciatim beatas Hieronimum and Augustinum passim
declarare, quam hae disciplinae necessariae sunt ad Scripturae sacrae
interpre^a^ionem.

And as the other Fathers in general, so in particular, St. Jerome and St.
Austin often declare how necessary these Sciences are for understanding the
Holy Scriptures. But that Mr. Blount (who, as I am told, had some Knowledge
this way) should stumble here, is to me strange.

He that will take the Pains to read the two little Treatises of Buteo de Arca,
and Matthaeus Hostus de Fabrica Arcae, in the Critics at large, will find the
Capacity of the Ark for the above mentioned Purposes so fully demonstrated, as
will make the Matter feasible. Wherefore with the most learned Dr. Stilling
fleet (now Lord Bishop of Worcester) in his Origines Sacra, p. 552. I think it
better to refer to the Authors themselves then here to Transcribe them.

Page 5. There is also another secret not contained in Scripture which is more
hard to comprehend, and put the honest Father (St. Austin) to the Refuge of a
Miracle: and that is, not only how the distinct Pieces of the World, and
divided Island, should be first planted by Men, but Inhabited by Tigers,
Panthers, and Bears; how America abounded with Beasts of Prey, and Noxious
Animals.
ANSWER.
St. Austin was never famed for his Skill in Cosmography; lib. 16. de Civit.
Dei. c. 7. he makes his Appeal to the Ministry of Angels, by the Command or
Permission of God. Had St. Austin lived in our Days, he would not have betaken
himself to so remote a Solution. I shall therefore to this purpose cite some of
our greatest Geographers, by which it will appear, that this thing is not so
hard to be comprehended as our Author bears us in Hand that it is. Keckerman in
the second Book of his Geography c. 4. lays down this Position -- Incertum est
an novus orbis cohaereat Europae and Asiae. And he strengthens the same by the
Testimony of Jacob; Chinaeus lib. Paster. Geogr. and by Gemma Frisius, c. 30.
Brerewood in his Enquiries, c. 13. some Parts of Asia and America are continent
one with the other; or at most, disjoined by some narrow Channel of the Ocean.
Dr. Heylin in his Cosmography, p. 1017. the West Side of America, If it be not
continent with Tartary, is yet disjoined by a very small Straight, as may be
perceived in all our Maps and Cards; so that there is into these Countries, a
very quick and easy Passage. Gerard Vossius, de Scientiis Mathematicis, p.
242. says, Ex Asia per fretum Anianum, non difficilem fuisse Navigationem in
Mexicanam, atque inde facillimum transitum in peruanum. I must confess nothing
pleases me more than the common Saying, Omnia modice and intra mo^um. Yet I
must subjoyn what Josephus a Costa says relating hereunto, both upon the
account of Mr. Boil, who in his History of Cold, commends the said a Costa, as
a very inquisitive and philosophical Person: as also, upon the said Acosta's
own account, who was for a long time a Traveller in America. In his Natural and
Moral History of the West Indies, p. 303. he says, The Old World joins with the
New in some Part, by which Men and Beasts may pass. And p. 503. If there be any
Sea betwixt the Old World and America, it is so narrow, that wild Beasts may
easily swim over, and Men may go over in small Boats. So that without a
Miracle, here is a plain Solution of this Difficulty, how the remote Parts of
the Earth might be Planted with Men, Tigers, Panthers, Bears, etc.

Page 5. It Is a Paradox to me, that Methusalem was the longest lived of all the
Children of Adam; and no Man will be able to prove it, while from the Process
of the Text I can manifest it may be otherwise.
ANSWER.
It Is no Paradox to believe that which has been opinioned by most Men, and in
most Ages, and is Established on good Grounds; although it may not
unexceptionally be Established by the Process of a Text; and such is the Case
of Methusalem's long Life. The Instances in Lucian de Longaevis, and in Phlegon
Trallian, of the same Subject, come very short of the Age of Methusalem.
Josephus indeed, in the first Book of his Antiquities, c. 4. cites Hesiod,
Hecataeus, Hellanicus, Acusilaus, Ephorus, and Nicolaus; who affirm, that some
lived to a Thousand Years. And Pliny in the seventh Book of his Natural Histry,
c. 48. confirms the same. But each of those Authors leave us uncertain as to
the Point in Hand. Josephus lessens the Authority he produces, by insinuating
the little Credit to be had to his Authorities; (...) neither does he express
how they made their Computation.

Pliny destroys the Authority he brings, by telling us, that some account six
Months to a Year; some three Months, some a Lunar Month; as namely, the
Egyptians: and that this is the reason why some were said to live a Thousand
Years. Which Latitude should we assume, Methusalem may be said to have lived
some Thousands of Years. But the Computation of Time in the Mosaical Writings
is most certain: the Years are there according to the Course of the Sun, the
Months according to the Course of the Moon; as will plainly appear.

The time of the Children of Israel's eating Manna is accounted forty Years,
in the end of the sixteenth Chapter of Exodus, and reckoned from their
departure out of Egypt, Numbers the 33d. Chapter, Verse 38. Which Number from
the same Season of the Year, to the same by the Years of the Sun, is most
exact; for they came forth of Egypt the fifteenth Day of the first Month, in
the beginning of Barley Harvest; and the very same Day of the same Month in
Barley Harvest their Manna ceased, Josh. 4. ver. 12. In the 25th Chapter of
Leviticus, the Israelites are commanded to sow their Fields, and cut their
Vineyard, and gather the Fruits thereof six Years; and to let the seventh rest
as a Sabbath Year to the Lord. And seven of those Sabbaths are accounted Forty
nine Years; at the end whereof, in the tenth Day of the seventh Month began the
Jubilee. These Years were manifestly Years of the Sun; otherwise all the Fruits
of those Years could not have been gathered in Harvest and Vintage, as God
appointed: for Forty nine Years of the Moon would very near have cut off One
and a Half, the last expiring in Winter, before any Corn or other Fruit were
ready to be gathered therein.

St. Austin in his fifteenth Book, de Civitate Dei, cap. 14. writing against
the Opinion of some, who were persuaded, that the Years of the Ancient Fathers,
which lived in the first Age, were not of the Sun; uses these Words, Tantus
tunc dies fuit quontus and nunc est. Tantus tunc mensis, quontus and nunc est
quem Luna caepta and finita conclusit. Tantus annus, quontus and nunc est, quem
duodecim menses Lunares, addites propter cursum solis quinque diebus and
quadrante, consummant.

The Day was as long then (says he) as it is now, the Month as long then as
now, contained within the compass of the Moon's Course from the beginning to
the end. The Year was then as long as now, perfected by twelve Months of the
Moon, with five Days and a Quarter added. So that the Year in the Writings of
Moses was a solar Year; the same we use at this Day. The Months mentioned by
Moses, were lunar Months complete. This is manifest by the History of Noah's
Flood, in the seventh and eighth Chapters of Genesis; where we are taught, that
the Flood begun the seventeenth Day of the second Month; and the Ark rested on
a Mountain of Ararat, in the seventeenth Day of the seventh Month: which Space,
by God's holy Spirit, is there counted a hundred and fifty Days; which
reckoning gives to every Month thirty Days apiece, neither more nor less.

Of this Opinion was St. Austin in hls fourth Book, de Trinitate, chap. 4. Si
duodecim menses integri considerentur quos triceni dies complent, talem quippe
mensem veteres observaverunt, quem circutius lunaris ostendit. That is, If the
whole twelve Months be considered, which contain thirty Days apiece, such was
the Month observed by Men of Old Time, even that which the Course of the Moon
shows.

According to this Measure of Time, the Days of Methusalem were Nine hundred
sixty and nine Years; and it does not appear that any other of Adam's Posterity
lived so long. I have been the longer on this pretended Paradox, because this
Instance is commonly made use of to invalidate the holy Scriptures; and because
the right stating of the scriptural Years and Months is of good Use in these
Controversies.

Page 7. I know that Manna is now plentifully gathered in Calabria; and
Josephus tells me in his Days it was as plentiful in Arabia; the Devil
therefore made me quere, where was then the Miracle in the Days of Moses, since
the Israelites saw but that in his time, which the Natives of those Countries
behold in ours?
ANSWER.
The Authority of Josephus is of little Moment in this case. Mr. Gregory of
Christ Church in his Discourse of the seventy Interpreters, p. 33. has these
Words, When Josephus comes to the Miraculous Passages of holy Writ, he uses a
fair way of Dissimulation, still moderating the wonder of a Work, that he bring
it down to the Heathens Faith, and make it for ordinary Belief. And of this the
said Gregory gives some Instances; as in the Israelites passing through the
Red Sea, of the Sun's standing still in Gibeon, of Nebuchadnezzar's change into
a Beast, etc. So that the Devil and our Author have appealed to an incompetent
Judge: Yet it must be confessed, that there seems some Foundation for this Doubt;
for very great Naturalists have given some Countenance to this Objection. As
Valesius in his Sacra Philosophia, c. 57. and Picus Mirandula, and Salmush in
his Commentaries on Pancirallus's Res Memorabile s, lib. 2. tit. 6. But he that
considers what the Author of Pseudodoxia Epidemica, lib. 7. c. 7. truly says,
will be satisfied of the Invalidity of this Quere.

No one part thereof, says he, will answer the Qualities of the Israelites
Manna, as to fall upon the Ground to breed Worms to melt with the Sun, to taste
like fresh Oil to be ground in Mills, to be like Coriander-seed, and of the
Color of Bdellium. And to this purpose in the Margint he cites the learned
Chrysostom. Magnenus de Manna. Nor will all kinds of Manna have the Properties of
the Israelites Manna, mentioned in the sixteenth Chapter of Exodus; he that
gathered much had nothing over, nor he that gathered little had any lack; that
which was gathered on the sixth Day did not stink as at other times, on the
Sabbath Day it was not to be found on the Fields: nor could any other Manna be
kept as this was for all Generations. Now if any Person can prove these
Properties in the present Manna of Calabria or Arabia, the Quere cannot be
Answered.

Page 8. There are great Errors in reading the Scriptures, in relation to
Divine Miracles; as the Darkness at the death of our Savior; which some say,
was spread over the Face of the whole Earth: Others, and some able
Interpreters, have only Translated it, upon all the Land of the Jews, viz.
Palestine, which the Hebrews always meant, when they said the Earth.
ANSWER.
That Errors may be committed in reading the Scriptures, is a thing too
notorious. But seeing our Author's Design is to disparage Holy Writ, ( Quid
verba quaero cum facta video, I may say with the Comedian); and by telling the
World there are Stories in it, which exceed the Fables of the Poets, and sound
like Garagantua and Bevis.

He plainly insinuates, that little Regard is to be had to Scripture-Miracles.
I shall lay down what is sufficient for asserting the most remarkable Instances
that he mentions; that the Darkness at the Death of our Savior was over the
Face of the whole Earth, (with relation to the Universality of the Globe)
cannot be proved from the Original, nor from our last Translators of the Bible;
who render it, Darkness was over all the Land; that is, Judea. So Dr. Hakewill
in his Apology, Lib. 5. p. 218.

The Words in the Original ore, (...). That the Universality of this Darkness,
as to the Globe of the Earth, cannot be from hence concluded, we have the
Authority of the most learned Critics in the Greek Tongue. Casaubon in his
Annotations on the Greek Testament, has on these Words, this Remark; Annotant
Homeri Interpretes, vox (...) interdum apud, bonas auctores (...) (...) quod
huic loco convenit. And then he adds, Assentior enim iis, qui sic hunc locum,
and marci similem, c. 15. ver. 33. interpretantur. And to the same purpose
Erasmus, Nam quod ait Evangelista, tenebras factas super Vniversam terram; ejus
regionis terram intellexit assentiente Divo Hieronymo, and asseverante Origene
in Homiliis, quas scripsit in Matthaeum. The Sum of which is, that the Word
(...) infers not this Conclusion. And as to the Word (...), or Earth, our most
learned Archbishop Tennison in Hobb's Creed observes, p. 65. does often
signify not the whole Word, but the Land of Palestine.

Seldom in his De jure Naturae and gentium juxta Hebraeos, lib. 6. c. 18.
affirms, That the Word Earth, is six hundred times used by the Talmudists, for
the Land of Israel. It Is used, says he, in this Manner, by the Evangelists;
Palam haec terrae notio, c. 15. Marci, ver. 33. tenebre fact suut per totam
terram usque in horam nonam. As also by St. Luke, Chap. 4. Ver. 25. Fames facta
est magna in omni terra. Which things considered, it will appear, that the
Darkness was only over the whole Land of Judea: or to use Mr. Gregory's Words
in the Preface to his Reader, The Face of the whole Earth (at our Savior's
Crucifixion) is to be meant, of the Land of Judea; as it is elsewhere. So that
Mr. Blount, by Printing those Words in a distinct Character; and intending to
persuade his Reader, that this is an Error committed in reading the Scripture,
Artificially endeavors the subverting the Veracity of the Miracle.

There is one Difficulty yet behind, and that is, Whether this Darkness was
occasioned by an Eclipse of the Sun, or by the Interposition of Clouds, or by
the shrinking in of the Sun Beams, like the Darkness of Egypt? Of this Opinion,
were Origin, Tertullian, Hierom, Chrysostom, Theaphylact, Enthymius, and Julius
Africanus, who reproves Thallus for calling it an Eclipse, as being an
unadvised Speech, and indeed it was so; for one Miracle would suffice for the
Darkness; but a total Eclipse, and that for the space of Three Hours, at the
full Moon (for it was at the Jewish Passover) would include many great Miracles.

Wherefore for the better understanding of this Miracle, we will briefly
mention what we have met with in good History, concerning the Suns Darkness,
and observe what was peculiar in that, at our Lords Death.

Trebellius Polio tells us, That in the days of Gallienus, that there were
Earthquakes and a Darkness for many days. St. Jerome ad Pamachiam, that about
the days of Pentecost, the Sun was so darkened, that Men thought that the day of
Judgment was at hand; which could not be an Eclipse, as Scalliger rightly
observes; whether you take it for the Jewish or Christian Pentecost.

Cederenus says, That in the days of Justinian, the Sun for a whole Year
together was of a Duskish Color, as if it had been in a perpetual Eclipse. The
like strange Accidents are reported by Pliny, and Theophanes; but our late
Naturalists have made it appear that there is nothing Miraculous in these
Effects; but none can presume to say so by this Darkness; That observes, First,
that it was only in the Land of Judaea where our Savior Suffered. Secondly,
That it was only between the Sixth and Ninth Hour, nor more, nor less; the
precise time of the Crucifixion. Thirdly, That it was accompanied with an
Earthquake. Phlegon (in his Cronican cited by Origin Cant. Celsum lib. 2.)
says, there were then many Earthquakes, it was accompanied with renting the
Vail of the Temple, renting Rocks, opening Graves, etc. enough to extort a
Confession from the Centurion that Christ was the Son of God.

Page 9. That God brought back the Shadow of those Lines, that it had gone down
in the Dial of Achaz, back Ten Degrees. Here some affirm, that the Sun went not
back in the Heaven (as it is generally believed) but only in the Dial of Achaz;
For, say they, if the Sun went back in the Zodiac, or that Degree of the
Ecliptic stand still, which He was a running that day, the Primum-Mobile came
also backwards, and with it all the rest of the Spears: if we say He went back
only in the Zodiac, and a Tenth part of the Zodiac; then say they, the Sun
must needs return through a great many Signs of the Zodiac, and bring back
with Him past Months, yea, and Seasons of the Year. Besides, that this Sign was
seen only in the Land of Judah, and not in Babylon.
ANSWER.
What kind of Dial King Ahaz His Dial was is not yet agreed on by the Learned
in that Science. Gafferell in his unheard of Curiosities P. 280. has these
words, As for the Figure of it, there is no Man hitherto, that has Published
what it was.

Mr. Gregory in his Preface, is of opinion, that King Ahaz. His Dial is like
none of ours now in use.

Godwin in His Jewish Antiqities, gives this account, The Dials in use among
the Ancient Jews differ from those in use among us; the time of the day was not
distinguished by Lines, but by Degrees. In the Dial of Achaz, the Sun went back
Degrees, not Lines; the Prophet Isaiah makes no mention of Lines.

When our Author therefore speaks of the Shadow of Lines, it is no wonder that
He misapprehends this Miracle: it is not to be doubted, but that the Miracle was
in the going back of the Sun, and not in the going back of the Shadow; the
latter being the effect of the former.

All Mathematicians agree in this, that a Dial may be made between the
Trophicks, on which the Shadow may naturally go back, And Clavius has
demonstrated that the same may be done on a Dial made without the Tropicks. In
our Elevation here in Exeter, a Plane may be fitted for such a Poler Altitude,
as will make a Retrocession of the Shadow Natural. I Remember a good
Mathematician told me, that he made a South Vertical Dial, for the Right
Honorable the late Lord Clifford, of Chudleigh in Devon; on which this
Phenomenon of the Shadows going back might be seen: the Degrees mentioned in
this Miracle, are primarily to be understood of those in Heaven, for they are
the Degrees most properly so called; therefore the Sun with the Primum-Mobile,
and the Caelestial Spears, went so far backward in their Diurnal Motion, as
made up the space of Ten Degrees in the Equinoctial Line, which answered to Two
Third parts of an Hour on the Dial of Ahaz.

The Difficulties which are suggested, are grounded on great Mistakes; as if
Equinoctial Degrees and Signs of the Zodiac were the same thing; and that the
Retrocession of the Sun, Ten Degrees in the Polar Altitude of Jerusalem, should
bring back with Him Ten Months, or Ten Signs of the Zodiac; an Error
inexcusable in the meanest Astronomer.

Of the like nature is that other, From the Miracles being visible only in the
Land of Judah, and not at Babylon. For the Acuteness of this Arch of Ten
Degrees was such, with relation even to those in Judaea; that it could not be
perceived there, unless Geometrically observed by a Quadrant or Astrolabe. And
I am certain that there is no Astronomer but must confess, that although the
Miracle consisted in the going back of the Sun; yet it was more apparent, by
the going back of the Shadow on the Dial. So that, had there not been a going
back of the Shadow, the Miracle might have been lost, and no Man might have
observed it. The Arch of the Ten Degrees in the Suns going back, being (as I
have said) so Acute, as that it was not to be perceived, but by the help of
such Instruments, which the Jews (as far as I have Read) never had.

Page 10. Others will not allow that the Flood of Noah was upon the whole
Earth, but only upon the Land of the Jews; not to destroy all Men, but only the
Jews.
ANSWER.
If there has been any Authors so absurd, as to limit the Flood to the Land of
the Jews (as Mr. Blount says there have been) they are not to be Defended.

The only Modern Author of any repute, (that I have met with) who bounds it
within narrow limits, is Isaac Vossius in His Dissertation de aetate Mundi;
where he has these Words,

Long absunt a veritate, qui existimant Noachi aetate per Vniversum orbem
propagata^ fuisse homines, qui ne Syriae quidem and Mesopotamiae fines forsan
excesserant ut vero Diluvii Inundationem ultra Orbis habitati Terminos
producamus, nulla jubet ratio: Imo prorsus absurdum ubi nulla hominum seeds,
illic etiam viguisse affectus paenae solis hominibus inflictae. That is,

They are far from truth, who think that in the days of Noah, Mankind was
propagated through the whole Earth. Whereas perhaps, there were then no Men,
but those, who lived in Syria and Mesopotamia Now that the Deluge should exceed
the Bounds of that part of the Earth, where Men were Seated, seems not Rational
to believe: Nay, it is absurd to conceive, that there should be any effects of
Punishment where there were no Offenders.

And the same Vossius, in His Cassigationes ad Scriptum Georgii Hornii, in
Defense of His Opinion, says, Non defuisse omnibus seculis, qui Mosem sic
interpretati sunt; olim sic sensit Theodorus, cumque secutus est Theodoretus;
and ex Orthodoxis qu^ssionibus que inter opera Justini Martyris extant, clare
colligi potest multas Christianas sic sensisse.

Clare quoque Josephus ostendit, non Vniversam Terram fuisse Inundatam, cum
dicit (...) Continentem in mare mutavit (...) minus est quam (...) sive Terra
habitata; illam enim in tres (...) sine Continentes pa^tiua^ur vetres, quod
notissimum. Pro toto vero Terrarum Orb, nu quam ea vox accipitur. That is,
There have been some in all Ages, that have Interpreted Moses as I have done:
Anciently of this Oppinion were Theodore, Mopsuesten, Theodoret; and it appears
out of the Orthodox Questions, among the Works of Justin Martyr, that many
Christians were of that opinion.

Josephus clearly shows the Deluge was not over the whole Earth in its utmost
Latitude; when he says, The Continent was changed into Sea. A Continent is less
than the Habitable World; which the Ancients divide into Three Continents.

And whereas Andrew Colvius objects to Vossius, The Universality of the
Expressions in Scripture, relating to the Flood.

Vossius makes this Reply: Quis nescit Vocabulum omnis passim in Sacris Literis
ambiguae esse significationis, and rarissime, absolute accipi, plurimis vero
locis restringi ad subjectum de quo agitur. Vt apud Mosem, Genesis 41. Cum famem
super Vniversam Orbem invaluisse scrib^t, non nisi de aliqua orbis portione
intelligendum esse fatentur Theologi, quid abstat igitur quo minus cum Deus
d^citu^ Inundasse Vniversam Terram; totam Terr^m habitatam, and Omma haebitatae
telluris animalia intelligamus?

Who is so Ignorant as not to know, that the Word (all) is every where in the
Holy Scriptures of an ambiguous signification, and very seldom put absolutely;
in most places it is restained to the Subject Matter: As in Genesis 41. When the
Famine is said to prevail over the whole Earth, Divines understand it of some
part of the Earth; What should hinder, but that the same may be understood in
this case of the Flood, and the destruction of all Creatures?

This is most certain from the Holy Scriptures. That all Mankind (those in the
Ark excepted) were destroyed by the Flood. For the occasion thereof is thus
expressed in Genesis. And God saw the wickedness of Man was great upon the
Earth, and that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil
continually: and the Lord said I will destroy Man whom I have created from the
face of the Earth.

And (again) all Flesh died thot moved upon the Face of the Earth; and every
Man, and every living Substance was destroyed that was upon the Face of the
Ground, both Man and Cattle; and the Creeping things, and the Fowl of Heaven,
and they were destroyed from the Earth, and Noah only remained alive, and they
that were with Him in the Ark.

So that Mr. Blount is very vain, in Mustering up the Arguments he pretends to
be brought to prove, that the Flood was only in the Land of the Jews. And
Vossius seems to be in a great Error, in limiting the same to Syria and
Mesopotamia. For as it seems strange, that in so short an Interval as that was
from Adam to the Flood; according to the ordinary Computation 1656 Years, and
not much above Two thousand according to the largest, the World should then be
fully Peopled: So it also seems no less strange, that in such a space of time
Syria and Mesopotamia should only be Peopled. Besides, it cannot be well
imagined, that so many Nations should have knowledge thereof, if it were not of
a much greater extent; For Vossius confesses that almost all Nations had
knowledge thereof, the Egyptians only excepted. Josephus a Costa Witnesses for
the Americans, and so does Laet. Martinus for the Chinese; for the knowledge
of others, Bochart in his Geogr. Sacra, and Grotius in his Annotata on the
First Book of the Truth of the Christan Religion.

And now we draw toward a Conclusion, I shall not use any other Words, then
those which are used by the most Learned Dr. Stillingfleet (now Lord Bishop of
Worcester) in his Origines Sacrae, p. 539 and 540.

I cannot see any urgent necessity from the Scripture to assert, that the Flood
did spread it self over all the surface of the Earth.

It is evident that the Flood was Universal as to Mankind, but from thence
follows no necessity at all, of asserting the Vniversallity of it, as to the
Globe of the Earth, unless it be sufficiently proved; that the whole Earth was
Peopled before the Flood: which I despair of ever seeing proved.

I grant as far as the Flood extended, all Creatures were destroyed; but I see
no reason to extend the destruction of these, beyond that compass and space of
Earth where Men Inhabited. -- All these are the Assertions of that great Man.

So that I suppose the vanity of Mr. Blount's Suggestion is apparent, by this
right the Notion of the Flood.

Page 12. I must ingeniously confess, Original Sin, was ever a difficult Pill
with me to swallow; my Reason stopping it in my throat, and not having Faith
enough to wash it down. -- And p. 15. never did any Church enjoin Penance, or
Repentance for Original Sin: wherefore it seems preposterous and unreasonable,
that any Man should be Damned for that, which no Man is bound to Repent.
ANSWER.
That Mr. Blount has not Faith to wash down Original Sin, which sticks in his
Throat, is a thing to be lamented; this truth being so plainly laid down in
Holy Writ, that no Man (who has any regard for the Scriptures) but will be
offended with him, for Writing so contemptably of this Doctrine.

The chief Argument which he brings for his opinion, taken from Penance and
Repentance is of no force But because I think it is new, I will consider it.

In the Primitive Church Penance was only imposed for Three Crimes, viz.
Idolatry, Homicide, and Adultry; which is proved at large by Morinus in his
fifth Book de Penitentia, cap. 3. out of Fathers and Councils; and he concludes
the Chapter thu -- To^^ig^^ur and tantis Testimonis freti, recte nobis videmur
Colegere, quadringentis prope annis a Christo nato, Patres haec sola tria
crimina Penitenta Cassigasse.

Trusting to so many Testimonies, we think we may truly conclude, that for
almost Four Hundred Years after our Savior, no Penance was Imposed, but only
for these Three Crimes.

Now if Mr. Blount's Negative Argument, with relation to the Practice of the
Church be valid; how many Men have lived in the World without Actual Sin? So
that his Argument proves too much, a most certain sign of its Weakness.

As for the Second part of his Argument; That no Church ever required
Repentance for Original Sin, is a mistake, and proceeds from not knowing the
Churches Practice.

In the Primitive Church, Repentance was required of all adult Persons, who
desired Baptism; which must relate to Original as well as Actual Sin.

Tertullian in his Book de Baptismo, says, Ingressuras Baptismum, orationibus
crebris, jejuniis, and geniculationibus crebris and pervigiliis orare aportet,
and confessione omnium retro delectorum. Such as intend to be Baptized, must
prepare themselves by frequent Prayers, Fastings, frequent Humiliations,
Watchings, with Confession of all their Sins.

Agreeable to this ancient Practice; our Church begins its Office of Baptism
with the Confession of Original Sin; in these Words, Dearly beloved, for as
much as all Men are conceived and born in Sin -- and our Church prays for the
Pardon of the same in these Words, We call upon thee for these Infants, that
they coming to this Holy Baptism, may receive Remission of their Sins by
spiritual Regeneration: And to the same purpose, before Tertullian, we have
Justin Martyr, in his second Apology, where he says, That those who were to be
Baptized; jejunare docentur, nobis una, cum illis, and orantibus, and
jejunantibus, (...). They are required to Fast, the Congregation also praying
and fasting together with them.

Now the Church requiring all Catechumens to renounce all Sin, the Devil, and
all his Works, to confess all their Sins, to fast and pray for God's Pardon, in
order thereunto; What is this but Repentance, as well with relation to
Original, as Actual, Sins? Besides, he promises amendment in this particular,
Never to be lead by his corrupt Affections.

Agreeable hereunto, is that in the Larger Creed in Epiphanius's Ancorate,
where Baptism is called Baptism of Repentance, and in the Creed of the Church
of Jerusalem, I believe one Baptism of Repentance for the Remission of Sins.

Page 16. It has been a Point very much disputed among several Foliticians in
the Commonwealth of Learning, Who was the real, and true, Author of the
Pentateuch. P. 17. It is evident, that the five Books of Moses were written by
another Hand after his Decease.
ANSWER.
Gregory the Great, in his Preface on Job, discoursing about the Author of that
Book, has these Words, Sen quis haec scripserit, valde supervacue quaeritur;
cum tamen auctor libri, spiritus sanctus fideliter credatur. Ipsi igitur haec
scripsit, qui haec scribendo dictavit; ipse scripsit, qui and illis operis
inspirator extitit. It is to no purpose to enquire after the Author of this
Book; it is sufficient to believe, that the Holy Ghost is the Author. He
therefore writ the Book, who dedicated the things that are written in it; he
writ it, by whose Inspiration it was written.

Hieronymus a sancta fide, p. 54. truly says, Constat Theodoretum and complures
alios patres, doctissimasque aetatis nostrae Theologes in ea esse sententia, ut
de autoribus multorum veteris instrumenti librorum nihil certi affirmari
potest, ut pluribus verbis ostendit sixtus senensis, and alis qui hoc
argumentum tractarunt. It is manifest, that Theodoret and many other Fathers,
and the most learned Divines of our Times are of Opinion, that nothing can
certainly be determined, who were the Writers of many of the Books of the Old
Testament; and this is proved at large by Sixtus Senensis, and others who have
examined and treated of this Argument.

Dr. Hammond, discoursing concerning the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews,
whether it be St. Paul or St. Luke, makes this Conclusion, All which can be
said in this Matter can amount no higher than too probable or conjectural; it
is no Matter of any Weight or Necessity, that it be defined, who the Author
was, whether St. Paul or St. Luke, a constant Companion of St. Paul's for many
Years, and the Author of two other Books of the Sacred Cannon.

I know not any thing justly to be censured in the Opinions of those Divines;
those are to be blamed that misunderstand and misapply what they have truly
written. This I am sure of, that nothing can be drawn from them, which may be
any way serviceable for Mr. Blount's design; who with a strange Boldness dares
to affirm, that Moses was not the Author of the Pentateuch.

There is no Book in the World, whose Author can be more plainly demonstrated,
than that of the Pentateuch; it can be made appear out of the Holy Scriptures;
for which, if Mr. Blount had any Reverence, he could never have fallen into so
great an Error. It can be made appear from the Consent of all Nations, and all
Authors (except some Modern ones) who make any mention of the Pentateuch;
whether Jews, or Christians, or Gentiles, they all admit it as a certain Truth,
that Moses was the Author thereof.

Our Savior, in the fifth Chapter of St. John, Ver. 46, and 47, says, Had ye
believed Moses, ye would have believed me, for he wrote of me -- But if ye
believe not his Writings how shall ye believe my Words.

Therefore Moses writ, and he writ those Books, which the Jews read as writ by
him; and no Man can deny, but those Books are the Pentateuch. It Is certain that
Christ always distinguished the Prophets from the Law of Moses, and by the Law
understood the Pentateuch. Philip said to Nathaniel, John 1. We have found him,
of whom Moses writ in the Law, of whom the Prophets have spoken, Luke 24. Ver.
27. And beginning at Moses and all the Prophets, he expounded to them in all
the Scriptures, the things concerning himself. And in the 15th of the Acts,
Ver. 21. For Moses of old time has in every City them that preach him, being
read in the Synagogues every Sabbath day.

Out of which it appears without all peradventure, that Moses writ the Law,; by
which Word, Philo Judaeus and Josephus say, the whole Pentateuch is meant. And
that the Modern Jews understand the Word Law, in the same manner, we have the
Authority of Leo Modena, a Rabbi of Venice, in his History of the present Jews
throughout the World, in which Book, p. 247. he has these Words:

We shall here in the last place, glve the Reader a View of the Thirteen
Articles of their Belief, as it is delivered by Rabbi, Moses Egyptus, in his
Exposition upon the Miscna in Sanedim, cap. Helech; which Articles are
generally believed by all Jews without contra: diction.

The Seventh Article of their Faith is, That Moses was the greatest Prophet
that ever has been; and that he was endued with a different and higher Degree
of Prophecy, than any other.

The Eighth is, That the Law which was given by Moses was wholly dictated by
God; and that Moses put not one Syllable in of himself.

What this Law is, appears out of the first Page of that History, among the
Rites which are observed by all the Jews, and he says, are the Precepts of the
Written Law: Namely, such as are contained in the Pentateuch, or five Books of
Moses, which are in all, Six hundred and thirteen in Number; that is to say,
Two hundred forty eight affirmative, and Three hundred sixty five negative. And
these they call Mizuoth de Oraita; that is to say, Precepts of the Law.

From hence we may conclude without all manner of doubt, that by the Word Law,
(in our Savior's Speech, and in those other places of Scripture which I have
cited) the whole Pentateuch is understood.

The Testimony which is brought from the Consent of all Nations, is so fully
explicated and declared by Huetius, that none can doubt of the Truth thereof;
and to whom I had rather refer my Reader, then here to transcribe him.
Especially, considering I have so fully proved the same from the Holy
Scriptures, and Indisputable Authority.

I shall only add two or three Observations hereunto belonging, and conclude
this Point.

The First Observation is, that neither Julian nor Porphiry, nor any of the
most inveterate Enemies of the Christian or Jewish Faith, did ever make it a
Question, whether Moses was the Author of the Pentateuch. The first that ever
started those Objections against it, and are now so much valued, was one
Abenezra a Jew; who, although he did not dare to be so bold faced, as to deny
openly so important a Truth: yet, by the Difficulties he proposed, and by the
manner of his proposing them, (as Mr. Blount does his Oracles) he plainly
enough insinuates to an intelligent Reader, that his design was no other, than
to overthrow the Authority of the Pentateuch; out of his Storehouse it is, that
Hobbs, Spinosa, and other such Politicians in Mr. Blount's Commonwealth of
Learning, have furnished themselves with Objections, such as they are, and
which have been often answered.

My Second Observation is, That not only Philo Judaeus, Josephus, and all
others, as well Ancient and Modern Jews, did understand by the Law, the whole
Pentateuch; but also the Gentiles did understand it in the same manner: and
consequently it cannot be imagined, that the Law mentioned by our Lord should
be taken in a different Sense.

The Author I shall cite for Proof hereof, is Dionysius Longinus, in his Book,
(...) Sect 7. (...).

So the Legislator of the Jews, no common Person, when he declares and makes
known the Power of his God, according to his Majesty, presently in the
beginning of his Laws, he tells us, that God said, Let there be Light, and it
was so.

Longinus in this place, calls the beginning of Genesis, the beginning of
Moses's Laws. And if Genesis comes under that Denomination, I think no question
can be made of the other Books, nor of the true Sense of those places by me
brought out of the New Testament.

My Last Observation is, That one of the great Proofs of revealed Religion
depends on the Antiquity and Verity of the Mosaic Writings, if these Books were
not written by Moses, a wide Gate would be opened for Libertines and Deists to
redicule them, and to expose them for Fables. Preadamitism and the Eternity of
the World, might be received as uncontrollable Doctrines; and Christian
Religion deprived of the Support of those Writings, to which our Lord was
pleased to make an Appeal.

So that is is no wonder that Mr. Blount should be so positive, and endeavor
with such Confidence to subvert these Writings, by affirming, That it is
evident that Moses was not the Author of them. He well knowing, that his
pretended Oracles of Reason will be accounted Scandalous and False, as long as
this part of Holy Scriptures, the Mosaic Writings, can be defended.

SECT. II. Of PARADISE.
IN this Section, the Mosaic History of the Creation is wickedly ridiculed.
What Ireneus says of some of the Ancient Heresies, viz. That the very naming of
them is a sufficient Refutation; the same may be said of some Passages I shall
here Transcribe.

Page 25. There is a Dialogue between the Serpent and Eve: It happened upon a
time, that Eve sitting solitary under a Tree, without her Husband, there came
to her a Serpent or Adder, which, I know not by what Means or Power, civilly
accosted the Woman, in these Words, or to this Purpose.

All hail most fair One, What are you doing so solitary and serious under this
Shade?

Page 26. Eve says, Let me see, had I best use it, or no? What can be more
beautiful than this Apple? How sweetly it smells? but it may be, it tastes ill.

Serpent. If it tastes ill, throw it away, and say I am a great Liar.

Eve. Well, I Will try; thou have not deceived me. Give me one that I may carry
it to my Husband.

Serpent. Well thought on, here is another for you; go to your Husband with it.
Farewell young Woman.

Page 27. God says to the Serpent; Hereafter vile Beast, instead of eating
Apples, thou shall lick the Dust of the Earth; and as for you, Mistress
Curious, in sorrow shall you bring forth Children.

Page 33. It perplexes me, how out of one Rib, the whole Mass of a Woman's Body
could be built, for a Rib does not equal the hundredth, perhaps not the
thousandth Part of an entire Body.

Page 44. The Text says, They sewed Fig Leaves together, and therewith made
themselves Aprons. From whence you may deduce the Original of the Tailors
Trade; But where had they Needles, and where their Thread, the very first Day
of their Creation, since the Th^ead-makers Art was not yet found out, nor yet
the Art of Working in Iron.

ANSWER.
In this Section are many such Queries; but these are more then sufficient to
make any Man Nauseate. For what Man that has but a M^^e of Piety, will not be
concerned to read such Expressions? to read the Holy Oracles of God to be thus
droll'd on, by these pretended ones? and this sacred Book of God to be thus
exposed by a scurrilous Libel.

Our Author often cites the Canons of the Church when they serve his Turn. Here
he mentions none; and I am certain there is good Reason for it: for not to
mention ancient Canons, which he must necessarily know, condemns this Practice.
The Council of Trent condemns it, and in Session 4th. condemns them who shall
convert and wrest the Words of Holy Scripture, to Profaneness, Scurrilousness,
Fabulousness, Flatteries, Distractions, Superstitions, or too scurrilous Libels.

The first Council of Millain declares, That their Rashness is very wicked, who
absue the Words or Sentences of Holy Scripture, to Flattery, Contumely,
Superstition, Impiety, or to any profane Purposes; and that the Bishops are to
punish such Offenders according to the holy Canons.

So that as far as I know, this folly of our Author in sporting thus with Holy
Scripture, is condemned by all Christians, of any particular Denomination in
the whole World.

What is material, and worthy of Consideration in this Section, we will now
examine.

Page 36. These are the Words of Moses; There comes a River out of Eden to
water the Garden, and from thence it divides it self into four Branches; the
Name of the first is Pishon, etc. Genesis 2. Ver. 10. Whereby it is apparent, that
either in the Entrance or Exit of the Garden, there were four Rivers, and that
those four Rivers did proceed from one and the same Fountainhead in Eden; Now
pray tell me in what part of the Earth, is this Country of Eden, where Four
Rivers arise from one and the same Spring?

ANSWER.
That there may be a plain and a full Solution of the difficulties, the Oracle
proposes both in this Paragaph, and in the other, which shall be examined in
this Section.

I shall premise a Consideration or Two, of good use in the Matters under
Debate.

The First Consideration shall be of the Opinions of the Ancient Jews and
Christians, as to this Book of Genesis.

The Second shall be of the great alterations that have happened to many places
of the Earth since the Creation: Out of which it will appear, that many places
then well known, may now be wholly unknown to us.

Lastly, I shall make a brief Reply to what the Oracle has here declared.

The First Consideration relating to the Ancient Jews, is that they always
looked on the Book Genesis, as a Book hard to be understood; yet to contain a
literal Sense.

St. Jerome in his Preface to his Commentaries on Ezechiel, says, Nisi quis apud
eos aetatem Sacerdotalis Ministerii; id est, tricesimum annum implever it,
principium Geneseos legere non permittitur. Unless a Man had attained to the
Year of the Sacerdotal Ministry, which is the Thirtieth Year complete, they
were not permitted to Read the beginning of Genesis; Which Practice appears
also out of the Prologue Galeat, and from Origin on the Canticles: we are told
by both, that the Jewish Doctors forbid these Four things (because of their
Difficulty and Profoundness) to be read by any, but such as attained to Thirty
Years of Age; and those were, the Three First Chapters of Genesis, the
beginning and end of the Prophet Ezechiel, and the Book of Canticles: This
Decree of the Jewish Doctors is also mentioned by Prosper Aquitanicus, lib. 3.
de Vita Contemplativa, c. 6. Where he gives us a good Account thereof; and
contends for the literal Sense.

Now although they account this Book obscure; yet I do not find, that any of the
Ancient Jews excluded a literal Sense, Philo Judaeus excepted, whose Arguments
are very weak, and unbecoming so great an Author.

It was a known rule among the Rabbis, that Scripture falls not in with the
Midrash, i. e. The Scriptures are to be Interpreted in a literal Sense. And
Buxtorf de punct. Antique. tells us, That when the Allegorical or Cabalistick
Sense is contrary to the Literal, the Cabalistick is to be rejected; neither
must we think otherwise of the Modern Jews, if they will be consentaneous to
themselves, and the Eighth Article of their Creed.

Out of which it necessarily follows, that although the Jews allowed an
Allegorical Sense, yet they never allowed any which interfered with the Literal.

If we consult the Ancient Christians, we shall find; that they were careful to
preserve the Literal Sense of Genesis. Epiphanius in Ancorato, c. 57. (...),
etc. If there be no Literal and Sensible Paradise, then there is no Fountain,
no River, no Pison, no Gihon, no Tigris, no Euphrates, no Fruit, no Leaves, no
Adam, no eating the Forbiden Fruit; but the whole truth is a Fable, and nothing
but Allegory: And c. 54. of the same Ancorate, he calls Origin ((...)) a
furious Mad Man, for his obtruding on the World Allegory instead of a Literal
Truth.

St. Jerome in his Comentaries on Daniel, c. 10. Writing something with relation
to the Mosaical Creation, seems to be much concerned, in these Words, Eorum
deliramenta conticescant, qui umbras and imagines in veritate quaerentes, ipsam
conantur subvertere veritatem; ut flumina and Arbores and Paradisum putent
allegoriae legibus se debere subruere. Let their follies be gone, who searching
after shadows and Images in the Truth, endeavor the subversion of the Truth it
self; and think to bring Trees, Rivers, and Paradise it self, under their Rules
of Allegory.

St. Austin lib. 8. de Genesi ad literam, cap. 1. Having delivered His opinion,
that some things in Genesis may admit (as he calls it) a Spiritual Sense, --
does then in general declare, -- Narratio in his Libris, non genus locutionis
figuratarum rerum est, sicut in cantico canticorum; sed omnino gestarum est
sicut in Regnorum libris and hujuscemodi Ceteris. The account which we have in
the Book of Genesis is not Allegorical or Figurative, as in the Book of
Canticles, but it is Historical and Literal, as in the Books of the Kings, and
such like Historical Books.

As to the Second Consideration, which relates to the great Changes which have
happened to the Surface of the Earth; I need not say much, since I think it is
taken for granted by all, that have any acquaintance with History, or
Geography. We Read in Plato's Timaeus, of a Discourse between the Egyptian
Priests and Solon, about Six Hundred Years before our Savior: Solon is told
there, that of old Time without the Streights of Gibraltar, there was a very
great Island called Atlantis, bigger then Asia and Africa put together, and the
said Island was afterward by a great Inundation and Earthquake, in one Day and
Night wholly overwhelmed and drowned in the Sea.

Some of the Ancients, as Strato, quoted by Strabo in the first Book of his
Geography, say, that the fretum gaditanum or Straight of Gibraltar was forcibly
broken open by the Sea: The same they affirm of the Thracian Bosphorus and
Hellespont, that the Rivers filling up the Euxine Sea, forced a Passage that
way, where there was none before; of the like nature is that account of the
Samothracians mentioned by Diadorus Siculus.

The River Arnus in Tuscany, now falls into the Sea, Six Miles below Piza:
Whereby it it appears (says Dr. Hakewel) that the Land has gained much upon
the Sea in that Coast, for that Strabo in his time reports, it was but Twenty
Furlongs (that is but Two Miles and a half) distant from the Sea.

Varenius Conjectures, That all China (which is as bigg as all Europe) or a
great part of it, was raised Originally from the Sea; for that great and
impetuous River called the Yellow or Saffron River, coming out of Tartary, and
very often overflowing the Country of China, is said to contain in it so much
Earth and Sand, as make up a Third part of its Waters; the evenness and level
Superficies of the whole Country of China renders this conjectture the more
probable, as that great Philosopher Mr. Ray, is of opinion in the 5th. Chapter
of the Consequences of the Deluge.

I shall here add, what we find to this purpose, in that excellent Geographer
Maginus, in his Preface; and in Ocellus Lucanus. Certum est, (says Maginus)
Insignes variationes in terrae partibus continuo evenire propter aquarum
Inundationes; marium praeruptiones ac recessus etenim non solum Regiones,
urbis, oppida, flumina, and alia hujusmodi sua nomina pro tempore mutant,
amissis prorsus prioribus; Verum etiam and fines ipsarum Regionum variantur,
and urbes oppidaque senectute delentur. Mare in uno loco Continentem Terrae
dilatat, in alio coarctat; and flumina quandoque augescunt, quandoque minuuntur
quandoque cursus variant, quandoque etiam prorsus deficiunt sic quoque fontes,
stagna, paludes alibi exiccaentur, alibi vero procreantur.

It Is certain there are great variations on the Surface of the Earth, which
continually happen by Inundations, the breaking in and recess of the Sea. Nay,
not only Countries, Citys, Towns, Rivers, and the like, change their Names, but
also Limits and Bounds; the Sea in one place gains on the Land, in another
place it loses. Rivers sometimes grow, sometimes lessen; sometimes change
their Channel, sometimes wholly fail: Fountains, great standing Waters and
Marshes in some places are dried up, and appear in other places, where they
never were before.

Ocellus Lucanus, (who is an Author much valued by Mr. Blount) p. 21^. of the
Oracles, has these Words, N^w corruptions and violent alterations are made
according to the parts of the Earth; sometimes by the overflowing of the Sea:
Sometimes with the dilating and parting of the Earth by Winds and Waters
imprisoned in the Bowels thereof; but an Universal corruption of the Earth
never has been, nor ever shall be. Now although Ocellus Lucanus be false in his
Conclusion, yet he is right in his Premises.

Of the truth of this Cosideration, Mr. Blount himself seems to be convinced,
in page 36. where he has these Words, -- But to end all these difficulties or
Controversies concerning the Originals and Channels of the Rivers that watered
Paradise, you will perhaps at last say, that the Springs as well as the courses
of Rivers have been changed by the Universal Deluge, and that we cannot
therefore be now certain where it was that they formerly broke out of the
Earth, and what Countries they past through. For my part, I am much of your
Opinion, provided you confess there happened in the Deluge such a Fraction and
disruption of the Earth, as we suppose there did. --

This Supposition is that of the late Theory of the Earth, which we can by no
means grant, and which the Authors before Cited never Dreamed of.

And now I return a brief solution to the difficulties proposed page 36. He
would be told in what part of the Earth this Country of Eden is, where Four
Rivers arise from one and the same Spring?

This is indeed a difficult Question, and not to be Solved: But then I must ask
him another Question, of no less difficulty; and that is, in what place of
Genesis Moses said this? In the whole History of the Creation, no such thing is
affirmed by Moses.

Huet Bishop of Soissons, in his Learned Treatise of the Situation of Paradise,
p. 44. returns this Answer, if by these Words, and a River went out of Eden to
water the Garden; Moses had meant, that this River sprung out of the Earth in
Eden, it is evident his Narative had been defective, and to make this complete,
it should have been in these Words, and a River had its spring in the Land of
Eden, from whence it run along to water the Garden.

And p. 48. the same Learned Bishop says, Moses has marked it plainly enough,
that a River went out of Eden to water the Garden; for these words gives us to
understand that there was but one River in the Garden, and in Eden, and
Consequently that the division did not happen there.

So that the Idea Mr. Blount has conceived of Paradise, seems to be as Gross
as that of Mahomet's; who when he entered into these Particulars, affirmed, that
the first River with which Paradise was watered, was of pure Water, the second
of Milk, the third of Wine, and the fourth of Honey.

The same great Prelate, Page 53. says, Moses did not say, whether the Division
of the River happened above or below Paradise, or whether it happen far or
near. He denoted it plainly enough, when he named the four Channels or Rivers
which grew from that Division. Those four Rivers were so well known in the
Places where Moses then was, and to those to whom he wrote, that it was enough
to name them, that they might be known. Yet he was not contented with it; and
as if he had foreseen that future Ages and far Nations, who were also concerned
in the Design of this Work, might want some clearing of this Matter, He gave so
evident Tokens to make those Rivers known, that no Man can mistake them but for
want of Heed. And for the further satisfaction of the Reader, I had rather
refer him to the Author before cited, than here to transcribe him.

Out of all which it is evident, what great Injury he has done to the Truth, by
affirming, that it is apparent in the Book of Genesis, that the four Rivers
proceeded from one and the same Fountainhead in Eden: Whereas, there is not
the least Footstep of any such thing in the Divine History. It Is evident what
Wrong he has done to some unwary Readers, by deceiving of them, and misleading
them, in a thing of so great Moment, Lastly, It Is evident of what Frame and
Make of Mind Mr. Blount was, who would not stick at any Methods, right or
wrong, to obtain his Point against Moses. Whose History of the Creation,
although Origin (in his Commentaries, generally corrupted and depraved) says,
it is allegorically to be understood; yet in his Third excellent Book against
Celsus, which all the World acknowledges to be Genuine, he has this Passage
worthy of Remark.

(...).

Moses was a very pious Man, one endued with the Divine Spirit, and wrote his
History with Truth and Fidelity.

Page 49. I am angry with Celsus, who calls this Account an old Wifes Fable;
upon which Origin replies very well by way of Answer, (...). That these things
were spoken in a figurative Sense. However, Celsus himself does in what
follows, acknowledge, that the fairest Interpreters, both among the Jews and
Christians, were ashamed of the literal Sense, and therefore accommodated them
to Allegories.

ANSWER.
No Man who has read Mr. Blount's Oracles can believe him, when he says, he is
angry with Celsus, for exposing and ridiculing Moses's Narration.

Origin in his Answer observes, that Celsus speaks in this place, neither of
Paradise nor of Eden, nor of the Tree of Life, nor of that of Good and Evil;
but that he calls Moses's Account of the Serpent, an Old Wifes Fable.

To which Origin answers, (...), (a word omitted by Mr. Blount) (...); a Man
may not be thought immodest, that conjectures there may be something of Figure.
Something that may move the Reader to seek for some considerable Matter under a
figurative Expression.

It is evident that Celsus was wont often to say, that the more modest Jews and
Christians in these Difficulties, had Recourse to Allegory; and to avoid Shame
renounced the Letter.

But Origin says, this was a Calumny, and made use of on purpose by Celsus,
(...), to bring forth Jews and Christians into Hatred and Contempt.

SECT. III. Concerning the Original of Things.
MR. Blount in this Section, discourses of the Center of the World, of the
Phaenomena's of the Heavens, of the Company of the erring and fixed Stars, the
Original of the Ocean; and many such like Subjects of Philosophical
Consideration; which, because they are things purely speculative, and may be
disputed pro and con in infinitum, I shall pass them over, and leave them to be
considered on by the Reader at his leisure.

Page 56. Many Fathers of the Christian Church were of Opinion, that before the
Earth or Moses 's World, there had been Angels for many Ages unknown to us.
ANSWER.
Mr. Blount has enumerated many Fathers, who were of Opinion, that before the
Earth was made, Angels had a Being: And yet every one knows, that as many
Fathers can be produced for the contrary Opinion. I know no general Council
has concerned it self in this Controversy; that of the Lateran, under Innocent
the Third (which defines the Creation of the Angelical, as well as Mundane
Substances in the beginnig of Time) is not accounted general by many learned
Persons, both of the Pontifician and Protestant Communion. From whence it
follows, that this is a Matter of Opinion, and not an Article of Religion. It Is
only required of us to believe that the Angels were created by God, and that
they are not Coeternal with him; which is the true Reason of this Difference
among the Fathers.

St. Austin, lib. 11. De Civitate Dei, c. 32. says, proinde ut volet
unusquisque accipiat -- dum a regula fidei non aberrat ut angelos sanctos, in
sublimibus coeli sedibus, non quidem Deo Coaeternos nemo ambigat. As to this
Matter which relates to the Creation of Angels, whether before or after the
Creation of the visible World, let every Man enjoy his own Opinion, only take
care you do not err from the Rule of Faith, and think that the holy Angels now
in the heavenly Places, are Coeternal with God.

Sixtus Senensis (to whom Mr. Blount seems to be beholding, although he names
him not) Lib. 5. Annot. 5. tells as, that the learned Father Theodoret was of
St. Austin's Opinion, having disputed this Point against St. Bazil; and that
Theodoret concludes, that if you grant that the Angels were created, it matters
not whether before or after the Mosaic Creation; verbum pietatis non offendet;
he will violate no Rule of Faith.

St. Jerome in his Epist. ad Cyp. thinks that in the Mosaic History of the
Creation, there is no express Mention of the Creation of Angels, because the
common illiterate People, were not so capable as to apprehend their Natures.

Perenius on Genesis propounds this Question, Why Moses did not mention the
Creation of Metals and Minerals, as well as that of Plants and Herbs?

To which he gives this Answer; Because Metals and Minerals are hid in the
Bowels of the Earth, and not so commonly known as Plants and Herbs; and that
Moses did not design to report all things in Particular, but first in General,
to relate that all things in the Beginning were Created by God, whether in
Heaven or Earth: and in Particular, such things as were most common and evident
to all Men.

Thomas Aquinas has also remarked, That in Moses 's Writings we have no
mention of the Creation of the Air, for that the same not being visible, it was
difficult to have a right Notion of that Body.

Yet methinks if Men have no mind to be contentious, there is reason to
believe, that the Angels were not created before the Heavens, the place of
their Residence and Abode.

The Jews will tell us, that Moses understood these Words of his; especially of
Angels, when he said of God. In the Beginning he created the Heavens. And the
Catechism of the Council of Trent, in its Exposition of the Articles of the
Creed, lays down the same Opinion; where it says, Coeli and terrae nomine,
quicquid Coelum and terra complectitur intelligendum est. Moses under the
general Terms of Heaven and Earth, comprehended all things in both; Angels, as
well as other Beings.

Page 54. We can evince the same by the sacred Oracles and Authorities of the
Fathers, as well as by Reason and Arguments, the Fall of the Angels was before
the Creation of the World.
ANSWER.
Mr. Blount may evince from his own Oracles, that the Angels fell before the
Creation of the World; but to prove it from the sacred Oracles, he will find it
difficult.

As to the Fathers, I have not observed above Two, who speak clearly as to this
Matter, and they are, St. Cyprian and Arnoldus Bonae Vallis. St. Cyprian in his
Book, De Zelo and Livore, has these Expressions, Diabolus inter initia statim
mundi, and perit primus, and perdidit. Ille Deo carus, and acceptus postquam
hominem ad imaginem Dei factum conspexit in Zelum malevolo livore prorupit. Et
dum stimulante livore, homini gratiam datae immortalitatis eripit, ipse quoque
id quod prius fuerat amisit. St. Cyprian is very plain, that the Devil did not
fall before the Creation. He says, the Devil in the beginning of the World
perished himself, and destroyed Man. He who was dear to God, and accepted by
him, after he saw Man was made in the Image of God, he was moved with great
Envy and Malevolence, and being stirred up by these Affections, robs Man of the
Grace and Immmortality, and himself lost that which he enjoyed before.

Some think that St. Cyprian contradicts himself, for as much as he writes in
the Book De Cardinalibus Christi operibus (which goes under his Name) ante hoc
temporale initium ipse in principio, imo ipse principium existens apud Deum
ante hominis conditionem superbientis Diaboli ruinam videt and affectatae
dominationis ambitionem. Where writing concerning our Lord, he says, Before the
Beginning of this World he was in the Beginning; nay, he was the Beginning
himself, being with God before Man was created; he saw the ruin of the Devil,
and of the Domination he affected.

It must be confessed that this place comes home, and is to the purpose. But then
it must be confessed, that not St. Cyprian, but Arnaldus, Abbot of Bonae Vallis,
was Author of those Books.

Bellarmine de Scriptoribus Ecclesiasticis, proves St. Cyprian could not be the
Author of that Book; because he affirms, Diabolum cecidisse de coelo ante
hominis creationem, cujus sententiae contrarium habet Cyprianus in Tractatu de
Zelo and Livore. That the Devil fell from Heaven before Man was created;
whereas St. Cyprian teaches the contrary in his Book, De Zelo and Livore.

Which Observation of Bellarmine is allowed of by Dalle in his Book, De Libris
suppositis Dionysio and Ignatio, p. 468.

Dr. Thomas James, in his Treatise of the Corruption of Fathers, informs us,
That in an ancient Manuscript in All Souls Library, the Author of this Book is
of much later Date, written by one that lived in St. Bernard's time, to whom he
wrote one or two Epistles, and that he was called Arnoldus Bonae villacensis.

We learn also from the foresaid Manuscript, that the Book was Dedicated not
unto Cornelius the Pope, who lived Anno. 254. but unto Adrian the Pope, the
Fourth of that Name, who was created Pope Anno. 1154. and succeeded Eugenius
the Third, to whom Bernard wrote his Books of Consideration. And agreeable
hereunto is Mr. Dalle, who in his Book before cited acquaints us, that the same
is to be found in a Manuscript in the French King's Library.

So that Mr. Blount's Authority from the Fathers, is reduced only to One that
delivers his Mind plainly, and he a very late one too, who lived some hundreds
of Years after St. Cyprian.

And now we will see his Reason and Arguments.

He says, p. 58, and 59, Really it is not at all probable, that the most
excellent Creatures were made of so frail a Nature, as that the very day of
their Birth they should fall into Misery and Evil.

Where we see, that after all those Brags of Sacred Oracles, and Authority of
Fathers, our Author with all his Reason and Arguments is forced to conclude
with probability.

Page 59. The Second Nicene Council, would have this Doctrine proposed out of
the Book of John Bishop of Thessalonica to be confirmed, these are the Words,
concerning the Angels, Archangels, and their Powers, to which I also join our
own Souls; this is the Opinion of the Catholick-Church; that they are, it is
true, intelligible, yet not wholly incorporeal and invisible.
ANSWER.
Supposing that it were true (as it is not) what Mr. Blount has delivered
concerning the Second Nicene Council 's Confirming the Opinion of John Bishop
of Thessalonica; yet it cannot be concluded that this was the Opinion of the
Catholick-Church, as to the Corporiety of Angels and Souls.

Who knows not that the Conditions commonly required to make a General Council
which (only can Represent the Catholick-Church) were wanting to the Second
Nicene?

Petrus de Marca, lib. 2. de Concordia c. 17. gives us this Account, -- Secunda
Synodus Nicaena, ab Ecclesia Gallicana in Concilio Francofordiensi repudiata
est; The Gallicane Church Assembled in the Council of Francford has rejected
the Second Nicene Council: And he subjoyns this excellent Reason, Secundam
Synodum Nicenam Oecumedicam dici posse negarunt, quod occidentis provinciae per
Epistolas more Ecclesiastico sententiam rogatae non fuissent. The Second Nicene
Synod was denied by them to be Ecumenical because no regard was had to the
Provinces of the Western Churches in order to their consent, according to the
Custom received in the Church.

And the same De Marca, lib. 6. c. 25. adds; In Synodo Francofordiensi, --
agitatum an Secunda Synodus Nicene recipienda foret tanquam septima Synodus
oecumenica -- decretum autem in Canone Secundo, Synodum illam repudiandam esse
and damnandam. In the Synod held at Fracford it was Debated whether the Second
Nicene Synod should be received, as the Seventh General Council -- but it was
Decreed in the Second Canon, that it should be rejected and Condemned.

Agreeable hereunto is that of Launey, some time a most Learned Doctor of the
Sorbon, in his Epistles, Par. 8. Epist. 11. Antiquiores and Gallia Scriptores
Nicaenam Secundam Vniversalibus non accensent conciliis. The more Ancient
French Writers do not enumerate the Second Nicene Council, among those which
they account Universal: And Launey then descends to Particulars, proving the
same by the Ancient French Annals and many Historians.

If we consult the Church here in Britain in those times, we shall find that
they Rejected it also.

Simeon Dunelmensis an Ancient and good English Historian, in his Book de
Gestis regum Anglorum ad annum 792 says, That Charles King of France seut a
Synodal Book into Britain which he received from Constantinople, in which Book
were contained the Decrees of the Second Nicene Council. Now, how our Church in
those days was pleased, or rather displeased therewith, the fame Dunelmensis
tells us.

In quo Libro, hu, proh Dolor! Multa inconvenientia, and verae fidei contraria
reperiunt, maxim quod ibidem confirmatum imagines adorare debere, quod omnino
Ecclesia Dei execratur. In which Book, alas! Many inconvenient things were
found, and repugnant to the true Faith; especially that which relates to the
Worship of Images, which the Church of God does utterly abominate. This
Testimony is the more to be regarded, for that it appears from hence, that in
those days our Church abhorred Image Worship.

This Testimony is Recorded also by Roger Hoveden, Matthew Westminster, and
other our Ancient and best Historians: And so much confounded the Romanists in
the beginning of the Reformation, that their great Advocate Harpsfield could
make no other Reply, but that it was commentitia and insulsa fabula, a foolish,
and an invented Fable, and that it was not Written by Simeon Dunelmensis or
Matthew Westminster (He makes no mention of Roger Hoveden, nor of the
Manuscript History of Rochester in the Cottonian Bibliothec) whereas the same
is now to be found in the Manuscript of Dunelmensis in Bennet College Library
in Cambridge: And those who have been conversant in those things, assure us
that the same is to be seen in diverse Manuscripts of Matthew Westminster and
Hoveden, and that all old and uncorrupted Copies testify the same thing. Of
what Quallity Dunelmensis was, I need not say much, since the Preface to the
December Scriptures, is very full to this purpose; I shall only here say, that he
is accounted one of our best Historians, by the Pontifician and Reformed
Parties. He was Chantour of the Church of Saint Cuthberts in Durham, and
continued his History to the Days of King Henry the First.

But, Supposing that this Synod was Universal, (or that which is all one) that
the Opinion of the Catholick-Church might be gathered from it, as touching the
Corporiety of Angels and Souls, Does it appear that such was the definition of
that Synod in any of its Decrees? Or, does it appear that they Confirmed the
Opinion of John Bishop of Thessalonica in this Point? No certainly, nothing
less.

And for this we appeal to Edmund Rich^r, a Doctor of the Sorbon, in his
Learned History of General Councils, in his First Book p. 655. where we Read,
-- Angelos and animas esse Corporeas nequaquam approbavit Synodus, sed fuit
peculiaris opinio Episcopi Thessalonicensis; -- The Second Nicene Synod did not
approve of the Doctrine of the Corporiety of Angels or Souls, but it was the
peculiar and private opinion of the Bishop of Thessalonica. And the same
Richer, farther adds, -- Accedit in Synodis, non attendi oportere ad ea quae
privatus aliquis narrat, sed ad solam Synodi definitionem, ut alias observatum
est.

Besides, in Reading Councils, little regard is to be had to what a private
Doctor or Bishop may declare or say, we ought only to look to the Decree or
Definition of the Synod. And this (says Richer) I have Observed in another
Place.

And now I may, without doing any wrong, Conclude; that Mr. Blount has Read
the Councils very negligently, and makes use of them at Second Hand. The same
may be said of the Fathers he quotes. He has injuriously imputed Heresy to the
Catholic Church; and has fastened an untruth on the Second Council of Nice.

Page 73. St. Austin Would have all things that are said to be the Work of Six
Days, to have been Created in one moment, although Moses divided them into Classes
and different times, that he might the better help the Imagination of the
People, to Comprehend the First Originals of things. God Almighty did in my
Opinion Create out of nothing in one Moment, and by one individual Act, all
Substances, whether Intellectual or C^^^^^al; nor did St. Austin in that come
wide of (...).
ANSWER.
I Remember that I have Read somwhere in Maldenate, that Gregory Nazianzen
Compares Heretics in Reading the Fathers, to Flies; if they happen on any
place that is sound they pass it over, if putrid or rotten, there they suck.

It must be Confessed, that St. Austin was here, in a mistake, and that in this
Point he came wide of the mark, to use Mr. Blount's expression. St. Austin was
indeed of this Opinion in lib. 5. de Genesi ad literam, and lib. 6. c. 5. but
the occasion of his mistake was Reading the Book of Ecclesiasticus in Latin.
And for the satisfaction of my Reader, I shall cite a place out of Gerhard
Vossius in his Pars altera de Creatione thesis. 16. Where he takes notice of
this Mistake of St. Austins, and the occasion of it; and from whom we have a
satisfactory Answer.

Hoc Siracidae illo Ecclesiastici 18. adstrui posse censent. Qui vivit in
aeternum creavit omnia simul, sed praeterquam quod apocrypha canonicis opponi
non debent, Graece est non (...), sed (...), hoc est pariter: ut sententia sit,
omnia unum agnoscere creatorem sive communiter, ut in complutensi, transfertur,
hoc est, communi lege, ut Junius vertit, and accipi debere sequentia inibi
ostendunt: quod si vidisset Augustinus, non tantoper^ (...) eo loco torsisset
in Genesi ad literam, lib. 5. (...) lib. 6. c. 5.

By that place of Sirac^des, in the 18th. of Ecclesiasticus, some think it may
be proved, That God created all things not in any Intervals of time, but in one
and the same Instant. The place of Ecclesiasticus is commonly, but falsely
translated. -- He that lives for ever, created all things together, or at
once, -- but that besides Apoeryphal writings are not to be opposed to
Canonical Scripture: The Greek has another meaning; for in Greek the sense is
-- He that lives for ever, has created all things in like manner. So that the
sentence in Ecclesiasticus is, All things in like manner have one and the same
Creator. Thus it is translated in the Complutensian Bible: or else, as Junius
has translated it, All things were created after the same method, as it were
by a common Law. And this is the genuine sense of the place, as the following
places in Ecclesiasticus will convince us: Which if St. Austin had seen, he had
not been misled, nor had been put to so much trouble by this place.

No Man can have a greater deference for St. Austin, than my self; yet I must
confess, that both those great Men, and the Governor of the African Churches,
were but meanly skilled in the Greek. St. Austin confesses the same in his 8th.
Epistle to St. Jerome: Petimus ergo and nobiscum petit omnis Africanarum
Ecclesiarum studiosa societas, ut interpretandis eorum libris, qui Graece
Scripturas nostras quam optime tractaverunt, curam atque operam impendere non
graveris: We desire, and together with us desires all the Studious Society of
the African Churches, that he would not think it burthensom to bestow some
pains in interpreting those Books which were written in Greek upon the holy
Scriptures. And Father Simon in his Critical History on the Old Testament, Book
3. says, That Austin did not understand Greek well enough to read the Greek
Fathers Commentaries upon the Bible; and therefore He desired St. Jerome to
translate them into Latin, that he might read them.

Yet it must be granted. That although he was no Critic, He had yet some skill
in that Language; for he makes sometimes mention of the Greek Codes, as Ep. 59.
and in his Retractations: but his skill therein was so ordinary, as it often
occasioned some mistakes. Upon the whole, it is very surprising, that such a
Critic in the Greek, as our Deist would be thought to be; when He saw St.
Austin's slip (as He must unavoidably observe it, if he read Him of these
matters) should yet make use of His Authority: it being certain, that the false
Latin translation misguided that great Father. All the Question seems to be
about the particular matter of the Creation, when God was pleased to make the
World. And that this may be a thing of some difficulty, I think few men will
deny that have well considered it. I am sure Gassendus in his Physics, was of
this opinion, when he says, Majus est mundi opus, quam ut assequi men's humana
illius molitionem possit. The creation of the World is so great a work, that a
Man can scarce comprehend it after a diligent intention. And I have often
thought that this of Gassendus is not much abhorrent from that of Solomon,
Ecclesiastes 8th. ver. 16. and 17. When I applied my heart to Wisdom, and to
see the business that is done upon the earth (for also there is that neither
day nor night sees sleep with his eyes) ver. 17. Then I beheld all the work of
God, that a Man cannot find out the work that is done under the Sun: because
though a man labor to seek it out, yea further, though a wise man think to know
it, yet shall he not be able to find it. Maimonides (who was in great
Reputation among the Jews) determines the Question thus, Omnia simul creata
aberant, and postea successive invicem separata; all things were created at
once, and afterward divided into separate Classes and Times.

However it be, it is certain St. Austin had a firm Veneration for the Mosaic
History; he never ridiculed it, as our Author does; and if he mistook in the
Interpretation of a place of Genesis, he may be excused, who submitted himself
to the Rule of Faith, and constantly believed that the World had a Beginning.

And although our Author in this place thinks St. Austin came not wide of the
Mark, yet I suppose he will not thank him for what he says in his 43d Chaprer
of Heresies, where he accounts the Origenists for Heretics, for interpreting
Paradise Allegorically, and not according to the Letter.

SECT. IV. Of the Modern Brachmans.
PAGE 77. Having spoken already of the Modern Brachmans in the Indies, whom
besides the near Resemblance of their Studies and Customs, we have several
other Arguments to show they are descended of the ancient Race.
ANSWER.
There is a Treatise amongst the Works of St. Ambrose, whose Title is, de
Moribus Brachmanorum; this Treatise is in three Libraries in Italy, viz. the
Vatican, the Millain, and Medicean, under the Name of St. Ambrose; but there
are good Arguments to induce us to believe this Treatise to be Spurious. In
this Treatise are several commendable Qualities of the Brachmans represented:
and the Dialogue between Dandamis and Alexander, contains good Morality. But
the Account we have here is so different from that in ancient Authors, as that
it may easily induce us to conceive a vast difference between the Ancient and
Modern Brachmans.

Page 78. Now their Body of Learning does not teach nor treat of each little
Point or Nieity in Philosophy, as our Modern Philosophers use to do; but like
the Natural Theology of the Ancients, it treats of God, of the World, of the
Beginning and Ending of Things, of the Primitive State of Nature, of the
Periods of Worlds, and their Renovations.
ANSWER.
If our Modern Brachmans philosophize in these things, as the Ancient Brachmans
did; the Modern could not philosophize out of Books given by God to the great
Prophet Brahma, as formerly the Law of the Israelites was to Moses; as Mr.
Blount reports they were wont to pretend.

Clemens Alexandrinus, p. 451. says, They worshipped Hercules and Pan. And a
little after- (...). They Worshipped a certain Pyramid, under which they
thought a certain God to be buried. Porphury in his 4th Book, De Abstinentia,
accuses them of Polutheism; and so does Quintus Curtius, in his Eighth Book.

Maffeius, in his Book of the Indians; affirms that they worshipped God, or a
Demon in the Figure of an Ox, as the Egyptians did Apys; and that they also
worshipped an Elephant as God.

Page 83. They affirm there are several Worlds existing at one and the same
time, in diverse Regions of the Universe; and that there are several successive
ones. So that the same World is destroyed and renewed again according to
certain Periods.
ANSWER.
Of these several Worlds existing at one time in diverse Regions of the
Universe, I find no mention, either in that Book under the Name of St. Ambrose,
nor in Porphury, nor in Clemens of Alexandria. Strabo indeed, lib. 15. says,
That their Opinion of the World was, (...). That the World had a Beginning, and
was Corruptible and Orbicular; but he has not a Word of the Multitude of
Worlds, nor of their Renovations, nor Periods. The (...) in Clemens of
Alexandria, is the Metempsychosis, and relates not to successive Worlds.

Strabo moreover acquaints us, that they did philosophize about the Immortality
of the Soul as Plato did; as also of the Punishments in Hell, which Strabo
impiously calls Fables. But as to this Account of the Opinion of the Modern
Brachmans, of whom we should have so many Particulars, seems very strange; when
our Author, p. 79. tells us, That they are said to conceal their Divinity, and
their Opinions in Philosophy in all kinds, besides the (...) and (...). And it
must be confessed that these two Opinions were entertained by the ancient
Brachmans; for there is plain Proof thereof in Porphury, and in Philostratus in
Photius's Bibliothec.

The Account we have in Quintus Curtius, lib. 8. is, That they approved of
Self-murder, they worshipped many Gods, and especially Trees for Gods. The
Remark of Curtius is worth Notice, Quis credat inter haec vitia esse curam
sapientiae? Who can think where there were such Vices, any regard could be had
for Philosophy?

What Mr. Blount could design by this Section, cannot by me be comprehended;
his Arguments have little strength; and supposing they were convincing, yet
nothing could from thence be collected worthy of Observation.

Page 87. We have a Letter to Dr. Sydenham, where he writes of the Deists
Arguments, and says, That human Reason is like a Pitcher with two Ears, and may
be taken on either side.
ANSWER.
What he writes of human Reason, in comparing of it to a Pitcher with two Ears,
may be allowed, and gives us some Light how to behold his Oracles as we ought;
for most of them have two Handles, and are proposed (as the Devils Oracles were
of Old) full of Ambiguity; Epicterus in his Enchiridion, c. 65. says, (...)
(...); every thing has two Handles; Reason certainly has so. And from hence
we may infer what a bad Foundation it is in Matters of Religion. The necessity
of revealed Religion from hence appears, as also does the little Support we can
have from that which is commonly called Natural.

In a Word, This Assertion of Mr. Blount's is both a sufficient Reproof to the
Vainglorious Title of his Book, and subverts the very design for which it was
written,

Page 87. Though Deism is a good manuring of a Man's Conscience, yet certainly if
sowed with Christianity, it will produce the most profitable Crop.
ANSWER.
This Assertion is very absurd; for Christianity and Deism are wholly
inconsistent; the one supposing the necessity of a Mediator, the other
renounces it, and accounts all Mediatorship with respect to God unnecessary. So
that supposing Deism, the very Essence of Christianity is destroyed; so
ridiculous is it to talk of sowing Christianity on a Conscience manured with
Deism.

SECT. V. Of the Deists Religion.
Page 88. and 89. The Deists Religion is first negative: God is not to be
worshipped by an Image, nor by Sacrifice -- the positive is, by an inviolable
adherence in our lives, to all the things (...), by an imitation of God, in all
His imitable Perfections; especially in His Goodness, and believing
magnificently of Him.
ANSWER.
As to the negative Religion of the Deist, we confess, That in the two first
negatives, we have no controversy with them, in the sense they are here
proposed. For we acknowledge, There ought not to be made any material Image of
God; neither ought God to be worshipped by any Sacrifice of any bruit Creature:
but that God's infinite Mercy excludes a Mediator, that we deny. The whole
System of Christian Religion requires our Belief thereof: and therefore, as we
have said in the end of the foregoing Section, the Deist is repugnant to
Himself, when He supposes some advantage from Christianity; and yet wholly
rejects the grand Hypothesis, upon which it is built.

As to the positive Proposition, we say, It is defective, and leaves us in
great uncertainties. Cornelius Agrippa, de vanitate Scientiarum, c. 54. truly
affirms, Quod aliquando vitium fuit, modo virtus habetur; quod hic virtus est,
alibi vitium sit, quod uni honestum, alteri turpe; quod nobis justum, aliis
injustum: apud Athenienses licuit viro sororem germanam habere in Matrimonio,
apud Romanos nefas habetur: That which has at some times been accounted a
vice, is now accounted a virtue; that which in this Country is accounted a
virtue, in another is accounted a vice; among the Athenians it was lawful for a
man to marry his own Sister, which by the Romans was abominated; and much more
has Agrippa to the same purpose: that of Lucan concerning the Parthians, is
unknown to none: Cui fas implere parentem quid reor esse nefas: Nothing in
Nature can be thought to be unjust to that man, who thinks he may lawfully lie
with his own Mother. Julius Firmicus, in his Epistle to Lollian, gives also
this Instance, Apud Aegyptios and Lacedaemonios furari honorificum, apud nos
furca suspensi strangulantur. Among the Egyptians and Lacedaemonians it is not
only accounted lawful, but honorable to commit theft; but with us it is
punished with death.

Diogenes Laertius vita Pyrrhonis, -- (...) -- And so he goes on, instancing in
particulars, that which is allowed by those to be just, is condemned by others
as unjust; that which by some is accountde good, by others is accounted evil:
The Persians think it lawful to lie with their own Daughters; the Greeks detest
it. The Massagetes have Wives in common, etc. the Greeks abhor it: The
Cilicians think Robberies to be lawful; it is otherwise with the Greeks: And
much more is to be found in the same Laertius to this effect.

Out of which it is manifest, what a blind guide Nature is in matters of
Religion: how vain the Religion of the Deist is, and what necessity there is of
Divine Revelation.

What our Author adds of the Imitation of God in all His imitable Perfections,
and especially in His Goodness, and believing magnificently of it, destroys His
Hypothesis, and supposes revealed Religion: And I appeal to the Reader, whether
Mr. Blount can think magnificently of the Goodness of God, when He and His
Deist affirm, That a Mediator derogates from the Infinite Mercy of God, equally
as an Image does from His Spirituality and Infinity. And that not by the by,
but openly in the Chapter where the Articles of the Religion of the Deist are
treated of, there it is where this Position is laid down: for this is the third
Article; -- Not by a Mediator, for it is unnecessary, and derogates as much
from God's Mercy, as an Image does from His Spirituality and Infinity. The
Repugnancy of which to Holy Scripture, appears from the First of Timothy, 2.
Chap. v. 5. For there is one God, and one Mediator between God and Men, the
Man Christ Jesus: Our Lord is also called Mediator of a better Covenant, Hebr.
8.6. the Mediator of the New Testament, Heb. 9. v. 15. And the Mercy of God is
frequently declared by His sending a Mediator. So that the Deist's Religion
bids defiance to Christian Religion; and yet now and then He expresses some
regard for the same; which overcomes all Impudence, unless He owns that the
Deist's Religion is made up of Contradictions.

Page 91. To be sure the Deist is no Idolater; the Jew and the Mohammedan accuse
the Christian of Idolatry; the Reformed Churches, the Roman; the Socinian, the
other Reformed Churches; the Deists, the Socinian for his Deus factus: but none
can accuse the Deist for Idolatry, for He only acknowledges one supreme
everlasting God, and thinks magnificiently of Him.
ANSWER.
The Immortal Deist (as our Author calls him, p. 95.) had good reason thus to
boast, if He alone were free from Idolatry.

His Position may be true; His Logical Inference is faulty: For there is not
one here mentioned, neither Romanist, Reformed, or Socinian, but will
ackowledge one Supreme everlasting God, and thinks magnificently of him. So
that if any of the forenamed may be Idolaters, notwithstanding this
ackowledgment, what should hinder but that our immortal Deists may be so too?

Dr. Pearson in his Exposition on the Creed, Article the first, says, That to
imagine the Universe to be infinite, and eternal, is to imagine it to be God;
the Consequence is unavoidable.

That great Deist Pliny, begins his Natural History in these words, Mundum
numen esse credi par est, aeternum, immen sum, neque genitum, neque interiturum
unquam; It is fit to be believed that the World is God, eternal, immense,
having neither beginning, nor end.

That this is the opinion of our Modern Deists, these Oracles of Reason prove:
for in the Title Page of the Book we find it laid down as the the 16th. Oracle,
That the World is eternal.

So that it is easy to be perceived, how ungrounded this Vaunting of our Deist
is: and that He will find it more difficult to purge Himself of Idolatry, than
to fasten it on others.

Doctor More indeed in his Apologetical Epistle for the Cartesian Philosophy, (
p. 4.) peremptorily asserts, That there were always, and even now, that there
are some, who seriously conjoyn this Opinion of the Independency and Eternity
of Matter, with the Religious Worship of God: But then the Dr. adds, That this
is inconsistent with the true Notion of God: and in truth it is in Scripture
language, halting between God and Baal, which include Idolatry.

That the Infinity of the World introduces a Duality of God, is rightly
inferred by the great Scaliger in his 359. Exerc. cont. Cardanum -- Infiniti
mensura nulla est; duo infinita nequeunt esse; neque in natura, neque extra
naturam, essent enim duo principia prima: An Infinite cannot be measured,
wherefore there cannot be two Infinites; Equality is the formal Reason of
Commensuration. And yet the Deist makes both God and the World Infinite.

The Deist acknowledges here in words, That there is one Supreme God; yet He
cannot say this upon any firm Principle, because ( p. 192.) He says, If Genesis
be but a Parable, the Persians may be in the right, as well as the Jews; Which
is in effect to say, That they who believe and worship two contrary Gods, with
two contrary Services, as the Persians did, according to the appointment of
their Zoroaster (who was 5000 Years ancienter than the Trojan War, if you will
believe their fabulous Chronology) may be as much in the right as those, who
believe one only God. To such Repugnances Men are obnoxious, who defend
untruths: and to those may be applied that of the Apostle (in the 2 Ep. These.
c. 2. ver. 11.) And for this cause God shall send them strong delusions, that
they should believe a lie.

Saint Austin in the fourth of his Confessions, chap. 7. speaking of the
miserable condition He was in, when a Manichee, breaks out into this
Expression, -- Non enim tu eras, sed tantum phantasma, and error meus erat Deus
meus: Not thou, O Lord, but a vain phantasm, and my error was then my God. --
How appositely and truly this may be applied to the Deist, the Reader cannot
but perceive; and would to God it might be applied, not only to them, with
respect to their Error; but also with respect to their Conversion.

SECT. VI. Concerning the Arrians, Trinitarians, and Councils.
Page 97. How grateful this Discourse of yours will be to the Quicunque Men, I
shall not presume to determine, since I am sure Mr. Hobbs is as much above
their Anger, as they are below his Resentments.
ANSWER.
With what Contempt does He here treat the Ecclesiastics of the Church of
England? These are the Quicunque Men that here meant.

As to His Opinion of them, in this His odious Comparison between Mr. Hobbs
(whom He so much honors, as p. 16. to call Him the great Modern Philosopher of
this Nation) and them; I need say no more than this, -- That the most partial
Reader must be convinced, that no Man can, or has been more plainly refuted,
than Mr. Hobbs has been by our Quicunque Men: to omit others, our most
Reverend Archbishop's Book, called Hobbs His Creed, and Dr. Templer's Idea of
the Theology of the Leviathan, are Demonstrations.

Page 98. Constantine at first espoused the Arrian Interest, to mount the
Throne, as the present Lewis the XIV. did the Interest of the Hugonots.
ANSWER.
What ground or Authority our Immortal Deist might have for this His Assertion,
I do not know; I believe it is a Dream of His own. I am confident no
Chronologer of any repute could affirm so great a Falsity, nothing is more
notorious, both in Ancient and Modern History, than that Constantine mounted
the Throne, before Arius himself; much less the Arians made any considerable
figure in the World. Perhaps the odium He thought might reflect on Constantine,
by the Comparison of Lewis the XIV. prompted Him to commit so palpable an
Error. Had there been any truth in this Imputation, it cannot be imagined, that
the Arian Historian Philosorgius would have past it in silence; who only says,
That when Constantius was dead and buried, that Constantine (...) Connstantine
was His Successor in the Empire.

Page 98. If you will believe the Learned Petavius, and other Arians, they did
offer to be tried by the Fathers that preceded the Nicene Council.
ANSWER.
Petavius is a late Author, and unless he brings Proof for what he says, he is
not to be relied on in historical Matters of so remote Antiquity. Sandius in
his Nucleus, Hist. Eccles. p. 256. cites our Bishop Tailor to the same purpose,
viz. That the Arians appealed to the Fathers for Trial, and that the Offer was
declined.

To which our learned Dr. Gardener in the Appendix ad Nucleum, makes this
Answer, Ego vero a reverendi Tayleri manibus venia petita, fateor me Socratis
and Zozomeni verbis potius assenteri, etc. I for my part am forced to beg
Bishop Taylor's Pardon, and do confess, that I assent rather to Socrates and
Sozomen, who report the contrary. Which Answer is good and valid.

The Bishops that lived in those Days were far enough from declining Trial by
the Fathers, that preceded the Nicene Council, that they desired nothing more.
The Arians were the Men (as Socrates says, lib. 5. c. 10.) that trusted to
(...). They were the Men that refused the Judgments of the Ancients, and
defended themselves by Niceties and Disputations. And to the same purpose
Sozomen, lib. 7. c. 12.

I will cite two or three Authorities more, which will make this thing so very
plain, that nothing but reading Fathers at second hand, and too great Credulity
can apologize for Mr. Blount.

Athanasius is known to be a Bishop, who made as great a Figure in the Church
as any one in his time; a Man of great Learning, and exemplary Piety, and one
that was as well acquainted with the Methods that the Orthodox and Arians made
use of, as any Man could possibly be. This great Athanasius, in his Book of the
Decrees of the Nicene Synod, says,

(...). Behold, we have demonstrated this our Opinion from Fathers to Fathers,
as they delivered the same to us. But for your parts, O new Jews and Disciples
of Caiaphas! What Fathers can you produce that are Fautors of your Heresies?
Truly ye cannot bring so much as one of the number of those who were accounted
Prudent and Wise, all such detest you. Ye can allege none but your Father the
Devil, who was the sole Author of this Heresy and Defection from the Truth.

Alexander, Bishop of Alexandria, a Person in nothing inferior to Athanasius;
one that had all the Qualifications desirable in a good Prelate. In an Epistle
of his to Alexander Bishop of Constantinople, (as we find it in Theodoret's
Ecclesiastical History, Book the first, Chapter fourth) says, (...).

You Arians have so good Opinion of your selves, as that you think none of the
Ancients are worthy to be compared to you. Neither will ye endure, that those
who in my younger Days were esteemed as our Guides and Masters, should upon any
Terms be equalled to you. Neither will ye grant that any of our present
Colleagues have any competent Knowledge of these Controversies. Ye think your
selves to be the only wise Men; and that although ye have nothing, yet ye enjoy
all things. You boast, that you alone are the finders out and possessors of
Truth; and that to you such Mysteries are revealed, and kept from other Men.

By which Words Alexander of Alexandria signifies, that the Arian Sentiments
were repugnant to the Doctrine of the most ancient Fathers, to the Doctrine of
his immediate Predecessors, and of all those Bishops who had the Government of
the Church, when this unhappy Arian Heresy began. He signifies also, that the
first Defenders of Arianism were Enthusiasts, and pretenders to extraordinary
Revelation.

To these two, I will only add St. Austin, who treating of the blessed Trinity
at large in fifteen Books, in his first Book, Chapter the 3d. he delivers his
Mind as fully, and as much to the purpose, as either of the two before quoted:
Thus he says, Omnes quos legere potui qui ante me scripserunt de Trinitate,
divinorum librorum vetorum and novorum Catholici tractatores, hoc intenderunt
secundum Scripturas docere, quod pater and filius and spiritus sanctus unius
ejusdemque substantiae inseparabili aequalitate divinam insinuent unitatem.

All the Authors that I have met with, who have written before me of the holy
Trinity; all the Orthodox Writers and Commentators of the Divine Books of the
Old and New Testament proposed this to themselves, to prove, that according to
the Holy Scriptures, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, have one and the
same Substance, which includes a Divine Unity with an inseparable Equality.

This last Testimony of St. Austin is very remarkable, and as comprehensive as
the most zealous Trinitarian could desire. And from hence we cannot but
observe, how blameworthy some very learned Men of the Roman Communion have
been; who, though they sincerely believe the Doctrine of the Holy Trinity, yet
by affirming, either by mistake or design, that this heavenly Doctrine cannot
be proved by Scripture, nor by the Fathers that preceded the Nicene Council,
but only by unwritten Tradition they have given great advantage to the
Antitrinitarian to triumph, and have confirmed them in their Heterodox Opinion,
nempe hoc vult Ithacus, magno and mercantur Achivi.

Page 98. For at that Council the Arians were rather condemned by a Party, than
by the General Consent of the Christian Church: because Constantine, out of
above two Thousand Bishops then Assembled, excluded all but Three hundred and
Eighteen; nor were those perhaps (for Accounts vary) all Bishops that made up
this great Council.
ANSWER.
This is a heavy Charge against the Nicene Council; it had been but reasonable
that the Immortal Deist should have showed the Grounds which he had for this
Accusation: No Truth nor Innocence can be sufficient, if an Accusation goes for
Proof.

He that should read the ancient View of Bishoprics in Aubertus Miraeus, or
the Sacred Geography of Carolus a Sancto Paulo, would give little Credit to
this Charge, for he would not find half that number of Bishoprics in the
Christian World.

We confess there is some difference among ancient Authors as to the precise
Number of Bishops in the Nicene Synod, but then the difference is very
inconsiderable, not so portentous and extravagant, as it is here represented;
nor a Word of this pretended Project of Constantine's.

Athanasius, Hilary, Hierom Ruffin, Socrates, and others affirm the Number of
the Council to be 318. It Is true, there were many Presbyters and Deacons that
accompanied these Bishops, of whom these Authors make no particular mention,
there being no such regard had of them, as there was of the Bishops.

I am verily persuaded, that what Mr. Seldom says in his Commentary on
Eutychius, p. 81. will obtain Belief among all unprejudiced Persons; I will
therefore report in his own Words, Nemo mihi Sancto Athanasio aequiparandus, is
scilicet Archidiaconus tunc Ecclesiae Alexandrinae cum Alexandro patriarcha
suo, cui proxime successit; testis interfuit oculatus. Atque diserte is in
Epistola ad Episcopos Africanos. (...).

No one in my Opinion, as to this Matter, is to be compared to Athanasius; he
was Archdeacon of the Church of Alexandria, an Eye Witness, and immediate
Successor to Alexander the Patriarch, and he expressly writes in an Epistle of
his to the African Bishops, That in the Synod held at Nice, there were
assembled Three hundred and eighteen Bishops.

There is an ancient Author, who wrote a Book about the time of the fourth
general Council held at Chalcedon, One hundred and twenty Years after that at
Nice. The Title of the Book is, An Exposition and Collection of all the said
Synods.

This Book was brought into England in Manuscript, together with many other
Manuscripts of great Value, by Christian Ravius, a German, a Man very well
versed in the Oriental Learning: This Book gives us an account much differing
from Mr. Blount's. He says, There were 232 Bishops in the Council, Presbyters
and Monks 86, in all 318. Here is no mention of 2000 Bishops, nor of any
Artifice of Constantine's.

And this is the more to be regarded, if it be true what Sandius the Arian
Historiographer imagines, p 166. that the Author of this Collection was Sabinus
the Macedonian, who wrote a Book of the same Title. Socrates assures us that
this History was written with great Partiality, being an Enemy to that Council,
and one that accused the Fathers thereof, as simple and ignorant Persons, for
which he is reproved by the same Socrates, lib. 1. c. 6. and lib. 2. c. 13. How
glad would Sabinus have been to have laid hold on this occasion to blacken
Constantine and this Synod, had there been the least Color of Truth for so
horrid a Calumny.

Perhaps some may think that Mr. Blount had somd good Grounds for laying this
Imputation on Constantine and the Council, although he did not produce them,
and would therefore be willingly satisfied, what Conjectures may be made in
order thereunto.

For the satisfaction of such, I make this Answer, That I believe Mr. Blount
had no Grounds, but such only as we find cited in Sandius and Seldom. In the
first we find out of Hottinger in his Oriental History, viz. That Petricides
and Elma Cinus, Arabian Writers, have delivered to Posterity, that there were
at Nice 2300, which in truth can make nothing for Mr. Blount, the Question was
of Bishops only, not of Others For Socrates, lib. 1. c. 5. Eccles. Hist. says,
that there were at this Council Presbyters, Deacons, and of other inferior
Orders innumerable. And I find this of Socrates to be very agreeable with that
which is delivered by other Historians of that Age; and which peradventure
might give the first occasion of this exorbitant number of Bishops. And if we
may be allowed to consult Reason in historical Matters, I cannot do better then
to cite Nicetas Coniates, lib. 5. c. 9. where he gives this Reason why no more
Bishops met in so venerable an Assembly, because Age and Sickness detained
many, and that Bishoprics were then thin sowed, every little City being not
then advanced into an Episcopal See.

In Seldom we find Eutychius affirming, that in the City of Nice were assembled
2400 Bishops. According to Dr. Pocock's Translation, Josephus Aegyptius affirms
the number to be 2048. And the same is affirmed by Ismael Ibn Ali, the
Mohammedan Historian. These are the only Authors that I have any where observed
to have been made use of by learned Men to this purpose.

To all which the Novelty of the Author is a sufficient Answer. Certainly those
Historians who lived in the Age when things are transacted, and are
Eyewitnesses, and are a great part of the Affairs themselves, are to be
believed before others, that lived some hundred of Years after the things were
done.

But since Ismael Ibn Ali the Mohammedan, seems more full to Mr. Blount's
purpose than the others, I will here translate him.

About the End of the twentieth Year of Constantine the Emperor, there were
gathered together in Council 2048 Bishops; then the Emperor chose out of that
number 318. And they did Excommunicate Arius of Alexandria, because he did
assert that Christ was a Creature. The foresaid Bishops were consenting to the
Emperor's Pleasure, and so they innovated and published a New System of
Christian Religion.

Eusebius, who lived in those Days, and was a Member of the Council, says in
his Chronicle, that the Vicennalia of Constantine were Celebrated at Rome, Anno
330. and that the Council was assembled Anno 325. So that this Trip of the
Mahometans is an Argument that he made use of bad Records in compiling his
History. And whereas he says the Council innovated as to Religion, he writes
like a Mohammedan indeed, and not like a Man acquainted with the Mysteries of
our Sacred Religion.

We have therefore reason to believe, that as the Arabic Canons, falsely
fathered on this Council, are exploded by all that have any Gust of Criticism;
so likewise will these Modern Arabic Pamphlets be rejected by all such as will
take the Pains to examine them.

Page 99. The Arians had not the Freedom to dispute their Cause in the Council
of Nice.
ANSWER.
If this could be made appear, then farewell to the Authority of the Nicene
Council; but if this be false (as undoubtedly it is) what a horrid injury is
done to this most Venerable Assembly? This is one of the greatest Objections
the Protestants have against the Council of Trent, and that the Catholics of
old had against the Arian Synods: but who can believe this, that knows with
what fervency and zeal Saint Athanasius declaims against this perverse Method?
And this Method He says is repugnant to the Law of God, and the Blessed
Apostle. Athanasius Apol. ad Constable. Imper. (...). The divine Law, and the
Blessed Apostle require and Command all parties to be heard: And to this
purpose He quotes Acts 24 ver. 19. who ought to have been before thee, and
object if they had ought against me -- or else let these same here say if they
have found any evil doing in me, whilst I stood before the Council. And he
quotes the 25.

About whom, when I was at Jerusalem, the chief Priests, and the Elders of the
Jews informed me, desiring to have judgment against him. -- to whom I answered,
It is not the manner of the Romans to deliver any man to die, before that he
which is accused, have the accusers face to face, and have license to answer
for himself concerning the crime laid against him.

Can it now be possibly conceived, that Athanasius should thus expose himself,
and the Sacred Synod, as He must of necessity have done, if either He or they
had been obnoxious to the same charge?

Sozomen, lib. 1. c. 15. Eccles. Histor, (...). When the Bishops were assembled
together, they sent for Arius, and proposed his Opinion to be disputed and
discussed.

Socrates, lib. 1. c. 5. (...) (...). The Opinion of Arius was defended by
Eusebius Bishop of Nicomede, by Theagnis Bishop of Nice, by Maris Bishop of
Chalcedon in Bithynia; who were opposed with great zeal by Athanasius a Deacon
of the Church of Alexandria.

Theodoret lib. 1. c. 7. I have formerly made mention of some who in the
Council defended the cause of Arius: besides those, Menophantus of Ephesus,
Patrophilus of Scythopolis, Theognis of Nice, Narcissus of Neroniad (this
Neroniad is a City of the other Cilicia, now called Irenopolis) 'Theonas of
Marmarita, Secundus of Ptolemais, a City of Egypt, opposed the Catholiek Faith,
and took on them the Defense and Patronage of Arius.

Ruffinus lib 1. c. 2. For many days there was a great dispute in the Council,
where some vehemently favored Arius, and contended for his Doctrines.

Who can now believe, after such a cloud of of Witnesses, that there should be
the least Mite of truth in this Position of Mr. Blount's, That the Arians had
not the freedom to dispute their cause at the Council of Nice.

What should occasion this grand Mistake in our Deist, may without great
difficulty be conjectured: I do not find any ground for it in the Arabian
Historians before mentioned: but in that impudent Writer Sandius, page 167. I
find the whole charge: For there He affirms, That Arius and his Accomplices were
censured, judged, and condemned, causa inaudita multo minus rationibus
expensis: They were condemned, says He, without being heard; much less had they
permission to produce their Arguments and Reasons. And that which overcomes all
Impudence, is, that the said Sandius for proof, cites Socrates, Theodoret, and
Athanasius himself; whereas there is nothing in those Authors but makes against
Him; for the places I have cited, I have viewed in the Original.

Upon the whole, this plainly appears, that Arius was cited before the Fathers
in the Council, His Propositions were debated, His cause was espoused by some
in the Council with much zeal; every thing on either side was weighed with
great deliberation, that nothing might be rashly concluded in so weighty and
important an Affair.

Page 99. The Arian Doctrine was not only confirmed by eight Councils, several
times assembled at Tire, Sardis, Syrmium, Millain, Seleucia, Nice, Tarsis, and
particularly at Ariminum (where six hundred Bishops were of their opinion, with
only three which held the contrary) they also punished others who were of a
contrary opinion, with Confiscations, Banishments, and other grievous
Punishments.
ANSWER.
The Arian Doctrine, according to Athanasius, was confirmed (...), The Arian
Doctrine was confirmed by ten Synods, and more: Neither is this any wonder, for
the Arians had for a long time the Sunshine of the Secular Power. The Question
then is not of the Number of Synods, but of the Methods by which they did
proceed: As to the Arian Methods, we have this account from Athanasius; All
their Councils were (...), All the Methods they took were irregular; they were
grounded on Hatred, Ambition, and Violence: and this made their Councils void
to all intents and purposes.

And as to the Council of Ariminum, He says, (...), Things were there
determined by ambition and violence. Nay He is so positive, as to this of
Ariminum, that he plainly says, That the Advocates thereof, (...), That if the
Advocates of that Council did but know how irregular the Proceedings at
Ariminum were, they would be silent, and not plead for it. So charitable was
this good Man, that although the Arians persecuted Him causelessly, with all
imaginable malice and wickedness, yet He could not think that they would
proceed to such boldness, as openly to defend such notoriously unjustifiable
courses.

As to the Number of Bishops pretended to be present at the Council of
Ariminum, there is some difference between our Author, and Sandius: the latter
making the Number to be a thousand or more: Interea qui Arimini convenerunt
Pontifices numero millenarium excedente fuerunt. And this Hunerick testifies in
Victor. Vticen. lib. 3. I have consulted the place, and can avouch for Sandius,
that he has rightly cited Victor. Utic. For thus it is in the Bibliotheck of
the Fathers: But the Authority of Hunerick is of no moment. He was an Arian
Prince, a Vandal; and one who to carry on designs, would not confine himself to
numbers: and peradventure the consideration thereof might move Mr. Blount to
make allowance, and to confine Himself to six hundred; a very competent number
and more than I am willing to acknowledge. For I cannot but think that they are
both out of the way; since Sulpitius Severus, an ancient Author, and one that
had many conveniences of knowing the truth, much better than either of them,
assures us that there were very few above four hundred; Quadringenti and
aliquot amplius, are the words of Sulpitius Severus, lib. 2. Hist. Sacra. And
whereas Mr. Blount says, That out of the number of six hundred, there were only
three that dissented; he is under a great mistake: and to make it very plain, I
shall cite Theodoret lib. 2. Eccles. Hist. cap. 23. where we find what here
follows.

The Great Athanasius in his Epistle to the Africans, writes after this manner
of the Council of Ariminum, Who can bear with them who prefer the Council of
Ariminum before that of Nice? or rather who cannot but hate such, as reject the
Decrees of those at Nice, and are in love with such as were extorted by force
and violence at Ariminum? It happens to such as it happened to the Jews,
accordingly as it is written by the Prophet, They have forsaken the fountain of
living waters, and have dug to themselves broken cisterns, that cannot hold
water. So these Men leaving the Sacred Nicene Council, have betaken themselves
to many Synods, which are in themselves vain, and of no effect. And yet at
Ariminum there were no less than two hundred Dissenters; and not three only (as
Mr. Blount bears us in hand) that held the contrary.

As to what is added concerning the Persecutions used by the Arians, we own it
to be true; and the Orthodox frequently inveighed against the Arians for these
their Barbarities. I shall therefore acquaint my Reader what Grotius says, lib
2. De Jur. Pacis and Belli, cap. 21. sect. 5. Athanasius is very vehement
against the Arian Heresy; for in his Epist. ad Solit. they were the first who
made use of the Temporal Power to punish dissenters with Stripes,
Imprisonments, Confiscations and Banishments, says Mr. Blount, Those Bishops
were condemned in France by the judgment of the Church, which persecuted the
Priscillianists to death; and in the East that Synod was condemned, which
consented to the Burning of Bogomilus.

Page 100. As for the Trinitarians of those times, I must confess that I cannot
but esteem them as enemies to all Humane Learning; for they had Canons
forbidding them to read any Ethnic Books.
ANSWER.
I have seldom found such Confidence any where, as these Oracles do in all
places afford us. How ridiculous this insulting of Mr. Blount's is, will fully
appear in handling this Point. In prosecution of which, I shall

First, Lay down the Discourse of Father Paul relating hereunto.

Secondly, I shall show what Reasons I have to dissent from that learned and
worthy Person.

Thirdly, I shall consult the Opinions of some of the most Learned of the
Eastern Church, with my Reason for so doing.

Lastly, I shall make plain Inferences, which will be sufficient to cramp the
Presumption of our Deist, and to defend the Trinitarians (as he calls them)
against the Imputation of Ignorance.

Of what Candor and Learning Father Paul was, every Man knows that has read
his History of the Council of Trent; where p. 472. he has this Discourse,

In the Church of Martyrs there was no Ecclesiastical Prohibition, though some
godly Men made Conscience of reading bad Books, for fear of offending against
one of the three Points of the Law of God; to avoid the Contagion of Evil, not
to expose ones self to Temptations without Necessity or Profit; and not to
spend time vainly. These Laws being Natural, do remain always, and should
oblige us to beware of reading bad Books, though there were no Ecclesiastical
Law for it. But these Respects ceasing, the Example of Dionysius Bishop of
Alexandria, a famous Doctor did happen, who about the Year of our Lord, 240.
being reprehended by some of his Priests for these Causes, and troubled with
these Respects, had a Vision that he should read all Books, because he was able
to judge of them; yet they thought that there was greater Danger in the Books
of the Gentiles, than of the Heretics; the reading whereof was more abhorred
and reprehended, because it was more used by Christian Doctors for a vanity of
Human Eloquence. For this cause St. Jerome either in a Version, or in a Sleep,
was beaten by the Devil: So that about the Year 400, a Council in Carthage did
forbid to read the Books of the Gentiles, but allowed them to read the Books of
Heretics, the Decrees whereof is among the Canons, collected by Gratian, and
this was the first Ecclesiastical Prohibition by way of Canon. Thus far Paul.
And now I come to the second thing.

The Council of Carthage which Father Paul relates to, is that which is
commonly called the 4th Carthaginian Council, whose 16th Canon is, -- ut
Episcopus Gentilium lib^os non legate, Haereticorum autem pro necessitate and
tempore: That a Bishop do not read the Books of the Gentiles; but in reading
the Books of Heretics, He is to have regard to Necessity and Opportunity.

Now in this particular, I dissent from Paul, and join with that great
Antiquary Justellus, who in his Preface to the Code of the African Church,
says, -- Concilium quod vocant quartum Carthaginense, plane repudiandum est,
nec fides adhibenda Canonibus 104 quos sine auctoritate huic Concilio
adscribunt: The Council, which is commonly called the fourth Carthaginian, is
to be wholly rejected, neither is there any Faith to be given to the 104
Canons, which without any good Authority they ascribe to it.

There is no mention of these Canons in the Collection of Ferrandus; nor in
that of Dionysius Exiguus; nor in the Code of the African Church; nor in the
Collection commonly called the Afr. Council. In a Manuscript that belonged to
Cardinal Barberini, they are entitled Ancient Statutes of the Eastern Church.
But these Canons themselves prove the contrary. The Ceremonies of the
Ordination of the lesser Orders, as they are sat forth in this Council, are
agreeable enough to the Practice of the Western Church, where these Orders were
conferred by delivering holy Vessels; but not to the Eastern Church, where
these Orders were always conferred by Imposition of Hands. In other Manuscripts
they are entitled, The ancient Statutes of the Church. In a word, there can be
no sufficient reason given, why they should not be found in the ancient
Collections, if they were genuine. The ancientest Author Father Paul cites is
Gratian, whose testimony is of no weight, if not strengthened by some
collateral Evidence: For all know He is a perfect Rhapsodist, and this is so
fully made out by August. Tarraconensis, in his Book de Emendat. Gratiani, that
there is not any place left for the least doubt. Which prejudice, together with
that of Moderness, may be objected against Isidore, Burchardus, Hincmare, Ivo
Carnotensis, etc. and the defense which Schelstrate makes is so weak and dull,
as that it savours little of a Vaticane Library keeper: whereas otherwise in
his Ecclesia Africana, He discovers much Learning and Reading.

I am now to consult the Opinions of some in the Eastern Church, and to bring
my reason for doing so.

Saint Basil in the first Tome of his Works, has a Homily, whose Title is,
(...). This Homily was composed for young Men, not to prohibit them to read
the Books of the Gentiles, but to direct them, and to show what benefit they
might reap thereby. Amongst other things He takes notice that Moses was
educated in the Learning of the Egyptians; and so proceeded to the knowledge of
the true God. In like manner in following ages, Dauiel at Babylon learned the
Learning of the Chaldeans, and from thence proceeded to Divine Doctrines.

Gregory Nazianzen, ad Seleucum Iambie. 3. treats of this matter, where he
prohibits nothing as touching reading the Books of the Gentiles, but only lays
down this Rule, That from the same Plant Roses may be gathered and Thorns, and
that we ought to take one, and leave the other.

The reason of these two citations is, to stop the mouths of those, who pretend
that the Apostles prohibited the reading the Books of the Gentiles: and for
that purpose quote chap. 5. of the Apostolical Constitutions; whose Title is,
(...); concerning reading the Books of such as are not within the pale of the
Church.

To which there needs no other Reply, than the Testimonies of these two learned
and pious Bishops: If there had been such Constitutions in their times, they
could never have written as they did. Besides the Authority of these pretended
Constitutions, as to this point, is so fully refuted by Mr. Dalle in his Book
de Pseudopigr. Apostolicis, page 326. that there is no place left for a Reply.

I may add hereunto the Law of the Emperor Julian the Apostate, from Theodoret
Eccles. Hist. lib. 4. c. 8. He first of all prohibited the use of Rhetoric,
Poetry, and Philosophic Arts to the children of the Galileans (so he called
the Christians) and the reason of the Law is in these words: They wound us with
our arrows, as it is in the Proverb; for out of our own Books they borrow
arguments, which they make use of to our confusion: And all know this to be
true, who have read Tertullian, Arnobius, Lactantius and others, in their
Controversies with the Gentiles.

The Corollaries and Inferences I shall make are very plain: First, I affirm
that there is no good Evidence for such a Canon anno 400. much less Canons, as
Mr. Blount says.

The Second is, That this pretended Canon was made 75 years after the holding
of the Nicene Council; and therefore our Deist could not gather from this Canon
the Ignorance of the Trinitarians of those times.

The Third is, That it cannot be presumed that the Canons of the Church should
be conform to the Decree of the Emperor Julian, which was made on purpose to
eradicate the Christian Religion; no more can it can be presumed, that Basil
and N zianzen would impugn an Apostolical Constitution.

Lastly, The Learning of the Gentiles was so amply treated of by the Fathers of
the 4 first Centuries; their Philosophy and Theology was so fully examined and
refuted by them; that unless these Books had been prohibited, it was impossible
for the Trinitarians of those times to have been ignorant of all the solid
Learning contained in the Books of the Gentiles.

Page 103. And to show how ignorant the Clergy were in the time of the Emp.
Marcian, we find the Greek Tongue so little understood at Rome, and the Latin
in Greece, that the Bishops in both Countries (in all 630.) were glad to speak
by Interpreters. Nay in this very Council at Chalcedon, the Emperor was fain to
deliver the same speech in Greek to one party, and in Latin to the others, so
that both might understand him: the Council of Jerusalem for the same reason
made certain Creeds, both in Greek and Latin; at the Council of Ephesus, the
Pope 's Legates had their Interpreter to expound the words: and when Celestine
's Letters were there read, the Acts tells us how the Bishops desired to to
have them translated into Greek, and read over again; insomuch that the Romish
Legates had almost made a controversy of it, fearing least the Papal Authority
should have been prejudiced by such an Act: alleging therefore, how it was the
ancient custom to propose the Bulls of the Sea Apostolic in Latin only, and
that that might row suffice. Whereupon those poor Greek Bishops were in danger
not to have understood the Pope 's Latin, till at length the Legates were
content with Reasons, when it was evidenced to them, That the major part could
not understand one word of Latin. But the pleasantest of all, is Pope Celestine
's Excuse to Nestorius, for his so long delay in answering his Letters, because
he could not by any means get his Greek construed sooner. Also Pope Gregory the
Fiest ingeniously confesses to the Bishop of Thessaly, that h^ understood not
a jot of his Greek.
ANSWER.
Mr. Blount has discovered much malignity against the Clergy in this and the
next Page; the great Imputation of their not being good Grecians, cannot be
charged on the present Clergy. Besides we are not so ignorant, as He is
disingenuous who has taken all those choice Remarks, word for word out of Du
Ranchin's Review of the Council of Trent, p. 151 and 152. and yet makes no
mention of the Author, to whom he was so much obliged.

What our Author proposes to Himself by this Method, is not very material; for
since the Latin and Greek are the Learned Languages, why may not one of them be
sufficient for a Clergyman? He that has been in the least concerned in the
Popish Controversies, cannot be ignorant that Casaubone, Rainolds, Dalle and
others, have sufficiently demonstrated, how unskilful Baronius and Bellarmine
have been in the Greek Tongue; and yet who can doubt but that they were
deservedly reputed great Clerks? Who can doubt but that St. Austin, and the
African Bishops were very Pious and Learned Men? and yet how meanly they were
skilled in the Greek Tongue, I have shown in another place. If our Author be
delighted with such Instances, He might have brought some more pertinent to His
purpose: For Alphonsus a Castro tells us, there were some Popes so illiterate,
as they were totally ignorant of Grammar. Saint Amor tells us of a Pope, who
said, He was a Canonist, and no Divine. The Learned Bishop of Sarum, in the
Preface to his Regale, acquaints us with a Report at Rome, at the Election of a
Pope, that Cardinal Albici should say, For the Love of God, let us at least
have a Pope, that is so learned, that He may be able to read the Gospel in the
Mass. However it be, none of Mr. Blount's Instances affect us of the Reformed
Church, whom yet I think he purposely designs to derogate from in his
Paragraph: For p. 97. he writes very contemptibly of them; and says, 'The
Quicunque Men (by which he understands the Clergy of England) are as much below
Mr. Hobbs his Resentments, 'as he is above their Anger. And this he writes near
the beginning of this Chapter, where these his Proofs are of the Ignorance of
the Clergy; but how unjust this charge is with respect to them is so manifest,
that it would be a madne^^ (...) ^^fute him.

SECT VII. Of the Immortality of the Soul, and the Original of the Jews.
THese Oracles of Reason have nothing remarkable from p. 106 to p. 116. save
only this, That he borrows whole pages, without any acknowledgment. The Epistle
to Mr. Wilwood is a translation out of Gassendus third and fourth Chapters of
the third part Syntag. Epic. Philos. his Treatise of Beneficence to Madam; and
his preference of Plato and Pythagoras to Aristotle, are either purely Moral,
or else grounded on the Sentiments of those Philosophers, with whom we have no
mind to contest at present, about those Points of Fate and Fortune.

Page 117. Your incomparable Version of that passage of Seneca, where he begins
with -- Post mortem nihil est, ipsa and mors nihil: There is nothing after
death, and Death it self is nothing. And page 128. he says, This is Seneca 's
Opinion.
ANSWER.
What Seneca's Opinion was of the Immortality of the Soul, cannot be concluded
from this passage. For he frequently contradicts Himself in this particular.
And as Lipsius in the Third Book of His Stoical Physiology observes, aliquando
accedit, aliquando recedit; sometimes He affirms it, sometimes He denies it.
In the 36th Epist. where He commends a certain person who removed from
unavoidable Troubles in public Affairs, and comforts Him against death, he
has these Expressions, Mors quam parti mescimus and recusamus intermittit
vitam non eripit; venet iterum, qui nos in lucem reponet dies. Death, which we
so much fear, may intermit Life; it shall not wholly deprive us of it, the day
will come which shall restore us from Death to Life. And if we add what follows
(quem multi recusarent nisi oblitos reducerent) his Contradictions in this
place will be both visible and palpable. In his 63d Epistle, which was a
Consolatory one upon the Death of a Friend; and in the end of that Epistle he
says, Et fortasse (si modo sapientum vera fama est, recipitque nos locus
aliquis) quem putamus periisse, praemissus est. And perhaps our Friend, whom we
fear is lost for ever, is only gone before us. Some wise men are of Opinion,
that there is a common Receptacle for us all. And this makes Lipsius, in his
Commentaries on this place, to say, Dubie and trepide super immortalitate
animae and alias. Seneca philosophizes doubtfully of the Immortality of the
Soul, as he does also in other places. And although Mr. Blount would in this
page persuade us, that Senecae is for the Mortality of the Soul, yet p. 124. he
confesses the Contradiction himself; where he writes, When I hear Seneca the
Philosopher, and others, preaching up the doctrine of the Souls Immortality,
with a quid mihi cura erit transfuga? tackt to the end of it, nothing under
Heaven seems to me more unaccountable and contradictory?

By which we see what little regard is to be had to the Stoical Philosophers,
if you consider them without their moral Sentences. He that has but the least
Skill in Natural Philosophy, cannot but perceive how grossly erroneous they are
therein. They who make the great God Corporeal; they who make the Stars to feed
on the Vapors of the Earth (in which absurd Notion Seneca, with his Rhetorical
Flourishes, seems to boast), they who make the Sun to drink up the Waters of
the Sea to quench his Thirst, and the Moon to drink up the Rivers; they (I say)
who discourse so unphilosophically in these Physical Matters, if they err in
the momentous point of the Souls Immortality, it cannot be accounted strange.

Natural Religion being, according to our Author, grounded on the immortality
of the Soul; and yet, as it will appear hereafter, that this immortality cannot
certainly be known but by Scripture and the Parsons harangues (as He, by way of
contempt, says, p. 118.) and not by the Reasons of Philosophers; The necessity
of Revealed Religion, must be very evident, which our Deists Hypothesis will
not allow.

P. 118. No Subject whatever has more entangled and ruffled the thoughts of the
wisest men, than this concerning our future State; it has been controverted in
all Ages by men of the greatest Learning and Parts.
ANSWER.
The Method Mr. Blount proceeds by in concluding from the Immortality of the
Soul to future Rewards and Punishments, is very good; and I think the
Reciprocal Consequence to be equally true.

The Sadduces, as Josephus tells us, lib. 18. Antiq. c. 2. affirm, (...). The
Souls of men perish together with their Bodies. And the same Josephus, de bello
Judaico, p. 788. affirms, that the Sadduces did (...). They did deny the
Immortality of the Soul, and consequently Rewards and Punishments in the world
to come. And in this the Sadduces were agreeable to their Principles.

Ludovicus Vives, in his excellent Book De veritate fidei, chap. 5. lays it
down for certain, that whatsomever was affirmed by Philosophers with respect to
a future State, ita sunt leviter dicta ac frigide, ut non satis videantur
credere quae affirmabant. Whatever they affirmed with respect to Rewards for
Virtue, or Punishments for Vice, was so slightly and coldly delivered, as that
they seem not to believe themselves. And the same Author speaks to the same
Purpose, chap. 6. What the Philosophers declare as to Remunerations after this
Life, they do it, timide and quasi diffidentur. They declare their Opinions
with Fear and Diffidence.

This Censure of Ludovicus seems to be too mild, as I will exemplify in some
Particulars.

Cicero in his Oration pro Cluentio, speaking of the Death of a certain Person,
says, Quid mali mors illi attulerit? Nisiforte ineptiis ac fabulis ducimur, ut
existimemus illum apud inferos impiorum supplicia sufferre. What Evil did Death
bring to him? certainly none at all, unless we give credit to such Fables and
Fooleries as we are told befall impious Persons in another World. And in the
first Book of his Tusculane Questions, Quae anus tam delira quae timea ista.

Aehcrontia templa, alta or^i, pallida
Leti, obnubila, obsira ^eneb^is loca.
Non pudet Philosophum in eo gloriari, quod haec non timeat, and quod falsa
esse cognoverit. What dreaming Old Woman can be so delirious, as to be afraid
of Acheron's Temples, of the Principalities of Hell, of pale Death, of the
cloudy and dark Palaces below? It is a shame for a Philosopher to boast that he
does not fear these things, for he knows that they are mere Cheats.

As for Pythagoras, we have his Opinion in Ovid's Metamorphosis; -- Quid Styga,
quid tenebras, quid nomina vana timemus? Why should we be so vain, as to be
afraid of Styx, Acheron, and such ridiculous Trifles? And Plato alone seems
only to speak doubtingly, when in his Phaedon, speaking of the Rewards of good
Men, concludes with a (...). I cannot positively determine in this matter.

To these I must add many more Testimonies, together with that large Quotation
of Pliny, with which our Author fills two whole Pages and more; but these may
suffice to make it appear that we can have no certainty of a future State but
from the Scriptures: And that Natural Religion, Mr. Blount's Diana, can give no
satisfaction in this Point controverted (as he says) by Men of the greatest
Learning and Parts.

It would be now worth knowing, what are the Expectations of a Deist, with
relation to this future State? To which Mr. Blount replies. (Page 91.) That
there is a probability of such a Deist's salvation, before the Credulous and
ill living Papists: which in truth is no more then this, the Deist has more
probability of his salvation then he that has none at all. Especially if he be
in earnest when he writes,

(Page 92.) That the Popish Religion stands on the same Foundation with Heathen
Idolatry. I say, if he be in earnest; for in his Notes on Philostratus, (p.
84.) speaking of Cato's Sarcasm (in Tully's second Book De Divinatione) with
Respect to the Pagan Southsayers, and blaming his profane Acquaintance, he
seems to be of another mind. Very miserable and sad must the condition of
Mankind be, if there be no certain Rules whereby Salvation may be obtained. Yet
such is the Condition into which Deism would bring us, although we live
according to its Principles.

Page 118. Seneca has not wanted Advocates for the assertion of his Opinion;
nay, even such who would pretend to justify it out of the very Scriptures
themselves: as when Solomon says (Eccl. 7.12.) Then shall the Dust return to
Dust as it was, and the Spirit to God that gave it -- And Eccles. 3.20, 21. All
go to the same place, all are of Dust, and all turn to Dust again; who knows
the Spirit of Man that goes upward, and the Spirit of the Beast that goes
downward to the Earth. Again, Eccles. 3.19. That which befalls the Sons of
Men, befalls Beasts, even one thing befalls them both; as the one dies, so
does the other; yea, they have all one Breath, so that a Man has no
preeminence above a Beast.

ANSWER.
Our Author takes it for granted, that Seneca was of opinion that the Soul was
mortal, the contrary has been proved be to questionable. These places of holy
Scripture have been made use of by Mr. Hobbs in his Leviathan, p. 303. The
great Art in managing this Argument, consists in confounding the Sense of those
several places of holy Scripture, which are to be interpreted a part from each
other; as is observed in Hobbs his Creed, p. 223. the Preacher in this Book
sets forth the beginning, progress and ripeness of his Disquisition, concerning
the Happiness of man: Wherefore in the beginning of his Enquiry, he sets
down his raw Apprehensions; and he relates in the first and second Chapters,
how he once thought Folly equal with Wisdom, and that there was nothing better
than to eat, and drink; and what adventures and trials he made toward the
better understanding of what was good for the Sons of Men. In his third
Chapter, he declares how full of Mystery he found the works of God (ver. 11.)
and how little was manifest, especially to sensual Men, of the future State:
But in the 11 and 12 Chapters, wherein he declares his advanced judgment, and
calls Men off from the World, to the thoughts of the day of Account, and to
the early Remembrance of their Creator; to the Fear of God, and the Observance
of his Commands: He lays it down as a positive Doctrine (a Doctrine apt to
promote such Observance, Fear, and Remembrance) which at first was delivered by
him as a Problem, or as the mistake of worldly Men, that when the wheel shall
be broken at the cistern, and the circle of our Blood utterly disturbed; then
the Dust shall return to the Earth as it was, and the Spirit shall return to
God who gave it.

This is a full and satisfactory Answer to the Advocates of this Opinion; yet
we might say wi^h good Reason and good Authority; That Solomon in the forecited
places, personates the Atheist, Raimundus Pug. Fid. p. 155.

What our Author affirms (p. 119) concerning some Men, who have misapplied
those forecited places of holy Writ, to the Anima Mundi of Pythagoras; and
which has been revived by Averroes, and Avicenna: And to what end (p. 125.) he
refers his Lordship the Right Honorable Strephon to Pomponatius, and
especially to Cardan, is here to be considered; because we may see from hence,
in what Authors our Deists are conversant, and how dangerous those Authors are.

Averroes (as Richer asserts, lib. 4. Hist. Genesis Council. par. ult. p. 22.) was
condemned in the Lateran Council, under Leo the X. because he held, That there
was one only Soul in all Men; which is the Universal Soul, the Anima Mundi.
Whereas it is certain that every Man has a particular Soul of his own. So that
this Doctrine of Averroes tends to the subversion of all Religion and Piety: a
Doctrine fit for the Devil. For as Cardan (in his 19. Book de Subtle) tells us,
the tallest of the Demons that talked with his Father, Palam Averroistam se
profitebatur, told him plainly, That he was an Averroist.

Pomponatius (as Dr. More lib. 3. de Immortal. anim. c. 16. informs us) was of
opinion, that there were not as many particular Souls, as Men. He acknowledged
the Wisdom and Miracles of Christ, but referred all to the Stars. This was the
Petrus Pomponatius, who was (as Richer says in the forecited place) Preceptor
to Pope Leo the X. and by whose command he writ the Book De Immortalitate
Animae: which was then generally read, as Books of that nature commonly are;
but thanks be to God, such Books are forbidden amongst us by Proclamation.

Cardan (to whom he especially refers the most Ingenious Strephon, p. 117.)
affirms the Law of Christ to be from Jupiter and Mercury: that Jupiter being in
the Ascendant was the cause of his so soon disputing with the Doctors in the
Temple: that it was Saturn tendered him sad; whence Josephus took occasion to
say, -- Visus est saepius flere, ridere nunquam. That Jupiter meeting with
Venus, was the cause of our Lord's having red Specks in his Face; for which he
cites, Josephus, saying, He was Lentiginosus in facie.

Out of what has been said, it clearly appears That Impious and Blasphemous
Authors are in repute with our Deists, and that consequently it is no wonder,
that such Oracles (as these Pretended Oracles of Reasons) are obtruded to the
World.

Lastly, it must not pass unobserved, That this Cardan, who has so wickedly
derogated from our Lord, has also falsely fathered on Josephus the two
forecited Assertions; neither is there the least footsteps of either of them in
any of the Works of Josephus.

Page 124. Besides the authority of the holy Scriptures, as also the
innumerable other arguments, which may be deduced as well from Philosophy as
Reason, to prove the Immortality of the Soul, together with its Rewards and
Punishments (though I determine not their Duration) yet there is no argument of
greater weight with me, than the absolute necessity and convenience that it
should be so; as well to complete the Justice of God, as to perfect the
Happiness of Man, not only in this World, but in that which is to come.
ANSWER.
That the Arguments which are brought from the Holy Scriptures, are only
sufficient to prove the Immortality of the Soul; and the Rewards and
Punishments of a Future State, has been proved already: and it will appear to
be so, by what remains to be said, with respect hereunto. Yet our Author,
although he appeals to their Authority, can have no benefit thereof: Forasmuch as
he makes our Savior and Moses Politicians, p. 121. And perhaps these Lawgivers
established the Immortality of the Soul, not so much out of regard to Truth, as
to Honesty, hoping thereby to induce Men to Virtue, p. 123.

His perhaps cannot excuse him from Blasphemy, and a design of Subverting the
Holy Oracles. For how little regard he has for them, appears from his
Parenthesis concerning the Duration of Future Rewards and Punishments, the
Scriptures being positive, as well in the one, as in the other; and the
Duration of them is of absolute necessity to complete the Justice of God, as to
persect the Happiness of Man, not only in this World, but in that which is to
come, if the Scriptures be true.

What he says of the Arguments which may be deduced from Philosophy and Reason,
we will now examine; and produce the strongest, and most insisted on. This
Argument is laid down by Plato in his Phaedrus, made use of by Tully in his
Tusculan Questions, Book the first, and in his sixth Book of a Commonwealth.

Plato is always preferred by Tully before Aristotle, and is called by him The
God of Philosophers. And now let us see how he proves the Soul's Immortality,
on which depend Future Rewards and Punishments: (...). That is that mighty
Argument which Plato calls a Demonstration; and concludes this is sufficient
for the demonstration thereof.

The Analysis of which is; The Soul is always in Motion; that which is always
in Motion, is Self-moving; that which is Self-moving, is never deserted of it
self; that which never deserts it self, never ceases to move; that which never
ceases to move, is the Source and Origin of all Motion; that which is the
Source of all Motion, has no Beginning; and that which has no Beginning, has
no Ending.

Whereas every Proposition is either false or uncertain, or incoherent, as Mr.
Parker in his Censure of the Platonic Philosophy has observed.

Many such like trifling Argumentations are remarked by Baptista Crispus. And
Theopompus truly maintains that many of Plato's Dialogues are trifling and
false, as many of them are stolen out of the Discourses of Aristippus, or
Antisthenes, or Bryson of Heraclea.

Can any Man in his right Wits imagine that the immortality of the Soul can be
proved from hence? Can any Man think that Plato himself thought this to be a
good Proof? Certainly I think notwithstanding his Boasts of a Demonstration, he
could not be so vain, nor so illogical, as to think so.

Manimus Tyrius, in his 28th Dissertation, tells us, that Pythagoras was the
first Philosopher among the Greeks, who did dare ((...) is his Word) to own the
Immortality of the Soul. Whereas if this had been a Matter of absolute
Necessity antecedent to Revelation, there had been no such Presumption in
Pythagoras. So that this Argument (of great Weight, as he calls it) is of no
Weight at all. It may perhaps become the Harangues of the Parsons (as our
Author scornfully writes, p. 118.) in a Country Auditory, but is very
unbecoming such a Damasippus and great Bearded Philosopher, as our Author is
accounted by his Admirers.

Pythagoras also (according to the foresaid Author) is said to be the first who
asserted the Pre-existence of Souls; which was a very general Opinion amongst
the Ancients. Of this Opinion were the Gymnosophists, and other wise Men of
Egypt, the Brachmans of India, the Magi of Babylon and Persia, as appears
plainly by the Magical Oracles of Zoroaster with the Scholies of Pletho, and
the Chaldaic Oracle with the Scholies of Psellus: Nay, Aristotle himself was of
this Opinion, as is to be seen in his second Book, De Generat. Animal. c. 3.
where his Opinion of the Immortality of the Soul and Pre-existence are so
connected, as if the one did suppose the other. Now the Arguments made use of
were exclusively drawn from the Soul's Operations incommunicable to the Body;
which is the best Argument Natural Reason can suggest. The Method of our Author
is wholly new, and the Weakness of it rather Subverts then Establishes what it
pretends.

Wherefore I shall conclude this Subject in the Words of the most learned
Bishop of Worcester, in the third Book of his Origines Sacrae, p. 608, and 609.

The Scriptures give the most faithful Representation of the State and
Condition of the Soul of Man. The World was almost lost in Disputes concerning
the Nature, Condition, and Immortality of the Soul, before Divine Revelation
was made known to Mankind by the Gospel of Christ; but Life and Immortality was
brought to Light by the Gospel, and the future State of the Soul of Man not
discovered in an uncertain Platonical way, but with the greatest Light and
Evidence from that God who has the Supreme Disposal of Souls, and therefore
best knows and understands them. The Scriptures plainly and fully reveal a
Judgment to come, in which God will judge the Secrets of all Hearts; when
every one must give an account of himself to God; and God will call Men to give
an account of their Stewardship here of all the Receipts they have from him,
and the Expenses they have been at, and the Improvements they have made of the
Talents he put into their Hands. So that the Gospel of Christ is the fullest
Instrument of the Discovery of the certainty of the future State of the Soul,
and the conditions which abide it, upon its being dislodged from the Body.

This Passage of that excellent Prelat is a full confirmation of what I have
written of this Subject, and a brief Refutation of this Oracle of Reason.

Page 126. It makes me admire at what you say, that a Person of such Honor,
Knowledge, and Judgment, as Sir Henry Savil was, should so far complement the
Jewish, as to rob the English World of the fifth Book of Tacitus 's History, by
omitting any part of it in his Version; since, according to the true Method of
Translating, an Author ought not to be drawn off, but generously and freely
p^ured out of one Language into another; least in separating him from the
Dregs, you ^^a^e the Spirit behind you.
ANSWER.
I do not remember Sir Henry Savil gives any Reason (why he omitted the
Translation of the fifth Book of Tacitus's History) either in his Epistle to
the Reader, or in his Notes, or in any other of his Learned Works. But I
suppose the true Reason was because Tacitus's account of the Jews is full of
Slanders, Falsehoods, and Contradictions. Wherefore Tertullian calls Tacitus
(though in other things an excellent Historian) mendaciorum plenissimus scriptor;
a Writer who abounded with Lies.

Tacitus in many places of his Account is contrary to the Holy Scriptures, so
that our Author may cease his Admiration, if he be in earnest in the 134th Page
of his Book, where he thus writes; The Relations of Trogus Tacitus, and the
rest, are only the uncertain Accounts of partial Authors, since the best and
only History extant to be relied on for this Subject is the Holy Scriptures,
dictated as every good Christian ought to believe by the Holy Spirit.

Whosomever considers that Deism is repugnant to Christianity (as I have
proved) may justly admire at these last Expressions.

For my part, I cannot liken Mr. Blount to any Man but to him in Lucian, who
was half White and half Black; or to him in the Comedy, that out of the same
Mouth blowed both Hot and Cold.

But he may in some fashion be excused, for he has really observed Pliny's
Rule, relating to the Title of his Book. That of Cardan in the 19th Book, De
Subtilitate, is here verified (and he says, demonstrated in his Book, De Fato)
Si Oracula ambigua non essent, non essent Oracula. If these Oracles are not
Ambiguous and Contradictory, they would not be Mr. Blount's Oracles.

And here I cannot but admire that Mr. Blount should be guilty of the same
fault, of which he accuses Sir Henry Savil, for he Translates not much above
two Thirds of Tacitus's account of the Jews. Shall we say he did this to
complement the Jewish, and to rob the English Nation of the Spirit behind? Was
he not obliged to do it for his deservedly Honored, and most Ingenious Major
A. as he calls him, p. 126? Or shall we say that he only separated the Dregs
for his ingenious Major A? I am sure he has been very disingenious in his
Translation, for he has not only abused his Major, but his Reader also; nay,
Tacitus himself.

Tacitus says that the Jews did, Effigiem animalis, quo monstratore errorem
sitimque depulerant, penetrali sacravere.

Which place he thus Translates, They likewise Consecrated the Effigies of an
Ass, for being their Guide to the Waters where they satisfied their Thirst.
Whereas Tacitus makes no mention of an Ass, unless Animal be Latin for an Ass.

And whereas Tacitus says they consecrated an Animal in penetrali, that is,
their Holy of Holies -- he omitted that Word. The Lie was so great that the
ingenious Major could not swallow it.

For my part I cannot conjecture why he should only translate two Thirds, and
omit the other, but that he conceived the Part untranslated would have spoiled
his Project. For there is a palpable Contradiction in Tacitus, which renders
his Account Fabulous. In the Part untranslated, Tacitus says, Aegyptii Effigies
venerantur, Judai sola mente. The Egyptians worship Images, the Jews abhor
them. Tacitus also adds, Judaei nulla simulachra habent in urbibus nedum in
Templis. The Jews have no Graven Images nor Idols to be seen in their Cities,
much less in their Temples. The contrary whereof we find in the Translation of
Mr. Blount, as also in Tacitus.

Page 132. Abraham and Moses seemed first to institute Religious Worship, and
both of them were well skilled in Egyptian Learning, which gave ^ecasion for
some to think, that Moses and the Jews took diverse of their Customs from the
Egyptians: as for instance their Circumcision, because Herodotus says, That the
Phaenicians and Syrians in Palestine (whieh must be the Jews, since none else
used it in Palestine) took their Circumcision from the Egyptians; as also (says
he) they confess the fame themselves; nor does Josephus deny as much.

ANSWER.
We know nothing for certain concerning the Institution of Divine Worship but
from Moses. And from him, ( Genesis 4. ver. 26.) we learn, That Men began to call
upon the Name of the Lord in the Days of Enos. That is, The number of Families
increasing in the Days of Enos, they appointed more Public Places for God's
Service, in which at set Times they might together, and in a more solemn
Congregation, worship their great Creator. This is the Sense of the Chaldeo
Interpreter, and approved by our present most Reverend Archbishop in his
Discourse of Idolatry, p. 40.

Josephus in the first Book of his Antiquities, Chap. 4. says, That for seven
Generations Men persevered in Worshipping the true God, and had a regard to
Virtue; but in process of Time Men degenerated and forsook (...), the
Institutions of their Ancestors. If this seems otherwise to Mr. Blount, it is
not to be wondered at, since, p. 17. he positively affirms, That it is evident
that the five Books of Moses were written by another Hand after his decease.

That Moses was instituted in the Egyptian Learning we readily grant; he was
accounted but some of the Gentiles an Egyptian Priest; but the same cannot be
affirmed of Abraham. Josephus is very plain, when in the first Book of his
Antiquities, Chap. 9. he asserts, That the Egyptians learned all the Knowledge
they had in Arithmetic and Astronomy from Abraham.

(...). When Abraham came into Egypt he taught the Egyptians Astronomy and
Arithmetic, of which they were ignorant before. So that the Knowledge of these
Sciences came first from the Chaldeans to the Egyptians, and from them to the
Greeks.

Whether Moses and the Jews took Circumcision from the Egyptians, has been a
Subject of great Dispute. The well known place in Herodotus seems to me to say
so much, although our late great Critic, Bisnagius, in his Exerc. Hist.
Critic. (p. 119.) will by no means grant it. Grotius in his Annotations on the
1st Book of the Truth of Christ Religion, cites Herodotus at large, and
charge Herodotus with reporting an Untruth. He does not deny but that
Herodotus says, that the Jews confess, that they learned the Rite of
Circumcision from the Jews: but he says Herodotus did them an Injury in saying
so. Tantum vero abest (says Grotius) ut Judaei fassi sunt unquam ab Aegyptiis
se accepisse hunc ritum, ut contra aperte dicunt Aegyptios ab Josepho didicisse
circumcidi; It Is so far from Truth, that the Jews should confess that they
received this Rite from the Egyptians; that on the contrary they boldly affirm
that the Egyptians learned Circumcision from Joseph. And for this Grotius in
the place cited refers to Authorities.

What Mr. Blount writes concerning Josephus, the Historian, is of no moment.
Josephus in the 8th. Book of his Antiquities, chapter 4. cites this place of
Herodotus. He cites the same place also in his first Book against Apian.
Neither does he deny in those places what Herodotus affirms, but is altogether
silent: of which Silence, Bisnagius Exerc. Hist. Crit. p. 120. gives a good
Account: Because (says he) Josephus had long before expressed his Opinion of
the Original of Circumcision, lib. 1. Antiq. c. 11. (...).

God commanded that the Posterity of Abraham should be circumcised, that they
might keep themselves a part, and separate from all others. And Josephus to the
same purpose, lib. 1. c. 22. (...), Abraham being an hundred years old, when
Isaac was born, who was circumcised the eighth day: And the same custom is
continued for the Circumcision of Children, after the same number of days.

From which it necessarily follows, That Josephus his Opinion of Circumcision,
was very different from that of Herodotus: He says the Jews had it from the
Egyptians; Josephus says, they had it from God, and that they might be
distinguished from other Nations; and consequently Circumcision was among the
Jews long before the Egyptians had it. So that Mr. Blount may justly be accused
of Incogitancy, and of not Reading the Authors he cites.

Of this Opinion, or not much differing from it, was Photius, that Learned
Patriarch of Constantinople, in his 205th. Ep. to Theod. Hegumenos. (...), etc.
The Circumcision of Abraham and his Posterity, was instituted as an Emblem of
Restraint from Incestuous Copulations: The Chaldeans did lie with their
Mothers, Daughters, and Sisters, by a wicked and abominable Custom. Wherefore
that neither Abraham, nor his Posterity should be polluted with these their
wicked Practices, God instituted Circumcision. The circumcising his own Flesh,
importing the dividing and averting him from those of his Consanguinity, or
Affinity, in respect of Conjugal Conversation. Whereas the Chaldeans Impurity
and Incest, continued a long while after Abraham's time, without either Fear or
Shame.

And here it must not pass unobserved, That Mr. Blount makes use of the same
Method, that the professed Enemies of Christianity did of old. Julian the
Apostate affirmed that the Jews learned to Circumcise from the Egyptians; as we
are told by St. Cyril, Book the Tenth, contra Julianum, p. 354. And Celsus
affirms the same thing; to whom Origin, Lib. 2. p. 17. returns this Answer,
(...). That Abraham was the first of all Mankind that was Circumcised.

SECT. VIII. Of Marrying two Sisters, Judaism, Christianity, Millenaries.
Page 136. It is lawful to marry two Sisters: The first Text of Scripture which
is commonly urged in this case, is that of marrying a Brother's Wife, which
seems to be forbidden; where by a side wind, they would bring in that of
marrying a wife's Sister, as parallel, saying, Ubi eadem ratio, ibi idem Jus;
but with their Pardon, the Simile does not run upon four feet; the reason is
not the same, for the words (in Leviticus 18. and 16.) which forbid the
marrying a Brother's Wife, say, Because a Man thereby uncovers his Brother's
nakedness; which seems not at all to be a good reason against marrying the
Wife's Sister; because every Man is supposed to have discovered his first
Wife's nakedness before any such Marriage with her Sister.
ANSWER.
Our Author's Opinion concerning Marrying two Sisters, seems to me grounded on
that which He calls (in the 106 p. of his Book) the bewitching smiles of a
Woman; whom he there unhandsomly denominates, The most lovely Brute of the
Universe. And I doubt not but his Friend Torismond (as he calls him p. 135.)
looks on it as his best Argument.

We do not say that Similies always run on four feet, but I am sure the present
Similies do. The reason of the Law is the same, both as to Brothers and
Sisters: And whereas he says, Every Man is supposed to have discovered his
first Wife's nakedness; He seems not to understand the Scripture Phrase,
which is only used with relation to a turpitude committed by an unlawful
Marriage. If a Woman marries her Father, she discovers the nakedness of her
Mother in a Scriptural sense; though in our Author's Unscriptural sense, Her
Mother's nakedness was discovered before by Her Father.

Mr. Seldom in his Vxor Hebraica, Book first Chap. 6. tells us (that whereas we
read in the 16th. Verse of the 18th. Chapter, It is thy Brother's nakedness) in
a most ancient Copy of the Greek Version, in the King's Library at Saint
James's: Instead of Turpitudo est fratri tui, the words are (...), She is thy
Brother's Wife: Quasi (says Seldom) ipso nomine seu turpitudinis, seu nuditatis
fratris foemina, seu uxor ejus expressim nominaretur: As if (says he) he by the
words turpitude, or nakedness, of this Brother, his Woman, or his Wife, was
expressly named. If this Remark of Mr. Selden's be well, it is of good use: So
that the Reason of the Law is the same in marrying of two Sisters, as marrying
a Brother's Wife.

The Sense of the Law with Relation to Brothers, is, Thou shall not uncover the
nakedness of thy Brother's Wife, for it is thy Brother's nakedness. And by a
parity of reason, Thou shall not uncover the nakedness of thy wife's Sister,;
for it is thy Wife's nakedness. What our Author says concerning Penal Laws,
that they are tied up to the very Letter, is true; but it has no place, ubi
eadem oration, Where there is the same reason. And therefore the Karans, or
Scripturians among the Jews (who are opposed to the Talmudists or Traditionals)
that bind themselves most to the Scripture Rule, have resolved this matter:
First, that there is place for Argument and Deduction, from the words of the
Law: Secondly, that whatsoever can be deduced thence, either a fortiori, or a
pari; either because the remoter degree is prohibited, or that which is equally
remote, is to be deemed piously and rightfully concluded.

Thus when ver. 7. the Father and Mother are both named; and v. 12. The
Father's Sister: And v. 13. The Mother's Sister: And v. 14. The Father's
Brother: yet the Mother's Brother is not named; nor the Sister's Daughter,
which would be equivalent with that. And yet this being the Marriage of the
Uncle on the Mother's side with the Niece, which is of the same distance with
the Uncle of the Father's side, with the Niece, and the Aunt on the Mother's
side, with the Nephew, from the naming and prohibition of these, ver. 13 and
14. by the parity of reason, that which is not named, is by all resolved to be
prohibited.

And as Dr. Hammond p. 436. has observed, just thus it is in this matter. The
Wife's Sister, which is not named, is directly in the same degree of
Propinquity, with the Brother's Wife, which is named and prohibited.

Page 138. The Canon of Scripture, which seems more nearly to concern this
case, is Leviticus 18. ver. 18. where it is said, Neither shall thou take a
wife to her sister to vex her, to uncover her nakedness, besides the other in
her life time: But this does not therefore seem to restrain or prohibit the
marrying of two sisters one after the other; for the first being dead, the
other cannot be a Rival or vexation (as the Text calls it) to her dead sister:
And then how shall the Prohibition be urged, if the reason of it be removed? it
is rationally apparent that there is great stress placed in those Expressions
(during her life) and (to vex her, in uncovering her shame upon her) as does
more fully appear in our Translation of the Bible in Queen Elizabeth 's Reign,
printed An. Dom. 1599.
ANSWER.
If, as Mr. Blount says p. 137. all Penal Laws are straightly tied up to the
express Letter of the Law (where there is par ratio, the like or same reason)
and no where to be construed by Parallels; he has lost more for his purpose in
this place of holy Scripture, than he got by the former. For then nothing can
be concluded from this place of Leviticus, for marrying a Wife's Sister after
her death, the express Letter of the Law mentions nothing of it. All that can
be said for it from this place, is by deduction and consequence.

I shall therefore give a full Solution in the words of the foresaid Learned
Doctor: p. 437. if by the English reading of our Bibles, Leviticus 18. ver. 18.
(Neither shall thou take a wife to her sister to vex ber, to uncover her
nakedness, beside the other in her lifetime) it be thought that the marrying
the Wife's Sister in her life time, be the only thing forbidden, that will
presently be answered from the margent of our Translation, where the Hebrew
word is fitly and truly rendered [Not a wife to her sister] but [one wife to
another] and so is a direct Prohibition of Polygamy; at least, when the first
is deprived and vexed, by taking in of the second, but not a Permission to
marry, that was otherwise prohibited.

Page 140. By the Apostolical Canons, a Person marrying two Sisters, was not to
be a Priest; but that was the only punishment laid upon him: but does not
prejudice a layman, such as my Friend Torismond, who I presume never designs
to enter into the Priestly Office, unless it were to be a Confessor to the Fair
Sex.
ANSWER.
I am glad to hear Mr. Blount's Friend Torismond does not design to enter into
holy Orders: God forbid that such principled Men should have any benefit of the
Clergy.

The mistake of Grotius (mentioned p. 139.) proceeds from his not consulting
the Hebrew, as appears from what has been written before, from the Margent of
our Translation.

The Apostolical Canon, so much used in this Controversy, is the 19. (...). He
who has married two Sisters, or the Brother's Daughter, ought not to be
admitted into holy Orders.

Now as Grotius, and after him our Author, were mistaken, by following the
vulgar Greek Translation, so they are both here mistaken in their Inference
from this Canon. And forasmuch as Doctor Hammond's Answer to this Difficulty,
is most excellent; I will set it down in his own words: Where if it be thought,
that this is no mark of the unlawfulness of the thing, but only an Interdict to
the Clergy, that they shall not marry thus, leaving it free to others: this
will be the same strange way of arguing, as if from the Qualifications of the
Bishop, set down by St. Paul, that he should be no drunkard, no covetous
person, etc. i. e. that such as are so, should not be admitted to holy Orders,
we should conclude that these Qualities might be free and lawful for other Men,
who were not Ecclesiastics; or because the Bishop must be one that has not
married after such divorces, as are forbidden by Christ; and the Widow is to be
the Wife but of one Husband in like manner, it were therefore lawful for all
other Christians to use such divorces, and marry again, which we know was
prohibited by Christ; or that other Christian Women might have more Husbands,
or leave one, and marry another; which we know was never lawful among any
Civil, though Heathen People. The plain of it is, that the only thing conclusible
from the Interdicts of the Church Canons, is the frequency of such practices
among Unbelievers, which made it necessary to revive and refresh the
Prohibition to Christians: To whom, under Christ, such Marriages were reputed
so foul, and the state of such sins being permanent, did so muchen hance them
above the nature of single acts of greater sins; that, although for every
commiston of any known sin, a Man were not made incapable of any Dignity in the
Church (or rendered irregular, if after the receiving Orders, he were found
guilty) yet of these sins he that were once guilty, should for ever remain
under a brand, and be counted incapable of Holy Orders, which he that were
otherwise worthy, would not surely have been, had it not been accounted
unlawful, before that Canon inflicted that punishment on the offender. And then
it being acknowledged that Christ has not descended to the specifying of such
particulars; and that the Apostle that speaks of one such sin, says it was
not named among the Gentiles; the result will be, that this brand of the
Apostolical Canon, is founded in the Universal Prohibition, obliging all Men,
and so the Christians of all Nations, as well as the Jews; and that not
abrogated, but confirmed, and by stricter Precepts of Continence, and
Denunciations against the Incontinent, continued on the Christian by Christ

I know nothing in this account of this Great Man, but will pass muster, save
only that passage; in which he affirms, That it was never lawful among any
Civil, though Heathen People, that a Woman might leave one Husband, and marry
another.

For I am persuaded there was such a Law among the Athenians. Plutarch in the
Life of Alcibiades says, That His Wise Hipparete, being a very chaste woman,
and being provoked by his Adulteries, would have divorced him; and that the Law
was, that she should depose (...), that she should depose the Bill of Divorce
with the Archon, according to Law. But Alcibiades by slight of hand prevented
it, by tearing the Bill in pieces. However this shows what the Law was among
the Athenians.

Whether there was such a Law among the Romans, I do not remember; but their
practice is manifest.

Sic fiunt octo Mariti
-- quinque per Autumno. Juven. Sat. 6.
It was grown a Custom among the Women to have eight Husbands in five Years.

Et nubet decimo jam Telesina viro.

Martial lib. 6. Telesina is resolved to marry the tenth Husband.

And Seneca lib. 3. de Benefic. cap. 16. Non consulum, sed maritorum numero
annos computant; The Women now adays do not compute their Years by the
Consuls, but by their Husbands.

Joseph Scaliger in his Animadvesions on Eusebius, gives us this short, but
pertinent Account, Apud Romanos and Graecos, tam mulier quam vir, potest alter
alteri dicere, ut res suas sibi habeat, quin nomina rei illius propria jure
Attico prodita erant, ut si vir discederet ab uxore hoc diceretur (...), si
mulier diceretur (...). That is,

It was a Practice both among the Romans and Greeks, for Women as well as Men,
to Divorce each other. And there are proper Words in the Laws of the Athenians,
whereby both these Divorces are expressed. If the Divorce be on the Man's side,
it is called a Dismission, if on the Woman's side a Dereliction.

Had Friend Torismond been Confessor to the fair Sex ( p. 140.) in those Days,
he would have been much pestered with those lovely Brutes, ( p. 160.)

But I must beg Pardon for dealing thus rudely with the Ashes of one of the
learned Men of his time; and if I should say one of the exactest Critics in
Europe, I should say but a precise Truth. And perhaps (as I truly believe) it
was but a slip of the Pen. But I shall now take my Leave of him, and meet Mr.
Blount and Grotius, who has afforded him so much Assistance in this Point. It
is to be lamented that such a Person should give any Countenance to so great an
Error.

Page 142. Canon Elibertinus 61. Si Quis post obitum uxoris suae, sororem ejus
duxerit and ipsa fuerit fidelis, per quinquennium cum a communione abstinere;
eo ipso ostendens, manner vinculum Matrimonii; and ut jam diximus in Canonibus
qui Apostolici dicuntur, qui duas sorores duxerit aut fratris filiam tantum
Clericus fieri prohibetur. This Mr. Blount has out of Grotius, lib. 2. cap. 5.
de Iure pacis and Belli, and he thus Translates it; If any one after the Death
of his Wife, Marries her Sister, and she proves faithful to him, he must,
during five Years, abstain from the Communion; which plainly shows that the
Bond of Matrimony still remains inviolable: And as we have already said, in
those Canons which are called Apostolical, whosoever Marries two Sisters or his
Brothers Daughter, is only forbid to be a Priest.

ANSWER.
Mr. Blount in his Translation, has changed the ipsa, She, into ipsi, Him; the
Nominative into the Dative. He has changed the Sense of Fidelis, which here
signifies a Christian, and is opposed to Gentilis, a Gentile, into a Woman's
Chastness and Fidelity, to her Husband; which, as Gabriel Albaspine, sometimes
Bishop of Orleance,, in his Notes on this Council shows, alters the Case much.

I much admire how Grotius could gather out of this Council, that the Bond of
such a Matrimony should remain inviolable, since the Canon makes no mention
thereof, it is very illogical to conclude so peremptorily from the silence of
tne Council, and from a Negative to infer such an Affirmative, which we have
reason to think repugnant to the Opinion of the Council. If a Man commits
Incest by Marryng his Daughter, the highest Spiritual Punishment the Church can
inflict is Excommunication; how unreasonable would it be to conclude from
hence, that the Church did adjudge the Bond of such a Matrimony to be
inviolable?

That Mr. Blount did err in this Conclusion, is a thing not much to be wondered
at; Grotius's Authority is a probable Apology for an Error. Would to God he had
followed him in all things. But in this Mr. Blount is blameable, that he is not
agreeable to himself. His Rule, ( p. 137.) is, That Penal Laws are straightly to
be tied to the express Letter of the Law. If this be true, he has transgressed
his own Rule in his Reduction and Inference from this Canon, which is purely
Penal; the greatest Punishment in the Old Canon Law is Excommunication, as
Duarenus has it in his Body of the Canon Law.

And the same is asserted by Petrus de Marca, in his Book, de Concordia, by
Widdrincton, in his Apology for Princes, by Richerius, in his Book of
Ecclesiastical Authority, and others who are reputed most Learned in the Roman
Communion.

This Punishment is inflicted on Incest, Homicide, Adultery, and other grievous
Crimes. St. Austin in his first Book, Contra advers. Legis and Prophet. says,
that to be Excommunicated, is, Gravius quam ferro puniri, quam flammis consumi,
quam feris subjici; it is a greater Punishment than to be Beheaded, than to be
consumed by Fire, than to be thrown before Wild beasts to be devoured.
Tertullian in his Apol. Sect. 39. calls it, Censura Divina, God's Censure.
Summumque futuri judicii praejudicium est, si quis ita deliquerit, ut a
communicatione orationis, and Conventus, and omnis sancti commercii relegetur.
The Excommunicating of a Man, and separating of him from the Benifit of the
public Prayers, and the holy Communion, and the holy Assemblies, is a
representation of the final judgment of Condemnation at the last Day. This is
Religiously to be considered of by such Persons, who in our Days make a Mock
at, and contemn Ecclesiastical Authority.

What concerns the Apostolical Canons in this Paragraph has been before
examined. He that impartially weighs the weakness of Mr. Blount's Inference
from the silence of the Canon in this place, and the weakness of his other
Arguments, must think him over bold; when ( p. 136.) he declares, That in the
Defense of Marrying two Sisters, he will enter the Lists of Argument against
any Levitical or Canonical Gamester whatever.

The Queries and other things which in this Controversy are made use of by Mr.
Blount in the following Pages, being only Corallaries and Conclusions of what
has been examined and refuted, we wholly pretermit as unnecessary and
inconsiderable.

I purposed here to have concluded this Subject, but considering two things
relating thereunto, and that one serves for the better illustrating what has
been already written; and the other discovers the great Disingenuity of Mr.
Blount: I shall try my Readers Patience a little longer, whilst I lay them down
in order. The first is this,

There are several learned Men in the World who prefer the Greek Version of the
70, before the present Hebrew, which they account as a Copy, not an Original.
And whereas the contrary Hypothesis is the Ground of our Answer, to that place
of the 18th of Leviticus, Ver. 8. which is the principal place in the whole
Controversy: I think it convenient to wave this Privilege, and to join Issue
upon the contrary Hypothesis. I shall therefore lay down the Argument as it is
in the Oracles, and subjoyn an Answer.

Page 139. The Translation of the Bible in Queen Elizabeth 's Reign, Printed
Anno Dom. 1599. reads that of Leviticus after this manner -- Thou shall not
take a Wife with her Sister, during her Life to vex her, in uncovering her
Shame upon her.

Which seems to be very suitable to the Greek Translation, (...), where the
Prohibition running upon these Terms, or containing these Conditions, That a
Man shall not take a Wife (...), with her Sister, (...), during her Life,
because it would be (...), a Vexation to her; but she being dead, all those
Inconveniences expire with her, and so it may probably be imagined, Cessante
ratione cessat prohibitio.

ANSWER.
This Case of Marrying two Sisters was much agitated in the Primitive Times;
the Apostolical Canons, and the Council of Eliberis, are sufficient Proofs
hereof. In the times of St. Basil this Question was Controverted; especially
between him and one Diodorus, or by one under his Name; (as appears out of St.
Basil, Epist. 197.) and as great brags were then made, as now by Mr. Blount.
And this Oracle was then carried about as a Trophy, over that eminent Father.

The excellent Reply St. Basil made, may make us cease to wonder why Grotius
did not cite it. To be sure his Silence is a sufficient Shield for Mr. Blount,
we will therefore translate what is there written, and pass over the Original
which is very long.

Because (says he) the Writer of the Epistle by corrupt Argumentation has
endeavored to induce Men into the Commission of so grievous a Sin: It is a
necessary Duty incumbent on us to prevent the same by true Ratiocination. The
Epistle says it is written in Leviticus, Thou shall not Marry thy Wife's Sister
to vex her, whilst she is living. From whence (says the Epistle) it is
manifest, you may Marry her Sister when your Wife is dead.

We are asked, Whether it is not written, That a Man may Marry his Wife's
Sister? We say it is a certain Truth, that no such thing is written. No Person
but the Legislator ought by virtue of any Consequence to infer any thing from
the silence of a Law. For if this Liberty be allowed, a Man may Marry his
Wife's Sister though his Wife be Living. For this, Sophism will serve that turn
too; it is written, Thou shall not take thy Sister, that she may not vex thy
Wife; therefore where there is no Vexation in the case, the thing is lawful.
They who are for this Opinion may soon pretend, that there will be no Vexation
nor Jealosies between the two Sisters. Wherefore the Cause being removed, for
which the Legislator prohibited a Man to have two Sisters to Wife at one time,
What should hinder it? But you will say this is not written in the Law; neither
(say I) is the other there written. But, I say, if Consequences be allowed, the
Consequence is equal on either side, it grants equal License and Liberty.

How much this sort of Marriage was abominated by the Ancient Christians, St.
Basil abundantly declares, when in his Epistle he makes (...), Uncleanness to
be the cause of it, and the Marriage it self he calls (...), an unlawful
dwelling together, and no Marriage.

You may see how effectually Basil has refuted this pretended Oracle without
Recourse to the Hebrew; for he makes use only of the Translation of the 70. and
Quotes the place of Leviticus in the same manner our Deist does; the
Septuaginta having suffered no Alteration in this place.

Page 144. Whether the Solution of Justinian in the like cases of Affinity, in
the first Book of his Institutions (Tit. 10. de Nuptiis) be not properly
applicable to Leviticus 18. Ver. 18. Si una tibi nupta est, ideo alteram uxorem
ducere non poteris, quia duas sorores eodem tempore habere non licet -- If you
are Married to one, you cannot Marry the other, because you cannot, that is,
you ought not to be Married to two Sisters at one time.
ANSWER.
I do not remember that I have met with a greater Disingenuity in any Author,
than I have here found in this place of Mr. Blount's. I have consulted
Justinian's Institutes, with the Commentaries of Antonius Contius, Jacobus
Gothofredus, and Franciscus Acoursius, and I cannot find the place cited in any
of these Editions. There is a place or two (Tit. de Nuptiis) concerning
Marrying two Wifes, but not a Word of Marrying two Sisters. So that I have
reason to think, that Mr. Blount wilfully and fraudulently changed these Words,
duas uxores, (twice used in that Title) into duas sorores; two Wifes into two
Sisters; although the present case is wholly omitted. And I am verily persuaded
that nothing can excuse him, unless perhaps some invisible Manuscript, or some
Edition never heard of before.

It is not to be passed over in silence, that our Deist in this Page proposes a
Query concerning the Canons of the Church of England, viz. Whether if any of
the Canons of the Church of England be dubious, it may not be proper and
convenient to consult the ancient Canons for Explanation and Illustration?

What he designs by this Query (his other Queries have either nothing to the
purpose, or have been already answered) I cannot conjecture; considering his
Concessions relating to the 99th Canon, and the Table of Marriage set forth by
Authority, 1563. Wherefore to put all out of doubt, and to vindicate the
Perspicuity of the forementioned Canon, and that the Illustration it receives
from former Canons, makes more against Mr. Blount then otherwise: I will set
down the Opinion of our Church concerning these Marriages, out of the Book
Entitled -- Liber quorundam Canonum disciplinae Ecclesiae Anglicanae, Anno
1581. in which Book we find these Words -- Omnia Matrimonia, quae uspiam
contracta sunt intra gradus cognationis aut affinitatis prohibitos in 18
Levitici, autoritate Episcopi diss^lventur: maxim vero si quis priore uxore
demortua, ejus sororem uxorem duxerit: hic enim gradus communi Dostorum virorum
consensu and judicio pu^atur in Levitico prohiberi. That is, All Marriages
which have been at any time contracted within the Degrees of Cognation or
Affinity, prohibited in the 18th of Leviticus, shall by Episcopal Authority be
dissolved: Especially if a Man marries his deceased Wife's Sister. It is the
Opinion of the Learned, that this Degree is prohibited in the forenamed Book of
Leviticus. The Conclusion is very obvious, and our Author's wonted Subtilty
has proved a Disadvantage to his Design.

Page 157. I cannot find any Authentic Ground to believe, that the Sects among
the Jews were more Ancient then the Days of the Maccabees.
ANSWER.
It is a common Opinion among learned Men, that all the Sects of the Jews had
their Beginning after the Death of their Prophets. And this is substantially
proved by Cunaeus, lib. 2. c. 17. de Repub. Hebraeorum; But how long after
their Deaths, is a very great Question; as Pfeiffer says, Exercit. 4ta.
speaking of the Pharisees.

Casaubon in his first Exercit. against Baronius, quotes Josephus, lib. 13. c.
9. for mentioning the Pharisees, Sadduces, and Essenes, in the Affairs of
Jonathan Asmonaeus, 140 Years before the Nativity of Christ. The same Josephus,
lib. 18. c. 2. affirms, that those three Sects, or as he calls them,
Philosophies, were known to the Jews, (...), which the Translator renders,
multis retro saeculis, many Ages past.

Of all their Sects the Sadduces are the most ancient, and Casaubon in the
place cited thinks the Pharisees to be soon after them. Antigonus Sochaeus
(whose Disciple Zadoch, the Author of the Sect of the Sadduces was) succeeded
Simeon the Just, whom the Jews commonly, and among them Abraham Zacuth, makes
to be the same with Jaddus that went out to meet Alexander 330 Years before
Christ. So that Mr. Blount seems to be somewhat mistaken as to the Antiquity of
these Sects.

Page 158. The Introduction of those Sects, and of that Caballa, occasioned
that Exposition of the Prophecy of Jacob, viz. The Scepret shall not depart
from Judah, nor a Lawgiver between his Feet, until Shiloh come, and unto him
shall the gathering of the People be, from whence they did (according to that
fantastic Caballa) imagine, that whenever the Scepter should depart from
Judah, and the Dominion thereof cease, that then there should arrive a Messiah.
ANSWER.
The Exposition of this Place with respect to the Messiah is evident from the
Consent of the Ancient Jews, who never understood it in any other manner. All
the old Paraphrasts, call, Shilo the Messiah; the Targum of Jerusalem renders
it expressly until the time, when King Messiah shall come. Jonathan renders it
until the time when Messiah shall come. Onkilos until Messiah come, whose is
the Kingdom. The Talmud also reckons Shilo, among the Names of the Messiah.
Hoornbeck writing of the Conversion of the Jews, reckons the Concurrence of
diverse Rabbis to this Interpretation: And to the same purpose, Morney du
Plessis, in his Book of the Truth of Christian Religion, cap. 27. all which
Authorities assure us, that the Ancient Jews understood this Prophesy of the
Messiah; and that this was no Imagination, according to a Fantastic Cabbala,
as is wickedly suggested.

The truth of this exposition is Confirmed, by the Words which follow, To him
shall the gathering of the People be. For this is the same Character, by which
he was declared to Abraham, In thy Seed shall all the Nations of the Earth be
blessed. He was signified also by this Character in the Prophet Isaiah, In that
day there shall be a Root of Jesse, which shall stand for an Ensign of the
People; to it shall the Gentiles seek, and his rest shall be Glorious. As also
in the Prophet Micah, The Mountain of the House of the Lord shall be
Established on the top of the Mountains, and it shall be Exalted above the
Hills, and the People shall flow unto it.

And thus the Blessing of Judah is plainly understood, Judah thou art He whom
thy Brethren shall praise. Thy hand shall be in the Neck of thine Enemies, thy
Fathers Children shall bow down before thee.

Now this Blessing was to make way for a greater. This Government was not to
fail, until there came a Son out of Judah's Loins greater than Him. For whereas
Judah's Dominion reached only to the Tribes of Israel; the Dominion of Him who
came out of His Loins should be over the World, all Nations shall serve him.

Seeing then that this Exposition is not only according to the ancient Jews,
but according to the Scriptures themselves: How greatly has Mr. Blount erred,
in affirming that this Exposition was occasioned by the introduction of Sects
among the Jews.

Page 158. As for the Messiah being of the line of David, this was no general
Opinion; for how then could any have imagined Herod the great to have been the
Messiah?
ANSWER.
If this way of arguing be good, there is no general Opinion concerning any
thing: Leo Modena, in his History of the present Jews, (p. 249.) acquaints us,
that the 12th. Article of their Belief is, That the Messiah is yet to come. And
Modena page 247. says, that this is one of those Articles, which are generally
believed by all Jews without contradiction. Yet Isaac Vossius, p. 226. of the
Sibilline Oracles, tells us, Ne nunc quidem inter Judaeos desint, qui Herodem
pro Messia admittant; There are not wanting now some among the Jews, who affirm
that Herod was the Messiah. Is there any Opinion more general than that of the
Existence of God, yet some Philosopers have denied it? Have there not been some
Prodigies in Nature, who denied that there was any such thing in the World as
Motion? yet nothing can be more evident. Aristotle in his Metaphysics disputes
against some, who denied that it implied a Contradiction, for the same thing to
be, and not to be at the same time: (...): Yet I presume most men think the
contrary to be a general Opinion. In a word, this Method of Argumentation used
by our Author, is very ridiculous: For what Tully, in his Books de not. Deorum,
speaks, is very manifest: Nihil tam absurdum quod non dixerit aliquis
Philosophorum; Nothing contained so great an absurdity, but some Philosopher or
other would contend for it.

Page 158. How could Josephus fix that Character upon Vespasian, as Him who
should restore the Empire and glory of Israel, to whom all Nations should bow
and submit unto his Scepter?
ANSWER.
Josephus sought the Favor of the Romans, and He was kindly used by them; so
that it is not so strange He should interpret Oracles in Favor of Vespasian:
None of the Jews besides Him did so.

Philostratus says, That Apollonius Tianaeus was familiar with Vespasian; and
He indeed applied the Oracles of the Messiah, or King promiss'd to Vespasian:
but He was a vain Sycophant, a Magician, and in this very ridiculous.

But notwithstanding their Flatteries, Vespasian was of another Mind. He was
persuaded that the Oracle did belong to one of the Jewish Nation, and of
David's Family; wherefore He made it his Business to destroy the whole Race of
that Family, as Eusebius informs us, lib. 3. cap. 11. and 12.

Page 158. I do not read that the Jews harbored any such Exposition during
their Captivity under Nebuchadnezzar, albeit that the Scepter was at that time
so departed from the Tribe of Judah, that it was never resetled in it more.
ANSWER.
I have already made it plain, that the authentic Paraphrasts of the Jews
understand it, in this sense, as also God's holy Prophets. Our Author takes for
granted, That there should always be a King of the Tribe of Judah, until the
Coming of the Messiah: which is not affirmed by the Prophesy. We readily
acknowl'dge that Judah was not a Kingdom, till the Coming of the Messiah: for
there was no kingly Authority in Judah before David, nor after Zedekiah. Unless
you perhaps count the Macchabees (of whose Tribe there is some dispute, as Du
Plessis Morney assures us, c. 29. of his book of the truth of the Christian
Religion) or Herod, who was an Idumaean. The Meaning therefore of the Prophesy
is, Not that Judah should have a King till the Messiah came, or that it should
not cease to be a Kingdom; but that it should not cease to be a State, a Body
Politic, having Power of Government within its self, until Messiah came.
Wherefore the Seventy, for Sceptrum, a Scepter, translate (...), a Ruler, not
(...) a King. (...); a Governor should not fail to be in Judah. It should not
cease to be a Government, although it had no King of that Title. It cannot be
said that the Scepter departs from the Poles, whether the Elector of Saxony, or
Prince of Conti enjoy it

And to this purpose Episcopius in his Institutions truly asserts, Nec
dubitandum quin respublica ista, quando ei praecrant Levitae Hasmon^i, aut
Herodes Idumaeus, aut quicunque alius, eamque ex legibus and more populi
regebant, respublica semper manserit populi Judaici, eaque nomenclatura ubique
venerit ut ex historia temporum manifestum est: It Is not to be doubted but that
it was the Republic of Jewry, when the Hasmonean Levites presided, or Herod
the Idumean, or whosomever else governed according to the Laws and Customs of
the People of Jewry. This Republic so long continued, and it had that
Denomination, as is manifest out of History. The forecited Honor. Du Plessis,
in the 29. c. positively and truly affirms, Quod ipsi Sanhedrin seu Juces 70.
quos R. Moses Hadarsan ante adventum Messiae non destituros dicebat, sub
Assyriorum jugo and sub Macchabaeorum Principatu persever abant: The Sanhedrin,
or 70 Judges, whom Rabbi Moses Hadarsan asserted, should not cease till the the
Coming of the Messiah, continued under the Bondage of the Assyrians, and the
Government of the Macchabees. He also adds, In ipsa captivitate habuerunt
perpetuo Judaei suum Reschgaluta, id est Principem exulum ex tribu Juda, exque
ipsa Davidis stirpe, quod Judaeorum Historiae testantur: The Jewish Historians
testify, That when they were in Captivity, they had their Prince of the Tribe
of Judah, of the Family of David. And yet Mr. Blount, contrary to all these
Authorities, peremptorily says, That the Scepter in the Captivity under
Nebuchadnezzar, so departed from the Tribe of Judah, as that it was never
resetled in it more: A plain Argument He had not well considered Revealed
Religion, which so ignorantly he impugns.

Page 159. Other Prophecies are either general, and indefinitly expressed, as to
the time of their accomplishment; or inexplicable from their obscurity, or
uncertain as to their Authority: such as are the Weeks of Daniel, which Book
the Jews reckon among their Hagiographa, or Sacred, but not Canonical Books.
ANSWER.
The Prophesies of the Prophet Daniel, which expressly point at the time of the
Messiah's Coming, and concur with our JESUS, are very considerable. The
Prophesy in the 9th. of Daniel, ver. 24, 25 and 26. Seventy Weeks are
determined upon thy people, and upon thy holy city, to finish the
transgression, and to make an end of sins, and to make reconciliation for
iniquity, and to bring in the everlasting righteousness, and to seal up the
vision and prophesy, and to anoint the most holy: Ver. 25. Know therefore and
understand, that from the going forth of the commandment, to restore and
rebuild Jerusalem, unto the Messiah the Prince, shall be seven weeks, and
threescore and two weeks; the street shall be built again, and the war, even in
troublous times: Ver. 26. And after threescore and two weeks shall Messiah be
cut off, but not for Himself; and the people of the Prince that shall come,
shall destroy the city, and the sanctuary, and the end thereof shall be with a
flood, and unto the ends of the war desolations are determined: Ver. 27. And he
shall confirm the Covenant with many for one week, and in the midst of the
week, he shall cause the sacrifice and oblation to cease, and for the
overspreading of Abominations; he shall make it desolate, even until the
consummation, and that determined shall be poured upon the desolate.

This Prophesy is clearly meant of the Messiah, because here we have not only
his Name, but his Sufferings; and the account of his Sufferings, not for
himself, but the People. The ancient Jews understood this place of the Messiah:
Hoornbeck to this purpose tells us, that R. Saadias a gaon, Rabbi Naahman
Gerundensis, and diverse others expound this place of the Messiah. At last he
gives us Manasse Ben Israel, which being very material, I shall quote it at
large out of him: Verum ut addam illud interpretationis hujus prophetiae, vary
etiam illa ab hujus aevi Hebraeis explicata est, neque illud mirum cuique
videre debet, si in prophetia tam obscura variant sententiae. But that I might
add this of the Interpretation of this Prophesy, for this is variously
expounded by the Hebrews of this Age: neither let this be a wonder to any, if
there be a difference of opinions in so obscure a Prophesy. There are therefore
those who take these 70 weeks so, that they say, After the end of them the
Messiah is to come, who would constitute the Jews Lords of the whole Earth. And
this truly all those did imagine that took arms against the Roman Emperor: and
although they were obnoxious to many miseries and labors, yet notwithstanding
they always placed their hope in the Messiah that was to come; because they
thought he would afford the sight of himself when they were in the midst of
their miseries: wherefore these words, To finish transgressions, they
expounded, That after the expiration of 70 weeks, sins are pardoned. Thus far
Hoornbeck out of Menasse Ben Israel.

We have here an evident testimony, that the Jews that lived about the time of
the Destruction of Jerusalem, looked for the Messiah then to come, because they
thought Daniel's Period was then ended; and though (by mistake) they expected a
temporal Prince, yet it is evident they thought this Prophesy did concern the
time, when the Messiah should come. That which is most difficult here, is, the
direct time of the Messias's cutting off, is told us under the name of so many
Weeks; which are not to be understood in our common acceptance of the word,
but are to be taken for Years. The word Weeks in holy Scripture signifies
sometime the space of seven Days, as here in this Prophesy, 10. chapter ver. 2.
where Daniel says, That he mourned three Weeks, or sevenets of Days: And in the
16. of Deuteron. 9. ver. where commandment is given, Seven Weeks shall thou
number unto thee: begin to number the seven Weeks from such time as thou
beginnest to put the sickle to the corn.

The word Weeks is sometime taken for Years in Scripture, and contains seven
Years: As in the 29. chap. Genes. ver. 27. Fulfill her Week, and we will give
thee this also, for the service which thou shall serve with me yet seven other
Years. As also Leviticus chapter 25. ver. 8. And thou shall number seven Sabbaths
of Years unto thee, seven times seven Years, and the space of the seven
Sabbaths of Years shall be unto thee forty and nine Years.

The Greek Word (...), in approved Authors, is in like manner used, not only
for seven Days, but also for seven Years space; as in the end of the 7th Book
of Aristotle's Politics, where mention is made of such as divided Ages by
Sevenets of Years. (...). And Varro in his first Book of Images, writes, Se
jam duodecimam annorum hebdomadam ingressum esse; That he had now entered into
the twelfth Sennet of Years: which Expression is plain and full.

In this Signification the Word is to be taken in this place, understanding by
70 Sevennets, 490 Years, having Proof thereof from Holy Scripture, and Profane
Authors.

And to those before mentioned we may add, Censorinus de die Natali, c. 14. and
Macrobius, Book first, in Somnium Scipionis, c. 6.

As for those who stretch the Word further to a Sevenet of Tenths, or Jubilies,
or Hundreds of Years, as some have done, their Opinion has neither warrant of
God's Word, nor any likelihood of Truth.

The greatest Difficulty is about the Beginning of those Weeks, concerning
which we need not say any thing, considering that those must be wilfully blind
that deny the completion thereof.

But our Author is not to be born withal, as to what he says concerning the
Prophecy's Authority; and that the Jews reckon it not among their Canonical
Books.

Father Simon, who had well weighed this Point in his Critical History of the
Old Testament, Book 1. Chap. 9. says, There are many learned Men who find
fault, that the Jews exclude Daniel from the number of the Prophets, and
Theodoret has reproved them very severely. But it is easy to reconcile their
Opinion in this Point, with that of the Christians, since they agree, that the
Books of the Bible which are called Canonical, have been equally inspired by
God; and moreover, that the Book of Daniel is of the number of these Canonical
Books.

Josephus, in the Tenth Book of his Antiquities, Chap. 12. writing of Daniel,
says, (...), That he was endued with a Divine Spirit, and that he was of the
number of (...). He was one of the greatest Prophets, that his Books were read
by the Jews, which abundantly demonstrated that he conversed with God. For he
did not only foretell things to come to pass as the other Prophets did, but he
determined the very time in which they were to be fulfilled. And whereas other
Prophets predicted Calamities, and so lost their Esteem among the Princes and
the People; He foretold Good Things to come, by which he conciliated the Favor
of all Persons; and as for the certainty of Events, he obtained a Belief
amongst all Men.

Porphiry the Philosopher, the Scholar of Plotinus, and cotemporary with
Origin, who made it his Business to refel the Prophesies of Daniel; when he
found all things so punctually delivered, as that there was no place for a
Refutation, he finally assumed the Impudence to affirm, that not Daniel, but an
Impostor under his Name, who lived in the time of Antiochus Epiphanes,
Published these Prophecies. And this his Impudence was much more tolerable than
that of Mr. Blount's, who asserts, that Daniel's 70 Weeks were uncertain as to
their Authority.

Page 162. He never evinced his Genealogy from David; for though some mean
Persons called him the Son of David, and the Mobb by that Title did cry
Hosannah to him, yet did he acquiesce in terming himself the Son of Man. As
also when he made his Cavalcade upon an Asinego, they extolled him as the
Descendant of King David.
ANSWER.
This is a very bold Stroke; Infidelity unmasked! To what purpose should our
Savior evince his Genealogy from David? The honorable Du Plessis, Chap. 30.
observes, Nusquam in Evangelio exprobratum Jesu legamus, quod ex stirpe
Davidis, seu ex tribu Juda oriundus nonesset, sed quod fabri filius, ut
diuturnae Davidicae domus erumnae ad inopiam nonnullos redegerant. We never
read in the Gospel that our Lord was upbraided with his not being of the Tribe
of Judah, or Lineage of David; it was objected, that he was a Carpenters Son,
for the Miseries that had befallen the House of David, had reduced some of that
Family to great Penury. Agreeable hereunto is that of Episcopius, lib. 3.
Instit. Jesum Nostrum ex tribu Judae ortum duxisse nemo circae ista tempora
quibus discipuli ejus vivebant, dubitavit. That our Lord Jesus sprang out of
the Tribe of Judah, no one doubted in the Days of his Disciples The Jews did
all acknowledge it, as appears by the Question of our Savior; How say the
Scribes that Christ is the Son of David? What think ye of Christ? Whose Son is
he? They say unto him, The Son of David.

The Genealogy of Jesus shows his Family; the first Words of the Gospel are,
The Book of the Generation of Jesus Christ, the Son of David. The Apostle in
his 7th Chapter of the Hebrews, Verse 14. For it is evident that our Lord
sprang out of Judah.

Benjamine Tudelensis (whom Abraham Zacuth in his Chronicon calls the great
Luminary) in his Itinerary affirms, that the very Mahometans call the Messiah
the Son of David. How impious is our Author then in this Expression, That they
were but mean Persons that called him the Son of David! How blasphemous he is
in his Expression of the Mobb, the Cavalcade on the Asinego, is manifest to all
those that have any Reverence for the Holy Gospel and the Prophets?

Page 164. It is apparent that not only the Jews, but also the Christians were
Millenaries, and did believe and expect the Temporal Reign of a Messiah,
together with the Union of the Jews and Gentiles under one most happy Monarchy.
ANSWER.
It must be granted, that many eminent Persons for Sanctity, favored the
Millenaries. But if we impartially examine this matter, we shall find that it
wholly rests on the Authority of Papias, who pretended Apostolical Tradition.
Now of what Authority this Author was, I report from the Words of Casaubon, in
his 16th Exercitation, Number 74. Narrat Eusebius in tertio Historiarum, papiam
hunc Scriptorem fuisse futilissimum, qui omnes traditionum fabellas mirifice
amplecteretur, and scriptis Mandaret. Multa igitur falsa absurdaque de Christo
and Apostolis scripsisse; and quaedam etiam fabulis propriora. Eusebius
declares, in the third Book of his History, that this Papias was a most triflng
Scribler, who embraced all manner of fabulous Traditions, and committed them to
Writing. He writ many false things of Christ and the Apostles; and some of his
Narrations look more like Dreams and Fables then true History -- And in that
number Casaubon gives a pregnant Instance out of Oecumenius.

Now, as Papias pretended this Tradition to come from the Apostles, so he did
nothing but what others in those primitive times were wont to do. It was usual
for Sectaries to boast that they taught the Doctrine of the Apostles, or at
least their Disciples.

We read in Clemens Alexand. (lib. 7. Strom.) That Basilides, an ancient
Heretic, boldly avouched, that he had for his Master Glaucias, St. Peter's
Interpreter; and that Valentinus affirmed with the like boldness, that he had
been instructed in Religion by Theodad, who was one of Saint Paul's familiar
Acquaintance.

It would be difficult to show the difference in the Cases beforementioned;
and consequently this Tradition of Papias may be as well rejected, as that of
Basilides, or that of Valentinus; and that Tradition can be no certain Rule for
us to walk by.

Page 165. Not one of the two first Ages dissented from the Opinion of the
Millenaries; and they who oppose it, never quote any for themselves before
Dionysius Alexandrinus, who lived (at least) 250 Years after Christ. Of this
Opinion was Justin Martyr, and (as he says) all other Christians that were
exactly Orthodox. Irenaeus relates the very Words which Christ used when he
taught this Doctrine -- This Pretense and Millenary Invention stopped the Mouths
of the Unbelieving Jews.
ANSWER.
It is a great Boldness to affirm, that not one of the two first Centuries
opposed this Opinion; For how could our Deist know this, when so many Monuments
of Antiquity relating to the first Centuries are lost? This Method I remember
to be used by Bishop Pearson, in the Defense of Ignatius's Epistles.

It is certain that in the first and second Ages there were some that denied
the Book of the Revelations to be Canonical Scripture, and that the Author
thereof was Cerinthus the Heretic, and not St. John; and there was no reason
that induced them to think so, besides this Doctrine of Milleranism. Nepos, an
Egyptian Bishop, was a great defender of this Opinion; he writ a Book (about
the Year of our Lord 244.) in defense of it; he Titles his Book, a Reproof of
the Allegorists. By that Name he called the Antimillenaries; so that the
Opponents of the Millenaries must have been then considerable, their Nickname
is sufficient Demonstration thereof.

It Is very surprising to hear our Deist affirm, that they who oppose this
Opinion never quote any for themselves before Dionysius Alexandrinus: Forasmuch
as the same Dionysius, in Eusebius (lib. 7. c. 25.) affirms that some who
Preceeded him rejected the Book of the Revelations upon that account.

Besides the Defenders of this Doctrine kept it as secret as they possibly
could. Non defendere hanc Doctrinam (says Lactant. lib. de vit. Beat.) public
atque asserere solemus. We are not wont to defend and assert this Doctrine
publicly. It Is no wonder then if the Opponents of this Opinion were not so
numerous. It Is also very plain that our Deist is mistaken in the Design and
first Contrivance of this Millenary Invention, as he calls it: Nay, Lactantius,
lib. 7. c. 26. pretends there is a Command from God to keep this Doctrine in
silence. Now if Lactantius, who was himself a Millenary, and well acquainted
with their Methods, has rightly informed us, our Deist's Suggestions must be
very weak.

We read in Eusebius, (lib. 7. c. 23.) how successful Dionysius was in
overthrowing Milleranism; and that Coracion, a principal Man of that Party, was
so convinced by him, as that He promised never to dispute for that Doctrine
more, never more to teach it, nor to make any mention of it.

If the Books of Dionysius and Nepos, two of the greatest and ablest Writers of
the respective Parties, were now extant, we could not fail of having a true
Prospect of this Controversy; but their Books by the Injury of Times are
perished. Upon which consideration, if we had said nothing else, this last
Remark had been sufficient to defeat Mr. Blount's Argument drawn from the
Silence of the two first Ages.

The various reading of the much celebrated place in Justin Martyr relating to
the Millenaries, leaves us in Uncertainties: But we are confident (after a
diligent Examination) that Irenaeus no where pretends (as our Deist bears us in
hand that he did) to relate the very Words which Christ used when he delivered
this Doctrine. Besides that which is a prejudice never to be overcome, is the
Silence of the Gospel in so important a Matter.

Our Author is frequent in quoting Councils as well as Fathers for
Heterodoxies: what reason there should be for his not citing any Councils in
this Case, no not so much as Gelasius Cyzicenus, in reference to the Nicene
Council, I cannot account for; I can only account for my self, and declare,
that what general, or ancient Prove. Coun. have done in this case, whether they
have approved it or condemned it, I do not know, neither am I ashamed so to
confess: For Scaliger (in his Exercit. 345.) calls, verbum Nescio, ingenni
candidique animi pignus.

In the beginning of the Reformation, there were some who endeavored to give
Countenance to this Opinion; wherefore our Church then passed a severe Censure
on such Persons. For in a Convocation at London, in the Year of our Lord, 1552.
in the last Article save one, the Millenaries are called Heretics.

The Article is as follows:

They that go about to renew the Fable of the Heretics, called Millenarii, be
repugnant to Holy Scripture, and cast themselves headlong into a Jewish Dotage.

This Article is to be seen in the Collection of Articles, Injunctions, etc.
(p. 52.) Prefaced by the Learned Bishop Sparrow. I say Prefaced, because the
Author of the Antopology, (p. 56) informs us, that the said Bishop told him,
That he was not the Collector; and that if he had been concerned in the
Collection, he would have published more Materials.

The latter part of this Information seems very probable; forasmuch as the said
excellent Prelat was most accurate in Matters of this nature.

From what has been said concerning this Subject, we may sufficiently discover
Mr. Blount's Vanity, when, ( p. 169.) he affirms that there was as Universal a
Tradition for Milleranism in the Primitive Times, as for any Article of our
Faith: Whereas there is no Article of our Faith but may be tried and proved by
that Golden Rule of Vincentius Lyrinensis, -- Quod omnibus, quod semper, quod
ubique; the Articles of our Faith have been received by all Orthodox Persons,
at all Times, and in all Places; which cannot be said of Milleranism. We
acknowledge no Articles of Faith, but such only as can be proved by Holy
Scriptures; and to such Articles the Rule of Vincentius is only competent.

This I conceive to be the Sense of our Convocation, in the Year of our Lord,
1562. ( Collect. Artic. p. 92.) when they define that all Articles of Faith are
grounded on those Canonical Books of Holy Scripture; of whose Authority there
was never any doubt in the Church. I think I may not be importune and
unreasonable, if I relate the whole Article.

Holy Scripture contains all things necessary to Salvation: So that
whatsoever is not Read therein, nor may be Proved thereby, is not to be
required of any Man, that it should be believed as an Article of Faith, or be
thought requisite or necessary to Salvation in the Name of the Holy Scripture,
we do understand those Canonical Books of the Old and New Testament, of whose
Authority there never was any doubt in the Church.

SECT. IX. Of Augury. Of a God. Origin of Good and Evil, plurality of Worlds,
Natural Religion, Ocellus Lucanus.
Page 167. Augury is a sort of the ancient heathenish Superstition: And Page
169. We may see that Superstition, like Fire, endeavors to resolve all things
into it self.
ANSWER.
Mr. Blount has given us some Account of the Pagan Superstition of Augury; out
of which it appears how insufficient Natural Religion is of it self, and how
necessary Revealed Religion is, to show the vanity of these Abominations. To
this purpose very remarkable is that of Alexander ab Alexandro, in the end of
his last Book Dierum genialium: Quantum debemus Christo Domino Regi and Doctori
nostro, quem verum Deum veneramur and scimus, quo praemonstrante explosa
monstrosa ferarum gentium doctrina rituque immani ac barbaro, veram religionem
edocti, humanitatem and verum Deum colimus, evictisque erroribus and infandis
ineptiis, quas prisci coluere, quid quemque deceat and quibus sacris quaque
mente, Deum colere oporteat noscitamus? How much do we owe to Christ our King
and Master, whom we acknowledge and worship as true God, by whose guidance and
direction, the monstrous Doctrine, and barbarous Rites of these savage Nations
being chased away; and we being taught true Religion, embrace Civility and the
true God: and the errors and unspeakable follies which the Ancients had in
honor and reverence, being brought to light, we know what our duty is, with
what Ceremonies, and what mind God is to be worshipped. Which is in effect the
same with that of the Apostle, Colos. 1. ver. 13. Thanks be to God, who has
delivered us from the power of darkness, and translated us into the Kingdom of
his dear Son. Now this of Alexander is the more to be remarked; forasmuch as
Augury, the Art of Divination, Astrology, Southsaying, and the like
Superstitions, like a universal contagion, had insected all Mankind (save only
where Revealed Religion had obtained) as Tully tells us in his first Book de
Divinatione: Qua est autem gens, aut quae civitas, quae non aut extis pecudum,
aut monstra, aut fulgura interpretantium, aut Augurum, aut Astrologorum, aut
Sortium (ea enim fere Artis sunt) aut Somniorum, aut Va^icinationum, haec enim
duo naturalia putantur praedictione moveatur: There could not be named any
Nation or City, which abounded not with these Abominations, and was not moved
with the Predictions of those who pretend to interpret Prodigies and
Lightnings; or with the Predictions of the Augurs, or Astrologers, or Oracles
(in these there was something of Art) or with the foreboding of Dreams, and
Accidents, which two last may have something Natural.

What Mr. Blount could promise himself by his Account of Augury, I cannot
imagine; but I am persuaded he could not think of any thing, which would prove
more disadvantagious to his Design in general, than this Subject.

Page 170. From the Pagan Processions, the manner of the Christians going in
Procession was thought to be first taken.
ANSWER.
Our Author is much mistaken as to the Institution of Processions. Gregory
Turonensis, lib. 11. Hist. cap. 37. gives us this Account: Refert Avitus in
quadam homilia, quam de Rogationibus scripsit, has ipsas Rogationes quos ante
Ascensionis Domini triumphum celebrantus, a Mamerto ipsius Viennensis Vrbis,
cui and hic eo tempore praeerat, institutas fuisse, dum Vrbs illa multis
terreretur prodigiis: Avitus reports in a certain Homily of his, which he writ
of Rogations; That Mamertus Bishop of Vienna, instituted those Rogations or
Processions, which we celebrate before our Lord's Asoension. Out of the said
Homily we have this occasion of their Iustitution; That it was appointed for
diverting God's displeasure, forasmuch as in those times there were great
Earthquakes, Incursions of Wolves and wild Beasts, frequent Fires, terrible
Sounds by night, to the extreme terrrour of the People. Wherefore the said
Bishop, knowing no better expedient to divert so severe a Chastisement, than
Fasting and Humiliation, ordered those Days for that intent; and contrived a
Litany apt and suitable for such humble Address. This pious course taking good
effect, succeeding times continued it in their Anniversary practice; so that
the first Council of Orleans established it by a Decree, in their 23. Canon:
Which Custom having had so long footing in the Church, our Reformers were loath
to be singular in rescinding of it: and the rather because they observed that
it fell casually and beyond its first intention, upon such a Season as might be
very agreeable to the Service of those days. For this being the Critical time
of the Year, when all the Fruits of the Earth are in greatest hazard of
miscarrying, by Frosts and unseasonable Weather; it is therefore exceeding
proper to supplicate God for the withholding of his Judgments, and to implore
his Blessing upon the Labors of the Husbandman. And although our Liturgy has no
set Office, yet our Church has set Homilies for it. And in the Injunctions an.
1559. and Advertisements an. 7. Elizab. it was ordered, That in the Rogation
Days of Procession, the Curat sing, or say in English the two Psalms, beginning
Benedic anima mea, etc. with the Litany, and Suffrages thereunto belonging.

So that I conceive the greatest Enemies our Church has, cannot blemish our
practice with Paganism or Superstition.

Polydor Virgil de rerum Inventione, lib. 6. c. 11. derives their Original
somewhat higher: Ejusmodi Processionum usum jam inde a principio apud nostros
fuisse, testimonio est Tertullianus libro ad Vxorem, quem forte intermissum
Mamertus renovavit; and illos a Judaeis mutuatos esse satis constat: These
Processions were in use among Christians from the very beginning of
Christianity, as Tertulian delivers in one of the Books, which he writ for his
Wife: which custom being long omitted, was at last brought into use again by
Mamertus; and it is manifest that the Christians borrowed it from the Jews.

The only Authors that I have read, that can give any countenance to this
Imputation of Mr. Blount's, are Fromondus in his Meteors, Book 5. chapter 4. Artic.
second, where we are told, That in the place of the Robigalia and Floralia, the
Catholic Church, instituted the Day of Rogation, and the Supplications and
Processions before Ascension day.

The other Author is Mr. Gregory, in his Notes on Ridley's View of the Civil
and Canon Law, p. 76. The old Romans instituted three yearly Solemnities, in
the honor of their Gods, for the Fruits of the Earth: These also the Romish
Church observed, having first moderated their Superstition, and directed them
to a more sacred end.

How malicious then is this Suggestion of Mr. Blount's: His Argument is no more
than this, That the Christians who appointed Processions and Seasons, to pray
to God for his Blessing on the Fruits of the Earth, are guilty of Paganism;
because the Gentiles were wont also to pray to their Idols for the like
Blessing. This, I say, is the strength of his Argument, upon supposition that
Mr. Gregory, and Fromondus are not mistaken; which they certainly are, with
respect to their original Institution.

Page 178. I must beg Mr. Lock 's Pardon, if I very much question those
Authorities he quotes from the Travels of some Men, who affirm some Nations to
have no notions of a Deity; since the same has been said of the Inhabitants of
the Cape of Good Hope, which the last Account of that place proves to be false
ANSWER.
I must confess it is very difficult to persuade a Man's self, That the Idea of
God is not innate: And if we respect Authority, with relation to some Nations
having no notion of a Deity, My Lord Bishop Stillingfleet is enough to stagger
any Man's Belief to the contrary; who in his Origines Sacrae (p. ^94.)
positively asserts, That of any whole Nation, which has consented in the
denial of a Deity, we have no evidence at all.

I must beg Pardon, with all deference to so great a Prelat, to transcribe a
Passage out of Varenius, in his Treatise de diversis gentium Religionibus (p.
238.) De Atheis quidam dubitant, alii omnino existere eos negant, atque cum
Cicerone putant, nullos dari tam feros homines, qui non aliquem agnoscant and
venerentur Deum. Nos illos opponimus manifestam and cui cum iudicio
contradicere nequeunt experientiam. Multos ex Graecis Philosophis homines,
certe haud quaquam feros, negasse omnes spiritus and Dei existemiam, vel saltem
de iis dubitasse testantur antiquitatis Scriptores: and Protagoram quidem ab
Atheniensibus came ob causam civitate pulsum esse Diogenes Laertius, and alii
clare affirmant. Non jam dicam de illis, qui quanquam inter Christianos
versantur, tamen Athei sunt, sed de remotis populis agemus. In Descriptione
Religionis Japonensis narravimus, tam ex Jesuitarum, quam Belgarum
annotationibus, quod multi hic reperiantur, qui nullam divinitatem credant;
nempe illos, qui ex Jenxuana haeresi sunt. Praeter bosce dari feros et
Sylvestres populos (quorum plerique sunt Anthropophagi et sine ulla Republica)
qui nullam Dei cognitionem habeant satis superque per navigationes comprobatum
est, nimirum in populis totius Brasiliae, populis circa Fretum Magellanicum, ad
Promontorium Bonae Spei, part Insulae, Sumatra Australi, item in Madagascare
insula et Hornanis insulis ad Novam Guineam. Etenim qui navigationem Navarchi
Le Maire circa totam tellurem per fretum ab eodem Le Maire dictum descripsit,
atque in hisce insulis multos dies commoratus est, ita loquitur: Non potuimus,
inquit, ex ullis judiciis colligere, quod hic populus aliquem Deum colat:
vivunt sine omni cura, ut aves in sylvis, neque tendendi, vel emendi illis mos
est; neque serunt, neque metunt, nec aliis laboribus fatigantur.

De Brasilianis Anthropophagis narrant historiae, cum Europaei aliquando sumpta
occasion a vehementi tonitru, existentiam Dei huic genti persuadere
conarentur, illos non erubuisse impudenter respondere, talem Deum nequam esse
oportere, utpote cui volupe esset, hominibus terrorem incutere. Considering
that this Treatise of Varenius speaks pertinently to our present purpose, and
that this Book is not in every Man's hand, I have transcribed this Passage at
large; and I here translate it.

Some doubt, others absolutely deny that there are any Atheists; and are of
Cicero's mind, that no Men are so barbarous, but that they acknowledge and
venerate a GOD. But we oppose to such manifest Experience, which no judicious
Person can contradict. Many of the Greek Philosophers, and certainly not
barbarous, have denied all Spirits, and the Existence of a God, or at least
have doubted thereof, as Historians bear witness. And Protagoras was banished
by the Athenians for that cause, as Diogenes Laertius and others testify.

I will say nothing of such as live among Christians, and yet are Atheists; but
of remote People, in the Description of the Religion of Japan, we have
delivered out of the Annotatations of the Jesuits, and the Hollanders, that
there are many among them to be found, who deny the being of any God; viz.
those who are of the Jenxuan Heresy. Besides those there are many barbarous
People (many of whom are Man-eaters, and without any form of Government) who
have no knowledge of God at all; as is over and above proved by Navigators: to
wit, the People of all Brasile, the People who live about the Magellanick Sea,
part of the People that live about the Cape of Good hope, South Sumatra, in the
Isle of Madagascar, and the Hornane Isles, about New Guinee. Truly he who
described the Navigation of Le Maire about the whole Earth, through the Sea,
called from him Le Maire, and tarried in those Isles many days, thus writes, We
could not by any signs gather that this People worshipped any God: They live
without any care, as Birds in the Woods; they neither buy nor sell, they
neither sow nor mow; neither are they wearied with any labor.

Histories tell us concerning those of Brasil, That when the Europeans took an
occasion, from a terrible Thunder, to persuade this Nation to the Belief of a
God: They were not ashamed impudently to answer, Such a God must needs be a
wicked one, who took pleasure to terrify poor Mortals

What Mr. Lock has written of this Subject I have not read: I am sure if what
Varenius writes be true, That Mr. Blount's whole Hypothesis of Natural Religion
is destroyed, whose principal Foundation (page 195.) as he pretends, is, That
there is one Infinite Eternal God, Creator of all things, and knowable by
Innate Idea's, or else he says Nothing to the purpose.

Page 182. But since our correspondence with China, we have found they have
Records and Histories of four or six thousand Years date, before our Creation
of the World; and who knows but that some other Nations may be found out
hereafter, that may go farther, and so on. Nay, the Chinese themselves in a
Traditional account tell us, That the Posterity of Panzon, and Panzona
inhabited the Earth 90000. Years. The Bramins of Guzarat said the Year 1639.
that there had past 326669. Ages; each Age consisting of a number of Years, and
if I mistake not, Centuries. Nay, the Egyptians in the time of their King
Amasis, Contemporary with Cyrus, had the Records and Story of 13000. Years, and
a succession of 330. Kings, which shows they were not Lunar Years.
ANSWER.
It may seem strange that Mr. Blount makes no mention of Dyrerius, the Author
of the Praeadamites, to whom he is so much beholden; as he also was to
Salmasius de Annis Climactericis: The reason whereof I cannot think to be other
than this, That he retracted his Opinion, as Isaac Vossius tells us in his Book
de Aetate Mundi, cap. 12.

It Is a wonderful thing indeed the Chinese should have Records of six thousand
Years date, before the World began: For Vossius assures us in his Book in his
Treatise de Artibus Sinam. page 83. Omnes Sinensium libri continentes
Historiam, Mathesin, Astronomiam, Musicam, and complures alias Scientias,
exceptis tamen iis qui ad Agriculturam, and rem Medicam pertinerent, combusti
fuere jam ante mill et nongentos annos jussu Regis Chingi, multis quidem aliis
celebrati operibus, et praesertim constructione vasti istius muri, cujus fama
implevit totum terrarum orbem: All the Books of the Chinese, which contain
Mathematics, Astronomy, Music, and many other Arts and Sciences (excepting
such only as belong to Agriculture and Medicine) were burnt a thousand and nine
hundred Year since, by the command of their King Chingi, who was celebrated for
his many great Works; and especially for the great Wall, the fame of which has
filled the whole World. But peradventure their Records were incombustible, or
reserved in the great Wall, for the Pre-adamites alone to consult.

But the mischief of all is, That this King Chingi was an ambitious Prince, and
for this end burnt all those Histories, that he might obliterate, and blot out
of Men's Remembrance all the noble Acts of his Predecessors.

The same Vossius, in his Castigations ad Scriptum Hornii, chapter 12. cites
Martinius, who gives us an Account of their Traditional Antiquity: Sciendum
itaque extremam hanc Asiam primum septem habuisse Imperatores, quorum ab
Electione per suffragia ab anno nimirum ante Christum natum 2846, usque ad
annum 2207, ante quae tempora nihil very se habuisse in suis Historiis fatentur
Sinae, deinde hareditaria fuit successio: We must therefore know that this
extreme Eastern part of Asia, had first of all seven Emperors, who were created
by the Election of the People, before our Christian computation 2846, even to
the Year 1205. before which time the Chinenses have no true Historical Account,
as they confess themselves, and then their Government began to be hereditary.
How vastly wide and different is this Account, from the Traditional account our
Author gives us of the Posterity of Panzon and Panzona, and from that of the
Bramins of Guzarat?

Joseph Scaliger, in his fifth Book de Emendat. Tempor. reckons the Chinese
among those, Qui veris historiae monumentis destituti hinc multa annorum
millia, and quaedam immania temporum intervalla expressit ab illis tam temporum
inscilia quam vetustatis affectatio: They were destitute of the true Monuments
of Antiquity; and from hence it is that they boast of so many thousand Years,
and those wonderful Intervals of time, which their Ignorance of History, and
their affectation of Antiquity occasioned.

From this Ignorance and Affectation, sprang those infinite Dynasteis of the
Egyptians, and those monstrous Traditions of the Chinenses, as have heard.

Besides it is to be noted, we have no certain knowledge what kind of Year they
used; which is necessary to be known, as before we observed concerning the
Mosaic History.

The Computation of the Egyptians is obnoxious to the same Objection: And
whereas our Author says, They were not Lunar, it is not material; for each of
the 330 Kings might reign a competent number of Solar Years, upon this his
Supposition: And this any Man may perceive, that knows the difference between a
Solar and a Lunar Year, as they are vulgarly understood. He that will defend
the Egyytian Chronology, must of necessity understand some form of Years
different from the Mosaic; as when they report of their ancient Kings, that
some of them lived 300, some 1000 Years, and more, as we find in Varro, cited
by Lactantius, Book 2. Orig. Error. c. 12. where although Lactantius differs
somewhat from Varro, yet as to the thing it self, they may be well enough
reconciled. We shall therefore speak of the Egyptian Year, forasmuch as
Macrobius, lib. 1. cap. 12. Satur. says, Anni certus modus ap^ld solos
Aegyptios, aliarum gentium dispari modo, pari errore mutantur: The Egyptians
are the best skilled in Chronology of any Nations. For others, although in a
different manner, yet they all err much in this particular. Wherefore if we
demonstrate the great variety and uncertainty that is among the Egyptians in
this point, we do (according to Macrobius) subvert the whole Pagan Chronology,
and the Dreams of the Preadamites.

Plutarch, in the Life of Numa Pompilius, affirms, That before Numa, who added
January and February, the Roman Year contained but ten Months. Among some
Barbarous People, the Year contained but three Months: In Greece among the
Arcadians, but four Months: Among the Acarnanes, six. Among the Egyptians a
Month was a Year; and aftewards their Year contained four Months. The Egyptians
are thought to be most ancient, and to compute an infinite number of Years in
their Annals; the reason of which proceeds from their using Months for Years.

Alexander ab Alexandro, Book 3. c. 24. Dier. Genesis writing of the variety of
Years used by the Ancients, says of the Egyptians, Non una facie, sed
multiplici sort variarunt, ut quandoque trium, saepius quatuor mensium annum
efficerent, plerumque mensis spatio ad cursum Lunae metiebantur: The Egyptians
did not use one kind of Year: for sometimes their Year consisted but of three
Months, more often of four, and for the most part it was but a Lunar Month.
From whence it follows, that nothing was more uncertain than their Account of
time; which yet is the basis of all true History: and that in things so remote,
we can have no sure footing but in the Mosaic History, of whose Chronology and
the certainty thereof we have discoursed at large.

Page 192. As to the Origin of good and evil, methinks it is less contradictory
and unreasonable to believe as the ancient Persians did, That there were two
Beginnings of things; the one good, the other evil. For how can Evil proceed
from a Being infinitely good, and without whom nothing is, If evil be not? And
if Genesis be a Parable, the Persians may be in the right as much as the Jews.
ANSWER.
The Origin of Evil has much exercised the Philosophers of old; nor can we
have any certainty thereof, without Revealed Religion. For how otherwise could
we come to the right notion of sin; or a deviation from Good in all Men, a
lapse from our first estate, wherein God, who is all good, created us?

How perplexed our Author is about this Question! for in this Page he affirms,
That if the Book of Genesis be a Parable (and he supposes it to be so) the
Persians may be in the right as much as the Jews. And yet Page 205. He affirms,
That this lapse of Nature, may be discovered by Natural Reason, if the opinion
of the Jews be according to Natural Reason (as Mr. Blount bears us in hand) how
can the Opinion of the Persians, which is diametrically opposite to it, be in
the right? these are great in consistencies.

If the Persians (laying aside the Book of Genesis) may be in the right, our
Author's Discourse of Natural Religion is ridiculous: For he supposes, Page
195. the first Article of Natural Religion to be, That there is one GOD
Infinite, Eternal, and Creator of all things. Whereas the Persians make two
Anti-gods, equally Infinite and Eternal, and that one of them is the Author of
Good, and the other of Evil. So that the Sentiments of the Persians is
repugnant to the Notion of a Deity: For while they make two Gods, they make
none at all. And consequently he is guilty of Idolatry and Atheism; and the
great Contradictions in the Opinion of the Persians are very palpable. If this
Persian Principle of Evil be absolutely contrary to the other Principle of
Good, it must in all its Perfections be contrary to it. Now since all
Perfections belong to that Principle which is good, as Infinity of Being, and
Necessity of Existence: it unvoidably follows, That the Principle of Evil, the
other Anti-god, which is in all things contrary to the former, must be an
Infinite Non entity, which yet exists. And if this be not the height of
Nonsense, nothing can be so. Besides, this Principle overthrows all Religion,
as well Natural as Revealed: it destroys all Virtue and Goodness: For if this
contrary Principle be the Cause of all Evil, then Evil necessarily falls out:
all Freedom of Will is destroyed: all difference of Good and Evil is taken
away. For if Evil becomes once necessary, it loses its Nature: there can be
th^n no Government of the World by Laws, no Rewards, no Punishments, for they
all suppose Liberty of Action. All these must be banished out of the World, if
this Persian Opinion be true. Which according to Mr. Blount may be true, if
Genesis be a Parable, and in his Opinion it is so: To such Contradictions Men
expose themselves, when they take on them the Patronage of such gross Lies and
Falsehoods.

How important this Question is, and of how great Concernment it is to us to
fix it on sure grounds, no body can be ignorant. To which purpose that of
Simplicius is remarkable, in his Commentary on Epictetus, (...): The
Controversy about the Nature of Good and Evil, not being well stated, is the
cause of great Impiety toward God, and perverts the Principle of good Life,
and casts those Persons into innumerable perplexities, who are not able to give
a rational account thereof.

If we consult Origin and Celsus, we may soon perceive that the Origin of Evil
cannot be discovered by Natural Religion: for both own the discovery thereof to
be of great difficulty.

Celsus says, (...): It Is a difficult thing to know the Nature of Evil, unless
a Man philosophises; the Vulgar are not capable of it. And although Origin
differs from Celsus, lib. 4. and says, That Celsus is in an Error in imputing
this to Matter, yet in this accords with him, (...): If any thing in the World
be of difficult discovery, that which relates to the Origin of Evil is of the
number of those things. This is affirmed by Origin, with respect to Natural
Religion; in which all things are of very easy investigation: and as Mr. Blount
says, of the Innate Idea of a Deity (p. 178.) are soon imprinted on the Minds
of Men.

Plutarch in his Book de Iside and Osiride (p. 369, 370, and 371.) (...), etc.
This Opinion pleases many and wise Men: some think there are two Gods, of
contrary Natures; one is the Author of all Good, the other of Evil. And
Diogenes Laertius tells us, that this was the Opinion of the Persian Magi, who
were of greater Antiquity than the Egyptians, according to Aristotle in his
first Book of Philosophy: One of those Gods was called Oromasdes, the other
Pluto, or Arimanius. And Plutarch says, That Mithra was a Mediatour-God, whom
the Persians placed between the other two. The Chaldeans made Gods of the
Planets, two of which they made Good, the other two Authors of Evil, and the
odd three to be promiscuous, and middle trimming Gods, half good and half evil.

The Greeks imputed all Good to Jupiter Olympius, but Evil to Hades. The
Egyptians teach that Osiris was the Author of all Good; but that Typho was the
Author of Evil. And Plutarch says farther, (...): The very Name of Typho is a
sufficient Indication of his Nature.

I shall not trouble my Reader with any more Instances of this Nature; because
how various and how different the Opinions of Philosophers were, as to the
Origin of Evil; how obscure and confused they were in the Account they gave
thereof, all Men know that have been any ways conversant in these
Controversies. And Plutarch's Books de Iside and Osiride, and de Procreatione
Animae e Timaeo, are undeniable and sufficient Evidences thereof: In which
Books, besides the diversities before mentioned, the Reader will soon find,
that the great Admirers of the Philosophers do not seem to understand them on
this Subject: But this indeed is no wonder, since nothing is more plain, than
that they did not understand themselves. Neither could it be otherwise, since
they were destitute of proper means requisite hereunto.

And now I appeal to any judicious Reader, whether any thing can be more
absurd, more impious, more contradictory to Right Reason, than what Mr. Blount
has written concerning the Origin of Evil. And if the right Notion thereof
could have been imprinted on Men's Minds by Nature, without Scripture and
Revealed Religion, how is it possible so many Philosophers and whole Nations
should have been guilty of such grand Absurdities, as we have seen that they
were.

Page 193. The Opinion of Plurality of Worlds seem more agreeable to God 's
infinite (for so must all God 's Qualities be) communicative Quality, to be
continually making new Worlds; since otherwise this Quality or Act of Creating
would be only once exerted, and for infinite duration lie useless and dormant.
ANSWER.
The Opinion of the Plurality of Worlds, was maintained by several of the
ancient Philosophers, as Anaximander, Anaximenes, Democritus, Epicurus, his
Scholar, Metrodorus, and others, who maintained an infinity of Worlds: and
their great Reason (as Elias Cretensis says) was from the infinite Power and
Goodness of God. On the contrary, the Stoics would not allow above one World,
which they call the Universe: and Plato endeavors to prove the same by three
Arguments, as may be seen in Plutarch, in his first Book, Chap. 5. of the
Opinion of the Philosophers. Of the same Opinion was his Scholar Aristotle, who
labors to prove the same in no less then two whole Chapters; as to the
Validity of his Arguments I shall not write any thing in particular, thinking
it much better to advise the Reader to consult him about this Subject. This is
notorious, that what he takes upon himself to prove, he commonly confirms by
strong Reasons; and indeed, a Man shall scarce find any philosophical Subject,
but may, by some means or other, be collected out of his Writings.

Dr. Pearson assures us, in his Dedication of Laertius to King Charles the
Second, that Dr. Harvey was commonly known to have said, Nihil fere unquam in
ipsis naturae penetralibus invenisse se, quin cum Aristotelem suum
pensiculatius evolveret, idem ab illo aut exp^ica^um, aut saltem cognitum
reperiret. He scarce ever found any thing among the Mysteries of Nature, but
when he had diligently perused the Books of Aristotle, he found the same,
either explained, or known by him. So that I conceive, that his Authority and
Reasons to be a great Prejudice to the Opinion of the Plurality of Worlds.

It Is reported of Aristotle, that when he read the Mosaic Writings, that he
commended them for the Majesty of the Style, he thought it worthy of a God. The
fault he found was, that the Method was Unphilosophical, which does not
command, but persuades a Belief in the Reader; without all Controversy, he
committed not that pretended Error in Moses. And therefore I doubt not, but the
Reader will find more satisfaction in his Oracles of Reason, for the Unity of
the World, then in Mr. Blount's for the plurality of Worlds.

But whatsomever liberty might be allowed Philosophers in this point, because
perhaps it may not plainly contradict any Principle of Reason, which was the
Rule they walked by. The same ought not to be allowed to us; for this Opinion
certainly deserves a Censure in all, who pretend to Christianity.

The Arguments made use of, are very weak, the Power of God is infinite, his
goodness is infinite and communicative, yet his Power and his Goodness does not
extend themselves beyond his Will and Pleasure. This would make God a necessary
Agent, and deprive him of those Perfections he has been pleased to bestow on
some of his Creatures. But that which exceeds all bellef is, that Mr. Blount,
who makes this World we live in eternal, and consequently uncreated, and a God,
should yet in this place contend for a Plurality of Worlds, and that upon a
pious pretense; for fear, forsooth, that the Act of Creating should only be
once exerted, and for an infinite Duration lie Dormant and Useless.

If this manner of Argumentation be allowed of, into what absurdities may we
fall? Tully, in his first Book, De Finibus, speaking of the difference between
Epicurus and Democritus (and that Epicurus corrupts and depraves what he
pretends to correct in Democritus) observes, that he makes innumerable Worlds
to have their Original, and to perish daily. Innumerabiles mundi qui and
oriantur and interiant quotidie. How agreeable is this false and ridiculous
Assertion with our Author's Method?

The minute Declination of Atoms without an efficient Cause is absurd and
unbecoming a Philosopher: Yet it is agreeable to this Method; for this
Declination is more according with God's Goodness, then a constant natural
Descent of Atoms in parallel Lines. But this favor must not be afforded here,
since Mr. Blount, by his approving Ocellus Lucanus, has banished, with
Epicurus and Descartes, all final Causes from these Speculations.

Nay, if this Method be allowed, I know nothing in Epicurus's Natural
Philosophy but may be defended; although Tully has abundantly proved him to be
as bad a Naturalist, as he was a Moralist, or a Logician.

This Opinion of the Plurality of Worlds, seems not to be so agreeable to Holy
Scripture. Certainly Moses's Relation of the Creation, must needs be thought to
be deficient, if this Opinion be true; for he menrions only one World, which
comprehended all Things. This Opinion was also for some time accounted
Heretical; for Virgilius, Bishop of Zalzburg, was cast out of his Bishopric,
excommunicated, and condemned for a Heretic, by Pope Zachary, for this
Opinion, as the great Annalist, Baronius, acquaints us, in the Year of our
Lord, 748. What Aventinus and others affirm of his Deprivation and
Excommunication, for holding there were Antipodes, proves a mistake. Although I
doubt not but that Assertion would have given great Offense; as may probably be
gathered from Lactantius, in the third Book of his Instit. chap. 24. and from
St. Austin, of the City of God, Book 16. Chap. 9. and from many others after
them. As also from the little Skill that Pope Zachary, and the Popes about
those Days, had in the Mathematical Sciences.

I hope it may not be unpleasing to the Reader, If I give him here a short
account of the Resolution of this Question by Mersenus, a late learned Jesuit,
and one that had the Reputation of a great Philosopher. He thinks the Opinion
of the Plurality of Worlds not to be Heretical, nor against the Faith; because
(as he says) it does not contradict any express place of Holy Scripture, nor
the determination of the Universal Church. Yet he thinks it to be a very rash
Opinion, forasmuch as it repugns the Consent of the Fathers; whose Authority,
notwithstanding, he thinks to be of no such Weight in Matters Philosophical.

If the Jesuit had plainly proved this matter to be purely Philosophical, he
had not been wide of the Mark. But the Method of Moses, and his Silence in so
great a Point, makes his Reproof to be too mild, this Opinion therefore (to say
the least of it) is impious, profane, and unbecoming a Christian.

What follows in Mr. Blount's Oracles, touching revealed and natural Religion,
has been often treated of in the foregoing Discourse; in which I have proved
the insufficiency of natural Religion, as to the great ends of Man's Happiness
and Misery in another World; and other things incident to that Question.
Wherefore, not being willing to trouble my Reader with long Repetitions, I
proceed to that which follows in this Section, and relates to Ocellus Lucanus.

Page 210. If any Man should conceive the Universe to have been made, he would
not be able to find into what it should be corrupted and dissolved; since that
out of which it was made, was before the Universe, as that into which it shall
be corrupted, was after the Universe.
ANSWER.
That which made Ocellus Lucanus, and Aristotle, and others, to fall into this
great Error, as to the World's Eternity, were two great Mistakes, which they
looked on as undoubted Principles. The one was, that out of nothing something
could not be produced; and that whatsoever had a beginning must have an end;
and reciprocally, whatsoever shall have no end, had no beginning. Whereas these
pretended Maxims are not grounded on general Reason, but only upon particular
Observations of such things here below, which are produced by the ordinary ways
of Generation and Corruption. Yet so difficult it is for a Man to retrieve
himself from such Observations, that it must be confessed, that among all the
Hypothesis of them who would destroy our holy Faith, none is so plausible as
that of the Eternity of the World. And this made Scaliger, in his sixty first
Exercitation against Cardan, Sect. 6. where he rejects the Arguments of
Philoponus as frivolous (for so he calls them) to conclude -- sola religione
mihi persuadetur mundum coepisse atque finem incendio habiturum. Nothing but
revealed Religion could induce me to believe, that the World had a beginning,
and that it should have an end.

Page 210. Ocellus Lucanus says, his Opinion is, that the Universe admits
neither Generation nor Corruption, forasmuch as it ever was, and ever shall be.
ANSWER.
It is very evident, that our Naturalist proceeds (in asserting his Principle)
of the usual Course of Generation and Corruption, which is obvious to our
Senses; or on the Works of Art, which always suppose pre-existent Matter;
which, if we deny, all his Arguments vanish. And in truth, he is guilty of that
Sophism, which the Logicians call, Petitio Principii, a begging of his
Principle; in taking that to be granted, which is the thing to be proved.

And whereas he says, if we could find out that of which the World was made,
yet we cannot find into what it is dissolved, he is under a great mistake; for
the Production of a thing has no necessary Relation to the continuance or
discontinuance of its Existence, for one thing may begin to be, and last but an
Hour, another may last for a thousand Years, another may last for ever; yet all
three (and as many as you please) may begin at one and the same instant, the
difference depending either on the Nature of the things themselves, or on the
Pleasure and Will of God who made them.

We acknowledge, and firmly believe, that the Universe was made by God; yet
with the same firmness we believe, that part of this Universe shall perish,
part continue to all Eternity, as Angels, and the Souls of Men; by which it
appears, that some things which had a beginning shall have no end, and some
shall have an end. So that Lucanus's pretended Universal Rule is not only
precarious, but also false.

P. 211. Now whatsoever had a beginning of its Production, and ought to partake
of Dissolution, ad^iteth two Alterations; the one from that which i^ less to
that which is greater; and from that which is worse, to that which is better:
and that Term from whence it begins to be altered, is called Production, as
that to which it arriveth is called State; the other alteration is from that
which is greater to that which is less, and from that which is better to that
which is worse; but the Period of this Alteration is called Corruption and
Dissolution. Now the Universe does of it self afford us no such Evidence, since
no one ever saw it produced nor altered, either in Ascensu or Descensu, but it
always remained in the same condition it is now in, equal, and like it self.
ANSWER.
Mr. Blount's Translation of Ocellus Lucanus is not so fair as it ought to be;
for the Greek Word, (...), as it is in the Original, ought to be translated,
Generation, and not Production, which somewhat alters the case, the one being
more general then the other; which yet I should have taken no notice of, did it
not seem affected and designed. But perhaps he followed the Translation of
Ludovicus Nogarola, the Italian, none of the best Interpreters. However, this
Argument of Ocellus is more gross then the former; for he who manageth the
Argument this way, proves nothing at all, save only this (which no Man in his
right Wits will deny) that this Universe, and the Parts thereof, which are of
greater Perfection, were not generated in that manner that we see some other
Parts thereof were, as Trees, Plants, and living Creatures.

But that there can be no other way of Production besides these ordinary
Generations, or that the Universe was not some other way actually produced,
neither this Argument, nor any other of his Arguments prove. And he still
labors under the Imputation of that Sophism, of begging the Question. If he
had proved that, it implies a Contradiction, for Almighty God to have produced
the Universe after any other manner, then those things are produced, which we
see and observe in this World, he had proved something to the purpose.

We assert one infinite and eternal Being, who produced all things out of
nothing, and preserves them in their Beings; and this we call not Generation,
but Creation; which is a Production excluding all Concurrence of any material
Cause, and all Dependence of any kind of Subject, as presupposing no Privation,
nor including any Motion. So that the proper and peculiar Sense of the Word,
Creation, is expressed, when we conceive something that is made, and not any
thing preceding out of which it was made. It must be granted, that the Word
used by Moses in the beginning of Genesis, requires not such a peculiar
acception, for it is often used to signify any kind of Production, as the
making of one Substance out of another pre-existing; as also, for the
renovating or restoring any thing to its former Perfection, for want of Hebrew
Words in Composition; nay, it sometimes imports doing some new and wonderful
Work, the producing some strange and admirable Effect. We do not therefore
collect the true Nature of Creation from the Force of any Word.

(The Words, Creation and Annihilation, in the Modern Sense, are not used,
either with the Jews, the Greeks or the Latins, they are factitious Words,
neither that I know of are they so used in any Tongue whatsoever), but we
collect it from the Testimony of God's Word. The Opinion of the Church of the
Jews, will sufficiently appear in that zealous Mother to her seventh and
youngest Son, 2d. Macchabees, Chap. 7. Ver. 28. I beseech thee my Son, look
upon the Heaven and Earth, and all that is therein, and consider that God made
them of things that are not. Which is a clear Description of Creation, that is,
Production out of nothing. But because this is not Canonical Scripture, we
shall therefore evince it by the undoubted Testimony of St. Paul, who
expressing the Nature of Abraham's Faith, propounds him whom he believed, as
God who quickneth the Dead, and calls those things which be not, as if they
were.

For, as to be called in the Language of the Scripture, is to be (behold what
manner of Love the Father has bestowed on us, that we should be called the
Sons of God, says St. John, in his first Epistle; who in his Gospel told us,
He has given us Power to become the Sons of God): so to call, is to make, or
cause to be; as where the Prophet Jeremy says, Thou have caused all this Evil
to come upon them, the Original may be thought to speak no more then this, Thou
have called this Evil to them; he therefore calls those things that be not,
as if they were, who makes those things which were not, to be, and produces
that which has a Being, out of that which had not, that is, out of nothing.
This Reason generally persuasive unto Faith, is more peculiarly applied by the
Apostle, to the belief of a Creation; For, through Faith, says he, Heb. 11.
ver. 3. we understand that the Worlds were framed by the Word of God; so that
things which are seen, were not made of things which do appear: For the (...),
in this place, is equivalent to the (...), in the Book of Macchabees; and this
manner of Speech is according to the best Greek Authors, as our Doctor Pearson
has observed. The Sense of the Apostle then is, that those things which are
seen; that is, that are, were made of those things which did not appear, that
is, which were not.

There is an excellent Treatise among the Works of Justin Martyr, entitled (
Eversio dogmatum Aristotelis) a Refutation of Aristotle's Opinions, directed to
one Paul, a Presbyter of great Note, as it seems from the Compellation given
him, (...). O most honorable Presbyter Paul. Who the Author of this Treatise
was, is not agreed among the Critics. He seems to be an Author of some
Antiquity, for Bellarmine (De Scrip oribus Ecclesiasticis, p. 72.) in his Book
of Ecclesiastical Writers, gives this account of this Question; De
reprehensione dogmatum Aristotelis meminit Photius in Bibliotheca, neque extat
evidens judicium falsitatis, ideo nihil habeo quod dicam. Photius, in his
Bibliothec, makes mention of the Book entitled, A Refutation of the Opinions
of Aristotle, of which there is no Proof of its being supposititious; wherefore
I will determine nothing thereof. Which Author having written something very
material to our present purpose, I have thought fit not to pass it over in
silence.

The design of the Treatise, as he tells Paul the Presbyter, was to gratify
him, in writing some Collections and Annotations of the Opinions of the Greek
Philosophers concerning God and his Creatures. Not, as he says, that Paul
should learn any truth from them, but to make it plain to him, that the Proofs
of those Philosophers were not grounded on Science and Demonstration, as they
vainly boasted, but on uncertain Conjectures.

According to those, who have received their Doctrines from God, and know the
difference between the Creator and the Creature; there is only one God
unbegotten, according to any Notion of that Word; who had no God, nor Gods,
before him, nor any Coeternal with him, who had no Subject on which to Operate,
nor any to repugn or oppose his Pleasure; having an incorruptible Nature and
Essence, and no Impediment in his manner of operating, (...): He has nothing
coeval with him, he needs no Materials to work on, no Adversary to withstand
him. And then having laid down Aristotle's Opinion, as to the necessary
Existence of Matter out of his first Book of natural Auscultations, thus
reasons against him; (...).

If Matter be as necessarily existent, and as unbegotten as God himself; and if
God out of this eternal Matter can make any thing, it is manifest that the same
God can make something out of nothing; for the same Contradiction (if there be
any) will be as much in the oneas the other.

This Observation is of great Value, and pulls up by the very Root, all the
Hypothesis of Aristotle, Ocellus Lucanus, and all other Abettors and Fautors of
this wicked Assertion of the World's Eternity.

For if Matter have its Original from it self, how can it be subject to the
Power of another? Whatsoever has infinite Power in it self, has a Power upon
something beyond it self; but if God and Matter have it both, they can never
have a Power upon each other, or without themselves.

Besides, if God's Power be infinite, it cannot be confined to Matter, for then
we conceive the Bounds of infinite Power; which is a greater Absurdity, then to
assert a Power which is able to produce something out of nothing. It is
commonly said in the Schools, that modus operandi sequitur modum essendi, such
as the thing is, such are its Operations. And this I conceive to be an Axiom
received by all Men. For if some real and Material Being must be presupposed by
indispensable Necessity, without which, God could not cause any thing to be;
then God is not independent in his Actions, nor of infinite Power, and absolute
Activity; which is contradictory to the Divine Perfection. Vain therefore is
this Oracle of our Author's, of the World's Eternity; or which is all one, the
Opinion of a real Matter coaeval with God.

Page 216. Now it is very much, that this Author, Ocellus Lucanus ( who for his
Antiquity, is held almost a Cotemporary with Moses, if not before him) should
have so different a Sentiment of the World's Beginning, from that which Moses
had; methinks if Moses 's History of the Creation, and of Adam's being the
first Man, had been a general received Opinion at that time, Ocellus Lucanus,
who was so ancient, and so eminent a Philosopher, should not have been
altogether ignorant thereof.
ANSWER.
What Origin observes of Celsus, lib. 4. that (...), etc. That he objected
Ignorance and Illiterature to Christians, whereas he himself was a great
Ignoramus in History, in making Hesiod ancienter than Moses, who was much
ancienter than the Trojan War. The same I have observed of Mr. Blount, who in
his Oracles has objected the same to a Learned Clergy; and yet is far more
absurd in his Chronology, relating to Ocellus Lucanus, than Celsus was in the
case of Hesiod. Hornius, in his Historia Philosophica, lib. 3. c. 11. makes
Ocellus one of Pythagoras his Scholars, Ex ejus discipulis qui ante Platonem
floruerunt, Architas, Philolaus, Ocellus Lucanus: Among his Scholars, who were
before Plato, are Architas, Philolaus, Parmenides. Mr. Seldom in his Book de
Jure Naturae and Gentium, lib. 5. c 11. Ex Pythagoreorum Schola vetustissimus
Author Ocellus Lucanus: In the School of the Pythagoreans was that most ancient
Author Ocellus Lucanus. And to the same purpose, our most Famous Men, Bishop
Pearson, and Bishop Stillingfleet. The eldest account I can find of Him in
Diogenes Laertius, is in the Life of Archytas Tarentinus; who in his Epistle to
Plato, says, That when he came to Lucania, he met with some of the Posterity of
Ocellus; and that what Commentaries he had met with of Empire, Laws, Sanctity,
and the Generation of all things, he sent to him.

This then is the greatest Antiquity that can be pretended for Ocellus, which
if granted to be true, yet he comes several Centuries short of Moses.

Yet, with all due submission to so great Authority, I have some reason to
think this may be a mistake; for the Writings of Ocellus savor nothing of
Pythagorism: He Philophizes without regard of numbers, and after the manner of
the Peripateticks, he uses the word Antiperistasis, which is not to be found
in any of the Ancient Philosophers, no not in Plato; and some accurate Persons
assure us, that Aristotle was the Inventor thereof: Neither can I think, what
Scaliger (in his 28. Exercit.) affirms concerning Plato's Antiperistasis, can
invalidate this Presumption.

As to the Dialect in which it was first written, I can affirm nothing for
certain: it is extant both in the Attic and Doric; in the latter those of the
Italic Family always writ, as Architas Tarentinus, Timaeus Locrus, and others:
and it is Suspicious, that this Book was first written in the polite Attic, and
afterward to conciliate some Authority, it was changed into the obsolete Doric.
But I leave this to the Critics, and make use of better Arguments: although I
cannot deny but that this Method is frequently made use of by Gerhard Vossius;
and particularly in the 12. and 13. chap. of his Book de Philosophia, in the
case of that great Physician Aretaeus the Cappadocian.

Plutarch lib. 2. of the Opinion of Philosophers, says, (...): That the World
was made by God, and if we respect its Nature, it was corruptible. And if we
consult Timaeus Locrus, or any other of the Pythagoric School, we shall find
their Sentiments very different from those of Ocellus: And in a word, it is very
strange he should dissent from his Master in a point of so considerable moment.

Aristotle lib. 1. de Coelo, c. 11. (...): All Philosophers say the World was
made, and not eternal: And to the same effect he speaks lib. 3. c. 2. Now
although we may suppose that Aristotle was so disingenuous as not to own, that he
had his Arguments from Ocellus ('it is certain he no where mentions him) yet it
overcomes all belief, that he should be so impudent as to affirm, as he did,
that all Philosophers before him held the World to have had a beginning, if
this Book of Ocellus Lucanus had been extant in his days, as it is now,
especially had it been of that Eminence and Antiquity as Mr. Blount pretends,
who has discoursed subtly, but very injudiciously of so weighty a Subject.

Page 218. It plainly appears out of the Bible, that there were two Creations,
both of Man and Woman; and that Adam was not the first Man, nor Eve the first
Woman, only the first of the Holy Race, and this diverse of the Jews believe.
For in the first Chapter of Genesis, ver. 27. it is said, -- So God created Man
in his own image, in the image of God created He him: Male and Female created
He them: Bidding them increase and multiply, and have dominion over all things.
Which plainly shows that Man was then created, and that the other Creation of
Adam and Eve, spoken of in the second Chapter, ver. 2. and 22. were of the
first Man and Woman of the Holy Race, and not the first Man and Woman that ever
was in the World.
ANSWER.
This seems to me to be the greatest Paradox, that I have at any time met with.

Vincentius Li^inensis (cap. 17.) accuses Nestorius, That, inaudito scelere
duos vult esse Filios Dei, duos Christos -- with an unheard of wickedness he
affirmed, That there were two Christ's, two Sons of God: one who was begotten of
his Father, the other of his Mother. Wherefore the Virgin Mary ought not to be
called the Mother of God, but of Christ: because that Christ, who was God, was
not born of the Virgin, but He only who was Christ.

Buxdorf in his Synagoga Judaica (cap. 36.) affirms, That the Modern Jews
believe that there are to be two Messiah's. Duos sibi Messiah fingunt, vel
somniant, alterum Messiam Ben Joseph, alterum vero Messiam Ben David: They
persuaded themselves, that one of their Messias's was to be the Son of Joseph,
the other the Son of David: That one was to be of the Tribe of Ephraim, a poor
simple Man; the other to be of the Tribe of Judah, a King and a Conqueror.

Tertullian (lib. 4. cont. Marcion, c. 6.) gives us this Account, Constituit
Marcion alium esse Christum, qui Tiberianis temporibus: Marcion held that there
were to be two Christ's; one who was revealed in the time of Tiberius, by an
unknown God, for the Salvation of the Gentiles; the other was to be sent from
the Creator, for the restitution of the Jewish state.

A Man might think that there was some mischief in this number Two; and that
the Philosophers who cursed it, had good grounds for so doing. Yet among all the
Two's, I find none to be more absurd and more ungrounded than this of the Two
Creations: For it is destitute of the least color of Reason. I think it not
unreasonable to query, from which of the two Creations our Deists descend? They
will not pretend to descend from Adam, for the Holy Race descended from him:
Neither do I know how they could descend from the First Creation, or from the
Man and Woman before Adam and Eve, if the Mosaic History of the Creation be a
mere Allegory.

This is a Knot to be untied by Friend Torismond, or Ingenious Major A. For my
part I know no way, but to cut it: And that our Deists may be said (like
Curtius Rufus in Tacitus) ex se nasci, to be descended from Themselves.

If the Book of Genesis be a mere Parable and an Allegory, as our Author bears
us in hand that it is, his Argument falls to the ground: But as we are of
another Opinion, so we shall answer his Argument upon a truer Principle.

Mr. Blount here follows the Author of the Preadamites, who makes a double
Creation; the one in the first Chapter of Genesis, the other in the second
Chapter; and that the first may relate to the first Peopling of the World; but
the second relates to the first Man and Woman of the Jewish Nation.

Whosoever consults Moses will find it otherwise. The utmost that can be
collected is, That in the first Chapter of Genesis, the creation of Male and
Female is laid down in general, ver 27. but in the second Chapter it is laid
down in particular, as ver. 7. The Lord God formed man of the dust of the
ground; and ver. 22. That the rib which the Lord God had taken from man, he
made a woman.

This is a matter of great Consequence; because if there were Men and Women
before Adam, I cannot perceive how the Scripture can be true. I will therefore
demonstrate first out of the Mosaic Writings, and secondly out of other places
of Scripture, that this a mere Fiction. Moses in his second Cap. v. 3. says,
That God blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it, because that in it He had
rested from all his works which God had created and made; can it then be
imagined that Moses should write thus, if the first Parents of the Jewish
Nation were not then created? Can it be imagined he should thus contradict
himself in the next words? certainly no Man in his right wits can think so.

Genesis the 3. ver. 20. we read, that Adam called his Wife's Name Eve, because
she was ^he Mother of all Living, that is, of all Men, as Mr. Seldom well
observes in his 1. Book De jure not and gent. chapter 5. whose words being very
pertinent, I shall here recite them. Nam etiam in Genesi capite tertio versu
vicesimo, omne vivens. Onkelos Chaldaeus expressim, Matter omnium filiorum
hominum. Cui consona est illa Judaeorum Mauritaniensium, Matter omnium viventium
quae rationalia sunt. Et Arabica illa altera Saudiae, ubi adjicitur quae
rationalia and mortalia sunt, etiam in Tawasii Persica ibi vertitur, Matter
omnium viventium quae rationalia: For also in the third Chapter of Genesis ver.
20. all living signifies every Man; as where Eve is called the Mother of all
Living. The Chaldean Orkelos renders it, The Mother of all the Sons of Men. The
Version of the Mauritanian Jews, The Mother of all living Creatures who are
rational. The Arabic of Saudia, adds a word, and reads, Rational and Mortal.
The Persian Version of Tawus renders it in like manner, The Mother of all those
living Creatures who are rational.

To this concurrent Consent, we are necessitated to add this Remark, viz. That
if the Hypothesis of the Preadamites be true, Adam had been very ridiculous, in
calling Eve the Mother of all living; when she was (according to them) but the
Mother of the Jewish Nation. And Moses had been very incongruous in his
History, which I suppose no good Man will say or think.

If we consult other Scriptures, how effectual to this purpose is that of the
first Epist. to the Corinthians, Chap. 15. The first man Adam was made a living
Soul: To what end (I pray) should the Apostle write this, but to denote that he
was the Root and Original of all Mankind. As also that the first Man is of the
Earth earthy, which is a formal declaration of that of the second of Exodus, He
was formed of the dust of the earth.

In the 17. Chapter of the Acts ver. 26. it is said that God has made of one
Blood all Nations of Men, for to dwell on the face of the Earth. How
inconsistent is this with a double Creation, and the proceeding of the Jewish
Nation alone from the latter? I know it is pretended that some Gr. Copies read
(...) without (...). And Erasmus (who loves sometimes to be singular) says,
Verum haud scio, an perperam a librariis haec Scriptura: Truly I do not know
whether this place of Scripture may not be changed by the Copiers. But here it
is with an haud scio: Erasmus cannot tell us on his word; and Suspicions
signify nothing.

I am sure St. Chrysostom Homil. 38. on the Acts of the Apostles, reads
according to our vulgar Copies, (...). And Grotius on this place in the
Critics, seems fully to express the Sense, when he writes, That God made all
Men. Ex semine unius Adami, ut eo quoque modo, cognationis naturali vinculo
colligaret: God made all Men out of the Seed of one Adam, and bound them as it
were with one Natural bond of Consanguinity. And in truth (...), or Blood, is
taken in this place for the Stock or Lineage, out of which Men came. And so it
is frequently taken in Greek and Latin Authors. Homer in the fourth Book of his
Odysses, (...):
'My dear Son, thou art well descended.
And Theocritus, in his Heracliscus, (...):
'Thou art of the Stock of Perseus.
Among the Latins, we have Virgil, Aeneid 6.

Projice tela manu sanguis meus:
'Cast thy darts, my Son.
And Tibullus ad Matrem de Filia, Quicquid agit sanguis est tamen illa tuus:
Let her do what she will, she will be still your Daughter. And not only among
the Poets, but also among the Orators too: As Quintilian in his Declamation
pro Milite, Abdicandus and ejurandus est non sanguis tuus: You may abdicate and
abjure him if you please, he is neither your Son, nor your Relation.

What Mr. Blount affirms concerning the Jews, That diverse of them are of this
Opinion, amounts not to much; for all Men know how illiterate, and how
monstrous the Rabbis have been in their Opinions, since our Savior's time.
Origin in his 2d. Book against Celsus, says, (...): We have nothing now from
the Jews, but Trifles and Fables. Morinus in his third part and 7th. Exercit.
gives this Censure of them, Nihil est tam absurdum, tam comicum, tam ridiculum,
tam monstrosum, atque ab omni fide, and probilitate abhorrens, ad quod
probandum statim praesto non sit illis e sacra Scriptura testimonium: There is
nothing so absurd, so comical, so ridiculous, so monstrous, so abhorrent from
all faith and likelihood, which they are not ready to prove, out of some place
of Holy Writ. This seems to be a Description of our Deists and Pre-adamites, in
their abuse of the Scriptures: however it demonstrates the little advantage Mr.
Blount can promise himself, from the countenance they give to his Opinion.

Capellus in his Arcannm Punctuationis, Book 2. c. 3. Judaei in propria
historia peregrini, antiquitatum suarum prorsus ignari: The Jews are strangers
in their own Histories, are ignorant of their own Antiquities. And certainly
this Character is justly applicable to all such of them, as collect from the
Wr^tings of Moses, That there were two Creations; and that Adam was not the
first Man.

Scaliger, in his sixth Book of the Emendation of times, acquaints us,
Manifesta est Judaeorum inscitia, and mnlta quae ad eorum sacra et historiam
pertinent, long melius nos teneamus quam illi: The ignorance of the Jews is
very manifest, and we Christians know their Sacred Rites, and their Histories
much better than they themselves. These are Testimonies which I have borrowed
from Learned Men, who were very conversant in all the Jewish Learning. And yet
after all, we have reason to believe this is a mistake in Mr. Blount: For the
4th. Article of the Jewish Faith (believed by all Jews without contradiction,
as L. Modena tells us in his Hist. p. 245.) is, That God was from all eternity;
and that all other other things besides had a beginning at some time. And
Article 9th. That Moses was wholly dictated by God, and put not one syllable in
of himself. Which as they plainly repugn the Opinion of Ocellus Lucanus, so I
think it not very reconciliable with the Consequences of Pre-adamitism, which
open so wide a door to Atheism. The words of the most Learned Bishop
Stillingfleet (in his Origines Sacrae, p. 537.) are worthy of consideration:
Whosoever, says he, seriously considers the frequent Reflections on the
Authority of the Scriptures, which were cast by the Author of that Fiction, and
his endeavoring on all occasions to derogate from the Miracles recorded in it,
may easily suspect the Design of that Author, That his Opinion in time would
undermine the Scriptures themselves.

This seems to be the Character of Mr. Blount; for his Method is the same. How
wickedly p. 25 and 26. does he feign a Dialogue between Eve and the Serpent?
With what levity p. 44. does he write of the Taylor's Trade, and the
Thread-maker's Art, which he makes use of to disparage the Mosaic History? With
what Blasphemy does he discourse of our Lord, p. 162. where he writes, that
some mean Persons called Him the Son of David; and the Mobb by that Title did
cry, Hosanah to him, when he made his Cavalcade upon an Asinego? How
unbecomingly does he speak of our Lord and Moses; when p. 121 he makes them
together with the Impostor Mahomet, to be Politicians? And how like the Author
of Pre-adamitism, he derogates from Divine Miracles, the beginning of his Book
sufficiently proves: where he uses all his Art to subvert these Divine
Demonstrations; and well knowing that his main strength lies in those
Difficulties, he places them in the Front, that he may poison his Reader's Mind
first of all, and so prepare it for Reception of the following Heterodoxies.
Wherefore we have considered this at large in the first Section of Genesis, and
Divine Miracles.

Page 224. Diodorus Seculus was famed for his great Learning, Reading,
Enquiring; speaking of the Chaldeans, he relates, 'That they thought very long
ago, that the World, according to its own Nature, was eternal, having no
Beginning, nor that it should have Corruption, in order to an End. And p. 225.
Before the Expedition of Alexander, they reckoned Four hundred and seventy
thousand Years. Likewise Cicero, ( who was cotemporary with Diodorus) mentions
the very same Account of Time, and Number of Years.
ANSWER.
The Opinion of the Chaldeans, as to the Original of the World, is laid down by
Diodorus Siculus, Book the second, in these Words; (...). The Chaldeans (says
Diodorus) affirm the World to be eternal, that it had no Beginning of its
Production, neither hereafter shall it have any Corruption. But the Order and
Beauty of the Universe must be acknowledged to proceed from Divine Providence;
and all the glorious things which we see in Heaven, owe not their Glory to
Chance and Accident, but to the firm and unalterable Determinations of the Gods.

Of what Necessity Revealed Religion is, and of what Benefit to Mankind, and
under what great Errors men labor who are destitute of it, this Instance of
the Chaldeans fully evinces.

The Reader cannot but observe the Art of our Deist, in relating the Opinion of
the Chaldeans; for he has wholly concealed what they say of Divine Providence,
that being not for his design. As also, their great difference from his beloved
Ocellus Lucanus. The Chaldeans make the World only eternal as to the Matter of
it, the Form they own to be from Providence; whereas Ocellus makes it eternal,
not only with respect to its Matter, but also with respect to its Form.

What he writes as to their Computation of Four hundred and seventy thousand
Years before Alexander, amounts to nothing; unless he had proved by what kind
of Years they computed, as we have done in the Mosaic Computation, which we
have proved to be Solar.

Diodorus observes, that the Chaldeans, in things pertaining to their Arts,
made use of Lunar Years of Thirty Days, which will make this monstrous Account
shrink considerably.

The Chaldeans make some of their first Kings to Reign above Forty thousand
Years, which is so incredible, that Anianus and Panodorus interpret those
Chaldean Years to be but Days.

That which will for ever cramp these vain Pretenses of the Chaldeans, is that
we have from Simplicius, on Aristotle's second Book de Coelo, where he tells
us, that Aristotle desired of Callisthenes, that he would certify him of the
Chaldean Observations, which Callisthenes did, and gives an Account not
exceeding Two thousand Years. Callisthenes was a grave Person, not to be
imposed on by the vain Brags of the Chaldeans; he would believe nothing that
they could not make to appear out of good Monuments of Antiquity.

This Argument will admit of no Solution; the Authority of one single
Manuscript to the contrary, mentioned by Sir Henry Savil, in his second Lecture
on Eucleid, is not to be opposed to all the vulgar Codes.

What our Author says concerning Cicero's mentioning the same Account of Time
and Number of Years, proves nothing but this, That Mr. Blount is a Man of
unparalleled Boldness, and abuses good Authors. It Is true, that Cicero
mentions this monstrous Account of the Chaldeans in two places, in his first
and second Books of Divination; but then he explodes the same as false and
ridiculous. It Is to be noted, that Mr. Blount cites Cicero in general, and
refers to no Book; he well knowing that all his Readers were not conversant in
Cicero; and that if he had mentioned the place where this was remarked, the
Reader would have cried shame on his Disingenuity Both these places being to
the same purpose, I will relate only that in the first Book, where Cicero
writing of the Babylonians (who are the same with the Chaldeans) has these
Words; Condemnemus hos aut stultitiae, aut vanitatis, aut imprudentiae qui
quadringenta and septuaginta millia annorum ut ipsi dicunt, monnmentis
comprehensa continent, and mentiri jndicemns -- We cannot but cnndemn the
Chaldeans of Folly, Vanity, and Imprudence, who boast that they have
Antiquities of 470000 Years; and in our Judgment they are guilty of Falsehood.

AN Appendix To the ANSWER.
I Have some reason to fear, that the Reader of this Discourse may think, that
I have been too brief in my Preface; wherefore I have thought fit to annex this
Appendix.

I have already acquainted the Reader, that I have pretermitted the Examination
of some things in these ORACLES OF REASON; viz. Things purely Philosophical,
and which may be problematically disputed on either side.

What those other things are which I have pretermitted, I think it reasonable
to acquaint my Reader with, least he may conjecture that I have passed over
some Material Difficulties; I shall therefore give in this Appendix a
particular Account.

I have not examined, nor any ways concerned my self, with those things that
are purely Political; as when our Deist, in the Letter directed to Sir W. L. G.
to be left in the Speaker's Chamber ( p. 137.) calls the Regulators of
Corporations, and the Surrenderers of Charters, Impudent, if without Blushing,
they call themselvrs Protestants: As also, when ( p. 174.) he says, If the
Church of England can be supported by such ill Men, the Lord have Mercy on her:
And ( p. 174) Of how great Importance an Honest, Impartial, and duly Elected
House of Commons is to this Nation, every body knows, and the ill Effects of
the contrary, I think, is unknown to no body: my old Lord Burleigh used to say,
we can never be thoroughly ruined but by a Parliament -- And in the same Page he
writes, I confess, I cannot but couple these Regulators and Surrenderers
together, with those Judges, and other Ge^tlemen of the long Robe, who were for
the Annihilating or Dispencing Power -- I have not concerned my self with these
Political Matters; because I have not been conversant in that sort of Learning,
and because they are without my Sphere, and proposed Design.

Neither have I concerned my self in discovering those Errors which are obvious
to every Man; viz. His illogical Inferences; or his great Confidence in abusing
good Authors.

We have an Example of the first ( p. 196.) where, when he is to prove the
Minor of his first Syllogism, viz. That no Rule of Revealed Religion, ever was,
or could be made known to all Men, he only proves that the large Continent of
America was not discovered till within these Two hundred Years, a Matter of
Fact incontrovertible. Whereas, unless he had proved that Revealed Religion
never was, nor never could be discovered to America, he has not proved his
Minor.

In like manner, when ( p. 224.) he is to prove rhat there were diverse othor
Authors who wrote before Moses; he thinks it sufficient to follow an Annotator
on Dr. Brown, who cites a Passage out of Apuleius, (whom the Pagans opposed to
our Lord, as they did Apollonius) which proves nothing, but that there were
some Men before Moses: But as for Writings, we find not one Syllable in that
place of Apuleius; which was the thing to be proved. As also, when ( p. 219.)
he was obliged by the Procedure of the Subject insisted on, to compare the Jews
with the Egyptians, Chaldees, and Phaenicians, in point of Antiquity; or to
compare the Writings of those respective Nations with each other; he changes
the Terms of the Comparison, and compares the Nation of the Jews with the
Writings of the Egyptians, Chaldeans, and Phaenicians: This is that which
Aristotle justly condemns in Argumentations and Comparisons, and calls it the
passing from one Genus to another.

If this Method had been used and allowed of in the well known Controversy
between the Scythians and the Egyptians, the Scythians would have been
vanquished, and the generally received Opinion of the Scythians Antiquity would
upon no good Grounds, have been banished out of the World.

I have taken no notice of these, or of such like weak Sophisms in the
foregoing Discourse; because they are in themselves very Childish, and are
easily to be observed by a considering Reader.

I have also pretermitted his palpable abusing good Authors, if the Abuse be
very obvious; an Example of which I shall here produce.

[Pag. 219. He thus writes; What Josephus speaks of the Greeks, and other
Nations, may with the same reason be applied to Moses and the Jews, viz. That
all Founders and Establishers of new Estates, have each of them supposed in
their own behalf, that whosoever was of theirs, he was the first of the World,
Contra Apionem, lib. 1.

Now howover Josephus boasts so much of the Antiquity of his Countrymen the
Jews, yet he himself confesses, that he, nevertheless, durst not presume to
compare the Nation of the Jews, with the Antiquity of the most Ancient and
Infallible Writings of the Egyptians, Chaldeans, and Phaenicians, who dwell in
such Countries as are not subject to the Corruption of Air; and are carefully
provided, that whatsoever has been done by them, should not sleep in Obscurity,
but be kept in Memory, in the public Writings of the most learned Men, Contra
Apionem, lib. 1.

And Page 220. Which is as if Josephus had said, forasmuch as no other Nations
but the Egyptians, Phaenicians, and Chaldeans, have certain Records of their
Original, therefore will I pretend my own Nation of the Jews to be ancienter
then them, who cannot disprove me; but because the Egyptians, Phaenicians, and
Chaldees, have more ancient Records of their Country in being; therefore to
prevent being confuted, I think it more convenient to yield to them in
Antiquity. And this is the Secret meaning of what Josephus says].

Thus far Mr. Blount.

To whom I return this ANSWER.
He that will but take some pains to read over the two Books, which Josephus
wrote for the sake of his Epaphroditus, and for such as he was, lovers of
Truth, in opposition to Apion of Alexandria, will soon perceive the
perverseness of our Author, to exceed that of this malapert, and petulant
Grammarian.

The design of Josephus in these two Books was to show, that Apion's Negative
Argument, from the silence of the Greek Authors (with respect to the Jews) was
of no moment; forasmuch as the Egyptians, the Chaldeans, and Phaenecians, who
had ancienter and more sure Histories; and had better ways and means of
Writing, then the Greeks make mention of his Countrymen the Jews: And this in
effect, is the Sum of all that Josephus writes on this Matter, in his Books
against Apion.

Josephus seems to make an Apology for the bragging Greeks in point of
Antiquity, when He says, that all their Greek Writers supposed in their own
behalf, that whosoever was of theirs, was the first of the World; but Josephus
also adds (what our Deist omits, and alters the case) that this was for want of
letters; the ancient use of which came to the Greeks from the Phaenicians and
Cadmus; and that at that time the Greeks had no certain Records: That Homer's
Poem was the ancientest Book which they had, and this was written after the
Trojan War: Nay, that this Poem was not at first written, but was preserved by
Tradition, and the People's Songs. And that this was the cause of that great
Dissonancy and Difference which appeared in Original Copies, when it was first
committed to Writing. It was for want of Letrers they had no ancient Histories;
and that their Cadmus Milesius, and their Acusilaus Argivus, did not long
preceed the Expedition of the Persians against the Greeks.

Whereas nothing is, nor can be more evident to him that reads Josephus, than
this, that the same Prejudice does not affect Moses; and therefore our Author
has with great Incogitancy affirmed, that what Josephus speaks of the Greeks,
and other Nations, may with the same reason be applied to Moses and the Jews.

Our Author by this Assertion, overthrows his own Supposition; for if Adam and
Eve were the first Man and Woman in the World, according to Moses; or at least
must be supposed to be such, according to our Author's Method in this place;
then there could not be two Creations, one in the first, and another in the
second Chapter of Genesis; there could be no Praeadamites, as is pretended; and
Adam and Eve were created in the first Chapter of Genesis: Which yet Mr. Blount
can by no means allow of, without being repugnant to himself, and contrary to
his own Method in another place.

Josephus no where affirms, that the Egyptians, Chaldeans, and Phenicians, had
more ancient Records than the Jews: He no where affirms, That he dares not
compare the Writings of Moses (so it ought to have been written, and not the
Nation of the Jews, as I observed in another place) with the most ancient and
infallible Writings (I use our Author's words) of the foresaid Nations.
Josephus indeed says, He will not enumerate the Jews with those Barbarous
Nations, with respect to the advantages of writing History; but then he
determines the advantage on the behalf of the Jews: For in that Book he plainly
asserts, That Moses was the most ancient of all Legislators; and that the Jews
had a more certain way of transmitting their Memoirs to Posterity, than the
Egyptians Chaldeans, or Phoenicians.

That Moses was a more ancient Historian than Berosus the Chaldean, or Manetho
the Egyptian, or Sanchoniathon the Phenician, is an unquestioned Truth, among
all such as know any thing of these matters: nothing being more evident than
this, That Berosus and Manetho lived after the time of Alexander the Great; and
that Sanchoniathon wrote after the Trojan War.

Josephus no where affirms, That the Writings of the forenamed Historians are
infallible; he only prefers them before the Greeks in point of Verity and
Antiquity: as for Infallibility, he allows it to no Historian but Moses, whom
alone he makes to be divinely inspired. As to the point of Antiquity, we appeal
to our Author himself, who (notwithstanding what he has here written of this
matter) page 224. confesses, That we have no Writer extant at this time more
ancient than Moses, unless it be Ocellus. -- His exception of Ocellus is of no
moment, as we have proved in the foregoing Discourse.

After all my Search, I can no where find Josephus absolutely affirming, That
the Egyptians, Chaldeans, and Phenicians had any certain Records of their
Original; but only Comparatively with the Greeks: He no where affirms,
directly, or indirectly, that the forenamed Nation, had more ancient Records of
their Country to refute him; and that therefore he thinks more convenient, to
yield to them in Antiquity: and therefore our Deist is forced to use this
Device, -- This is the secret meaning of what Josephus says.

What Josephus says is clear and perspicuous: there is no color for so
slanderous an Insinuation; and I think I may affirm witout any Calumny, or
Controversy, That not Josephus, but our Deist had a Secret meaning, to impose
on credulous Readers, by abusing good Authors.

We may bid Farewell to all Evidence in Matters of Fact, if Secret meanings be
allowed of: but perhaps our Deist had herein a regard to Himself; hoping that
at a dead lift, This Secret meaning might gloss, and varnish over some of his
monstrous, and incredible Tenants. I am sure that by this Hocus-pocus Trick, he
might have cited The Hind and Panther (which he quotes page 150.) for the
Antiquities of his Chaldeans, Egyptians, Phenicians; and have quoted Josephus
for the Frauds and Imposings of the Priest.

And now I am making toward a Conclusion; I hope I may do a thing grateful to
the Reader, and be not thought to deviate from my Subject, if I here present
him with the great Aversion that our Church has for Deism.

The Church of England ( Article 18.) declares in these words, They are also to
be had accursed, that presume to say, that every Man shall be saved by the Law
or Sect which he professes, so that he be diligent to frame his Life according
to that Law, and the Light of Nature; for Holy Scripture does set out unto us,
only in the Name of Jesus Christ, whereby Men must be saved.

This Article plainly declares (as Mr. Rogers on the Articles, p. 87. collects)
that the Profession of every Religion cannot save a Man, live he never so
virtuously. It also follows from this Article, That no Man ever was, or shall
be saved, but only by the Faith and Name of JESUS CHRIST.

The Opinion of the Deist is diametrically opposite hereunto: For (page 199.
and 200.) he affirms, That Natural and Unrevealed Religion, is sufficient to
make us happy in a future State. And he affirms (p. 201.) That this his Opinion
is Charitable; forasmuch as it does not exclude any Dissenters from Eternal
Happiness; and that God may be pleased with different Worships.

St. Austin in his Book of Heresies (cap. 72.) reckons that of the Rhetorians
to be one: Forasmuch as they believe, that all heretics hold the Truth, and
walk uprightly. Which Heresy St. Austin calls a Heresy of wonderful vanity, and
such as seems to him incredible: my own part I cannot perceive any great
difference between the Rhetorians and the Deists.

And whereas our Deist seems to value his Opinion upon the pretended
Charitableness thereof, and thinks that a Recommendation: He is much mistaken;
for this Opinion is rather Turkish than Charitable.

We read in Busbequius (Epist. 3.) that Rustan, the Prime Vizier, persuaded
that excellent Ambassador to turn Musselman; and that if he would do so, he
should receive great Honors and Rewards, from Solomon his Lord and Emperor:
To whom Busbequins makes this Reply.

Mihi certum est manner in ea Religione, in qua natus essem quamque Dominus
meus profitetur. Pulchre, inquit Rustanus, sed tamen de anima quid fiet? Et de
Anima, inquam, been spero. Tum ille cum paulisper intercogitasset, ita est
profecto: neque ego ab hac absum sententia, aternae beatitudinis consortes
fore, qui sancte innocenterque hanc vitam traduxerint quamcunque illi
Religionem secuti sunt. -- I am resolved, says Busbequius, to continue in that
Religion in which I were born, and which my Lord professes: Very well, says
Rustan, but what will become of your Soul in another World? I am, says
Busbequius, very confident of its welfare. Then Rustan, after some pause, makes
this Answer, I am of your Mind; this is my Opinion, That all Persons shall be
eternally happy, that lead an innocent life, notwithstanding their differences
in Religion.

The Prime Vizier's Opinion seems to me to be the same with Mr. Blount's; it is
altogether so charitable: And if our Deist had been present at that Interview,
it is apparent enough with whom he would have sided: And if the same Offers had
been made to him (which were made to that incomparable Ambassador, it is plain
enough what he would have done. So that if I should assert, That Deism is a
direct Road to Turcism, I think I should not be mistaken.

Our Deist must have more Confidence, and (all things considered) better luck
than Polus had in Erasmus his Exorcisms, if he can persuade any Persons who
seriously consult their own Salvation, To behold any Happiness in his Heaven.

It Is worth our observation, in what detestation and abhorrence our Church of
England has the Opinion of the Deists; for it affixes an Accurse to it: which
I think is not very usual for Provincial Councils.

Mr. Pool indeed, in his Appendix to the Nullity of the Romish Faith (page
240.) (...) these words: -- If we look into the Records of Councils, we shall
find, That this Practice of Anathematizing was not only in use in general, but
also in particular, and Provincial Councils. I doubt not but this Learned Man
had good grounds for his Assertion: Yet I must confess for my own part, I have
not observed this Method in Particular Councils; if we except that Orthodox
Council held at Gangra, in Paphlagonia, about the Year of our Lord 324. in
every one of whose Canons, about twenty in number, we find an Accurse affixed:
a sufficient Instance In Antiquity to justify our Church 's Method.

And since we have had an occasion to mention this Synod, and that we live in
an Age, in which Atheism and Deism abounds to that degree, that the Churches
set apart for GOD's Service, and our Religious Assemblies, are slighted and
contemned: I shall conclude with the Judment of that Pious Synod (Can. 5) Si
quis docet domum Dei contemptibilem esse ut conventus qui in ea celebrantur,
Anathema sit.

How nearly this concerns our Deists, and other despisers of GOD's Public
Worship, who frequently abuse GOD's Ministers, and make no Religion of
traducing and ridiculing them, is very plain and palpable: and there is here NO
SECRET MEANING.

EXEQUIAS DEISTAE, QUIBUS IRE COMMODUM EST JAM TEMPUS EST.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and Sold by Charles Yeo, John Pearce, and Philip Bishop,
Booksellers in Exon.
SElect Hymns, each fitted to two Tunes, to be sung in Churches. The Beauty of
Holiness: or, a short Defense and Vindication of the pious Decency, Regularity,
and Order, of Reading the Communion-Service, at the Communion Table; offered to
a dissatisfied Neighbor, from his Minister. A Form of Prayer for Married
Persons, for the most part taken out of the Liturgy.
In the PRESS.
A Practical Treatise concerning Evil Thoughts; wherein are some Things more
especially useful for Melancholy Persons. By William Chiloot, M. A. Danmonii
Orientales Illustres: or, the Worthies of Devon; Printed by way of
Subscription, Price in Sheets Sixteen Shillings and Six Pence; the first
Payment Eight Shillings. All Gentlemen that are willing to take the Advantage
by Subscribing, are desired to send in their first Payment with all speed to
the Undertakers, Charles Yeo, John Pearce, and Philip Bishop.

