Licensed,

June the 1st. 1687.
AN ANSWER TO THE CONSIDERATIONS Which obliged PETER MANBY, Late Dean of
Londonderry in Ireland, (As he pretends) to EMBRACE, what he calls, THE
Catholic Religion.

By William King, Chancellor of St. Patricks, Dublin.

Isaiah 1. 2. -- I have nourished, and brought up Children, and they have
rebelled against me.

LONDON, Printed for R. Tailor, near Stationers' Hall. 1687.

THE CONTENTS.
Chap. 1. The Examination of his Preface.
Sect. 1. THE Introduction. Sect. 2. Whether Mr. M. really desired the
Information? Sect. 3. Catholic Church defined. S. 4. Answer to his first
Question, What Church meant by the Catholic? S. 5. To his second Question,
Whether the Church of England? S. 6. To his third Question, With what other
Church she Communicates? S. 7. To his fourth, Whether the variety of all
Protestants be the Catholic Church? S. 8. To his fifth Question, Whether we
and Lutherans are the same in all material points? S. 9. Our Church visible
before Edward VI. S. 11. His unfair dealing with Dr. Heylin, and Dr. Burnet.

Chap. 2. About Mission.
Sect. 1. His Letter to his Grace the Lord Primate examined. S. 2. The
Questions concerning Mission reduced to five Heads. S. 3. The validity of our
Orders. S. 5. Answer to his first Question, What Priesthood had the first
Reformers, but what they received from Roman Catholic Bishops? S. 6. To his
second, Who Authorized them to teach their Protestant Doctrine, etc? S. 7. To
his third, Whether Cranmer did condemn the Church of Rome, and by what
Authority? S. 8. To his fourth, Whether a Presbyterian can preach against the
Church of England by virtue of Orders received from her? S. 9. To his fifth,
Whether an Act of Parliament in France, etc. be not as good an Authority for
Popery there, as in England for Protestancy? S. 10. Mr. M's Objections against
the first Reformers considered. S. 11. His Objections against Cranmer in
particular Answered, to the end

Chap. 3. About Confession.
Sect. 1. Whether We in our Church differ about Confession? S. 2. The Doctrine
of our Church in this matter, whence Confession appears not to be wanting. S.
3. His Argument proposed out of St. John 1. 9. compared with John 20. 23. S. 4.
The words if we Confess, John 1. Ep. 1. 9. shown not to refer to Auricular
Confession. S. 5. Gods faithfulness and Justice mentioned John 1. Ep. 1. 9. do
not respect particularly the Promise, John 20. 23. S. 6. If they did, yet this
would not prove Auricular Confession. S. 7. and 8. His second Argument from the
practice of all Ages and Churches considered, and shown to be false. S. 9. His
third Argument from the inconveniency that attends the want of Confession. S.
11. His fourth Argument from the interest of the Priest.

Chap. 4. About the place of the Catholic Church.
Sect. 1. Answer to his third Difficulty, Where is the Catholic Church? S. 2.
Whether extant before Cranmer? S. 3. Whether Cranmer believed himself a Member
thereof? S. 4, 5. The Reformation justifiable without charging the Church of
Rome with Idolatry. S. 6, 7, 8. All Idolatry not inconsistent with the Being of
a Church. S. 9. The weakness of his Argument brought to prove it.

Chap. 5. An Answer to the heap of Particulars thrown together at the latter
end of his Paper.
Sect. 1. and 2. His endeavor to vindicate his Church in her Devotions. S. 3.
Whether all elevated and judicious. S. 4. His first Answer taken from the
Benedicite to Protestant Objections against Prayers in the Mass directed to
Saints. S. 5. The second from the Angels being Favorites. S. 6. The third from
their knowing our Affairs. S. 7. His Excuses for the Mass being in an unknown
Tongue. S. 8. His Vindication of the Worship of Images, from the Council of
Trents forbidding Superstition S. 9. From Kneeling at the Sacrament. S. 10.
From Presbyterian Objections against our Practice. S. 11. His Excuse for the
ill Practices and Opinions of some Roman Catholics. S. 12. His recommendation
of his Church from her Books of Devotion. S. 13. From the Devotion of her
People. S. 14. From the Unity of her Members, that Unity showed not to be so
great as pretended, from the Schisms that have been in her about Ordinations.
S. 15. From the Disputes about Confirmation. S. 16. About Confession. S. 17.
What he objects against the Church of England, first from her stealing her
Communion-Service. S. 18. Secondly, from her want of a due Foundation. S. 19.
For trusting Reason too far. S. 20. And contradicting the visible Church. S.
21. Thirdly, Not yielding a due Submission. S. 22. Due Submission shown to be
paid by her to the universal Church, and taught to be due to particular
Churches. S. 23. Mr. M's Transcribing and Englishing Calvin examined together
with his Inference. S. 24. Mr. M's Submission to the Catholic and the
particular Church whereof he was a Member, examined.

AN ANSWER TO THE CONSIDERATIONS Which obliged Peter Manby Dean of Derry to
embrace the Communion of the Romish Church.
CHAP. 1.
To the Preface.
. 1. PEter Manby Dean of Derry has chosen this time, (for what reasons he knows
best) to declare himself of the Communion of the Church of Rome. Whoever does
so in the present circumstances, must run the hazard of being censured, for
having too great a value for the Favors and worldly Advantages that some late
Converts have met with. In order therefore to satisfy the World that he had
some other Reasons besides this prospect (I suppose) he published this Pamphlet
that I now answer. Whoever reads it, will find so little Method or Connection
between the parts of it, that he must conclude the Writer was never acquainted
with close thinking; and that the looseness and immethodicalness of it, is the
greatest trouble lies on the Answerer: the truth is, it sticks chiesly on
Formalities and Preliminaries, which no Advocate ever insisted much upon, that
was confident of the merits of his Cause: and therefore to answer it can hardly
be worth any ones labor. I confess I should have thought so too, if I had not
found some of his own party boasting of it; and I do now assure him that I do
not Answer it out of any apprehension I have of its seducing any of ours; and
that it had been answered long ago, if I had been possessed with any such
Suspicion.

It consists of three parts, and each of these do in effect contain the same
things, and except a man give a distinct Answer to each, he may pretend that
part is unanswered. I shall therefore follow him in his own method, and
consider* first, his Preface to the Reader: secondly, the Pamphlet it self: and
thirdly, his Latin Queries, and beg the Readers Pardon, if he find the Answers
sometimes repeated, when Mr. M. repeats the questions so often.

2. His Preface has huddled together some Questions and Dilemma's concerning
the Catholic Church, and raised some doubts, concerning which he professes
himself to be at a loss, and so desires information -- Thus page 1. When a
Protestant rehearses this Article of his Creed; I believe one Catholic Church,
I would fain understand what Church he means? Again, this makes Protestancy so
wandering and uncertain a thing, that I for my part cannot understand it: Page
3. He shall find me pressing for an Answer to such Questions as these.

Page* 1. of the Pamphlet, There are three points wherein I could never satisfy
my self; a little after, I could never find any satisfactory Answer to this
Question. Page 2. pronouncing the Church of Rome Idolatrous, I would fain know
by what Authority? -- A little after, by whose Authority -- I cannot tell. Page
3 there was no Answer to be had. -- A little after, I cannot find. l. 9. I do
not well understand. l. 15. I could never understand. Page 4. I would know.
Page 7. l. 13 I confess my dullness understands not. -- Page 8. line. 16. I
would fain know. line 25. Which Answer I confess I do not understand -- page
11. line 15. I desire to be informed. l. the last. I cannot imagine. Page 12.
line 15. I cannot understand.

Now, if he was so very ignorant as he makes himself, and so desirous of
information, he ought to have consulted some of his Spiritual Guides on these
heads, and not trusted altogether to his own Judgment; or else he ought in all
reason to have printed these Questions, before he resolved them unanswerable:
for how did he know, but some body might have had more to say to them than he
was aware of, and have given him satisfaction? If he had designed to be counted
either a prudent or honest man, this had been his method; but I have enquired
and cannot find that ever he proposed them seriously to one Divine, or applied
himself to any in this weighty affair, before he deserted our Communion; and
therefore though perhaps he may be ignorant enough, yet I think it apparent
that he only pretends want of understanding, and desire of information; or that
he has very little care of his Soul, or of what Communion he is.

3. To give his Questions proposed in his Preface a distinct Answer, I shall
first rank them in method.

Concerning therefore the Catholic Church, he asks,

1. What Church we mean? 2. Whether the Church of England alone as established
by Law, or as in Communion with other Churches? 3. With what other Church under
Heaven does the Church of England communicate in Sacraments and Liturgy? 4.
Whether the variety of Protestants be the Catholic Church, since they want her
Essential mark called Unity? 5. Whether we and the Lutherans are of the same
Church; the Lutherans holding a Corporal Presence in the Sacrament, and we
denying it?
All these we have in the first page of his Preface, and all proceed from the
same root, even ignorance of what is meant by the Catholic Church: If Mr. M.
had designed to deal ingenuously and like a Scholar that desired to clear
things, (which ought to be the design of every honest writer,) he ought to have
laid down a definition of the Catholic Church, and then examined to whom it
belonged, and shown the Church as established here by Law to be no part of it;
for, till that be done, all that is said is banter; for we mean not the same
thing by the Church. I never saw any Romanist take this method, and therefore I
have always believed that they rather designed to gain Proselytes by
confounding their Heads, than by clear Reason and Information; I will therefore
tell him what I mean by the one Catholic Church in the Creed; and if he do not
like the description, let him mend it.

The Catholic Church is the whole body of men, professing the Religion of
Christ, and living under their lawful Spiritual Governors. This body of
Christians is one, because it has, according to St. Paul Ephesians. 4. 5. one Lord,
one Faith, one Baptism, one God, and according to Saint Multae gentes, modo una
gens, quare una gens? quia una fides, quia una spes, quia una charitas, quia
una expectatio; postremo quare non una ^^^s, si una patria? patria (...) i^
^st. S. August. tom. 8. in Psalm. 85.
Augustine, many Churches are one Church, because there is one Faith, one Hope,
one Charity, one Expectation; and lastly, one heavenly Country; now if he had
been as much concerned to understand this a right, as he would have his Dear
Reader, he might easily have seen who it is that fancy to themselves a Church
divided from all the rest of the world, by breaking the bonds of Charity, and
coining new Articles, distinct from those of the Catholic Faith, which we
received from Christ and his Apostles; and that the Answers to his Questions
are very easy.

. 4. For to the First, when he would know what Church we mean when we rehearse
that Article of our Creed, I Page 1. Pref.
believe one holy Catholic and Apostolic Church? the Answer is, that we mean,
not any particular Church, nor any party of Christians of any one denomination;
but all those that hold the Catholic Faith, and live under their lawful
Pastors: while they have those marks I have laid down from the Scripture and
St. Augustine, they are still of one Communion, though by the peevishness and
mistake of their Governors, they may be engaged in Quarrels; as the Church of
Rome was in St. Cyprians time with the Church of Africa, about the allowing the
Baptism of Heretics; and the Quarrel came to that height, that when the
Africans came to Rome, not only the peace of the Church and Communion was
denied them, but even the common kindness of Hospitality; as we may see in
Firmilians Epistle to Saint Cyprian, Ep. 75. This Preciperet fraternitati
universae, ne quis %os in domum suam reciperet, and venientibus non solum pax
and communio, sed etiam tectum and hospitium negaretur. Cyprian. Ep. 75.
being supposed, it is no hard matter to find out the parts of this Catholic
Church wherever one comes, it is only Examining whether any Church hold the
Catholic Faith, and whether they live under their lawful Governors; and so
far as they do so, it is our duty to join with them, as true parts thereof.
Whereas he who with the Donatists, will unchurch three parts of four of the
Christian World; or fancy a Church divided from all others, though as sound in
Faith and as obedient to their Governors as possible; is like for ever to be
tossed too and fro upon the unstable waters of Schism, and dwindles the Church
into a Faction; and this gives a full Answer.

5. To his second Question, whether we mean by the Catholic Church, the Church
of England alone, or the Church of England as in Communion with other Churches;
for by this it appears, that the Churches of England and Ireland are no more
the Catholic Church, than the English Seas are the whole Ocean; but they are a
part thereof, because they hold the Catholic Faith entirely* and are governed
by their lawful and Catholic Bishops, who have not had for many years, so much
as a Rival appearing to contest their Title and Succession.

6. But then he urges in the third place, with what other Church does the
Church of England Communicate in Sacraments and Liturgy?

To which I answer, Unity of Liturgy is no part of Communion of Churches; let
him show, if he can, that the Catholic Church ever had any such Unity; Unity
in Faith, Sacraments and in worshipping God she has with all true Churches on
the face of the Earth, insomuch that there is not one Article in her Creeds,
nor one Petition in her Liturgy, that even Mr. M. can condemn; nor is there any
Office wanting, in which the Ancient Liturgies agreed; and then let him show
why all Churches hold not Communion with her? and who is guilty of the breach
thereof? If he say that we hold indeed the Catholic Faith, but not entire, let
him make it appear: but if he cannot prove that we deny any part of this
Catholic Faith, he acquits us from Heresy, and owns our union in Faith with
the Catholic Church. To prove this defect was chiefly incumbent on him, but he
has not so much as attempted it. He has indeed made an attempt against the
lawfulness of our Governors that is, to prove us Schismatics; but how
unsuccessfully we shall see by and by.

. 7. In the mean time to his fourth Demand, Whether by the one Catholic Church
be understood the variety of all Protestants, since they want her essential
mark, even Unity? I answer, that neither all Protestants are Catholic members
of the Church, nor are Protestants only; those amongst Protestants, that
embrace the Catholic Faith, and make no Separation from their lawful
Governors, and that live in unity of Faith and charity with their neighbor
Churches are Catholic members, and have that Unity, which is essential to the
Catholic Church; but these are not to be confounded with Presbyterians,
Independants, Anabaptists, Fifth Monarchy-men, Quakers, etc. since these have
separated themselves from their lawful Governors, as much as Mr. M. himself;
though their Crime be less than his: as he is less guilty that makes a
Rebellion, than he who joins with a Forreigner to enslave his native Country.

But he has an Excuse even for these, that he has heard out of the mouths of
some Protestants, that God had his people amongst all sorts of Protestants; and
what if some charitable people say with Saint Augustine; that they who Qui
Sententiam suam quamvis falsam atque perversam nulla pertinaci animositate
defendunt, praesertim quam non audacia praesumptionis suae pepererunt, sed a
seductis atque in errorem lapsis parentibus acceperunt, querunt autem ca^^a
solicitudine veritatem, corrigi parati cum invenerint, nequaquam sunt inter
Haereticos deputand^. August. Ep. 162.
defend their Opinion, though false and perverse without pertinaciousness,
especially when they were not the Authors thereof, through their own confidence
and presum (...) received it from their seduced and erring Parents, and seek
industriously the truth, and are ready to embrace it when they find it; are not
at all to be reckoned Heretics? is he sure that there are not some such
amongst every sort of Protestants, nay of Christians? I am sure, the passage he
quotes out of the second Paper mentioned by him, is no Confutation of this; nor
any thing to the purpose, except he has a mind to prove the Words true by his
own example: For, what Reason has he given why he quitted the Church in which
he was baptized, educated and preferred (whether above his Deserts, let the
World judge by this Paper;) but because the Discipline and Devotions of the
Church of Rome suit his present Fancy better than what he left; because he was
not able to answer some few Questions that have no great difficulty in them,
his private Judgment or Interest told him he ought to change his Church. And if
he changed his Church on the confidence of a Judgment he acknowledges
sufficiently weak, why will he not allow the same liberty to others? If he say
that the Church he has chosen is a Church from whence there can be no appeal; I
answer, he has only his own Judgment for believing so; and when that Judgment
alters, he may be of any other Church, and so he is fallen in spite of his
endeavors into the same mistake he would avoid. He brings in (to what purpose
he knows perhaps himself) a Story of a passionate Presbyterian, who said, that
he cared not what his Son was, so he was not a Papist: which may pass for a
Reason to those that build their Faith on Stories and Legends, and use to give
the Character of their Enemies only from their peevish Sayings, but is nothing
to our Church.

He argues against Schism, from 1 Cor. 1. 10. I beseech you brethren that ye
all speak the same thing, and that there be no Schisms among you: as if the
Church of which he pretended to be a Member did not abhor Schism as much as he;
and as if the first Schism from her Communion had not been by Papists about the
10th of Queen Elizabeth. Now the same St. Paul, 1 Cor. 6. 18. advises them to
slay fornication, and that as a thing contrary to our Union with God: Mr. M.
had best try his Logic, and see if he can from the first place, which forbids
Schism, prove that it makes a Man more cease to be a Member of the Church than
Fornication does, which is forbidden in the second.

He produces out of Romans 15. 6. that ye glorify God with one Mind and one
Mouth, to prove that we ought not only say the same things, but the same words,
especially about Sacraments and Liturgy, for by one Spirit we (meaning all
Christians) are Baptized into one body; therefore he exhorts them to take heed
of such Teachers as have no mission or authority for what they say, but only
good words and fair speeches to deceive the hearts of the simple. By the for
and therefore in this sentence one would expect that one part should be a
consequence of another, but there is not the least affinity between them: but
you must excuse him, for his talent never lay much, as has been observed by his
Friends, in drawing consequences.

Those, that by good words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple,
are not said to want Mission, Romans 16. 17. it is probable therefore they had
it; but St. Paul gives very different marks to know them by, even teaching
contrary to the Doctrine they had already received, serving their own bellies
-- not our Lord Jesus. Nonconformity therefore to the Doctrine taught by the
Apostles, and too eager a concern for the riches and interest of the Clergy are
the signs of a false Teacher, though he have never so Authentic Mission,
according to St. Paul, nay, though he were an Angel from Heaven. But if he had
been of Mr. M's opinion, the Romans must not have judged of their Pastors, or
attempted to discover Seducers by their Doctrine, but only by calling for their
Letters of Orders and Titles from the Apostles.

. 8. His fifth Question concerning the Catholic Church is, whether we and the
Lutherans are the same in all material points; the Lutherans holding a corporal
Presence in the Sacrament, and we denying it? to which I answer, that a
difference may be material, and yet not essential to Faith, so as to
necessitate a division of Church Unity; there is a very material difference
between those in the Church of Rome that hold the deposing Power, and those
that deny it; between those that hold the Pope infallible, and those that deny
it, and so in many other points, as material as those in dispute between
Protestant Churches; yet, inasmuch as they are not reckoned by all to be the
Essentials of Faith, they do not break Communion; and indeed, he understands
very little that knows not there may be difference of understanding about
matters relating to Sacraments, and yet Unity of Communion. As to his Objection
against the Calvinists, that they have no Order of Priests or Bishops, I leave
him to dispute it with them. Whether consequently they have no true Sacraments,
which he infers, I leave him to dispute it with his new Church, which allows
their Baptism; we are concerned in neither.

. 9. There is only one thing more he objects on this Head against our Church,
and that is, that she, as established by Law, is Catholic neither as to time
nor place, because not visible any where for many Ages before Edward the sixth.
This is the old Question, Where was your Church before Luther? And has been
often answered, by showing that we made no new Church by the Reformation, that
we kept all the Essentials of Faith and Worship received by our Ancestors, had
the same Creeds, the same God, Christ, Baptism, and Eucharist; and lastly, were
governed by the same Bishops and other Governors, before and after the
Reformation; and therefore it is a wild thought in Mr. M. to affirm that our
Church was not visible before Edward the sixth It is true, it was not
established by Law in all points as it is now, no more was the Church of Rome
before the Reformation by the Council of Trent, (for that also pretended to
Reform) but the establishing by Law is accidental altogether to a Church, and a
Church may be visible long before it is so established.

This is all in his Preface that any way relates to the Catholic Church.

. 10. The second part relates to the Mission of our Bishops, and is reduced to
four Queries, which shall have their full Consideration, when I come to
consider the first point that he lays down in his Book.

. 11. The rest is spent in comparing two Historians of the Reformation, that is
Doctor Heylin and Doctor Burnet, of whom he gives this Character, that Burnet
strains all his wit to palliate the doings of the Reformers, and paint them out
to advantage; Heylin represents them honestly for the most part, and in their
own colors: Whereas in truth the first does generally lay down naked matter of
Fact only, and leaves the Reader to judge; and the other passes his own
Censures, and gives his own Gloss on them; as may be seen by the very passages
Mr. M. quotes out of Doctor Heylin's Preface. The truth is he abuses both
Historians; Heylin by producing that for matter of Fact, which is all his own
Inferences and Conjectures, and so expressed to be in the very words: all that
was done in order to a Reformation, seemed to be accidental only, then -- I
cannot reckon his Death an infelicity, -- it is not to be thought, to the next
clause, nor was it like to happen, to the next -- might easily have done, to
the next -- was in all probability to the last.

Are not these Conjectures strong Arguments to prove the Reformation
unjustifiable? But he abuses him yet more in the passage concerning the Duke of
Sommerset, by reporting that as Doctor Heylin's Opinion, which he records only
as the Opinion of others, page 116. of his History; where among three or four
Conjectures, why the Duke did not claim the benefit of his Clergy; he sets down
this last, Finally whether it were some secret judgment on him from above (as
some men conceived) that he, who had destroyed so many Churches, etc. should
want the benefit of Clergy in his greatest extremity; where Mr. M. leaves out
the Parenthesis ( as some Men conceived) and falsifies him (perhaps to make him
recompense) by adding another of his own, he (the Duke of Sommerset) deprived
many learned men of their means and livelihood, ( for being Papists adds Mr.
M.) a most notorious falsehood; since it appears from all Histories of the
Reformation, that there was an universal Compliance of the Clergy; few making
any Opposition, and none almost absolutely refusing Conformity; his Papists at
that time loved their Means so well, or found so little amiss in the
Reformation, that they readily complied with all Changes. And as he thus abuses
and falsifies Heylin, so he does Burnet; he says, that the worst Burnet can
charge Heylin with, is his not vouching Authority for what he says; and he
affirms, that it is an untruth, that Heylin writ upon uncertain grounds, as
Burnet would insinuate. But Burnet in that place insinuates no such thing, but
only says he ought to have vouched them, that people might have judged of their
certainty. Heylin's own Testimony for his fidelity is not to be taken in his
own Cause; and therefore Mr. M. vindicates him very ill, when he produces
nothing else for him. He says Doctor Burnet does not produce one instance of
any moment, wherein he dares say, Doctor Heylin is false. I hope Mr. M. would
not quote any passage out of Heylin that was not of moment; what if that
passage that relates to the Duke of Sommerset here quoted, be recorded falsely
by Heylin, and taxt as false by Burnet? then I believe every body will judge
Mr. M. either very ignorant or very malicious; and yet thus it is. Says Mr. M.
from Heylin, The Duke of Sommerset was so defective in his Judgment, as not to
crave the benefit of his Clergy, which might have saved his Life. Now look into
Burnet ad Ann. 1531. page 186. 2 vol. and see whether he have not these words,
Some late Writers have made an Inference upon his not claiming the benefit of
Clergy, that he was thus left of God, not to plead that benefit; since he had
so much invaded the Rights and Revenues of the Church; but in this they showed
their Ignorance; for by the Statute, That Felony, of which he was found Guilty,
was not to be purged by Clergy.

The most likely excuse I can make for Mr. M. is, that he neither read Burnet
nor Heylin; if he did, he neither knew this, and concealed it; which makes him
very disingenuous: or did not observe it; and so he falls under the Character
of a thoughtless Reader, that could neither by his own Observation, nor the
Admonition of Friends avoid picking out, and repeating such an uncharitable
falsehood. It were easy to show several falsehoods (even in those things that
are most invidious to the Reformation) in Heylin's History, observed and
confuted by Burnet: one more particularly, in his saying, that the Father of
Queen Ann Boleyne was one of the Jury that condemned her; with which, as a
falsehood, he taxes Heylin in his Addenda* p. 363. first Volume, where he says,
that Doctor Heylin took this, as he did many other things, too easily upon
Sanders's credit; which (if true) is enough to blast the credit of his Book
with all Protestants, nay with all Men of Judgment that know what an infamous
Liar and Rebel Sanders was.

Whereas therefore he entreats the Protestant Reader to peruse Doctor Heylin's
History of the Reformation, we are content he should do so; and let him at the
same time peruse the History of the Council of Trent, written by Father Paul,
and let him impartially judge which was carried on by the worst Men and worst
Arts; the Reformation, or the Council.

What Mr. M. objects further in his Preface against Cranmer and the other
Reformers, shall be considered in its proper place.

CHAP. II.
I Come now to examine the Pamphlet it self, which consists of Three parts.

1. A Letter to His Grace the Lord Primate of Ireland.

2. Of Three points wherein he could not satisfy himself.

And 3dly. A confused heap of particulars at the latter end.

As to the Letter; it is a little ambiguous to whom it is directed; if to his
old Patron, as a civil Compliment at taking leave, he had done well to have
told the true Reason why he forsook him. Your Grace would not get me a
Bishopric, though often pressed and solicited by me; therefore I beg your leave
to seek a new Patron, whose Mediation may be more effectual. But perhaps Mr. M.
means another man, and then we may reckon this as the first Fruits of his
Conversion. Are you taught already the Art of Equivocation? We shall learn from
this what sincerity we may expect from you; and shall hardly believe you when
you tell us that it was not any consideration of Temporal Interest inclined you
to be reconciled. If you valued Temporal Interest so little, why were you so
earnest for a Protestant Bishopric? Why did you repine and murmur so much that
you were not preferred? Why did you declare to several about a year ago, that
you was no Roman Catholic, but yet would not appear against the Church of
Rome, because you hoped to rise by help of Roman Catholics? Why did you
endeavor to ingratiate your self by mean Arts, and condescend even to the
Office of an Informer? Why did you defer publishing this Paper (such as it is)
which was ready sometime before, till you thought you might be sure of keeping
the Profits of your Deanery? Either you are a Lay or Clergyman? If a Layman;
are not you abominably Sacrilegious, to have possessed, and still retain the
Revenue of a Clergyman? Why do you retain the Title of Dean in the
Frontispiece of a Book, which is designed to prove you to be no Priest, and
consequently incapable of it? If your Orders had yielded you as much per annum
as your Deanery does, Have we not reason to believe, you would no more have
renounced the one than the other? For shame, resign our Church her own, since
you have deserted her, or never talk of Conscience. Till this be done, it is in
vain for you to pretend that your having reflected on the uncertainty and
variety if the Protestant Spirit, or perused Catholic Books have undeceived
you. Did you never reflect on the uncertainty or variety of the Protestant
Spirit before, that it should have such a mighty influence on you just at this
time? sure there was greater variety when you was first educated in the
College, and when you first entered into Orders than now. They talked much of
the Spirit then, and you yet retain their language; if instead of that Cant you
had well studied and considered the Principles of the Church which you have
left, you would have found that there neither are nor can be any more certain
and steady Principles of any Religion, than hers are. You make your self a
great Novice, that at this time a day pretend to be converted by perusing the
Mass. In good earnest, did you never read it before? if you did, how comes it
to have such influence on you in King James the Second's time, and so little in
King Charles the Second's? All you pretend for your self is, that you were then
under Prejudice, and deceived by false Reports, concerning (that you call) the
Catholic Religion: that is, The Reverend Dean after near 30 years study had
his Religion by hear-says, wanted Honesty to be impartial, and either Industry
or Means to inform himself concerning the most material Controversies that are
on foot in the Church. Which Controversies are still the same, and the
Arguments pro and con of the same force they were before in every thing, except
the alteration of one circumstance that is, worldly Advantage* Is not this a
most excellent Account of your Conversion? And whereas you tell His Grace, that
all that have known you these several years can witness for you, that it was
not any consideration of worldly Interest that inclined you; you are obliged to
beg His Graces pardon for your false Information: for, I can assure you, I have
consulted many that have known you, and have not met one that can witness this
for you. But on the contrary, the most conclude, that it was the little grain
of Worldly Advantage turned the Scale for your new Church. This is therefore
the true Account you ought to have given His Grace of your Reconcilement.

. 2. The second part of Mr. M's Paper consists of three points, wherein he
professes, that he could never satisfy himself since he began to study the
Controversies between the two Churches.

The first was, The Mission or Authority of the first Reformers.

The second, The Want of Confession in the Church of England.

And the third, Where is that one holy Catholic Church we do profess to
believe in the two Creeds?

To the first of these points I shall reply in this method.

1. I will put together all the Questions that he asks on this Head.

2. Consider the Answers he produces to them.

And 3. The Objections he has raised against the Reformation or Reformers.

1. Concerning our Mission he asks in his Preface, page 3. What Priesthood or
Holy Orders had the first Reformers, but what they received from the hands of
Roman Catholic Bishops?

What Priesthood or Holy Orders have Protestants, but what they confess to have
received from Roman Catholic Bishops? Page 12. of the Pamphlet.

2. Who authorized the first Reformers to preach their Protestant Doctrine, and
administer their Protestant Sacraments? Page 1. of his Pamphlet.

I am not now disputing what Doctrine he preached; but who sent him to preach
his Protestant Doctrine, and administer his Protestant Sacraments? It Is not his
Doctrine, but Mission I am now enquiring after. Page 3.

3. Whether Cranmer and his Associates could condemn the Church of Rome by
pretense of the Mission they received from her Bishops? Page 3. of his Preface.

I understand not -- how any man can justify his Protestant Doctrine by
authority of the Popish Mission. Page 2. of his Pamphlet.

I must still ask the old Question; By whose Authority did he condemn that
Church, from whom he received his Mission? Page 3. of his Pamphlet.

The Archbishop of Canterbury, etc. at the time of their Consecration were
professed Roman Catholics -- But afterward turning Protestants, and
pronouncing the Church of Rome Idolatrous, I would fain know by whose
Authority? Page 2. of his Pamphlet.

At the time of their Consecration they professed Seven Sacraments, Anno 1536.
they retrencht them to three -- then to two, Anno 1549. -- By whose Authority
or Mission I cannot tell. Ibid. page 2.

Again, Who gave them Authority to pronounce themselves sound Members, and the
Church of Rome a corrupt Arm of the Catholic Church? Page 12.

The fourth Set of Questions concerning Mission is on this Head; Preface, p. 3
Whether a Presbyterian Minister having received Orders from a Protestant
Bishop, can, by virtue of such Orders, pronounce the Church of England a
corrupt Church?

I understand not how a man can forsake the Church of England, and preach
Presbyterian Doctrine by virtue of his Protestant Orders. Page 2. of his
Pamphlet.

Presbyterians being Interrogated, -- Did that Church authorize you to preach
against the Sacraments or Liturgy? there was no Answer to be had. Page 3.

I desire to know, whether an honest man can preach against the Liturgy,
Sacraments, or Constitution of any Church, by virtue of any Commission he
received from it? Ibid.

So that no honest man can turn Presbyterian or Independent Preacher by virtue
of his Protestant Mission. p. 4.

The fifth Set of Questions relating to Mission is, Pref. page 3. Whether an
Act of Parliament in France, Spain or Germany, be not as good an Authority for
Popery there, as in England for Protestancy?

A Parliamentary Mission then our first Reformers had, and no other that I can
find. p. 3.

. 3. Before I come to a distinct consideration of each of these, I must observe
that he waves the Dispute concerning our Priestly or Episcopal Orders, whether
valid or no; ( Pamphl. page 1.) Now, if these are valid, either let him show
one Sacrament administered by Protestants, which these Characters do not give
them Power to celebrate: or one Article of Faith that they teach, which the
same do not oblige them to teach: or else let him ask no more for their
Mission, and Authority, to teach their Doctrine, and administer their
Sacraments. If their Doctrine and Sacraments are not Theirs but Christ's; they
are not only sent, but obliged by their Orders to administer the one, and teach
the other, in the Churches wherein they are appointed Pastors.

I observe further, that he manifestly contradicts himself in this matter; for
he makes Cranmer and Latimer the first Protestant Bishops and owns their
Consecration ( p. 2.) and yet alleges ( p. 3.) that it is no easy matter to
find out who consecrated the first Protestant Bishops; because, for sooth,
there were none to do it, but Roman Catholic Bishops, who never use to
consecrate any Protestants. But if he had read Mason, and Archbishop Bramhall,
he might have seen who ordained the first Reformers, and their Succession to
this day: and if he had consulted Sir James Ware de Proesulibus, he might have
seen that there wanted not Bishops in Ireland willing to consecrate
Protestants; Primate Loftus being consecrated by the then Archbishop of Dublin,
Dr. Curwin, who continued in his Archiepiscopal See near six years after, and
then by reason of his great Age was translated to the Bishopric of Oxford at
his own desire. Antiquit. Oxon. de Aede Christi. lib. 2. p. 291. Ware de
Proesulibus, Hib. in Archiepiscopis Dubliniensibus, p. 120.

Nor is the Testimony he produces out of Burnet from Queen Mary at all
pertinent; all that appears from that Testimony is, that they who were ordained
according to the Form in our Common-Prayer-Books are not looked upon by the
Queen to be ordered in every Deed, but there is no reason alleged for it, nor
indeed can any be given, but because it was not done according to the
Pontifical; an ignorance excusable at that time, when perhaps she was informed
that something Essential was left out in our Form of Orders, or that the
Pontifical with its Tricks was not a new thing; whereas our Form of Ordination
is more full then any of the ancient Forms, both in Substance and Ceremony; and
therefore either the ancient Priests and Bishops had no sufficient Ordination,
or Queen Mary was misinformed when she did not reckon Ordination by the
Common Prayer Book ordering indeed.

. 5. Having premised this, I answer to his first Question, What Priesthood or
holy Orders had the first Reformers, but what they confess to have received
from Roman Catholic Bishops? If he mean by Roman Catholic Bishops, such as
owned the Bishop of Rome to be the supreme universal Pastor of the Catholic
Church by Divine right, to whom themselves were by God made unappealably
accountable, which is the Essential Character of a Roman Catholic; the first
Reformers received their Orders from no such Roman Catholics. Whatever Roman
Catholics hold now, he will never prove this to have been the declared sense
of the Church of England before the Reformation: and therefore the first
Reformers cannot properly be said to have received their Orders from Roman
Catholics, but from the Church of England.

There are two things to be distinguished in the Office of a Bishop; one is,
the Power or Capacity of governing the Church, interpreting Scripture,
Consecrating other Bishops, Ordaining Priests and Deacons, Offering, Baptizing,
and Confirming: the other is, the admitting the Bishop so empowered to the
exercise of that Power within certain Limits, which we call a Diocese. The
first of these is a Divine, and the second a Canonical Right. Now the first
Reformers received the first of these, that is, their Orders from Christ, by
the hands of their Consecrators, who were Bishops of England, for Rome. The
second of these they received likewise from the Laws and Constitutions of the
Church and Kingdom of England, of Rome: And it is to be observed that the Laws
of the one were directly contrary to the Laws of the other, and that the
Bishops of England had their proper and immediate Mission to their Churches by
an Authority maintained in opposition to the Popes Power, which he endeavored
as much as he could to abolish, but was not able; as may be seen in his
Contests with Chichley, Archbishop of Canterbury in Henry the Sixth's time.
Although therefore the first Reformers had their Orders from Bishops in
Communion with the Church of Rome; yet it was as Christian Bishops they
Ordained, and as English Bishops that they admitted the first Reformers to
their Charges.

But suppose they had no other Orders but what they received from the Bishop of
Rome himself; all that can be concluded from thence is, that we are obliged to
own, that the Orders of Priest and Bishop given by Roman Catholics are valid,
and capacitate a man to perform all the Duties belonging to those Offices in a
Christian Church, which we readily acknowledge, and charge the Popish Priests
and Bishops not with want of Orders, but with abusing the Orders they have, to
ill intents and purposes: The Roman Catholic Bishops do not confer Orders as
Roman, but Christian Bishops their Orders are Christian Orders, and those we
hold sufficient to all intents and purposes of the Reformation, and must do so,
till Mr. M. or some body else prove them insufficient.

He objects, page 2. That the first Reformers were Ordained Roman Catholic
Bishops, and made themselves Protestants, which proceeds on an ignorant
supposition, that every man is ordained to preach the Tenants of his Ordainers,
or else must have no Mission: whereas the Ordainers are only Instruments, but
the Power is from Christ; and they are no more accountable to their Ordainers
upon the account of being Ordained by them, then a man is accountable to a Lord
Chancellor for the use of his Power, because he set the Seal to his Patent by
which he claims his Power. In short, a man is Ordained neither a Protestant nor
a Papist, but a Christian Bishop; his Mission is a Christian Mission, let him
be sent by whom he will; and whoever gave him his Mission, if he teach any
Doctrine but Christ's, he is accursed. Hence when the Donatists were very
earnest to know the Ordainers of St. Augustine and Quid ad causam pertineat
veritatis, uniuscujusque Episcopi Ordinator, non satis agnoscimus; Testimoniis
divinis* pater Deus est edoctus. Coll. Carth^g. 3. Sect. 244.
other Catholic Bishops, they answer, We are not satisfied how the cause of
Truth is concerned, who was the Ordainer of any one; since God is shown to be
our Father. And when they press still to know the Ordainers, Superflua quaeri
video. Sect. 245.
St. Augustine answers, I see they insist on trifles.

'Twas on this Principle that Baptism and Ordination by Heretics were allowed
in the Catholic Church, to such as came ever from those Heretics, even
because they were Baptized Christian Proselytes, and Ordained Christian
Bishops; and they were never thought to go beyond their Mission, because they
renounced the Errors of their Ordainers.

If it be replied, that Heretics making themselves, of Heretics, Catholic
Bishops, change for the better; but Papists making themselves Protestant
Bishops, change for the worse. I answer, this quits the Plea of Mission, and
brings the Mission to the trial of the Doctrine. If then Cranmer and the rest
of the Roman Catholic Bishops made themselves only truly Catholics; they made
themselves nothing but what Christ had obliged them to in their Consecration.
He is the Father of Truth; the Children of Truth are owned by him as honestly
begotten, and no By-blows, as Mr. M. would insinuate, p. 2. in which he has
exactly transcribed not only the Argument of the Donatist Petilian against the
Catholics, but his very words, The true Question is therefore, Tandem
aliquando expressus dicat, utrum patris loco habeant Caecilianum, ex quo
deducta est ista progenies, non enim potest aliqua res sine generatore suo
nasci, aut sine capite incipere, aut sine radice sua crescere. Videt igitur
Nobilitas tua se originem non habere saepius potestatum si igitur originem non
habet, ipse est magis Haereticus, qui non habet patrem, qui habitum patrem
judicio suo damnavit. Astipuletur igitur, ut si criminosum patrem ejus
constiterit, eum crimina teneant; si autem innocentem, necesse habeat esse
filius innocentis. Coll. Carth. 3. Sect. 236.
whether Cranmer and the first Reformers embraced and vindicated the Truth in
their Changes; and let him join issue on this Point when he pleases, we are
ready to answer him.

. 6. To his second Question, Who authorized the first Reformers to Teach their
Protestant Doctrine, and Administer their Protestant Sacraments?

I Answer, No body but himself would have asked such a foolish Question; since
the Protestants pretend to no Doctrine or Sacraments peculiar to themselves, or
that may be called Theirs, but only to the Doctrine and Sacraments of Christ
received in the Catholic Church: If the Protestants were guilty of any fault,
it was not making new Doctrines or Sacraments, but rejecting those that some
counted old; and so their Crime was not the wanting Mission or Authority to do
what they did, but not using their Authority to its full extent, to do and
teach more: If they had power given them to Administer seven Sacraments, and
administered only two, as Mr. M. says, then it is a foolish thing to doubt their
Authority to Minister those two; whereas they are rather accountable for their
not Holding and Administering the other five: but the truth is, they received in
their Ordination power from Christ, to administer neither Protestant nor
Popish, but Christian Sacraments; and Mr. M. neither has, nor can make it
appear, that they Administer any other, or omit any that Christ has commanded.

He is aware of this Answer in his fifth Page, and gives a reply to it; I pray
(says he) the Reader to remember that this was the very Answer of Luther,
Socinus, Zuinglius, Calvin, and most other Reformers: Let me pray the Reader to
observe, that this is nothing to the purpose, if it were true; since we are not
to believe every Spirit, but try the Spirits whether they be of God. The false
Prophets pretended to Revelation as well as the true, was neither therefore to
be believed? the false Reformers, as well as the true* pretended to preach no
new Doctrine, or administer new Sacraments, but only the Doctrine and
Sacraments of Jesus Christ: Are neither therefore in the right? May not a good
Answer be abused and misapplyed? To clear therefore this matter, we own what he
contends for, that both true Doctrine and external and lawful Mission are
generally necessary to a regular preacher of the Gospel, page 5. and if either
of these are wanting, the person is not to be received. Which appears in the
Prophets he mentions from Jer. 23. ibid. who wanted not an external Mission,
whatever Mr. M. imagines; for the Prophets are the Pastors of the people,
against whom God pronounces a Woe, verse 1. and 2. of that Chapter; they are
joined with the Priests, verse the 11. and 34. and their fault was not
preaching without any Mission at all, but preaching false Doctrine; for which
no man can have a Mission, but even the Pope himself when he does so, is to be
rejected as a Seducer. If these very Prophets whom Mr. M. imagines to have had
no Mission had taught true Doctrine, God would have approved them, verse 22.
But if they had stood in my Council, and caused my people to hear my words,
then they should have turned them from their evil ways; that is, God would have
given them success: and when God says, verse 32. I sent them not, nor commanded
them, it does not relate to preaching, for God had commanded the Priests and
Prophets to preach; but it relates to the causing my people to err by their
Lies and Lightness, which is a good Argument against those that seduce the
people with Legends and Lies, and Revelations, and false Miracles, and
Doctrines of Profit and Gain, whatever their Mission be.

Now these two things being necessary to a true Teacher, we affirm, that the
first Reformers in England had both; not only the License and Approbation of
the Church as he states it, page 15. but her Ordination and Appointment also
according to the known rules of constituting Pastors, which some other
Reformers do not pretend to; and therefore all the Question is, concerning the
other Character of a true Pastor, preaching true Doctrine. If the first
Reformers had preached Popish Doctrine and administered Popish Sacraments, I do
not find but Mr. M. would have thought they had Mission enough: but I Answer,
that was not Christ's design in appointing Bishops, but his design was that they
should administer his Sacraments and teach his Doctrine. This all Bishops are
empowered and obliged to do; and therefore till he show that there is a
difference between Christ's Doctrine and Sacraments, and those that Protestants
Teach and Administer, their Episcopal Orders are sufficient to warrant them.

. 7. And so I proceed to his third Set of Questions, Whether Cranmer and his
Associates could condemn the Church of Rome, by pretense of the Mission
received from her Bishops? To which I answer, That if by condemning the Church
of Rome, be meant anathematizing her, and cutting her off from the Body of
Christ by a judicial Sentence, as if we were her Superiors; (which condemning
only is by authority.) We never thus condemned the Church of Rome: Faults we
believe to be in her that greatly need Reformation; but that Work we leave to
her lawful Governors; our Church having declared in her Preface to her
Liturgy, that in these her doings she condemns no other Nation, nor prescribes
any thing but to her own People only; Cranmer therefore and his Associates did
not condemn the Church of Rome, nor could he or his Fellows do it by pretense
of a Mission received from her Bishops, for they received no Mission from her
Bishops, but from the Bishops of England.

But then he proceeds to ask by whose Authority did they condemn the Church
from whom they received their Mission?

To give the World an account of this matter; it is to be observed that the
supreme Government of our Church has always been in a National Council or
Convocation of our Clergy; and that not only We but every National Church has
the same power of altering all Rites and Ceremonies, of abrogating and making
all Ecclesiastical Constitutions, and lastly of reforming all Abuses and
Corruptions crept into the Church; which the supreme Civil Power has of
altering the Civil Constitutions; the Fundamental Laws of Religion being
preserved inviolable in the one, and of the State in the other.

The Supreme Ecclesiastical Power being lodged here, the next thing requisite
is a certain Rule and Method, according to which, Laws were to be past by it;
and in the proceedings about the Reformation all alterations being made by this
Power, and in this Method, it follows that they were all made legally; and that
our Churches retrenching such Ceremonies out of the Service of God as were
judged Useless, Burdensome, or Superstitious; and such Opinions as were no part
of the Christian Faith, or corrupted it, was no more to make a new Faith or
Church, then to to reform Abuses in the State by Act of Parliament is to make a
new Kingdom. Nor do they that thus make a Reformation any more condemn their
Predecessors, because they reform what was amiss in their time; then Parliament
Men condemn their Ancestors when they make a new Law.

I do confess an honest Man cannot preach against the Liturgy, Sacraments, or
Constitution of a Church by virtue of any Commission from it; and that no
Church ought to be presumed to Authorize her Priests or Bishops to go and
preach the Gospel after their private Sense or Conscience, in contradiction to
her declared Doctrine and Worship; and that the Church of England gives no such
power at this day. But I deny this to be the case of the first Reformers, who
did not act as private men in the Church when they Reformed; but as
representing her in her Convocation, and by her Authority. Although therefore
the Church of England oblige private Men not to contradict her allowed Orders;
yet she does not bind her self from making such Alteration in a Canonical way,
as she sees convenient, or is convinced to be necessary.

If therefore Mr. M. can show, that Cranmer and his Associate made the
Alterations without consulting her, he went indeed beyond his Commission from
her; but if she assented to all he did and to this day approves the
Reformation, how did Cranmer condemn that Church from whence he had his Mission?

If the Alteration was good, and those things that were removed were really
Errors and Corruptions, did Cranmer and his Associates any more than what they
were obliged to do by the very Roman Pontifical in their Ordination? Episcopum
oportet judicare, interpretari, consecrare, ordinare, offerre, baptizare and
confirmare. Pontif. de Consecrat. elect. in Episc.
It belongs (says the Pontifical) to a Bishop to judge, to interpret, to
consecrate, ordain, offer, baptize and confirm. Did they do any more? This
Answer he owns, and ascribes to Burnet, page 3. The Pastors It is in Burnet's
Pref. Vol. 2.
and Bishops of the Church are ordained to instruct the people in the Faith of
Jesus Christ, according to the Scriptures: and the Nature of their Office is a
sacred Trust that obliges them to this, and therefore if they find Errors and
Corruptions in the Church, they are obliged to remove them, and undeceive the
people* Mr. M. would do well to answer, on this Supposition, Whether they are,
or are not obliged? If they are, then they have Mission enough to remove, in a
legal way, all Corruptions, even those of their Ordainers. If they are not, how
do they answer the Engagement made in their Orders, to teach the people
according to the Scriptures? But Mr. M. waves any Answer to this, and in effect
owns it, only he denies or seems to deny the Supposition; where he tells us,
Cranmer and one or two Bishops pretended Errors and Corruptions, and drove on
the Reformation against the major Vote of the English Bishops; p. 3. that is,
he had Power and Mission enough, but abused it: and so to know whether Cranmer
exceeded his Commission or no, we must know whether the Corruptions he reformed
were real or pretended. For if they were real, there is no doubt but he was
obliged to reform them; none else being under a deeper Obligation than he. So
then Mr. M's Question is out of doors, Who sent him? and another substituted in
the room thereof by himself; and that is, Whether there were Corruptions in the
Discipline, Worship and Faith of the Church at that time? or whether He, and
the other Men of Abilities were manifestly intoxicated with mistakes of Holy
Scripture, with a Spirit of Perverseness and desire of Change? (page 4.) And we
are content to join issue with him on these head^ when he pleases.

But perhaps though Cranmer was obliged to reform what was amiss; yet he ought
to have done it in a regular way: Whereas if we believe Mr. M be drove on a
Reformation against the major vote of the English Bishops. If by this, he means
establishing any thing without their consent, it is a most notorious falsehood;
for in all he did, he had the unanimous vote and consent of the major part of
the Convocation, the Universal submission of the Clergy, and approbation of the
People. If they complied against their Conscience, then by this we may see how
excellently the Mass and Confessing had instructed them in the Knowledge and
Conscience of their Duty; when they so readily complied with all Alterations.
Let him try, if he can bring a Protestant Convocation to an unanimous repeal of
these things by such motives. But if the Clergy in a National Council, and the
People in obedience to them, or from their own inclinations did comply in
earnest: what an idle Question is it to ask, By what Authority Cranmer
condemned that Church from whom he received his Mission and Holy Order? When
she concurred in all he did, and approved, nay, made all the Alterations in her
Liturgy, Sacraments, and Constitutions that were made.

The true Question therefore is, Whether the Church of England had full power
to Reform her self without the consent of the Pope?

For it is into his Supremacy all this Banter of Mission, and indeed the whole
Faith of the Roman Church, as distinct from the Catholic is resolved. If the
Church of England was not subject to the Church of Rome, she had sufficient
power to Reform her self: and the only thing for which she is accountable to
God, the World, and her Subjects, is the Goodnes^ of the Reformation. If that
was a good work, Cranmer did well in advising, and she in decreeing it: but if
the Errors removed by the Reformation were not real, but only pretended, as Mr.
M. would persuade us, (but will never be able to prove) Cranmer indeed was
answerable for giving her ill Council: but she her self is accountable for the
removal of them, for it was Her Act. 'Twas by Her Authority and Mission, though
Mr. M. cannot tell it, Page 2. that Anno 154^. the word Sacrament, in the sense
which the Church then gave of it, was restrained to Baptism and the Lords
Supper; and sure the Church of England had Authority enough to explain her
meaning, by what words she thought fit. Let him show if he can, that there were
more Sacraments (as she understands the word Sacrament) ever owned in the
Catholic Church, than those two allowed by her.

Lastly, to show that it was not Cranmer's private Opinion influenced the
Church; it is observable first that he had several private Opinions, (two
whereof Mr. M. lays to his charge in his Preface) which were absolutely
condemned by the Church, and the contrary established as her Doctrine, which he
himself signed.

2ly. That the Bishops and Clergy of England had unanimously entered upon the
Business of the Reformation in the time of Cranmer's Predecessor Archbishop
Warham, Anno 1531. by the Submission of the Clergy to the King, and
acknowledging his Supremacy: and again Anno 1533, by consenting to an Act
against Appeals to Rome, wherein the Nation was declared to be an entire Body
within it self with full Power to do Justice in all Causes, Spiritual as well
as Temporal. And this before Cranmer was Archbishop, so far was he from
condemning or imposing on the Church from whence he had his Mission.

. 8. The fourth set of Questions concerning Mission is on this head, whether a
Presbyterian Minister having received Orders from a Protestant Bishop can by
virtue of such Orders pronounce the Church of England a corrupt Church, or
Preach against her Sacraments or Liturgy, notwithstanding her Censures? His
design in this Question, is to show that the first Reformers had no more
Authority to Preach against the Romish Church, then such a Presbyter has to
Preach against our Church: I cannot understand how a man can forsake the Church
of England, and Preach Presbyterian Doctrine by virtue of his Protestant
Mission; nor consequently how any Man can justify his Protestant Doctrine by
virtue of his Popish Mission. page 2.

Why may not a Presbyterian, having the same Authority of Scripture which
Cranmer pretended to, Preach against the Superstition of the Common Prayer, as
well as he against the Idolatry of the Mass page 6. and more to the same
purpose, page 12.

In Answer to this, I will show first, why a Presbyter or Bishop, ought not to
Preach against the Constitution of the Church whereof he is a Member in
contradiction to her Censures. And secondly, that this was not the first
Reformers Case.

1. A Presbyter or Bishop ought not to Preach against the Constitution of the
Church of which they are Members: Because there is a Regular way in which they
may endeavor a Reformation. If they find any thing amiss in her Discipline or
Doctrine, they may make their Application for redress of it to those that have
power to reform it; but must not presume being Subjects to usu^p their
Governors Power: For this is the case of private men's reforming abuses in the
State in spite of the King; a remedy generally worse than the disease.
However, in both Cases private men may sue for Redress, and in their proper
Stations endeavor it. But if such a Bishop or Presbyter be Censured and
Suspended, he is thereby discharged from the Execution of his Office, and he
must no more make a Schism to regain it, then one must make a Rebellion in the
State to re-gain a Civil Office. This we urge, and I think with reason against
the Presbyterians and other Sects amongst us, that either have no Ordination or
Appointment to their Offices from the Church of England and Ireland, or else
abuse the Power against her, which was once given them by her, and from which
they are again legally suspended.

And as we urge this against them, so likewise against M. M. and his Party, who
without any Mission from these Churches, do according to their private sense
take a Commission from a Foreign Bishop and Church, to Preach against the
declared Doctrine of that Church, to which by the Law of Christ they are
Subjects. Them we count those Rebels, who when censured and condemned by their
own Churches and Governors against all the known Laws of our Church, flee from
her Tribunal, and appeal to Foreigners, And what Rebels or Heretics will ever
be convicted, ( p. 4.) if they may choose their own Judges, as those do? We do
not deny the Orders of the Church of Rome; we own that she can make Priests and
Bishops; but let Mr. M. show that the Pope could ever give them Power to
exercise their Office in these Kingdoms; since it is directly against the
ancient Laws and Practice observed and enacted by our Ancestors, and in force
at the Reformation. If a man like not the Orders* therefore of his own Church,
he must be without Orders, except he would be a Schismatic and Deserter, as
Mr. M. has made himself.

And this is sufficient to show that the Case of the first Reformers was vastly
different from the Case of the present Dissenters, which is the second thing I
am to prove. The whole strength of Mr. M's Paper does really depend on this
Parallel, and whoever reads it, will find that the only considerable Argument
he produce, is, that the first Reformers Mission could not be good, because the
Presbyterians have as much to say for Theirs: And that he can find no
difference between these two, only that the first Reformers were Authorized by
Act of Parliament. I have heard it given as the Character of wit, that it finds
out the likeness of things: whereas it is the work of Judgment to find out the
differences: Now Mr. M. having (whatever his Judgment may be) a great wit, no
wonder if he could find no other difference between those two Cases. His W^t
could serve him to find the likeness between the Presbyterians Case and Ours,
but his Judgment does not serve him to find the Difference, Now, if he had been
very inquisitive, he might have been informed in this by one of the late London
Cases, printed for Thomas Bassett, London 1683. and written purposely to show
this Difference; and it is a wonder that Mr. M. whose study lay much in
Pamphlets, mist it. If he saw it, he ought to have shown those Differences
there assigned to be none, before he paralleled the Cases. But to help his
understanding, I will show three material Differences, besides that of an Act
of Parliament and besides the truth of the Doctrine, which was really on the
Reformers side, and is only pretended to by Dissenters.

1. In the condition of the Persons that pretended to Reform.

2ly. In the manner of their proceeding.

And 3ly. In the Principles they took for their Rule.

First, Therefore there is a great difference in the condition of the first
Reformers, and the present Dissenters; these being only private persons, at the
best Presbyters over-voted by the major part of their Brethren: Whereas the
first Reformers were Bishops, and the chief Governors of the Church; who had a
Canonical as well as Parliamentary Mission, and to which of right it did belong
to Govern and Reform the Church, over whom they were made Overseers by the Holy
Ghost. Furthermore, the present Dissenters were the Bishops Subjects*
accountable to them as their Superiors, and liable to be discharged from their
Office, and the Benefits of the Communion of the Church by their Censure; and
so their Separation from their Bishops is a Schism; that is, an Ecclesiastical
Rebellion: But the first Reformers* were accountable to no Superior but Jesus
Christ; they were his immediate Vicars, not the Pope's; and therefore could not
be guilty of any Rebellion against him.

2. And as they were thus different in their Condition, so they were likewise
in the manner of their Proceedings: for the first Reformers did strictly forbid
private persons doing any thing of their own Head, as may be seen by the
Proclamation set out Feb. 6. Ed. 6. Anno 2. and accordingly they managed the
whole matter by public Authority in a Regular way, according to the ancient
Forms of passing Laws, and making Alterations in the Church. Whereas both
Presbyterians and Papists; that is, all Dissenters, proceed on their own Heads
in s^ight of their Lawful Governors. Let a Presbyterian take the same way to
remove the pretended Superstition of the Common Prayer Book that the first
Reformers took to remove the Idolatry of the Mass; or let the Papists take the
same way to Establish the Mass, that our first Reformers took to Abolish it,
and do it, if they can: But if they will make use of another way never allowed
in the Church, and yet pretend to the same Power that the Bishops of England
had, he must be blind that does not see the vanity of their Pretenses.

Mr. M. observes well, That the not considering this Matter, has brought a
world of Confusion on these Kingdoms, and till the People understand it, we are
never like to see an end of Religious distractions; (page 6.) for while men
without ordinary Mission from the Governors of a Church, or without
extraordinary Mission testified by Miracle, shall be received by the people
upon pretense they are sent by a Foreign Church, or that the People themselves
can declare them Commissionated by Christ, which are the pretenses of Papists
and Dissenters; what more peace can be hoped for in the Church, than in a State
where such things were allowed to be practiced? Why may not the Presbyterians
resist their Lawful Governors, as well as the Papists deny their Power, and
question their Succession, though they have none to oppose to it?

The third Difference between the Dissenters Case in respect of Us, and our
Case in respect of Papists, is in the Principles on which our first Reformers
proceeded. They did not pretend as he slanders them in his* Preface to justify
their Separation (for they never made any) by the Scriptures only as
interpreted by themselves, not only without, but against the Authority of the
present Catholic Church. For on the contrary, except he mean by the Catholic
Church, the particular Church of Rome, and her Adherents, the Catholic Church
was for the Reformers, as they conceived; and the greater part of visible
Christians concurred with them in their sense of Scripture, as to the most
material controversies between our Church and Rome. But the true Principles of
the Reformation were such as these, That the Catholic Faith ought to be always
the same in all Ages, and could not receive Additions or grow by time; that
nothing should be an Article of Faith to day that was not yesterday; and
therefore nothing was to be reckoned as Catholic Faith, but what was received
semper, ubique and ab omnibus, according to Vincentius's Rule; and that nothing
was thus Catholic, but what might be proved by Scripture taken in that sense
which has not been contradicted by Catholic Fathers. These were the
Principles of the Reformers Faith.

And in other things belonging to the Government and Polity of the Church, to
Rites, Ceremonies, and Liturgies: 'T was their principle, that every National
Church was at her own choice, how she would order them; and her Subjects owed
her Obedience. These are truly Catholic Principles founded on a Rock, the word
of God interpreted by Catholic Tradition, and not on the present sentiments of
any party of Men, and are a sufficient hedge against Heresy and Schism,
sufficient to secure the good correspondence of neighboring, and the peace of
particular Churches. Let any one compare this Basis with that of the Roman
Faith, and let him judge which is most solid; whether that which is founded on
the Scriptures as interpreted by all Ages of the Church, or that which has only
the Voice of a part of the Visible Church, and the greater part against it.
These are the two Bases of the Reformation and Popery.

To this Justification no Sectary can pretend, and though Luther and Calvin,
etc. had really this Warrant to reject the super-added Articles of the Church
of Rome, yet they differed in this, at least some of them, that they did not
think it necessary to wait the concurrence of their Governors, but concluded
the major part of the Peoples joining with them was sufficient, without regular
Forms and Process: and whether that may be allowed in any case I leave Mr. M.
and them to dispute, for we are not concerned in it, and they are of full Age
to answer for themselves, and he will find they can do it.

Only he is not to be pardoned when he brings in Socinus answering amongst
other Reformers, that he ^reached no new* Doctrine, nor administered any new
Sacrament; but only the Primitive Doctrine, etc. according to the sense of the
ancient Fathers, page 5. which plainly shows that he knew nothing of S^cinus
his Opinions or Principles, who S^cinus de Baptismo. Vol. 1.
positively denied the necessity of Baptism; and Socinus Res. ad 11 c^p. Vu
j^ki Cliss. 7. Arg. 5.
protested against being judged by that sense the Fathers or the Primitive
Church have given of Scriptures.

These are sufficient to show the vast difference between the pretenses of the
present Dissenters, and the ground of our Reformation. And that the Argument he
draws from the Obligation in Ordination laid on the Presb^ters of our Church,
to minister the Doctrine and Sacraments as this Church and Realm have received
the same according to the Commandments of God, page 4. is of no force against
the first Reformers; though it obliged Mr. M. not to desert our Church; and the
Nonconformists not to preach in contradiction to her declared Doctrine and
Worship.

. 9. And so I proceed to his fifth Query: Whether an Act of Parliament in
France, Spain, or Germany, be not as good an Authority for Popery there, as in
England for Protestancy?

I suppose by an Act of Parliament, he means the Laws enacted regularly by the
Supreme Powers of those Nations (which he ignorantly expresses by an Act of
Parliament) and to this I answer, That if any Religion is to be established in
any Kingdom by temporal Rewards or Punishments, to encourage the Obedient, and
terrify the disobedient; the supreme Powers of every Nation only can thus
establish that Religion; and they themselves are sole Judges with what temporal
Rewards and Punishments, and how far they will establish it: and they are
answerable only to God for their actings herein. If therefore the Supreme Civil
Government in France or Spain set up Popery, a Man must submit to it, or burn
for it, if the Law be so: and such a Law, though it is unjust, is as forcible
for a false Religion as a true.

But there is another way of establishing a Religion, and that is by convincing
Men's Minds that the Religion is true; and that, according as men cordially
embrace it, the shall be secured of the Divine Favor* and be happy in the next
World. And if this be the Christian Religion of which they are so convinced,
one Principle of it is, that the Professors thereof ought to associate
themselves into a Body, and that Christ the Author thereof has appointed
Governors who are to descend in Succession; and that to these, regularly
appointed, a due Obedience is to be paid, as Men value the Rewards or
Punishments of the next life. Now Men, thus persuaded, cannot think an Act of
the Civil Governors alone, a sufficient Commission for any one to undertake the
Function of a Spiritual Pastor, any more than an Act of these Spiritual Pastors
is sufficient to capacitate and commissionate a Man to discharge a Civil
Function: and therefore Mr. M. argues very unnecessarily against the Parliaments
Power to preach or administer Sacraments, page 3. since the 27th. Article of
our Church denies expressly that Power to the Civil Governors. I suppose I have
sufficiently shown that our first Reformers had a Canonical as well as
Parliamentary Mission, and I suppose that this Canonical Mission is nothing the
less valid, because the other goes along with it.

But then it may be objected; Have not France and Spain an Act of the Church,
as well as State, for establishing their Religion? I answer, they have; and so
has Mahometism in Turkey an Act of what they count the Church, for its
establishment. And therefore it is not sufficient that the Power that
establishes a Religion be competent; and the Methods regular by which it is
settled: but likewise it is necessary that the Religion be true in it self: and
therefore a man must examine whether the Christian Religion be more purely and
truly taught and established in England, or in Spain, before he either reject
or embrace the one or the other. For a false Religion may have all the regular
settlements that a true can have and the Professors thereof being conscious of
its weakness, are often more industrious to make the accidental security the
stronger. And I do affirm that there is not one Argument in this Paper urged by
Mr. M. against Protestants, but might with equal advantage be urged mutatis
mutandis against convert Christians in a Mohammedan Country; and this alone is
sufficient to show them all to be unconclusive. The way therefore for every man
to be satisfied in his Religion, is to examine it apart from the accidental
advantages of it, and choose that which has best reasons to recommend it: for a
man ought to choose his Church by his Religion, and not his Religion by his
Church.

But he asks in case there be no Judge to determine who have the true sense of
Scripture, Roman Catholics or Protestants, whether the Catholic sense be not
as good as the Protestants? (Pref. p. 3.) It were a sufficient Answer to this,
to put another case like it to him in the person of a Turk: And it is this, in
case there is no Judge to determine (as I know of none, says the Turk) which
is the Word of God, the Bible, or the Alchoran. Why should not the Affirmation
of us M^slelmans (who are ready to vouch to the death for the Alchoran, and are
twice the number of you Christians,) be as good authority for Men to believe
the Alchoran came from God, as your vouching for your Bibles is sufficient to
persuade men to believe that they came from him.

But I do not love to shift off a Question, and therefore tell him that the
sense put by Roman Catholics on the Scripture, is not so good as the sense put
on them by the Protestants. If it were, they would not be afraid to put it to
the World, and let every person that is equally concerned judge for himself:
but they had rather appeal to themselves as Judges, and then they are sure of
the cause.

But then he tells us, that he could never understand what Unity of Spirit, or
agreement in Faith Christians are like to have (page 3.) upon these Principles.

To which I Answer, more than they have now. If National Churches were left to
be governed by themselves, and the Subjects of each Church bound to adhere to
their immediate Governors in all quarrels with neighboring Churches, those
contentions must soon come to an end, as the quarrel between St. Cyprian and
Stephen did. For when the Governors of differing Churches find that they
cannot hurt one another, or advantage themselves by denial of Communion (as it
must be when the one Church does not raise a Faction to side with it in the
other) the quarrel must soon cease; for the thing that makes quarrels endless
is interest. But if it once be counted Lawful for one Church to get a Party in
the others Precincts, and set up Altar against Altar in the same place, this
will continue the Schism, and is the very fundamental reason of the breaches of
Charity amongst Christians that now pester Christendom, which are much worse
than Divisions in Faith. And thus I have answered all his Questions, and
considered all the Replies he made to these Answers he himself was pleased to
observe, which were the two first things I undertook on this Head.

. 10. I shall in the third place consider the objections he makes against the
Reformers as to their Lives and Principles. If I had a mind to shuffle as he
does, I would answer with him, page 13. As for the ill practice of some, and
the ill Opinions of other Reformers, which Papists are wont to charge upon the
Reformation, I pass them over as no Argument at all. In our Articles and Canons
an unprejudiced Reader shall find nothing but what is judicious and pious. But
his slanders are so malicious that they ought not to be passed over without
Animadversion.

First therefore against Somerset and Dudley, whom he calls grand Reformers, he
objects Sacrilege and Plundering the Church. But as for Dudley, we are not
obliged to defend him: he was a false Brother; being as he professed at his
death always a Papist in his heart: and no wonder such Villains should pervert
the most innocent design to their own advantage; since there was a Judas even
among the Apostles, who minded only the Bag. Somerset was not clear from the
same vice. But it is to be considered that the Pope had taught them all this
Lesson by his example and wicked management of the Goods of the Church. 'T was
he first gave the proper Patrimony of the Church, even Tithes to Laymen, to
useless and idle Monks and Friars; it was he that by making a Trade of Simony
and Sacrilege took off men's Veneration for Holy things, and made Noblemen
believe that Estates were as well bestowed in their hands as to enrich a
Foreigner. Whoever reads our Chronicles will find this to be the true Ground of
the Dilapidation of the Goods of the Church, and that this took off the
Conscience of Robbing her.

As for Cranmer and the Bishops, they did what they could to hinder it, but
were forced to buy God's truth and the estalishment thereof at the rate of some
of their wordly Goods; a bargain Mr. M. would never have made, nor any one that
values the Church only for her outward splendor. But the Reformers hearts were
not so full of the World, and yet they never established one Article or Canon
that allows Sacrilege.

. 12. But he proceeds and objects against Cranmer: 1. his Opinions* 2. his
Recantation, 3. his Treason, 4. his Divorcing Queen Katherine, 5. his
Destroying Religious Houses, and hanging up poor Abbots, 6. Setting the People
a madding after New Lights, and 7. All the Confusion and Mischiefs that have
since broke out upon the Stage of Great Britain.

1. Cranmer's Opinions: In his Preface Mr. M. Objects to him, that he said by
the Scriptures no Consecration is necessary to a Priest or Bishop; only
Appointment: and then, that the power of Excommunication depended only on the
Laws of the Land: but he does not observe that Cranmer did only humbly propose
these* and did not define them, as may be seen expressly in his Subscription;
nay, upon better information, retracted them, as appears by his signing Dr.
Leighton's Opinion to the contrary. I confess it looks like a Providence that
Cranmer should embrace some of these Opinions: For by this it plainly appears
that he did not influence the Reformation so much as to make his private
Opinions pass for the Doctrine of the Church, as some have with confidence
enough pretended; and Mr. M. amongst the rest, who does dissemble (or
considering his reading does probably not know) the original of these mistakes
in Cranmer, and some others at that time, concerning the distinction of Civil
and Ecclesiastical Power, which was this; The Pope had made a confusion of the
Civil and Spiritual Power, by assuming to himself the erecting Kingdoms,
transferring Rights, Dispensing with Oaths, and Deposing Princes: of all which
there were fresh instances at that time particularly, the Deposing Henry VIII.
and Absolving his Subjects from their Allegiance by Paul III. This having
confounded the two Powers; no wonder that men could not on a sudden clear their
eyes so as exactly to see the limits* or if Cranmer, being well assured of the
Pope's usurpation* did on the other hand at first give too much to the Prince;
which yet on second thoughts, finding himself singular in it, he recalled, and
joined with the rest in subscribing the public Doctrine directly contrary to
his former private Opinion. Burnet's first Volumn, Addenda page 327.

Whereas the Pope the Head of Mr. M's Church was in as great an Error as
Cranmer, and for which there was less ground, and yet neither He nor His
Successors have retracted it to this day. Let the World judge of the Discretion
of this Man who forsakes a Church, because one of the Reformers had an odd
Opinion, which he Retracted and established the contrary in the Church; and yet
joins with a Church; whose Head at the same time professed and imposed as great
an Error, and which stands yet unrecanted.

. 13. The second Objection against Cranmer, is his Recantation for fear of
Death; but let the World consider whether he or they that put him to that fear
for his Religion were most guilty: and let Mr. M. say, whether he be so sure of
his constancy in his new Religion, that he would be contented to be counted a
Villain, if fear of Death should make him dissert it; and then why should not
he allow something to humane frailty?

. 14. But he Objects in the third place, that Cranmer subscribed a Letter for
the Exclusion of his Lawful Princess: But whoever reads the History will find
that he was brought with greater difficulty then any to subscribe to her
Exclusion, and not till after the King, the whole Privy Council and Judges had
Signed it; this then was a point of Law in which he was not singular. Mr. M.
takes the liberty to question Queen Elizabeth's Title, and sure it was no
greater fault in Cranmer to question, Queen Mary's after the Opinion of the
Judges given against her, There is great difference between Rebellion against a
King of undoubted Title; and being engaged on a side where the Title is really
doubtful. The first is a great wickedness, and the last a great infelicity.

. 16. His fourth Objection is the Divorcing Queen Katherine; but it was not
only Cranmer's Opinion, but the Opinion of most learned Men in Europe, that her
Marriage to the King was null. How Virtuous or Innocent soever Mr. M. reckons
her, Cranmer was in the right when he and all the Bishops of England so judged
it. The scruple was first raised in the King by the Ambassadors of Spain, and
further confirmed by those of France before any intrigue with Anne Boleyn.

. 16. His fifth Objection is dissolving Religious Houses and Hanging up the
Abbots.

As to his dissolving Religious Houses, if his Council had been taken, it had
turned to the advantage of Religion and the Kingdom, and I do not find that
either have lost by it as it is. As for his Hanging up the Abbots, this is one
of Sanders's lies transcribed by Heylin, in his History, who tells us ad An.
page 9. 1537.
of the Executing of some Abbots and other Religious Persons for their
stiffness, (if I may not call it perverseness) in opposing the Kings desires:
but this is confuted by Burnet. Who shows that the Abbots were attainted ad An.
1538. v. 1. page 236.
neither for stiffness nor perverseness, but downright actual Rebellion, that
is taking Arms against their Sovereign, or sending Money to those that did.

. 17. Sixthly, His setting People a madding after new Lights; that is, he
allowed People the use of their Eyes and Ears, and did not think Ignorance the
Mother of Devotion, or that Peoples Devotion or Religion was more acceptable to
God, because they did not understand it; of any other setting People a madding
after New Lights, Cranmer never was Guilty: And thus Christianity set the World
near 1700 years ago a madding, and was accused by the Heathen for it.

. 18, But he objects, lastly, That Cromwell and Cranmer were the Ringle^ders of
all that Confusion and Mischief, which has since broke out on the Stage of
Britain.

This is to charge them home, and would do their work in earnest, if true; but
the best of it is, that it wants proof and Truth: for the Times since the
Reformation have been as signal for Piety and Justice, as any like tract of
time before, and blessed with the longest and most flourishing Peace, that,
perhaps ever was seen in England for the space of, at least, 80 years, in which
it was carried to the highest pitch of Glory that ever it reached.

And besides all this, many Confusions and Mischiefs that happened since in
these Kingdoms proceeded clearly from other hands. Pray, were Cranm^r and
Cromwell the Ringleaders of Tyrone's Wars? and of the Massacre of the
Protestants in 1641? which were the greatest Confusions in Ireland since the
Reformation. Were they the Ringleaders of four Rebellions in Henry the Eighth's
time? of the Four in Edward the Sixth's, or the Rebellion and Plots in Queen
Elizabeth's? These were nevertheless some of the Confusions since on the Stage
of Britain.

But a great many Sects have risen since, of which the Reformation was the
occasion, if we believe Mr. M. I answer, Christianity was the cause of as many,
and the Grace of God it self was abused. But it is to be observed, that the
first Sect that opened the Gap, and introduced all the rest was POPERY, planted
among us by the Emissaries of Rome. These broke the Hedge, and showed the way
of Separation; others only imitated them, and transcribed their Practices and
Principles, thinking they might as well teach men by their own Authority, as by
a Foreign Commission; and it is like, that such as favor them now, set them on
at first, purposely to make them a ^log and Objection to the Reformation.

Two means we do own Papists have to prevent Sects, that we want, Ignorance and
the Inquisition* in a profound Ignorance, as in a dark night all things are
silent; but there will be a bustle and stir among men, while the Sun shines.
And for the Inquisition, it is the true Ram Hist. Council. Trid. dent. ad An.
1558.
to beat down Heresy, and defend the Apostolic See; if we believe Paul the
Fourth. But we beg his Holiness's Pardon; we had rather suffer all our Sects,
if they were more, than admit these Remedies; which after all are not
effectual, as we may see from the new Sects in Italy; and we cannot think those
the only fit means to prevent Divisions in Christianity, which may as well be
applied to keep it out, and preserve Union amongst Infidels.

CHAP. III.
. 1. AND now I come to the second Point, wherein Mr. M. was dissatisfied, which
he tells us, was the Want of Confession to a Priest.

There is so little looks like Reason on this Head, that it is harder to find
out what he intends for Argument in it; than to answer it. I will do him
Justice, and consider even that little he has said. And that in this method.

1. I will lay down the Doctrine of our Church concerning Confession. How far
she declares it necessary, and how far expedient only: from whence it will
appear, that Confession is not wanting in her.

2. I will consider what he has produced in favor of its necessity, or
expediency.

The first of these seems necessary to be handled; because he tells us, that he
diverse times discoursed with Protestant Ministers, and some Protestant Bishops,
about this matter; and was sorry to find no Harmony in their Opinions, p. 6.
Now let us suppose it were true, that private men differed in their Opinions
about some matters relating to Confession: yet it were nothing to the purpose:
at least, it could be no reasonable motive to go from us to the Church of Rome,
since her private Doctors differ as much about it. Some of which say, that the
Priest ought to take the Penitents word, and grant him Absolution; although he
do not believe his Profession of Repentance to be sincere. Others hold, that
the Confessor ought to be satisfied of the Penitents sincerity before he
absolve him. Some say Attrition with Absolution is sufficient ^o obtain
Remission of Sins; others say Contrition is necessary; which is as material a
difference as almost can be. Many such differences there are amongst them, and
the one party accuses the other of Heresy for their dissering Opinions; and
yet it seems this want of Harmony amongst the Roman Doctors and Bishops did not
hinder Mr. M. from embracing their Religion. It was therefore very partially
done to leave Our Church for a pretended difference amongst our Doctors: For
let us take the Difference as he represents it, and it is really no more. Some
said'twas a thing allowed by the Church of England as very expedient in some
Cases, but no matter of necessity; others thought it but a Picklock of Secrets,
and a matter of ill consequence. Methinks there is a very good Harmony between
these, and that the same Men might have said both: at least the Opinions are
easily reconciled, since both agree that in all cases it is no matter of
necessity; and neither deny, that in some cases it is very expedient:
Notwithstanding which it may be in other cases, but a Pick-lock of Secrets, and
matter of ill consequence. Where is the disagreement or contradiction between
these two? To give Mr. M. back one of his own Arguments, for my part I do not
understand it.

2. I have read a great many Protestant Books, and consulted both Divines and
Bishops; and do profess that I have found them very well agreed in these things.

First, That every Sinner ought to be heartily sensible of every Sin he has
committed, and acknowledge it before God with shame and sorrow; and that he can
expect no Pardon from God till he actually abhor and forsake the Sin. Wherever
Confession is mentioned in Scripture, it is to be understood of this kind of
Confession; except the Circumstances manifestly determine the sense otherwise.
This Confession alone was sufficient to obtain Remission of Sins under the Old
Law, Psalm. 32. 5. without Auricular Confession to a Priest.

2. It is necessary to Confess and Acknowledge such Sins as injure our
Neighbors, not only to God, but likewise to the injured person; where that
Confession may be an Advantage or Satisfaction to him. Restitution must also go
along with Confession if it be possible: If the injured person, or they who
have a title to what was his, are not to be found; the Restitution is to be
made to God for some Charitable use, according to the advice of the Priest.
This case is thus determined by God himself, Lev. 6. Numb. 5. and by Our Church
in her Exhortation to the Communion.

3. Where a Sin is notorious or public, in as much as the Church is injured by
it, and the Fact falls under her Cognizance and Jurisdiction, she may call the
Sinner to an account, oblige him to make public Confession of his Guilt, and
to submit to such Discipline as she judges most probable to reform him. Her
Sentence of Absolution is necessary to a person thus called to an account by
her, where it may be had; neither can he be absolved from his Sin without
submitting to her Orders. This appears to be the sense of our Church, from the
Rubric to the Communion and 33. Article.

4. Where theee is any doubt or scruple in a Man's mind concerning the nature
of an Action, whether it be good or evil; concerning his own Repentance,
whether it be sincere and sufficient: or concerning the means and way to attain
to this true Repentance: In these and the like cases the Sinner is obliged to
repair to his Spiritual Guide for his Resolution, Counsel and Direction. This
is commanded by Our Church in the Exhortation that gives warning for the
Communion.

5. Where the sense of Guilt lies heavy on the Conscience of a Sinner, so that
there is danger of his being swallowed up by too much Grief; he who finds his
Spirit thus wounded is required to have recourse to his Spiritual Physician;
that by the Ministry of Gods word, he may receive the benefit of Absolution. As
Our Church has expressed it in her Exhortation, whose words Mr. M. has corrupted
(that he might find an occasion to cavil,) first by alleging this Proviso as
hers in the matter of Confession; if a Man be troubled with any doubts or
scruples; whereas she uses no such words* either in her Office for Communion,
or Visitation of the Sick: which are the two places he alleges for them. And
Secondly, by leaving out these words, but if any one requires farther comfort
or counsel, in this following Sentence; If there be any of you, who by this
means cannot quiet his own Conscience herein, but requires farther comfort or
counsel: let him come to me, or some other discreet and learned Minister, and
open his grief. Where the words he has left out make her sense plain, that she
requires men to come to a Priest, not only in cases of Scruples and Doubts, but
likewise of Grief for the sense of Guilt: and that she proposes Advice and
Counsel as a remedy for the one, and Absolution as a remedy for the other.
Which clearly destroys Mr. M's surmise; as if Confession in our Church were for
nothing else but to be resolved in our Scruples and Doubts.

6. Confession to a Priest, even of secret Sins, is counted with us an act of
Mortification, and of great uses in most cases: as it is of great use and
safety to consult a Physician at any time when one finds himself sick: this is
prescribed by the 19th Canon of the Church of Ireland. It is counted a great
Wickedness for the Priest to reveal any such Confession. And it is forbidden
under the pain of irregularity, by the 64* Canon.

7. It is not necessary by any Divine Command, that a man should discover every
Sin to a Priest, though he may be had, any more than it is necessary every time
a man is sick to send for a Physician. And therefore Auricular Confession is
not the only way for obtaining Pardon of Sins committed after Baptism.

From these things, in which our Bishops and Divines are all agreed, though Mr.
M. slanders them for want of harmony, it appears, that neither public nor
private Confession is wanting in our Church, and it can no more be said that
Confession to a Priest is wanting in her, because she does not oblige all
People to it under penalty of Damnation, then a City can be said to want Water,
where the Fountains are full and open, only because Men are not obliged under
pain of Death to use them.

If therefore Mr. M. means any thing when he professes himself dissatisfied
with the want of Confession to a Priest; he must mean, the want of a Law to
oblige all men who hope for pardon of any sin, to confess it in particular to
the Priest, and receive his Absolution for it. We must own that we have no such
Law in our Church. But the reason of that want is, because neither Christ nor
his Apostles left us any such.

3. It was incumbent on him, before he left our Church on that account, to
produce this Law, and show Confession to be otherwise necessary than is taught
and practiced by her. Let us us therefore examine what he has said on this head.

And here the only thing produced by him for the necessity of Confession to a
Priest, which looks like an Argument, is contained in these words. p. 7. If we
confess our Sins, God is faithful and just to forgive us our Sins, says St.
John. Faithful and Just, to what? even to his own promise which he has thrice
repeated in the Gospel; whosesoever Sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them;
but other promise that he will do it without the Ministry of his Priests, we
read not in the New Testament.

In answer to this Argument, I will show, 1. That the words If we confess our
Sins, do not concern Confession to a Priest. 2. When God is said to be Faithful
and Just, it does not particularly respect that promise, John 20. 23.
Whosesoever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them. 3. If it did respect
this Promise, and the Ministry of a Priest were granted to be absolutely
necessary to the pardon of Sins; yet it would not follow that Auricular
Confession were necessary.

4. First, the words of St. John 1 Ep. 1. 9. If we confess our sins, do not
concern Confession to a Priest: but were designed by the Apostle to oblige
every man to acknowledge and confess that he is a sinner, and that he needs
Repentance and the Blood of Christ for his salvation; which will appear from
the occasion and circumstances of this place. I think it is agreed that St.
John wrote these words in opposition to the Disciples St. Iren. lib. 1. cap. 1.
p. 29. Paris 1679.
of Simon Magus, who taught, as St. Irenoeus informs us, that such as were
perfect among them, and had that Principle they called S^lt and Light could not
^in: Not but that they were guilty of the greatest villainies: but they reckoned
nothing in themselves sin, because they walked in Light and Truth, while the
rest of the world were in Darkness, as they pretended. In opposition to these,
St. John shows us, v. 8. that if we pretend thus to be without sin, we deceive
our selves, and the truth is not in us, but if we own and acknowledge our sins,
and heartily endeavor to avoid them; then the Blood of Christ cleanses us from
all sin, according to Gods promise, who gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him might not perish. It is plain, from verse. 10. that
such as refused to confess their sins, according to St. John, made God a liar.
Now this is literally true of those who deny that they are sinners, as those
Heretics did: but to deny the necessity of a particular enumeration of sins to
a Priest, does no ways impeach Gods truth: and therefore the Confession
required by these words, if we confess our sins is not Auricular.

This is farther manifest from the ancient Fathers of the Church, not one of
which understand these words of Confession to a Priest.

St. Augustine has written a Comment on this Epistle, and he thus explains this
place. If thou confess that thou Ergo si te confessus fueris peccatorem, est in
te veritas. --. -- dic hominibus quid e^, dic Deo quid es. Qula si non dixeris
Deo damnet Deus, quod in te inveniat. Aug. Tract. 1. in 1. Ep. 1 John
art a sinner, the truth is in thee -- Tell men what thou art; tell God what
thou art. If thou tell not God what thou art, God will damn what he finds in
thee. If thou would not that he should damn, condemn thou.

Occumenius refers this whole passage to the Jews. If we who said his Blood be
on us, and on our Children, Occumenius in locum.
should impudently say that we have not sinned, we deceive our selves -- but if
we acknowledge and confess this sin, he will forgive us. Which sufficiently
shows, that by confessing our sins here, is meant the acknowledging our selves
to be sinners, in opposition to those who plead innocence: And that this has no
relation to a particular Confession of Sins to a Priest.

Sect. 5. But 2. When God is said to be Faithful and Just, it does not
particularly respect that Promise, John 20. 23. Whose Sins you remit they are
remitted; which is sufficiently proved from this Argument that no ancient
interpreter has thus applied them; but on the contrary have referred them St.
Cyprian de orat. dom. p. 149. Oxon.
to other Promises. Thus St. Cyprian refers them to that Petition in the Lords
Prayer, Forgive us our Trespasses, and interprets Confessing in St. John by
this Petition in the Prayer; to which he says, Forgiveness is promised, St.
John therefore says, that God who keeps his Promise is faithful to forgive
Sins, because he who has taught us to pray for our sins, has promised, that
his Fatherly Mercy and Pardon shall follow.

The Roman Gloss says, God is faithful, who promised Grace to the humble.

Oecumenius refers this to Isaiah 43. 26. Where Oecum. in Loc.
according to the Septuagint Translation, the words are, tell thy sins first,
that thou may be justified. Which is ushered in with that promise, v. 25. I,
even I am he, that blotteth out thy Transgressions for mine own sake, and will
not remember thy sins.

Lyra says, God is faithful to forgive us our Sins, because he promised so,
Mat. 3. 2. Repent ye for the Kingdom of God is at hand.

You see that the ancient Interpreters could find other Promises both in the
Old and New Testament, which obliged God to forgive Sins before Auricular
Confession is pretended to be instituted; and not one of them dreamed that St.
John had relation to that promise; beside which Mr, M. affirms there is not
another in the New Testament. How will he reconcile this to his profession of
Faith, in which he promises never to interpret Scripture, but according to the
unanimous consent of the Fathers? When there is not one Father to vouch his
sense of this place, and several against him.

6. But 3. Suppose, that consequence followed from this place which he infers
that God will not remit Sins under the new Testament, without the Ministry of
his Priests: Yet it would not follow that Auricular Confession is necessary;
because under the old Law the Sins of the People were not pardoned without the
Ministry of Gods Priests, and yet it is confessed that Auricular Confession was
not then instituted. Besides if the Ministry of the Priest be necessary, why
should that be understood rather of their private than public Ministry? And
lastly, their Ministry may be necessary on other accounts than hearing
Confessions and pronouncing Absolutions. Thus Oecumenius makes the Forgiveness
Oecum in Loc.
of Sins here promised to be that Remission which is obtained in Baptism.
Therefore (says he) God does certainly remit Sins to them that come to his
holy Baptism. St. Chrysostom. lib. 3. De Sacerdotio.
St. Chrysostom, who wrote his Books De Sacerdotio, purposely to magnisie the
Priests Office, interprets the promise in St. John 20. 23. by the power of
admitting to Baptism, and the Lords Supper: together with the Priests
Intercession and Prayers for Sinners; but he says not one word of their
remitting by an Absolution or Judicial Sentence. Whosoever knows St.
Chrisostom, must own that if he had known or believed such a magnificent power
in the Priests, he would never have omitted it, in Books written designedly to
magnify their Office. I conclude therefore that although the Ministry of the
Priests under the Gospel is necessary to the pardon of the Peoples Sins: Yet
that Ministry may consist in the use of their Directions, Prayers,
Intercession, and Sacraments; and I believe Mr. M. will hardly be able to show
any other way of Absolution used by the ancient Church. Nay, Non quasi a nobis
Remissionem peccatorum consequantur, sed ut per nos ad intelligentiam
dil^ctorum suorum convertantur, and domino before satisfa^ere cogantur,
Cyprian. Ep. 75. p. 219. Oxon.
St Cyprian denies that Priests properly forgive Sins; because all that they
can do is to put men in a way to be forgiven.

Sect. 7. The second thing Mr. M. intends for an Argument in favor of
Confession, is what he alleges, p. 7. that Confession is approved and
frequented by all the Christian World, except the People of our Islands, and
some few others that call themselves reformed; and further p. 8. that it was
never heard of in the Catholic Church that Christians may receive the
communion of Christ's Body and Blood without a previous confession and
Absolution. Which if true, proves this Doctrine to be Catholic both as, to
time and place; but the best of it is, that we are not bound to take his word.
And that upon Examination this will be found false in both the parts of it. For
neither do all other Christians beside the Reformed frequent and approve
Auricular Confession otherwise than our Church does: Nor is it any new thing in
the Catholic Church for Men to come to the Communion without private
Confession and Absolution by a Priest.

The whole Greek Church denies Auricular Confession to be of divine Right,
pretending it only to be a positive and Ecclesiastical constitution: And they
give the Communion to Laics both in health and sickness, though they have not
before confessed their Sins to a Priest; and that because they are persuaded that
Confession is Arbitrary, and that Faith is the only and true preparative for
receiving the Eucharist. So Father Simon shows from Caucus Venetus in his
Religion and Customs of the Eastern Nations, p. 8. Land. Ed. 1685. and he owns
that Caucus has asserted nothing as to that point which does not agree to the
real belief of the Greeks, p. 13.

Of the Christians of St. Thomas in India, he relates from Meneses, that they
abominate Auricular Confession, p. 94. And though he pretends this to be an
abuse introduced into that Church, p. 102. yet he produces nothing but his own
conjecture to prove it so, and acknowledges, that most in the East think not
themselves obliged to it by Divine Right: and consequently it may either be
used or laid aside as the Church thinks convenient. We learn the same from the
Gloss of their own Canon Law; where Decret de poenit. Did. 5. Can 1.
we are told, that Confession to a Priest is better said to be instituted by a
certain Tradition of the universal Church, then from the Authority of the Old
or new Testament. This Tradition of the Church obliges as a Command, and
therefore with us (he means the Church of Rome) Confession of mortal Sins is
necessary. But is not necessary with the Greeks, because they have no such
Tradition. Here is a Tradition pretended of the Universal Church, and yet an
acknowledgment, that at least one half of that Church has no such Tradition:
which is as good sense as Roman Catholic. However I take this to be a
Demonstration, that Confession is no otherways approved and frequented by the
Christian World; (except the Church of Rome) than it is by the Reformed. That
is, it is looked on by all, but Mr. M's Church, as a piece of Ecclesiastical
Discipline only, and then it may be used or dispensed with, as the Church sees
most for her Edification.

8. This is not only the Opinion of the greater part of the present Visible,
but it was so likewise of the Ancient Church: Though Mr. M. tells us with
confidence enough, that it was never heard in the Catholic Church till Henry
VIII. that any was admitted to the Communion without Confession.

Yet we find direct proof to the contrary in Antiquity: Eudaemon -- Episcopo
Nectario dedit consilium, ut Presbyterum poenitentiarium tolleret, and Tiberam
daret potestatem, uti pro sua quisque Conscientia ad mysteria participanda
accederet, Soc. l. 15. cap. 19. Ab illo tempore, quo Novatiani se ab Ecclesia
sejunxerant, recusa verantque cum his, qui tempore persecutionis regnante Decio
concitatae lapsi erant, communicare, Ecclesiarum Episcopi Canoni adjunxerunt,
ut in singulis Ecclesiis Presbyter quidam paenetentiae praeesset, Soc. ih.
Socrates tells us, that Nectarius Bishop of Constantinople, took away the
Priest that was appointed for Confessions since the time of the Decian
Persecution, and gave free leave, that every one should come to the
participation of the Holy Sacrament, as his own Conscience directed him. Hoc
tempore Presbyterum, qui poenitentibus deputatus esset, esse non amplius passus
est, omnium primus Nectarius: quem omnes fere Ecclesiarum Praesules imitati
sunt, Sozom. lib. 7. cap. 16.
And Sozo men adds, that the Bishops of almost all other Churches imitated him.

De paenit. Did. 1 Can. 89. Cui autem horum potius inhaerendum sit, lectoris
judicio reservatur.
Gratian proposes the Authorities for and against the necessity of Confession,
and leaves it to the Readers Judgment which he will believe. Igitur 1150.
tempore Gratiani nondum super hoc quicquam definitum a^t praeceptum erat ab
Ecclesia, quia Gra^^anus non ignorasset nec omisisset, s^d fere post alios 100
Annos introducta fuit oris Confessor per Innocent III. Glossa Margin ubi supra.
And the Gloss on that is very remarkable. In the year 1150. in the time of
Gratian, nothing was defined or commanded concerning the necessity of
Confession by the Church: For if there had, Gratian had not been ignorant of it
nor omitted it, but Confession with the Mouth was introduced near an hundred
years after by Innocent III. Thus the Roman Gloss, and the Reader must judge,
whether he will believe Mr. M. who affirms, that Auricular Confession was
always necessary, or the Canon Law and Gloss, that says, it was made necessary
about the year 1215: That is not full three hundred years before Henry VIII. so
late is this Sacrament even in the Roman Church, and the Doctrine of its
necessity.

9. The third Argument Mr. M. produces for Confession, is grounded on the
inconveniences that arise from the want thereof: He tells us, that Protestant
Sermons have some Authority upon the People, but not much for lack of this curb
on their Vices, p. 6. Now whether Sermons or Auricular Confession are the
greatest curb to Vice; can only be judged by Experience; and let that determine
whether Protestants or Papists are most Licentious: Let us compare Protestant
Countries with Popish, and see where Vice does most abound. Let us look into
Germany, Denmark, Switzerland, the Low Countries, England and Scotland, and
compare them with Italy, France, and Spain; and let any one judge which are
most corrupt in their Morals, or most happy in their Government. Among our
selves, Let us compare the Protestants who have lived in prosperity these last
thirty years, and consequently have been most liable to corruption, with the
Papists that have been in adversity, and consequently are at the best: and from
these, we shall discern what a mighty curb Confession is on the Vices of Men.
Lastly, Compare the times before the Reformation, with what has been since, and
we shall find even Rome it self at this day reformed to what it was: which
shows that the Light of Truth, which we propose to our People is not so weak a
curb on Men's Vices, as Mr. M. would persuade us.

This second inconveniency he alleges from the wont of Confession is the
encouragement it must needs give People to sin, when they consider they are not
obliged to give an account for their Sins. So ( p. 6.) Catholics commit sin,
it is true; but call themselves to an account for it by Confession and
Submission to their ghostly Fathers. Protestants sin likewise without calling
themselves to any such reckoning; because they can make a shift without it. And
again ( p. 7.) I pray the Reader to consider whether private Sinners in the
Church of England do not offend God at a cheaper rate than in the Church of
Rome; since in the Church of Rome they are bound to some Penance; but in the
Church of England they may confess to their Ministers, and do Penance if they
will, or if they will not, they may let it alone.

To which I answer, That the Church of England has no Tax of Sins, nor does
She promise Pardon of Sins upon the performance of any external action
whatsoever, whether it cost the performer dear or cheap. But she tells her
People, according to the Scriptures, that there is no other way to be forgiven
our sins, but be heartily turning from them; that a good Life, and sincere
Obedience to the Commandments of God through Faith in Christ are the only means
to escape Damnation. And that according as every one is certain of the
sincerity of his own heart, he may be certain of Heaven, and no otherwise.

Let us then compare the Doctrine of the two Churches together, and let the
Reader judge, who teaches the easiest method for Pardon of Sins. Says the Si
quis ita animo affectus sit ut peccata admissa doleat, simulque in posterum non
peccare constituat: etsi ejusmodi dolor non efficiatur, qui ad impetrandam
veniam satis esse possit: ei tamen, cum peccata Sacerdota rite confessus
fuerit, vi Clavium scelera omnia remitti, and condonari. Catech. ad Par. par.
2. etc. Poenit. Sect. 47.
Church of Rome; If any be so affected in his mind, that he is sorry for the
sins he has committed, and design not to sin for the future, although he be
not touched with such a sorrow, as may be sufficient to obtain Pardon:
Nevertheless when he confesses duly to a Priest, he does by the Power of the
Keys obtain Remission and Forgiveness for all his Villainies.

Says the Church of England; Repent you truly for your sins past, have a
lively Faith in Christ our Savior; amend your Lives, and be, in perfect
Charity with all Men; so shall ye be meet partakers of these holy Mysteries*.
The Church of Rome sees the difference of these two, and pretends, that
Confession was appointed by the Mercy of God, to make Pardon Ut enim hoc
concedamus, contritione peccata deleri; -- quoniam pauci admodum ad hunc gradum
pervenirent, fiebat ut a paucissimis hac via peccatorum venia speranda esset.
Ubi supra Sect. 46.
the more easy. For, Let us grant it, faith she, that Sins could be blotted
out by Contrition. -- Yet in as much as few could come to this degree, it must
happen that very few could expect Pardon of Sins this way. The true Intention
of Confession, and of all other parts of Christian Discipline is Amendment of
the Peoples Lives. And it will be found that Men do not come to Confession so
much to help them to live well for the future, as to ease themselves from the
Trouble that the memory of their Sins past create them, and when by Absolution
they are eased of the sense of their former Guilt, they are apt to think they
may begin on a new score. And hence it often happens, that Men are more
negligent after Confession than before. And let never so much care be taken to
prevent this abuse De la Freq. Communion, part. 2. chapter 40* item part. 3. chap.
16.
which Mr. Arnauld confesses almost Universal: while People believe that the
Priest can forgive them their sins, as soon as they are sorry for them, and
purpose to forsake them, it is impossible it should be removed. Whereas when a
Man is referred to his own Conscience, as the final judge of his own Condition;
and told that he damns himself if he be partial. And that no other Sorrow or
Repentance for Sin can save him, but such as will in earnest prevail with him
to forsake his Sins, and live a good Life. In this case a Man will find it much
easier to satisfy the Priest, and obtain Absolution from him; than to satisfy
his own Conscience. Nay, after all, the Priest can only judge of a Man's
Repentance from his own Mouth, and if the Man be partial, or mistaken in his
own sincerity, the Priest must be so too, and his Absolution insignificant. And
therefore our Church, who lays the efficacy of Absolution on the sincerity of
the Penitents Contrition and Faith, and tells her People, that her Absolution
is only Conditional, deals more severely, and sincerely too, with her
Penitents, than the Roman Church, who lays the chief stress on the outward
Absolution of the Priest. The Matter of Fact appears to be really thus, from
the practice of the lewdest Livers amongstus, who often take Sanctuary in that
Church, and without any amendment of Life, live in hopes of that Salvation in
her, which they know they could not hope for in ours.

11. The last Argument Mr. M. urges for Confession, is the Interest of the
Priest; faith he, The Church of England, for want of Confession, appears to me
to have lost that Interest in the Consciences of the People, which both the
Roman and the Greek Priests are happy in at this day. I do believei n my
Conscience this Argument goes a great way with Mr. M. and not only with him,
but with all those Priests who value their Interest as he does. But he would
have done well to have told us, what that interest is, in which the Priests
count themselves happy. For the Priests have counted themselves happy sometimes
in an interest, which contributed very little to the happiness of the People.
In short, we neither do, nor ought to covet any other interest with our People,
than the power of doing and making them good; and God be thanked, we have as
much of that interest, as any Clergy of the World; and dare compare the Lives
of our People, with the Lives of either Greeks or Romans. It was therefore some
other interest which brought in Auricular Confession, and in which Mr. M. would
count himself happy. I shall not determine what that may be, which Mr. M. could
not find in our Church; only he must know, that among us truly mortified,
diligent, sober, prudent Clergymen, who continually reside on their Cures, and
show themselves an Example to their Flocks in meekness, humility, watchfulness
and charity, have no reason to complain that they want interest with their
People. But there are some that think it too dear a purchase at that rate, and
therefore had rather come at it another way. That is, by persuading people that
they can forgive them their Sins, though perhaps they are nothing bettered by
Confessing. Thus Mr. M. seems to state the case: What if some Catholics are
never the better for it? What are many Protestants the better for all the
Sermons they hear, and Sacraments they receive? If we confess our Sins, God is
faithful and just to forgive us our Sins. What? though we are never the better
for Confessing. If that be Mr. M's meaning, and he believes himself, he had
reason in earnest to change his Church: For he may be sure we have no such
Catholic Doctrine.

CHAP. IV.
1. MR. M. tells*us, that the third difficulty that stuck with him, was the
Answer given by Protestants to that Question, Where is that one Holy Catholic
Church which we do profess to believe in the two Creeds? To this he adds
several other Questions: Was there any such Society as one Holy Catholic
Church extant upon the face of the Earth, when Cranmer began his Reformation?
What Provinces of the Earth did this Church inhabit? Did Cranmer believe
himself a Member of it? Who gave him Authority to Reform this one Catholic and
Apostolic Church? To set up Altar against Altar, etc. p. 8.

To each of these Questions I will give a distinct Answer, and show how little
Reason any one has to make a difficulty of them.

To the first, Where is that one Holy Catholic and Apostolic Church which we
profess to believe in the two Creeds? I Answer, not in any one place or
Province exclusively to the rest, but in all places where Men professing the
Faith of Christ, live under their Lawful Pastors or Spiritual Governors. It Is
by these two marks we must find the Catholic Church, if we would not mistake
the Society of Schismatics and Heretics, nay of Heathens for her. Wherever
we find the Faith of Christ, and the Persons professing it, living in
submission to their Regular Pastors; there we have found a branch of the
Catholic Church; and to that Society we ought to be ready to unite ourselves
in this Profession and Submission.

But Mr. M. by his eagerness to have us assign the ubi, or place where to find
this Church, seems to imagine, that there is some one place, or ubi, where she
is always to be found. At least, that there is some where a Head and Principle
of Unity, by union to which, the Society is made one. But we deny any other
Head or Principle of unity to this Society, besides Christ Jesus. And we
believe, that to assign any such on Earth, is to destroy the very notion of the
Catholic Church, and make her as particular as the Jewish Synagogue, out of
which no Person or Nation was excluded, so they would turn Proselytes, any more
than they are excluded out of the Church of Rome, if they will embrace her
Faith, and submit to her Government. But the Church is called Catholic, in
opposition to such a particular Society; because she consists of many such
Societies, which have in every Nation the same Privileges, which were before
peculiar to the Jews. And these particular Churches are entire Bodies in
themselves, not made accountable by Christ or his Apostles to any Foreign
Church, as to a Head, but only as to a Sister. Neither is the union of these
particular Churches into one Catholic Church, an union of subjection to one
visible Head, but an union of Faith and Charity under our visible Head Christ.
When therefore Mr. M. asks in what Provinces of the Earth this Church does
inhabit? I answer, in most Provinces of the World; in more by many than he or
his Church will allow. Let him read St. Augustine on the 85 Psalm, and he will
tell him the sin of those that confine the Church to a Province, or corner of
the World, to a Sect or Party of Christians.

2. To this second Question, Was there any such Society upon the face of the
Earth, when Cranmer began his Reformation? I answer, there was, and the several
branches of it were dispersed through many Provinces in Europe, Asia and
Africa. The Church of England was one branch thereof, such she has continued
ever since, and we hope will continue to the end of the World: And therefore he
might have spared the labor which he has spent to prove that there was extant
such a Church on the face of the Earth; since we believe as firmly as he can
desire, that according to our Savior's Prediction, the Gates of Hell shall not
prevail against the Catholic Church.

3. To this third Question, Did Cranmer believe himself a Member of this
Church? I answer, He did. And being placed by Providence in an eminent station
in the Church, and the Care and Government of so considerable a part thereof
being* committed to his charge, he found himself obliged by the Laws of God and
Man to remove those things he apprehended to be Corruptions and Abuses. And if
they were really such, who but Mr. M. can doubt his Authority do do it in a
regular way?

And therefore to his fourth Question, Who gave him Authority to Reform this
one Holy Catholic Church, and to set up Altar against Altar? I answer, No
body; he never attempted the one or the other. He never attempted to Reform the
Catholic Church, because he had neither Power or Inspection over her. Nor did
he ever pretend to make any Law to oblige her. He only endeavored to cultivate
and reform that part of her that was committed to his Care. And he must have
lost his Understanding, or renounced it, that does not see that this is the
Duty of every Bishop, nay of every Parish Priest in his sphere; and therefore
except Mr. M. can show that Cranmer went beyond his sphere, he talks and asks
questions to no purpose.

I suppose that I have already shown that Cranmer did not exceed his Authority
in his proceedings at the Reformation. And as he did not pretend to reform the
Catholic Church, so neither did he set up Altar against Altar. There was no
Schism made by him in England; the Division of Communion was made long after,
about the Tenth of Queen Elizabeth, on the Bull of Pius V. Heylin ad Ann. 1564.
and 1565. p. 172.

4. Mr. M. seems to have nothing to object against all this; only he insinuates
that the Reformation supposes the Catholic Church to be lapsed into Idolatry:
And if she were guilty of Idolatry, she should be no Christian Church: And then
there is an end of the Episcopal Succession of the Church of England, and
consequently of the Church it self.

There is not one step in this Argument, but is justly liable to exception. I
shall only desire the Reader to consider these few things, and then judge,
whether Mr. M. can be supposed to have examined this matter, either diligently
or impartially. 1. The Reformation may be justified without charging the Church
of Rome, or any other Christian Church with Idolatry. 2. The Idolatry with
which we commonly charge that Church, is not inconsistent with the Being of a
Church, or Succession of Bishops. 3. The Argument Mr. M. has produced, to prove
the Impossibility of a Christian Churches teaching and practicing Idolatry, is
weak and inconclusive.

Sect. 5. First, The Reformation may be justified without charging the Church
of Rome, or any other Christian Church with Idolatry: Because there were many
confessed and notorious Abuses in the Church that needed Reformation, besides
what we count Idolatrous. And the Governors of the Church were obliged to
reform them whether they were Idolatrous or no; except Mr. M. thinks that
nothing but Idolatry can need Reformation. Prayer in an unknown Tongue, the
half Communion, the ludicrous and antique Ceremonies of the Mass, private
Masses and Indulgences, Appeals and Foreign Jurisdiction, with many other
things were removed by the Reformers; not because they counted them Idolatrous,
but because they were great Abuses and Deviations from the Primitive Rules and
Practice of the Church. The things in the Roman Church, which we commonly
charge with Idolatry, are the Worship of Images, the Invocation of Saints, and
Adoration of the Host: Now the Reformation would neither be unjustisiable nor
unnecessary, tho we should reckon these practices only in the same rank of
abuses with the former. We need not therefore charge the Church of Rome with
Idolatry, to justify our first Reformers. But whatever be said as to that, he
may assure himself we never did, nor will charge the Catholic Church with any
such Crime. She never decreed either worship of Images, or adoration of the
Host.

6. But secondly, the Idolatry with which we charge the Church of Rome, is not
inconsistent with the being of a Church, or Succession of Bishops. I do consess
there is an Idolatry, inconsistent with all true Religion; that is, when Men
renounce the true God, and worship a false one in his stead. But there is
another Idolatry, that consists in worshipping a false God with, or in
Subordination to the true. And a third, which Men incurr by giving some part of
that honor to a Creature, which God has reserved sor himself; or asking those
things of Creatures, which God only can give: And it is with this last the
Church of Rome stands charged.

Now not only Doctor Stilling fleet, whom he confesses he never read, but Just.
Vindic. p. 171.
Primate Bramhall also, (whom he pretends to have seen) have proved that some
practice of this kind of Idolatry, as well as some other Sins, may consist with
the Being of a Church. But what shall we say to a Man who understands but
little himself, and will not be persuaded to read those who can inform him. Who
takes this opinion by hear say, as if it were peculiar to one Author; whereas
it is the common sense of our Controvertists. Which I think is a Demonstration,
that not withstanding what he pretends ( p. 1.) he is yet to begin to study the
Controversy between both Churches. He confesses he did not understand this
matter; and then let the World judge, whether it was done like a Man who either
loved, or designed truth, to write against a thing before he undrstood it.

7. In order to help his understanding, he would do well to consider, 1.
Whether to teach and practice Idolatry, destroy the very Being of a Christian,
more then of a Jewish Church. Now it is plain that the Jewish Church both
taught and practiced Idolatry, and is charged as Idolatrous; 1. When Aaron with
the whole Congregation, sacrificed to the Calf: and afterward, when the Kings
of Judah established Idolatry in the very Temple of God: In which Idolatry the
Priests, Prophets, Princes and People concurred; as we may see, Jer. 2. 26. and
yet neither their succession nor Church failed

Sect. 8. 2. The Primitive Church did not look on all Idolatry as destructive
of the Being and Succession of a Church: Because she allowed the Succession of
those she counted Idolaters. Such she reckoned the Arians, as we may learn from
Athanasius and Gregory Nyssen; and yet the Succession of the Arians was allowed
in Soc. lib. 2. cap. 37. Col. Allogr. 1612.
Felix, Bishop of Rome. In Sozom. lib. 4. cap. 27.
Meletius, Bishop of Antioch. And lastly, in the Bishops of Spain, who had been
Arians from their first Conversion, till the time of their King Ricaredus, in
whose Reign they turned Catholics, and proceeded in that Reformation at the
same rate our Reformers proceeded in Ours. Spond. ab Anno 595.
If Mr. M. had lived among them, he would have told them that they were no
Bishops, nor had any Church: Because their Predecessors for several Generations
had taught and practiced Idolatry. And if we believe him, surely that destroys
the very Being of a Christian Church. But neither these Bishops, nor the Church
of that Age were of his Mind. And therefore they went on in their Business, and
settled their Church without troubling any body to assist them. And though they
had no other Ordination or Sacraments, than what they had received from Arians,
(that is from much worse Idolaters than the Papists are counted) yet no body
ever questioned their Church or Succession. But Mr. M. and his party, love to
cut short God's Church and Inheritance, and seem afraid too many should go to
Heaven. And therefore when any thing in a Church does not please them, they
immediately un Church her, and send her Members to Hell: Imitating exactly in
this, as they do in their Reordination, the Heretical Donatists. Whom In psalm.
85. Christo talc^ maledicunt, qui dicunt quod periit Ecclesia de ^o^^orbe
te^raru^^, and remansit in sola Africa. Si diceres illi, perdes villam tuam,
forte non a ^e temperaret manum; and dicis Christum perdidisse haereditatem
suam redemptam sanguine suo. -- Ergo injuriam facis Christo, ut dicas populum
ejus ad istam exiguitatem diminutum. Ideo natus es, ideo Christianum te di^is,
utlinvideas gloriae Christi.
St. Augustine sharply reproves for their Uncharitableness.

Sect. 9. But 3. Mr. M. is the more inexcusable; because the Argument he
brings, to prove the Inconsistency of Idolatry and a Christian Church, is so
very trisling and inconclusive. For (says he) what agreement has the Temple
of God with Idols, and what concord has Christ with Belial? For ye are the
Temple of the Living God; what Communion has Light with Darkness? 2 Cor. 6.
16. What! Idolaters, and yet a true Church? It Is as much as to say, they are in
the way to Heaven and Hell at the same time, p. 8. In answer to this, I must
desire the Reader to look into the place of Scripture here quoted, and observe
that the Sentences are broken, and mangled, and transposed; either out of
Design, or, as I am apt to think, out of mere thoughtlessness. If he had given
it whole, the Reader would easily have perceived its weakness; for it is not
only said, What agreement has the Temple of God with Idols? v. 16. but
likewise, What Fellowship has Righteousness with Unrighteousness? and, What
Communion has Light with Darkness? v. 14. If then, according to Mr. M.
Idolatry destroy the very Being of a Church, because there is no agreement
between the Temple of God and Idols: why shall not every Unrighteousness or Sin
destroy likewise the Being of a Church? Since there is no fellowship between
Righteousness and Unrighteousness; no communion between Light and Darkness. May
not I argue as he does, What! Unrighteousness and a true Church? It Is as much
as to say, they are in the way to Heaven and Hell at the same time. This is the
very Argument by which Aug. Tom. 7. lib. 2. contra Literas Petiliani.
Petilian the Donatist endeavored to unchurch all other Christians besides his
own Sect, and annul all other Baptism besides his own parties: because he
pretended they communicated with wicked Men; and there could be no fellowship
between Righteousness and Unrighteousness, between Believers and Unbelievers.
How then could an Unbeliever regenerate a Believer in Baptism? There is indeed
no agreement between Idolatry and a true Church; no more is there between her
and any other Sin. But things that have no agreement do not immediately destroy
one another. It does not follow therefore, that to teach and practice any Sin,
destroys the very Being of a true Church. Rebellion is as the sin of
Witchcraft, that is, equal to one of the worst kinds of Idolatries; shall
therefore every Society of Men, that teaches and practices Rebellion, cease to
be a Church? I hope Mr. M. will not say it. I do not say any Society of Men
ever taught Treason, or Rebellion, or Idolatry to be lawful; for this would
indeed un-church them: But many have commanded such practices, and taught them
to be lawful, which being put in execution, were really treasonable,
rebellious, or idolatrous. Thus the Council of Later an commanded Temporal
Lords who did not purge their Dominions Vid. Council. Later. 4. c. 3.
of Heretics, to be deposed by the Pope; and absolved their Subjects from
their Allegiance. And thus the Council of Lions deposed Frederick the Emperor.
The one of these taught, and the other practiced Rebellion. Must we therefore
un-church these Councils? Vid. Bullam apud Burnet. Col. p. 166. ex Bullar.
Cherub, tom. 2. p. 740.
Pope Paul III. and his Faction taught and commanded the Subjects of Henry
VIII. to depose their Prince. Apud Sanderum de Visibili Mon. p. 710.
Pius V. taught and commanded the Subjects of Queen Elizabeth to do the like to
her. These were all acts of Treason or Usurpation: and sure these are the way
to Hell as well as Idolatry. And then to say, those that were guilty of such
things, were Members of the Catholic Church, is according to Mr. M. to say
they were in the way to Hell and Heaven at the same time; but such Arguments
must be taken from him where there are no better.

CHAP. V.
1. THe third part of Mr. M's Pamphlet, consists of a confused mass of
particulars, without any order or connection; one would think it had been taken
from the mouth of one who had spoken it ex tempore, and had never been allowed
the liberty to revise it. There are at least five offers at a conclusion. Says
he, p. 9. to conclude, p. 10. in a word, p. 11. in sine, next paragraph on the
whole matter, p. 12. after all his concluding, he must have a word or two
before he make an end, p. 13. he promises to say no more, and yet he cannot
forbear adding two or three things, nothing to the purpose. Thus he says and
unsays, and labors in a heap of confusion. And when all is done, he puts
things in a less advantageous Light, than has been done by many of his Brethren
before him. I shall bring what he says, such as it is, into this method. 1st. I
will consider what he says in order to vindicate, or recommend his new Church.
And 2ly. Wherein he criminates ours.

2. He endeavors to vindicate his new Church in her Devotions; as to the
Direction of them: as to their being in an unknown Tongue; and as to their
being made before Images. He endeavors to recommend her, from the excellency
of her Prayers, and from the Devotion and Unity of her People.

As to the direction of her Prayers; he tells us, That instead of Idolatry, he
found most elevated and judicious Prayers to the Holy Trinity; concluding in
the Name of our Savior Jesus Christ, p. 9. and he asks, Do Roman Catholics
ever say Mass to any other object but the living Father, Son, and Holy Ghost?
p. 12. Now if all the Prayers in the Mass be so very elevated and judicious,
and all said to the Trinity only; then God forgive the wickedness of those
People who quarrel at this, and persecute it with so blind and furious
Aversion. But soft and fair Mr. M. consider they are Heretics you pray for,
and ten to one either do not deserve, or do not need your Charity. For suppose
the Prayers in the Mass were never so judicious, and never so well directed;
yet for ought the People know, or any assurance they have besides the honesty
of the Priest, the Prayers may be Conjuring, or Cursing; directed to Jupiter or
Mahomet; and therefore it is your own Fault that people persecute them with so
blind and furious Aversion; since you keep the people in that blindness, and
will not let them understand their Prayers, that they may admire their
Judiciousness.

3. But 2ly. It is to be considered, that the Mass was patched up in a
barbarous and ignorant Age, though many of the Materials are old; and the
composition is such, that all, even of the Roman Communion, are not satisfied
concerning the Judiciousness of the Prayers in it. In so much that Ipsa etiam
loquendi forma Canonem ipsum non indectis hominibus obscuriorem, and
difficiliorem reddat. -- Est autem hujus obscuritatis praecipua causa, quod in
co multipliciter Sacrificii nomen usurpetur; and subito non nunquam ex uno
intellectu in alium transitio fiat. Consid. de iteratione, p. 1004.
Cassander, who was a little better acquainted with it then Mr. M. confesses
the phrase is obscure, even to Learned Men: that the Canon is difficult, and
that sometimes there is a sudden (b) Ut si orationibus his sua veritas constet,
intelligi debent ea symbola pan^s, and vini, quae in dominica mensa ad
Consecrationem proposita sunt, nomine populi esse oblata. -- Deinde dubium non
est, quo tempore Canon hic initio usurpabatur, aliquos semper a^fuisse, qui una
cum ipso sacerdote, haec Sacrificia laudis effere^aut, and Sacramenta
participabant, id enim Canonis verba manifest^ significant. -- Cujus ignoratio
aliis ad superstitionem ^o abutendi aliis, ut impium ipsum damnandi occasionem
dedit. Ubi supra, p. 1003.
jump from one sense of a word to another.

Cassander was no perverse illnatured Phanatick, but a learned and ingenuous
Roman Catholic: and yet he finds fault with this Prayer Mr. M. has produced,
and others of the like importance in the Mass; because they are improperly used
as Masses are now celebrated: for these Prayers have respect (as he tells us)
to an ancient custom in the Church now gone out of use; and agree chiefly to a
Solemn Mass, in which there is supposed to be a Communion and Congregation of
the people that have offered Bread and Wine. This Bread and Wine offered by the
People, is that immaculate Sacrifice offered up by the Priest in the Prayer
mentioned by Mr. M. And where neither People are present, nor any Offering is
made by them, this Prayer, and several others in the Mass, make a hard shift to
gain the Estimation of either Sense or Truth, much less of Judiciousness. And
has given occasion to some, to abuse the Mass to Superstition; and to others,
to condemn it as Impious. How can a Priest, with either Judgment or Truth,
offer a Sacrifice for all present, as the Prayers direct him to do; even in a
solitary Mass, when none is present or near him?

But 3ly. As all the Prayers in the Mass are not judiciously contrived, so
neither are they all said to the Trinity; the very Sacrifice being offered Ut
illis proficiat ad honorem, nobis autem ad salat^m: and illi pro nobis
inter^^dere dig^entur, etc. O^do Miss^.

Suo loco and ordine nominantur, non tamen a Sacerdote qui sacrificat
invocantur. De Civit Dei, lib. 22. cap 10.


up for the Honor of Saints and Angels, and to obtain of them their
Intercession: besides several Prayers made to them for the same purpose,
directly contrary to what we learn from Saint Augustine to have been the
Practice of the ancient Church.

4. Mr. M. seems aware of this Objection, and hints at three Answers to it.
1st. That Presbyterians object as much against that Canticle in the
Common Prayer Book, called Benidecite. 2dly. That the Roman Catholic ascribe
nothing to Angels or Saints, but as the Ministers of God And 3dly. That the
Angels must know our affairs, and the Saints have intelligence from them; and
therefore we pray to them.

1. He assures us, That the Reader shall find Protestants objecting nothing
against Consessing, and Praying to Saints and Angels; but what Presbyterians do
against that Canticle in the Common Prayer Book, called Benedicite omnia opera.
O Ananias, Azarias and Misael, praise ye the Lord, is as rank Popery with
Presbyterians, as any thing in the Mass, or Litanies of our Lady, p. 9. Now
except he be able to show where the Presbyterians have declared this as their
sense, we can count him no better than a Slanderer. For my part I do prosess,
that I never yet met with one single Presbyterian so silly as to make this
Apostrophe for an Invocation of dead Men, who do not hear us. The disparity of
the case is so manifest between our Church and the Roman, that it is hardly
possible any should mistake. Consil. Trid. Sess. 25. de Invocatione, and^.
The Roman Church has determined that it is good and prositable humbly to
invocate the Saints, and to flee to their Prayers, Help and Assistance. Article
22.
Our Church has declared Invocation of Saints to be a fond thing, vainly
invented. To parallel therefore the Presbyterian Objection (if any such there
be) against us; with ours against the Papists on this Head, is to shift off an
Objection, which did not easily admit of an Answer.

5. Let us see if this second Answer be any better; which is, that the Roman
Catholics attribute nothing to Angels or Saints, but as the Ministers and
Favorites of the Living God, receiving from him whatever understanding they
have of our affairs, p. 12. But what then? May not Men ascribe more to
Favorites than the King allows them, and is not that an encroachment on his
Prerogative? If Mr. M. will show us, where God allows us to make Prayers to
Saints, to erect Images for their Worship, burn Incense before them, dedicate
Churches to their Honor, make Vows to them, or devote Orders and Societies of
Men as slaves to their Service, he will indeed vindicate his Church against the
Reformation: for in possession of all these, the first Reformers found them,
and justly concluded it safest to lay them aside, as too much to be allowed
Favorites out of our own head, without the express Declaration of the Princes
Will. But if he cannot show that God allows them these things, it will be the
safest way, and no hurt for him or us, to lot them alone.

6. His third Answer or pretense is no less insufficient: where he alleges,
that the Angels must know our affairs, because they are ministering Spirits,
sent forth for the good of those who shall be heirs of Salvation; and because
they rejoice at the Conversion of sinners: and have glorified Saints no
Communication or Intelligence with the Angels? p. 13. To which I answer, That
these allegations neither justify the Invocation, nor the worship of Angels or
Saints. It is true, the Angels are ministering Spirits; but we neither know
which of them are assigned to minister unto us, nor when they are present.
These things depend altogether on the immediate Will of God; and therefore it
is to Him not Them we are to apply our selves, if we would obtain their Care
and Ministry for our good. It Is true likewise, that the Saints and Angels
rejoice at our Conversion, when that Conversion comes to their knowledge. But
that place in St. Luke 15. 7. I say unto you, Joy shall be in Heaven over on^
sinner that repents, more than over ninety nine just Persons, does no more
prove that the Angels in Heaven know all the Conversions on Earth, or that we
ought to pray to them; than my saying, That there is more joy in Rome over one
such Proselite as Mr. M. than over ninety nine born Roman Catholics, does
prove that I believe such Conversions are all known there; and that therefore
Mr. M. may go into his Closet, and pray to the Cardinals, because it is plain
his Affairs are known at Rome. Lastly, It Is true, that the glorified Saints
have Communication with the Angels, and may receive intelligence of our Affairs
from them; and therefore I would advise Mr. M. to send his Service and Requests
to them by the next Angel he meets going that way. But because Angels pass and
repass from Heaven to Earth, to conclude that we may at all times, and in all
places, with mind and voice pray to Saints, is as foolish, as to conclude,
because we have Posts pass from London to Dublin, that therefore a Man here may
beg the assistance of his Friends Prayers who are in London, every time he goes
to his knees. This is the wise Vindication Mr. M. has made for his Church, as
to the Direction of some of her Prayers.

7. The second thing which Mr. M. undertakes to vindicate in his Church, is her
using a Tongue unknown to the People in all her public Devotions, and
Services. And it happens to him in this, as it does in most other things; if
all that he says were granted him, it would neither justify his Church, nor
condemn the Reformation; since not one of his Arguments so much as pretend, to
prove a known Tongue unlawful in the public Service of God, or an unknown
Tongue expedient: which will appear on the Examination. He alleges therefore,
1. That the Objection of its being said in the Latin Tongue, allows every one
to hear it that understands Latin. A great favor indeed. Who can after this,
accuse the Roman Church of keeping Men ignorant of her Service? It is plain
from our very Objection that they may hear it, if they but understand Latin;
and it is their own fault if they do not understand it: It Is only spending seven
or eight years to acquire the Latin Tongue, and then they may undestand some
part of her Service. But pray what is this to the illiterate World, who are
past the age of learning Latin? What is this to the Poor, who are the bulk of
the World, and have the best and most peculiar Title to the Gospel; and yet
have neither capacity nor opportunity to learn Latin? Mr. M. bids them be of
good cheer: For unlearned Catholics, if the truth were known, understand as
much or more of the Mass, than illiterate Protestants do of the Common Prayer.
If a Man were apt to give ill words, the confidence and palpable falsehood of
this Assertion would certainly provoke him. It were better surely to believe
nothing but our Senses, which he falsely imputes to some Protestants, than to
undertake to face down Sense and Experience, in a matter in which the meanest,
most illiterate Protestant in the World, will be a Demonstration against him.
We are content our People should believe all Mr. M. says, according as they
find this true. But he objects farther, What does the Protestant Multitude
understand of the Predictions of Isaiah, etc. read in their Churches by
appointment of the Common Prayer? Suppose they understood not one word of them:
how does it follow, that unlearned Catholics understand more of the Mass, than
illiterate Protestants do of the Common Prayer Book? This is a new Instance of
Mr. M's old Infirmity, in drawing Consequences. We are now talking of Common
Prayers, in which the People ought to join: and he talks of the Lessons, which
are no part of them. There are commonly in every Congregation, persons of
better and of meaner capacity; it is fit both should be instructed. Those
Lessons out of Isaiah are for the better capacities, and are read so, as may
make them most easy to them. And what great matter, if the weaker, for whom
they are not intended, do not understand them, since they are sufficiently
provided for otherwise. Their obscurity might be some reason against reading
them at all; but if they ought to be read, as is ordered both by the
Common Prayer Book and Breviary, I hope they will be better understood in
English than Latin: And yet after all, there is not one Lesson ordered to be
read by the Common Prayer Book, but the meanest of the Protestant Multitude
understands more of it, then a whole illiterate Popish Congregation understands
of the Breviary, or Mass; and of this he may make an Experiment when he pleases.

His second Allegation in behalf of his Church is, that she has set forth
Expositions of the Mass in Print. How many Evpositions of the Mass (says he)
are extant in Print by Commandment of the Church? So that no Man can be
ignorant of it that desires to be informed. To this I answer, That if by an
Exposition be meant a Translation of the Mass, there is not one extant in Print
by Commandment of their Church. On the contrary, the Congregation of the Index
have Damned the very hours of the blessed Virgin, for being in the Vulgar
Tongue; as may be seen at large in Saint Amors Journal, Part. 3. Chap. 5.
There is indeed a Translation stolen out of late in English, but it is without
any Authority, which may be called a Commandment of their Church. However, if
it were set out by her Authority, what could it signify to the greater part of
the People, who are neither able to procure nor read that Translation? And if
they could read it, yet would no more be able by help of it to join with the
Priest, then by any other Devotional Book. Lastly, What is this to the
Reformation, which found not one Exposition in Print by Commandment of the
Church, nor any counted necessary? I will venture to put one Question to Mr. M.
and having asked so many, I hope he will not take it ill. Ought the Mass to be
understood by the People, or no? If it ought to be understood, why is not the
best method taken to make them understand it; even to read it in a Tongue
understood by them? If it matters not, whether it be understood by the People
or no; to what purpose does he talk of an Exposition?

His third Argument in behalf of the practice of his Church, is taken from the
Example of the Jewish Church. Had not (says he) the Jewish Church almost all
her Scriptures and public Service for fourteen Generations, that is to say,
from the Captivity unto Christ in the old Hebrew? A Language not then
understood by the the common People. I Answer, she had some of them in old
Hebrew, but not only in it. They were read in the Synagogues, first in Hebrew,
for the use of the Learned; and then in the Vulgar, for the common People. This
he might have learnt from Father Critical History of the Old Testament lib. 2.
chap. 18 p. 123. London, 1682.
Simon, Proleg. 12. sect. 7. p. 83.
and Bishop Walton: Nay De sibyllinis c. 16. p. 184. Land. 1684. Et before ad
Iterat. p. Simonis obj. Resp. p. 376. and 377.
Doctor Isaac Vossius is positive, that the Greek was the vulgar Language of
Jerusalem in our Saviors time; and that the Septuagint Translation, and not
the old Hebrew, was read in the Synagogues of the Jews. And all unanimously
conclude, that the people either understood the original of what was read, or
were made understand it by an Interpreter. It Is probable, Saint Paul, had
respect to this custom among the Jews, when he commands the Prophet that spoke
with Tongues to keep silence in the Church, if there was no Interpreter, 1 Cor.
14. 28. And therefore Mr. M. has quite mistaken his Argument, when he asks, Did
our Savior or his Apostles ever reprehend the Jews -- for not translating the
Scripture into the vulgar Language? There was no ground for such a
Reprehension, since the Jews had done it three hundred years before; and
therefore will rise up in Judgment against the absurd practice of the Roman
Church, and will condemn her; who is more unkind to her Subjects than the very
Jews, and has provided worse for their Edisication in this point. It is to no
purpose to say as Mr. M. does, that the Latin is more vulgar than the English:
Since this is a manifest falsehood, and must be owned to be such, by all men who
consider that the Latin is not vulgar in any place of the World.

I cannot tell whether I can call it a fourth Argument which offers, in these
words, If the Service of God must be said in the maternal tongue of every
Nation, where shall an English man in France or Spain, that understands not the
language, go to serve God on the Lords day? I answer, To Church, and join his
presence and private Devotion with the Congregation; since he cannot join in
the public Prayers. In case of necessity, a man is accepted by God according
to what he can do; and what is not in his power, is not required of him. In a
Country where there are no Christians, he must go no where; and in a strange
Country, he must go to the public Devotions, though he do no^ understand them:
For that is better then not going at all.

His last Argument for the vindication of the public Service of the Church in
an unknown Tongue is, That this would destroy all Community of Sacraments and
Lit^rgie, between the Members of the Catholic Church; which being one Body or
Society of Men, cannot be like the Builders of Babel, who could not understand
one another Language. Now if they that understand not one another language
are Builders of Babel; then the Priest and People, where the Service is in an
unknown Tongue, are plainly such Builders: For they do not understand one
another. Two Cities may very well be Built, and conveniently Governed by two
People of different Languages; and these Cities may likewise manage all their
common Business, and keep a good Correspondence, by the help of a few Men that
understand both Languages. But two Languages in the same City is very
inconvenient, and cannot be so remedied, It is so in the Church: Distant
Congregations may have a very good Communion with one another by the help of
their Priests who understand a common Language: But to have a Language spoken
to a Congregation, or in it, that the Members cannot understand, is to bring in
a great confusion, and directly opposite to the Apostles command, which he
himself here produces, Romans 15. 16. that we should with one mind and mouth
glorify God: For how can a Congregation glorify God with one mouth, if they
do not understand the words in which they are to join? Thus Mr. M's. Arguments
constantly make against himself. If want of a common Language destroys unity of
Sacraments and Liturgy, in distant Churches, it destroys that unity much more
where there is wanting a common Language between the Priest and People in the
same Church. But the truth is, the unity of the Sacraments and Liturgies, have
no dependency on the unity of Language; but are the same in whatever language
they are used or administered. And so it was in the Primitive Church, where
every People had their own Liturgy in their own Language. Mr. M. foresaw that 1
Cor. 14. would be objected against him: And he tells us, p. 11. That he humbly
thinks it not well understood by Prostants. This is a main point; and one would
have expected a substantial Reason for his Opinion, some Determination of a
Primitive Council, or a whole shoal of Fathers at least: But instead of that,
he pretends to cut the throat of the Objection out of that very Chapter, in
which Protestants glory. If any be Ignorant (says he) let him be Ignorant.
Wherefore Brethren, covet to Prophecy, and forbid not to speak with Tongues,
v. 39. God is not the Author of Confusion but Peace, v. 33. I shall not trouble
the Reader with an Answer to these Arguments; if Mr. M. designed in earnest to
prove by them, that we do not well understand the Apostle in this Chapter, I
would advise him to take the Opinion of a Physician, whether all be right about
his Head.

8. The third thing wherein Mr. M. endeavors to vindicate his Church is the
Worship of Images. And to this purpose he alleges, First, That the Council of
Trent has commanded all Superstition to be taken away in the use of Images;
and then gives it in charge to all Bishops to look to it, p. 12. If they had
reckoned the Worship of Images Superstition, this had indeed taken away our
Objection, but on the contrary; the Council decreed that Images of Christ, not
of his Human Nature, (as he improperly expresses it) and likewise of the
Blessed Virgin, and other Saints, are to be had and retained, especially in
Churches, and due Honor and Worship is to be paid them. And that we ought to
kiss, uncover our Heads, and fall prostrate before them.

9. But then, Secondly, He bids us enquire whether Roman Catholics pay any
more respect to them, than Protestants do to the Elements of Bread and Wine,
which (say they) are but a Figure or Image of Christ's Body and Blood. To which
I answer, That this Enquiry supposes two notorious Falsehoods: First, That
Protestants pay any other respects to the Elements of Bread and Wine, then that
of not diverting them from their Sacramental use. And Secondly, That they say
the Elements are but a Figure or Image of Christ's Body and Blood. Our Curch
having declared in her Rubric after the Communion, that the kneeling at the
Reception of the Sacrament, is only to Christ; and that no Adoration is
intended, or ought to be done unto the Sacramental Bread and Wine: and likewise
concerning the Elements, that they are not only Signs or Images, but effectual
means of conveying the Body and Blood of Christ to the Faithful. Which I hope
no Papist will say of his Images. And now I must refer it to the Reader,
whether he will suppose Mr. M. to have been ignorant of our Doctrine in this
point, or to have knowingly, and against his Conscience, suggested these
falsehoods.

10. His third attempt for the Defense of his Church in this Practice, is from
his old Friends the Presbyterians. The Church of England Protestants are every
jot as offensive to us (say the Presbyterians) kneeling before the Elements of
Bread and Wine, as the Papists kneeling before the Image of Christ. To which I
answer, That if the Matter of Fact here alleged, were true, (which I do not
believe,) yet it were no Argument; because the Presbyterians, or whosoever are
thus offended, are manifestly unreasonable in paralleling these two cases. The
Disparity is apparent, and the very same that there is between receiving a
Pardon, or any other signal Favor from the Kings own Hand on my knees; and
falling down every time I see his Pictuure on a Sign-post.

But once for all, let Mr. M. know, (for he professes to need Information,)
that it is is no Anwer to an Argument, to pretend that others urge it against
the Proponents themselves; except the Answerer show that both urge it with
equal Reason. For so the Apostles might have been answered by a Heathen. You
would persuade us, that we are under the Power of Satan, and Aliens to the Life
of God: Do not the Gnostics say the same of you? Silence them, and we will
believe you. So a Roman Catholic may be answered by an Indian, You would have
us renounce our Idols and Heroes; whereas there is a People amongst yourselves,
called Protestants, to whom your kneeling before the Images of Christ, and
praying to Saints, are every jot as offensive as our praying to our subordinate
Celestial Powers and Kneeling before their Images. If this would signify
nothing to Mr M. why should it signify any thing to us what Presbyterians
object against our Kneeling at the Reception of the Sacrament? or how are we
concerned, what they pretended in 41, against our Reformation, or Hugh Peter's
in 47, against theirs? except he will undertake to justify their Pretenses,
which is a Task themselves could never perform.

11. There is only one thing more he says in vindication of his Church; and
that concerns the ill Practices we charge on some Roman Catholics, and the ill
Opinions of others. He does not deny that there are some such, but he looks on
it as no Argument at all. If so, he wrote his Book to very little purpose; for
why are we more concerned in the ill Practices or ill Opinions of some who
pretend to Reform, than he is in the ill Practices and Opinions of the Pope and
Court of Rome? Yet these pretended faults of the Reformers, make up the
greatest part of what he Objects against our Church; which shows that he has
one Rule for us, and another for his own Party. But the truth is, we charge the
Council of Trent it self with some ill Practices and Opinions. For tho we take
Popery as the most judicious Papists represent it; (and they who bring the
Decrees of the Council of Trent nearest to Protestanism, I find are at present
counted such) yet still there needs better Vouchers than Mr M. to make us
believe all things in it Judicious and Pious.

12. Having thus examined all that he has said in defense of his Church, let us
next consider what he has offered to recommend Her: And of this nature he
produces three instances: The Excellency of her Books of Devotion; the Devotion
of her People; and the Unity of her Members. He tells us, p. 9. that, that
which obliged him most of all to the Church of Rome, was the perusal of her
Books of Devotion; such as St. Francis Sales -- Neirembergius -- Lewis
Granatensis -- especially the Mass it self. If these obliged him most of all,
had he lived at the Reformation, he had wanted some of the strongest
obligations to keep him in the Roman Communion; three of these four he mentions
being written after the Reformation, and the other but a few years before. And
now they are written, he was not debarred the use of them in the Communion in
which he lived. The Spirit of the Reformation, which he says he compared
without prejudice, with the Spirit of the Roman Church, allowing the use of all
Books that may advance Piety, by whomsoever they are written, which the Spirit
of his Church does not: But what is this to the Reformation, which did not
find, much less condemn these Books? Let him show one Book of Devotion, or
Exposition of the Mass, or Breviary, extant in English before the Reformation,
if he can; and remember what has been done since, to the eternal shame of
those, who never troubled themselves with Devotion, till mere necessity of
supporting their interest among the People put them on it. As for the Piety of
the Prayers in the Mass, let him who understands, both compare any Prayer there
with our Litany, and it is hardly possible Prejudice should so blind him, as not
to see which has the advantage.

13. But, nevertheless, he alleges, that the Devotion of their People exceeds
ours. Let the Reader compare that Devotion which Catholics pay to the Sacrifice
of the Mass, with that which most Protestants show to the Common Prayer, and
then see how much better we are by Reforming the Mass into English, p. 11. To
which I answer, That if it were granted, that Papists appear to be more devote
at Mass, than Protestants at Church (for that I suppose he means by paying
Devotion to the Mass, and showing it to the Common Prayer) yet it would not
follow that the Mass were better than the Common Prayer, or a fitter means of
Devotion; since that difference might arise from other motives, as it
manifestly does. The Roman Catholics place much more Religion in outward show,
than the Protestants, and therefore no wonder if they be more diligent in it.

2. If the appearance of Devotion at public Service be an Argument of the
goodness of the Service, the Turks who out do the generality of Christians in
frequency, seeming Devotion, and Reverence at their Prayers, as we are informed
by Travelers, must be concluded to have the best Service: and he would do ill
on Mr M.'s Principles that would Reform the Alcoran into the Mass.

3. The matter of Fact is not true, as I am informed by those that have seen
their Communicants and ours. Protestants have according to Mr M.'s desire,
compared the Devotions of the Church of Rome with those of the Church of
England, in a Discourse designed for that very purpose, and Printed, London,
1685: In which it is shown, That whatever the Romanists pretend, there is not
so true Devotion among them, nor such rational provision for it, nor
encouragement to it, as in the Church established by Law among us.

4. It is not material what their Devotions appear to be, if their Lives are
not better than ours, which I am sure they are not. Open Profaneness is hardly
more provoking to God, than show of Devotion without proportional Sanctity of
Life, as we learn from the Case of the Jews of old, in Isa. 1. Jer. 7. and in
many other places of Scripture.

14. The third thing whereby he endeavors to recommend his Church, is the
Unity of her Members: In the Church of Rome he shall find variety of Religious
Orders, but no Schism, nor Discord about their Sacraments or Liturgy: In the
Garment of the Church, there is Variety, but no Rent: No confusion of Sects,
nor Disobedience to Superios. p. 14. If this be true, she is the happiest
Church that ever was in the World; much happier than the Church of the Apostles
time: for there were Schisms and Discords about Sacraments and Liturgy in her.
Witness the Apostle, 1 Corin. 1. 11. also 11. 18. Nay, there was Disobedience
too, Gal. 3. 1. 3 John 9. It is therefore strange we should be able to find
none in the Church of Rome. May we not rather conclude that Mr M. has either
partially, or negligently sought for these Schisms and Discords? Since really
there has hardly been greater Schisms and Discords in any Church than in her,
tho he affirms we shall find none. See his Chronology ad ann. 1439
Bellarmine loved the Church of Rome as well as Mr M. and he owns twenty six
Schisms in her. See his Chronicon Pontificum ad ann. 137^.
Onuphrius Panvinius, who uses not to speak ill of the Roman Church, reckons
thirty; one he calls the worst and longest, which continued fifty Years, others
were of twenty, or fifteen, or ten, etc. These Authors only reckon those
Schisms where the People were divided between two Popes: But it were easy to
show, that besides these there were in that Church great and enormous Schisms,
which had no Popes to head them. And as for Discords about Sacraments, I
suppose, Mr M. reckons Ordination a Sacrament: And concerning it there have
been many Discords; many Popes have damned their Predecessors, and annulled
their Ordinations. So Stephen VII. nulled the Ordinations of Formosus his
Predecessor. John IX. did as much for Stephen, and Sergius III. for him. Cum
postea fere semper se^v^ta h^c consuetudo sit ut a^^a prio^um Pontificum,
sequentes aut infringe^ent, aut omnino tollerent. Plat. de Vuis Pon. if. in
Joh. 6.
Platina tells us, That after the time of Stephen VI. or, as others reckon, the
VII. it became a Custom for the succeeding Popes to infringe, or quite destroy
the Acts of their Predecessors. Spond. ad ann. 908. Se^^. 2. H^ncque tantum
inval^it meret^i^um imperium, ut pro ^r^itrio legitime creatos Pontifices
dimoverent, and violentos ac ne^atios homines int^uderent. Quae considerans,
quis non putarit Deum oblitum Ecclesiae sua? Spond. ubi supra Se^^. 3.
Spondanus tells us, These are the unhappy times, wherein every intruding Pope
annulled the Acts of his Predecessors. And further, that the power of Whores
was so great in Rome, that they removed true and lawful Popes, and thrust in
violent and wicked men. Who, considering this, would not think God had
forgotten his Church? Behold the Mission of the Roman Bishops, and their Unity.
And if notwithstanding these Schisms and Intrusions, which continued for many
years, the Church of Rome continued a true Church, and her Ordinations valid;
let the Reader judge, what there is so Horrid or Irregular in our Reformation,
that should void our Orders, or make us cease to be a Church.

15. I suppose Mr. M. counts Confirmation another Sacrament; and there have
been no less discords about it of late in the Roman Church. The Regulars of
England on one side, and the Bishops of France, with the Sorborn on the other.
And those of each party charge the other with Heresy, not without the
disturbance of the public Peace, and a rent of brotherly Charity. So the
Congregation of the Index tells us: which Congregation made a Decree to
suppress the Writings of both Parties, May 19. 1633. And here we do not find
that Obedience to Superiors in this matter of which Mr. M. boasts: for
immediately there came out at Paris a Disquisition against the Decree, the
Jesuits Reply, and the Bishops of France renew their Condemnation and Censure,
Nov. 29. 1643. and I do not find that they are yet agreed. Mr. M affirms we
shall find no Rent, no Confusion of Sects, no Disobedience to Superiors in the
Church of Rome. But whosoever will read the Decrees and passages about this
matter, in St. Amours's Collection at the end of his Journal, p 26. or in
Petrus Aurelius's Vindiciae Censurae, will find a great rent of brotherly
Charity, much Confusion, and great Disobedience in the disagreeing Parties; and
these about no less things, than the Sacrament of Confirmation, the Hierarchy
of the Church, and Supremacy of St. Peter.

16. Confession is no less a Sacrament with Mr. M. and the Disputes in his
Church have of late been as high about it, as about the former; one Party
charging the other. with no less than Heresy: as may be seen at large in the
Bishops of France's Letter to Innocent the X. at the end of Mr. Arnauld's Book
of Frequent Communion. If their public Acts are to be believed, there are
Rents, Scissurae fraternae Charitatis in their Church. But if we believe Mr. M.
there is no Rent, Scissura non est. I shall say nothing of the Dispute
concerning the Regale in France at this day; I need not put him in mind of what
Obedincee has been paid to the Pope, or to his Excommunications of the
Archbishop of Toulouse, and Regalists. He may see the whole in a Book
entitled, Regale Sacerdotum, 1684. I do not see but the King and Church of
France make themselves Judge, Witness, and Accuser in this Affair with the
Pope, as much as Henry VIII* and the English Church did.

17. This is all that Mr. M. seems to say, either to vindicate or recommend his
Church. Let us see next what he objects against ours. And in all this last part
I can find only three things of this nature: One is P. 10. That the Church of
England is beholding to the Mass for the best Flowers in her Communion Service.
The second is, that the Protestant Church has no other Foundation, than every
man's Reason. And the third is, That we do not pay a due Submission to the
Church. As to the first of these, I suspect the chief reason, why some of his
Party object the Communion Service, being taken out of the Mass; is not that
they think it any fault if it were; but because they bell eve it may gratify
and incense their Friends, the Nonconformists, against the public Service of
the Church. But I answer, That the Model of our Service, and Materials thereof,
are not taken out of the Mass, but out of the ancient Liturgies of the Church,
to which it is much more conformable than to the Mass.

18. The second Objection he brings against our Church is, That she has no
sufficient Foundation: P. 11, I desire to be informed whether the Protestant
Church had any other Foundation (setting aside an Act of Parliament) than every
Man's own Reason; or which is the same thing, the Scriptures Interpreted by
every Man's Reason? There are but two Bases whereupon to settle our selves, the
Scriptures and Fathers expounded by my own Reason; or the Scriptures and
Fathers expounded by the voice of the present visible Church. This later is
Popish, and cannot support a Reformed Fabric. In answer to this, I will show,
first, in what Sense every Man's Reason, may be said to be the foundation of
his Church. Secondly, That our Church has trusted her Reason in the expounding
Scriptures and Fathers, no farther than she ought to have done. And Thirdly,
That she has not Expounded them so as to contradict the sense of the present
visible Church.

First therefore, When Mr. M. alleges that our Church has no other Foundation
than every Man's Reason, he may mean that she has no other Foundation for her
Religion, than what natural Reason, without the assistance of Revelation, and
other helps God has afforded her, does suggest. And this is a manifest Calumny,
because she has, besides what natural Reason of it self suggests, the
Scriptures, the Fathers, the universal Tradition of all Ages past, and present,
for every Article of her Faith. Let him show one Article that wants any one of
these, and we will strike it out of our Creeds; or any other Article that has
this testimony for its necessity, and it shall be inserted.

There may be another sense of these words, The Protestant Church has no other
Foundation than every man's Reason: and it is this, The Protestants make use of
no other faculties, to find out the sense of Scriptures and Fathers, of the
former and present Church, but their Reason and Senses: and consequently rely
on them with God's assistance, to find out the true Religion and Church. This
Sense we allow, and except Mr. M. and his Party, will show us some other
faculties, given us by God, whereby we may choose our Religion; they ought not
to blame us for using these only. When they find out another faculty of the
Soul, besides these two, whereby we may distinguish Truth from Falsehood, we
promise them to use it also. And though Mr. M. confesses his own Reason, to be
as weak as any body can think it and pretends not to assert it, but the
Authority of the Church: yet, till he tells us by what faculties he judges
himself obliged to submit to the Authority of the Church, and by what faculties
he comes to know that the Roman Church is she, to whose Authority he ought to
submit; we must tell him, that the Authority of his Church, as to him, is
founded merely and solely on his own Reason, how weak soever he own it. And so
must the Authority of every Church, to every man in the World. And therefore it
is foolish to object, That the Protestant Church has no other Foundation than
every Man's Reason and Senses; for no Church, no not Christianity, has or can
have any other.

19. But Secondly, Perhaps Mr. M. means only that we do not allow the voice of
the present visible Church a due regard in our Determination, concerning Faith
and Religion. In Answer to which, in the second place, I say, our Church
trusted her reason no further in expounding Scripture than she ought to have
done. And here it is to be remembered, that she is a complete Church, associated
together in one entire Ecclesiastical Body, with full power to Interpret and
Teach her Subjects, all things relating to Faith and Discipline: As these
Kingdoms are a complete Commonwealth, associated into one civil Body, with
full power to Interpret and Enact all things relating to the Law of Nature, and
the Civil Government of the Kingdoms. As therefore these Kingdoms do not trust
their Reason too far, when they determine concerning the Laws of Nature without
Appeal; so neither did our Church trust her Reason too far, when she determined
without Appeal, concerning matters relating to Faith. And there is no more
inconvenience can befall her Subjects, by allowing her this power in this case,
than can befall them, by allowing their Civil Majestrates the like power in the
other.

20. And third, to show that she did not intend to contradict the general voice
of the visible Church, with which Mr. M. seems to charge her; she was content
to refer all difference between her and her Neighbor Churches, to the
Arbitration of a general Council, even of the West. And to this she Appealed,
when the Pope pretended to Excommunicate her. And not only she, but other
Protestant Churches did the same. But the Roman Church being Conscious, that
the general Voice and Sense of the visible Church, was against her Usurpation,
durst not stand this Trial; but without any Authority from God, or the visible
Church (if we understand by that the general Body of Christians) took on her
self to be Judge, Witness, and Accuser. Which was more than Luther did; for he
referred himself, and Appealed to a general Council.

21. The third Objection Mr. M. alleges against the Reformers, is, their not
yielding a due Submission to the Church. For after all his clamor against
Reason, he allows us to make use of it with Submission; he has expressed his
meaning in this, so as it is not easy to guess, whether he means by submitting
our reason, an entire resignation of it, to believe whatsoever the Church of
Rome by a Priest, or a Council tells us, and then the only use of reason will
be to find out Arguments to defend what she has taught us; or whether by
Submission he means only a due regard to her Determinations, so that a Man of
her Communion shall not allow himself publicly to oppose and contradict her
Doctrine. This last he seems to understand by Submission; because he opposes it
to Contradiction and Petulancy. And then why is not this Submission due as much
to the Church of England and Ireland as Rome? Did not Christ say to the Bishops
of England and Ireland, He that hears you hears me; as well at to the Bishop of
Rome?

22. But to clear this matter a little, I will show that we pay all due
Submission to the Church. And, Secondly, Examine what Submission Mr M. has paid
her. When we talk of Submission to the Church, by the Church may be meant
either the Universal Church, or the Particular Church wherein we were Born,
Baptized, and Educated: and to both these we profess and pay due Submission.
Witness of the Doctrine of Christ, and we receive her Testimony. The only
Question with us is, What Doctrine Christ and his Apostles Taught? And this we
believe contained in the Scriptures. Concerning the Sense of any Word in them,
we receive likewise the Testimony of the Catholic Church. Every Doctor
approved by her, is a Witness, and every Council received by her, is as the
Deposition of Witnesses. By this means we know her Sense in former Ages, as
well as in this Age, and are able to compare them together. Where these agree,
we have no reason to doubt her Veracity; but where one Age of her says one
thing, and another Age says another thing; we count our selves under no
obligation to believe either of their Testimonies to be a necessary part of the
Doctrine of Christ. It Is therefore the Church of all Ages, and places, that we
reckon the Ground and Pillar of Truth. Whereas Mr M. con^ines us to the Visible
Church, and pretends we are to take the Sense of all former Ages, from the
present. But pray why may not I as well understand the Sense of the Church of
the fourth Age from the Council of Nice, as I can understand the Sense of the
last Age from the Council of Trent? It was therefore by this Rule, and with
Submission to his Church, that our Reformers proceeded in their Reformation:
and except Mr M. can show (which he has not so much as endeavored to do) that
they deviated from this Rule, he has done nothing to prove that they had not a
due Deference and Submission to the Catholic Church. And as she thus submitted
to the Sense of the Universal Church, so she requires all her Subjects to
submit to her, to receive the Faith, to which she, with the Catholic Church,
bears Testimony, to own her Laws of Discipline, submit to her Censures, and
conform to her Constitutions. But she pretends to no Dominion over men's Faith,
or to oblige them to believe any thing, because she has decreed it: Her
Authority is to propose as a Witness, not to define as a Judge. If any one
dissent from her, he must not make a Schism, or turn Preacher in contradiction
to her Authority: If any one be otherwise minded, he must follow the Apostle's
Rule, Phil. 3. 15. he must conform as far as he can, and yield a Passive
Obedience to her Censures, where he cannot give an Active to her Commands.
While he walks by this Rule, he can neither be a Schismatic nor Heretic; and
may expect, if he use due means, that God will either reveal to him what he
wants, or pardon his Error if he mistake.

23. This Submission is coherent even with Calvin's Principles: And though I am
not concerned for any private Divine, yet since Mr M. has troubled us with so
few Quotations, I will pay him so much Respect as to take notice of this; and
the Reader may from it learn how faithfully he Transcribes and Englisheth his
Quotations.

The Quotation as in Calvin* As Transcribed by Mr M. Non alius est in vitam
ingressus nisi nos ipsa concipiat in utero, nisi pariat, nisi nos a^at suis
uberibus -- Add quod extra ejus gremium nulla speranda est peccatorum
remissio, nec ulla salus -- Lib. 4. Cap. 1. Sect. 4. Extra Ecclesiae gremium
nulla speranda Salus, nec Remissio peccatorum, quia non est alius in vitam
ingressus. Thus in English literally. Thus rendered into English by Him. There
is no other Passage into Life, except the Visible Church conceive us in her
Womb, bring us forth, and nourish us with her Breasts -- Add to this, That out
of her Bosom there is no Remission of Sins to be expected, nor any Salvation.
He that will enter into Life, let him mortify the Pride of his own Reason, and
humbly cast himself at the Feet of the Catholic Church.

Both Calvin and we own that Pride, and all other Passions, ought to be
Mortified: And except Mr M. can show that we have used our Reason proudly, that
is, not yielded, out of some design, Passion or Prejudice, when our Reason was
convinced, we have just reason to reckon all his Accusations effects of his own
Passion, and Petulancy against his Mother Church. He confesses that many of us
are Cathol^ks by Inclination; (I hope we are really so) but the Tyranny of
Prejudice, or Interest keeps us Protestants. But for Prejudice, let the World
judge, whether our People are more liable to Prejudice* who are allowed to
Read, and Examine, and Judge for themselves; or the Members of his Church, that
are taught to submit without Examination. As for Interest, I think it is the
Interest of every man to continue Protestant, if he value his Soul: but for
Worldly Interest, the Scales are hardly equal. I find not one of their Converts
who has lost by it yet. But whatever our Interest is, our Loyalty is
unquestionable; if he know diverse Loyal Persons of the Church of England, I
know none else.

24. Let us now take a view of his Submission to the Church. 1. For the
Catholic Church* he has taken the liberty to cut off from her, what Members he
thought fit; and has reduced her to a fourth part of Christians: He has
obtruded Articles of Faith on her* to which she never gave Testimony* and has
subjected her to a Head at Rome, to whom God never subjected her; that is* He
has created a Catholic Church out of his own head, and rejected that of
Christ's Planting.

2. As for the Particular Church, which made him a Member of Christ by Baptism,
this his spiritual Mother, he has pronounced a Harlot, and her Children
By-blows* He has condemned her Sacraments, degraded her Bishops, to whom he
swear Obedience, renounced her Orders, and given her the Title of an
unsanctified Nation. In short, as far as lay in his Power, he has exposed the
Nackedness of his Mother. Behold the Petulancy and Contradiction of an
undutiful Son. But thanks be to God, notwithstanding his feeble Attempts, Her
Bow abides in strength, and the Arms of her Hands are made strong, by the Hands
of the Mighty God of Jacob, Genesis 49. 24.

CHAP. VI.
ALthough Mr. M. has nothing new in his Latin Addition, but only repeats what
he said; first in his Preface, and then in his Book; yet, I did not think it
fit, to let what he has said in this Language, be without some Animadversions
in the same.

Ad dubia quae proponuntur super Reformatione Anglicana, sic respondetur.

Ad 1. An Ecclesia Anglicana sit tota Ecclesia?
Resp. Quam absurdum sit ut una particularis Ecclesia ^e esse totam Catholicam
Christi Ecclesiam, extra quam non est salus, impudenter jactitet, videant
Romanenses. Ecclesia Anglicana membrum duntaxat Ecclesiae Catholicae sese
existimat: Omnium Ecclesiarum Sacramenta a Christo instituta amplectitur,
dummodo in unitate fidei, in materia debita, and sub forma praescrip^a
celebrentur. A^ Nos, vel ipsius Ecclesiae Romanae Baptismum rejicimus? aut an
illa nostrum non recipit?

Ad 2. Number Ecclesia Anglicana recipit Sacramenta Lutheranorum, etc.
Resp. Sacramenta Lutheranorum, etc. Vera esse Sacramenta; and forte solus est
Mr. M. qui aliter sentit. Sacramenta non sunt eorum Sacramenta, a quibus
celebrantur; sed Christi and Ecclesiae: sicut nos docuit sanctus Augustinus
contra Donatistas Ep. 48. Non in vobis mutamus in quibus estis nobiscum --
Nobiscum autem estis in Baptismo, in Symbolo, in coeteris Dominicis
Sacramentis, and paulo ante, ex Catholica enim Ecclesia sunt omnia Dominica
Sacramenta quae sic habetis and datis, quemadmodum habebantur and dabantur,
etiam prius quam inde exiretis; non tamen ideo non habetis quia ibi non estis,
unde sunt quae habetis, haec ille de Sacramentis Haereticorum. Donatista itaque
est, qui Sacramentum rejicit, quia a Schismaticis celebrari putat; multo magis
qui eorum Sacramenta rejicit, qui fidem Catholicam profitenter, and se
studiosos unitatis Ecclesiasticae, and fraternae Charitatis exhibent.

Ad 3. Unde missus est Cranmerus ad praedicandum Evangelium suum Reformatum?
Resp. A Christo missus est Cranmerus per manus Episcoporum Angliae secundum
Ecclesiae Anglicanae institutionem ad praedicandum, non suum, sed Christi
Evangelium: probandum igitur est, Evangelium Reformatum aliud esse a Christi
Evangelio, priusquam mandatum Missionis excessisse dicatur Cranmerus. Contra
Ecclesiam Romanam non rebellavit, quoniam illi jure subjectus non erat, neque
ab ea Missionem aut jurisdictionem proprie recepit. Ecclesia quae illum misit
in communione erat cum Ecclesia Romana, non illi tamen subjecta, jure aliquo
divino.

Ad 4. An liceat Ministro ab Ecclesia Anglicana fugitivo praedicare contra eam,
etc?
Resp. Videat ipse, per quam Missionem public per hanc chartam praedicat
contra Ecclesiam cui obedientiam juravit? Est enim and hoc, praedicationis
genus efficacissimum.

Ad 5. Utrum defectus Missionis sit error in Fundamentis?
Resp. Si per Missionem intelligitur externa illa, quae secundum Canones ^it;
defectus in ea non est semper error in Fundamentis: multi enim Episcopi Romani
ejusmodi Missione caruerunt. Corcedo furti and Latrocinii reum esse, qui sine
regulari externa Missione in ovile ingreditur; non tamen inde sequitur, omnia
quae facit aut mala aut nulla esse cum semel in ovile ingressus sit. Simoniacus
aut intrusus ^ur est and latro; an igitur Sacramenta ab ipso celebrata nulla
sunt aut invalida? Omnino tamen deest ei Missio inte^na, and defectus est in
externa.

Ad 6. Utrum Cranmerus intravit per ostium Parliamenti?
Resp. Intravit invitus (ut ^ere omnes boni Episcopi) per ostium quod illi
leges, tam Ecclesiasticae quam civiles, secundum ^acras Scripturas,
monstrayerunt* Cantent s^ modo possunt, hanc canti^enam se^^ar^^; and si placet
sit illis pro Magistro Symphoniae Mr. M. nunquam tamen Harmoniae regulis
respondebi^ eorum cantus. Objicit nobis varium and Multiplicem Scripturae
sensum, sed imm^^ito, ipse enim si Christianus est, objectionem solvere
tenetur, aut ^altem interpretem assignare, qui verum Scripturarum sensum a
^a^so hucusque discreve^it, illumque verbis expresserit, quorum sensus non
aeque multiplex est, ac sensus Scripturarum. Ac objicit ^ine tali judice
altercari in aeternum necesse est: concedo equidem quod illi quibus ambitio and
lucrum dominantur, in aeternum altercabuntu^ sub quovis Judice: nec aliter
voluit Deus? aequum enim est, quod ^mpii and superbi in Haereses and Factiones
labi permittantur; at boni and modesti ^ub pastoribus sibi a Christo assignatis
vivent, sine altercationibus quae unitatem sc^ndunt.

Dicit 7. Ad haec postulata saepius se quaesivisse responsum, sec nullum
hactenus invenisse. A quibus haec quaesivit? An a nostris? Vix credo, nullum
enim invenio, qui haec illum quaerentem audivit, aut somniavit; si igitur
quaesiverit, ab aliis certe, non a nostris (a quibus oportuit) quaesivit; sort
a fratribus Monasticis quorum consortio per annum praeteritum se totum dedit;
non autem miremur aut illis defuisse responsum, aut si quod habuissent celasse.
Addit tandem responsum (quod dicit a multis obtendi solere) scilicet Cranmerum
cum sodalibus ord^nes accepisse a Christo per manus Episcoporum pontificiorum;
si per pontificios intelligit Episcopos in communione cum pontifice Romano,
verum est at si per pontificios, intelligit Episcopos qui se Subjectos Papae
jure divino agnoverunt, aeque falsum est quam quod maxim; ut igitur Christiani
Episcopi, non ut pontificii, ordines conferendi potestatem habebant; qua usi
sunt in assignandis sibi Successoribus; qua etiam Cranmorum Christianum, non
pontificium Episcopum conse^r^^unt; qua tandem errores and corruptelas quae in
Divina irrepser^nt, secundum Scripturas sacras and sensum veterum
reformaverunt* and hac cu^a se veros pastores probarunt: Audiendi itaque erunt:
and Mr. M. qui illos audire recusat, inter Rebels filios numerandus est. Cum
igitur primi Reformatores subjecti non essent pontifici, sed Co Episcopi, non
magis adversus Doctrinam Ecclesiae Romanae insurgere existimandi erant, quam
Regnum Angliae insurgeret contra leges Galliae, si se and subditos and statum
suum secundum leges naturae reformaverit: nullus itaque hic nodus nisi quem
fallax Mr. M. imaginatio ligavit. Solus culpandus pontifex, qui revera judicem
testem and accusatorem egit, and a sociis suis Episcopis quod jure suo
utebantur, sese and Ecclesiam suam abscidit, pacemque cum illis noluit.

Ad 8. An cuilibet Ecclesiae nationali jus sese reformandi competit?
Resp. Nihil contra objicit dubitator, nisi si ita se res habeat, tum pari jure
reformatam fuisse gentem Scoticam ad Calvinismum, etc. quod nullo modo
sequitur; non solum enim potestas quae reformat, legitima esse sed etiam
legitime procedere debet. At si quae in illis gentibus circa reformationem
illegitime facta fuissent, non erant corrigenda concitando factiones and
schismata contra publicam earum Ecclesiarum pacem, nec privati in parts contra
pastores solicitandi (est enim illud remedium morbo plerumque perniciosius) ^^d
ad m^lior^m ^rugem reducendae erant errantes Ecclesiae communi Christianitatis
concilio and hortatu; praesertim dum errores suos aliis non imposu^ru^t. Eo
usque enim unitatem deseruisse non sunt aestimandae. Quod in Sancto Cypriano
manifestum est, qui ^^cet cum suo provinc^ali concilio in errorem lapsus est,
and in eo usque ad terminum vitae perseveravit, a schismate tamen a Sancto
Augustino in libris de Baptismo excusatur, quod nullum a jure, Communionis si
diversum senserit, amovebat; neque Tyrannico terrore ad obsequendi necessitatem
collegas suos adegit, quando habeat omnis Episcopus pro licentia libertatis,
and potestatis suae, arbitrium proprium, tamque judicari ab alio non possit,
quam nec ipse potest judicare. Ut loquitur ipse Sanctus Cyprianus in Concilio
Cartha giniensi*

Existimat vero ille, falsum esse quod facta erat mutatio Religionis ex voto
gentis, and Cleri Anglicani, sed ex vertigine paucorum, and ad annals illorum
temporum nos relegat. Ad eos itaque eamus, indeque manifestum erit, nullam
mutationem majori consensu aut factam fuisse aut receptam, quam Reformationem
in Anglia. Si non favissent nobis annals illorum temporum, unde erat quod tam
solicit conquisiti, and aboliti sunt sub Maria, idque per mandatum publicum.
Ut videre est ex Rot. Pat.

Ad 9. An licuit Ecclesioe Anglicanae, cum esset membrum Ecclesiae Catholicoe,
semet abseindere a reliquo corpore?
Resp. Nunquam semet abscidit; manet illi unita unitate fidei, and charitate.
Regnum Angliae membrum est societatis humanae aeque ac Ecclesia Anglicana est
membrum Catholicae: nec magis Ecclesia estimanda est semet abscindere a reliquo
corpore, cum se pro jure suo reformat; quam regnum semet a societate humana
abscindere, si ad suam reformationem Leges novas condat. Conata equidem est
Ecclesia Romana nostram a communione Catholica abscindere, illi communionem
suam denegando; ad respondere possumus quod Ecclesia Orientalis per
Firmilianum, and Africana per Sanctum Cyprianum Stephano Episcopo Romano ipsas
excommunicare nitenti, responderunt. Ep. 75. Peccatum quam magnum tibi
exaggerasti, quando te a tot gregibus scidisti? excidisti enim teipsum, noli te
fallere, dum enim putas omnes a te abstineri posse, solum te ab omnibus
abstinuisti.

Ad 10. An depravatus fuit per totum orbem verus Dei cultus ante ortum
Cranmerum?
Resp. Possunt ea in cultum divinum irrepere per universum orbem quae
reformatione indigeant; nec tamen inde sequitur cultum Dei verum tolli, aut
deprava^^: manet aurm verum, licet a scoriis non penitus purgatum sit.

Ad 11. Utrum hodie extra regnum Angliae and Hiberniae nullus extat purus and
Apostolicus Dei cultus?
Resp. Quod extat alibi talis cultis quoad essentialia: at forte neque in
Anglia, neque alibi tam purus asserendus est Dei cultus, ut nihil in eo quoad
accidentalia imperfectum inveniatur; in ipsis Apostolicis Ecclesiis, viventibus
adhuc Apostolis, multa indigebant reformatione, ut colligere possumus ab ipsa
scriptura.

Ad 12. An liceat populo Anglicano comminisci sibi Ecclesiam a toto orb
divisam?
Resp. Non licere, neque talem commentus est; e contra, omni Ecclesiae verae,
Catholica side and charitate, unita manet Ecclesia Anglicana. Qui nolunt cum
illa pacem, divisam sibi Ecclesiam commenti sunt. Nullius Ecclesiae Sacramenta
aut Ritus damnat, integrum Sacramentum Eucharistiae suis restituit, super^luos
and superstitiosos Ritus in rebus divinis abrogavit, and aliis Ecclesiis ut
abrogent, suadet; cum autem in eas potestatem non habeat, non est cur sibi
damnandi illos officium arroget, sed (ut in simili casu Cyprianus in Concilio
Carthaginesi,) Expectemus universi Judicium Domini nostri Jesu Christi, qui
unus and solus habet potestatem, and proeponendi Episcopos in Ecclesioe suoe
gubernatione, and de actu eorum judicandi. Non existimandus est quid sit
damnatio intelligere, qui tam facile totas Ecclesias damnet, and Statanae
tradat.

Ad 13. Utrum Cranmerus fuit primus Archiepiscopus Ecclesioe Anglicanae?
Resp. Stultissime hoc quaeri. Videat Catalogum Episcoporum, and dicat an
primus sit. At qui illum antecesserunt erant Pontificii, ergo defuit illi
successio. Itane? si fuissent nigri aut albi, ipse autem Rufus, an defuisset
illi successio? non magis ad ordines pertinet, an pontificius, aut graecus sit,
bonus, aut malus, qui eos confert, quam si sit niger aut albus. Ordines
(pariter ac sacramenta) non sunt pontificiorum aut reformatorum, sed Christi
and Ecclesiae, nec alicujus Sectae sed Ecclesiae se sacerdotem prosessus est
Cranmerus: ad eum sinem consecratus est. Sola Quaestio est, an been se gesserit
in domo Dei, ubi oeconomus constitutus erat: ut id vero innotescat, examinanda
sunt quae fecit, and cum factis missio comparanda; si nihil non Christianum in
Ecclesia statuit, satis erat illi abunde Christiana missio ad mandata Christi
implenda; asserit sciscitator noster importunus, Cantuarienses Episcopos per
novem anteriora secula pontificios fuisse, sine front and veritate: cum nemo
ante* Anselmum de Pontificis potestate qualis nunc vindicatur, somniaverit; cum
leges Angliae ante Thomam Becket, ut in Matthaeo Parisiensi videre est ad annum
1164. potestati universalis pastoris direct contrariae fuissent; cum ipse
Warhamus immediatus Cranmeri praedecessor, cum assentiente tota convocatione,
supremam Regis potestatem in Ecclesiasticis agnovisset: quam si quis
Pontificius agnosceret, erat and Warhamus pontificius. At si quis
praedecessorum ejus aliter sentiebat, number id impediret successionem? Respondeat
Sanctus Cyprianus, qui errantes Antecessores in re maximi momenti, scilicet de
aqua vini loco in Eucharistia substituta, ita excusat. Ep. 63. Si quis de
Antecessoribus nostris vel ignoranter vel simpliciter non hoc observavit:
potest simplcitati ejus de indulgentia Domini venia concedi, nobis vero non
poterit ignosci, qui nunc a Domino admoniti and instructi sumus.

Ad 14. Utrum sit verd Ecclesia quoe non habet legitimos Pastores?
Resp. Quod potest esse vera: testis Ecclesia Romana, quoe tot habuit
Pontifices Haereticos, Schismaticos, Simoniacos, Intrusos, and Dubios, qui
omnes Legitimi pastores non erant, An igitur Romae defecit Ecclesia? possunt
etiam esse vera Sacramenta ubi very non sunt Pastores, ipsa enim fatente Romana
Ecclesia Faemina and Haeretica vere Baptizat, an illa est verus pastor?
Reformati veros pastores habent: inepte igitur quaeritur an praestat sub una
specie cum Pseudo Catholicis communicare, quam sub nulla cum Reformatis? nullus
Reformatus enim est, qui non sub duabus speciebus communicate; imo praestat illi
nullum quam mutilum Samentum, cui id vitium innotuit.

Ad 15. Utrum 39 Articuli Ecclesioe Anglicanae sunt Articuli fidei vel non?
Resp. Omnes non sunt; plerique negativi Articuli ad rejiciendas vel falsas vel
superstitiosas opiniones excogitabantur, quas alii pro Catholica side obtrudere
conati sunt; tales autem non sunt dicendi Articuli fidei: quod vel hinc liquet,
si quis pro fidei Articulo venditaret, cras^a^^ore extremum judicium; qui id ad
fidem pertinere negaverit, non dicendus esset novum Articulum fidei
excogitasse; sic enim infiniti esse possent, and quilibet cudendi Articulum
potestatem haberet. Alii inter 39 ad politiam and regimen Ecclesiae pertinent,
qui plerumque inter fidei Articulos non sunt numerandi alii sunt veritates
magni momenti, quae vero tuto ignorari a privatis Christianis possunt, imo si
pertinacia absit, non credi. Alii sunt revera omnibus cognoscendi and credendi,
qui soli sub nomine Articulorum fidei proprie veniunt. Quod vero insert ille
(scilicet) si non sunt Articuli fidei, ergo nemo tenetur fidem illis habere sub
periculo salutis, non sequitur: potest enim salus periclitari imo amitti,
pertinaciter negando alias veritates, quam quae proprie ad fidem spectant. Cum
igitur Articuli 39 ad diversitatem opinio^um evitandam ab Ecclesia proponuntur;
nullus qui pacem amat, illis se opponere debet.

Ad 16. Utrum Religio Reformata sit divisibilis in semper divisibiles.
Resp. Quod videtur istam quaestionem ut plerasque suas a jocularibus recentium
in Collegio oratiunculis mutuatus fuisse: and quod verisimilius hoc facit,
solis fere illis insignem ibi sese M. M. reddidit.

Ad 17. An in re Eucharista Argumentum a sensibus ductum sit fallibile?
Resp. Argumentum istud fallere non potest: ratio quam proponit dubitandi nulla
est, revera enim lignum pulchrum erat oculus, neque oculos primam nostram
parentem decepit; sed fesellit sese homo, dum serpenti potius quam Deo credidit
de effectu manducationis, (scilicet) quod non moreretur etiamsi comederet, de
quo oculus nihil illi retulit. Credulitas itaque non sensus primos nostros
parents decepit, caveat itaque a credulitate, qui in quicunque re*decipi non
vult.

Ad 18. An Ecclesia Anglicana mutabilis sit ad nutum Parliamenti?
Resp. Quod non est ita mutabilis, neque unquam ita mutata fuit: potest Rex cum
Parliamento, temporalibus praemiis aut poenis quae sancienda sunt in Religione
sancire: quis nisi mente captus hanc potestatem illis negabit? aut quis nisi
manifesto falsus plus circa Religionem reformatam Parliamentum tan^asse dicet?
Sunt igitur duo in stabilen^a aut reformanda Religione distinguenda: primum
est, judicare de veritate Religionis, and illam quae vera esse judicata est
Christi authoritate sub salutis amittendae periculo omnibus commendare; alterum
est, sic commendatam ab Ecclesia Religionem temporalibus praemiis aut poenis
munire. Primum pertinet ad Ecclesiam, secundum ad civilem Potestatem. In
stabilienda Reformatione, Ecclesia Anglicana in Convocatione, civilis Potestas
in Parliamento propriam sibi Provinciam sigillatim curaverunt.

Ad 19. Utrum spiritus Calvini negantis, ac Lutheri affirmantis corporalem
proesentiam, sit uterque a Deo?
Resp. Quod neque Calvinus ab inspiratione spiritus negavit, neque Lutherus
affirmavit aliquid de corporali praesentia. Ridicule itaque quaeritur an
uterque sit a Deo. Author Quaestionis, cum inter Fanaticos educatus esset,
audivit omnia aut spiritui bono aut malo attribui, and videtur adhuc in ea
sententia haerere; and inde somniat, non posse aliquem vel affirmare vel negare
aliquid nisi ex spiritus alicujus impulsu. Quod tamen somnium vel hoc exemplo
excutiat, Paulus III. Papa affirmavit se posse Henricum VIII. imo quemlibet
Regem deponere, and per Bullam idem tentavit. At M. M. (ut spero) negat
potestatem deponendi Regem Angliae inesse Papae. Quaero igitur an spiritus
utriusque idem sit, aut an uterque possit esse a Deo?

Ad 20. Nonne impudentissimus fuit Calvinus usurpato sibi munere Reformandi
orbem cum juvenis esset 26 annorum?
Resp. Non fuit impudentissimus, impudentior enim Johannes decimus, qui Hugonem
puerum quinquennem in Archiepiscopum Rhemensem and Primatem Galliae
confirmavit, ut videre est apud Flodardum Histor. Rhem. Lib. 4. Cap. 17 and 18.
Impudentior Johannes Papa undecimus Sergii tertii nothus, qui studio and
authoritate matris Marozioe infamis scorti and adhuc amoribus aptae, in
Vicarium Christi universalem juvenis successit. Test Luitprando. Lib. 3. Cap.
12. Si haec nihil* ad se existimat dubitator, sciat neque ad nos Calvinum: de
quo tamen nihil inimicis credendum; non enim sibi reformandi munus usurpavit,
sed reformantibus semet adjunxit.

Ad 21. An ex utero Reformationis effluxerint coedes -- and be^lla civilia
queemerserunt anno 1641?
Resp. Quod non, Caedes enim rapinae and bella plus quam civilia quibusin vitas
innocentium ultra omne exemplum tunc temporis saevitum est in Hibernia, ex
Cleri Romani Sanguinolenta instigatione originem duxerunt. Quae vero in Anglia
and Scotia nata sunt mala, non magis ex utero reformationis effluxerunt, quam
gladius schismata and contentiones e doctrina Christi.

Ad 22. Utrum Africa sit feracior monstrorum, quam Britania fanaticorum?
Resp. Brittannia non magis ferax est Fanaticorum quam Italia and Hispania:
Fanaticus est qui se divino spiritu agi aut illuminari falso credit; plures
sunt ibi and in majori pretio qui hoc sibi vendicant, quam in Anglia. Fanaticus
est qui ex scripturae sensu male intellecto sese legitimis pastoribus public
opponit. Tollatur Inquisitio, and inveniet quamlibet regionem non minus feracem
esse ejusmodi fanaticorum quam Britanniam, sola igitur Inquisitio est qua
mellus se habent in hac part Italia and Hispania quam Britannia: at nos
malumus fanaticos quam inquisitionem: idque ex Christi praescripto qui ut
zizania cum tritico simul crescere s^nerent, servos jussi^. Plures and magis
perniciosae Haereses in primaeva Ecclesia ortae sunt, pluresque fanatici, quam
inter Reformatos. An sanius contra judicium discretiones and scripturas jam
arguitur ex eo quod eorum abusu fanatici; fiunt quam contra Religionem
Christianam, quod ejus praetextu tot abominandae Haereses, quas recensent
Sanctus Epiphanius and Sanctus Irenaeus, orbem inquinaverunt?

Ad 23 and 25. Quibus de legitimatione Elizabethae and Marioe filiarum Henrici
octavi quoeritur.
Resp. Elizabetham legitimos habuisse natales, utpote quae nata erat ex
matrimonio legitime cum Matre ejus contracto post sententiam divortii Patris
and Catherinae* vel portius postquam conjugium eorum nullum esse pronuntiatum
est. Nec minus tamen Maria patri tanquam legitima succedere debuit, cum nata
esset antequam vitium matrimonii, propter quod nullum judicatum est, aut patri
aut matri innotuit; Filius enim natus ex matrimonio bona fide vel alterius
parentis inito est vere legitimus secundum legem Civilem. Ex cras^a igitur
juris ignorantia nata est is it opinio, non posse and Elizabetham and Mariam
legitimas esse regni Haeredes.

Sed quaerit and urget qua Authoritate uxorem suam Catherinam repudiavit
Henricus?

Resp. Authoritate legis Divinae, judicio Ecclesiae Anglicanae, cujus erat
judicare de Matrimoniis infra Angliam initis, concilio sententia and
approbatione fere omnium Cordatiorum and Doctiorum istius aetatis prius
habitis. At qua Authoritate Mr M. damnat Reges and Reginas Angliae, aut de
eorum jure ad Regnum determinat, ipse respondeat.

Ad 24. Utrum laudanda sit sapientia Henrici Octavi, qui expulso uno Papa
Romano infinitos Papas ex subditis suscitavit?
Resp. Henricus Octavus expulit quidem Romani Pontificis usurpatam
jurisdictionem secundum veteres regni leges, nullum vero Papam ex subditis
suscitavit; supponit igitur quaestio falsum, and frivola est: nullus enim Papa
dicendus, nisi qui jurisdictionem universalem per Ecclesiam Catholicam sibi
vendicat: Quisnam e subditis Henrici id sibi unquam vendicavit? At permisit
Henricus illis Scripturam, an hoc est Papam suscitare? Quot Papas suscitavit
Christus, qui hoc omnibus premisit? At secundum privatum sensum Scripturas
interpretari cuilibet Henricus concessit: fallitur and falsus est Mr M. Nullus
enim rigidior submissionis in rebus ad Religionem pertinentibus exactor a suis
quam Henricus: Nemo qui cum sensum Scripturae quem pro Catholi^^ hab^bat ab
omnibus amplectendum sub majori poena Cur^vit. Neque si hominibus aures and
oculos resti^^isset in re Religios^, Papas suscitas^e aut Ecelesiasticam
Authoritatem subvertisse dicendus esset: quod absurd and ignoranter obji^iunt
Papicolae.

Ad 26. Si nefas sit mutare Religionem Parliamentaria Authoritate stabilitam,
unde licuit Elizabethoe Religionem evertere Catholica Regni legibus stabilitam?
Resp. Nefas est Catholicam Religionem quacunque Authoritate evertere; neque
Catholicam Religionem sed Romanam Elizabetha mutavit; quae vi and fraud
stabilita, jure totius regni and majoris and senioris partis Ecclesiae consensu
eversa est, odiosam enim sefallaciis ineptiis, tyrannide and vivicomburiis
innocentium reddiderat. Hinc facile ad abrogandas leges and civiles poenas
quibus ista religio ste^erat, Parliamentum semet accinxit: nec difficilius
(sancitis Canonibus Ecclesiasticis) reformatam Religionem stabili^e Ecclesiae
persuasum est. Nec aliter nec melius veritas stabiliti in nostris regnis
potest. Ejusmodi constitutionem and stabilimentum Romanae Religionis in Anglia
vel ipsius infallibilitatis jactura Pontifex redimeret: at sine vi, sine fraud
and fallaciis ut hoc fiat desperandum esse novit, and inde est quod in tot
facies se vertit.

At quaerit quomodo poterant jurare Elizabetham esse caput Ecclesiae, quando
non poterant jurare eum esse caput Regni?

Itane Petrus M. quam regnum, quam leges, quam nascendi jus, quam omnes orbis
Principes, and ipse tandem Papa pro legitima Regina habuerunt, solus pro spuria
impune rejiciet? Qui talia audet, perdidit cum religione frontem, and cum
sensibus and ratione ejuravit and omnem exuit sese modestiam. Fuit itaque
Regina caput Regni: ut vero caput Ecclesiae eam esse aliquis juraret, nec lex
jussit, nec in his verbis Eli^abetha exegit. Quatuordecim equidem Episcopos
fedibus expulit, and merito, ob recufatum ju^amentum primatus, quod ipsi
excogitavere, quod toties susceperant, and quod strenue sub patre and fratre
propugnaverant, sed non authoritate sua sola non ^^auditos expulit, ut Maria
Episcopos quibus suocesserant: neque recusantes igni ^remandos mandavit, ut
Maria; sed e contra leniter illos tractavit, illi^que uti vellent vivere
permisit, unde nihil contra Reginam moliti sunt, aut contra reformationem, cui
non conscientia sed pudore prohibiti, ut plurimum consentire noluerunt. Quod
vel ex eo colligi potest quod cum Episcopis in eorum locos surrogatis pacifice,
plerique vixerunt, neque alios praeter reformatos sibi successores constituere.
Abi tu and fac similiter.

Ad 27. No^^e Liturgiam suam suff^^atus est Cranmerus ex Missali, Rituali, and
Breviario Romana?
Resp. Reformatores primaevae puritatis studiosi non tam novam Liturgiam
condere, quam veterem restituere in animo habuerunt. Inde est quod quae vetera
erant, in illa adhuc manent, imo multa a vetere Gallicana Liturgia semel
utebantur hae Regiones, restituta in nostra Liturgia invenimus; neque ullum
officium in qua antiquae Liturgiae consentiunt, omisit Ecclesia nostra. An
Liturgiam itaque a novi^ additamentis purgare est illam suffurari?

Ad 28. Nonne juramento primatus tene^tur Protestants obtemperare Regi ut
supremo Gubernatori?
Resp. Rebellis est qui negat. At quid sibi volunt, haec verba, tam in omnibus
spiritualibus quam temporalibus? Resp. Explicari haec in Articulo 27. scill^^^
Regi soli temporalem gladium commissum esse: Ac proi^de omnes ^^ve (...) sint
five Civiles, in Offici^ co^tineat, and ^^^^tumaces and delinquentes Gladio
civili coerceat. Sive igitur Clericus sive Laicus sit qui civili Gladio
puniendus est, solus Rex est qui infligendi poenam istam habet potestatem: imo
etiamsi Clericus ille aut Laicus propter haeresin aut aliam quamcunque causam
quam maxim spiritualem ista poena esset mulctandus; neque hoc est omnimodam
obedientiam tam religiosam quam civilem Regi praestare: restat enim Ecclesiae
sua potestas spiritualis integra, nempe verbi, sacramentorum and spiritualium
poenarum distributio. Quicunque igitur excommunicandus est, propter quamcunque
causam, ab Ecclesia non a Rege est isti censurae subjiciendus. Satis igitur
constabit jurisdictio quam Regi tribuimus sine clavium potestate, totaque
secundum Articulum praedictum spectabit ad gladium civilem. Cum dicitur* igitur
Regem esse unicum gubernatorem, tam in spiritualibus quam temporalibus,
intelligitur illum esse unicum temporalem gubernatorem, cui jus gladii in
omnibus rebus tam Ecclesiasticis quam temporalibus competit, and qui solus
Judex est supremus, quando and quoties uti debet ea potestate. At concesso,
omnimodam obedientiam quae homini praestari potest nos illi debere, quomodo
sequitur quod infert* M. M. quod oportet nos cum Calviniano esse Calvinianos,
Arianos cum Ariano; Annon cives Romani totam istam obedientiam, quam per hoc
juramentum vendicarunt nostri Reges, Papae praestare tenentur? An igitur
oportet eos, cum Haeretico Papa aut Schismatico, Haereticos aut Schismaticos
esse; Quia Papa est unicus illis supremus gubernator, tam in omnibus
Spiritualibus quam temporalibus?

Nos vero quae Regis sunt Regi tribuimus, reservatis Deo quae sunt Dei. In
omnibus Regi vel passivam vel activam obedientiam praestare tenemur; and si
quando lis inter Regem and subditos orta fuerit an licitum sit quod imperatur;
necesse est quemlibet pro se Judicem esse: nec ulla hic fomes bellorum
civilium; id enim vitabitur si modo vel activa vel passiva obedientia
praestetur. Quod contra hanc Doctrinam assert facile diluitur (scilicet) tum
Regem non supremum esse sed Scripturam and statuta, non enim scriptura aut
statura sunt gubernatores, sed suprema regula secundum quam Regi est
obediendum. Ut vero quaestionem quaestione rependam, videat, An se tam facile
expediat; Si quando lis inter Ecclesiam and civilem potestatem orta fuerit,
quaero quis inter illas erit Judex? Si Papa investituras Episcoporum, verbi
gratia, immunitatem Clericorum, provisiones and appellationes sub censuris
decreverit, repugnantemque Regem excommunicaverit, quis de gravibus his causis
inter illos judicabit? assignandus Judex, nisi mavis illos in aeternum
altercari, quis quaeso erit Judex inter concilium Papale and Comitia Regum?

Ad 29. Cur Reformationem tam avide amplexi sunt tot Nobiles sub Elizabetha?
Resp. Nihil ad nos cur amplexi sunt, quidam Christum etiam ex invidia
praedicarunt. Sperabit vero meliora quilibet qui charitati non valedixit,
praesertim cum meminerit quot viros scientia celebres, concilio graves,
fortitudine claros, pietate insignis protulit ista aetas, qua neque prior
aliqua aetas felicior, nec quam posterior forte aequabit. Nulla tot viris
claruit quibus patria and respublica cordi erant, quibus ista vitiorum seges
ignota, quae praesenti aetati incubuit. Inimicus est Anglorum famae virtuti and
armis qui aliquid vel suggeret, quod tot heroum gloriae obesset; quorum virtuti
patria debet, quod supra Garamantas and Indos, and ad usque sydera nota est.
Novimus quid jam facit Nobiles, and e Nobilibus papicolas: spondeat ille pro
omnibus qui jam Papismum amplectuntur, and ego vicissim spondebo omnes Nobiles
sub Elizabetha non lucri sed Conscientiae gratia reformationem amplexos.

Ad 30. Cur plebs Anglicana novitatis avida odit Papismum?
Resp. Propter crudelitatem, falsitatem, tyrannidem and novitatem, quae omnia
nativo Anglorum genio repugnant; non enim (ut falso insinuat) Anglicana plebs
novitatis avidior quam quaelibet alia gens. At Religio est quibusdam, patriam
odio, patrios mores faistidio, and populares, calumniis prosequi: qui
peregrinorum morum and rituum miratores, quicquid externum est quasi verum and
vetustum magni faciunt. Illa enim religio, quaesensum and rationem naturalem
tollit, naturalem etiam in patriam and amicos affectum subvertit.

Ad 31. An Ecclesia Anglicana fallibilis ^it vel infallibilis?
Resp. Particularis Ecclesia licet in se fallibilis, quamdiu tamen se
observationi praeceptorum divinorum accingit, and mediis quae Deus illi
indulsit industry utitur, id est quamdiu veritas illi usui est, neque falli
neque fallere errore aliquo saluti pernicioso potest: idemque de quolibet
Christiano dicendum. Dum autem actu non fallitur licet fallibilis fundatur
super Petram; qui enim super eam fundatus non est, salvus esse non potest.

Ad 32. De Ligno Scientiae and Vitae, aliud responsum non meretur praeter verba
Christi, qui malum facit odit lucem, lignum scientiae non erat lignum vitae* at
in eodem Paradise simul consita sunt a Deo; quae conjunxit Deus maledictus qui
dividit.

Ad 33. Nonne in Ecclesia Anglicana desideratur versio Bibliorum multo
emendatior and correctior?
Resp. Versio Bibliorum Anglicana emendatior est vulgari Latina versione, licet
nihil est ab omni part perfectum. At non vult Romana Ecclesia emendatiorem,
sed nullam in vulgari idiomate vers^onem. An non praestat igitur, nobiscum
versione minus correcta uti, quam ^um Romany nulla? mentitur, ubi asserit in
versione nostr^ ^itiari textus, in favorem carnis, and gratiam schismatis: quod
productis ab ipso exemplis patebit.

Gal. 5. 17. Ut a nostris vertitur, nec favet carni, nec schismati. An favere
dicendus est carni, qui dicet hominem dum carne ducitur omnia quae vult
spiritus non posse facere: esto tum carni favebat Sanctus Paulus qui Romans 8. 7.
de Carne affirmat quod ^egi Dei non est subjecta nec esse potest, qui autem in
carne sunt Deo placere non possunt.

Dan. 4. 24. Caldaeis exact respondent unde nostra est versio, si igitur
conformis sit origini, non multum moramur vulgarem Latinam, cujus tamen non
alius sensus est in hoc loco, quam quem verba Anglicana ferant.

1 Cor. 7. 9. (...) de illis dicitur, qui sui potestatem non habent; ita
Sanctus Theodoretus, qui ad haec verba hac paraphrasi utitur, Sin autem
cupiditatis impetum far non potestis, sed ad sustinendum certamen imbecilli
animo estis, nulla lex prohibet qu^ minus Matrimonium contrahatis.

Item Sanctus Anselmus apud Lyram, Qui propter mentis imbecillitatem non
possunt continere carnis impulsionem, nubant.

Item Lyra, id est, Si donum continendi non acceperint a Deo.

Item Commentarius sub nomine Sancti Ambrosii, Quid si impulsu carnis
perseverare se viderint non posse: An hi omnes favisse carni and
schismatidicendi sunt, eo quod nostrae versioni astipulantur?

Idem dicendum est de Matt. 19. 11. (...), omnes non capaces sunt, vel propter
socordiam vel propter impotententiam, quid hoc ad indulgentiam carnis? An
Christus indulgebat carni cum sese explicans addit secundum vulgarem Latinam
(videlicet v. ejusdem Capitis 12.) qui potest capere, capiat?

Job. 7. 1. Exact Haebraeis verbis respondent, and si marginem inspicias,
Latinis.

Exodus 20. 4. Recte redditur ab Anglis interpretibus, nec a vulgari discrepa,
quae non idolum sed sculptile reddit: sculptile vero non melius Anglice reddi
potest, quam ut habent nostra Biblia; nec aliud per idolum intelligebant 70.
quam imaginem ad cultum fabrefactum: unde plurima exemplaria substituunt, (...)
Deuteronomy. 5. 8. idem igitur (...) nec aliter redditur a Callis and Italis, quorum
alteri in Catechismis vulgaribus reddunt Image Taillee, alteri Imagine Sulpita.
Ut videre est in Diario de S. Amor, Part 3. cap. 5. ubi haec ipsa quaestio
coram Cardinalibus discutitur: frustra igitur in versionem nostram insurgit,
qua dubium est an sincerior extat. Nihil adhuc momenti contra Ecclesiam nostram
protulit, si quid habeat proferat tandem; and Argumentis non quaestionibus, rem
agat. Meminerit enim quis sit, qui plures ejusmodi proponere posset, quam quas
facile solvat sapintior.

FINIS.

