THE CAUSE and CURE OF Offenses: IN A DISCOURSE On MATTHEW. 18.7.

BY R. Kingston, M. A. Prebendary of So^. and Chaplain in Ordinary to His
Majesty.

1 Cor. 10.32. Give no offense to the Jew nor to the Gentile, nor to the Church
of God.

Romans 16.17. Mark them that cause divsions and offenses, contrary to the
Doctrine ye have learned, and avoid them.

LONDON: Printed for Daniel Brown, at the Black Swan and Bible without
Temple Bar. 1682.

To the Right Worshipful SAMUEL ASTRY Esquire His Majesty's Coroner, and Attorney
in His Majesty's Court of King's Bench, and one of His Majesty's Justices of the
Peace for the County of Gloucester.
SIR,
THO I have so deep a Resentment of those many and extraordinary Favors which
you have been pleased to confer upon me, that I know it impossible to make any
proportionable retaliation, and think it would be also more than a venial sin,
to offer such a violence to Gratitude, as not to acknowledge them with all
Thankfulness; yet I must assure you and all the World, the Arguments which
prevailed with me for this Dedication, were fetched from Topics of a far
different nature. The Discourse is of a Pious and Public Concernment, and
therefore no other Patron could be more suitable, than one of such a Sober and
Well-tempered Zeal, and that with such a prudent care of the Public Peace and
common good adorn your Station, as all that know you must bear witness to.

The Cure of Offenses, and an endeavor to recover the Age from the Mischiefs
of Misunderstanding and prejudice, and settle it in a harmonious peace, and
united Devotion, will not go under any other Patronage, than of so Loyal a
Subject to his Majesty, a hearty well-wisher to the Doctrine and Discipline of
the Church of England, and one that by Inclination, as well as Authority, is an
enemy to all that of malicious wickedness offend against either.

Neither do I fear hereby to derive (from the most invidious person) any envy
upon you, or the imputation of flattery upon my self; since it is a well-known
Maxim, that Honor as a shadow flies the pursuer, but follows him close that
flies from it: and among thankful men, Desert will sooner be descried where it
obscures it self, and published with greater applause the less it is affected.

Sir, If these few and unpolished Papers, that in all Humility and
Thankfulness, and as a lasting Testimony of my due Respects I here offer to
you, may be serviceable to the Public, in reducing Dissenters to a Venerable
Esteem of our Church, and an unanimous embracing all its Holy Sanctions, I have
accomplished my end; and hope to obtain your pardon for making use of your Name
to countenance this honest Design: in confidence whereof, I shall never cease
to implore the Blessings of Heaven for your self, your Virtuous Consort, and
all your hopeful Issue; and take leave to assume the Honor of being

Worthy Sir, Your most Humble, Obedient, and thankful Servant, RICH. KINGSTON.

THE CAUSE and CURE OF Offenses.
St. MATTHEW. 18.7. Woe be to the man by whom the offense comes.


THE Disciples of the holy and blessed Jesus, hearing their Royal Master
discourse of his Death and Passion, Mark 9.31.
like Alexander's Captains, every man looks for a Seigniory: somebody they
think must be Lord-Deputy on Earth, when Christ is gone to his Glory; 34
and therefore ambitiously enquire, who should be the person dignified with
superiority in that Kingdom of the Messiah, which they supposed would now be
erected upon earth. One thinks his Merit shall prefer him; another, his
Intimacy; another, his Affinity; another, his Seniority: but our Savior, who
knew their Thoughts, and understood their unwarrantable Designs was after
worldly Gain, and secular Grandeur, drives them from that unhallowed inquest
with Words and Signs too. First,

35
With a Word of Admonishment, The greatest among you must be as one that serves:
and unless they lowred those aspiring thoughts, and abandoned their ambitions
designs after Greatness, they could not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; they
could not truly and indeed be his Disciples, or deserve the very name of
Christians. As if he had said, Should your Gifts and Graces prefer you, should
you obtain what you wish, and be the uppermost Garments in the mystical Body of
Christ; yet may you not contemn or despise your Underlings. But on the
contrary, the greater dignity you acquire, the more service will be expected;
the larger portion of Favor is bestowed, the higher Obligation lies on you to
be beneficial to others; for herein you comply with the grand design of eternal
goodness, who is unwilling the meanest person on earth should be lost, that
might with our indulgent and charitable methods be recovered to the knowledge
and exercise of Godliness.

The next warning is by a Sign. A little Child coming in his way, our Savior
sets him in the midst of his haughty followers; saying, Unless they became as
little Children in their innocence and unconcernedness, Heaven was no place for
them. As if he had thus reproved their sinful affectation of Dominion: You that
aspire to the highest place in my Kingdom, if you persevere so diametrically
opposite to the Laws of Christianity, the lowest Class will be too good for
you. And lest such eminent Grandees should scorn to take their Copy from a
Child's hand, he tells them in what esteem these Punies are with him; Receive a
little one, (says our Savior) and you receive me: offend a little one, and
you offend me. Beware then, whoever you are that pretend to belong to Christ,
that you make not the fall of others, steps for your selves to rise by: That
being great men, or having advantage by Authority, or the luckiness of
befriended Circumstances, that you wrong not, nor offend, the genuine Babes of
Christ, and instead of a temporal Happiness, incur an endless Woe: For woe is to
the man by whom the offense comes.

Which words are the denuntiation of a sad Curse against those that scandalize
or offend Christ's little ones: Yet notwithstanding our duty is so plainly
explicated and represented in Gloss, and Case, by the several Commentaries of
St. Paul upon this commination of our blessed Savior; the words being
misunderstood by the Ignorant, and misapplied by the Litigious, I hope it will
not be thought waste of time to explain them.

The Greek Grammarians tell us the word (...) properly signifies the Prop or
little piece of wood in a Trap or Pitfal, that supports the device, and being
touched lets it fall; Aristoph. Suidas Lexic. voc. (...).
but I suppose naturally has a more general Notion, and signifies any thing
that makes one halt, or limp, or that occasions a man to stumble or fall, from
(...) to halt, (...) as from (...) and such like; wherefore it is rendered
sometimes a Stumbling Block, that which in Hebrew (...), and St. Peter
expresses by another Greek word, (...) it denotes then any thing done by us,
whereby another is hindered in his course of piety, in his way to Heaven. So
that to scandalize or offend, is to discourage, grieve, or afflict them, to
stagger, and make them doubtful in their thoughts of Religion; and by our
Advice, or Example, to mislead them from virtuous courses, and to encourage
others in sinful practice.

What this Woe or Curse was which our Savior denounced against offenders, we
may easily understand by taking our measures from the sixth Verse: For our
Savior could not meet with a Metaphor near home to express the horror of his
indignation and resentment by: It seems the four Capital punishments used by
the Jews, (...) too ^aint colors to delineate his frightful figure with, and
therefore borrows a word from the Syriac Tongue, whose custom it was in
notorious cases to drown Malefactors; He that offends one of these little ones,
(says our Savior) it were good for him that a Millstone was hanged about his
neck, and be drowned in the depth of the Sea, (...), when the repeating the
same thing in two Synonymous words, much aggravates the sense. Thus
Aristophanes his Scholiast informs us, that the Grecians when they inflicted
this punishment, put a weight upon the criminals Neck: And our Savior, to show
how much he is offended at the offense given to his little ones, appoints the
weight to be a Millstone of the largest size, (...), Mola jumentaria, such a one
as was usually turned about by the help of Asses, which might sink him to the
lowest Abyss of misery.

Now this being compared with the words of the Text, it acquaints us, that the
heaviest Woe, the bitterest Curse, and the hottest place in Hell, is appointed
for the man by whom the offense comes. For though it must needs be that
offenses come, yet Gods wise permission of them does not hinder his just
vengeance upon them, as not laying any necessity upon the will of man, and
consequently not lessening his Guilt or penalty.

St. Jerome has told us, In Commentar. Matthew. 18.
that this doom pointed at Judas alone, by whose sudden and traitorous Plot,
as our Savior forewarned, all should be offended. But what need we settle it
upon one man, when the foregoing words tell us, that the whole world is full of
offenders, full of offenses; corporeal offenses, which holy David was beset
with, Traps, and Snares in his way; spiritual offenses, which the Prophet
Malachi spied, when men were made to stumble at Gods Law.

These are of two sorts; active, or passive: active, of themselves, or by
accident. Of themselves (...) when the work and intent both (...) vicious. So
by accident, when a good work appears evil, or fails in some needful
circumstance.

Passive offenses are taken or given. Given, by the broad offenses of others:
Taken, by our own Malice: One, the offense of the little ones; The other, the
offense of the Pharisees. The one attended with a vae, the other with a Sinite:
Woe be to those that give the little ones an offense; but if the Pharisee take
an offense where none is given, woe be to himself.

To lay open the terms in a word; the little one is a weak Christian; the
offense, an obstruction or impediment in the way of his Salvation; the woe, an
endless torment.

Now to rive this great Block in sunder, we shall find several pieces big
enough to stumble at; big enough to kindle an everlasting fire, to bring an
everlasting woe upon us: whether we consider the deportment of our Tongues or
our Lives, offenses are given by both.

I will begin with a mad Engine, that lies in a wet place, yet vomits fire. The
venom of other creatures are in their Tail, but the poison of man is in his
Tongue: There are men that have adders poison under their lips; Psalm. 52.4.
whose sole employment is in mischievous words; giving a loose to a dangerous
precipitancy, where they should use the curb of a religious restraint. St.
James out of our own mouths will inform us, that the least part of our selves
gives the loudest report. The Tongue is a little Member, but boasts great
things. Jam. 3.5.
If the Soul be puffed up with haughtiness, it is the Tongue that speaks
proud things; and when the thoughts are conspiring into a Mutiny and close
Rebellion, at last they burst out, With our Tongues we will prevail; who is
Lord over us? Psalm. 30.12.
To what unholy and irreligious purposes is that useful faculty of Speech
perverted, and that which was designed for the benefit of Mankind, become the
common disturber thereof? that we have great cause to conclude with St. James,
If any man offend not in word, Jam. 3.2.
he is fit to be accounted in the number of those that can inoffensively govern
the whole body. The fairest Garden is spoiled without an Hedge. Had our
Grandmother Eve but senced in her Tongue, she had not lost her Paradise, nor
bequeathed the unhappy Legacy of sin and misery to her Posterity. Job obtained
a victory over the Devil with silence: he that filled his body with Ulcers,
could not blister his Tongue, nor exasperate that unruly member to charge his
Creator foolishly. It Is the great policy of Satan, to continue our Vassallage
by the same methods by which he first procured it, viz. a phrenetick Garrulity:
we all fell, because Eve could not hold her peace; because she would say that
to her Husband, she had not learned of her God. When broad chinks and cranneys
are seen in the walls of our House, we begin to fear its downfall; and why do we
not as well the fatal Prognostics of unclosed Mouths? How many Christian-souls
have been crushed to death, yea, sunk down to Hell? How many a credulous Ear
has sucked offense in? how many Houses have fallen into discord and jars, for
want of stopping up the gaping chinks and cranneys of a wide Mouth? But that I
may be a little more particular, our Tongues are apt to offend, as in many
others, so chiefly in these things; either in the broaching of error, or the
concealment of truth, or in the rash publication of it; by vile Calumny, by
corrupt Counsel, by Flattery, or by Filthiness.

You see what a large Field I am got into, and how many stones of offense lie
about it: and though Solomon says, He that removes stones shall be hurt
therewith; Eccles. 10.9
yet I go on to prepare the way of the Lord and his little ones; beseeching you
all to remember that you are not at a Musick-lecture, to have your Ears
tickled; but at the Chair and Tribunal of Christ, to have your offenses
arraigned, to have your lives bettered. And now as I have been always careful
not to give offense by making a Satyr on any religious Party, the same method I
shall still pursue, as far as it consists with my duty toward God, the peace
and quiet of his Church, and the discharge of my own Conscience.

In the rank of offensive Tongues, I will first present you with the false
Prophet, the teacher of Lies, which causes many unstable Souls to err from
the faith once delivered to the Saints; the Priests (says Malachi) are
departed out of the way, and then no wonder that the People stumble at Gods
Law: some fat gobbet those spiritual Guides step aside for, and care not whom
they mislead for company. When Physicians design to purge a Sucking-child, they
command the Nurse, and not the Child to take the Potion, that with more safety
in the Nurses Milk the Child may receive the benefit of the Medicine. The Devil
is no less skilled in poisoning the Babes of Christ; for thus the two great
Clerks of Rome, the voluminous Cardinals, and their succeeding Jesuits, have
infused corrupt Articles into our common Creed, have taught people to shake off
obedience to their lawful Sovereign, and to expect Wreaths of Martyrdom for
bloody Assassinatious. It Is true indeed, they call us Heretics, and charge us
with Schism in departing from their Communion; but these calumnies will easily
be blown off, and like bullets shot against Heaven, fall upon their own heads:
for we withdrew not from them, till they gave the offense by departing from the
Catholic Faith. And to prove this, I need no other testimony than their
Tridentine Creed, which in those Articles wherein they differ from the Church
of England, is neither true, ancient, nor Catholic, but an entire Apostasy
from it, and without controversy, is the most Catholic, and greatest Heresy
in the Christian-world. View it first in their Doctrine of Transubstantiation;
an Opinion that upon due examination and choice, no man can embrace without
reproaching his Maker and Redeemer, by renouncing his very Reason and outward
Senses: For to make me believe that to be Flesh which I see and taste is Bread,
is to turn fool or madman; and for an unwarrantable Faith, forfeit both my
Reason and Sense: and by the same reason they would justify this fond and
absurd Notion, a man may as well believe the Picture of a man to be the man
himself. If the Church of Rome would lay aside their Fire and Faggot, (the
strongest argument that ever yet they brought to prove it) and tell us which of
Christ's Bodies it is that is corporeally in the Sacrament, whether his
glorified, or not glorified body, and clear it from all those monstrous
absurdities which that opinion is guilty of, they would greatly oblige us; for
till they have done this, they must give us leave to believe it a real and
substantial contradiction.

And notwithstanding Gods solemn prohibition against the worship of Images
delivered in fire, with Thunder and Lightening, on the Mount; Deu. 27.15
yet in a direct opposition, the Church of Rome command under dreadful
Anathema's, that religious worship be given to them. Jo. Azor. tom. 1. lib. 9.
c. 6.
Aquinas says, that the same Worship is to be given to the Image of Christ, as
to Christ himself: Sum. par. 3. q. 25. art. 3.
And this is avouch'd by Pedro de Cabrera super loc. to be the Doctrine of
their whole Church, and the contrary to be heretical. Zac. Bovir par. 2. reg.
1. p. 189.
Thus impudently sacrilegious dare they be, though the Scripture says, Cursed
be all they that worship graven Images, and boast themselves of Idols. Deuteronomy.
27.15.


Again, the Church of Rome forbids the use of the sacred Oracles to Laics,
Council. Trident. 22. Sess. c. 8. 9 Canon. Ind. expur. regul. 5.
and has therefore placed the holy Bible in the front of prohibited Books, and
Anathematized all those that should dare to translate it into any Language
vulgarly intelligible: and to strengthen this ungodly Decree, the Sons of that
Church have superadded many slight and undervaluing expressions, tending to
lessen the esteem of God's holy Word. One tells us, that if the Scriptures were
not strengthened by the authority of the Church, they were of no more value than
Aesops Fables. Vid. Chemnit. exam. de S. Canon, p. 47.
Another of their Authors (enriched with the same brazen modesty) says, that
the people were permitted to read God's Word, was the invention of the Devil!
Peris. de tradit. par. assert. 3.
Blush O Heavens, and be astonished O Earth, at such daring impieties! Tell it
not in Gath, nor in the Streets of Askelon, lest whole Christianity be
stigmatized for a delusion, through the wickedness of those that bear the world
in hand they are the only Catholic Christians.

The Doctrine of deposing Kings, disposing their Kingdoms, and authorizing
Subjects to destroy their lawful Sovereign, they not only stoutly deny even to
death, but accuse us of scandalizing both them and their Religion, in charging
the act of one man as a blemish on the whole Church. And for the more credit to
their charge, they vapor with a Decree of the Council of Constance, which (as
they say) forbids the murder of Crowned Heads. Council. Constable. Sess. 15.
It Is true, by this Council the Murder of Kings is covertly forbidden, but
tacitly implied; for it only makes the horrid act unlawful, where it wants
the Judges Sentence: But if his Holiness, or any General of an Order, sentence
them, it renders the proditorious act not only Lawful, but Meritorious. And
that this was but the opinion of one man, viz. Mariana, is a grand mistake; for
it is a Doctrine taught in their Schools, justified by their Practices, and
maintained in their Writings, as might be made appear from Ribadenira, Becanus,
Windects, Stapleton, and the rest of that lawless herd of Ignatian Casuists:
Nay, it is a Doctrine whose bloody hand can never be concealed, nor the stain
washed off from their Church, whilst the triumphant Oration of Pope Sixtus the
Fifth continues extant in the world, which he made to his Cardinals in the
Consistory upon the barbarous Assassination of Henry the Third of France, after
he was stabbed to death by Clement a Dominican Friar, assimilating it with the
mystery of the Incarnation and Resurrection, and with the acts of Judeth and
Eleazar. Again,

When Gerrard designed the Murder of the Prince of Orange, he had
encouragement, and blessing, from the Warden of the Friars at Tourny; and the
Jesuit his Apologist, says, That Gerrard did that deed, pour la bien de virtue!

Campian the Jesuit, having Command from Rome, and associated by William Parry,
conspired the death of Queen Elizabeth.

Gordon, Chreiton, and Abercany, Jesuits, plotted the death of King James; and
this traitorous design was forwarded by two Breves from Clement the Eighth: and
Cardinal Bellarmin calls Garnet, and his fellow Oldcorn, Martyrs, and for such
are Registered in the Jesuits Catalogue of Martyrs, Printed at Rome, 1607. Of
these sanguinary Attempts, I could give you instances usque ad nauseam; but for
the present let these suffice.

What has been said, I hope is sufficient to prove, that their bloody Tenent
of King-killing, is not the Opinion of one man only, but that some of all
Orders in that Church have bin guilty of it; and tho Charity may incline me to
believe, that many Loyal persons of the Romish persuasion, do abhor those
Jesuitical principles and practices, yet the Pope, nay, the whole Church cannot
be acquitted, till they have punished those Churchmen of his, who have
publicly abetted such treasonable Conspiracies, censured Mariana's, and such
other Books as have commended Regicides, to the great scandal of Religion; and
by his Pontifical decree, provided better for the safety of Kings, than his
College of Jesuits have: for till this be done, and they have given us as many
years experience of their Loyalty, as they have of their Treachery, 'twill be
of dangerous consequence to believe them innocent: For what faith, or trust,
can be reposed in those men, whose Church persuades them to be wicked, and
covers all their hell-bred Contrivances under the umbrello of Religion, which
does nothing else but give scandal to it, and bring upon themselves an endless
Woe?

Now having done with these killing Nurses, I could gladly break off this
unsavory Theme, but that there is another Sect amongst us, whose Poisonous
Doctrines are as baneful if we take not heed: It Is one of the present Troubles
we groan under; a proud company of male-contented Bablers (who are Priests of
their own making, and the sictitious Idols of abused Phancies), having imbibed
Seditious principles, from them unwary Zealots have sucked not the Sincere milk
of the Word, I will be bold to say, but a poisoned dose of Schism and
Prejudice. Thus the Stars fall from Heaven, the waters below are turned into
wormwood, and the drinkers dye. What mischievous offenses have overspread the
bosom of great Britain? What splenative rage, and opprobrious words, are cast
on the face of Authority? What stumbling blocks are daily thrown out, to check
harmonious Peace, and united Devotion, since troublesome, rebellious, and testy
Spirits were both indulged and applauded!

It Is now grown a necessary point of Purity, to muzzle Assemblies into Schism
and Faction, to snivel out a demure Lie, instead of a holy Doctrine, to vent a
Libel instead of a Use, to bring in suspicion that Thames and Tyber have joined
Channels, and that our Government, Rites, and Liturgy, are wholly Romish, or
Antichristian. With this sour milk the Babes of Christ are publicly fed, and
yet the Nonconforming Presbyters would be thought no Offenders.

The boisterous Thunders of Heaven strike not the top of Olympus; but saucy
Seducers are now found, that fear not to blast the height of Majesty, overthrow
the Seats of Superiority, and tear Allegiance out of the peoples hearts; and
instead of casting St. Peter's Net into the wild lusts of Mars, translate the
blessed Gospel of Peace into the iron language of Blood and War, Trouble and
Discord. Truly however such clamorous Zealots boast of the certainty of their
Election, Christ has marked them with a woe of rejection. Woe to those
barbarous Pilats that mingle blood with their Sacrifices; Woe to those furious
Sampsons that must have multitudes to perish with them; Woe to the Seducing
Prophet, by whom the offense comes.

But truth as well as error may occasion an offense; good Counsel, like the
Peach-tree, may bring forth poisonous fruit in one place, and wholesome in
another. The messages of Heaven are often compared to showers of rain, which
falling in due season makes a plentiful year; but scarcity follows unseasonable
showers: That which in one place avails, in another annoys; it inricheth our
fields, but dirtieth our streets. Woe be to those Clouds (says Bernard) that
send such showers, as make foul work among us, but bring forth no Fruit.

A word spoken in due season, and sit place, has an excellent savor; but when
both these are wanting, the audience goes away worse. Among others, there are
three ways of giving offenses, even in the publication of Truth. 1. Either by
scrupulous Doctrine, 2. By bitter Rebukes, or 3. By personal Invectives.


First, We have some that while they would be thought Solid, do indeed prove
but saucy Divines; on all occasions they are rushing into the hidden Secrets of
God, and perplex their weak people with the thorny mysteries of Election and
reprobation; a doctrine which is fitly ranked among those things that profit
being unknown: Not that I deny, but there may be excellent matter drawn from
such high Points; but the Brain must use her knowledge, as she does her
spittle, and vent no more of it, than may stand with the bodies welfare. The
bright countenance of Moses was vayled, when he was to deal with the people,
whose benefit he preferred before his own applause. It were far better men
obscured the light of their knowledge and learning, than that they should
display it to affright others, or dote about questions that breed envy and evil
surmises. There are in our Religion several Mysteries, and holy Scripture
contains many things above the reach of our quickest Capacities; and in nothing
more men give offenses, than in going about to explain Mysteries, and give an
account of such things, which themselves acknowledge to be incomprehensible.
And this is not my opinion only, but (what some men will think strange) it is
Mr. Calvin's also: for at the close of his Doctrine of decrees, he advises
Ministers to be very wary of proposing this Doctrine to the people, for fear of
giving them offense and disturbance: For if a man (says he) should come into a
Congregation, and thus bespeak them: Friends and Christians, I am here sent to
you to preach the Gospel; but I must acquaint you aforehand, that there are but
two or three among you, those (that are the Elect) that are like to be ever the
better for my Ministry; and as to the rest of you, there is Horribile Decretum,
a dreadful Bar in your way, that all the Preaching in the world can do you no
good; and the Ordinances of Christ, apply to them as you will, can never prove
available to your Salvation: His hearers would run out of the Church, and cry
the man were out of his Wits. This just resentment was extorted from the
Geneva-Oracle, by an ingenious reflection on his own Scheme, and the unhappy
consequence he foresaw it would produce; and I heartily wish his caveat might
be observed by his followers. For certainly it would conduce more to the Glory
of God, and the Interest of Christianity, if men would let those things that
are mysterious remain so, and employ themselves in promoting Justice, Honesty,
and serious Devotion; and instead of reprobating one another into the Regions
of darkness, to do offices of love and friendship one toward another, and
adorn the Doctrine of our Savior by our mutual good will, and serviceableness
to our brethren.

Secondly, Public Rebukes, (unless like Jonathans Rod they be dipped in honey)
offend all. The rough hands of Esau were unfit for Superiority. Sinners like
blind men must be led gently, not haled by violence. What gets the Merchant by
a Tempest? Who had not rather drink at a sweet Fountain, than a brinish Sea?
who raises a fallen man, that bows not himself down? sleepers ought to be waked
gently: for as frightful and violent rousings have driven many into wild
Lunacies; so wounded and broken hearts are cast into despair, profane ones
into fury and virulence, by the offensive harshness of a bitter reprover. St.
Chrysostom observes, (...), That too unreasonable, or importunate reproof, is
apt to make the Sinner first shameless, and then obdurate.

In the List of the Beatitudes, we are to be first Meek, and then Merciful: we
must be merciful to the Soul of our brother; but we must have the Spirit of
meekness in our selves first. To correct other men's offenses in anger, is to be
guilty of greater than theirs. How have those grim Orators forgot this, that
vomit nothing but fire and brimstone! that breath nothing but judgment and
condemnation! that thus unadvisedly skare distressed souls from the door of
Christ's mercy! The Jews have a saying, It were better we were cold in our
graves, than we should make our brother pale in a public assembly: Our
reproofs are allowed to glow with the ardent desires of our Neighbors
reformation; but if we suffer them to grow so hot as to blister the skin of his
Reputation, it is reproaching, not reproving. God Almighty, I am sure, has a
quarrel to those rigorous masters, that have not strengthened the diseased, not
healed the sick, nor bound up that which was broken; Eze. 34.4.
but instead of a pious condescension to their Infirmities, have by bitter
taunts encouraged them to presume, or frighted them to desperation.

Thirdly, Personal invectives offend all: our blessed Lord brought not his
Traitor upon the stage in public view, but deciphers him in general terms, One
of you shall betray me. St. Paul would have his Timothy to rebuke and entreat
all; but gives him no commission by a particular reflection to scandalize any.
We are Fishermen, and must cast in a common bait, without design to wound any
single person in the common esteem; lest instead of reforming his vices, we
give him a real offense, and make the sore rankle worse for being vanned with
the public Air. How ill-becoming is it then in our low-spirited predicants,
that choose a Text on purpose to begin a braul! and Raise a Doctrine to revenge
some Peccadillo on their silent Auditors! This is to Preach our selves, and not
Christ, and him crucified; to bring into contempt Gods sacred Ordinance, and to
make the more serious part of our discourses to be slighted, for blending our
little quarrels with the holy message, and driving on some design of our own,
under the mask of a more holy Employment. One would think the foolishness of
this Vice might obstruct a further progress: For it neither procures us
Friends, nor removes our Feuds; but on the contrary, enrages our enemies, and
makes them assume an unjust defense, rather than fall under a just shame. In
whatsoever Sphere we move, it is good neither to bite nor fawn, but rather
subscribe to him that said, Nolo minor me timeat, despiciatur major. An even
and humble carriage to all men, especially whilst dispensing the sacred Word,
makes men look like Ambassadors of Christ, and such whose Religion is not vain,
spending it self in idle and frivolous taunts, but is circumscribed within the
bounds of Charity, that will neither hear nor speak any thing that may directly
occasion an Offense.

Our blessed Savior restraining the hostility and murder of the Tongue,
threatens hellfire to them that call their brother fool. Meaning, that all
language which does really, and by intention, disgrace him in the greater
instances, is as directly against the Charity of the Gospel, as killing a man
was against the Justice and Severity of the Law: And although the Word it self
way be used to reprove the indiscretions and careless follies of an idle
person; yet it must be used only in order to his amendment, by an authorized
person, and within the limits of a just reproof, upon just occasion, and so as
may not do him mischief in the event of things. And though some men justify
their personal rebukes, from examples in Scripture, as from our Savior calling
his Disciples (...) foolish, and St. James using (...) vain man, the same in
signification with the forbidden Raca; and St. Paul calling the Galatians mad,
foolish and bewitched; and Christ calling Herod Fox, etc. Yet is their practice
not warranted hereby, unless it be done in the some manner, and with the same
mind: if it be for correction and reproof toward persons deserving it, and by
persons whose authority can warrant it, and this be done prudently, safely, and
usefully, it is not contumely; but when men upon all occasions revile an
offending person, lessenning, sowring his spirit and his life, despising his
infirmities, tragically expressing his lightest Misdemeanour, being
tyrannically declamatory and intolerably angry for a trifle: These are such
who, as Apollonius the Philosopher said, will not suffer the offending person
to know when his fault is great, and when it is little: For they who always put
on a Supreme anger, or express the least anger with the highest reproaches,
make no difference between him that robs a House, and him that breaks a Glass.
Non plus oequo, non diutius oequo, was a good rule for reprehension of sinners.
He that reproves too long, does reproach and harden the Offender; he that does
it too bitterly, betraies his own anger, and is guilty of railing; if too loud,
he is immodest; if too public, he is unmanly; and if too personal, he is
imprudent, for no clamorous person can be wise. The cure of which evil consists
in following St. Paul's Exhortation, Let all bitterness and clamor be put away.
Spare the person, but not the sin; for he carries a witness in his bosom, that
tells him he is the man against which the arrow of reproof is shot; whereas the
opposite dealing will rather shame the sinner, than amend him. Voe increpanti,
Woe to the bitter reprover by whom the offense comes.

Fourthly, Yea, and non increpant too; our very silence may give an offense:
But one Erring man is winked at, says Origin, and the whole Church is wounded.
What mercy is this, to dispense with one, and to destroy all! How ost is all
Israe^ punished for the fault of one Acha^ Concealed enormities imply a
permission that encourages to perpetration; and now that which might have been
blown away with a word is grown a rooted example. Suc^ Prophets had Jury in
Isaiahs time that smoothed up the people in lyes^ Prophets that should have
bee^ Heads, and indeed were nothing bu^ Tayls; nothing but tails to cover
filthiness: Isai. 9.15.
Or as Ezekiel amplifie^ Ezekiel. 13.4.
that homely Caracter, They were grown Foxes with great tails, as sit as could
be to hide or wipe away the noysomness of a sinning people, as Foxes with their
dangling singles do their filth, that they may not be sented by their loud
threatening enemies. O Mercenary wretch, says St. Augustine, thou saw a Wolf
endangering the Flock of Christ, and rannest away! How ran I away? will some
old Levite reply, that sticks faithfully to his Glebe and vails; why, here I
live, here am I Canonically resident; how do I run away? That Father will tell
you, you are then fled, when your lips are sinfully closed; when either to keep
a commodious friend, or to shun a furious enemy, some lewd man shall be let
alone in his impieties. How many luxurious wantons might have been chaste and
regular? How many in whom the sparkling Canary has drowned Reason and Grace,
might have start up rigid Paterns of Temperance and Sobriety! How many gripple
Mammonists might have become renowned Miracles of Bounty, if some holy and
wholesome tongue had given a timely assault, and come in to the rescue of the
precious Image of God, so miserably defaced by an unchristian connivance? But
on the contrary, that which is our shame, and should be our sorrow, we suffer
Gods Name to be dishonored and blasphemed, Christ's body to be torn and mangled
afresh with Oaths, and his truth impaired with impious Absurdities, yet never
open our mouths in their vindication! What preposterous madness is this! should
our friends Coat but sit disorderly on his back, we would presently rectify
the immodish error: But his life is wretchedly debauched and dissolute, and we
never stop him in this dangerous Carreer. Is not the Soul of more worth than
the Raiment? this at most but an unfashionable blemish, but the other fearful
and extremely perilous. Might not the Jew suffer the beast of his Neighbor to
fall and perish; and shall we suffer the Soul of our brother to be undone to
all eternity? God forbid; let us rather by good advice, snatch them as brands
out of the fire. And this is a duty not confined to those of the Ministerial
Function only, who must needs want the frequent and requisite opportunities,
but indispensibly incumbent upon all men who fear God, and wish the good of
humane Souls.

Easy observation will make it apparent, that the neglect of this Duty has
caused the greatest degeneracy in Christianity, and made Religion esteemed the
most inconsiderable part and end of our lives: That general remisness visibly
in Piety, is chiefly, if not wholly, to be attributed to this sort of slavish
Compliance, which even Conscientious men are too apt to admit of, in relation
to other men's vices; by which they receive a current stamp and approbation,
whilst a prudent reproof would certainly work a Shame, if not a Conviction in
the sinner. Now this unfriendly and unchristian Custom, is usually warranted
upon the pretended Civility of the Age, and Freedom of conversation, which
allows every man an uncontrollable privilege of living his own life: And then
it must be no less than rudeness and impertinence, to introduce any religious
Cautions. Indifferency here makes the best company; and any reluctant dislike
of Sin, spoils and disturbs it: And so Christ himself must now be excluded, as
an unfit Companion for Publicans and Sinners. All concern for his Honor must
out of civility be disclaimed, even by his own followers, because to the Jew he
is a stumbling blook, and to the Greek Philosopher foolishness. As the
transcendent Graces and Gifts of Gods holy Spirit are almost levelled with
moral Virtues, so those Gospel-duties, such as the fear of death could never
yet dispense with, must now be restrained and limited, by the rules of a
pretendedly civil, i. e. a licentious Conversation. Nay, so far has this
endearing and obliging humor prevailed, that men are afraid to stand up in the
Cause of God, lest they should affront his Enemies; but must live in constant
rebellion to their own Consciences, on the petty obligation of Civility and
Manners falsely so called: Whereas according to the rule of good Manners, that
is certainly the highest rudeness, to dare to appea^ irreligiously in the sight
of them tha^ have by a solemn and sacred Vo^ engaged themselves in a contrary
Profession. For as in civil matters, to conceal Treason includes an equal
guilt, and is obnoxious to the same punishment with the actual offense: So in
this case also, he that does not reprehend a sinner, is little less than a
cringing assistant to another debauchery. For shame therefore, my brethren,
let it not be said of you, that you love the Society of wicked Wretches, better
than the blessed Fellowship of Angels; and that you had rather hear your God
and Savior abused, than disturb your hellish company: and will hazard the
damnation of your souls, out of Courtship to the Devil, rather than be counted
absurd among unreasonable men. It was this filled the soul of Isaiah with
amazement and horror, if the Fathers construe him right: Woe unto me, says
that generous Seer, because I am a man of unclean lips: Isai. 6.5.
He cannot praise God with the singing Seraphim, says Jerome, because his lips
are unclean, and their foulness arose from hence, that they had not faithfully
reproved wicked Vzziah. All Ely's personal holiness is eclipsed with the guilt
of those heinous Transgressions he winked at.

The Prophet Hosea exhibits a complaint against a sort of Priests, Cannibals
rather, that eat up the sins of the people: Hos. 4.8.
for as the Viands we eat, after a short digestion become our own flesh and
blood; so the Sins of the people which we smother and palliate, being thus
swallowed, become our own. The sacred Ministers of Justice, in what Orb soever
they shine, will easily apprehend how much this Lesson concerns them,
especially in this dismal Juncture of public affairs; and permit me (not as an
imperious Dictator, but) as an humble Suppliant, to ^ntreat you to remember
that the sins of others, which you labor not within your powers to prevent,
are yours in the guilt, as well as those of your own personal commission: and
the exercise of Lenity in grand Enormities, brings a woe upon your own heads
For to justify the Wicked, and condemn the Righteous, are both alike to God
Have a care therefore, you earthly gods, that you give no Indulgence o^
Countenance to that generation of Vipers, that would be poisoning the Cups of
sacred Monarchs, and thrusting their stings into the innocent hearts of
merciful Princes, or sucking the Royal blood of their lawful Sovereigns. And as
you have any love or regard for that Religion which is pure and peaceable,
truly Ancient, Catholic and Apostolic; or any abhorrency to that enchanting
City fully of Idolatry, Superstition and Blasphemy; any concern for the safety
of his Majesty's Person, Crown and Dignity, and your own Freedom and Property,
that you would vex those Midianites that trouble you with their wiles; and
correct those Amalekites which conspire the ruin of our Israel, and endeavor
once more to make England, Issachar like, couch under the burden of a Romish or
Phanatick Vassalage, It Is as manifest as the Sun on the Meridian, that the
mischief, intended is acted with two hands, (as the Prophet most emphatically),
the best of which is a Bryer, and the most righteous of them sharper than a
Thorn-hedge; Mic. 3.4.
which gives us cause to implore the assistance of both arms against them, the
strength of the Brachium seculare, to be added to our weaker Ecclesiastical
coertions, to manacle those mighty men in outrageous Wickedness, who every
where confront not us, but God, in open Rebellion or private Treachery, in a
Conclave or a Conventicle. Does the Sun in his imagined Progress meet with
Constellations full of venom and irregularity? their hurtful malice is
corrected by his beneficial Rays: Does he meet with benign and temperate
Planets? they have strength and influence added to them by that Superior
Light. What do we look for from the Superior Powers, but the approbation and
encouragement of the virtuous Stars, and the Cure and Correction of the
Malignant? And here I cannot but complain of those Stumbling Blocks that stop
the course of Justice; Our Constables Assize and Session blanks, and our
Churchwardens Visitation bilks: Oh abominable partiality! they that are
always inveighing against the Times, to indulge the petulancy of a mistaken
Zeal; and come forth all the year with eager Complaints against those that sit
at the Helm; they that are daily bellowing out their Discontents, and
arraigning their Governors failings; they that find all things amiss in the
management of public affairs; when themselves are inspected (and it lies in
their power and office, by virtue of the solemn Oath of God, to redress these
grievances, by presenting the Offenders to the cognizance of their Superiors)
like surly Elephants endure no representment of their ugliness, not the least
aspersion of a disorder. Abroad in the Church or State, they will tell you
nothing is right; but on their own dunghills, in their own Parishes, or
Constableries, omnia been, all is as it should be. Thus these poor Officers
plunge themselves into Perjury, for fear of some frowning Sir; and disoblige
their Consciences, because they will not displease their Neighbors; and by
concealing past offenses, bring them into a custom, which no vigilance can
remove. Voe silenti, woe to the silent Tongue by whom the offense comes.

Fifthly, And now Calumny follows with her mouth full of Poison, ready to blast
and offend all. As Timothies Pipe enkindled the rage of the fighting
Macedonians, so spleen and hatred are stirred up, with the railing accents of a
malevolent Tongue. The spies of Canaan, as an honest Rabbin observes, did but
discredit the trees and the ground, and the stone-walls, and a thousand
mischiefs ensued: how many evils may we then think do they bring on themselves
and others, who sharpen their tongues to wound and disgrace men! When our
Savior asked his Disciples what men were wont to say of him, had they been
addicted to the vice of raising quarrels, they might a replied, One calls you a
Demoniac, another a Samaritan, another a Wine-bibber; these are the goodly
Characters you get from a thankless people: But these harsh and approbrious
titles are kept from his ear; they tell him nothing but their good words; One
calls you John Baptist, another Jeremy, another some great Prophet. The lips of
Christ's Spouse are like a thread of Scarlet; yea, indeed, like that Scarlet
thread which Rahab tied to her window, not to strangle any, but save all. The
lips of a true Christian are tied with such threads as prevent mischief, but
breed none. It would be well done of our shrill Dames, and imperious Women, to
think a little on Rahab, and keep their houses unhurt with the Scarlet thread
of silence and modesty. We should not then have our ears filled, and our hearts
wounded with domestical brauls; we should not have groundless and rancorous
tales so current among us; we should not have every small spark made a mountain
of Aetna, if this Scarlet thread of Silent and Modesty Charity were but
religiously fastened to the door of our lips. But Grave and Good men, for ought
I see, are as ready to over-lash, as that weak Sex; and let me tell them, such
offenses are worst. A ball of wool or leather hurts not where it lights; but a
bullet spit with violence from the mouth of a Canon, causes Towers and Bulwarks
to moulder into dust: So men of gravity being once heard to bolt out rash and
unjust Verdicts, the weak Christians that cannot judge must needs stumble. How
has the cankered mouths of some demure Levites, who had first got a reputation
of singular Sanctity, blasted the face and form of our renowned Church,
inslam'd peoples hearts with a rude and spightful Opinion of the Reverend
Prelates set over them! How have these great Wheels set the lesser a going,
that now too many Families are become houses of Inquisition, when every Notch'd
Idiot will as freely as falsely talk of those men, in whose aweful presence
'twould be sawciness for them to speak at all without permission. The Bible
these holy Railers seem to hug, has told them, if a Ruler be reproached, a
bird of the air (which Hugo the Cardinal thinks is an evil spirit) shall accuse
them of it; and that if they inure their Tongues to speak evil of Dignities,
and despise Dominions, they are filthy dreamers, not true Disciples. Our Lord
has put cases of an offending eye, and hand, and foot, but we hear nothing of
an offending head; That, says Cajetan, challenges more regard, than to be
profaned by any vulgar breath, or to be censured by any thing under Heaven.
How much then they are to be reproved, that in their Conventicles set their
lungs to sale to encourage Sedition, and promote a new Rebellion by justifying
the last; I leave it to God and their own Consciences to judge: but it makes me
very suspicious they are of the same spirit with Diotrephes; (for there is a
strange temptation in being a Head, or Ruler, though but of a Faction) and that
their constant belching such malicious words, disloyal glances, and
uncharitable reflections against their lawful Superiors, proceeds from that
ambitious love they have to Pre-eminence; which slains their Zeal with such an
aversion to those Humilities and due Submission they owe to others.

Methinks it is mischief enough in the busy tales of Detraction, that ill
opinions are bred by it, Unkindness fostered, Charity quenched, and Jarrs
raised that many times end in Blood, that we need not add to it the displeasure
of an enraged Deity. Solomon tells us, There are six things the Lord hates, and
the seventh he counts a foul abomination. Pride and Bloodiness, and wicked
Imaginations, were hateful enough; but there is yet a worse, a more abominable
thing, a scandalous Babbler, a sower of Discord among brethren: this shall be
laid in our dish in that terrible Judgment, that we sat like grim Judges, and
spoke harshly against our brother, and slandered our mothers son. This is a
fruitful, though a foolish Vice. For through the help of the Devil, and our
corrupt Nature, whenever we have a mind to throw dirt at one another, there
is enough to be found in every street. The Apostle tells us, In some things we
offend all. Which renders it the greast imprudence imaginable, for him that
has a house made of glass, to throw stones at his neighbors windows, when the
slightest requital will quickly demolish the brittle Fabric of his own
Reputation. Alterius dictum aut factum ne carpseris unquam
Exemplo simili ne te derideat alter.
And however we set a grave look upon it, as if we had done nothing amiss;
however our own Oracles please us; however we rise up from our garrulous Bench,
forgetting the mischief is done both to the audience and accused; Yet the
severe Judge of Heaven and Earth will call us to a strict account, and make us
at last see the foulness of that Vice we accounted none; and then voe
detrahenti, Woe be to that man by whose detracting tongue the offense comes.

Sixthly, Pernicious counsels are Offenses of the Tongue also, and as gross and
spreading as any. Sin is then grown to a fearful height, when it delights to
spread its infection; when the lewd man takes up his seat in the Chair of
Pestilence; when like a Doctor of the Chair, those evils that he practices
himself, he seeks to teach others. The Spirit of God finds fault with the
Church of Pregamus, that she had a sort of men that held the Doctrine of
Balaam; upon the naming of which, some will think, says Origin, there were
some in St. Judes time that studied the Black Art, some profound Wizzards that
pretended the hidden skill of that old Serpent. No, that man teaches the
Doctrine of Balaam, that follows his example in persuading unwary souls to the
commission of scandalous Actions. It was Balaams bad counsel, that laid the
fair women of Moab as stumbling blocks before the People of God. Seducing
persuasions, which either stumble us in the ways of Goodness, or lead us into
a vicious course, (and so pull the wrath of God on our heads) these are the
Doctrines of Balaam. Thus the Serpent seduced Eve, and she Adam: Thus Solomon's
wives turn his heart from God, and crafty Achitophel puts Incest into Absolons
head: Thus a litigious wretch that has undone himself in Suits of Law, lies
like a gloing coal ready to kindle others; for none proves a deeper knave, than
a spent fool. Thus the corrupted Advocate puts Lies and Perjury into his
Clyents mouth, for the maintenance of an unjust Cause. Thus furious Revengers
bring in Seconds, to embrue their hands in blood: Thus Country- Tiplers are
grown Rashers and Anchova's to one another: Thus one Sacrilegious Cormorant,
the Bell-weather of the Parish, encourages another, and he a third, to a
concealment of the Churches due! How fearful and lamentable is it to conceive
what a deal of this scandalous Ware is openly vended in City and Country! How
the gripple Shopman nurtures his Apprentice in a Trade of Lies: how the
ravenous Cheater draws on his landed Novice to Dice and Drabs: How one cries
out with Solomon's Ruffler, Come, let us take our sill of love till the day
break: another, Come, let us lay wait for blood: another, Let us lurk privately
to undo the Innocent; let us join purses, and find out the strong drink, and
continue till night at the wine-boles.

How would the King take it, should War and Tumul arise, to have his own Guard
enticed from him, to serve on the Enemies side! we are by Baptism become of the
household and retinue of God, and shall we make it our study to pluck his
Servants away from him, to corrupt his household with traitorous counsels, and
persuade them to serve on his Enemies side, and not look for a furious revenge,
not so much as a rebuke from our Ministers mouth? Truly 'twould be
well-pleasing to us, that we might always come to you as the gracious Heralds
of Peace: But Christ Jesus has given us an example, to thunder in such a Case
as this, to ring it aloud in the terrible Ruffians ear, Voe male consulenti, Woe
be to the man by whose pernicious counsel the offense comes.

Seventhly, How have I forgot that tempting Siren, whose enchanting Songs lulls
incautious Mariners into a sound sleep, while their Vessel splits upon a Rock!
That crafty Panther, whose odoriferous breath enticeth herds of Cattle after
him to their own destruction; I mean the smooth and flattering Tongue, by which
the Offense comes. As the Shellfish is mounted alost in the Eagles Pounces, to
be shattered with the greater fall: So frail men are highly extolled by their
pick-thanks, but it is to tumble them down into a depth of Sin. The precious
balms of ungodly men have a secret dose of Poison in the composition; that
Oleum peccati and Oleum veneni, are used promiscuously in the Hebrew Dialect.
Now as dogs pursue their game best, when the huntsman excites them to sport and
courage with his voice: so wicked men run more eagerly into vicious courses,
when they are encouraged to it by their obsequious Flatterers. It Is now
nick-nam'd a point of good Manners, a token of Humility and Gentleness, to
sooth and applaud men in Vice and Vanity: and he that basely stoops not to
those inhumane appliances, shall be reported Proud, Peevish, and Envious. But
know your friends, know your enemies better, whosoever you are that love to be
tickled with the glosing tongues of parasitical observers. To steal our
Houshold-provision were a gross theft; but to be robbed of our Seed-corn, was a
worse damage. What are our inward affections, but seminaries of all the
goodness can be derived from us? Now these affections are stolen and spoiled,
when oily tongues, to endear themselves, and patch up the rents in tattered
fortunes, shall so egregiously abuse us, as to think well of our own
enormities, and pursue what we should most abhor. What can mischief us more,
than the pilfering of our hearts, and depraving our inclinations? for by this
means the very Seeds of Grace are risled away, and we are left barren (like the
Fig Tree) to the curse of an incensed Judge. Woe be to them that call good
evil, and evil good; that put light for darkness, and darkness for light. Vae
Adulanti, woe to the flattering Tongue by which the offense comes.

Eighthly, And may we not rank those in the List of Vocal Offenders, from whose
unsavory Jests, lascivious Songs, and scurrilous Pens, balls of Wildfire are
cast abroad to inflame others; whose Bills, like tame Ducks, are ever dabling
in stinking mud? How is our tuneful Melody scandalized with debauched Airs; the
harmless recreative Instruments of Music, transformed into the Engines of
Mischief, our entertainments fly-blown with and loose and abusive Catches! I
hope none will be so uncharitable to think I conclude all under Offenses that
musically recreate themselves, and delight others; no, for Gods people may be
merry within the limits of filial duty: it is the abuse only that I declaim
against, who am of Aristippus's mind: In libri Patris Sacris,
Men's quae pudica est nesciet corrumpier.
But these empty sounds vanish into Air, and reach but to few; we have found a
way, with the publication of obscene Pamphlets, to make our offenses Eternal,
and are become universal Bauds to the whole world. Cupid is Crowned a Laureat,
and that unchaste license which has been expunged and hissed at in Heathen
Poets, is hugged and applauded in Christian. The Jews have a saying, that when
Scurrility is heard without, the door rots; the door! nay, the Audience rather;
for rotten communication is the quickest corrupter of good Manners.

Can we think Almighty God bestowed our breath on us to no other purpose, but
to blast his Image? Can we think our Creator intended us for nothing else, but
to be the Devils bellows? Oh woeful merriment, that afflicts our God, and
grieves his Spirit and holy Angels, to make sport for the Devil and his
infernal Crew! Let no evil commnication, says the holy Apostle, proceed from
you mouth; and presently adds, Grieve not the Spirit of God. Go now, unhappy
drols, and think to delight your fond admirers with an obscene Jest: but
remember, that truly Religious hearts are grieved; nay, the Spirit of God is
grieved with those that thus hazard their souls, to purchase the reputation of
Facetious Blateroons. Has Christ pronounced weeping and woe to them that laugh
now: How then can they think to escape, that do not only admit, but cause and
further this vain and frolic excess. Oh lamentable and heedless folly! to
kindle a wanton delight in some loose heart, to feed a lascivious ear, and make
our company merry, we bring on our souls a sorrowful woe. Voe turpiloqui, woe
to the scurrilous Tongue by whom the offense comes.

Ninthly, Derision and Mockage is the last offense I shall arraign in the
Tongue: For, O foolish Galatians, who has bewitched you! says the chosen
Vessel. As the grumbled Charm of a Witch, some think will strike dead a little
child, so the goodness of a weak Christian, with every breath of derision is
almost blasted. How little a thing stays a boat on the river, and startles a
horse by the way-side! no less easily are we detered in a course of Goodness.
Some frail disordered man has the symptoms of a growing Cure upon his Soul,
has mewed off his sick feathers, and now begins to startle at his former
excess; to forbear his brain-shaking Cups, and hell-invented Oaths; has tied up
his Tongue to the good behavior, and imposed on his Conversation the strict
Rules of Religion: and now the fleering drunkards make Songs upon him; the
scorns and taunts of his old Mates lie in his way, and he falls again upon the
same rock of offense. Another is mildly disposed, and would wink at a wrong,
but hot-spurs are hissing his pusillanimity; he shall be marked out for a
Coward and Milk-sop, that dares not incur the guilt of a spontaneous Murder, to
gratify some beastly humor. Should a sort of poor Christians be redeemed from
the Turkish Gallyes, what would we think of him that should endeavor to betray
them again to their old servitudes? Is a soul loosed from the power of Sin and
Satan, what a horrid villainy is it to ensnare it again into that Captivity!
Whosoever he be, that thus nips the buddings of Grace, like the cruel
Egyptians, he does but strangle the Hebrew Babes that God would have preserved;
and like Tyrannous Herod, put Christ to death, when he is first conceived and
born in a regenerate heart. But the most degenerate sort of scoffers, and dregs
of mankind, are those that scoff at Religion, and deride our hopes of another
Life, as the Phantasms of a melancholy Priest, or the Politic stratagems of
some cunning Statesmen, to keep people in awe. We are cast into the very
Dog-daies of Atheism and Ungodliness, and live among those which scoff at such
things that are most Sacred and to be trembled at. Oh the frequent darings of
Divine Vengeance, that continually pierces our ears, and wounds our hearts! and
those vented in such direful expressions, that the most deeply damned in hell
could never be guilty of worser. Wonder not if this be the Cordolium of all
that are religiously sensible in the land, if it puts them into the weeping
Prophets Iliaca passio, My bowels, my bowels, I am pained at the very heart;
for it is enough to raise a paroxysm of grief and indignation in the holy
Apostle, and make the hearts of good men sink and dye in them, to see how
prodigiously lewd and impudent men are grown. Yea, those dull souls who are
insipid and dreggy on all other arguments, are by the Devils, and the
Leviathans help, grown eloquent in abusing God and Religion, to magnify their
abused Corpuscularean Philosophy.

Tell them of a God, and they laugh aloud at your folly, who are so tame and
childish to believe what you never saw; and pity your ignorance, for being
deluded by the men in black, into the melancholy thoughts of Religion.
Democritus and Epicurus are polite Authors, and in better credit with such,
than Moses, St. John, or St. Paul; and Hobs's borrowed Hypothesis, than the
sacred Volumes of the Old and New Testament. Quis fando temperet a lachrimis?
They can solve the Phoenomena of Nature, without the allowance of a Deity; and
derive the worlds Original from a Fortuitous concourse of Atoms. Thus these
imperious Atheistical Dictators, boast themselves the only men of Learning and
Discretion; stigmatizing all others, as ignorant Rusticks, and illiterate
Buffoon's, that have nothing of generosity, who dare not set their mouths
against Heaven, and defy the Authority of their Maker. Now to blunt the edge
of this scoffing Wit, which boasts of so easy a Victory over despised
Christianity; Pray consider, that their only argument is taken from Sense,
unless they enforce them with Oaths, the usual Graces and Ornaments, and the
only proof they have for such wild discourses; and are to be pitied and prayed
for, but not disputed with, lest we spread the contagion, having to do with
such as had rather loose Heaven, than live soberly; and have no other reason
why the say there is no God, but because 'twould be well for them there was
none. It Is a strange delusion that has infatuated these absurd Animals, that
they dare sport with the flames of Hell, in scoffing at God and Goodness, and
the same moment startle at their own Shadow, frighted with the noise of
Thunder, and are as fearful of being alone in the night, as other vermin are
of light and company. O quam multos dominos habet, qui unum non habet! Every
surprising accident skares them from their Principles; there being nothing more
evident, than that the greatest Atheist is always the most notorious Coward.
Thus we read of Antiochus, when he enjoyed the constant series of a smiling
fortune, boasted himself Superior to God himself; but when the inconstant
Goddess withdrew her Beams, and appeared unto him under a cloud of Troubles, he
changed his note; for having received a fall out of his Chariot, and his
insolency curbed by an immediate blow from Heaven, he could say then, as too
many of our Atheists do upon the assault of a disease, and the fears of death
(Pray God it be not then too late) Justum est hominem mortalem subditum esse
Deo. It is meet and requisite for mortal men to be subject to the immortal God.
Tell me, I pray you, that pretend to be so great masters of Reason, whether
it is not more agreeable to the principles of right Reason, to believe a God,
than deny it; if so, then give over (ye men of sense) those sordid
extravagancies, that render you Clowns to Heaven. Burlesk no more upon God, nor
cast disgrace upon the holy and blessed Trinity: For if frail man compacted of
infirmities is so jealous of his Honor, that (by the commands of Hell) he
thinks himself obliged to duel him that stains it; How will God Almighty be
jealous in taking vengeance against such as blaspheme his Godhead, neglect
their own Salvation, and choose rather to venture their whole Happiness in
gratifying their corruptions, than provide for their own Safety by examining
their groundless surmises? And you that have better learned Christ, be
entreated t^ shun the Society of such scoffing Atheists, who would laugh you
into eternal mourning, and mock you from the exercise of Piety, till the Dev^
claim you by Prescription. By (...) stratagem or device has the Devil^ much
disheartened from Religion, an^ afflicted men for it, as by Scoffers, wh^ make
themselves the main promote^ of his Cause, and advancers of hi^ Kingdom: by no
methods has the Devil more instructed those tha^ would be bad, and discouraged
other^ from being good, than by these accursed instruments of Cruelty. When the
Jews could not withstand the miraculous coming of the Messiah any other way,
they took shelter in a taunting proverb, Can any good come out of Nazareth?
When the convincing power of Miracles had proclaimed his Divinity, and the
Works that Christ did had declared he was the Son of God, they had no way to
prevent believing on him, but Is not this the Carpenters Son? Thus also fares
it with Religion, that they who have their minds estranged from it, from thence
take an occasion to scorn and deride it. But if nothing else can persuade you
to rise out of the Chair of Pestilence; See the examples of Gods Judgments upon
Scorners: Ishmael mocking Isaac, was banished the pleasant land, and exposed as
a prey to foreigners: Michal mocking David for dancing before the Ark, was
punished with the sorrow and shame of barrenness. Machivel that mocking
Atheist, dyed in the prison of Florence; and Julian that made Christianity a
derision, expired in a most hideous and cruel manner. Nothing is more just and
equitable, than for the impudent in sin, to be dashed out of countenance, and
to be beaten with their own Weapons; for the Lord scorneth the scorners, and
will mock at their Calamities when they come, who mocked at God before they was
inflicted: take heed therefore you offend none of God's little ones, those that
begin to taste sweetness in the Word of God, and the promises of the world to
come; but rather strengthen the weak hands, and the feeble knees, and encourage
all men in the way of Goodness. But Changelings sometimes pass for the Babes of
Christ, and while I am pleading for the Righteous, I would not patronize a
counterfeit in the ways of malice and disobedience, in the ways of guilt and
dissimulation, (which many now take for the straight paths of Christ). I think
we do well to stop your course, and to deride your deviation: but far be it
from us to retard you in the ways of Jesus, the good old way wherein you may
find life for your Souls; the ways that are strewed with Love, Peace, Meekness,
and Humility; woe be unto us if we call you not (as we do daily) to walk
therein: but if any by precept, or example, put you from the pursuit of these
real Graces, Voe deridenti, woe be to that man, by whose deriding Tongue the
offense comes.

The next member that upon arraignment will be found guilty of Offenses, is the
Eye; a part of the body endued with so much excellency, and withal so much
iniquity, that I know not whether it may more invite your admiration or your
sorrow; for when the heart corrupts the eye, and the eye betraies the heart, it
stains its own glory, by agreeing with the mind in the service of Iniquity; it
renders the eye an egregious offender: for if with a greedy aspect it looks
upon food, without charging the stomach, it is guilty of Gluttony; if on a woman
to lust after her, it is guilty of Adultery; if it beholds riches with covetous
desires, it has committed Robbery; if on another good, with an eye of evil,
it commits the sin of Envy; which is the meaning of our Saviors reprehension,
Is thine eye evil, because mine is good? But as if the vice of the husbandmen
were transformed into a virtue, sinful man is continually reviving it, in
repining that his fellow labourer in the vineyard that came in late, should
receive equal wages with himself, who like Coesar and Pompey can endure no
equal, nor second to rival him in his victorious Achievements: Hence it is
that Envy is called the green sickness of the Soul, that feeding upon cinders,
or rubbish, contracts the stature, impallids the body to a hectic leanness,
and through default of the liver, spots the face with gutta Rosacea, as the
effigies of the man by whom the offense comes. This is he that cannot endure
the abilities of any, should be admitted competitors with his feeble
acquirements; thinks illustrious merits an upbraiding his own defects, and that
he is lighted into envy by the splendor of his rivals virtues, against whom he
has no other quarrel, than what the Affricans have against the Sun, Vrit
fulgore suo; or what one had against Demosthenes's candle, only because it
stood in his light. This sin of Envy renders men more vicious than devils; for
we nowhere read, that they envy one another: Besides, their malice arises from
the want of that good which they have lost, and these envy that good which
another has found. And now through the suggestions of Malice, the sinner
wracks himself with jealousies and surmises, to persuade himself each Candidate
is his enemy, that he has a greater share in the love of the Popularity; and
this puts him upon base and ungenerous employments, to satisfy an unreasonable
and impatient jealousy; sends him as a spy into every dark corner, to discover
that which only dwells in his own imagination; and all this while he has
perhaps been fighting with his own Chagrene Ghost, and has had no other enemy,
than his own ill nature. This makes it a kind of misery to be excellent,
because it is sure to be attended with malignity; it being the constant guise
of poorer spirits, those brats of moldy clay, to erect obelisks to their own
obscure bearings, out of the ruins of others: and since they are unable to
raise themselves to the esteem of their adversaries, they endeavor by Calumny
(or the exercise of their befriended, not acquired authority) to bring them
down to the same ignoble level with themselves. This is a stone of Stumbling,
and a rock of offense, for Christians to malign each other: Joh. 1.2.9.
for he that hates his brother is in darkness until now; but he that loves
abides in the light, and there is no occasion of stumbling in him. But that
which aggravates the offense, and makes the sin become so excessively sinful,
is, that the only cause for which the envious man is enraged against his
brother, is that for which Cain slew Abel, because his own works were evil, and
his brothers good. And that this has been the constant practice of this
devilish vice, will appear when we further consider, that for this cause
Joseph's brethren sold him; and it was virtue in David, that provoked Saul to
seek his life; and the Ninevites repentance, that distempered Jonas; for this
cause (namely unparalled goodness) 'twas, that the Jews conspired the death
of our Savior, and which made the Roman Governor endeavor his releasement,
because he knew that for envy they had delivered him. This is even the nature
of envy, to assault the worthiest persons, whose eminency shines beyond others
in glorious Actions, but meddles not with such as be of meaner quality. But to
persuade men from the practice of this unchristian and unmanlike vice, know,
that Divine Justice has appointed this sin to be the torment of it self; for
Envy, like cankered Brass, feeds upon his own substance. Justius invidia nihil
est, quae protinus ipsum
Authorem rodit excrutiatquesuum.
But I shall rather prescribe Antidotes against this poison, than show the
punishment that attends it: and to that purpose, if thou see another abound
in Learning, Judgment, or the like commendables, be not so envious to thy self,
as to be vexed at that which may better or inform thee, if thou would make a
right use thereof.

If thou hear him defend the Truth with applause of others, let not a perverse
emulation tempt thee to maintain the contrary, to the subverting of the
hearers: for there is, says Nazianzen, a happiness even to be overcome. And it
is far better to be honestly vanquished, and quit the field, than to obtain an
inglorious Victory, with the shipwreck of true Religion. If thou see another
endued with spiritual Graces, as Virtue, Knowledge, Temperance, Patience; here
is matter for thy godly Emulation, but not for thy bitter Envying: thou
should strive to match him in the exercise of holy duties, but not to damp
his alacrity by malicious detraction. According to our Saviors precept, our
light should so shine before men, that they seeing our good Works, may glorify
our Father which is in Heaven. Therefore let not thy envy be the cloud to dim
the light of another works, and thereby hinder so much glory, as might redound
to thy heavenly Father. Chrysostom.
Although such a man were thy enemy, yet because Almighty God is glorified by
him, he ought to be thy friend: and now because God is glorified by him, shall
he therefore be thy enemy? God forbid! Remember whose work he is doing, and
encourage his faint endeavors with the addition of thy service, and help to
effect what thou daily prayest for; That Gods will may be done on Earth by
thee, and thy fellow servants, as it is in Heaven by the glorious Angels.

The Tongue is now wormed, and the Cataract of Envy over the Eye is touched;
but I must lead you on with Ezekiel to more abominations, to more offenses in
our lives; they are of two sorts, injurious and exemplary.

First, The injurious offenses are apparently indigitated in our Saviors
words: for who receives his little ones, but their hopeful benefactors? and
who on the other side gives them offense, but their spiteful opposers? And here
our old Complainants are ready to commence their suit, in reckoning up the hard
measures offered to their Zealous guides, who are exiled their Pulpits, stripped
of their Maintenance, rated, fined, persecuted, as their word is; whereas the
contrary is most evident, Being treated, through the kindness of some, and the
remisness of others, more favorably than the Law allows, and their practice
deserves. And when they fall under any pecuniary mulct or corporal restraint,
their punishment is of themselves; they cannot be called innocent Sufferers,
but injurious Agressors. I would to God they would once learn to saddle the
right Ass: for, as St. Augustine said of Sara and Hagar, the Maid did more
persecute the Mistress by her pride and sauciness, than the Mistress did her
Maid by the severity of her discipline: and notwithstanding the Dissenters
clamorous Charge, upon a Melius inquirendum, 'twill be found, that Schismatics
do more persecute and offend the Church, than holy Church does persecute or
offend them: and so unhappy consequences have been the issue of their lucrous
ingannations, that the Church better endured the Swords of Tyrants, than the
tongues of Schismatics: for while we smarted, Unity remained; but while these
Anticeremonian Bigots are believed, the Church is obnoxious to ruin, by the
seeds of division they sow amongst us.

But that which spreads the contagion, is, that the Schismatical tenants of
some Nonconforming brethren, like ill weeds in a fat soil, have done greater
mischief through the good opinion men have of their personal Sanctity. They are
good men! and (by a bad consequence) all they do must be so accounted.

But what can the pretense amount to, when examined by an intelligent and
unprejudiced soul? for it is not flourishing the banner of goodness, that can
privilege men from either error or sinning: neither ought the
unreprovableness of men's converse in other things, countenance their
Schismatical opinions, or Church-dividing practices, against the light of
divine Scripture, and right Reason. Let men's Gifts and Graces be as large as
they themselves would have it believed, must not men of honesty live under
Laws, and submit to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake? Surely however
they whisper the contrary, they dare not speak it aloud, lest they be as openly
convicted to resist the Ordinance of God, and purchase to themselves Damnation.

These are the gildings and varnish of those selfish intrigues, whereby men of
good hearts, but weak heads; and women, who have weakest judgments, but
strongest wills and passions, are cozened into a good opinion of these painted
outsides, to embrace a Cloud instead of Juno, and forsake a peaceable Church,
to be members of a contentious Conventicle. I take no delight in searching the
wounds, or displaying the faults of a religious Party; but in so noble a Cause
'twould be a sin to hold my peace: Meam injuriam patienter tuli, injuriam
contra sponsam Christi far non potui. It Is a deplorable offense, that men of
excellent parts and improvements, which might be eminently serviceable to the
Church of God, should abuse their learning to the maintenance of a Schism; and
instead of winning souls to Heaven, with busy and ill-boding diligence compass
sea and land to draw proselytes to a party. How many Kilns and Barns (the
present threshing-sloors of discontented Jebusites) are turned into Trojan
horses, from whence public mischiefs proceed! How many souls are heedlesly led
by these stubborn and furious guides, into a bitter distaste of their common
Mother the Church! how many into a Peevish disesteem of their able and pious
Instructers! yea, which is most lamentable, into a true loathing of their
spiritual Food. But to return to injurious offenses, cast your eyes I, beseech
you, about you, and every corner will afford you such, as under a pretense of
Purity, root up the Vineyard of God, affront Majesty, scorn Laws, and pursue
their hateful designs, with all the violence of disloyal and affrighting
insinuations: whose deadly Talons (like the soaring Eagle) are only bowed in
(I fear) for want of an opportunity to prey and ravin. Another way of
discerning the humor and malice of injurious Sectaries, is in the bitter
Colycinthos they shred into the pots of those profits they relish not. Let some
Reverend Divine but cross and discountenance Schismatical fancies; let him but
walk in the ways of Meek obedience and Humble concord, he shall be defamed in
their Conventicles, and called either a Tory, a Papist, or at best a Papist in
Masquerade; he shall be defrauded in their Contracts, excluded their Houses,
deprived utterly of all their Contributions: his heart shall be broken with
daily affronts and oppositions; his intents crossed, and his desires hindered:
the Reverence due to his Function shall be detained; and by telling the Vulgar
he is a man of Arbitrary Principles, he preaches Obedience to Laws, he is
therefore of a persecuting spirit. And by these arts having prejudiced the
Factious many, nothing but the salt scorn of a sour face shall be cast upon
him. His domestic necessities, and painful maladies, shall be so far from any
share in their aid, or pity, that they shall rather become matter of mirth and
mockage amongst them; his grave shall be made for him, and his knell rung in
the votes of unmerciful people, e're God takes him away: Nay, which is worst of
all, his holy Labors shall be despised, his Rebukes slighted, and his Doctrine
taxed; his Church either quite forsaken, or thinly resorted to. And are not
these offenses enough to stumble one; Nay, to hinder the course of Christ's
Gospel? to keep many good wits from entering upon a Function, that, in the
conscientious discharge of it, brings nothing but barrenness and vexation?
Truly, if they can show us no better fruit of their boasted holiness, like the
barren ground the Hebrews are told of, they have a curse at their elbow. Vae
injurianti, Woe be to that man, by whose injurious dealing the Offense comes.

But injurious offenses cannot be thought all that our Savior meant; for when
he puts those cases of an offending Eye, and Hand, and Foot, we understand it
not of our own members, as if they should offer us violence. We proceed
therefore to the last block, the exemplary offense; and this I will devide into
three parts, and in them show you.

1. That Offense may be given by the indiscreet management of a good work.

2. By the unreasonable use of an indifferent thing: And

3. By the foul example of a work in its own nature evil.

1. In the performance of a good work commanded by God, we are not to balk an
offense, but as much as in us lies to remove a misprision. It Is better an
offense should be given, than any of Gods sacred Truths should be betrayed. Si
aliqui sunt infirmi, and scentia destituuntur, non oportet ut nos eorum causa
Christiana liberate fraudemur: Pet. Martyr
what though some are weak, and destitute of knowledge, there is no reason that
we for their cause should be cheated of our Christian liberty. We must not
regard their offense, who refuse to be healed, unless we our selves become
sick. In those works which fall not under a strict command, we are to do that
which we cannot omit without an offense; and though it is certain (...), nothing
can be so spoken or done, but it may be spoken against: yet when we consider
that the Ceremonies of our Church (about which Dissenters make their pretense
to quarrel) are but few in number, are significant in their nature, and
advantageous to the grand designs of Religion in their use, our Christian
liberty consists in this, That we have leave (...) do them, without the
imputation of Sin^ nay, it is so far from being a Sin or Offense, to comply with
our neighbor^ in such plainly innocent usages, and harmless customs; or with
the will of our Governors, when they command us such things, that it would be
both sin and scandal to refuse so to do^ for our refusing to comply with either
of these, can hardly proceed from any better principle, than a proud
affectation of Singularity, or at best from a superstitious Scrupulosity. St.
Pa^ would have us abstain from every appearance of evil; but wills us not to
think every thing evil which some men call so; for in that good old way which
the covenanting Consistorians and blind Papists call Superstition and Heresy,
we may truly worship the God of our Fathers: for God judges not as man judges.

2. In the use of indifferent things, we have two lights to show us our way;
Faith, and Charity; Faith pondering the nature of the thing it self, to settle
the wavering conscience: Charity prescribing the time and manner, lest we incur
danger, and our weak brother offense. Truly a scandal taken from the use of
indifferent things, if it proceed merely of weakness and ignorance, is to be
pitied and tendered. The Apostle is ^ull of warnings, serious warnings, that we
lay not a stumbling block before our weak brother, that we cause him not to
perish for whom Christ dyed: and for his own part avers, he would eat no flesh
as long as he lived, rather than it should stick in another man's stomach. But
does he mean that his weak brother should keep him for ever thus cautelous? Or
does he yield to their infirmity only so long till the truth be taught him?
Yea verily: for if our weak brother after a clear instruction will yet remain
blind, and stumble at every thing, his weakness is no longer to be yielded
unto, but to be corrected. Pertinacia potius quam imbecillitas, says a learned
Divine; you are mistaken, my scrupulous brethren, you are mistaken, it is rather
Obstinacy, than Infirmity; it is rather wilfulness, than weakness in you, since
there is nothing in our worship of God committed that is unlawful, or omitted
that is necessary. You that are Dissenters contend for trifles, we for order
and obedience: as for example, in our English Church many people stumble at our
public Rites decent Gestures, and Vestments; and challenge us fiercely of
these as offenses. But give me leave to tell you that these ungrounded notions,
how plausible soever, are but the dreams of some misty sleepy brains: for the
Devil, that he may keep the world under these delusions, it is his usual knack
to burden the forms of Gods Worship with clamor and vulgar prejudice, lest
the union of Christians should destroy his Kingdom, or lessen his Subjects. I
appeal to any indifferent man, whether it be not more injurious to Christian
liberty, to follow the humorous dislikes of private and petulant spirits, which
require the omission, or to yield obedience to lawful Authority, which by
mature advice commands the use of such things, as are otherwise, and in
themselves, equally indifferent for use or forbearance. The respect of private
scandal cease, when just authority determines our liberty: and that restraint
which proceeds from special duty, is of superior reason to that which is
derived from common charity: We ought to bear a greater regard to our public
Governors, than to our private brethren; and be more careful to obey them,
than satisfy these. It Is true, we are commanded be not conformed unto this
world; Romans 12.2.
but the main import of the words, and design of the Apostle, is in what
follows: But be ye transformed by the renewing of the mind: Newness of mind, is
that Substantial duty of Christianity, which makes all other things lawful unto
us. To the indifferent things of the world we may conform for quietness sake;
to the things of decency and order, we should conform for conscience sake;
only to the wickedness of it we should not fashion our selves.

But since I know that our adversaries out of interest cannot be quiet, but
will (notwithstanding all that can be said to the contrary) load innocent
Ceremonies with scandalous Epithets (for by this craft they get their livings)
let me demand of them, How came you so weak, that are so pure? How long has
the lawfulness of these things been cleared among you? what pains has been
taken by our reverend Prelates? What evincing arguments have fallen from the
Lips and Pens (...) our reverend Divines? what stone (...) offense have we not
removed, to make your way clear? And now let the world judge, if our holy
Mother the Church, who but maintains her ju^ Right and Liberty, be to be taxed
for giving offense, or not rather her wea^ Sons, which shut their eyes against
the light, to be sharply reproved for the^ wilful disobedience. Yet am I no^ so
uncharitable to think, that every one which dissents from the doctrine of this
or that Church must be stigmatized for a Schismatic: No, if a dissenter be
meek and modest, humble and holy, and makes no breach in the Church's Unity;
such a one has the temper of a sober Christian, and will do no mischief to
Religion: but when dissenting about indifferent things, is managed with Pride
and Passion, Rage and Malice, tending to the subversion of Government and good
Order; Then it is manifest there is something more in the case than Conscience,
and the man is become Factious. When a weak scruple against the Sign of the
Cross, shall make men Rebels against the Crown; when a superstitious abhorrence
of a white Vesture, shall make us dye our garments in blood; and a furious zeal
against an Organ, shall make men call for the confused noise of Drums and
Trumpets, it is manifest they have lost the temper of sober Christians, and
deserve the hateful name of Rebels, as well as Schismatics. It Is a strange
delusion that has seized some which scruple at an innocent Ceremony, who
against all convictions and armies of reason will be troubled, and will not
understand; this is very bad; but it is worse that he should think himself to be
the more godly man, for being thus troubled and diseased; and that upon this
account he shall fall out with his lawful Sovereign, calumniate his Actions,
reproach his Counselors, abuse his subjects, and quarrel with his Government,
and despise it; this man nurses his scruple, and instead of curing a Boil, dies
of a Cancer: or is like a man that has strained his foot, and keeps his (...)
for ^ase; but by lying long there, falls into a Lip^thymie, and that bears him
to his grave. Thus calling themselves to doubtful disputations, (instead of
practicing known duties), they go on deceiving and being deceived, to their own
discomfort here, and misery hereafter. But I gladly shift the Scene; entreating
my dissenting and scrupulous brethren to remember, it is all our duties to obey
and do what is commanded; not judging our Judges, but quietly submitting to
their Injunctions, who watch for our souls, and must give an account to God.
But if so many mischiefs and offenses proceed from indifferent things, what
shall we think of gross and infectious evils, the misleading acts of the
vicious or indulgent Ruler, the Riots and Rapines of the rich, the lewd
examples of Churchmen, Parents and Masters, domestic fails, the foul slips of
the Religious, the mutual seducements of men and women by scandalous habits,
Cum multis aliis, etc.

The Ruler is first. As Jacobs Sheep brought forth Lambs agreeing in color
with the pill'd rods they cast their eyes on; so many people, either out of a
greedy hope to thrive by a servile imitation, or out of a vain ambition to
follow their betters, take courses of the same tincture with the Scepters of
Authority. When the Clock strikes not in due season, we blame not the weights
or movement, but the Clock-keeper; and whom are the fails of the Vulgar
ascribed to, but their eminent Guides? Let Baltazar carouze in the hallowed
boles of the Temple, and all the Court will pledge him: let Queen Vasti
control her husband, and all the scattered Dames in the Country-provinces will
take the Reins into their own hands. Why did the Heathens so furiously rage?
who did the people imagine a vain thing? The Psalmographer resolves us, The
Rulers of the earth took counsel together against the Lord, and against his
Anointed. Who could imagine a people so laden with the favors of a gracious
Messiah, that saw their sick restored, their blind enlightened, their lame
walking, and their dumb speaking; yea, their dead bodies brought to ^ife! Who
would imagine after these beneficial works, they should put him to so base and
bitter a death? Had not Herod and Pilat, had not Annas and Caiaphas, had not
the Chief Priests and the Ruling Elders took counsel together against the Lord,
and against his Anointed? Therefore, as if the guilt of all this had stuck on
the Princes and Rulers, the holy Psalmist directs his advice to them only: Be
wise now therefore, O ye Kings, be learned ye that are Judges of the Earth. It
is with men as with fishes, if the head begins to putrisy, the body can be
worth nothing; if the head be sick what can the heart do but faint, and the
body but languish? If a Ruler hearken to lies, (says Solomon) all his servants
are wicked. And here turning our woe on the Romish and Factious Grandees that
have hearkened to lies, and led people into mischievous inventions: how are we
bound to bless God for the upright and moderate sway, the inoffensive and meek
carriage of our Royal Head, and his subbordinate Deputies, whose very lives may
as well silence a saucy Libeller, as their authority?

But this word gives them another memento: Authority has a Sword in her hand;
and if she bear it in vain, sin is heartned, and offenses given. The old Giants
were called Nephilim, Cadentes, not as if they fell from Heaven, but because
other men asrighted with their grim looks, were ready to fall down and swoon
away. Among us, it is rather the over- gentle, than the terrible Rulers, are the
right Nephilim, that make men fall into a custom of sinning: for as Moses Rod
cast on the ground became a Serpent, so the Rod of Justice that falls from the
Magistrates hands for earthly respects, what does it prove but a destroying, a
poisoning Serpent? therefore is it good Counsel given by the Son of Syrac, Let
no man seek to be a Judge, who is not able to take away iniquity, lest at any
time he fear the person of the mighty, and lay a stumbling block in the way of
uprightness. Honor on a Fools back is as Snow in Summer, as Rain in the time
of Harvest, not only unfit for himself; but pernicious to others: for as
Summer-Snows corrupt the Fruits, and Harvest-Showers rot the Corn; so a weak
Ruler is the spoil of a Country. And though we may thank God that even this way
we are better provided, yet our Saviors Item (like Philip's boy) may stand for
a Remembrance; when sin and partiality would get admission, Voe Rectoribus, woe
be to the exalted man by whom the offense comes.

And now if oyled Paper would be writ on, I could try the Rich of this world
how prone they are to scatter Offenses; as St. Paul says, They fa^ themselves
into diverse snares and temptations, and bring others into the same trap. Riches
in the Hebrew Dialect have a name that implies Stability; they are called
Jechum, as if they made a man to stand sure: but if they make our selves stand,
and others fall, what are they but unrighteous Mammon? Our Saviors Churl was
arrayed in Purple, which is a bloody color; and how many of our great men's
Robes are dyed in the blood and wrack, and offensive spoil of their poor
Neighbors; yea, in the pillage of the Temples? How many of these dry Nurses
have Breasts great enough, but yield no Milk for the Babes of Christ, whose
houses stand like Beech-trees, only for Beasts and Drunkards to be sheltered
under; or like Oaks of Bashan (as the Prophet speaks) that have nothing but A
corns for a few Swine, while the poor and indigent are denied sitting relief,
and forced to rob, pilfer, and offend God, if not to challenge him of unjust
partiality?

2. It Is another offense I take it in men of Quality, that many of them are
become the Patrons of Schism, and instead of their true Mistress, that heavenly
and religious Wisdom, that is both pure and peaceable, like Errant Knights in
the Pores legend, have embraced an ugly Witch with her angry and fantastical
face, the masked Hypocrisy of cunning Zealots; that such men whom our Pulpits
have spewed out for retaining their old Principles of Disobedience, Tumult,
Schism, or Heresy, shall by these great ones be hugged and listened to as the
only Oracles of Infallibility. O how they bless and admire themselves (and are
proclaimed by others) as the grand Sticklers of their Party, because they have
a Nonconforming Levite to their Priest! Is not this an offense, that you that
impose Laws upon us, are the first breakers of them your selves, and think you
do God good service, while you fight against him, in disturbing the peace of
the Church and Kingdom? Ubi sublimior praerogativa, ibi major culpa. Salvian,
lib. 4. de gubernat. Dei.
Combustible matter is not more incident to ruin by its vicinity to the
flames, than your inferiors are by tracing your steps. You know well, the
honor and respect that belongs to your qualities, cannot exempt you from the
common Obligation and Law of Religion; but the greater your persons are, the
more enforcing is your interest to be religious, because your Examples are more
leading and influential. Be not, I beseech you, the Ringleaders into Schism,
but be Followers of solid Piety and sincere Religion: for this will adorn your
bearings, and ennoble your Souls and Names in the lasting Records of Heaven.
And on the contrary, woe be to them that add fuel to the fire of Dissension:
Voe diviti, Woe be to the man by whose abused riches or honors the offense
comes.

3. It Is a great exemplary offense in the judgment of all the sober and
unprejudiced world, that our Nonconforming Brethren give, in separating from
the Church of England, because in our public Service we use Set Forms of
Prayer: and because they think themselves innocent, though but for the
advantage of accusing us first, ^s laying these stumbling blocks in the way to
Peace and Unity; I shall tak^ off this Sanctimonious Vizor, (mad^ only to
startle the unwary admirers, that gaze on the outside only) and make it appear
to all that are not guarded with the Shield and Buckle^ of Irrationality, That
they themselves are the men by whom the offense comes.

And that I may leave them without quarrel, I shall make them both Judge and
Party, and endeavor to convict or acquit them by a Jury of their own packing,
and their own Creatures being Judges. This makes Religion contemptible (says
Mr. Baxter) when we are perceived to place Religion in unwarrantable
Separations, and affected Singularities from a true Church, and have no other
pretense, but that they pray by a Book, and we pray without one: These are the
Complaints that make our Houses and Streets ring, that our Governors are
Persecutors, because they would compel you to hear a man that is Conformable,
and pray with such as use the Liturgy, and communicate with a Parochial
Congregation. These are the no Crimes you charge on the Churches score, and the
foundation on which you build the Wall of Separation, and estrange your selves
from the best Church in the world. But how you will answer this to God Almighty
in the Great and Terrible Day, is my wonder and astonishment: And therefore
entreat you to consider whether these are sufficient causes to make Rents and
Divisions in the Church, and raise Contentions and Heart-burnings amongst those
which agree in all fundamental truths. No, but rather on the contrary, if you
had (as God bethanked you have not) a just cause to refuse Communion with our
Church in some instances; yet you ought not therefore to proceed to a total
Separation from it, or to erect new Churches in contradistinction to us, or
gratify the humorous dislikes of them that do, by joining with them. You often
call us Popish Prelatical Priests; but if you will believe Mr. Baxter, he says.
You are the great Factors of Rome, and Vpholders of the Triple Crown: For
(says he) Defense of the Principle of Love p. 52.
thousands have been drawn to Popery, or confirmed in it by your Separation
already; and I am persuaded that all the Arguments else in Bellarmine, and all
other Books, have not done so much to make Papists in England, as the Divisions
among our selves; yea, some Professors of strictness in Religion, and of great
esteem for godliness, have turned Papists themselves, when they were giddied
and wearied with turning.

They know but little of the world, who perceive not that our Differences are
the Contrivances of the Romish Cabal to ruin us: Read the Bishop of Rhodes's
History of Henry the Fourth of France, and Campanella's Spanish Monarchy;
where, after a long discourse of the intended Invasion of England by the
Monarchs of Spain and France (incited thereto by the Commands and Benedictions
of Rome, as well as their own Ambition) they especially declare their
judgments of the means and instruments to be employed for the Ruin of the
English Church in this sort, that there was no better Artifice, than by causing
Divisions and Dissentions among the English: And to this purpose they advised
it as the only way, to erect certain Schools and Academies in Flanders, that
the Students thereof may disseminate Seeds of Division in Natural and
Theological Sciences: which would discompose their Opinions, and unsettle their
Judgments: for (say they) the English are inclined to Novelties, and are no
less violent in defending them. And how considerable the effects of this
Contrivance has been, their late horrid Conspiracies against our gracious King,
do manifest. And you, my dissenting Brethren, of whom it may be said, as
Chemnitius spoke of the Monks concerning Pelagianism, You defy the Heretic,
and foster the Heresy: for while you separate from us, you do no less than
make your selves Agents to accomplish their designs, in overthrowing a Church
you acknowledge to be true, and promote the Errors of Antichrist.

Many sad Examples might be produced to this purpose; Vid. Dr. Ashton's
Postscript to the case of Scandal
but I delight not to vex a Wound by a continued application of Corrosives: I
shall therefore proceed to answer the main Objections against the use of our
Common Prayer Book; the first of which is,

Object. Praying by a Set Form, is a humane invention, and sinful, because not
commanded in Scripture.

Answ. In answering whereof, I must invoke again the assistance of Mr. Baxter,
(for they that raise these Spectrums are best skilled in laying them:) Lib. id.
page 53. ad 60.
"If by false Worship, says he, you mean forbidden or not commanded, we (i. e.
the Presbyterians) worship God falsely every day, and in some part of the
matter, very often our Disorders, Confusions, Tautologies, and unfit Expressions
are all forbidden, and so false Worship: and if God prohibit it in the
Liturgy, he prohibits the same in extemporate Prayers; in which some good
Christians are as failing as the Liturgy. And as the words of the Liturgy are
not commanded in Scripture, so neither are the words of our extemporate or
studied Sermons or Prayers. God hates every sin in every Prayer, but he hates
the avoiding of Prayer and due Communion much more; and you but strain at Gnats
and swallow Camels, while you thus eagerly contend for the Shadow, and let the
Substance glide from you; giving us cause to think these Niceties are but the
Bones that the Devil throws amongst us to break our Teeth with, and in the mean
space reject the wholesome Food of our Souls."

Open your Eyes, I beseech you, and you will easily discern how you are imposed
on, and made the Engines of their Malice, who would destroy both us and you.
Methinks I hear the Papists, Independents, Anabaptists, and Quakers, hissing
each Party on, saying, There, there, so would we have it: One while crying,
Throw Dirt enough on the Surplice, and be sure some will stick; call the sign
of the Cross the Mark of the Beast; tear in pieces their Liturgy, and call it
the Popish Mass Book: Another Sect saying, Bate them nothing; and others, Stand
it out, and yield to nothing; with a deal more of this insignificant Jargon:
Who are well assured, that if there be once a right Understanding, and
consequently a mutual Agreement betwixt the Episcopal and Presbyterian Parties,
they must of necessity dwindle into their Original Nothing; or like rotten
Houses, when the substantial Props they lean on are taken away, moulter to
dirt, and bury themselves in their own Ruins. Have a care therefore you warm
not these Vipers any longer in your bosoms, by espousing their Quarrels: for if
ever they come to be strengthened with power, will turn their stings against
their Nourishers; as the Independents have done against you once already.

Object. But the Covenant ( i. e. the Scotch Covenant) (say they) wherein we
have lifted up our hands to the most High, makes it unlawful to hold Communion
with any that use a Liturgy.

Answ. I shall again make bold with Mr. Baxter for this reason, that Lawyers
affirm, there needs no greater conviction of an Offender, than the Confession
of one of the Accomplices: His words in answer to this Objection are these: "No
man of us all has need or ought to go to the Covenant to know what is his duty
in the Worship of God, but only to the Scriptures: for if Scripture make it
not a duty, the Magistrates Law will make it a sin; and if Scripture make it
not a sin, the Magistrates Command will make it a duty." And in p. 9. and p.
88. of his Defense of the Principles of Love, resolves it thus: "To prefer no
public Worship, or a worse, before the Liturgy, is deformation and
profaneness: for all the reformed Churches in Christendom do profess to hold
Communion with the Church of England in their Liturgy, if they come amongst us
where it is used: Therefore it seems to me to be Perjury and Covenant Breaking,
either to prefer no public Worship before the Liturgy, or to refuse Communion
with the Churches that use it, as a thing merely on that account unlawful."

Consider further, that your Separation savours of Novelty, (which among the
Wise and Holy, without any further aggravation, renders it scandalous) and our
practice corresponds with Antiquity, whose custom in the first and purest times
was, to pray by Forms: Nay, the Ancients pronounced it a sin to do otherwise in
their public Devotions. And though I urge not their Practices and Opinions, as
Principles of infallible verity, to command your belief; yet I hope you will
admit them as grounds of credibility, to facilitate your assent, being handed
to us by those that cannot be imagined not to know, being so near; nor be
suspected to combine flalsly to impose on us, being so pious. And if you want
an Example, take it from the Disciples; who out of a sense of their own wants,
bespake their Master, thus: Teach us to pray, as John taught his Disciples.

I beseech you therefore, consider in time, what you are doing: for if Mr.
Baxter prophecies right, he tells you, That Separating will at last ruin the
separate Churches themselves: for no instance can be given (says he) of a
separate Church of a hundred years standing. To conclude, the same Author
says, The Protestant Religion must be kept up by the means of the
Parish-Ministers, and by the Doctrine and Worship then performed; and they that
think and endeavor that which is contrary to this, of what side soever, shall
have the hearty thanks and concurrence of the Papists. O that now, my
dissenting Brethren, you would be persuaded to lay aside all prejudice and
partiality, self ends and interests, and follow the things that make for peace:
Suffer your Reasons to awake; put on Modesty, be clothed with Humility, and
call no men, or decent Custom, Popish or Antichristian, till you are assured by
an infallible sign it is so; lest you be found fighters against God, and
slanderers of your Brethren: Be not rash censurers, but judge righteous
judgment, lest you abuse the truth it self, and call the Spouse of Christ an
Harlot.

The Church of England is barefaced, has no Idols to obscure, no spiritual
Cheat with which to delude you; for the representing of which, we should stand
either in need of darkness, or a false light: we have nothing in our public
profession which the wisest men, the most pious Christians, may not practice;
nothing in our Faith which they ought not steadfastly to believe. It is only
want of Enquiry, and a sober Examination, that the purity of our Churches
Doctrine is not more generally embraced; it is because the calmness and sobriety
of its Devotion, the moderation of its Discipline, the largeness of its
Charity, are not more impartially enquired into, that men mistake us, divide
from our Communion, trouble the world with their impertinent noise and clamor,
and administer matter of offense to many thousands in England, who are hardened
into an utter neglect of Godliness by the unwarrantable Singularities, and the
scandalous sins, especially of those Professors that have been most addicted to
sinful Separations; without receiving occasion, or giving a reason for it.

And to conclude, I am afraid that all those Scruples that have been urged to
vindicate a Separation from our Communion, will be found too light at the day
of the Lord, to counterpoise the vast guilt of Schism and Disobedience. Could
you make it appear that your Salvation was in the least hazarded by Communion
with us; if you could not have Peace, but upon those ill terms of parting with
Truth and Holiness; could you demonstrate that in any thing we are departed
from the true Church, your Separation was warrantable: but since it is evident
our Church has preserved entire that Faith which was once delivered to the
Saints, without any loss or innovation; since all the Laws and Rules of holy
and Christian life, are by our Church taught; since men may conform to all the
Constitutions of our Church, and yet be as holy as the best of Saints in any
Age of the world; since there is nothing herein commanded, that ever God did
forbid; and since all this we are able to prove by the clearest Demonstrations,
it must necessarily follow, they incur a Woe that call good evil, and light
darkness.

4. It Is no less a heinous offense also to separate from a true Church, under a
pretense that notoriously sinful Members are received into Communion with it.
This is to strain at a Gnat, and swallow a Spider; and to prevent an imaginary
guilt of Pollution by others, incur a real guilt of Schism in themselves. And
though by dispencing with Humility and Charity, they magnify themselves, and
brand those they separate from, with the disgraceful Epithets of ungodly and
profane, and with the Whore in the Proverbs, wipe their mouths, and say, they
have done no harm; yet in the judgment of St. Paul, the sin of Separation is so
dangerously infectious, that the persons guilty of it are to be set in the
first rate of Offenders, and to be shunned as soon as descried: Mark them that
cause Divisions and Offenses, contrary to the Doctrine you have learned, and
avoid them. Romans 16.17. (...) est attente, diligenter, quasi hosts e spicula
observetis. Biza in loc.
Divisions are the Intelligences that put the Orbs of Offenses into motion, and
are the prime subversion of the Church; which otherwise is rarely endamaged:
for whilst it is united, Satan is not admitted, nor Scandals started; which
makes the Apostle in another place so passionately resent the injury offered to
the Church by Divisions, that he wishes they were cut off that trouble it, by
unsetling and removing its Votaries from their first Station. (...).


And you will have no cause to think this a severe process, since there is more
mischief threatened to the Church of God, and less hopes of recovery in a
Separatist, than a more notified Malefactor: A debauched man, if discreetly
reprehended, will blush and tremble at his Miscarriage; but an Ableptick
Schism-Master will disdain, insult, and spurn at him, that by a modest Reproof
would turn him from the error of his way; besides, a Sect-maker disturbs the
peace of the Church, tears its Unity, and paves a Causey to destruction, whilst
the other only perverts himself, and disquiets but his own Conscience. But
admit some of the Members of our Church were as bad as they would render them,
it makes no Pallizado for their Conventicle: for as long as the Church
sojourneth on Earth, bad men will be mixed with the good; and they deserve a
sharp reprehension (in the opinion of Mr. Calvin) Calvin. in Mat. 13.36
that tumultuously depart from the Church, or by unseasonable rigidness
endeavor to overthrow it. And Christ Jesus in propounding this Parable (says
the same Author) would bridle and moderate their Zeal who think it unlawful to
have Communion with none but pure Angels; and they that preposterously make
haste to root out all that displeases them, do as much as in them is, prevent
Christ's Judgment, and usurp the Angels Office.

Mr. Perkins tells us, Expos. on St. Jude, v. 9. Amplified on Gal. 1.2
that faults in the manners of Professors, is no warrant for our Separation:
for tho vices (says he) appear in the lives of Ministers and People; so long
as true Religion is taught, and the Sacraments duly administered, it is a
Church, and we may not depart from it.

Mr. Hildersham makes it is Doctrinal Observation upon the fourth of St. John
22. Lecture the 36.
That those Assemblies that enjoy the Word and Doctrine of Salvation, though
they may have many corruptions in them, are to be acknowledged the true
Churches of God, and such as none of the faithful may make separation from.

I am almost assured, they would think it little less than Sacrilege, not to
allow these men to be theirs; and whether it be not an offense for those of a
second Edition to make their practices clash with these allowed Doctrines, let
Conscience judge: Only give me leave to make this use of their Doctrine, That
it is extremely sinful for Presbyterians to separate from the Church of England,
their own celebrated Teachers being Judges.

Our blessed Savior refused not to communicate with the Twelve, though he knew
one of them was a Devil; nay, he lived and died in Communion with the Jewish
Church, though 'twas abominably corrupted; and was so indulgent and graciously
applicable to sinners, that the Pharisees called him a Companion and Friend of
Publicans and Sinners.

One reason why Christ would be baptized among the common sort, is rendered by
Spanheim to be, that he might convince the World he was no Friend to those
Opinions that debarred men from frequenting the means of their Salvation, under
the color of their present unworthiness: for he came not to call the
righteous, but sinners to repentance. It is the works, not the workers of
darkness, that the Apostle enjoins us to have no fellowship with. Judas his
personal action in eating the Pascal Lamb, was an abomination; but it had no
reflection on the Apostles that communicated with him: for as their Faith and
Piety did not sanctify him, neither did his iniquity defile them, or hinder
the benefit of their worthy receiving. The Sons of Ely were practically
vicious, scandalous Sons of Belial; 2 Samuel 12.29.
yet the People that communicated with them were Gods people. Scripture almost
every where is loud in the commendation of unanimous Congregations; but
stigmatizeth the privacy of a disjoynted Separation.

Neither is it fit for you, my dissenting Brethren, to complain against our
Parochial Communions: for the detestation of our Offenses, is no Privilege nor
Plea before Gods dreadful Tribunal, for the prosecution of your own, though
spun with a finer thread: First cast out the beam that is in your own eye, and
then you may see clearer to take the mote out of your brothers eye.

Give me leave, I pray you, out of love to your Souls and the Church's peace,
to be plain with you: for I must not, I dare not flatter you, by sowing Pillows
under your Elbows, and calling you precious Souls, Gods elect people, and your
lawless Meetings the Assembly of Saints, until I have other proof of your
immunity from the common Errors of others, besides your own naked
affirmations. Do not delude your selves, nor suffer your Hirelings to do it:
you are not better than others, but are daily convicted of Pride and
Covetousness, Envy, Malice, and Incharitableness, Dissimulation, Lying,
Overreaching, and Hypocrisy, to every discerning eye; and the reason why it
is no more notorious to the common view, is, you have learned the knack to
indulge each other in your close iniquities, to palliate your open wickedness,
and obscure your own Crimes by defaming others.

But were you as eminent Vessels of Honor as you would be thought to be, yet
you may not disdain those that are but of wood and stone, as unworthy your
Societies. It Is one of Machiavil's principles, that who they stagger with one
wrong, they must utterly cast down with more; which you make your practice, if
you endeavor not by uniting with us, to ward off that blow that from the hand
of our common Enemy is falling on us. 'Twould well beseem the goodness you
pretend, to return and strengthen us with your better Members (if you have any
such) that we may be thereby enabled to mend what is amiss, and bless God for
the mercy of making men to be of one mind in a house, and stilling the Outrage
of an unruly Faction: And I beseech God Almighty to endue us all with a
sorrowful apprehension of all our Offenses, that our Parochial Assemblies may
be more sober and devout, and that your separate Churches may be more just,
humble, and charitable; that we may all study to preserve the unity of the
Spirit in the bond of Peace, all minding the same thing; and that there may be
no Divisions amongst us, but that with one mind and one mouth we may serve the
living God; that his Name may be glorified, our Sins purged, all our Souls
saved, and avoid that woe that belongs to them that cause Divisions and
Offenses. Ve Segregatori, Woe be to them that separate themselves, sensual,
having not the Spirit.

5. Neglecting the service of God in the public Offices of Religion, under the
fallacious pretext of being above those subsidiary helps, or being better
employed on the Lords day at home, is a most injurious and scandalous offense.
Do you provoke the Lord to jealousy? are you wiser than he, that you usurp a
privilege of doing only what is right in your own eyes, in opposition to the
all-wise commands of a Deity? Many Opinionists have done wickedly; but this in
pride and ingratitude exceeds them all. Woe be to him that is alone, in the want
of a spiritual Guide to correct his wandering, and direct his feet in the right
paths. For so pernicious is an affected curiosity to be wiser than our
Neighbors and Teachers, that it forces men upon dangerous precipices to their
destruction: Whereas abiding in their Station with a meek and humble obedience,
in a plain and well-ordered Devotion, would have made them better men, if not
more knowing Christians. To decline offenses, to be careful and conscientious
in our several actions, is a purity that every man ought to strive after; but
to cheat the world into a belief that we do so, only by separating from our
Brethren, is a double iniquity. You think you are above Ordinances; but I doubt
it is nothing but a wanton fastus, and proud temper of spirit, that makes you
boast so: and if your own arrogance and presumption would give you leave to lay
aside the flattering glass of Self-love, you would find you stood in greatest
need of them.

Object. But, say they, we can better employ our time at home, and read good
Books, and better Sermons than our Ministers can make. And in these studied
Excuses, take themselves to be no less zealous, but only more discreet than
their Brethren, who do not the like; when indeed they are guilty of folly and
wickedness: Of folly, in ascribing as great applause to our private Devotions
(which lose their virtue, and have no promise of audience, being done in
opposition to God's public Worship) as the united Orisons of religiously
disposed persons in Gods House of Prayer: And of wickedness, in offering
Sacrilege for Sacrifice, robbing God of one duty, and paying him with another;
withholding the greater, and yet would seem conscientious in the less. Whilst
thus contemning the Precepts of Heaven, and the Communion of Saints, in doing
their own Will, they lose the benefit of both: Who has required these things
at your hand? Religion is not a thing left to the arbitrary fancies of men, to
cull out from that diversity with which the World abounds, what best pleases
themselves; neither are the ways and mediums of the exercise of it, put into
their power; but as God is the Object of Worship, so the means and manner by
which, and how he is honored, and his Servants benefited, must be
circumstantiated by himself; his Will, and not ours, must be the sole and
adequate Rule. All Ordinances do not work necessarily, as the Sun enlightens
the sable Skies; nor physically, as having an inherent power to produce their
effects: but they are operative by the sacredness of their Institution. Be wise
then, O Christians, in maintaining a venerable esteem of our Church devotions,
where God by solemn Prayer is invoked, the Word preached, and the Sacraments
rightly and reverendly administered; being as Babes for hunger and thirst after
them, though not for knowledge and understanding in them. It Is a no less common
than dreadful observation, that those that leave the Church Assemblies, do at
last bid adieu to Religion also: Which that we may prevent, it is expedient we
forsake not the assembling of our selves together, as the manner of some is,
but account it a special favor from God, when we may congregate our selves
freely to worship the God of our Fathers. And that our obedience may keep pace
with the mercy, let us provoke one another to the discharge of this duty,
saying, Come, let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God
of Jacob, to pray before the Lord, and with praises make his Name glorious. But
alas, we might rather expect the removal of this Blessing, than the continuance
thereof, for our exceeding faultiness and negligence. God has given a long and
happy rest to the Land of our Nativity, with advantages of giving our
attendance at the posts of the doors of the Lords house: We are not driven,
like the Primitive Christians, of whom the world was not worthy, to assemble by
stealth in Dens and Caves of the Earth, being persecuted, afflicted, and
tormented; but the Gates of the Lords House have been open to us, and we have
or might have had free access to his Altars. While other Nations have heard the
terrible noise of Cannons, and the dismal effects of War and Bloodshed, the
shreeks of Widows and Orphans, we have had the music of Bells calling us to
the House of God, and there the melody of Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual
Songs. We read in Acts 9.31. that the Churches had rest through all Judea; and
what use did they make thereof? Did they grow careless and wanton, kick against
the Breasts that gave them suck, and spurn at those Knees whereon they were
dandled? Did they contemn Ordinances, slight the Sacraments, throw contempt
upon Prayer, and despise Prophesying? Did they lose their first love, and
neglect the good opportunities which God gave them for their increase in
Holiness? No, they were edified, and walked in the fear of the Lord, and were
multiplied.

Oh let us follow these pious Examples, in loving the place where Gods honor
dwells, and answering the end for which they were appointed. He that frequents
the place of Gods Worship, has an early Title to a Blessing: for though many
are found of God that sought him not, yet few or none ever sought him but they
shall find him, though it be in the last Watch of the night: Nay, sometimes
those who have had ill designs in going to Church, yet God has made it work
for their good, and of unwilling Auditors, framed willing and real Converts.
St. Augustine in a proud humor of carping, entered the Church of St. Ambrose,
but departed with a broken and bleeding heart: And who can tell but God may
work as great a change on you, if you would not fly the means that God has
appointed, and wilfully neglect so great Salvation?

Let us at last, with the shrill Cock, not only awake others, but clap our own
sides. A sinning Priest is the fall of many, and the offense of all: It was a
lamentable sight in the Prophets eye, that the very stones of the Sanctuary
were stumbling blocks in every street. What does embolden sin more? what does
occasion more spiritual falls, than the foul Example of a Churchman? who is
heavenly in his Pulpit only, but out of it given to all excess of riot. Oh how
barbarously and cruelly do they wound the Gospel of our Lord Jesus, that preach
it to the World, yet live as if they intended to go to Heaven some other way
than that which they teach their Auditors! Nay, how is it possible his
discourses against sin, and of Heaven and Hell, should prevail to the amendment
of others, who has no care of his own Soul? for the love men have to their
Vices, with a little help from the Devil, will easily persuade them the whole
is fictitious, or else that Heaven may be obtained, and Hell escaped, upon
easier terms than the Priest tells them. How odious is the name of some old
Heretic that has filled the Church with Garboils and Blasphemy? yet a crafty
Heretic, in St. Bernard's account, hurts less than a lewd Minister: for
Heretics poison the Church but with Words, with giddy Tenants, and airy
Speculations, which vulgar heads are not capable of; but each shallow Idiot
will spy a disorder in our lives, and sooner follow our Vices, than maintain
our Opinions. Divines may not think to carry it as some more wittily than truly
say Physicians do, to have the Sun see their good deeds, and the grave abscond
their failures. No, my brethren, in the very walls of your houses holes will be
dig'd (as in the Prophecy of Ezekiel) to spy out your secret abominations; we
cannot err, but with the Snail, we leave our slimy filth to public view; and
what need we wonder, that our Messages miscarry, and that the following slock
are tumbling down, when their Shepherd is walking on the edge of Rocks! The
River Nilus, as Aristotle tells us, has a mavelous Stone in it, which if
ground to powder, and given to a dog in some proper Vehicle, he will never be
able to spend his mouth. Beloved, that harsh and austere life, as it were the
Stone of Nile, if we soften it in liquor and voluptuous courses, we quite lose
the vigor of our rebuking voice, the authority of our holy Embassy! What do we
sweating in Pulpits, if we love and practice the Vices we declaim against!
Divinity is a strange kind of Physic, that effects no Cure, unless the
Physician take it as well as the Patient. Who pulls a drowning man out of a
deep stream with a dry hand? Joash his Arrow is then prevalent, when the
Prophets Arm is joined to it. A merry Soldier struck a bird dead, from which
his Comrades expected an Augury; saying, How should these silly creatures
direct others, that cannot secure themselves? Who goes to a Barber for his
bread, or to a Victualler for his cloth? and who will e're hope to receive
direction for Holiness from them, in whom there is nothing to be seen but Vice?
We often complain, and it may be justly enough, of prevailing Faction amongst
us; but I am sure nothing so much promotes their interest, as the scandalous
lives of some that exercise the Ministerial Function among us. The late
incomparable Bishop, Dr. Jer. Tailor, tells us, Sermon to the University of
Dublin.
If we live Holy, our Doctrine will be true, and that truth shall prevail: but
if we live Wickedly and Scandalously, every little Schismatic will put us to
shame, and abuse our Flocks, and feed them with Colocynths and Hemlock; and
place Heresy in the Chair oppointed for our Religion. It Is an error I know, a
fond and precise error, to think the Power of Gods Word, or the benefit of the
Sacrament, should be tied to the holiness of him that ministereth. The Church
in the Canticles is a Garden of Nuts: Cant. 6.11
and if the Law of God that is planted here, be a Nut, we may safely eat the
Kernel, though it come from a slovens hand. But truly it were to be wished,
that as the beautiful Heavens above our heads, are infinitely raised from
earth, most different and opposite to her Center; so the Messengers of Heaven
were as far removed from the base and sinful customs of this corrupt World,
that instead of refreshing Fountains, they were not Whirlpools to draw into
danger such as are about them: For as the Ivy and Elm, for the People and
Pastor grow together: The people, says Jeremy, take ill courses: Jer. 23.10.
and the reason is added in the next words: The Prophet and Priest are profane
men. Therefore St. Paul thought it would ask more than an ordinary care; Romans
12.17
that it would be a point of high prudence in us, to be honest men, not only
in the sight of God, but in the eyes of the World also. Even Kings and
Emperors have refused to quench their extreme thirst with offered Water, when
their Armies had none: they would not give an example of Intemperance: Why then
do they that are Sacred to God, offer themselves up to swinish excesses, with
the hazard of so many Souls? The Whale espying her young ones at a low water,
left in danger of the almost-dry shore, spouts such abundance of water upon
them, that they can swim away in that artificial Tide. ^nat.
Did we truly regard the welfare of the Servants of Christ Jesus, we would part
with our Liquor, to save their Souls; we would abandon our delights, we would
cast out a drunken humor, to bring them again into the right way: and this we
may learn from the Indian Ocotochlus, that having obtained his Prey by a great
noise, invites other beasts to feed on it; and when they are sated, feeds on
the rest, that the poison wherewith he abounds, might not injure his mes-mates
by feeding with them. What a shame is this to us men! to us consecrated
Priests! that will abstain from none of our Cups, from none of our Carouses,
from none of our vain delights, how scandalous, how infecting soever.

Truly, the best remedy I can commend unto us of the Clergy, who are set upon a
hill, for religious Example, or the peoples Scorn and Derision, is a holy
Privacy and Retiredness; at least a careful choice of our Company. It is on
record in Leviticus 14.36. That the Priests of God must not come into a
polluted house. They that are strangers to the course of our lives, will judge
of us by the quality of our company. We loose our masculine Gravity, and get
contempt by Familiarity: We throw the Honor of our Function too prodigally
into a common bosom, whiles we are seen mixing at Feasts and merry meetings
with light and dissolute persons. Our Savior is observed never to stay long at
Capernaum: it was a place of pleasure, and, as Druthmarus tells us, was much
haunted for that purpose, even by the Grandees of Rome. People are prone to
take offense that Churchmen, should share in those pleasures, or haunt those
places, which yet themselves will freely enjoy. The damned Churl thought he
must be a man of another world, that could convert his brethren. How shall
Soldiers wound their enemies, if their Battalion stand not aloof? how shall we
vanquish humane corruptions, if we keep not from them? St. Paul wished himself
separate even from Christ, for his brothers sake; and shall not we separate
from lewd and debauched Societies, for as great a matters does it not hinder
men in the way of Salvation to be insensible of their own errings? and who will
think that he goes astray, while his Pastor is in his company? should no
scandal ensue, yet we pull a stain upon our selves: For he that sorts with
uncivil men, shall hardly come off untainted.

While the Hebrew Multitude sports and dances, and worships a golden Calf,
Moses is on the Mount with God, praying and weeping, and interceding for the
sins of the people Let the world take her course, and pursue her follies it is
not for us, my holy Brethren, it is not for us to mix with it: it would become
us better to retire, and pray and weep for public offenses: not to lie as
stumbling blocks, and pull Gods anger upon us; but to stand in the gap, and
turn away his wrathful Indignation: This were the way to be held in greater
account, if we were less seen; to be more conspicuous, if we were more hidden;
if like the Halcyon birds, we came not out but to calm a tempestuous, Sea, to
remove troubles, and to bring peace to the vexed Conscience. Woe be to them
that gad abroad on contrary errands, even to raise stirs, and to cause
offenses. Vae Sacerdoti, woe be to the Churchman, by whose irregular Life the
offense comes.

A sinful compliance with the humors of Factious people, against the prescribed
Order of Holy Church, is another offense in Clergymen; and too many such false
brethren there are amongst us. I speak this to their shame, who like Aristotle's
first matter, are capable of any form which profit shall stamp upon them, and
will be any thing, but what they ought to be: for in declaiming against abuses,
their meaning is not to have them redressed, but by disgracing the present
posture of things, to make a way for their own exploded Discipline; it being a
certain Rule, that he which persuades a multitude that things are not as they
ought to be, shall never want Rewards, nor Auditors; because under this fair
and plausible color, whatsoever they utter passes for good and current: These
are the seeming friends that do more hurt to the Church of England, than her
professed enemies: For open force is not so dangerous, as close dissimulation.
In which respect it may be truly said of our Church, what is spoken of the
Eagle in the Greek Apologue, (...), that died with the greater horror, because
she received her mortal Wound, with a Dart which was winged with a Feather of
her own kind. These serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly, who
creep to the Altar to devour the Church's Morsels, whilst privately they cry,
Down with it, down with it, even to the ground. And though by Subscription they
have given us an assurance of their Submission, yet by conforming with a
grudging conscience, out of necessity, and not with a ready mind, do more
undermine the Churches Impositions, than the Nonconformists themselves. They
were unhappy in their Education, and (to prove they are like glass, which once
being cracked, does ever remain crazed and unsound) do continue obstinate and
incorrigible, in their sneaking obnuntiations: and accordingly when they are
called to execute the Ministerial Function, if they may do it safely, and
without censure, it is ordinary without any remorse, to the great scandal of
poor people, and the hardening them in their Errors, upon all occasions, to
neglect the Constitutions of the Church: as for instance, if a zealous and rich
Malcontent desires the Baptism of his Child may not be accompanied with the
Sign of the Cross, it shall, to please this Opinionist, be censured as a Romish
use, and omitted accordingly; though the Incumbent is sensible, that very act
renders him Perjured in the wilful breach of his Oath of Canonical Obedience.
If a sick person entreats the Prayers of the Congregation, the Office of the
Church for that purpose shall be neglected in the Desk, to show how far the
Mimick can exceed the Churches prescription in his Extemporary abilities in the
Pulpit, And because the common Devotions of the Church must precede the Sermon,
they shall be so irreverently hurryed over, that the people may easily perceive
the Heteroclite performs them not as Prayers, but as an imposed Task, for which
he mourns in secret. These are the slights which our Semiconformists use, to
secure the good Opinion of the Factious, and to stigmatize their Zealous
brethren with the Name of Rigid Conformists, who but conscionably perform what
they apprehend to be their Duty. This gives us cause to complain with the
Prophet, that the Leaders of the people cause them to err, and deserve to be
sharply rebuked, that they may be sound in the Faith, and not tossed to and fro
with every wind of popular oblimation. For though they applaud themselves with
the gilded title of moderate Men, they are in plain and true English, the Pest
and Bane of our Church, whose ambodextry contributes not to the strengthening of
the Edifice, but to the demolishing of the Fabric

Paul exhort men to Moderation by his own example, when he became all things to
all men, that he might gain some?

omnifarious principle, imports no more than this, that he denied himself in
the use of his liberty, to gain those that were not acquainted with the extent
of it; and dealt with all sorts of men in that way, which he thought most
probable to convert them to Christianity, and keep them in the regular
profession of it: Not that he sneaked and dissembled, and made weak people
think that he was of their mind; and so confirmed them in their mistakes and
follies: Nor had he any regard to the humors of unreasonable and merely
captious people, that will be finding faults upon no ground at all: this must
needs be unworthy of an Apostle; for it is so of all inferior Ministers, and
likewise of every private Christian. Let me therefore entreat you, my brethren,
who are too guilty in this particular, not to sacrifice your Souls to your
Fortunes, nor repair a subsistence with the least breach of your Consciences:
But for time to come approve your selves faithful, by employing your best
diligence to inform the judgment of others, (especially those that seem to have
your Persons in admiration) concerning the Nature and Use of those things they
oppose with so much fury; and not humor them in their petulant dislikes, and
pernicious errors; nor suffer them to continue therein without your rebukes,
either public, or private, as prudence shall direct, and opportunity minister
occasion: and this will be a means to pacify the God you have angered, the
Consciences you have grieved, the Church that you have wronged, and your Souls
and Brethren whom you have offended. Voe Semi-christiani, woe to the partial
Conformist, by whose sinful compliance the offense comes.

There be little ones in the Family too; little ones in a literal sense, such
as our Savior was now pointing unto: and here I must bring you forth the
Guardians of Youth, Parents, and Poedagogues, and Heads of Families, who either
by negligent nurture, or naughty examples, are guilty of an Offense. What an
offense was it in Noah's Family, to see the old man so drowned in his excess!
How is Cham heightened with scorn and derision, Shem and Japhet dejected with
shame and grief, at the ill example of their aged Father.

As water follows the track of your fingers end, so young children with the
least word or deed, are drawn away: I speak that which I have seen with my
Father, and you do that which you have seen with your father, says our blessed
Savior. John 8.38.
How ready are children to do that which they see done by their Parents! Beware
therefore, all you that have attained this Reverend Name, that you let not your
children see you do or speak, that which they cannot do or speak after you, but
they must sin.

The most powerful motive to sin, and that which makes a forcible entry into
the Soul, is Vice armed with the authority of a Parent; be it Lying, Swearing,
Drinking, or Gaming, that usual, though dangerous Sport, which does not so much
recreate, as infect them with all ill customs, of lying, and couzenage, and
the like abominations

Many times, on the other hand, Parents corrupt their children with too much
indulgence and mildness toward them, never finding in their hearts to chastize
them, upon a foolish conceit, they are too near our bloods to be controuled.
What! do not vermin, and other superfluities proceed from our own bodies, yet
being noisome are cast forth? How shall Amaleck be chased away, if the Rod of
Moses be not lifted up? How shall growing corruptions be rooted out, when
Discipline and due correction are laid aside? it was this plunged King David in
a world of Woe; for cockering one of his Sons, he felt the loss of two: Had
Amnon been chid by his Father, he had not perhaps been murdered by his
Brother. Yet so far are many from observing these things, that they rather
cherish them in their faults, hearing their lewd words with applause and
smiling, as the tokens of a pregnant Nature; which fond indulgence, as it is
still pernicious to children, by unsinewing their minds and bodies into all
kind of Luxuary, so it proves many times no less disastrous unto Parents, who
are commonly most grieved with those whom they breed most wantonly: Then
feeling the sad truth of Syracides his Observation, Cocker thy child and he
shall make thee afraid, play with him and he will bring thee to heaviness.
Ecclus. 30.9.
He that will let his children alone till they have (...) Animum consilio ac
ratione firmatum, a fixed and settled judgment, shall find evil habits so fixed
and permanent, that good counsel will be too easy a remedy.

It Is another offense in point of Nurture, that they who would not lay the
Fruit of their Orchards on a dank floor where it would rot and putrify, will
yet suffer the Fruit of their Loins to be depraved and corrupted in bad
company, which is the plague and bane of all Goodness; whose poisonous leaven
more infecteth, and sinketh deeper into the soul, than all the precepts of
Virtue and Godliness can do on the contrary: Such Parents are like the Estrich
that is hardened against her young ones; who provide not for their children the
sincere Milk of the Word, that they might grow thereby: But from the time of
their being washed in the Laver of Regeneration, take no more care, but expose
them forthwith to such lusts and conversations, as are much more wild and
savage than those beasts Lam. 4.3. Job. 39.14.
in the comparison; to which they cannot choose but be a prey. They strive
indeed (as the moding term is), to educate them into men betimes; that is, make
them conversible and bold: and since for that they must engage them into
frequent company, where they see and hear men's follies, that I say no worse, by
that means they come to have their understandings stored with nothing but the
modes and sins of Conversation; filled with froth and mud, for want of
religious principles being instilled and wrought into their minds before these
evil days came on.

It Is another offense in point of Nurture, that young ones for durty respects
are forced to a course of life either in the Church or Kingdom, which they
neither affect, nor are fit for. A man would think the maid that let in St.
Peter to a warm Hall, and a good fire in a cold night, had done him an high
courtesy, but it proved a manifest injury: for that very maid drew him first to
the foul sin which he shortly after committed. So men think they have fairly
acquitted themselves in Offices of love and care, if they can bring up a child
to be a Scholar. Nay, the violence of some rigorous Pedant (who, I verily
think, is as deep in our Saviors woe, as any other) shall make him one whether
he will or no: and now an Advowson is bought for him, the maid has opened the
door: worldly policy and covetousness has brought the youngster into the high
Priests Hall to the fireside; but how often does sin and offenses follow! your
Scholar perhaps has neither body nor brain fit for his Function; and then like
cruel Palamedes, you have but laid your child before Ulysses Plough to be run
over; or like our Lords Tempter, you have but led him up to the Pinnacle of the
Temple to get a fall. This might have been prevented, if you had gone to work
like the old Spartans; they would feel the palms of a man's hand, whether they
were hard or soft, whether he were like to be a painful man, ere they would
choose him into a public Office. We should do as much in the trial of Wits and
Inclinations, ere we mark out a little one for his profession: for many times
the Kingdom is robbed of a good artificer, and the Church over-charg'd with a
bad Minister.

In Heads of Families it is an offense that there is no more care took of a
Servants Soul: the Master Gent. Calling.
imposes his Vices upon his whole Family, as if they were to be the badges and
cognizances to witness whom they belonged to; as if they thought it a
disparagement to their qualities, to go to Hell without an honorable Retinue.
Hence disorders and drunkenness are winked at, as if they made for the Masters
credit; as if Bounty could not be seen but in a Deluge, or Hospitality stood in
staggering; that many of them are wholly kept with Kitchen drudgery, or wordly
employment, from the service of God. Voe patri, Voe patri familias, Voe
lactantibus! woe be them that give suck, if they bring up their babes no
better; woe to the Parent, to the good man of the house, by whose ill example
or loose Government the offense comes.

There are offenses we see in the fails of Superiors, there are offenses too
in the fails of the religious. As pilferers regard not empty Cottages, but prey
and break into rich houses to rob and spoil; so that cunning tempter bestirs
himself most to rifle such hearts as are richly fraught with the graces of God:
and many times his desire is attained; for through those relics of corruption
that still reside in the best of us, we are too prone to stumble into the paths
of sin. Certainly, Religion it self gets a blot in the fall of a just man;
how is the Name of the Lord blasphemed, when the man after his own heart is
found an Adulterer? let him therefore that thinks he stands sure, let him that
professes the Name of Christ with zeal and ardour, let him take heed lest he
fall, lest the profane Philistines rejoice, and uncircumcised hearts triumph
over goodness it self, in the fall of her zealous Votary.

None so much detriment Religion, as those that profess a believing in Christ,
but in their conversations deny the Lord that bought them. Now what is this,
but to act the Heathen under the Honorable name of a Christian, and offend
more heinously for being invested with that Sacred Title? as the higher our
Prerogative is, so much the greater is our fault. The very Religion we profess,
is an aggravation to our sins; he that knows his Masters will, and squares not
his life accordingly, does but load his Soul with the greater guilt and more
intolerable punishment. There may be some excuse for ignorance, but the
contemptuous and wilful sins of professors, will not obtain an easy pardon; to
him that knows to do good, and does it not, to him it is sin. Jam. 4.17.
With what face can we look up and call our selves by Christ's Name, who are
shamefully upbraided by the practice of a Pericles, Socrates, and Aristides,
who are accounted Heathens and Barbarous? what prodigies of baseness do we
Christians make our selves, upon the account of our scandalous practices, whose
holy Religion lays undispensible obligations upon its followers, only to think
upon and to do whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just,
whatsoever are of good report: and it is heartily to be wished, that men would
not pride themselves in the mistaken signs of Grace, and think their condition
good, only because they have persuaded themselves to believe so; but would
endeavor to be true and real Christians, that the Name of God and Religion be
not evil spoken of for their miscarriages.

Lastly, Men and Women offend one another, by that wanton garb of Apparel they
have taken up. Light Weeds I know are accounted but a slender fault, but why
should not our Pulpits arraign that which Esaiahs did? how does that noble
Prophet lift up his voice like a trumpet, proclaiming an heavy woe to those
that draw iniquity with cords of vanity? To steal a silken string were no great
Robbery; but how if a row of Diamonds hung upon it? how if on these things we
count but light and vain toys, monstrous iniquities do depend? Pride and
haughtiness, oppression and envy, scandal and lust, what goodly Patrimonies do
they not exhaust? what works of mercy do they not devour? what honest eyes do
they not offend? what hearts do they not batter? O God, what do we mean to
endanger one another? why do we kindle the flame of Lust in another bosom?
should our own hearts be innocent, yet we draw suspicion and envy upon our
selves. Our blessed Savior would have us wise as Serpents, and it is a piece of
the Serpents wisdom, that coming abroad to drink, he leaves his poison at home,
lest other Creatures perish by his infection, that drink at the same Spring.
Let us, my brethren, be thus wise; does any infectious evil reside in our
Souls, any poison of Asps lurk under our tongues, any foul enormity appear in
our lives, any unjust violence defile our hands, any scandalous Weeds hang on
our backs; either spit your poison out, or so smother it, that it hurt none but
thy self. Was not young Jacob, says St. Ambrose, even then an happy man, when
he was turned out to the wide world, when he was fain to forsake his Country,
and Friends, and his Fathers house? how happy a Voyage did that forlorn
wanderer make, that thus saved his own life, and his Brothers innocence? get
thee gone, O man, get thee gone from thy brothers sight, if there be ought in
thee that offends his eye, or wounds his Soul; and that for thy brothers
sake, for thy Saviors sake, for thy own sake.

First, for thy Brothers sake: for by thine offensive carriage thy weak Brother
perishes. 1 Cor. 8.10.
Methinks every word is a new enforcement; offend him not, for he is thy
Brother; offend him not, because he is weak; offend him not, because he
perishes by it. The Jews that sought our Saviors life, would be thought
Abraham's Children; but Christ fetches their Pedigree from Hell; they are of
their father the Devil, who was a Murderer from the beginning. Joh. 8.44.
How was the Devil a Murderer? he came not with a Sword or Poniard at his
side, but whispered a wicked word, and killed us all: he killed our bodies, he
killed our Souls too, when our forefathers were tempted to sin. Now if those
that sought the bodily death of our Savior, were in this the brats of that
murderous Feind, how can we think better of them that seek the destruction of
Souls, since it was of the Soul too that the Devil was a Murderer from the
beginning? By killing a man, thou do but rob him of that Breath which is
common to him with other Creatures; but by leading him into a vicious course,
thou strippest his Soul of that life of Grace, which the Angels of Heaven are
more happy in than in their natural being: murder the Body, and thou take
but his Soul from it; but mislead his Soul, and thou take away his God.

2. As for thy brothers sake, so for thy Saviors sake too, take heed of
offenses, lest thy weak Brother perish for whom Christ dyed. Consider, O Man,
says holy Bernard, if the Son of God gave up his precious Blood to redeem the
Souls of men, do not they persecute him worse, who rob him of his purchased
Souls, than the Jews did, who shed his precious Blood? it is one of the Laws of
God, that if a stack of Corn, or Corn-field, had been burnt up, he that kindled
the fire was to make amends for the loss. For a whole year the poor Husbandman
had took pains for that hoped^ crease; but it was not one, nor two, nor three,
but thirty three years together, that the Son of God labored hard to get a
crop of Souls into his Garner: what fearful Agonies did he go through! what a
bloody sweat bedewed his face, that these fruits might prosper and grow! and
rather than go without this fruit, he would give his life for it: every
Christian Soul is (as it were) a sheaf of this harvest, which after so many
toylsome endeavors of that careful Husbandman to bring it to maturity, if thou
shall now scorch and burn up, by mis-leading a man first into the crooked paths
of sin, and at last plunge him into the unquenchable flames of Hell; has not
the Lord of the Harvest Reason to look these consumed sheaves, this spoiled
crop, this wastful detriment should be made good? and how this restitution
should be made, God Almighty has directed in another case: If a man dig or
open a pit, and an Ox or an Ass fall therein, the owner of the pit shall
restore the price of the beast. Exodus 21.33.
By drawing thy brother to sin, thou have opened a bottomless pit, in which his
Soul is everlastingly plunged: and since thou can not restore that perished
Soul, thou must be accountable to God for the price of it; and what was the
price of thy Brothers Soul, but the precious blood of the Son of God? let me
entreat you therefore to consider in time, that it is no petty driblet, no
trifling arrearage thou runnest into, but it is those invaluable drops of thy
Saviors Blood thou art now guilty of: and with what payment can thou wipe
out such a score! why, if there be none else, it must be such a recompense as
the Mosaical Law exacted, a life for a life, an eye for an eye, a tooth for a
tooth, a burning for a burning, a wound for a wound. Have thou been an helper
of thy Brothers destruction? a Soul must go for a Soul, a burning for a
burning; thou that have brought his Soul within the reach of those endless
torments, can look for no less to be the portion of thine inheritance, than
to be cast irrecoverably into the merciless and devouring flames of Gods
everlasting displeasure.

3. For thy own sake, give no offense: for as Moses loads him with fearful
curses, that shall remove the bounds of his Neighbors land; so the Law of God
has fenced in the Souls of men; and he that makes them common, which that
Divine rule had enclosed, stands liable to the seven curses of the Son of God,
woe be to that man; and thus we find it of old: for as they that intend to
destroy any devouring beasts of prey, can do it no better way than by killing
those that are great with young; so Almighty God has always took vengeance on
the Parents and Authors of sin, that he might root out the young cubs in their
Dams belly.

When the Jews were consulting what to do with him that gathered sticks on
their Sabbath Day, Gods Oracle instructed them to stone him to death, because
(as Theodoret states it, though the fault in it self were a light one) he was
the first that offended in this kind: the first man that violated that Sacred
Law, and in his mis-leading act, as in the Womb of a she-Wolf, the future
transgressions of others lay bleeding. For this cause, when that vile Traitor
Judas had hanged himself, his bowels gushed out on the ground, because he was
the first man that laid wicked hands on the body of Christ. Now when that
bloody Wolf had devoured the consecrated sop, methinks all those indigested
Gobbets unworthy receivers take in, were now contained in his belly; God
therefore provides that belly should be presently ripped up, and those bowels
gush out, that these horrible profanations, even in their Dams belly, might
receive their Deaths wound. The Serpent, says Chrysostom, was punished worse
than the woman, the woman worse than the man; Isabel that devised the mischief,
worse than Ahab that took away the vineyard: so thou that art the moving cause
of another destruction, must look for an heavier torment than those thou have
seduced: the people of God were plagued for sinning with the Daughters of
Midian, but the Midianite was worse plagued for laying those stumbling blocks
before the people of God.

What a spotted Chronicle attends that Son of Nebat, Jeroboam, he that set up
his glittering Calves to keep the people from the Temple of God! this
scandalous affront was so taken to heart, that almost in every page it is
complained of: whenever the slips of other Princes fall into mention,
Jeroboam is cried out of as the ringleader; Jeroboam the Son of Nebat that
made Israel sin. So hateful to God was the offensive Idolatry of this man, that
even long before he rejected the Tribe Jeroboam came of, he chose not the Tribe
of Ephraim (as the Psalm speaks) Psalm. 76.67.
and Theodoret venters to tell you why, Because it was of this Tribe Jeroboam
descended, who plucked away Ten Tribes from the Worship of God. Even in this
life the plagues of God meet with scandalous sins, a blemished name, outward
mishaps, and the fierce sting of an accusing Conscience. But our Saviors woe
implies more, the lasting torments of another world; and therefore he says,
'twere better a millstone was hanged about thy neck, and thou cast into the Sea,
than these offenses were given; for that Massy piece could only sink thy body
to the Seas bottom, but lewd and offensive courses will at last drown both Body
and Soul too in the Sulphurous lake of Hellfire.

Now to keep off the blurs of following offenses, or the woes of offenses
already come, I advise men to three things; Restitution, Circumspection,
Mortification.

1. First, in case of offenses already given, I advise Restitution. For can we
think Almighty God takes more care of our Silver, than of our Souls? no! one
Soul is of more value with him, than the wealth of the whole world: if then he
will have Zacheus restore that base Metal that was unjustly taken away, how
much more does he look some amends should be made for a precious, for an
immortal Soul? have thy public aberrations given the world an offense? let thy
public amendment proclaim thee to be a new man. As those Eastern Sages while
they stayed with Herod, lost the sight of the Star, but when they left Herod
met with it again: so if thou have lost the splendour of thy good name, by
wallowing in a known sin, recover it again by forsaking thy vicious courses.
Have thou drawn men by thy lewd suggestions? draw them to God by thy good
Counsels; if that fail, by thy fervent prayer: if the same parties thou can
not recover, bring in others instead of them; as, if thou have borrowed so many
Crowns and could not repay the very pieces, it is enough if thou return an
equivalent sum. But thou will say, It lies not in my power to do this, I shall
but get mocks, and do no good. Let not that obstruct thy holy endeavors; for
whether they turn or no, thou shall be no looser; the God of Heaven is a
gracious paymaster; and as the hired labourer that has dug in the garden,
or held the plow, has not his payment deferred till the flowers blow, or
harvest appear, but is immediately discharged, though those prosper not: so if
thou work in the vineyard of God by thy good Counsels, and holy examples,
whether the fruit be answerable to thy pains, or not, thou shall be sure of thy
reward in heaven.

2. Since these things are thus, since every stumbling block we lay in our
brothers way, does but kindle our flame higher in the next world; what manner
of persons ought we to be! how holy and spotless in our converse! how strict
and cautelous in our lives, like those nimble Creatures in Ezekiel? Ezekiel. 1.
what a sort of Eyes had we need have on all sides? how importunately should we
invoke God, to order our steps aright, that we hurt not our feet against the
stones! to keep the door of our mouth, that we offend not with our tongues; and
the windows of our eyes, that they gaze not on forbidden objects; to manacle
our hands from violence and oppression, and restrain our feet from revenge! how
diligently should we all watch, lest we enter our selves and draw others with
us into temptation?

3. But if offenses will come in spite of our circumspection, our Saviors
Counsel may help all; do but cut off these offending parts with the keen razor
of a sober mortification, and thou art safe; whether it be a wanton eye, or a
griping fist, or a foot too swift in the pursuit of a bloody revenge; whether
it be a licentious tongue, or a quaffing Weazand, or the lap of a scandalous
weed; whatsoever irregular lust it be that lays a stumbling block, an
occasion to fall in thy brothers way, do but pare them away with the dreadful
remembrance of their imminent woe, lest the offending part being now spared,
thy whole body be afterward cast into Hell.

Now to God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, be ascribed all honor and glory,
world without end. Amen.
FINIS.

