The King's Power in Ecclesiastical Matters truly Stated.
HIS present Majesty having erected an High Commission Court, to enquire of,
and make redress in Ecclesiastical Matters, etc.

Q. Whether such a Commission, as the Law now stands, be good or not?

And I hold that the Commission is not good. And to maintain my Opinion herein
I shall, in the first place, briefly consider what power the Crown of England
had in Ecclesiastical or Spiritual Matters (for I take them to be synonymous
Terms) before 17. Car. 1. ca. 11. And, 2dly. I shall particularly consider that
Act of 17. Car. 1. ca. 11. And, 3dly. I shall consider 13. Car. 2. ca. 12. And
by that time I have fully considered these Three Acts of Parliament it will
plainly appear, That the Crown of England has now no power to erect such a
Court.

I must confess and do agree, That by the common Law all Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction was lodged in the Crown; and the Bishops, and all spiritual
Persons derived their Jurisdiction from thence: And I cannot find, that there
were any attempts by the Clergy to divest the Crown of it, till William the
First's time, in whose time, and his Successors down to King John, the Pope
obtained four Points of Jurisdiction, 1st. Sending of Legates into England.
2dly. Drawing of Appeals to the Court of Rome. 3dly. Donation of Bishoprics
and other ecclesiastical Benefices. And, 4ly. Exemption of Clerks from the
secular Power. Which four Points were gained within the space of an Hundred and
odd Years; but with all the opposition imaginable of the Kings and their
People; and the Kingdom never came to be absolutely inslaved to the Church of
Rome till King John's time; and then both King and People were, and so
continued to be in a great measure in Henry 3d's time; and so would in all
likelihood have continued, had not the Wise Edward 1st. opposed the Pope's
Usurpation, and made the Statute of Mortmain: But that which chiefly brake the
Neck of this, was, That after the Pope and Clergy had endeavored in Ed. 2. his
time, and in the beginning of Ed. 3. to Usurp again; Ed. 3. did resist the
Usurpation, and made the Statutes of Provisors, 25. Ed. 3. and 27. Ed. 3. And
Richard 2. backed those Acts with 16. Rich. 2. ca. 5. and kept the Power in the
Crown by them Laws; which being interrupted by Queen Mary, (a bloody Bigot of
the Church of Rome) during her Reign, there was an Act made in 1. Eliz. ca. 1.
Keble's Stat.
which is Entitled, An Act to restore to the Crown the ancient Jurisdiction
over the Estate, Ecclesiastical and Spiritual, and abollishing all foreign
Powers repugnant to the same. From which Title I collect three things, 1st.
That the Crown had anciently a Jurisdiction over the Estate Ecclesiastical and
Spiritual. 2dly. That that Jurisdiction had for some time been at least
suspended, and the Crown had not exercised it. 3dly, That this Law did not
introduce a New Jurisdiction, but restored the Old; but with restoring the old
Jurisdiction to the Crown, gave a power of Delegating the Exercise of it. And
as a consequence from the whole, that all Jurisdiction that is Lodged in the
Crown, is subject nevertheless to the Legislative power in the Kingdom.

I shall now consider, what Power this Act of 1. Eliz. 1. declares to have been
anciently in the Crown, and that appears from Sect. 16, 17, 18. of the same Act.

Section 16 Abolisheth all Foreign Authority in Cases Spiritual and Temporal,
in these words, And to the intent that all the Usurped and Foreign Power and
Authority, Spiritual and Temporal may for ever be clearly Extinguished, and
never to be used or obeyed within this Realm, or any other your Majesty's
Dominions or Countries; (2) may it please your Highness, that it may be further
Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Foreign Prince, Person, Prelate,
State or Potentate Spiritual or Temporal shall at any time after the last day
of this Session of Parliament, use, enjoy, or exercise any manner of Power,
Jurisdiction, Superiority, Authority, Pre-eminence or Privilege Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical, within this Realm, or within any other your Majesty's Dominions
or Countries that now be, or hereafter shall be, but from thenceforth the same
shall be clearly Abolished out of this Realm, and all other your Highnesses
Dominions for ever; any Statute, Ordinance, Custom, Constitutions or any other
matter or cause whatsoever to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding. And
after the said Act has abolished all Foreign Authority, in the very next
Section, Sect. 17. it annexeth all Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction to the Crown in
these words, And that also it may likewise please your Highness, That it may be
Established and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That such Jurisdictions,
Privileges, Superiorities and Preheminences, Spiritual and Ecclesiastical as
by any Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Power or Authority has heretofore been, or
may lawfully be exercised, or used for the Visitation of the Ecclesiastical
State and Persons, and for Reformation, Order and Correction of the same, and
of all manner of Errors, Heresies, Schisms, Abuses, Offenses, Contempts and
Enormities shall for ever, by Authority of this present Parliament, be United
and Annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm. From these words, That such
Jurisdiction, etc. as by any Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Power or Authority had
then-to-fore been Exercised or used were annexed to the Crown, I observe, That
the Four things aforesaid, wherein the Pope had incroached, were all restored
to the Crown and likewise all other Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction that had been
exercised or used in this Kingdom, and did thereby become absolutely vested in
the Crown.

Then Section 18. gives a power to the Crown to assign Commissioners to
Exercise this Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in these words, And that your
Highness, your Heirs and Successors, Kings or Queens of this Realm shall have
full Power and Authority, by virtue of this Act, by Letters Patents under the
Great Seal of England, to Assign, Name and Authorize when and as often as your
Highness, your Heirs or Successors shall think meet and convenient, and for
such and so long time as shall please your Highness your Heirs or Successors,
such person or persons being Natural born subjects to your Highness, your Heirs
or Successors, as your Majesty, your Heirs or Successors shall think meet to
exercise, use, occupy and execute under your Highness, your Heirs and
Successors, all manner of Jurisdictions, Privileges and Preheminences in any
wise touching or concerning any Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction within
these your Realms of England and Ireland, or any other your Highnesses
Dominions and Countries, (2) and to Visit, Reform, Redress, Order, Correct and
Amend all such Errors, Heresies, Schisms, Abuses, Offenses, Contempts and
Enorimties whatsoever, which by any manner of Spiritual or Ecclesiastical
Power, Authority or Jurisdiction can or may lawfully be Reformed, Ordered,
Redressed, Corrected, Restrained or Amended, to the pleasure of Almighty God,
the increase of Virtue and the conservation of the Peace and Unity of this
Realm; (3) And that such person or persons so to be named, assigned, authorized
and appointed by your Highness, your Heirs or Successors after the said Letters
Patents to him or them made and delivered, as is aforesaid, shall have full
Power and Authority by virtue of this Act and of the said Letters Patents under
your Highness, your Heirs and Successors to exercise, use and execute all the
premises according to the tenor and effect of the said Letters Patents, any
matter or cause to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

So that, I take it, that all manner of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction was in the
Crown by the Common Law of England, and declared to be so by the said Act of 1.
Eliz. 1. and by that Act a power given to the Crown to assign Commissioners to
Exercise this Jurisdiction; which was accordingly done by Queen Eliz. and a
High Commission Court was by her Erected; which sat and held Plea of all
Causes, Spiritual and Ecclesiastical during the Reign of Queen Eliz. King James
the first, and King Charles the first, till the 17. year of his Reign.

Which leads me to consider the Statute of 17. Car. 1. ca. 11. which Act
recites the Title of 1. Eliz. ca. 1. and Sect. 18. of the same Act, and recites
further, Section 2. That whereas by color of some words in the aforesaid
branch of the said Act, whereby Commissioners are Authorized to execute their
Commission according to the tenor and effect of the Kings Letters Patents, and
by Letters Patents grounded thereupon, the said Commissioners have to the great
and insufferable Wrong and Oppression of the Kings Subjects, used to Fine and
Imprison them, and to exercise other Authority, not belonging to Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction restored by that Act, and diverse other great Mischiefs and
Inconveniences have also ensued to the Kings Subjects by occasion of the said
Branch, and Commisions issued thereupon, and the executions thereof: Therefore
for the repressing and preventing of the aforesaid Abuses, Mischiefs and
Inconveniences in time to come, (by Sect. 3. the said Clause in the said Act 1.
E. 1. is Repealed with a Non obstante to the said Act in these words) Be it
Enacted by the Kings most excellent Majesty, and the Lords and Commons in this
present Parliament Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That the
aforesaid Branch, Clause Article or Sentence contained in the said Act, and
every word, matter and thing contained in that Branch, Clause, Article or
Sentence shall from henceforth be Repealed, Annulled, Revoked, Annihilated and
utterly made Void for ever; any thing in the said Act to the contrary in any
wise notwithstanding.

And in Sect. 5. of the same Act it is Enacted, That from and after the First
of August, (in the said Act mentioned) all such Commissions shall be void, in
these words, And be it further Enacted, That from and after the said First day
of August no new Court shall be erected, ordained or appointed within this
Realm of England, or Dominion of Wales, which shall or may have the like Power,
Jurisdiction or Authority as the said High Commission Court now has or
pretends to have; but that all and every such Letters Patents, Commissions
and Grants, made or to be wade, by his Majesty, his Heirs or Successors; and
all Powers and Authorities, Granted or pretended, or mentioned to be Granted
thereby, and all Acts Sentences and Decrees to be made, by virtue or color
thereof, shall be utterly void and of none effect.

By which Act then, the power of Exercising Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction by
Commissioners, under the Broad-Seal, is so taken away, that it provides, no
such Power shall ever for the future be Delegated by the Crown, to any Person
or Persons whatsoever.

Let us then in the last place consider, Whether the Act of 13. Car. 2. ca. 12.
has Restored this Power or not?

And for this, I take it, that it is not restored by the said Act, or any
Clause in it; and to make this evident, I shall First set down the whole Act,
and then consider it in the several Branches of it, that relate to this matter:
The Act is Entitled,

An Act for Explanation of a Clause contained in an Act of Parliament made in
the 17th. Year of the Late King Charles, Entitled, An Act for Repeal of a
Branch of a Statute in primo Elizabethae, concerning Commissioners for Causes
Ecclesiastical.

The Act it self runs thus, Whereas in an Act of Parliament made in the
Seventeenth Year of the Late King Charles, Entitled, An Act for Repeal of a
Branch of a Statute primo Elizabethae, concerning Commissioners for Causes
Ecclesiastical, it is (amongst other things) Enacted, That no Archbishop,
Bishop nor Vicar General, nor any Chancellor, nor Commissary of any
Archbishop, Bishop or Vicar General, nor any Ordinary whatsoever, nor any
other Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Judge, Officer or Minister of Justice, nor
any other person or persons whatsoever, exercising Spiritual or Ecclesiastical
Power, Authority, or Jurisdiction, by any Grant, License or Commission of the
Kings Majesty, his Heirs or Successors, or by any Power or Authority derived
from the King, His Heirs or Successors, or otherwise, shall (from and after the
First Day of August which then should be in the Year of our Lord God, One
thousand six hundred forty one) Award, Impose or Inflict any Pain, Penalty,
Fine, Amercement, Imprisonment or other Corporal Punishment upon any of the
Kings Subjects, for any Contempt, Misdemeanor, Crime, Offense, Matter or Thing
whatsoever, belonging to Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Cognizance or
Jurisdiction; (2.) Whereupon some doubt has been made that all ordinary power
of Coertion and proceeding in Causes Ecclesiastical were taken away, whereby
the ordinary course of Justice in Causes Ecclesiastical has been obstructed.
(3.) Be it therefore Declared and Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty,
by and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords and Commons in this present
Parliament Assembled, and by the Authority thereof, That neither the said Act
nor any thing therein contained, does or shall take away any ordinary Power or
Authority from any of the said Archbishops, Bishops, or any other person or
persons, named as aforesaid, but that they and every of them, exercising
Ecclesiastical Iurisdicton, may Proceed, Determine, Sentence, Execute and
Exercise all manner of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and all Censures and
Coertions appertaining and belonging to the same, before any making of the Act
before recited, in all Causes and Matters belonging to Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, according to the Kings Majesty's Ecclesiastical Laws used and
practiced in this Realm, in as ample Manner and Form as they did and might
lawfully have done before making of the said Act.

Sect. 2. And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the before
recited Act of Decimo septimo Car. and all the Matters and Clauses therein
contained (excepting what concerns the High Commission Court, or the new
Erection of some such like Court by Commission) shall be and is thereby
Repealed to all intents and purposes whatsoever, any thing, clause or sentence
in the said Act contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

Sect. 3. Provided always, and it is hereby Enacted, That neither this Act nor
any thing herein contained shall extend, or be construed to Revive, or give
Force to the said Branch of the said Statute made in the said First Year of the
Reign of the said Late Queen Elizabeth mentioned in the said Act of Parliament
made in the said Seventeenth Year of the Reign of the said King Charles; but
that the said Branch of the said Statute made in the said First Year of the
Reign of the said Late Queen Elizabeth shall stand and be Repealed in such sort
as if this Act had never been made.

Sect. 4. Provided also, and it is hereby further Enacted, That it shall not be
lawful for any Archbishop, Bishop, Vicar General, Chancellor, Commissary, or
any other Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Judge, Officer or Minister, or any other
person having or exercising Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, to Tender
or Administer unto any person whatsoever, the Oath usually called the Oath Ex
Officio, or any other Oath whereby such person to whom the same is tendered or
Administered, may be charged or compelled to Confess or Accuse, or to purge him
or her self of any Criminal matter or thing whereby he or she may be liable to
Censure or Punishment; any thing in this Statute, or any other Law, Custom or
Usage heretofore to the contrary hereof in any wise notwithstanding.

Sect. 5. Provided always, That this Act or any thing therein contained shall
not extend or be construed to extend to give unto any Archbishop, Bishop or
any other Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Judge, Officer or other person or persons
aforesaid, any Power or Authority to Exercise, Execute, Inflict or Determine
any Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, Censure, or Coertion, which they might not by
Law have done before the Year of our Lord 1639. (2.) Nor to Abridge or Diminish
the Kings Majesty's Supremacy in Ecclesiastical Matters and Affairs, nor to
confirm the Canons made in the Year 1640. nor any of them, nor any other
Ecclesiastical Laws or Canons not formerly Confirmed, Allowed or Enacted by
Parliament, or by the Established Laws of the Land, as they stood in the Year
of our Lord 1639.

From the Title of the Act, and the Act it self considered, I gather,

First, That it is an Explanatory Act of the 17. of Car. 1. as to one
particular Branch of it, and not introductive of any New Law.

Secondly, That the occasion of making it was not from any doubt that did
arise, Whether the High Commission Court were taken away? or; Whether the Crown
had power to Erect any suchlike Court for the future, but from a doubt that
was made that all ordinary Power of Coertion, and proceedings in Causes
Ecclesiastical was taken away whereby Justice in Ecclesiastical Matters was
obstructed; and this doubt did arise from a Clause in 17. Car. 1. ca. 11. Sect.
4. herein mentioned to be recited in the said Act of 13. Car. 2. ca. 12.

Thirdly, That this Statute of 13. Car. 2. ca. 12. as appears upon the face of
it, was made to the intent the ordinary Jurisdiction which the Bishops and
other Ecclesiastical persons had always exercised under the Crown, might not be
infringed; but not to restore to the Crown the power of Delegating the Exercise
of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, by Letters Patents to Lay persons or any
others, and as to this nothing can be plainer than the words of the Act it
self, Sect. 2.

Whereby 17. Car. 1. is repealed but takes particular care to except what
concerned the High Commission Court or the new erection of some such Court by
Commission.

Neither did the Lawmakers think this Exception in that Statute of 13. Car. 2.
ca. 12. Sect. 2. to be sufficient, but to put the matter out of all doubt, in
the Third Section of the same Statute, It is provided and Enacted, That neither
that Act nor any thing therein contained, should extend or be construed to
revive, or give force to the Branch of 1. Eliz. 1. Sect. 18. but that the same
Branch should stand absolutely Repealed. And if so then the power of the Crown
to delegate the Exercise of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction is wholely taken away;
for it was vested in the Crown by 1 Eliz. 1. and taken away by 17. Car. 1. ca.
11. and is in no manner restored by 13. Car. 2.12. or any other.

But there may arise an Objection from the words in the Statute of 13. Car 2.
ca. 12. that says, That that Act shall not extend to abridge or diminish the
Kings Majesty's Supremacy in Ecclesiastical Matters and Affairs. Whence some
Men would gather; That the same Power still remains in the Crown that was in it
before 17. Car. 1. ca. 11.

To which Objection I give this Answer, That every Law is to be so construed,
that it may not be Felo de se, and that, for the honor of the Legislators,
King, Lords and Commons. Now I would appeal to the Gentlemen themselves that
assert this Doctrine, Whether they can so construe the Act of 13. Car. 2. ca.
12. as they pretend to do, without offering violence to their own Reason? For
when the 1 Car. 1. ca. 11. had absolutely Repealed the Branch of 1. Eliz. 1.
that vested the power in the Crown of Delegating the Exercise of Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, and Enacts, That no such Commission shall be for the future; and
the Act of 13. Car. 2. ca. 12. Repeals the 17. Car. 1. ca. 12. except what
relates to that particular Branch, there can no more of the Kings Supremacy in
Ecclesiastical Matters and Affairs, be saved by the saving in the 13. Car. 2.
ca. 12. but what was left in the Crown by 17. Car. 1. ca. 11.

And now I hope I have sufficiently evinced, That all the Proceedings before
the Ecclesiastical Commissioners are CORAM NON JVDICE; and therefore have
sufficient Reason to believe, That the same would never have been set on foot
by his present Majesty (who had always the Character of JAMES the Just, and
has Promised upon his Royal Word, That he will invade no Man's Property) had he
not been Advised thereunto by them who are better versed in the Canons of the
Church of ROME, than in the Laws that relate to the CROWN and CHURCH of ENGLAND.

FINIS.

