TYRANNY DETECTED AND THE Late Revolution Justified, BY THE LAW of GOD, the LAW
of NATURE, AND THE PRACTICE of All NATIONS.

BEING A History of the Late King JAMES's Reign, and a Discovery of His Arts,
and Actions, for Introducing Popery and Arbitrary Power, and the Intended
Subversion of the Protestant Interest in the Three Kingdoms: AND How that
Design affected all EUROPE.

WHEREIN All the Arguments against the REVOLUTION are fairly Propounded, and
Heartily Answered; the Pretended Reasons against the Present SETTLEMENT
Recited, and Modestly Refuted; and Obedience to King WILLIAM, and his
Government, Legally and Religiously Asserted.

By RIC. KINGSTON.

LONDON, Printed for John Nutt, near Stationers Hall, MDCXCIX.

To the Right Honorable WILLIAM Earl of Portland, Viscount Woodstock in the
County of Oxon, Baron of Cirencester in the County of Gloucester, Knight of the
most Noble Order of the Garter, One of the Lieutenant-Generals of His Majesty's
Forces, Groom of the Stole, First Gentleman of the King's Bedchamber, One of
the Lords of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, etc.
May it please your Lordship,
MY vast Obligations to your Lordship's Goodness exceeding all possibility of
Retaliation, and a private Acknowledgment being too faint a Testimony of the
Gratitude of my Mind, I have presumed on this Method to make my Thankfulness
extend beyond the Limits of my Life, and acquaint the World that His Majesty's
Bounty, and your Lordship's Favors, have not been thrown away upon an
Ungrateful Person, but bestowed upon a Dutiful Subject, who has hitherto, and
as long as God affords him Life, will express his Duty to your Lordship, in the
Sincerity of his Service to His Majesty's Government; and that I know will be
more acceptable to your Lordship, than tedious Harangues, or elegant
Expressions; where the greatest I can make, is the least that I acknowledge to
be due to your Lordship from me.

The following Discourse, my Lord, shows the Lawfulness of our late happy
Revolution, and might justly command my Obliging the World with an Account of
your Lordship's extraordinary Merits, in that, and all other Occasions, for
England's Safety; But when I consider your Lordship is better pleased in
deserving, than hearing an excellent Character, and that your Lordship being
one of those Pillars that under His Sacred Majesty support the Weight of
Public Transactions, I cannot hope the Great Affairs of your Eminent Station
should afford you Time to Read a longer Dedication, and therefore dare not give
my self the Liberty of writing so much as a short Elogy upon a Subject that is
able to justify the largest Panegyric. Now,

That your Lordship may enjoy a long and happy Life, exalted in your Prince's
Favor, and prosperous in all your Negotiations, to the Encouragement of true
Piety, Loyalty, and Virtue, shall be the Incessant Prayers of,

My Lord, Your Lordship's Most Humble, and Entirely Devoted Servant, RIC.
KINGSTON,

The PREFACE.
Reader,
THis small Treatise that now salutes your Hands, and is submitted to your
Censure, is the Tenth I have Writ and Published on the Government's Behalf
since the happy Revolution; and for some Reasons being forced to conceal my
Name, some of the Scribbling Tribe have been pleased to call themselves the
Authors of them, and have stolen Rewards from Public Hands for what were only
my Productions; therefore seeing most of those Books are Sold off, and as soon
as a Work of another Nature is Completed, that has been long under hand, I
shall Collect them all into one entire Volume, Publish it with my Name to it,
and leave the Usurpers to prove their Titles to what they have so unjustly
claimed. In relation to the Subsequent Discourse, I must acknowledge the Path
has been already trod by others; but whether in Brevity and Perspicuity they
have made the Way so plain to every Understanding, your self, not I, must now
determine. However, since large Volumes neither correspond with the Purses nor
Leisure of the Generality of English Readers, and that our Enemies talk this
Subject as leudly now, as at the Beginning of the Revolution, I have
accommodated our Friends with an Antidote against that Infection, at a Price,
and in a Volume, that will neither burden the Reader's Memory, waste his Time,
nor disoblige his Pocket; and yet furnish him with Reasons to answer all
Objections in favor of James the Second, or those advanced against our Legal
Establishment.

Vale.
Tyranny Detected; AND THE Late REVOLUTION JUSTIFIED, etc.
WHoever has an Inclination to satisfy himself, or others, that the Attempt of
the late King, in Subverting the Protestant Religion, and Introducing and
Establishing Popery in these Kingdoms, was no Design of a late Invention, nor
only owing to the Caprichio of his own Bigotry in the Romish Persuasion; to go
no further backward, must take his Era from the Restoration of Charles the
Second, who was Embarked in the same Enterprise though ( for fear of Traveling
again, as he was pleased to phrase it) he was unwilling to divulge it, till he
was leaving the World, and thought it Inconsistent with his future Estate, any
longer to conceal the Secret.

To the Banishment of the Royal Family, and their sitting loose in the
Principles of that truly Catholic Religion, in which they were Educated, must
be ascribed this fatal Change: Their Exile, and other Inconveniences, laid 'em
open to many Temptations: The Allurements and Promises of those Popish Princes,
on whom they must necessarily have some kind of Dependence, smoothed the Way;
and the Caresses, and Incessant Importunities of their Mother, assisted by the
Crafts and Treachery of Priests and Jesuits, (who know how to improve every
Advantage,) at length prevailed upon the Unsteady Royal Brothers, to Abjure the
Protestant, and Espouse the Popish Religion. Their Example Influenced many that
had either Dependence on them, or Expectation from them, to Write after
Quicquid Principes faciunt praecipere videntur. Quint. ^la. 4.
their Copy; and so the King, and Duke, were early furnished with a Set of
Men, Ready Prepared to execute what was subservient to the Great Design of
Subjecting England's Obedience to the Triple Crown.

Nor can any Rational Man (at this time of day) doubt, but that Charles the
Second Lived and Died a Papist, who has either heard what he both Said and Did
when under the Prospect of approaching Death, and past hope of Acting a Part
any longer; or who have Read the two Papers left in his Strong Box, published
to the World, and Attested by the late King James to be Genuine. No less have
we Reason to doubt, but Setting up Popery and Arbitrary Power was his
Darling-Project, since the whole Course of his Reign was but one Entire
Confirmation of those Destructive Machinations: And though with the Highest
Asseverations, and Dreadful Imprecations, he often denied both; making us
believe what he was not, by Inveighing against what he really was; yet the
Actions of Princes, that speak louder, and convince more effectually than
feigned Declarations, or Proclamations; Evidently showed he did but bubble, and
delude the Nation, till, Insensibly to us, and with Security to himself, he
might appear in his own Likeness, and do here, what in France he had promised.

His Engaging in an Expensive and Bloody War against the States of Holland,
could have no other Design, but to weaken the Protestant Interest, both in that
Commonwealth, and in his own Kingdom. Provocations they had given him none; nor
could he assign any Reason of State on his own part, unless he fetched it from
the Romish Alcoran, that says, we must have no Peace with Heretics, and allows
all Acts of Injury and Violence to Protestants.

His stifling the Popish Plot, and delivering the Papists, as much as in him
lay, from the Danger into which it had cast them; His being the Author, or, at
least, the Great Encourager of Sham-Plots, charged upon Protestants; His
continued Confederacies with the Known Enemy, to the Disobliging of his own
People; His Betraying of Europe by false and flattering Promises, when he might
have prescribed what Terms of the Peace he pleased, during the whole Course of
his Mediation at Nimeguen; or, in Conjunction with the Dutch, and other Allies,
have continued the War against France, to the greatest Advantage that ever was
put into the Hands of the Confederates; is a manifest Proof, how he stood
affected: And though he made great Shows as if he had been in earnest, all was
but Deceit and Color; for at length, contrary to all the Rules of Policy, and
without Ground or Pretext for such Proceedings, a Peace was clapped up Sir W.
Temple's Memoirs
in the Duchess of Portsmouth's Chamber, by the Intervention and Pursuit of
Monsieur Barillon; to the great Amazement, and general Prejudice of all
Christendom.

His then Majesty's neglecting to Assist the French Protestants, under great
Persecutions for their Religion, was more than a Tacit Consent to their Utter
Extirpation. His Intailing the Duke of York upon the Nation, contrary to the
Desires and Endeavors of Three Parliaments; and that not out of Love to his
Person, but Affection to Popery, which he knew that Prince was engaged by
Solemn Oath to establish; are Sufficient Evidences of Charles the Second's
Religion, and his being engaged in the Design of Subverting ours; which, I
think, no Man will question, that was not concerned with him in it.

'Twas by a strange Providence, as well as great Oversight in the Conduct of
the late King, that we arrived at this Discovery; for so many good Men that
believed the Tremendous Oaths his Majesty, Charles the Second had swallowed,
and thought it impossible he should prevaricate in so solemn a Matter, were so
fixed in their Opinions of King Charles's being a Protestant, and so Outrageous
against them that durst but whisper the contrary, that had it not been for his
Receiving Absolution, and Extreme Unction, from a Popish Priest, a little
before his Death; and for what he left in Writing, under his own Hand; he would
still have passed for a True Protestant; and the Nation, in favor of that
Monarch; would have still been kept under their former Delusions. And,

Though, at the same time, it gives us but an Indifferent Character of this
Prince, who, for the Lucre of a Crown, thus notoriously dissembled with God and
Man; and that in all his Declarations and Speeches to the Parliament, and in
Complying in the Offices, and in Communicating in the Holy Sacrament of the
Church of England, he wore the Vizor of a Protestant, when he was a Member of
the Church of Rome, and was by Oath, when he changed his Religion at St.
Germains, in France, obliged to set up Popery! Yet it gives us an Everlasting
Abhorrence of Romish Principles, which, for the Sordid Interest of that
Idolatrous Church, did not only Dispense with, but Indulge such Crimes, as the
worst of Heathens, and Pagans, would blush at the Thoughts of. And here, though
the Series of the Narration will hardly allow it, I will draw a Veil before the
Picture of this Unhappy Prince; and without Exposing his Intricate, and
Bifarious Actions to a more Open View, and Censure, content my self by telling
the Reader, he Lived in a Cloud, he Died in a Storm: But by what means he came
to his End, God knows; though the Suddenness and Meanness of his Interment Raised
many Suspicions.

Neque Sepulchrum, quo recipiat habet portum corporis:
Ubi remissa humana vita, corporis requiescat a malis.
He had no Tomb, nor with a Port was blessed;
Where, after Death, his Corpse in Peace might rest.
I am not unsensible that some Judicious Enquirers into these Affairs, will
think I ought to have begun the Designs of Advancing Popery and Arbitrary Power
with the Reign of the Family of the Stewarts in this Kingdom; But since I
cannot with Justice think the first two Kings designed to bring in Popery; and
having Occasion to take notice of every of their particular Efforts for the
Introduction of Arbitrary Power, in their several Reigns, in the subsequent
Discourse, I thought it excusable that I began no Earlier than the Restoration
of Charles the Second, and therefore proceed to show what Methods were taken by
him, to Erect those Idols, and subvert our Religion and Laws; and they were
principally Four: First,

1. By Abusing the Credulity of the Nation, with the fond Hopes of such
Privileges and Immunities, as were never intended them. Of this kind was his
Declaration from Breda; which promised Indulgence and Liberty of Conscience to
all Protestants, that would live peaceably under the Civil Government; But if
we had looked before us, and not suffered our Prejudices against the many late
Mock-Governments, the Tyranny of our Fellow Subjects, and the Transports of
being delivered from them, in the Accession of the Rightful King to his Throne,
to have blinded our Eyes, we might easily have perceived, that it was never in
his Thoughts to perform it: For, the Previous Obligations he was under, to the
Church of Rome, had a Virtue to Supersede, and Annul, his Engagements to
English Heretics. So that all he Intended by that Declaration, was, to Tie up
the Hands; and Lull those into a Tameness of Admitting his Return into his
Dominions, whom a Jealousy of being afterward persecuted for their
Consciences, might have awakened, to withstand and dispute it, 'till they had
better Security. And so it came to pass; for he was no sooner seated in the
Throne of his Ancestors, and saw himself secure, but he discharged himself from
every thing that the Royal Word, and Faith of a Prince, had obliged him to
perform. Secondly,

2. By Sowing Discord, Dividing Protestants, Alienating their Affections, and
Imbittering their Minds one against another; that being so Divided, and
Enraged, they might contribute to each other's Destruction; or, by weakening
their Interest, become an easy Prey to the Fury of Papists. And truly, nothing
but an Early Prospect of this Method could have Emboldened King Charles to
enterprise upon our English Liberties, and the Reformed Religion: For, though
there have been always Differences among them, concerning Ecclesiastical
Government, and Discipline, and about Forms and Modes of Divine Worship; yet
they always accorded in Essentials of Religion, and in the Preservation of
their Natural and Legal Rights and Privileges, as well as in a Common
Detestation of Popery and Tyranny, and the Sinister Arts of promoting them; But
when these Fiery Bombs of a Popish Court, were by various Hands, thrown among
Protestants, all went to wrack by our fatal Divisions; and such an Unlimited
Power was thrust into the Hands of Caesar, over our Lives, Religion, Laws,
Estates, and Liberties, that if his Amorous Intrigues, and Careless Temper, had
not diverted him, he had certainly arrived at that Pitch of Absoluteness in
Church and State, that he aspired after; and had laid all his Subjects at the
Discretion and Will of the Monarch.

3. The next Expedient that King Charles employed, to accomplish his Design,
was, Encouraging and Cherishing Papists upon every Occasion, when it might be
done without an open Reflection on himself, or Government; and yet, sometimes he
broke through those Maxims also; though one would have thought their Intolerable
Insolences, on every Gleam of Royal Favor, might have justly checked his
Clemency. Instances of his particular Respects for that People might be easily
given; but because it will be particularly discoursed in his Successor's Reign,
I shall give but Two here, and those were, His Conniving at their Increase, and
Executing the Laws with greatest Rigor against Protestant-Dissenters; giving
private Instructions to his Judges, to stifle the Execution of the Laws against
Popish Recusants, though directly levelled against them, and but by a forced
Construction, inflicted upon Protestants.

4. But the last, and most Effectual Stratagem, for the Service of this King's
Arbitrary Ends, was, Tying all his Ecclesiastical Promotions to the Preaching
up Passive Obedience, and Non-Resistance: And in this he succeeded so
unluckily, that those who refused to comply with this Upstart Doctrine, were
scarce reckoned among the Number of Christians; whilst a little Court-Zealot,
that had nothing else to recommend him, but a Blind Obedience to the Orders of
Whitehall, in Preaching up this Slavish Doctrine, was Dignified with the Title
of a True Son of the Church, and Loaded with Preferments.

Into what a doleful Condition was this Nation reduced, when Religion was
forced to truckle to New-invented Politics, and our Laws were Bribed into a
Conspiracy against themselves? Now both Pulpit and Press were Surfeited with
such Discourses as these, viz. That Monarchy was a Government by Divine Right;
That it was in the Prince's Power to Rule as he pleases; That it was a Grace
and Condescension in the King to Govern by Laws; That for Parliaments to Direct
or Regulate the Succession, bordered upon Treason, and was an Offense against
the Law of Nature; and, That the only Benefit left to Subjects, in case the
King will Tyrannize over their Consciences, Persons, and Estates, is, tamely to
suffer, and, as they Absurdly expressed it, to Exercise Passive Obedience.

Thus were Minds, and Consciences, of the Subjects corrupted with such
Pestilent and Slavish Notions, that at length the whole Nation was betrayed
into such a Stupidity, and Insensibility of their Religion, and Legal Rights,
that our Limited Monarchy was almost turned into an Absolute Tyranny, and our
Ancient Privileges dwindl'd into nothing.

Under pretense of Preserving the Church, too many of the Clergy gave
themselves over to an Implicit Serving of the Court; and became, not only
Advocates, but Instruments, for the Robbing Corporations of their Charters;
Imposing Sheriffs upon the City of London, who were not Legally Elected; and of
Fining and punishing Men Arbitrarily, for no Crime, save their having, by
Modest and Lawful Ways, Asserted their Own, and the Nations Rights.

Under pretense of Jealousy of the Fanatics, they became Tools under this
King, for Justifying the Dissolution of so many Parliaments, the Invasion made
upon their Privileges, the Ridiculing and Stifling Popish Plots, the Shamming
of Forged Conspiracies upon Protestants; the Condemning of several Men to
Death, for High Treason, who could be Rendered Guilty by the Transgression of
no Known Law; and finally, for Advancing the Duke of York into the Throne, who
was engaged in a Conjuration against Religion, and the Civil-Government; and
whom Three several Parliaments, for those Reasons, would have Excluded from the
Succession. But,

When I say, these Enormities were committed by the Clergy, I desire not to be
understood, as if I intended to comprehend all that Sacred Order under the
Guilt of such Rash and Inconsiderate Designs; for there were many Good Men
among them, who were so far from Sacrificing our Religion, and Laws, to Popery
and Arbitrary Power, that they publicly declared their Dis-likes, and
Abhorrence of such Extravagant Proceeding, though they wanted Power to stem the
Torrent that was overflowing both Church, and State; and as soon as Providence
minister'd an Occasion, were the first that put to their Hands to stop the
Violence of the Stream, and Confine the Power of the Late King, within the
Bounds of Law and Justice. But to return from, this Digression;

This Passive Obedience Doctrine was broached by some Modern Divines, about the
middle of the Reign of King James the First; who, in Opposition to Buchanan,
Knox, and other Scotch Ministers, (that gave too great Encouragement to
Sedition, and Rebellion,) and to Curry Favor with that Monarch, run into
contrary Extremes, under the Names of Duty, and Loyalty: So hard and difficult
it is, to observe the Golden Mean.

Dr. Harsnet, Bishop of Chichester, was the first I meet with in that Reign,
that gave himself the Liberty, from these Words, Give unto Caesar the things
that are Caesar's, to discover New Notions in Politics, as well as Divinity;
and to Assert publicly, That the King had an Absolute Right to all that
Subjects were possessed of. And for this Service, in Betraying his Country, he
was Translated from the Diocese of Chichester, to Norwich; and thence, to the
Archbishopric of York.

In the Beginning of the Reign of King Charles the First, these Preachments run
something higher; and Dr. Manwaring holding forth before that King, at
Whitehall, Invested him with an Uncontrollable Authority; gave him Power to
Raise Taxes, or Subsidies, without Consent of Parliament; and in the
Conclusion, resigned all the King's Subjects to the Devil, that refused to obey
it: For which he was presented to a Fat Living in Essex, and afterward
promoted to the Bishopric of St David's; which, under what sad Constellation,
or Fate, I know not, has often been Pestered with Men of the same Principles!

The Promotion of these Temporizers encouraged Dr. Sybthorp, a Confident and
Kinsman to Dr. Lamb, to attempt the Mending his Circumstances by Tracing their
Steps: And in an Assize-Sermon at Northampton, on Romans 13.7. he laid our All at
the King's Feet; and left poor Subjects nothing but Tears for their Loss, and
Prayers to be supplied in their Wants. Thus, bating Preferments, Sybthorp soon
obtained his Ends; and his Vicaridge of Brackly was mended, by the Addition of
the Rich Parsonage of Burton on the Would, in the same County.

Nor did the Reward of this Service extend only to Sybthorp, but slew a
Cathedral Height; for Dr. Abbot, Archbishop of Canterbury, refusing to License
this Sermon to be Printed, was soon after Suspended from his Bishopric, and
Dr. Laud, that did License it, being then Bishop of St. David's, was Translated
to London, and afterward to the Metropolitan See of Canterbury. Nay, so strong
run the Tide of Preferment then in this Corrupted Channel, that few Divines, or
Common or Civil Lawyers, were preferred to any considerable Place, either in
Church, or State, that did not in the Pulpit, and on the Bench, vigorously
maintain these Novel and Destructive Opinions, to the Scandal of their
Functions, and intended Ruin of the Kingdom.

To this Doctrine must be ascribed the Mischiefs of all former and later
Reigns; under the Protection of which, any King may play the Tyrant without
Control, though it often proves Fatal to him that lays the Train: And so it
happened to Charles the Second; for no sooner had his Unlimited Power been so
Strenuously Asserted, that he was come to give the finishing Stroke, but his
Death seemed Necessary, and Seasonable, to make way for the Duke of York, to
open the Execution of the Grand Design, in a barefaced Subversion of the
Religion and Laws of England.

At the Beginning of the Restoration, so great an Opinion was conceived of His
Highness the Duke of York, that his partial Admirers would suffer no Man to
Insinuate his being Reconciled to the Church of Rome; but set him up under all
the Noble Qualities that might render him Acceptable to a Credulous People; not
only as Merciful in his Temper, Just in his Dealings, and endu'd with all
Gracious Inclination to our Laws, and the Rights of the Subject, but for one
Orthodox in his Religion too, and who would prove a Zealous Defender of the
Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline of the Church, as Established by Law.

In this Persuasion they continued some Years; and though he had at length
withdrawn himself from all Acts of Fellowship with the Church of England;
Refused the Test, enjoined by Law, for distinguishing Papists from Protestants;
had Resigned his Office of Lord High Admiral; stood Excluded from the House of
Lords; and that so many Parliaments had eadeavour'd to Exclude him from
Succession to the Crown, because he had Revolted to the Sea of Rome, and
thereby became Dangerous to the Established Religion; yet all this would make
no Impression upon a Wilfully Deluded, and Obstinate Sort of Protestants; but
in Defiance of all Means of Conviction, they would persuade themselves, that he
was still a Zealot for our Religion, and a great Patriot of the Church of
England: Nor could any thing undeceive them, till upon his Brother's Death, he
openly declared himself to be a Papist; and afterward, in the Fumes and
Raptures of his Victory over the late Duke of Monmouth, had discovered, and
proclaimed, his Intentions to overthrow both our Religion, and Laws. Yea, so
closely had some sealed up their Eyes against all Beams of Light, and hardened
themselves against all Evidences from Reason, and Fact, that had Success
attended the Duke of Monmouth's Arms, the late King had gone off the Stage with
the Reputation among them, of a Prince tender of the Laws of the Kingdom; and
who, notwithstanding his being a Papist, would have preserved the Reformed
Religion, and maintained the Church of England in all her Rights and Grandures:
And though his whole Life had been but one continued Conspiracy against our Civil
Liberties and Privileges, he had left the Throne with the Character, and under
the Esteem, of a Prince that, in the whole Course of his Government, would have
regulated himself by the Rules of the Constitution, and the Statutes of the
Realm.

Aditum nocendi perfido praestat fides. Sen. in Oed. Act. 3. Scen. 1.

So Simple Truth does her fair Breast Disarm,
And gives Base Treachery a Power to Harm.
King Charles being now Dead, the late Duke's Expectations Answered, and his
Ambition gratified with a Crown; at his first coming to it, he endeavored to
Confirm some, and Gain other of his Subjects into a good Opinion of him, and
their own Happiness under his Government: And therefore, in his first Speech to
the Parliament, declared so much Tenderness for them, and such a Dear Respect
for the Preservation of their Liberties, that the Cajoll'd Parliament, from an
Excess of Satisfaction, showed as much Affection for him, as ever Parliament
did to a Prince of their own Religion; and gave Money till he himself put a
stop to the profuse and excessive Expressions of their Satisfaction.

It must be granted, that the Lives of some Professors are not so bad as the
Consequences of their Erroneous Opinions; and it was charitably thought by the
Parliament, that the late King James, though a Papist, would not Govern so
Arbitrarily as the Encouraged Doctrines of the Age gave him Leave to do; But
when they saw their Error, and perceived that Popery and Arbitrary Power were
never to be parted; that the Monks and Friars Entered to Act in their proper
Habits; that Seminaries were set up in several Places, and Houses filled with
these Religious Furies; that the Laws being, in the late Reign, betrayed into
his Hands, he unmercifully Stabbed and Dispatched them; and that his Antecedent
Oaths and Promises were all come to nothing; how it filled them with
Resentments, for his having thus Abused their Credulity, Deceived their
Expectations, and Reproached their Gloryings, and Boastings of him? But, alas!
it was then too late to seek a Remedy for those Evils, that an Easy Belief,
and a Fond Compliance with Empty Popish Promises, had brought upon us: Now we
Feel, what we would not See, and Prevent, at a Distance.

-- Quid nobis certius ipsis Lucret.

Sensimus esse potest, quo vera, ac falsa notemus?
And what thing can there be more sure than Sense,
By which we Truth discern from false Pretense.
We smarted under our own Rod, and had plenty of miserable Occasions for the
Religious Exercise of that fatal Duty, Passive Obedience! Our Satisfactions in
our New King were vanished; and the Hopes of living happy Subjects under him,
were sunk into Apprehensions of Approaching Slavery: A general Consternation
fell upon the whole Body of the People; and the very Tools that assisted the
late King in subverting their own Religion, and the Civil Rights of their
Brethren, were afraid, in so Universal a Calamity, that themselves should also
feel the sad Effects of that Thunder, with which they had Armed their Tyrant.

In how happy a Condition was James the Second, before he violalated his Oaths,
and Promises; and so might have continued, if he could have prescribed any
Limits to his Desires of Reigning more Absolutely than the Laws of the
Constitution would allow him? He had all things at pleasure, to make him Great
among his own Subjects, and Formidable to his Enemies. The Parliament gave him
more Money, for the Time, than to any of his Predecessors: The Nobility raised
him Forces, to subdue a Popular Invader: Addressors offered him their Lives and
Fortunes, and vy'd with each other in the Demonstrations of their Loyalty!

What related to the private Satisfaction of the late King's Humor, was
cheerfully complied with: But when it was apparent that the whole Kingdom was
designed a Sacrifice to his Lawless Ambition, and Frentick Zeal! his Subjects
began to search into the Measures of their Submission, and to enquire how far
they were obliged to obey an Arbitrary Prince; and from thence, began to take
new Measures; insomuch that the late King no sooner altered from what he seemed
to be in his first Speech, but the People changed from what they were; and took
up Resolutions to Embrace the First Opportunity, and Means of Deliverance.

But because Precipitation, and Immaturity in Action, Ruin the best laid
Enterprises in the World, they resolved to Suffer till Patience should Ripen
the Design, and render the Execution of it Easy, and Effectual. To this
purpose, the Great and Wise Men of the Kingdom having abandoned the Court, as
an Infectious Palace, and retired into the Country, they debated on this
Subject; and all agreeing in an Acknowledgment of their own Weakness, in so
manifestly exposing themselves, and their Country, to the Capricious Humors of
a Tyrannical Prince; though they heartily wished him all Happiness; yet they
thought their Duty was stretched too far, when by a blind Submission to his
Irregular Commands, they were obliged to forego the Natural Principles of
Self-Preservation; and that by seeking officiously to add to their Loyalty,
they must Detract from their Judgments, Consciences, and Honesty; and therefore
apyly'd themselves to find out a Remedy that might either Recover, or Disarm
him, and yet deprive him of nothing but the Liberty of doing Wrong. And,

Who can blame those Wise and Prudent Patriots, for laying hold on the first
Advantage for their own, and the Nation's Preservation, when all Hopes of the
late King's Reformation were so utterly Extinguished, that every Moment
produced new Projects of our Ruin? He now Gloried in being thought a Zealous
Papist! and gave up himself Entirely to the Conduct of Infamous Jesuits! They
were the Governors and Directors of his Conscience! they Influenced all his
Counsels! And he seemed to have no other Sentiments, either in Religion, or
Politics, but what was breathed into him by that wretched Society.

He parted with a Flower of his Crown, in Abolishing the Act of Supremacy; and
divested himself of all Power in Spiritual Affairs, to gratify the Pope's
Ambition; and from being Supreme in his own Dominions, was reduced to be an
Under-Officer to the Sea of Rome; having left himself no Power, but to Execute
such Orders in Extirpating Heretics, as that Church thought fit to impose upon
him.

See into what a Subjection and Vassalage he had brought himself! He that would
observe no Laws at home, laid himself under the Penalty of those at Rome; who
would allow him no Room for Mercy to his Subjects, without bringing a severe
Judgment upon himself. For Tho. Acqu. Sescind. par. Sur^mae ^^aest. 50. Art. 3.
if he neglected to destroy Heretics, after he was admonished by that Church
to do it, he forfeited his Crown to the Pope, his Subjects were discharged of
their Allegiance, himself Deposed, and his Kingdom must be given to another.
Severe Sentences for not being a Murderer: But there is a Worse behind; his
Eternal Damnation must follow his Temporary Losses, and Deprivation, in case of
Disobedience.

Under these Circumstances, what Hopes had England of any Good from James the
Second? For, after all this, to pretend he would support our Religion, and
Civil Constitutions, (which are as opposite to Popery, as Light to Darkness,)
is mere Nonsense, or think he would run any of these Hazards, or blot his Name
in the Roman Calendar, to preserve a Poisoned Nation, a Generation of Obstinate
Heretics, Enemies and Traitors to God and Man, (for with these Epithets
Bellarmin adorns our Characters,) is to persuade the World that our Reason's
grow downward, and that by imbibing this contradiction, we were preparing to
swallow Transubstantion also.

Suetonius in the Life of Tiberius says that Emperor could never have made such
Inrodes upon the ancient Privileges of the Roman Empire, if he had not been
assisted in it by Time servers and flatterers, nor could James the second so
easily have fallen into the Desire and Exercises of a Dispotic power, if his
own Inclinations had not been assisted by the concurrence of Ill men, and the
prevailing opinions of the age, that made way for it; among which this was one,
viz. that Monarchy and Hereditary Succession was by Divine Right, and
Inalienable. A pleasing doctrine to Princes that are grasping at Arbitrary
Power, as giving them liberty to be as Tyrannical as they please, because no
Man can be said to offend that acts Nemine injuriam facit, qui jure suo utitur.
from a principle of Divine and Inherent Right; for that never dies, nor can be
Abolished, and therefore, since this Doctrine has been of fatal consequence,
both to Kings and Subjects, Give me leave to offer something against its
spreading farther, by asking these modest Questions?

When, and to whom, was this Charter granted? If they say it had the same
original with the Creation, and was conferred on Adam by God Almighty, their
Proof ought to be taken, and with certainty too, from the Sacred Records,
before they can hope to gain credit to their Assertion. Now that Adam had a
Paternal Authority none will deny, but that he had a Monarchical Jurisdiction,
and that it was perpetual, and extended beyond the bounds of his own Family, or
that his Sons, when out of their Fathers Jurisdiction had not the same
Authority in their own Families, as Adam had in his, is no where to be found in
Scripture, granted either before, or after the Universal Deluge to Noah's
posterity; for besides the absurdity of the Notion, in making all other Forms
of Government in the World Tyrannical and Unlawful, it is unreasonable in
respect of Kings themselves: For unless they can prove themselves the immediate
Heirs of Adam, which is impossible to do, they have no right to the Crowns they
claim by Human Constitutions, but are all Usurpers; and when the late King
makes such a Proof he will say something to the purpose, till then, I think it
improperly urged on his behalf, that the Divine Right of Monarchy began in
Adam; because there was such an early breach in the Succession as might spoil
all pretenses to it for the future. I wish the case be not too parrellel. For,

Cain having murdered his Brother and Fled his Country he made a forfeiture of
his Right, and by his Abdicating the Government after the Decease of Adam it
must devolve upon Seth; which was an Interruption in the Succession in the very
first Descent, that it could never be thoroughly settled in after Ages. The Truth
is, before the Flood the Scripture is so silent in this matter, that no Man can
affirm whether the Government of the World in those yearly Ages was Regal,
Aristocratical, or Paternal, and consequently not in which Form to fix this
pretended Divine Right, without offering injury to the other. Nor after the
Flood do we mind this Right granted to Noah in greater proportion than to his
Sons in common; Which was, to acquire what they could, and enjoy what they
acquired; for these are the words of their Charter, to subdue the earth and
Genesis 9.
possess it.

The New Testament gives no greater encouragement to this pretense of Divine
Right than the Old; for though in the Theocracy Kings were set up by God, yet
that method ceased when Shylo came; and though the blessed Jesus, and his Holy
Apostles, were very pressing in those Moral duties of Obedience to Superiors,
yet they no where asserted a Divine Right, nor prescribed any Forms of
Government, or making alterations; but yielded a cheerful Submission to the
Reigning Powers where they came, without calling their Titles into doubtful
Disputations. Now seeing we cannot find this Divine Right of Monarchy, and
Hereditary Succession, granted by the Law of God, as founded in Paternal or
Patriarchal Authority, nor Morally impressed on human Nature, nor possitively
Revealed in holy Scripture, which I shall particularly discourse hereafter; let
us descend into our own Histories, and if we cannot find it there, we must
leave it as a Chimera, or a politic Stratagem to Introduce Tyranny.

Democracy was the first Government in this British Isle. Their Druids served
both for Priests and Judges; the whole Nation were a barbarous People that knew
not God and worshipped Idols. And it would seem strange to search for a Pearl
in this Dunghill; to derive a Pedigree from these brutish Ancestors: or build a
Divine Right of Succession, upon such a Heathenish foundation, when a Human
Right is more Eligible and Honorable.

After the Druids, succeeded a Race of Lords or Petty Kings, that divided
Britain into eight and twenty Provinces, and changed the Democracy into an
Aristocracy, every Province paying Allegiance to their own Lord; and because
among such a Medly, it would be hard to find from which of them to derive a
Divine Right of Succession, I shall leave it as too Nice and Intricate a
matter, and pass to the Romans.

Whose Government when Julius Caesar made his first and second Descent into
Britain was Aristocratical, and he himself had then no greater title than
Dictator, and if we examine the whole time of their continuance here, which was
Five hundred Years, we shall find that all the several Governors came in by
Intrusion, Usurpation, Adoption, Confirmation, or Purchase; but not one of them
ever claimed by Hereditary Succession.

Britain being abandoned by the Romans, they elected Vortigern Earl Cornwall
King; but upon the Leudness and Debauchery of his life, and neglecting the true
Interest of the Kingdom, they Deposed him, and chose his Son Vortimer, and
after his decease, upon promising to Govern more Regularly, by a new Election,
re-inthron'd Vortigern; who was Conquered by the Saxons whom he called in to
assist him in his Wars against the Picts and Scots; so that here also we have
quite lost all pretenses to a lineal Succession from the Britains, or a
pretended Power from God to Oppress and Ruin his People.

The Saxons were a Wild, Illeterate, and Barbarous People, living by Plunder
and Rapine; Soldiers of Fortune without any certain Habitation, and having no
Title of their own, as they Demeaned themselves, could very ill pretend to have
one from God; nor could their Heptarchy introduce a Divine Right among us; for
then we must allow seven Kings at once to Govern by Divine Right in England.
The Danes drove out the Saxons, enjoyed the Monarchy many Years, and after much
struggling were repulsed by the Saxons, and they again by the Danes, among whom
were so many Kings Banished, Murdered, and Deposed, that it is impossible, with
any kind of certainty, to fix a Succession from any of them. For,

Edward the Confessor that succeeded Harold, the last Danish King in England,
and in whom, for want of Issue that Line was extinguished, had no Hereditary
Right. 'Twas at first indisputably in Edward Son of Edmond Ironside, Father to
Edgar Etheling his Nephew, during his Life; and after his Decease, to that
Edgar who was also Nephew to the Confessor.

Harold, Son of Earl Godwyn, that without other Ceremony set the Crown upon his
own Head had no pretense of Right to it, (though as affairs then stood was very
fit for it;) for Edgar Etheling was then living and claimed it, though he wanted
Power to maintain his Right, and so Harold kept the Crown till he was deprived
of that, and his Life, by one of another Family and a Foreign Nation; which has
utterly destroyed all pretensions to the Divine Right of Succession in this
Kingdom, unless you will make God the Author of all those horrid Murders,
Devastations, and Confusions that were committed by many of these Princes in
acquiring their Crowns. And here I must pursue the Succession from the Norman
Race.

William the First was Illegitimate, and had no Right but from his Sword, and
the Peoples submission and Electing him, after he had subdued King Harold, and
the latter Right he always preferred before the former.

William the second was Elected against the Right of his Elder Brother Robert,
who was then living.

Henry the first was Elected King, Favente Clero and Populo, his Elder Brother
Robert being living at the same time, and claimed the Crown in Right of his
Birth.

King Stephen was Elected a Clero and Populo, and Maud, who had the Right of
Succession was excluded.

Henry the second came in by consent, yet he had no Hereditary Right; for his
Mother Maud the Empress, Daughter and Heir to Henry the First was then living.

King John had no Right of Succession; for he had an Elder Brother, Jeffery
Earl of Brittany, who had issue Arthur and Eleanor, whose Heirs for ought we
know to the contrary, may still have a being in the World; but John, though
Arthur, his Eldest Brother's Son, was then living, was Elected a Clero and
Populo, and being divorced from his Wife, had Henry the Third by his new Queen.

Henry the third was Crowned, and settled in the Kingdom by the general
Election of the People, though he had no Right to the Succession; for Eleanor
Daughter to Jeoffry his Father's Eldest Brother was then living.

Roger Mortimer Earl of March, Son of Edmund by Philippa Daughter and Heiress
to Lionel Duke of Clarence, a younger Son of Edward the Third was by Parliament
in the 9 R. 2. declared Heir apparent to the Crown, which could not be but by
virtue of an Act of Parliament.

Henry the Fourth came to the Crown by way of Election, and in the eighth Year
of his Reign was the first Act of Parliament made for entailing the Crown with
Remainders.

By virtue of which Entail his Son Henry the fifth became King, and after him
Henry the sixth, in whose time

Richard Duke of York claimed the Crown, and an Act of Parliament was made 39
Hen. 6. that Henry should enjoy the Crown for his Life, and Richard and his
Heirs after him. After which King Henry raise's an Army, kills Richard, for
which He, the Queen, and Prince were all Attainted, 1 Edw. 4. because Richard
was declared Heir apparent to the Crown after Henry by Act of Parliament; but
this Attainder was repealed in terms of Disgrace and Detestation. 1 Hen. 7.
Rot. Parl. 1 Hen. 7.


Edward the fourth succeeded Henry 6. by virtue of an Act of Parliament made in
the time of Hen. 6, for entailing the Crown, as Son and Heir to the Duke of
York.

Richard the third was confirmed King by Act of Parliament, though he came to it
by blood and murder.

Henry the seventh comes in by no Legal Title, because Edw. the fourth's
Daughter, and his own Mother were both living. In his time the Crown was
entailed on him and his Heirs, by an Act of Parliament, and he would never
suffer any other Title to declare his Right.

Henry the eighth succeeded, who, as all his Laws speak, derived his Title to
the Crown from his Father by virtue of the Act of Parliament above-named, and
not by any Title from his Mother, though by the Law of Succession, his Right from
Queen Elizabeth, Daughter of Edw. 4. was indisputable. In his Reign the Crown
was thrice entailed, but the great one was that of 35. c. 1. by which

Edward the sixth, Queen Mary, and Queen Elizabeth succeeded, in whose Reign
was made an Act of Parliament, making it high Treason to say it was not in the
Power of Parliaments to limit the Succession of the Crown.

Upon the Marriage of Queen Mary to King Philip of Spain, both the Crowns of
England and Spain were entailed, and the Articles of Marriage confirmed by Act
of Parliament, and by that Act of Parliament Philip was created King, and
exercised Sovereign Authority, and particularly in making Laws, together with
the Queen, the Style of the Royal Assent to Bills in Parliament, being at that
time Le Roy and La Reign les veulent, by all which it appears, that the Kings
of England, since the Crown was settled in a particular Family, as well as
before are Kings by the Laws of the (...) of human Constitution, though their
Power is from God Almighty. Nor does this opinion aim at the changing our
Hereditary Monarchy into an Elective Kingdom; but shows that there is no such
absolute necessity of keeping the Lineal Descent in respect of a single Person,
that it cannot be changed for the preservation of a Kingdom, contrary to the
Opinion of our Lawyers, who affirm from History, Records, and Law Books, that
our Monarchy is Hereditary as to a Family, but Elective as to Persons. However,
to obviate the prejudice that might arise from that preconceit, I shall show
you it is Hereditary; and yet, that that Hereditary Right came also by Law, and
therefore may be interrupted by our Legislators.

That England is an Hereditary Monarchy, and that the common course of
Succession is to be inviolably observed when it consists with the public good
and safety of the Kingdom, none will deny; for our own Laws have so determined
it, as a custom grounded upon sufficient Reasons. Our Ancestors perceiving that
the way of Electing Kings was subject to many Inconveniences, and often
exposed the Kingdom to Tempests, Interregnum's, and Revolutions, as well as to
the seditious commotions of underhand dealers, and the Pride and Ambition of
Men too desirous to be uppermost. And that Kings coming to the Crown by
Election, neglected the Demeans, and squandered away the Treasure of the
Nation, because they had no prospect of leaving the Crown to their Heirs; 'twas
therefore thought advisable, and beneficial to the Public, to fix the Royalty
in a particular Family. As for example. In the eighth of Hen. the fourth, there
was an Act of Parliament which entailed the Crown with Remainders. And to name
no other instances of the like kind, it was made Treasonable by an Act of
Parliament in the thirteenth of Queen Elizabeth, for any Man to affirm that the
common Laws of this Realm ought not to direct the Right of the Crown of
England, or that the Laws were not of sufficient force and validity, to limit
and bind the Crown of this Realm, and the Descent, Limitation, Inheritance, and
Government thereof, So that it is plain, an Hereditary Right, is a Right by the
Laws of England, and not otherwise: And what need is there of any other, since
a Right by Law makes a Rightful and Lawful King, in despite of all the
over-nice Distinctions of State-Criticks to the contrary. And, truly

Of all Men living, the late King James, and his Defenders, have least Reason
to quarrel this Right by Law: For, How came it to pass, that the Line of the
Stewarts had a better Title to the Crown of Scotland, than that of the Baliols;
but only that the Laws of Scotland, that is, the Consent of the Estates of that
Kingdom made them so? For, otherwise, if we search into the Pedigrees of those
two Families, we shall find that Baliol, according to the common received Rules
of Descent, was nearer in Blood to the last King David, than Bruce; and was so
adjudg'd at a solemn Hearing Bak. Chron. page 96.
between both Parties, by our King Edward the First, in Parliament. Besides,
the late King has left it upon Record, from his own Mouth, that the Laws of
England were able to make a King as great and happy as he could desire to be;
and after that, I cannot imagine what he could wish for next. But,

His Intentions being fixed to destroy those Laws that, in observing them,
would have made him great and happy, he stood in need of a Title Superior to
them; therefore his Flatterers contrived one of a Divine Original, and yet it
died before him; the Divinity of his Office was more Mortal than that of his
Person; and well it might, having no Being, unless in the Heads of its first
Inventore. The Scripture has declared the Falsity of this new Hypothesis: Romans
13.
St. Paul saying, There is no Power, but of God, must be understood of
Government in general: For the Apostle does not say, There is no Prince, but is
of God; but, There is no Power, but of God. St. Peter also makes Kings to be of
Humane Constitution, as well as our Laws, which know no such thing as a
Personal Authority in the King, Antecedent, and Superior to all Laws; nor no
Divine Law, or just Inference from it, which does any where set aside Humane
Constitutions agreeable to Christianity, and beneficial to Civil Societies.

Therefore, if a King, by Lawful Succession, shall act unlawfully; and instead
of preserving the Religious and Civil Rights of his Subjects, shall endeavor
to destroy them, he may be set aside, without Prejudice to the Constitution,
since we are not obliged to preserve the Right of the Succession to the
Destruction of the Kingdom. Fit, and Just, ought to overruled Custom; and
Formalities give way to the Necessities of the Public. 'Twas a common Saying
amongst the late King James's Favorites, that their King had a Divine Right,
and therefore he would not be a Slave to the Law: And there is greater Reason
that his Subjects should not be Slaves to a Tyrant, that broke them; nor
Millions of Souls be ruined, to humor a Single Person.

No pretended Right whatsoever can Legitimate Unlawful Practices; and
therefore, when a King, forgetting whose Minister he is, degenerates into
Tyrant, and deprives the Nation of all those Blessings that Heaven had given us
the quiet Enjoyment of; I think there can be no Reason assigned, why we should
endure those Violences any longer than till we are in a Capacity to help our
selves. The Right of Succession has been always Claimed, but not constantly
Enjoyed; and the Two Houses of Parliament, notwithstanding this Claim, have set
the Crown upon the Heads of those Princes whom they knew had no Hereditary
Right to it; and yet they have been esteemed as Lawful Kings in all our
Chronicles and Laws, while those who were next of Blood were laid Aside, when
the Safety of the Kingdom, which is to be considered in the first, and chiefest
place, makes it necessary so to do.

Into what a lamentable Condition would this Kingdom have been reduced, if the
Law that Intails the Succession on the Next in Blood, should also give him a
Power to do what he pleases, be it Right or Wrong! Wherefore, as the Law has
often dispensed with the Next Heir, before he came to the Crown, for the former
Reasons; so it shows us, that we are no ways bound to a Prince on the Throne,
who, by Breaking the Laws of the Constitution, has Abdicated the Government,
and stands Virtually Deposed by his own Actions, as well as by a Law as ancient
as Edward the Confessor. (or rather, Edgar, his Grandfather,) which says, If
the King refuses to govern by Law, not so much as the Name, or Title, of King
remains to him: For Nec nomen Regis in eo constabit Spel. Council. leg. Guil. c.
6. Hoveden's Annals, Part 2. p. 608.
he ceases to be King, that governs by his own Will, and not according to Law.
So that it is plain, the Kings of England are not Kings by a Divine, but Humane
Appointment: They are not Absolute, but Limited Monarchs, and Circumscribed and
Bounded in their Powers, and Prerogatives, from Oppressing and Destroying their
Subjects; which if the late King had observed, without suffering himself to
have been abused by False Notions, and Fawning Flatteries, he might have been
as Great, and as Happy a Prince, as he could have wished himself to be:
Whereas, striving to be above all, has reduced him into a Mean and
Insignificant Station. So true is that Maxim, That they which Wrestle with
Laws, are always Thrown; and fall Uneasy, and Unpitied. But,

As Mischiefs seldom come Alone, so this pretended Divine Right was accompanied
with the Doctrine of Passive Obedience, and Non-Resistance; the first set him
above all kind of Restraint; and the other laid his Subjects under his Feet, to
be Trampled on, or Destroyed, at his Pleasure; and both being of pernicious
Consequence, I shall endeavor to stop the Currency of the latter also, by
showing that the Doctrine of Passive Obedience and Non-Resistance are False in
their Application of it, and Dangerous to Kings, and Destructive to Subjects.

They are false, as the Authors apply them, in Licensing all kind of
Wickedness; and putting it into the Power of every Arbitrary Ruler, to invade
the Laws and Liberties, the Lives and Fortunes of his Subjects, and to do what
Mischief he pleases, whilst by a Voluntary Submission, we yield up our Rights;
which tho we might have been able to have Kept them while we had them, may
never be in any possibility of Regaining them when we have lost them.

Nam quid vis citius dissolvi posse videmus,
Quam rursus reficio --
For Things much sooner perish, than attain
(Being dissolved) to be repaired again.
Sad Examples whereof we have in our Neighboring Kingdoms, who, for want of a
timely opposing the Arbitrary Power of their Kings, have fallen into
Governments as Absolute and Tyrannical as the Ottoman Empire, where no Man can
call any thing his own.

Certainly, those which with so much Zeal, contend for Passive Obedience, never
considered the Consequences of it. What would not some Princes do, if they were
assured that no body would oppose them? Nay, what would not the late King have
done, had he been let alone to pursue his Violent Methods, without that most
admirable Check of Providence that encountered him?

Nature has founded our Obedience upon a Supposition, that it was for the Good
of the Community, and not otherwise: And would it not be a Contradiction, if
Princes might extend their Authority beyond the Design of its Institution, and
attempt the Destruction of the Society, and we quietly submit to whatever they
pleased to do? I am as far from denying the Persons of the Kings and Queens of
this Nation to be Sacred, and Inviolable, as any Man living; yet, I dare not
say they are to be Obeyed in All Cases whatsoever; for then the Doctrine of
Passive Obedience, and the Bow-string, would be the same; and we must owe our
Lives to Fortune, not to Justice.

What if a King should take pleasure in Burning of Cities, Murdering Men, and
Ravishing Women; for such Kings there have been in the World, and what has
been, may be again? Sure 'twould be a piece of the greatest Impiety, and
Wickedness, but to imagine he might do it without Control. Fathers, by the Law
of Nature, have a greater Authority over their Children, than Kings have over
their Subjects; and yet, if a Father comes to kill his Child, he is not obliged
to submit, and open his Breast to the Dagger; or hold up his Throat, whilst his
Father cuts it! No; Nature, Common Sense, Self-preservation, and the Practice
of all Nations, is too powerful for the Sophistry of such Principles; and those
that cannot reason, can feel what they are to do in such Cases.

Grotius says, The King must be bereaved of his Wits, that attempts the
Destruction of his whole People; but grants that they do sometimes destroy one
Part, for the sake of another; (as King James's Design was, to destroy the
Protestants, in favor of the Papists; and the English, in favor of the
Irish;) but says, he ought not to be Obeyed in such Frentick Depopulations. And
if Grotius thinks the Prince Mad that attempts it, we may conclude them little
better, that mis-apply their Parts, to defend it: For, though the Scripture
commands Obedience to Authority, without Exception; yet in Cases of Certain,
Apparent, and Extreme Necessity, such as ours was in the late Reign, it may as
Reasonably be presumed to be Excepted out of that General Rule, as Works of
Mercy and Charity were allowed upon the Sabbath Day, by our Blessed Savior.
It Is the Right of Kings, that we Obey them; and suffer Private Injuries, rather
than destroy the Public Peace: But it is the Right of God that we Disobey them,
when their Wills oppose his Divine Laws, or Common Safety.

2. It is dangerous to Kings themselves, as it invests them with a Power to do
more than they Ought, which at one time or other will be turned upon
themselves; for where Fear and Terror are the only Foundations of Obedience,
the Seed of Resistance will be growing up: Men may bear the Yoke of Servile
Subjection, for a while, with Patience; but if it galls their Shoulders by a
sharp and long Continuance, they will bethink themselves how to throw it off:
Therefore the Way for Princes to keep their Power, is, to exercise it with
Lenity; and to grasp at no more, than what tends to the Subject's Ease, as well
as their own Superiority over them.

This makes a Prince Supreme by his Virtue, as well as his Character; and so
Indears his Subjects Duty, that he cannot raise his Thoughts above the Pitch of
their Obedience: Whereas, if he acts like the late King James, and Insists upon
Obedience without Reserve, and will force a Necessary and Reciprocal Duty into
Extremity of Slavery, it will put his Subjects into the same Humor, and learn
them, by his Example, to exceed the Bounds of their Allegiance. All Compulsary
Methods, Indirect Courses, and Stretches of Power, are a kind of Foul Play; and
he that uses it himself, does, by Implication, allow it those he plays with; as
the late King found, by a dear-bought Experience.

Mighty Nations may be upheld by Absolute Power; but the Narrow Territories of
England must be supported by Justice, or the Door will be set open to the Next
better Comer. For though the British Nation, generally speaking, are great Lovers
of Monarchy, yet they perfectly hate Tyranny; and as they were born Free, so
they love to continue in that happy Condition, as their Right, and not upon the
Precarious Condescentions of a Superior Power.

3. It Is Destructive to the Being and Safety of the People; for a Single Arm,
Unresisted, is able to Assassinate a whole Kingdom. Passive Obedience has no
other Tendency, than to Invite Destroyers; and, without being obliged to their
own Ill Nature, Courts them to exert their Cruelties in our Utter Extirpation,
and at once destroy all the Laws of the Land. I would fain know to what purpose
Laws are made in our Defense, if we must have no Benefit by them; and whether
faustering this Principle, is not to bind the Subjects Hand and Foot, and leave
nothing but poor suffering Souls in the whole Kingdom, as often as the
Sovereign is pleased to exercise his Arbitrary Jurisdiction?

Inventing this Doctrine, and giving it a Currency through the whole Land,
looked as if the Authors and Promoters of it were fishing for Expedients to
Ruin the Kingdom; trying Experiments, how high their King could provoke, and
how low and meanly we could submit to his Arbitrary Injunctions. They showed a
Wantonness in their Impositions, and a Luxury in abusing the Patience and
Quietude of the Nation, till Vengeance overtook them. It Is the Scandal of
Englishmen, that they are fond of Novelties; and these State-Brokers were
willing to keep up the Reproach in the highest Instances: But, sure, they could
not, in their Lucid Intervals, imagine there was any Pleasure in Irish
Massacres, or think that Wooden-Shooes would sit easy on English Feet; and
therefore were unkind in Tempting the late King to be Cruel, whose Inclinations
wanted no Spur to quicken his Zeal for our Destruction.

But to do these Sticklers all the Right we can, and yet silence them for ever,
their Practices are the best Confutations of their Principles; for, though when
other Men smarted, they felt no Pain; yet, when they saw Sacrilegious Hands
seize their Preferments, and that the Swords of their Artificial Forging were
like to pierce their own Bowels, they began to Distinguish away this
Destructive Doctrine, Propose Methods to prevent their Ruin, and, for the
Generality of them, were as forward as any, to Invite, and Join with our Great
Deliverer. Now, since the very Gentlemen that hatched, and showed this Monster
in Government, have with their own Hands taken down the Cloth, they have proved
my Assertion; viz. That the Doctrine of Passive Obedience, directed to these
Ill Ends, is False in its Application, Dangerous to Kings, Destructive to the
People, and ought to be reduced to its Primitive Standard, or, as they employed
it, to be banished the World.

Non-Resistance, linked with Passive Obedience, is but using more Words to
express the same thing; and I should have wholly overlooked it, as a
Frivolous, if not a Ridiculous Addition, but that it gives me an Opportunity to
confute the whole Design of Inslaving the Kingdom, by showing,

That in Cases of General, Evident, and Extreme Necessity, for the Preservation
of a Kingdom, such as ours was under the Dominion of the Late King James, it is
lawful for Subjects, in their own Defense, to oppose a King that would destroy
them.

And here I have a very Tender Point to handle, lest I should seem to encourage
Sedition, or humor those that are given to Change; which is as far from my
Intentions, and as contrary to my Inclinations, as the two Poles are distant
one from another. I am endeavoring to beget a good Opinion of our present
Settlement, to keep Men in a quiet Obedience to the Government, to live in
Peace and Charity one with another, to remove the Prejudices that some have
conceived against the Methods that were used to remove the late King James, and
placing King William in the Vacant Throne: And to procure these Good Ends, I am
obligid to show our Resisting him, as Affairs were then Circumstantiated, was
Lawful, and Justifiable, both in the Action, and Intention; and therein am so
far from Encouraging Sedition, that I have all along restrained the Subjects
Resistance to Cases of General, Evident, and Extreme Necessity; and never to be
attempted, but upon such Emergencies. To every Good King, and Lawful
Government, we have as many Ties of Obedience, as there are Christian Virtues;
and he must Renounce his Christianity, that forsakes his Allegiance; for
Obedience is a Duty which we Religiously owe to God, which we Naturally owe to
our Parents, which we Morally owe to our Laws, and which we Religiously,
Naturally and Legally owe our Sovereign, as he is God's Vicegerent, Father of
his Country, and our Liege Lord. This is the Prince's Due, and the Subject's
Duty; and, to prevent Mistakes, will be further explained in the following
Character of a True English Subject.

He is one that Quietly, and Contentedly, moves in his own Sphere, without
Intermeddling in Nice and Secret Matters of State, that are out of his Reach,
and Inconsistent with his Duty; that heartily Obeys the King, in all his
Commands that do not thwart the Laws of God, Nature, or his Country; that
Honors, Loves and Defends the King's Person, Crown and Dignity, and Cheerfully
Contributes to the Support of his Government; that makes his Private Concerns
stoop to the Public Good, and Sustains those Losses with Patience that he
suffers for the Common Interest: One that can distinguish betwixt Slavish Fear,
and Religious Obedience; betwixt the Interest and Cause of a whole Nation, and
the Clamours and Discontents of a Litigious and Incorrigible Faction: One that
will be True to his King, without being False to his God, or Treacherous to his
Country. And, to conclude, One that (like the Poet's Dyal) always stands True,
though the Sun of Reward, or Favor, never shines upon him.

In this Portraicture of an English Subject in Little, you may see the whole
Design of Christianity on this Subject; which is, Keeping every thing within
its proper Bounds, without Needless Increments, or Criminal Abatements of Royal
Authority, which always terminate in Vanity, or Wickedness; and consequently,
are extremely prejudicial to the Receiver, and Detractor.

It Is the Evil in the Increase and Use of Power, that those declaim against,
who are for no more than a Legal Obedience; for Non-Resistance, in its proper
Latitude, has its true Weight and Value with us, as much as any other Christian
Duty; and though we cannot swallow it so Glibly, as it was Adulterated in the
late Prescription, (to serve a Temporizing Interest, abstracted from the
Public Good,) yet that does not hinder us from Digesting it better, and
Practicing it more Dutifully, and Constantly, than those who were as Ready to
Throw it up, as they were to Imbibe it; or that still Retain it, to do further
Mischief. And having thus secured our Loyalty and Fidelity to our Sovereign,
under this Supposition, I shall reassume the Argument for Resistance, when the
Necessity of it is as Certain, and General, as ours was.

All differing Persons about Non-Resistance agree in this, That if a King is
resolutely bent to Destroy his Subjects, and that no Persuasion can alter his
Purpose; but that he stocks himself with such Ministers and Officers as will
cooperate with him in the execution of his Tragical Designs; his Subjects may
Desert him, Decline his Government and Service, and seek Protection where they
can find it. Of this Opinion is the Excellent Grotius, Barclay, Pufendorf,
Bodin, Bishop Bilson, Bishop Sanderson, Dr. Hammond, and Mr. Falkener. I
confess they say the case is not to be put, as almost impossible to happen; yet
I think it but Reasonable to suppose it here, because I shall prove it in the
Sequel beyond Contradiction, that the late King James was under a necessity of
destroying his Protestant Subjects, that all his Actions openly declared it,
and therefore may say, with the Author of Jovian, That 'twas Lawful to resist
him, since he himself has said in the same Page, That he should be tempted to
pray for the Destruction of such a Prince, as the only means of delivering the
Church; and for that Reason I am charitably inclined to think, that the great
Promoters of Non-Resistance never intended this Doctrine should extend beyond
Private and Tolerable Evils; for stretching it to Intolerable and Universal
Mischiefs, would have proclaimed 'em void of Sense and common Discretion, as
well as Humanity, which can no way agree with some of their Characters.

Sober Men would soon be agreed about the Resistance pleaded for, if they were
not more prejudiced against the Word, than against what is intended in the
Thing, either as to the Object or End of it; for to resist Violent Usurpations,
and Horrid Cruelties, is not Resisting the Supreme Authority, or the Ordinance
of God, but opposing Murderers, and Cutthroats, who under Venerable Disguises
are Destroying the People, and covering the Land with Blood and Carnage.

Names and Titles can never Sanctify or Alter the Nature of Facts, the thing
done, and the Manner and End of doing it will denominate the Action: For tho as
King he may put his Subjects to Death by form of Law, he cannot kill or
otherwise destroy them without it, but at the same time he gives himself
another Epithet, looses the Right he had, and ceases to be a King by such
repeated Acts of Illegality and Tyranny.

The Ends of Government (which is the Peoples Good) are as Sacred as the
Prince's Authority; and if, as the Apostle says, he be not to us the Minister
of God for Good, he looses the Title of God's Minister, for his Servants they
are whom they obey. St. Paul never Intended to Abrogate the Laws of Nature,
which gives every Individual Person a Right to his Own, nor Expose Men to
Beggary, Slavery, Inevitable Ruin here, and Damnation hereafter; for Resisting
a Prince that was engaged to destroy his People; since no Man that has not lost
the use of his Reason, can believe that Murdering, Ruining, and Inslaving the
Bodies and Souls of the People, is any part of Civil Government, or that
Resisting an Implacable Tyrant, is Resisting the Ordinance of God; when it is
plain that God never gave him any such Authority.

To say that such Kings are set up by the Almighty, as a Punishment for our
Sins, is no Argument against Resistance, but a strong one for it; for the
Pestilence, Famine, and the Sword of Foreign Enemies, are all of them Evils
sent by God for the punishment of our Offenses; yet I think no Man will say but
we ought by all Natural and Humane Endeavors to free our selves from those
Calamities, without an immediate Revelation. The like may be said of Tyrants;
for the contrary would level us with Beasts, which may be Sold, Killed and
Devoured, at the Will of those that have power over them. So that from what has
been said, it is evident that Resisting Tyrants, is not Resisting the Supreme
Authority, but Defending our selves against the Insults of a Destroyer, under
the cover of another Title. This Consideration will set us right, and not Rob
us of the pleasant Idea's that spring from our Deliverance; for if any, for by
Ends, deny what has been said above to be a Truth now, they will be of another
Mind at the Day of Judgment, when things shall appear as they are.

The Ends of Resistance, and Self-Defence, does also prove the Lawfulness of
it, as it Respects the King, or his Subjects, who are equally concerned in the
Benefit of it. Is it not better for a King to Assure his Authority by rendering
it Just and Moderate, than expose it to danger by Arbitrary Attempts? Is it not
better to comply with the kind Persuasions and Dutiful Admonishments of his
true Friends, and Faithful Counselors, (which is always presumed to go before
Actual Resistance) than to feel the bad Effects of his own misguided Will?
Cicero says, Cicero pro Balb.
* By this means the Romans established their Empire, in sharing the Advantages
of it among the People, whose Obedience is secured by Acts of Grace, and
Protection from Danger; and truly did not the boundless Ambition of Unwary
Monarchs blind the Eyes of their Reason from discerning their True and Lasting
Interests, they would never run into such Extremes of Arbitrary Sway, as
rendered their Government Odious, and their Persons Hated.

No King in Europe has more his own Will, and lives more happily, than He which
conforms his Inclinations and Actions to the Sense of the Law, and the Love of
his People; and in this Sense he may be as Absolute as he pleases, without
Overturning the World to accomplish it: He can Desire nothing, but what will be
freely Granted him; nor Do any thing, that will be Distasted. And what can the
greatest Monarch in the World desire more, than to have his Wants Liberally
Supplied, his Actions Universally Approved, and Applauded? This, and no other
End, is the Design of the Resistance contended for, but that a Prince,
misguided by ill Counsel, may, without Injury to his Person, or Diminution to
his Rightful Authority, (if fair Means can prevail,) be Reclaimed from
Violating the Rights of his Subjects, and brought to a Temper consistent with
his Own, and his Subjects Happiness: And if any Ill-minded Men carry it
further, we can only say, that the Abuse of a Thing, does not impeach the
Lawful Use of it: Let those that offend the Law, suffer for the Breach of it.

Another End of Resistance, is, the Good of the People; for when all other
Means to reduce the Prince into a right Temper, has, with all due Respect, and
Submission, been used, but effected nothing; then, and not before, Resistance
is necessary; for our Privileges are granted by the same Laws, by which the
Prince has his Authority; and makes an Universal Defection, or Resistance,
lawful, when all would be Ruined without it; for the Doctrine of Non-Resistance
is not of Constant and Eternal Obligation, in all Circumstances. Calling to
Account, are Acts of Authority; but Resistance for Self-Defence, is a Right of
Nature, and Inalienable. In every Province and Kingdom of the Universe, we may
find Instances where Subjects have been necessitated to secure Themselves,
their Religion, and Liberties, by Resisting their Prince, whose repeated Acts
of Tyranny did visibly threaten their Ruin; and this was always looked upon as
a sufficient Reason to dispense with their Allegiance, especially when the
Necessity was not pretended, or Created, by themselves; but apparently forced
on them by their Prince, who was obliged to preserve them. When our Savior was
walking in the Garden, and expected the Jews to come and Seize him by Violence,
he was pleased to command, that he which had a Sword, should take it; and being
told there were Two Swords, he said, it was Enough. How Enough? Not to
encounter the Armed Multitude that came along with Judas! he could not think
so! But they were Enough to let his Disciples know, that upon such Occasions
they had a Right to defend themselves. In Extreme Dangers, we are allowed to
make use of Extreme Remedies.

Former Ages, it seems, were Strangers to the Doctrine of Non-Resistance; for
Resistance has been allowed by Kings themselves. Henry the Second allowed it,
by causing his *Barons to Swear, ^russel's History of (...).
that if he should not perform the Covenants between himself, the King of
France, and Richard Earl of Poictou, his Son; they should renounce him, and
join with the King of France, and Earl Richard, against him. Richard the First,
when he went to War in the Holy Land, substituted William Bishop of Ely, and
Lord Chancellor of England, to Govern in his Absence; who abusing his
Authority, the Bishops, Earls and Barons having Routed his Party, they Deposed
and Banished him; and these Proceedings were approved, and confirmed by the
King himself, at his Return. So that in those Early Days the Nobility, Clergy
and People had no Apprehensions of an Irresistible Power in Kings, and those
Commissioned by them, when they found their Power grew Tyrannical, and
Unsupportable.

King John attempting to destroy the Liberties and Privileges of his Subjects,
granted by Magna Charta, the Bishops, Barons, and Great Men of the Kingdom, of
all Degrees, and Conditions, took up Arms against him, and never laid them
down, till the King, and the Prince, his Son, had sworn upon the Holy
Evangelists, to maintain the Subjects Privileges; and if they should break
them, that it should be lawful for his Subjects to Renounce their King, and to
gain them by Force: And this was never accounted Rebellion; for the Pardon that
followed it, was mutual, not only for those that adhered to the Earl of
Gloucester, but for those also that took part with the King.

In the Reign of Edward the Second, this Doctrine of Resistance was asserted
upon several Occasions; and so gross were the Enormities of this Prince, that
in an Act of Indemnity, in the First of Edward the Third, the particular
Illegal Acts of the King, his Father, are recited, and all that Resisted him,
are Pardoned, without loading their Memories with Reproachful Epithets.

Henry Duke of Gloucester opposed the Tyranny of Richard the Second, and had
the Crown for his pains; and those that came over with him were pardoned in
decent Language, without calling them Rebels, or Traitors. So that, it seems,
the Parliaments of Edward the Third, and Henry the Fourth, that Passed these
Acts of Indemnity, had no ill Opinion of the Doctrine of Resistance in Cases
of Extreme Necessity. To which, give me Leave to add the Opinion of a Learned
Man on this Subject, and I shall ease the Reader of further Trouble: It Is
Opusc. advers. Adulat. consid. 7.
Gerson the famous Chancellor of the University of Paris; who says, It Is an
Error to assert, that an Earthly Prince, as long as his Dominion lasts, is not
engaged to his Subjects in any thing; for, according to the Divine Law, Natural
Equity, and the true End of Power; as Subjects owe their Prince Fidelity,
Subsidy, and Obedience; so their Prince owes them Fidelity, and Protection; and
in case he does Publicly, Obstinately, and Imperiously oppress them, their
Natural Right takes place, and makes it Lawful for them to Repel Force by
Force. So that the late

King James has no Reason to complain of Hard Measure from his late Subjects:
For, if the King of England be a Limited Prince, as certainly he is, and bound
by Oath to Govern according to Law, and that his Authority depends upon the
Right Exercise of it, and can claim no Allegiance, but upon those Conditions,
they are not to blame; for they did not Desert or Resist him, till he had
Renounced to be their King according to the Constitution, by avowing to Govern
by a Despotick Power, unknown to the Constitution, and Inconsistent with it.

The Breach was first made on his part, by Renouncing to be their King
according to the Law that made him King; that is, such a King as he Swore to be
at his Coronation; such a King, to whom the Obedience, and Allegiance; of
English Subjects are due; and Setting up a Dominion, which, to all Intents and
Purposes, was as manifest an Abdication, or Abandoning his Legal Title, as if
had done it by Express Words, or Formal Deed. So that it is plain, his Subjects
did not Desert or Resist him, till he had Abdicated his Kingship, and Licensed
them to provide for themselves, under another Monarch, that would govern
according to the Laws of the English Constitution, which he had Renounced.

If the Entreaties, Persuasions, Admonitions, Addresses, or Petitions, of the
Greatest Men of all Qualities in the Kingdom, could have prevailed with him to
have done himself, and his Subjects, Justice, the Crown had been still upon his
Head, and his Subjects happy under him: But he positively refused all Advices,
but what tended to his Ruin; and neither his good Subjects Prayers, the Fear of
God, the Love he ought to have born to his own Country, now on the Brink of
Destruction, nor his own Interest, could influence him to Act Reasonably, or
see his own Ruin, before an Obstinate Perseverance had rendered it desperate!
What then must his Subjects do? To content our selves with Praying to God only
for our Deliverance, were to exclude the Measures of Humane Prudence. We take
not those Methods when our Houses are on Fire, or a Madman comes to cut our
Throats. To wait for his Death, had been to make our selves miserable while he
lived: And by suffering his Arbitrary Power to Increase, and take Deeper
Footing, was, to have Entailed Slavery upon our Posterities; and to have
expected a Miracle for his Conversion, was, to suffer the Fate of a whole
Kingdom, to depend upon a Senseless and Dubious Peradventure: All which being
seriously considered, nothing in the World will appear more Reasonable, Just,
and Necessary, than our Self-Defence, against the Exorbitancies of James the
Second, and providing for our selves without his Concurrence; it being not in
the Design of God, or Nature, or in the Power of Art, to make that Man happy,
who, instead of Cooperating to it, Acts directly against it: And therefore,
his Interest was not so considerable, as to be preferred before the Safety of
the Kingdom, and the Lives and Fortunes of his Quondam Subjects, which were
snatched, as Brands out of the Fire, by the Doctrine of Resisting in our Own
Defense.

It Is true, the Promoters of Slavery, under the Umbrage of Non-resistance fall
very heavy upon this Innocent Principle, and upbraid the Notion as opposite to
the Law of God, to the Law of Nature, and to the Laws of our own Land; but a
brief discussion of their suggestions, will show their Lion is not so fierce as
they have painted him. The Holy Scripture does command Obedience to Authority
without Exceptions, and forbids Resistance of the Supreme Power under severe
Penalties; but it seems very hard that Religion should weaken our Arm in
defense of it self, and force our Obedience to a Power set up to Ruin it; and
therefore unless our Adversaries can prove this General prohibition is extended
in the Design of the Lawgiver, to all cases of Apparent, and Extreme Necessity,
such as ours was under the late Reign (which I am assured they cannot do) they
say nothing to the purpose; for we urge it no farther, and equally abhor it
when it exceeds those Cases as a Doctrine inconsistent with Christianity; but
yet we say also that Non-resistance is not always obliging, as affairs may be
circumstantiated.

General Precepts, or Prohibitions, are always to be understood with particular
exceptions to unforeseen accidents, and makes what was forbidden at some time,
and in some cases, become our Duty in others. Therefore Men must not run into a
Triumph when a Text or two, seems to favor their opinion; for as an Ingenious
Author observes, Eternal Righteousness, Justice and Truth, Upright Honesty, the
Right of the Case, and the Reason of the thing, must always govern the sense of
Scriptural expressions. Saul was an Anointed King, and yet David had commission
from God Almighty to make War against him when he transgressed the bounds that
God had set him. And it may be showed in many Instances, (though scarce parallel
with our Dreadful circumstances under the Reign of James the Second,) where
Resistance was not only allowed but commended. The Judges of Israel who must be
presumed to know the Law of God better than others, and were filled with the
Spirit of God, in all their Actions encouraged the Israelites to rise in Arms
against their Princes who kept them in continual bondage, and slavery, and the
Names of Deborah, Barach, Gideon, Abimelec, Jeptha, Samson, etc. are celebrated
upon the same occasion.

Nor is the Law of Nature against Resistance in cases of Extreme Necessity, and
I wonder how any Man can urge the contrary, since it both Asserts and Approves
it. The Law of Nature says the incomparable Grotius is a Judgment or Instinct
of Right Reason, which Judges by the conformity and contrariety of an Action
with Reasonable Nature, what there is in every action of moral turpitude, or
moral goodness, and how far it is commanded or forbidden by the Author of
Nature. Now Right Reason tells us it is Reasonable to defend our Lives against
the Attempts of every unlawful Aggressor. And Mr. Hobbs, who can never be
suspected to give too little power to Kings, or too much to the People, says
it is the First principle of Natural Right, for every Man to defend his Life and
his Limbs, by all means that he possibly can; for though when Communities and
Societies are formed, this Right of Defending, and Avenging our selves,
devolves upon the Supreme Magistrate, and consequently makes it unlawful for us
to kill a Man that endeavors to Assassinate us, if we can prevent his efforts
by addressing our selves to Justice; yet if by that means we cannot secure our
lives, that Necessity puts us in possession of our Natural Right, and our own
Arm becomes our Magistrate, and gives us Authority to defend our own lives,
though (if it cannot be avoided) with the loss of the Aggressors. Let us put the
Case.

Suppose a Prince had resolved on a design to Kill his Subjects, that he
solemnly swore to protect; what are the Subjects to do in this condition; To
say they will implore the assistance of the Laws was to mock them, and delude
our selves, for they cannot resist Dragoons and Firelocks. To go to the King
is to no purpose; he is in the Design, and so far engaged, that he thinks in
Conscience he cannot go back, and is therefore stocking himself with a set of
Men, that will not boggle at the execution of it. In such a Case this Absolute
Necessity (where the Society must perish for want of Protection) puts us in
possession of our Natural Right to defend our selves; for none has a power in
Right of his own Will to take away our Lives, but the Almighty power that gave
them.

If an Inferior Magistrate, Governor of a Province, or City, Rebels against the
King from whom he received his Authority, in order to deprive him of his Crown
and Dignity, none will scruple to resist him in defense of the King, who is
Supreme Lord both of him and us: And by the same Reason may a Sovereign Prince
be Resisted that Usurps upon the Rights of God; for no Prince is more Superior
to his Subalterns, than God Almighty is to all the Kings and Potentates of the
whole Earth.

Reason and Religion command, and commend a dutiful submission to Authority;
but neither Reason, Nature, nor Religion, obliges us to comply with the
Sovereignty of the Creature, to the prejudice of the Creator, or subscribe to
such orders of an Arbitrary Prince, as manifestly oppose the Rights of God,
unless we are fond of Inheriting the Title of being Cruel to our selves,
Unnatural to our Children, and professed Enemies of our Country, for though
slavery may be the misfortune of good People, to submit to it can never be
their Duty.

Another great Engine wherewith our Adversaries serve themselves to batter down
the Doctrine of Resistance, is the Law of the Land, and particularly* the Act
of Parliament made in the 13th of King Charles the Second, which seems in their
apprehensions, to extirpate this Principal Root and Branch; though I believe
'twill fail them, when we have considered the Occasion of that Law, and the
Intention of the Ligislators. And this I hope to do with a Modesty suitable to
the great Veneration and Esteem that is due to those August Assemblies, Acts of
Parliament (in my opinion) being only subject to the Censure of those that have
a Right and Power to make them. And yet I hope, with submission, 'twill not be
indecent to say that Laws made in extraordinary Heats are not Regular
Obligations, nor ought to let Loose the Kings Hands and Tie up the Subjects.

England had been long Harrass'd, Enslaved, and almost Ruined, by an Unnatural
War; Scandalized by the Murder of a King, under Forms of Law, and Justice;
Oppressed by the Tyranny of their Fellow Subjects; and wearied out with changes
of Governments, and variety of afflictions. Sometimes a Commonwealth, the
Keepers of the Liberties of England, a Rump Parliament, then two successive
Protectors, a Council of Officers, a Committee of Safety, the Rump restored;
another Committee of Officers; the Fag end again; the Secluded Members; a Junto
that brought in King Charles the Second, and delivered England out of Cruel
Servitude, that was so sick with changing Masters, that when King Charles was
Enthroned, and called a Parliament, (which chiefly consisted of Sufferers under
the late Mock-Governments, or the Persons, Sons, or Relations, of such as had
been in actual War against the Parliament, or Sufferers for Charles the first)
the Excess of Joy that attended their Deliverance, and a Resolution to prevent
such Commotions and troubles for the future, so transported them, that they
thought they could never do enough to Greaten their Monarch, or discountenance
the late Republicans; and therefore in the heat of their Zeal, though they aimed
well, might overshoot the mark, and stretch the Prerogative of the King, and
the Obedience of the Subject, beyond their ordinary Limits, and like Fond
Bridegrooms, give away more Authority in a Week, than they could Redeem in
their whole Lives; which has been too often practiced in England in former
times, in hopes to oblige their Monarchs, though as often attended with Sorrow
and Repentance, and these, or at leastwise some of these things might be the
occasion of that Law.

For it could never be the Intention of a Parliament to make the most Violent
and Illegal Actions of Arbitrary power wholly Irresistible, or pull down the
excellent structure of a Limited Monarchy, and set up an Absolute Despotick
Tyranny, where the King and those commissioned by him might do what they
pleased with our Religion, Lives, and Estates, and make it Treason to resist in
any case whatsoever. Was not this to give away their own share in the
Legislative Power, and contradict the Preamble of every Act of Parliament,
which says, all Laws are made by the consent of the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and the Commons assembled in Parliament, and by the Authority of the
same, never failing to insert those Words? And that this would have been the
inevitable consequence of such an Unlimited obligation upon the People, is
plain, for what makes a King Absolute, but that his Subjects are under a
necessity of Obeying him without reserve, i. e. never to oppose his commands in
any case whatsoever. And to confirm my self that they never intended such a
breach in our constitution, is because the extravagancy of the Act with such a
design, would have accused both their prudence and Fidelity.

Judge Cook in his Institutes, says that Laws made against Right Reason, and
the Law of Nature are void in themselves; and then there is no necessity of
obeying them longer than till we are in a capacity to deny or dispute it; what
Man of Common Sense can believe that so many Wise Men (how good an opinion
soever they might have of the King then in the Throne) would Arm all his
Successors with a power as Despotick and Absolute as the great Turk, who may
have the Heads, and Estates of his Subjects as often as he pleases to command
them.

The last Argument I shall use to show that that Parliament did not Intend to
couch the People under such an Entire and Universal Submission as is maintained
by our Adversaries, is because they had no Power to do it; for no Power can
reach beyond the Reason of its Institution, which is, to preserve the Lives and
Privileges of the People, and not make 'em Slaves and Vassals to a Delegated
Authority. Who can believe that the Nation ever Entrusted any sort of Men with
a Power to destroy them, or to Surrender their All into the Hands of a Cruel
Tyrant? As Representatives of the People they could have no more Power than the
People could give them, nor could it be extended beyond theirs from whom it was
derived, or that is allowed by the Law of Nature, Nam quodcunque suis mutatum
sinibus exit. Lucrit. l. ^

Continuo hoc mors est illius. quod fuit ante.
-- Since what does its limits pass By change, quite perishes from what it was.
because it was not in their power to grant it. No Man can license another to
kill him, because the consent is Unnatural, and Null and Void in it self; so no
Community can give any persons power to destroy them, either directly or by
consequence; for it is preposterous in Nature that the Means should be
destructive in the End, and that those that were substituted for our
Preservation should be the Instruments of our Ruin; which must necessarily
follow if they Intended by that Law to Invest all our Princes with a Power to
do whatever they please, and that in no case whatsoever they might be Resisted;
to which I shall add no more, till I have answered the Calumny of the Papists,
who charge the Revolution upon the Principles of our Religion.

Pere d'Orleans the Jesuit, with design to draw off the Roman Catholic Princes
from a Revolution d'Angleterre, Tom, 3. p. 395.
Confederacy with King William and other Protestant Princes for the
preservation of Europe, and to persuade them to unite their Arms with those of
France, and the late King James; on whose success (as he says) depends the
Glory and Stability of the Popish Religion, after he has scandalously told them
that this Confederacy was a Combination against God and his Messiah, the subtle
Missionary would insinuate that the late King was Deposed merely upon the
account of his Religion, and that if he had been of no Religion, or any thing
but a Papist, he had never lost his Crown; which is a great Calumny, and to say
no worse a wilful mistake, for in Ancient times, long before the Reformation
had footing in England, and when the profession of the same Religion tied Men
in one Communion, and Worship; and when there could be no Apprehension of
Grudges, upon the Pretense of Different Persuasions in Religion; there were
equal Animosities and Struglings between the Ancient Britains, and their Kings,
as often as they thought their Laws and Liberties were in danger of being
Invaded or Destroyed by them, None that converse with History can be ignorant,
that the same Innate and Congenial Temper has always swayed these Northern
Climates, in all Ages within the Reach of History; and was observed to be
Predominate by Julius Caesar him self, in his own Reign here. Tacitus has an
Instance, very applicable to this purpose: Ipsi Britanni selectum, and tributa,
and injuncta Imperii munera impigre obeunt; si Injuriae absint, has aegre
tolerant, jam domiti ut pareant nondum ut serviant. Tacit. in Vita Agricolae,
Sect. 13.
The Britains, says he, are easily assembled, pay Taxes freely, and execute
Offices in the Government cheerfully, if no Injuries be offered them; for they
are willing Subjects, but impatient under Slavery. When they were under the
Power of the Normans, they had often Recourse to their Arms, to prevent the
Encroachments, and abate the Oppressions of that Race of Kings, although they
were All of the same Religion; as is apparent in the Reign of William the
First, who, upon the Opposition he met with, relinquished his Pretense to
Conquest, and swore to govern the Kingdom by its Ancient Laws. William the
Second was defeated by many of his Subjects, who took part with his Elder
Brother, Robert Duke of Normandy, because Rufus had violated the Laws. From the
same Cause, when Duke Robert raised an Army against his other Brother, Henry
the First, the greatest part of Henry's Army Revolted to Robert, because, as
Matthew Paris says, Henry had already been a Tyrant. Another Commotion was
raised against this Prince, and the Party headed by Stephen, Archbishop of
Canterbury. King John was brought to Reason, by the Resistance he found by the
Great Prelates, Nobility, and Gentry, who slighted the Pope's Bull for
Abolishing their Great Charter; and valued neither the King's Arms, nor the
Pope's Excommunicating of them all, when they stood in Competition with their
Ancient Rights and Privileges. What Troubles and Danger did the Barons and
Bishops bring upon Henry the Third, for Violating their Privileges? His Reign
gave Birth to the Complaint that filled the Subjects Mouths in the Reign of
King James, viz. That Judgment was committed to the Unjust; the Laws, to the
Lawless; Peace, to Men of Discord; and Justice, to the Injurious: So that not
only the Nobility, Gentry and Commonalty, but the Bishops of his own Church,
Warred against him, threatened him with Excommunication; and that if he would
not be reclaimed from his Illegal and Arbitrary Proceedings, they would conferr
with the other Estates of the Realm, and (as they had done in his Predecessor's
Time) would choose a New King. And if, in so Ancient Times, when Popery was on
the Meridian of Glory, and Power, not only the Laity, but the Prelates of the
Church, thought it Lawful to Resist their Monarchs, who were breaking in upon
their Liberties; why may not Protestants do the same, without Scandal to their
Holy Religion, when they had greater Reasons, and stronger Provocations, than
former Times could pretend to?

Their Religion was never in danger by any of those Kings: But ours had
received a deadly Wound by James the Second, and was almost Expiring, till we
took shelter under a Prince who is not only able to Protect his own Subjects,
but to hinder other Nations from being brought under the Yoke of Slavery.

The Reader (I hope) will easily perceive that these Instances are not urged to
flatter the Rage, or gratify the Passions of Seditious Rebels; but only to
show, that it has always been the Genius of the English Nation, under all Forms
of Religion, to be very Tender of their Privileges; and gave greater Proofs of
their Zeal for them in Times of Popery, than ever they have done since ehe
Protestant Religion obtained amongst us: Which may, at once, confute the
Jesuits, and convince the World, that we did not resist the late King James
because he was a Papist, but because he was a Tyrant; though it has been observed
in England, that Popery was the first Step to Arbitrary Power; and the nearer
any of our Kings inclined to Popery, so much the more did our Privileges
decline, till at last they were almost totally destroyed by a Prince that
openly professed it; and all our Crime is, that we would not be content to be
Ruined by the late King, and his Popish Emmissaries; and rather chose to desire
Protection, Liberty, and the Restitution of our Privileges, from His Present
Majesty, than abide in the Condition of the vilest Slaves to the late King
James! A Crime, for which, I am very confident, no Papist, though he Rail at us
with his Tongue, can condemn us in his Conscience. And this brings us to the
last Plea that our Opponents are pleased to enter against the Doctrine of
Resistance, and securing our Obedience to the late King; viz. That we are
obliged by our Oaths, to Obey, and not Resist him, upon any Pretense
whatsoever. To which I Answer:

How large an Extent soever some Men may give to the Oaths they took, in
pursuance of an Act of Parliament in the 13th of Charles the Second; yet they
ought to remember what must always be supposed, as the Natural Condition of
every Oath, Rebus sic stantibus, Things continuing in the same State as they
were in at the Time of Taking these Oaths; for otherwise, the Obligation ceases
when Things are so changed, that they are Unlawful, or impossible to be
observed. When we took these Oaths to the late King, we believed he would
observe and keep his own Oath at his Coronation, and protect us in our
Religious and Civil Rights; and therefore we swore to obey him: But when he
broke his own Oath, and employed his Power to Ruin us, and our Religion, out
Allegiance was at an End, and we had no Reason to observe those Oaths that were
taken when Things were in a better Posture; and which we should never have
took, if we could have foreseen what since has unfortunately happened; for
though we were cheated by our Credulity, the Change of Circumstances has
cancelled the Obligation of those Oaths, and made it our Duty to do the
contrary.

We are obliged to obey our Parents, while they maintain their Characters; but
our Obedience ceases, when they command what is sinful. Nature founded our
Obedience to Authority, upon a Supposition that it was for the Good of the
Community. Kings are the Guarrantees of this Formal Alliance, and from the
Obligation of the Original Compact arises our Submission: But if Princes extend
their Authority beyond the first Design of its Institution, and destroy the
Society over which they preside, our Obedience is at an end, and we may justly
oppose them; for no Oath, or Promise of Obedience, can supercede our Antecedent
Obligations to our selves, or our Country. Had King James kept his own Oath, we
had been obliged to ours; but his changing from what he promised to be, set us
at liberty. The Deceit was his own Contrivance, in disguising himself; for had
he appeared in his own Likeness, and honestly told us what he designed, before
we were decoyed into Oaths, I believe there would have been as many Non-Jurants
then, as there were Honest and Thinking Men in the Kingdom.

All Oaths, though never so cautiously worded, have still some Tacit Exceptions,
or else they would sometimes Interfere with Common Equity: Therefore it is a
good Exception in Law, and a Salvo in Conscience, to say, that the Thing, when
the Oath was taken, was Unforeseen; and so unlikely to happen, that it was
thought almost impossible to come to pass; viz. That the late King James should
endeavor to Ruin his Subjects, which of necessity must have been his own Ruin
also, when the Account should be adjusted between himself and Partners. Again,

As the late King managed his Affairs, these Oaths, and our Obedience were
Contradictory to themselves, and therefore not Obliging. We swore in the Oath
of Supremacy, that the King is Supreme Head and Governor in his Dominions; and
that the Pope neither has, nor ought to have any Superiority or Authority
therein: But the late King, notwithstanding this Law, would have the Pope
Supreme in Spirituals! Could we make him what he would not be? Could he absolve
us from those Oaths, after we had taken them? Or how was it possible for to
observe them, but we must offend one Way, or the other? The Low says, we must
take these Oaths, or pay Five Hundred Pounds, besides other Penal
Disabilities: The King says, we must not take them, upon pain of his
Displeasure, and being turned out of the Offices we enjoy as our Freeholds by
taking the Oaths; what must the Subject do, when the Law and the King are at so
great Variance, and the Subjects Duty involved in such Intricacies, that could
never be salv'd, but by the Monarch's Abdication? But

That which utterly puts an End to the Obligatory Part of these Oaths, and
makes them Null and Void, was, his Voluntary Withdrawing himself from the
Kingdom, Abdicating the Government, and Leaving the Throne Vacant; for that set
his Subjects Free, to all Intents and Purposes; because he that leaves the
Government of his Subjects, must be supposed to Resign his Interest in them;
for Government is so necessary for the Preservation of Subjects, that he who
intends to have Subjects, must at the same time intend to have them Governed,
or their whole Allegiance ceases. Nor if he could pretend he was forced to go
off, will that avail him, because it was of his own procuring: He might have
prevented it by Calling a Parliament, and Complying with Justice; and the not
doing what he ought, makes his Desertion Voluntary. I mention this, only to
answer those that object it without Cause; whose Partiality spoils their
Judgments, and drives them to little Shifts, to support their false Pretenses.

His Departure into France, and Desertion of the Crown, was whole- Voluntary; no
Force compelled him, no Danger threatened him, the People were willing to have
Retained him; but he, according to Hales's and Brent's Advices, would leave the
Kingdom in Confusion, that he might return the sooner, and have his Ends of us;
which would bear very Severe Reflections; but his Going off being the only kind
Act that ever that King did for England, I shall omit them now, out of pure
Gratitude for that transcendent Favor.

What remains then, but a serious Advice to our Scrupulous, or Obstinate
Brethren, that they would no longer insist upon Controverted Cases, and
Ill-timed Niceties, that hinder their Obedience, or slacken their Gratitude to
God, and our Sovereign Lord, King William, for our Miraculous Deliverance; nor
Ruin themselves, nor expose the Nation to Danger for the sake of the late King,
when they neither ought, nor can do him any Service; for seeing, by the Law of
Nature, the Design of Government, and the Practice of all Nations, the late
King has Forfeited and Renounced his Right, and they are discharged from their
Oaths and Allegiance to him, that they would now honorably deliver up that
Pretense which they can no longer defend, and pay their Obedience where Divine
Providence, the Laws of the Land, and an Extraorninary Merit, has made it due.

What can be more dishonorable, than that the Dishonor and Loss that has
befallen this Unfortunate Prince, was the Consequence of his own Arbitrary
Actions, and is primarily to be imputed to himself, in exceeding the Bounds of
his Limited Authority, which he ought in no wise to have done; for the Royal
Dignity of England is so far from being a Despotick kind of Government, that it
carries along with it, in its very Essence, a Mixture of Interests betwixt King
and People; and lays an Obligation upon the King, to govern, not by his own
Arbitrary Will, but according to Law. And so careful have the English Subjects
always been to preserve the Government in this Equal Poize, that every
Deviation from it, has been looked upon by them, as a Step toward Tyranny. And
not only the English, but so strangely has all Antiquity looked upon the
Affectation of Absolute Power, that Isidore lays it down as the Character of a
Tyrant, That he is Ambitious of Absolute Dominion, and oppresses his Subjects
by a Lawless Authority, And the Scholiast of Aristophanes says, That a King
differs from a Tyrant in this, that a King possesses his Kingdom, as receiving
it from his Subject, upon certain Conditions prescribed by Law; but a Tyrant
Enters and Rules by Force and Violence. James the Second could not be ignorant
that other Kings of England have sometimes showed their Inclinations, and made
some private Lashes, and subtle Essays, toward an Unlimited Power; but being
told of it, as an Incroachment upon the Laws, they have always publicly
disclaimed it; and yet the late King would attempt it!

Fortunae miseras auximus art vias. Propert. lib. 3. El. 6.
He with Misfortune, against himself, took part;
And his own Wickedness increased by Art.
King Charles the First, in his Declaration from 1694.
Newmarket, showed the Unlawfulness of it; for, says he, The Laws are the
Measures of my Power. Few Words, but very significant; and agree with what was
said by that great Lawyer, Bracton, That he is no King that governs by his own
Will, and not by Law; nor are his Commands obliging. Which made King James, in
one of his Speeches to the Parliament, call those Flatterers that persuade
Kings not to confine themselves within the Bounds o^ their own Laws, Vipers,
and the Pests of King and Kingdom And the Lord Verulam says, the People have as
good a Right to their Laws, as to the Air they breath in; and he that persuades
his Prince to break them, is as great a Traitor to him in the Court of Heaven,
as the Villain that draws his Sword upon him in his own Palace.

Lewis the Eleventh of France, though he had been a very Arbitrary Prince, when
he lay upon his Deathbed, told his Son Charles the Eighth, that it was a
Diminution to the Greatness of a King, not to govern by Law, and treat his
Subjects Humanely; for no Man can be called a King, but he that governs
Freemen.

King James the First, in another Speech to his Parliament, sums up all in this
memorable Passage, viz. That a King governing in a settled Kingdom, leaves to
be a King, and degenerates into a Tyrant, when he ceases to rule according to
Law. And yet all this could not restrain James the Second from endeavoring
after an Absolute Power.

The Sentiments of these Great Men might be very prevalent upon Ingenuous
Princes; yet our Ancestors, unwilling to expose themselves and us to Contingent
Hazards, or leave it to the Mercy, or trust only to the Good Nature of Princes,
who being but Men, might be swayed by their own Passions, abused by their
Credulity, or mis-guided by Evil Counselors, to act against their own, and
their Kingdom's Safety, they thought fit to bind up their Kings from Invading
their Laws, or venturing upon an Unlimited Power, by the most Sacred Obligation
in the World; viz. a Solemn Oath, and Promise, at their Coronations, to govern
according to the Laws of the Land: And Taking this Oath has always been the
constant Practice of our Saxon, Danish and Norman Kings, even to James the
Second, who made no Scruple in Taking, nor no Conscience in Breaking it. To
this, I might add, that our Kings are Circumscribed by Law, because, in many
Instances, the Law has determined what they can, and what they cannot do
lawfully; But because this Point has been Invidiously and Indecently handled,
by some Perulant and froward Tempers, who have set too narrow Bounds to the
Royal Prerogative, I shall wave it, and conclude this Paragraph with that
excellent Saying of King James the First, to both Houses of Parliament: Wherein
he expressly tells them, See his Works.
That a King of England binds himself by a double Oath, to the Observation of
the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom: Tacitly, as being a King; and so bound to
protect his People, and the Laws of the Kingdom: And Expressly, by his Oath at
his Coronation. So that every King in a settled Kingdom, is bound to observe
that Paction made to his People, by his Laws, in framing his Government
agreeably thereunto; according to the Paction that God made with Noah, after
the Deluge.

To Recite more upon this Head, was, to pour Water into the Sea; for that King
that does not think himself obliged by his Oath to govern according to Law, no
other Legal Mound can hold him from breaking down the Fences of the Kingdom,
and laying all Waste before him: Which, though others might aim at by a
Side-Wind, no King of England ever claimed a Right to it, but the late King
James; and it was a piece of Haughtiness, and Extravagance, above all Example,
except what his own following Practices has furnished us with. And having thus
proved, that the late King James was, by his Oath, obliged to Govern by Law, I
proceed to show you, that instead of Answering this great End,

He made it the whole Business of his Reign, to act directly against the Laws,
to subvert the whole Constitution, and expose the Nation to certain Ruin and
Destruction. And, Secondly, That by so doing, he renounced to be our King; and
justified the Legality of the Estates proceedings against him.

That he intended no Good to England, might plainly be discerned, by the great
Number of Jesuits and Popish Priests, that from all Parts, flocked about him,
and were Caressed and Indear'd by him, at his very first Accession to the
Crown; for if Charity could have obliged us to believe him never so
Good-natured, it was Morally Impossible for him to continue Good, in such Ill
Company; who, wherever they come, set the Country in a Flame that receives
them. 'Twas, I say, a Sign that some very Ill Thing was to be done, when such
Sanguinary Hands were to be employed, as were Reeking hot in the Blood of
Neighboring Protestants; and against whose Cruelties, Self-Interest, Love of
Glory, Greatness of Mind, nor Goodness of Nature, could never divert those
Princes from Persecuting, and Rooting out their Protestant Subjects, that had
once imbibed the pernicious Principles of the Jesuits, who, like their Father,
the Davil, are always wandering about, seeking whom they may devour.

In what a happy Estate was the German Empire, till the Jesuits prevailed with
the Emperor to espouse their Interest; and, rather than let a few Protestants
live peaceably in Hungary, involved the Empire in a War that has lasted Thirty
Years already, and God only knows when there will be an End of it?

What Scandalous Breaches of Promises, and Havoc, has been among the Hugonots,
in France, by Merciless Cruelties, Murders, Thefts, Rapine, and all kind of
Devastations, since the Jesuits have been permitted to influence the Affairs of
that Kingdom? To give no more Presidents of their Barbarities to Protestants;
and bewitching, with their Poisonous Tenants, the Counsels of Unwary or
Bigoted Princes.

How have they persuaded the Duke of Savoy, contrary to all Politics, to
Persecute and Banish his Protestant Subjects, who, in all probability, would
have given him the best Assistance, when he shall want their Service, for the
Preservation of his Dukedom? And how far the late King James would have
followed those Presidents, while these Incendiaries were the Directors of his
Conscience, may be easily understood by the first Steps he made toward the
Ruin of the Protestant Interest. First,

In Setting up a Dispencing Power, and Assuming an Arbitrary Authority, that
should know no Bounds, but what his own Will should prescribe to it. By virtue
of this Unlimited Power, he brought a Jesuit into the Privy Council, made a
Professed Papist Secretary of State, constituted two Popish Judges, and filled
up many of the most Important Offices, and Places of Trust, and Profit, in the
Kingdom, with Papists; such as Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, Mayors of
Cities and Corporations, and Officers in his Army. And that he might be able to
gain his Point, and force those that refused to comply voluntarily, he put the
Tower of London, the great Magazin of England, and Keeper of the Regalia, into
the Hands of Sir Edward Hales, as Rank and Sour a Papist, as ever our Soil
produced; and filled all the Vacant Places of his Army with Popish Officers. By
the same Authority he granted an Ecclesiastical Commission, gave Four Popish
Bishops Power to visit several Districts in England, placed a Society of
Jesuits in the Savoy, and erected Popish Schools and Mass-Houses in most of our
Cities and Corporations: And Lastly, To annoy his Subjects, and force his Way
through all Difficulties, in Times of Peace, kept a Standing Army.

It Is needless to tell the Reader, that these Proceedings were contrary to the
Laws of the Land, and wholly Inconsistent with them; for there are very few, or
none, but know it already, in general Terms. I shall therefore apply my self to
show you how it was against Law, and what would have been the Consequences of
this Unlimited Power, if the late King had continued longer amongst us. And
this brings me to show you his particular Actions.

To feel the Pulse of England, and try how they Resented his Proceedings, the
late King commonly began the Exercise of his Arbitrary Power in Scotland; and
from the Measures that were taken there, we might take a Prospect of his
Tyranny, and our own Calamities; for though he showed us his Designs under the
Soft Title of Dispencing, in Scotland he threw off that Vizor, and explained
himself, in calling it Vide Scotch Declaration.
Annulling and Disabling Laws. And to show all the World his Arbitrary Ends, he
gave such a Specimen of his Single, Unlimited Power there, that he attempted to
do more in that Kingdom, (which, as well as ours, is a Limited Monarchy,) than
the United Power of King, Lords and Commons, together, were able to do; and
that was, by imposing an Oath on that People, contrary to Law, in these Words:

You shall swear, to the utmost of your Power to Defend, Assist, and Maintain,
the King, and his Successors, in the Exercise of their Absolute Power.

And this, I take Leave to say, the King and Parliament could not impose upon
the Subject; because it was, in it self, a Subversion of the Constitution, as
being an Obligation to support a Power destructive to the whole Frame of the
Government. This Caprichio of the late King James was the Masterpiece of all
his Jesuited Counsels, and the Finishing Stroke of an Eternal Vassalage; for
this Oath was created by his Arbitrary Power, and his Arbitrary Power was to be
supported by this Oath; and both must grow together, and run in an Endless
Circle, to the utter Extinction of all the Remains of our Natural Liberty, or
Legal Government. And what was done in Scotland, we have Reason to believe, in
its Course, must have been exercised in England also; the late King having no
more, or other Authority in one Kingdom, than he has in the other; and both
then governed by the same Arbitrary Maxims, and Popish Ministers.

In England, the late King assuming a Dispensing power, Usurped the whole
Legislative Authority into his own Hands, for to Dispense with Laws is as great
a power as to make them; and by the exercise of it, invested himself with a
power as great, if not greater, than that of King and Parliament together, who
can jointly, but not severally, give any Resolve the Authority of a Law. The
pretenses to justify this Action was, that he might have the assistance of all
his Subjects, and that the Papists having been equally Loyal to his
Progenitors, they might not be discouraged by legal Discriminations. This was
but a light pretense, though part of the Intrigue, for his dispencing power was
chiefly directed to another and more considerable purpose.

From the latter end of King Charles's Reign, the Press was laden with
Pamphlets, and City and Country filled with invectives against Parliaments, as
unnecessary Wenns in the Government that were fit to be cut off, that the Royal
Authority might be without any Legal, or Pecuniary Restraint, or Limitation.
Now the Dispencing Power would do this Work effectually; for it put the whole
Legislative Authority into the King's Hands, and made Parliaments Useless, and
signify Nothing! For this End was it set up: And the Employing Papists, that
were Unqualify'd by Law, was for no other End, but to support the Dispencing
Power, till it had accomplished what was intended by it.

Protestants could not be supposed to engage in this Design, for the Law was
made in their Favor, and was their Security against Romish Persecutions, and
Depredations; and therefore the late King would bring Papists into the
Government, to whom the Laws were Enemies, that, in requital, they might be
Enemies to to the Laws, and stick at nothing, to support their King's Power
that made them what they were, and would only continue them in their
Advantageous Stations. So that if that King should gain his Point, there seemed
a kind of Mutual Necessity for the late King to Introduce Papists, and for
Papists to execute his Orders, or the Power, and the Officers, would sink into
their Original Nothing: But the Snare is broken, and we are Delivered.

Strong Desires are the Common Temptations to the Use of Ill Means; and never
did any Man grasp at the Power to do Mischief, without the Purpose. If ever
there have been such mysterious Riddles of Irregular Virtue, yet James the
Second never gave any Instances of it; for it plainly appeared in him, how
effectually the Temptation of Unlimited Power worked in his Ambitious Humor.
He never thought any thing Enough, till he had engrossed a Power to Ruin All,
and turn Old England into a Wilderness of New Confusions. By this Dispencing
Power, he at once suspended above Forty Statures relalating to our Religion;
and the next Week, by the same Arbitrary Power, might have suspended Forty
more, that secured our Civil Properties likewise; for he had no more Right to
do the one, than the other; and so might have gone on to the End of the
Chapter, till he had Abrogated all the Laws in the Statute-Book; and acted
here, as afterward, Doctor King tells us, he did in Ireland; State of Ireland,
p. 92.
Seize Men's Goods, for his own Use, by a File of Musketeers, or, at best, by
his own Warrant, without any kind of Legal Process; and to which he had no
other Claim, but that he wanted them. Now if this be not Tyranny, nothing in
the World can merit that Appellation; and therefore, since I have been often
forced to give his Government that Title, that I may not seem to beg the
Question, or slander the Reign of that Unfortunate Prince, give me leave to
show you here, that it was a Tyranny through the whole Course of his unhappy
Reign; and that the Power he assumed, and the Maxims he acted by, had all the
Marks of Tyranny.

First, It was a True Tyranny; for the Violence he offered his Subjects, was
not the Effect of Inadvertency, Ignorance, Weakness, or Passion, which may
sometimes attend the best of Princes; but it was the deliberate Act and
Execution of many premeditated Resolutions; and grounded upon a Belief that he
had a Right to do whatever he thought fit to his Subjects. To do an ill Action
may be sometimes the Misfortune, not always the Fault of a Prince; But when
that Action is justified by a Right to do it, though the Laws utterly forbid it,
it is an Act of True and Absolute Tyranny, and can neither be defended, or
palliated. David was not a Tyrant in the Affair of Uriah; for he committed the
Crime like a Criminal, he was ashamed of the Action, and did all he could to
smother it, and never attempted to change his particular Passion into a public
Law, or Example. He who kills one, or a few, says Sen. Ep. 17. Qui unum, qui
plures occidit, non tamen Reipublicae laesae; sed caedis est.
Seneca, is not a Tyrant against the Commonwealth, but a Murderer: For Tyranny
consists in doing Wrong to all, grounded upon a Principle that he may do it
Lawfully. So Ahab's Action in taking away Naboth's Vineyard, was a heinous
Crime, but not properly an Act of Tyranny, because he did it by Collusion, and
under Color of purchasing it, without any Pretense of Right to do it. But all
the late King James's Actions had another Face; he justified his doing private
and particular Injuries, by assuming a Right to do so by All. He entailed
Misery and Destruction upon the Kingdom, by suspending and abolishing all Laws
that were made for its Security, and setting up his own Will instead of them.
He was not content to imprison some Bishops, or to affront some great Lords, or
deprive some particular Persons of their Rights; but he struck a Blow at the
Root, and by the Exercise of his Dispencing Power, and giving Authority to
Papists, whose Consciences laid them under a Necessity of destroying Heretics,
he was Ruining All: For, to suspend the Penal Laws against Papists, was, in
plain English, but to give them Power, in time, to execute the Bloody Decrees
of the Romish Church, upon English Protestants. Secondly,

2. The late King James's Tyranny was not only a True, but it was also a
Notorious and Evident Tyranny: No Artifice, Pretense, or Color, could hide it
from the Eyes of all Men; it was to be Read in All his Actions, past, and
present: What he had in Speculation when he was Duke, he practiced when he was
King. The Maxims of the greatest Quod Principi placuit Lex esto.
Tyrants he still laid Claim to, and observed no Rule, or Law, but his own
Will: Am not I your King, and ought to be obeyed without Reserve? was the
Language of his Proclamations, as well as his private Closetings. He threatened
all that would not comply with his Absolute Power, that they should feel the
Effects of his Displeasure; and by discarding some of the most Intelligent and
Experienced Men in the Kingdom, to to usher in Raw and Headstrong Papists,
proclaimed to all the World, he aimed at something that was Illegal, and could
not be compassed, but by Agents of his own Creation, that would venture at All,
to please their Master. And that the Knowledge of what he designed might not be
confined within his own Territories, he sent an Ambassador to the Pope,
directly against the known Laws of the Kingdom; and received a Nuncio from
thence with as much public State and Pomp, as if he designed to let all the
World see how far his Vanity, and Affectation of Arbitrary Power, and
Affronting the Laws, would carry him; though in that he had no better Success,
than in the rest of his Negotiations; for the Pope knew him too far in League
with the F -- K --, to think him a Friend of his, and treated his Ambassador
accordingly.

3. It was an Universal Tyranny: Nothing was exempted from his Lawless Will;
for by his false Persuasion in Religion, that we, as Heretics, were fallen
from our Rights, and had no just Claim to any thing we possessed; our
Consciences, our Lives, and our Estates, were all at his Disposal; and though he
might, by straining the Point, show us a little Favor, and let us enjoy them a
while; yet he could do us no Wrong in taking them away at his pleasure.
Agreeably to this Persuasion he adapted all his Actions, and no Order, Degree,
or Condition of Men in the Kingdom, but in some Instance, or other, felt the
Smart of them.

The Nobility and Gentry, by the Inquisition that was made after Popish Lands,
and the Promise of Restoring them to the Church, saw themselves in danger of
being Robbed of their Estates, or holding them precariously at the Pleasure of
Monks or Friars: And some that were then forced to sell their Estates, were
great Losers, and could scarce find Chap-men (as Things then stood) that cared
to buy them.

Some of the Reverend Bishop's were Imprisoned, for declaring they had
Consciences; others Cited before the Ecclesiastical Commissioners, for not
admitting Popish Priests into Benefices; and all frowned on that durst take the
Liberty to Preach against the King's Religion. They saw their Power declining,
by the Authority that was given to four Popish Bishops to hold Visitations in
their Diocesses; and the whole Body of the Protestant Clergy were on the Brink
of Ruin, for not Reading his Illegal Declaration.

Both the Universities felt the Effects of his Unlimited Power, in the
Dissolution of Magdalen-College in Oxford, and the Suspension and taking away
the Perquisites of the Vice Chancellor of Cambridge.

The Parliament, to whom he had many Obligations, were Dissolved, for refusing
to Repeal a Law made against Papists.

The Judges that had so much Law and Honesty, as to declare their Opinions
against his Dispencing Power, were laid aside, and others thrust into their
Places that would serve his Arbitrary Purposes.

Protestant Officers in the Army were, to their great Loss, Cashiered, to make
way for Papists; and some of them, threatened with Death, for Lieut. Col.
Beaumont, Tho. Paston, Simon Park, Tho. Orm, Will. Cook, and John Port; all
Officers (...) ^^^^anders.
refusing to admit Irish Papists into their English Protestant Companies, that
had the Guard of no less important place than Portsmouth.

Merchants were forced to pay Custom, where no Law enjoined it. Innkeepers,
Victuallers, and other Tradesmen, were impoverished by Free Quarter; and the
Poorest People in the Kingdom were Oppressed by the Illegal Exaction of
Hearth-Money. Fourthly,

4. The late King James's Reign was a Necessary Tyranny; and so much the more
necessary to push him forward to accomplish his Designs, that this Necessity
was imposed upon his Conscience by the Laws of his Church, under the
Expectation of Rewards, or Dread of the Punishments, that would attend his
Obedience, or Disobedience, to their Decrees. All the Popish Writers agree,
that Beccan. Theol. Scot. p. 1. c. 13. quaest. 5.

Tho. Aquin. Summmae quaest. 10 art 3.

Durand. Sancta Portian. quaest. utrum Haeret. sint tolerand. quaest. 5.

Bellarmin. de hicis, l. 3. c. 21.

Concilio Tolof. p. 46.

Council. Later. 4.


every Prince ought to Exterminate his Protestant Subjects; that the Omission
of that Duty, is Damnable; and that putting them to Death, when they have
nothing else to lose, is a Just, Meritorious Action. And we have Reason to
believe, if Heaven was to be purchased, God pleased, the Papists gratified, and
his own Ambition and Prejudice humored, in doing it, the late King would not
leave these Blessings behind him. Now, where the People claim a Right to their
Privileges, as well as the Prince to his Prerogative, the Prince will certainly
begin his Reign with the Destruction of those that have a Right to oppose his
Absolute Authority. And these Maxims, of a Right to do it in Conscience, were
the Inducements to King James's Tyranny; which we might expect to see
Increased, but never Relaxed; for though he might change his Councils, he could
not change his Conscience; nor whilst he had such Directors of it as the
Jesuits are, can it be supposed otherwise, but that he would follow the Lessons
they taught, and he imbibed, as conducing to his Eternal Happiness? Fifthly,

5. It was a Consummated Tyranny; nothing remained Entirely Free; but all was
subjected to the good Pleasure of his own Will. His Arbitrary Power influenced
all in Authority: His Privy Council, generally speaking, were made up of such
as would concour with his Unlimited Authority, and were obliged by their
Interest to assist the Project, and Subvert all that opposed it. The Judges
gave it for Law, that he had a Dispencing Power, and ought not to be Resisted
in the Exercise of it. The Magistracy was infected with the same Malady; and
the Soldiery were obliged to defend it with Sword in Hand.

6. It was, as intended, an Eternal Tyranny; for, besides that his Abrogating
the Laws gave an Example to his Successors to trace his Methods, and in time
make themselves as Despotick Princes as the Czar of Moscovy, or the Turkish
Emperor; he was introducing a Suppositious Heir, that should be trained up in
the same Principles, and invested in the same Power; and so keep out a
Protestant Successor, whose Religion would better instruct him in his Duty, in
maintaining his own Prerogative, and yet indulging his Subjects in such a
Liberty as does no way Impair or Attaint their Allegiance: Whereas a Popish
Successor would have made Tyranny as perpetual as it is Absolute.

7. To conclude, The Tyranny of the late King's Reign was an Incurable Tyranny.
If it had arose from the Heat of Youth, Time might have quenched that Fire, in
correcting the Cause. If it had proceeded from any Corporeal Disease, a Remedy
might have been found to cure it. If it had been the Effect of an Incurable
Disorder in his Intellects or Temperature, we might have flattered our selves
that it would last but one Reign; or that Defect might have been supplied by a
Regent. But none of these can be objected against the late King James, for he
Nursed it many Years in his own Bosom; it grew up with his Understanding, and
was a true Tyranny in its Design; necessary, as imposed on him by his
Conscience; evident in all his Actions; Universal in its Object, and Extent;
Consummated in its Degrees; Eternal in its Consequence; and altogether
incurable by reason of his Age, and introducing a Popish Heir; without the
Application of such a Speedy and Effectual Remedy as God was pleased to send us
in our Extremity.

Some of the late King James's Friends are pleased to extenuate the Crimes they
cannot defend, in charging all the Faults of his Reign upon his Ministers;
which, if allowed to be True, might lessen them in part, but not discharge him
of the whole: For if the Master's Actions be never so Innocent, or Inoffensive;
yet, if out of Cowardice, or Affection, he becomes the Patron of his Servants
Insolences and Outrages, by Protecting, or not Punishing their Misdemeanors,
he renders himself Guilty, and will share in the Contempt and Hatred of his
People. But when we consider how he labored the Point himself, by Closetting,
Persuading and Threatening many Great Men, and others, to engage with him in his
Design of Setting up Popery, and Dispencing with Laws, and whose Image and
Superscription it bears, the Glory of the Enterprise will be all his own; for I
can never think his Ministers capable of all those Extravagancies themselves,
any further than that they knew it would please him. Indeed, I can very easily
suppose them chiefly Devoted to their Own Interests, and willing to Share in
the Spoil of Ruined Subjects; yet methinks there should be some kind
Remembrance of their Native Country, that would sometimes check the
Dissoluteness of such Arbitrary Managements: And a certain Pride that Men take
in acting prudently, and not exposing themselves to the Hatred and Derision of
all Mankind, should have stopped their Carier in such Illegal Proceedings. And
so it appeared; for at last, under these Apprehensions, we find many that
deserted the late King, after he thought himself sure of them; and resigned
their Places, and refused to act by his Commission, or obey his Orders, after
their Names were Inserted in Commissions, and their Persons Actually Engaged in
his Service. So that it is plain, this Project was the Issue of his own Brain,
heated by the Jesuitical Dictators of his Conscience: The Fountain was
corrupted, and then no wonder the Streams run foul.

Something might be said in favor of the late King, if he had set up his
Dispencing Power for a General Good; but it is evidemt that it was only intended
to enable Papists to ruin Protestants; and therefore the Irish Parliament, in
their Act of Attainder, put it out of their King's Power to exercise his
Prerogative in showing Kindness to Protestants that wanted it: For when See The
State of the Protestants in Ireland, by Bishop King, p. 179.
Sir Thomas Southwell was (contrary to the Articles on which he Surrendered
himself) condemned for High Treason against King James; and at the Request of
the Lord Seaford, that King was willing to Pardon him, and sent his Warrant to
the Attorney General, Sir Richard Neagle, to draw a Fiat; the Attorney General
positively told the King, he could not Pardon him; and though the late King
seemed to be in a Heat, and told Sir Richard, he had betrayed him, yet it must
be presumed they Understood one another, for so the Matter ended; and Sir
Thomas went into Scotland, with the Lord Seaford, without being able to obtain
a Pardon for his Life, or Estate.

From this, and other Instances that might be given, we may see their Popish
Juggling; for when an Act of Parliament is made against a Papist, 'twas no less
than Treason to question the King's Pardoning and Dispencing Power; but when an
Act bears hard on a Protestant, and their King (as he pretends) has a Mind to
Ease them, then the King has no Power to Dispense, he cannot grant a Pardon,
his Hands are bound up by Law. So that the End of Setting up this Dispencing
Power, was only to shelter Papists from the Law, and ruin Protestants; for the
Papists, in their Hearts, we see, are as much against it, as the Protestants.
To go on:

The late King declared in Council, that he would publish such a Proclamation
in England, as he had done in Scotland; and that none should have Employments
under him, that would not cooperate in taking off the Penal Laws: And he began
to execute these Resolutions with a Conduct full of Violence, and Injustice.

The Lord Bishop of London was put out of the Privy Council, and Suspended from
his Episcopal Office, because he would not Suspend Doctor Sharp, now Archbishop
of York, without Legal Process. The Earl of Rochester was deprived of his
Office of Lord Treasurer, because he would not change his Religion. And the
Duke of Sommerset lost his Office, because he would not violate the Laws of the
Kingdom, in performing the Honors at the Reception of the Pope's Nuncio, as is
usual at the Introduction of Ambassadors.

To say, in Excuse of this, that James the Second turned out Great Officers of
State, because they would not obey him, and concur with his Intensions, is to
publish a Truth that ought to have been Concealed by his own Party; because it
was an evident Demonstration, that his Intentions were Unjust, and levelled
against our Laws, and Religion. In Things Lawful, though not Expedient, he found
a Tacit Compliance; nay, some of them, to keep him in Temper, perhaps complied
further with him than the Strictness of the Law would justify; (as Men pull
down some Houses at a Fire, to preserve the whole Town from Burning:) But, to
comply in all things, had been to forfeit their own Honors, to justify his
Illegalities, and Tyranny.

2. The Second Means that the late King James employed, for the Destruction of
the Religion and Liberties of England, was, granting an Ecclesiastical
Commission, directly contrary to Law. This declared by what Methods he intended
to govern; for every Step he made, was a new Project to assert his Arbitrary
Power; and acquaint his Subjects, that he would make all Laws Useless, that all
Power should rest in his own Hands, and the Administration be Issued from no
other Source but his own Will and Pleasure; for there was no Occasion for such
a Commission, but only to show what he would be at, and declare his Purpose to
ruin the Church of England. Therefore the Commissioners were Devoto's of the
Court; for the Archbishop's Name was put in, but to grace the Matter: They knew
before that he would not Act; and therefore, to color the Sham, they obliged
him to ask Leave to be absent.

To make this Commission more Illegal, a Papist is appointed one of the
Commissioners; and the whole clothed with as Absolute a Power, as the late
King himself was aspiring after! They had not only Power to Repress and Punish
all Abuses punishable by the Ecclesiastical Laws; and to proceed against
Offenders, by Interdiction, Suspention, Excommunication, Perpetual
Imprisonment, etc. but they had also Power to Exercise their Authority in all
Parts of England, to Visit Cathedral-Churches, the Universities, Colleges,
Parishes, Schools and Hospitals; to Judge in all Causes, and make new Laws,
Rules, Orders, and Statutes, and Abolish the Old ones, as the present Necessity
required; notwithstanding any Privilege, Statute, Exemption, or Prerogative to
the contrary. Which was such a boundless Stretch of Power, as never had, nor, I
hope, never will have any other President than it self. Thirdly, He pursued his
Arbitrary Methods by

3. Setting up Popery, in Opposition to the National Religion, to Ruin his
Protestant Subjects, and force the whole Kingdom under Subjection to the Papal
Laws, which had already sentenced them to Destruction; and that nothing less
could be the Design of this Unhappy Monarch, will evidently appear, if we
consider how Popery represents us to the World, and how Papists think
themselves obliged to treat us under those Characters.

The modestest Terms the Popish Writers can afford the English Protestants, is,
That they are a Pack of Sacrilegious Usurpers of their Church's Patrimony, and
a Nest of Obstinate Heretics that ought to be Sacrificed to their Revenge, and
Rooted out of the World by any Means whatsoever; and this, say they, is always
to be attempted by every good Prince, according to Bellarmine's Salvo, Ne sint
fortiores nobis; Unless they be too strong to be subdued. For, otherwise, even
Massacres are never condemned but when they are unsuccessful. And how then they
would have used us, if they could have established their Mischiess by Laws as
Bloody as their Minds, let the Marian Persecution acquaintus: And why should we
tempt them again, whose Religion is Cruelty, and smells so much of Fire, that
the very Smoke makes us tremble.

The Laws of England always intend the Preservation of the Subject? but Popery,
when Triumphant, in respect of Protestants, is destructive, to all Laws;
contrary to the Law of Society, to the Law of Government, to the Law of Empire,
to the Law of Royalty, and especially to the Laws of a Mixed Monarchy, such as
England's are; and Protestants can never be safe where it is Regnant. First,

1. Popery is against the Laws of Society in all Protestant Countries, as well
as in England; for, according to the Romish Tradition, the Reformed are all
Heretics; and, as such, are Ipso Facto deprived of the Right they had to their
Goods, their Children, their Liberty, their Privileges, and even of their
Country; and ought to be regarded only as Robbers, Becan. Theol. Scol. p. 1.
cap. 15. quaest. 6.
Thieves, Murderers, Rebels and Traitors, condemned to Death by the Church,
and ought to be delivered to the Secular Power to be Executed. And to complete
the Tragedy, that Holy Church appoints prodigious Recompenses to Princes that
Exterminate them, and Anathematize those that refuse it. Now, whilst a Popish
Prince lies under the Persuasion that his Protestant Subjects are such as his
Church represents them that they are not a People, nor have Right to any thing
they possess, he lies under so great a Temptation to destroy them, that they
had no Reason in the World to trust him with their Lives, or suffer him to set
up a Power that will inevitably destroy them. Secondly,

2. It is not less Incompatible with the Law of Government; for that is
designed to Protect and Defend: And how can that End agree with that of Popery,
which is to Exterminate Heretics? By the Law of Government, we are Objects of
Protection; by the Law of Popery, we are Subjects of Destruction. The Prince
receives from God, and the Society, a Power to protect his People; but he
receives from the Church his Mother, an Order to destroy them, as Condemned
Heretics: And which of these two Orders think you shall prevail with a Popish
King above the other? Why, thot in which he is most Concerned, and to which
Eternal Recompenses are inseparably annexed: And then, in what a sad Condition
were the Protestants of England, in the Reign of the late King. Thirdly, Against

3. The Law of Royalty, to which Popery in the Case supposed has an absolute
Antipathy; as will appear, if you consider that all Royalty necessarily
contains three Things, viz. the Consent of the People, engaging to obey; the
Consent of the King, promising to protect; and the Manner by which the King and
People confirm their Promises, which is a Religious Oath. Now, a Popish Prince,
that governs a Protestant People will be always wanting on his part of the
Contract, if he takes the Maxims of his own Religion for the Rule of his
Government.

It Is a Contradiction to believe he will act against his own Inclination, or
that he will cancel the Antecedent Obligation which he was under to the Church
his Mother, in preserving Heretics, that are not a People, but a loose sort of
Animals, doomed to Destruction! Does the Prince break his Faith in not
performing the Oath he took when Invested with his Kingly Authority and
promised to protect his People? No, say the Directors of his Conscience! The
Oath was against the Laws of Holy Church; therefore sinful, and void. Besides
(say they) the Prince took the Oath with Intention to break it, and the
Intention must always govern the Action, especially when it falls under the
Church's General Rule of not keeping Faith with Heretics.

4. To dismiss this Argument; Popery is particularly against the Laws of a
Mixed Monarchy, such as England's is, because the Prince believes he has a
Right to treat Heretics as he pleases; and may lawfully take away their Lives
and seize their Estates, without doing them any kind of Injustice; for being
fallen from the Right of Society, he can do them no Wrong. Besides, All Princes
that attribute to themselves an Absolute Power, think they owe an Account of
their Actions to none but God, and a Prince under the Circumstances that we
have observed, will never think he displeases God, by destroying Heretics,
Durand. a San. Port. quaest. 5. utr. sint tolerand.
that, as their Writers say, are Enemies to GOD and Man. So that we see the
Advancement of Popery in a Protestant Kingdom, is a necessary Introduction of
Tyranny, and Intails a Law of Misery and Desolation upon all Protestants: And
such was King James's Design here.

Let no Man argue the Impossibility of Introducing Popery into this Kingdom,
because the Number of Papists are but small in respect of the Protestants; for
that will not render the Design Impracticable, but rather make the Execution of
it more cruel and barbarous: A whole Nation upon the matter, must be co^rupted
from the Faith of the True Religion or be destroyed. You know what Progresses
were made toward it, by Tying all Preferments to Popery, Unarming Protestants,
putting the whole Strength and Power of the Kingdom into the Hands of Papists,
and sending over Irish Soldiers, to increase a needless and dangerous Army. And
what this might have grown to in time, was easier to foresee than Remedy; for
an Ordinary Strength, Unresisted, might Assassinate a whole Nation. Fifthly,

5. In the Heat of the late King's Zeal and Fury to procure such a Parliament
as might set up a Power and Interest agreeable to his Humor, and destructive
to the Kingdom, Quo Warranto's like Bombs, were thrown into Cities and Boroughs
to destroy the Freedom of Elections, which is the Foundation of Government; for
What will become of the Liberty of Parliaments, without the Freedom of
Elections? And how can England enjoy their Privileges, without the Freedom of
Parliaments? All which were to be violated at once by this Undermining Project;
and Persons must be imposed upon them for their Representatives in Parliament
which were none of their Choice, but Pressed by a Popish Court and solely at
their King's Devotion. Some are pleased to express themselves in very harsh
Language against that which they call the Pentionary Parliament, as more
zealous for the Advantage of the Crown, than the Welfare of the Kingdom; But
what dreadful Consequences might be predicted from a Parliament consisting both
of Papists and Popish Pensioners, if it had been possible for the late King to
have accomplished his Designs, are almost beyond the Power of Melancholy to
suggest them in Figures black enough to express their Horror. The Choice of a
Parliament that would do whatever he thought fit, was the only thing wanting,
therefore all things were disposed and regulated after such a manner, as might
bring such a sort of Men together at Westminster, as might gratify his Popish
Arbitrary Ends, and Vote Protestants to be the main Grievance of the Nation.

6. Another Intrigue of the late King's, was to Ruin the Kingdom by a Chain of
Consequences, and as the Destruction of the Liberties of England was the
Overthrow of the Protestant Religion, so he would make the Subversion of our
Religion serve to destroy our Liberties. This made him impatiently covet that
Papists might be freed from the Penal Laws and Tests, which were the Barriers
to Defend the Nation from Romish Usurpation. And this piece of Tyranny above
all the rest is most notorious. A Protestant Nation makes Laws to preserve
themselves from being Victims of Popish Fury: These Laws were necessary at all
times, but more especially under the Reign of a King that had been pleased to
declare himself a Papist; and yet these are the Laws that the late King would
violate; and not violate only, but utterly Non tam commutandarum, sed
evertendarum rerum cupidi.
Abolish: and persecuted those who had a Zeal to preserve them; Imprisoning
some, Destituting others, and Threatening all without Exception that dared to
gainsay it.

For this End he raised an Army, kept it up in Time of Peace, and put into it
as many Irish as he could find, of the Posterity of those who committed the
Barbarous and Bloody Murders, and Massacres on the Bodies of English
Protestants, in 1641. and to do the like to us in England, or force us to
submit to the cruel Yoke of Slavery and Superstition. It Is natural for a Prince
to Raise Forces for the Defense of his Dominions, when he fears Enemies from
abroad; But to entertain an Army in Times of Peace, only to Rob his People of
their Laws and Privileges! to Ravage his Universities, and to put public
Destroyers into the Govent, must surely pass for a manifest Tyranny! Our Laws
do not only totally exclude Papists from Military Offices, but injoin them to
be Disarmed also: Notwithstanding, James the Second did not only Arm them, but
put them into the First Employments of the Army and all other Stations: And was
so fond of them, that no Consideration either of Quality, Loyalty, or Merit,
(except he was a Papist,) could Recommend any Man to this King's Favor, or
give him Title to the common Kindness of a Civil Reception; but all were Smiled
or Frowned on, as they were distinguished by their Religious Principles.

Men may live happily under a Government, and yet be excluded from having any
Office, or exercising any Authority under it; and therefore the late King's
Fondness, and the Papists Forwardness to thrust themselves into Employments,
gave a great Suspicion, that it was for no good End, that he put Wise and
Experienced Men out, to make room for a sort of Raw Papists, who being not used
to Public Business, were not capacitated for it. No Man can imagine that the
late King made this bold Adventure, in Employing Papists, for nothing; or that
he would disoblige the Body of his People for their sakes only, without
designing some other Advantage to himself by it: He must have some peculiar
Service for these Unqualify'd Favorites to do, in which the rest of the Nation
would not inter-meddle. The Contest was between the King's Absolute Power on
the one side, and our Laws and Religion on the other: And therefore, to know
what Work their King had for them to do, and to what End he would have employed
these Services here, is but to see Vide State of Ireland under the Reign of the
late King James.
what Use he put them to in Ireland, and how they demeaned themselves toward
Protestants where the Scene was opened, and all manner of Violences committed
upon Protestants, by his Authority.

He also corrupted the Exercise of Justice, on which depends the Safety of the
Nation and the Stability of the Throne. The Judges were Tampered with, and
Admitted upon Condition of favoring and promoting the late King's Arbitrary
Power, and the Popish Interest. Those Judges were Deposed who were fixed in
their Religion, and Resolutely defended the True Interest of their Country, and
others put into their Places, of no Honor, Integrity, or Capacity; but known
Temporizers or Papists, who were excluded by the Laws of their Country: Upon
this, followed very Arbitrary and Illegal Proceedings in the Courts of
Judicature. A Prosecution was carried on against Seven Reverend Prelates, for
Petitioning the King to Redress their Grievances, and giving their Reasons why
they could not obey his Arbitrary Commands. Causes were Tried in the Court of
King's Bench, that were only Cognizable in Parliament. Partial, Corrupt and
Unqualify'd Persons were Returned, and Served on Juries in Cases of High
Treason, that were not Freeholders. Great Bail required of Persons Committed
in Criminal Causes. Excessive Fines Imposed for small Offenses. Illegal and
Cruel Punishments Inflicted, without Example or Law, to warrant them. And, for
a finishing Stroke,

The late King was also pleased to Grant and Seal a Commission to several
Unqualify'd Persons, to Examine the Revenues, and Search into the Foundations
of all the Hospitals in the Kingdom, and see to what Uses they were first given
by their Benefactors: And into the Estates that some time ago belonged to
Monks, Friars, and other Religious Orders of the Romish Church, with Intent to
Restore them to the Papists, who complained to the late King, that they were
Wrongfully Deprived of them. In brief; Never any Prince, in so short a time,
committed so many Irregularities, and made such Inroads upon our All, as James
the Second did, by his Dispencing Power in England, his Absolute Power without
Reserve in Scotland, and his Actual and Absolute Destruction of the Liberties
and Religion of the Protestants in Ireland.

To which, if we add the more than seeming Probability of the late King's
Leaguing with France, for the Extirpation of the Northern Heresy 'twill
complete his Design, and make the intended Ruin of England unavoidable; for
more Hands would have made lighter Work, and Experienced Artists would have
finished it sooner. I will not urge this League as a plain and positive Truth,
though I am strongly inclined to believe it; and therefore shall only produce my
Reasons, and leave them with the Reader, to judge as he pleases.

Mr. Coleman, who must be presumed to know much of his Master's Mind, (being in
the same Interest, and the Tool he worked with in all his Secret Practices,)
gives great Suspicion of the Truth of this Combination in a Letter to Sir
William Throgmorton, Feb. 1. 1678. You well know, (says he) that when the Duke
comes to be Master of our Affairs, (i. e. to be King of England,) the King of
France will have Reason to promise himself All things that he can desire. And
in a Letter to Father Le Chaise, Confessor to the French King, he says, That
His Royal Highness was convinced that His Interest and the King of France 's
were the same. And whether he ever thought fit to change his Mind since his
Accession to the Crown, his own Actions will better declare, than any Gloss of
mine.

In this State of Amity Things continued between the French King, and the Duke
of York till he was King. And when the Prince of Orange's Fleet was preparing
for his Noble Expedition into England, they seemed to rest on the same Foot;
for Monsieur le Comte d' Avaux, the French King's Ambassador at the Hague, in a
Memorial to the States General, acquaints them, That his Master knowing the
great Preparations for War that their Lordships were making, both by Sea, and
Land, was not without some Design formed, answuerable to the greatness of those
preparations, and his Master believing that it threatened England, he had
Commanded him to declare on his part, that the Bands of Friendship and Alliance
between him and the King of Great Britain, will oblige him not only to assist
him; but also to look upon the first Act of Hostility that shall be committed
by your Troops, or your Fleet, against his Majesty of Great Britain, as a
manifest Rupture of the Peace, and a Breach with his Crown.

To this Memorial the States of Holland gave Answer, That they Armed, after the
Example of their Neighbors, to be ready upon Occasion. It Is true, the French
Ambassador, does not mention the League in express words, yet he gives very
shrewd Hints that there was some such thing as a League, or an Equivilent,
between, the two Crowns; and so the States of Holland took it. For in their
Answer to the English The Marquess d'Arbaville.
Ambassadors's Memorial, their Lordships tell him, That they were long since
fully convinced of the Alliance which the King his Master, had treated with
France, and which has been mentioned by Mr. Le Comte d'Avaux in his Memorial.
The Industry and Care that has been used to stifle this League does also give
cause to suspect it. For the Revoking and Imprisoning Sir Bevel Skeleton the
English Agent in France, upon a Supposition that he had talked of it, and
Rewarding him afterward with the Lieutenancy of the Tower are plain
Contradictions; and therefore the English, and Dutch, had reason to believe the
League, and Insist upon it, when the French themselves had discovered it. Now
compare all this with Mr. Coleman's Letters, and the barbarous persecutions of
the French Protestants so tragically carried on in France, and which were also
going on to be Imitated in England, at the same time that the French Memorial
was delivered, and you will have all the Reason in the World to to continue
your belief of it, for the greater security of England.

Thus have I given a brief Survey of the late King's Tyranny, in Matters of
public Fact, as the natural consequence of his Espousing and Advancing the
Popish Religion, upon the Ruins of the Reformed. I must now acquaint you what
Course the Nation took to procure their Deliverance.

Who seeing themselves Involved in such deplorable Circumstances, Gaul'd under
the Yoke of Papistick Tyranny, Afflicted at the dismal prospect of being
deprived of the Exercise of their Established Religion, and the loss of their
Civil Properties and Privileges: After they had ineffectually employed all
Dutiful and Obliging Methods to Reclaim the King, and waited till England was
on the Brink of Destruction, before they would assume their Natural Right, and
Defend themselves: God Almighty, (who from Heaven beheld their approaching
Calamities) put it into the Hearts of some thoughtful Persons of all Qualities,
Degrees, and Conditions in the Kingdom, to make their humble Application to the
Illustrious Prince of Orange, who as a Sovereign Independent Prince, nearly
allied by his own Blood, but nearer by his Virtuous Princess to the Crown of
England, and a Protestant in his Religion, had an undoubted Right to interpose
between the late King and his injured Subjects, and according to his own
Benignity, and the Example of his Illustrious Progenitors, Defend, and Deliver,
an oppressed People.

Divine Providence having thus prescribed the Means of our Deliverance, some
good Men, whose Names ought to be Celebrated with Eternal praises, found a way
maugre the danger that attended it, to Address this magnanimous Prince: Lay the
Complaints and Dangers of the Kingdom before him, and Implore his Gracious Aid
and Effectual Assistance, to Free a Languishing people from inevitable Ruin;
promising to Live and Dye with his Highness in so Glorious an Enterprise.

Animated by his known Piety, and Christian Compassion, his Native Heroic
Bravery, and the Prayers and Necessities of a miserably Harrass'd, and almost
Ruined Kingdom, he was pleased to undertake our Deliverance; and to the
Goodness of God, and this Great Prince's Wise and Valiant Conduct only, We owe
that Mercy; for tho God can work miraculously for the Accomplishment of his own
Will, yet in Human Reasoning, no other Prince but our now Gracious King, was
qualified to undertake it. For,

He is a Prince of a Ripe and Excellent Apprehension, of a strong and profound
Judgment; has a Right Notion in all Ambiguities, and is not easily Imposed upon
by the Sentiments of others. Able to Determine in all Occurrences, by the
strength of his own Genius; and yet never unwilling to hear the Opinions of his
Counselors: Deliberate in his Resolves, and Firm in his Purposes: Undaunted in
Dangers, and of a steady Conduct in Security. That knows how to gain Power, and
how to make it Pleasant and dureable by the Regular use of it, as appeared to
all the World in the Upright and Discreet management of this Great, and almost
Miraculous Revolution.

The States of Holland accommodated the Prince of Orange with Shipping, and
other Necessaries for this glorious Expedient, and meritted our eternal
Gratitude; but having met with ill Returns Dutch Design Anatomized.
from some Mercenary Pens, I shall take off the Scandal and Reproach they have
thrown upon that Action, by showing it, Kind, Grateful, and Justifiable to all
the World.

There are many Considerations that justify the Interposition of the States of
Holland, and the first is, That 'twas to preserve the Peace of Europe; for all
their Neighboring Princes perceiving the growing power of France to threaten
the Welfare and Quiet of Christendom; and that the Obsequious compliance of the
late King James, in all the Proceedings of that Towering Monarch (as well as
Monsieur le Comte d'Avaux's Memorial,) showed a dangerous Alliance between
those Two Crowns; the Princes of Europe, and the States of Holland, entered
into a Confederacy to prevent the Conjunction of the Armies of these two
Princes, and save Europe. This memorable Concurrence happening about the same
time that the Prince of Orange had promised to Assist the People of England, in
Redressing their Grievances, and Restoring them to their Just Rights and
Privileges. Whilst the Prince of Orange was doing that Good Office in England,
the other Princes in the League, watched the the Motions of France, and made
them incapable of helping each other; and so the Emperor of Germany, the Pope
himself, and the rest of the Confederate Princes as well as the States of
Holland, were in the same design against the late King James, as the only means
to preserve the peace of Europe.

Besides, in this Generous Action, the States of Holland writ after an English
Copy, and expressed their Gratitude for the same Good Office the English did
them on the like occasion, Hist. Belg. p. 203.
when the Spaniards threatened not to leave a Protestant alive in Holland.

Those Provinces are of the same Religion with us, and when they saw our Prince
had formed Designs to make us all Papists, or Destroy us, even Humanity obliged
them to succor us, when the whole Nation so apparently wanted it; but the best
Reason for what they did, except those of common Christianity, is given by
themselves; as I find it in an Extract of the Resolutions of the States of
Holland upon the 28th. of October, 1688. where, among other Reasons, for
Assisting the Prince of Orange with a Fleet and an Army, this is one. The King
of France (say they) has, upon several Occasions, showed himself disaffected
to that State, which gave Cause to fear, and apprehend, that in case the King
of Great Britain should happen to obtain an Absolute Power over his People;
that then both Kings out of Interest of State, and Hatred, and Zeal, against
the Protestant Religion, would endeavor to bring that State to confusion, and,
if possible, quite subject it.

There is no question, but this Wise and Prudent State saw our Ruin, would, in
time, prove their own also, and Foreseeing and Preventing it, will Justify them
before God and all the World.

Now to show that other Princes were of the same Opinion with the States of
Holland, and saw the Designs of the F. K. and the late King James threatened
the Peace and Safety of Europe: Let us take a short view how these Princes
carried it one toward the other.

None are Ignorant that the F. K. as soon as he apprehended that a pretended
Zeal for Religion was the only way to advance his Ends, and humor his Ambition,
but that he trumpt it up in all Courts where the same Religion was professed.
Religion was a Cloak to his Designs, when he made an Incursion into the Spanish
Netherlands; and in the last Dutch War Anno 1671.
(from whence We may date all our Misfortunes.) He in Conjunction with the King
of Great Britain to destroy the States of Holland, Intimated by his Ambassadors
to the Pope, to the Emperor of Germany, and all other Princes, whom he had a
mind to deter from lending Assistance to the Dutch, that they were a Nation
fallen into Abominable Heresies, and therefore all Christians were obliged in
Conscience to War against them, and rend in pieces that flourishing Republic;
and this furnished King James with the same Religious pretenses against his own
People.

At the very beginning of the late King's Reign, the F. K. set him a Pattern at
home, and broke the inviolable Edict of Nants, Vid. Ed. Nants, 1685.
and King James, in imitation of so pious an Example, set up his dispencing
Power in England, violated his Oaths and Promises to his People, and both under
pretense of Zeal for Religion; but all the Roman Catholic Princes were
sensible to what eminent dangers that boasted Zeal had reduced them to; for
what Reverence, what Veneration could they think those Princes had for the Name
of Christian, that made no Conscience of their Oaths, that broke their Faith
with Christians, and leagued with Infidels; who preferred the Crescent of
Mahomet before the Cross of Christ, and bribed the Turks to begin a War against
the Emperor 1683.
and Ruin that Capital City Vienna, which is the Bulwork of Christendom against
the Incursions of the Barbarians.

Who can think that Spiritual Things ever employed the thoughts of that
Monarch, unless in order to Temporals, that reflects with what violence he
makes ostentation of his Zeal at home, and at the same time espouses the Cause
of the Protestants in Germany and Hungary, persuading them to follow the
Fortune of Count Teckeley, and to join with the Turk, to demand satisfaction
for the violence offered to their Religion. And this deceitful Artifice and
Chichanery was the Cause that the Pope, for some time, resolutely refused to
elect Fourbin into the Coledge of Cardinals.

As this affected Devotion of the F -- K. was subservient to his Ambition, so
James IId's Biggotry was early suspected to rise from the same Cause, as the
Earl of Shaftsbury declared before King Charles II. in a Speech Shaftsbury's
Speech. State tracts. Part 1. p. 463.
in the House of Lords, that the Duke of York had quitted his Religion, that he
might gain a powerful party to his Faction. And this agrees with a Letter
written about the same time, and Recorded in the fifth Book of Collections;
wherein the Author tells the Duke of York, that it is the opinion of all Men,
that he Apostatized from his Old, and embraced a New Religon, not as Charmed by
its Perfections, but allured by the promises of an Absolute Monarchy, and the
blandishments of a Despotick Power, which by this means would one time or other
fall into his Hands. Afterward the same Letter admonishes the Duke to beware,
lest being dazzled with the splendor of the French Monarchy he should endeavor
to overthrow the best Government in the World, since he seemed to imitate King
John who offered to turn Mohammedan, if the Emperor of Morocco would assist him
with a Force, to Revenge the Insolency of the Barons, who vindicated their
Liberties against the Encroachments of their King.

The Successes of France in War, the intimate correspondence between the Duke
of York and that King, who managed England by the Politics of Cardinal
Richlieu and Mazarine, at length induced the Duke of York to publish himself a
Papist, and knowing that thereby he hazarded the loss of the Church of England
party, he cajoll'd the Dissenters, and heaped his Favors upon them, that they
might be the Tools of his Ambition, and also caressed the Romanists both at
home and abroad, that they might be inclined for Religion sake to assist him.

But the Catholic Princes fathomed his design, which was staged under the mask
of Piety, and joined with the Interest of France; and therefore Pope Innocent
XI. was not only incensed with the French King, and when he was drawing his
last breath, recommended his Emnity to the Cardinals that stood about him; but
also delivered it as his Judgment, Vindic. Gov. p. 44.
that the designs of the late King James tended only to his own Ambition, and
his Brother's of France: and therefore did not receive the Earl of Castlemain,
his Ambassador, with so much Honor as was due to such a magnificent and
sumptuous appearance; for his Holiness knew how all things were so managed by
the Jesuits, that every thing should be a Sacrifice to the Ambition of France;
and therefore as the Pope Complimented the late King James with a coolness of
affection, so he allways suspected him, sometimes discovered his Animosity, and
received the News Vid. representat. of Dangers in pol. tract. par. 2. p. 398.
of his Abdication with transports of Joy and Gladness.

It Is manifested the Emperor of Germany concurred in opinion with the Pope, for
after the late King's Abdication, when he begged the Emperor's assistance in his
misfortunes, Tracts of pol. col. 12. vid. the Emp. of Ger. Letter.
and made use of his affection to the Romish Religion as a motive to incline
him; the Emperor returned this Answer, That the late King James 's Affairs had
been now in a prosperous condition if he had hearkn'd to the advice of his
Ambassador, Comitis de Kaknuits.
and not to the perfidy and flattery of the F -- King, and had hindered by his
Authority and Arms the F -- from violating the League, and Peace, whereof he
was made Guarrantee by the Treaty of Nimeguen. Now, says the Emperor, How can I
assist you, who must be forced to oppose the Forces of F --, and the Turk, who
did not doubt of the Fidelity and Assistance of England; for the greatest
injury that can be offered to our Religion is done by the F --, who is
Confederated with the Turk, the inveterate Enemy of Christianty. So that the
Jesuits that persuade the Roman Catholic Princes for their Religion sake to
desert the Friendship of our Potent Monarch, who has restored us to our Dying
Liberties, is just as if they should persuade the Confederate Princes to
declare for those two Kings, who not only designed to enslave all Europe, but
also cherished the cause of the Infidels against the Christians; and this
brings me again into England.

And here it would be vain and impertinent in me, to attempt to give a
particular account of the Prince his successful and prosperous Expedition,
where there were so many Eyewitnesses of that great and miraculous Providence,
that was visible in the progress thereof; which was such as showed the
undertaking to be acceptable to Almighty God, who prospers the endeavors of
Good Men; but takes the wicked in the Nets which they spread for the Innocent.
I shall therefore only tell the Reader that His Highness the Prince of Orange
being happily and safely arrived in England, He was Saluted and Welcomed with
all the demonstrations and transports of Joy and Gladness, that an ill used
Nation were able to Express, under a sense of their Calamity, and a hopeful
prospect of Deliverance, from a cruel Tyranny.

This Joy and Satisfaction daily increased as his Highness's Declaration was
spread through the Kingdom. For the Jesuits having loaded this Pious and Noble
Expedition, with all the Odium of Virulent Pens and Tongues, his Highness's
Declaration, which showed the End of his coming, was not with any design upon
the Person of the late King, Aspiring at his Crown, or with any intention to
subdue the Kingdom? (as had been maliciously suggested) but purely that the
Abuses and Grievances of the People (Pathetically and Truly Enumerated, in his
Highness's Declaration) might be Redressed by a Parliament, free in all its
circumstances; all Fears and Jealousies vanished, and Men of all Qualities
hastened to put themselves under the Auspicious Conduct of this Illustrious
Prince, that God in the Eternal Counsel of his Wisdom, had Appointed to be the
Glorious Deliverer of England.

Now let all Men judge of the Equity of his Highness's Demands, and the Justice
of his Proceedings. His Own, and his Princess's Right to the Succession of the
Crown, was like to be supplanted by a supposititious Child, and a flourishing
Kingdom in danger of Destruction, and both evidently, plainly and certainly so.
And can any Man think he ought to Renounce his Own, and his Princess's Right,
and frustrate the Expectation of a whole Kingdom, to which he was Allied by
Blood, Nature, and all the sacred Obligations of Religion, rather than disturb
the progress of a Jesuitick Tyranny, covered under Royal Authority? Sure none
in the World can think so!

Had this Illustrious Prince conceived any Prejudice against this Unfortunate
Monarch James II. Turned his Eye toward the Crown, or would have seen England's
Misery before the Oppressed Subjects themselves Represented it to him, and
prayed his Relief; His Highness was not without an earlier Defense de la Nation
Britanique, p. ^^
knowledge of it, and Solicitations to do what at last Necessity compelled him
to. For there are many yet alive in Germany, Holland and England, that very
well remember how much his Highness was Importuned at James the 2d's first
coming to the Crown to make a Descent into England, with a Force able to
Redress the Affairs of that Country, and prevent the inevitable Ruin which so
openly threatened it. This was known immediately after the Death of Charles the
Second, when one of the most powerful Princes of Europe having represented to
his Highness that All was going to Ruin, and would be utterly lost in England,
if a sudden Interposition of the Prince of Orange did not prevent its impending
Destruction, and therefore Offered him what Assistance was requisite for such a
Noble and Pious Enterprise; but that Puissant Prince received no other Answer,
but that his Highness was in hopes that God, and that King's own Interest,
would possess him with better Sentiments, and therefore his Highness would
Attempt nothing in that kind against the late King, till he was forced to it by
the last Extremity; but if his hopes were disappointed, and there was no other
Remedy, he would not be wanting in his Duty. And,

God be praised, his Highness at length, in due time, performed his Promise,
and Silenced all that declaim against it.

It cannot be imagined that his Highness was pleased to see the Efforts of the
late King, in abolishing the Penal Laws against Papists, which were so
essentially necessary to our Preservation; nor can his Highness be thought easy
at the sight of the late King's climbing up a Precipice from which he must
necessarily fall, or by an Artificial and Politic Silence encourage K. James's
Ministers to carry all things to such Extremities, as might render his Conduct
Odious; for the Letter of Mr. Fagell upon this Subject, will be an Eternal
Monument of the Free and Sincere proceedings of his Highness with the late King
in this whole Matter.

Much less can our Adversary deny that his Highness was Requested by the People
to Defend their Religion, Rights and Privileges; for God Almighty, to the
eternal Confusion of our Enemies, suffered themselves to declare it, in a
Memorial, they published to all the Confederate Princes, with design to break
the League they were so much afraid of; for after they had in that paper
undecently treated his Highness, and menaced him with I know not how many
Tragical Stories, they yet acknowledge that He was Invited by the Nation.

Nor could his Highness hinder the Lords, and other Persons of the best Quality
in England, from showing their Grievances, and Imploring his Gracious Succor,
when the Extremities they were under compelled them to it; and also told Him
that if his Highness refused them, they would enter into their Natural Right,
and Defend themselves by their own strength, against a Power which was become
(as they declared to his Highness in their Memorial) a Power of Destruction.

Let our Adversaries now tell us, if the Case was not very Important; and
whether the Prince of Orange ought to have contemned the just Fears of the
English, and all the Protestants of Europe, who are embarked in the same
Interest and Danger, and have slighted all the Princes that either by
themselves, or by their Ministers, persuaded his Highness to enter upon an
Action on which depended the Common Safety of Europe? I don't believe they dare
say, after all the Facts we have enumerated, that his Highness ought to contemn
the Public, or dispute Matters of so great Notoriety; but if the English Fears
were well grounded, and their Oppressions True and Real, and that if his
Highness could not persuade himself from being of the same Opinion with the
rest of the World, that he could refuse to assist those that requested it, in
such a pressing necessity; and on an Occasion where Providence appeared so
expressly for our Deliverance, and which if neglected, perhaps could never be
Retrieved.

Now let the French Missionaries, or their English Pupils produce their Fine
Reasons, and tell us if his Highness ought to forget his God, his Religion, the
Rights of his Princess, his Own, the Liberty of England, and of Holland (which
must Infallibly share in the Misfortunes and Depredations of England) the
Protestant Religion breathing its last, and all Europe in danger of losing its
Liberty; Let them also tell us if they can, whether the Respects due to a
Father in-Law could counter-balance so many Great and stupendous Interests, or
the Sacred and Inviolable Obligations that engaged him to God, and the public
good of so many Millions of Souls that depended on it?

Every Prince of the Royal Blood of England, is, in Right of that Blood,
obliged to regard England as his Own Country, and to take care of the
Inhabitants over whom he has a Right to Reign; that the Demeans of the Crown be
not Wasted, nor the Subjects Injured; and the nearer he approaches the
Succession, the greater is his Obligation to Defend them from Violence, and his
Country from Ruin; to which Country, next unto his God Chari sunt parents,
cha^^i liberi, propinqui, familiares; sed omnes omnium charitates Patriae una
complexa est pro qua quis bonus dubitet mortem oppetere, fi ea sit profituturus
(...).
, and before all other Relations whatsoever, he stands Particularly and
Religiously concerned for its Peace and Preservation.

His Highness the Prince of Orange could not neglect it now in common Prudence,
without manifest prejudice to his Right of Succession; for the People of
England, by applying to his Highness, had not only Recognized his Right to the
Succession, but also acqaainted him in their Memorial, that if he refused them
Succor under their present Ill Circumstances, they would Assume their own
Right, and Free themselves; and how far their Resentments of such a Slight
might have Transported them, is not easy to imagine.

Now although the Reasons alleged are sufficient to show the Justice of the
Prince's Interposing between the late King and his Subjects; yet I shall show
also that it is justified by many Presidents, and where the Emergencies were
not so considerable as ours, nor their Titles to the Government so
Incontestable as the Prince of Orange's was to the Crown of England, who yet
are Celebrated in History for their great Achievements on such Occasions.

Constantine's quarrel with Maxentius, Eusebius Eccl. Hist. p. 268.
had no other ground (and that was enough) than that Maxentius Tyrannized over
the Romans; for which Constantine Invaded him, Slew him, and was received by
the Romans as their Deliverer. As remarkable was his Raising War against his
Brother in Law Licinius, because he persecuted the Christians; for which, when
he had overcome the Tyrant, the Christians placed him on the Throne in
Licinius's Room; and Historians have Celebrated his Name as a most Holy, and
Generous Champion, in the Cause of Christ and their Country. Constantine, the
Younger Son of Constantine the Great, threatened his Brother Constantius with a
War, and made him desist from persecuting the Catholic Bishops, and forced him
to Restore Athanasius to his Bishopric of Alexandria: The like was done by
King Pipin, and Charles the Great against the Lomlards, and by all the
Christian Princes against the Turk, in the Holy War.

To come nearer our own times. Queen Elizabeth gave a Powerful Aid to the
Hollanders, Vid. English Chron. and Hist. of her Life.
against the Tyranny of the Spaniards. King James the First See his Manifesto.
16. and K. C. Declaration on that Subject.
on the behalf of the Prince Palatine, against the Emperor of Germany. King
Charles the First, assisted the Rochellers with a Fleet, and an Army against
the French King in the cause of Religion, and was encouraged to it by several
of his Bishops; and 'twas always looked upon as a great Blemish on the Reign of
King Charles the Second, and gave suspicion of his being in the Popish
Interest, that he suffered the F. K. to proceed so far in destroying his
Protestant Subjects, without such a seasonable Interposition as might have
prevented it, or gained an Opportunity of making his Reign glorious, and his
Kingdom easy, by a War which in all probality would have brought that Monarch
into better Terms for the Advantage of Europe. So that from the Reasons
aforementioned, and the Presidents now alleged, his Highness's Expedition to
Rescue an Injured People from the Tyranny of Arbitary Power, was one of the
most Generous and Pious Enterprises, that any Age has acquainted us with; and
that the Good of this Nation, was the only motive that gave birth to this
undertaking; see it in the Words of his Highnesses own Declaration.

Since the English Nation has always testified a most particular Affection and
Esteem, both to our Dearest Consort the Princess, and to our selves, we cannot
excuse our selves, from Espousing their Interests in matters of such high
Consequences; and from contributing all that lies in us, for maintaining both
of the Protestant Religion, and of the Laws and Liberties of those Kingdoms,
and for the securing to them, the continual enjoyment of all their just Rights,
to the doing of which, we are most earnestly solicited by a great many Lords,
both Spiritual and Temporal, and by many Gentlemen and other Subjects of all
Ranks. Therefore it is, that we have thought fit to go over into England, and
to carry over with us a Force, able by the Blessing of God, to defend us from
the Violence of those Evil Counselors; and we being desirous, that our
Intentions in this may be rightly understood, declare that this our expedition
is intended for no other design, but to have a free, and lawful Parliament
assembled as soon as is possible; and that in order to this, all the late
Charters by which the Elections of Burguesses are limited contrary to the
Ancient custom, shall be considered as Null, and of no Force; and likewise all
Magistrates who have been unjustly turned out, shall forthwith Resume their
former Employments, as well as all the Boroughs of England, shall return again
to their ancient prescriptions, and Charters, and that the Writs for the
Members of Parliament shall be addressed to their proper Officers, according to
Law and Custom. That also none be suffered to choose, or to be chosen Members
of Parliament, but such as are qualified by Law; and that the Members of
Parliament shall meet, and sit in full freedom; that so the two Houses may
concur in preparing such Laws, as they upon full and free debate, shall judge
Necessary, and Convenient, both for the confirming and executing the Law
concerning the Test, and such other Laws as are necessary and convenient, for
the security and maintenance of the Protestant Religion, etc.

Thus his Highness was pleased to declare his intentions, with which the Nation
was so Entirely satisfied, that they conquered all that Read, or heard them,
insomuch, that many Persons of Quality, and others, met his Highness at Exeter,
put themselves under his Conduct, and many other Lords and Great Men, who had
raised Forces in all parts of the Kingdom, to strengthen the Prince's
Expedition, were marching with all speed to join his Highness's Troops. And now

A War being ready to break forth in the Bowels of the Kingdom, several
Spiritual and Temporal Lords, in an humble Petition to the late King, advise
him in order to Redress the Grievances of his People, to prevent Distractions,
and the effusion of Christian Blood, to call a Parliament free in all its
circumstances; but the late King was pleased to Deny their Request, till the
Prince of Orange had acquitted the Realm. vid. his Answer to the Lord's
Petition.


Several Privy Counselors before this, had advised his Majesty to call a
Parliament without delay, and before his Subjects Asked it; assuring him, that
if any attempts were made upon his Royal Person, or Authority, it would
effectually engage many honest Men to stand by him; besides, no ill
consequences could be suspected from it, because it would always be in his
Power to Prorogue or Dissolve it; and then he might, at the last Shift, trust
to his Land and Sea Forces. But

The Jesuits, who had his Ear, and Heart, entirely open, and fixed to their
pernicious Counsels, on the other hand, represented to him, that he would be in
Danger to see the great Forces which he had then on foot, join with his
Parliament against him; or, at least, Discontents and Divisions would arise
amongst them: But if he stood his Ground, and suffered no Parliament to meet,
All would faithfully adhere to him, so long as he absolutely relied on his
Forces: And, accordingly, he took this last and worst Advice, and would never
be brought off, till it ended in his Ruin.

In order to fight the Prince, the late King having sent a great Army before,
he marches down to Salisbury himself; where continuing a while, and finding his
Army daily Desert, and being assured by the Lord Feversham, and others, that he
could not Rely upon the remaining part of his Soldiery, (who unanimously
declared they would not fight against Protestants, nor offend the Prince that
Heaven had sent, for the Deliverance of the Nation from Popery,) with a very
small Number of Attendants the late King returns again to London, and in
Council orders the Lord Chancellor Jeoffreys to vid. the Proclamation dat. Nov.
30th, 1688.
Issue out Writs for the Sitting of a Parliament at Westminster on the 15th Day
of January following. And,

To second this plausible Pretense of Gratifying the Prince, and the whole
Nation, in Calling a Parliament, the late King, by three Noble Peers, sets on
foot a Treaty with the Prince, for the Security of the Parliament's Sitting
without Interruption, the Accommodating all Differences, and Restoring Peace
and Tranquillity to the Nation. The Prince freely accepts it; and with the
Advice of the Lords and Gentlemen assembled with him, his Highness was pleased
to send the late King such Proposals as he was pleased to say, The Letter to a
Bishop, q. 14.
were Better, and Fairer, than he could, or did expect from him: But all this,
on the late King's part, was only a Flourish, a Touch of the Jesuits Morals;
for the late King never intended to perform one Syllable of these Specious
Pretenses; and therefore, having sent away the Queen, the Child, Count Dada,
the Pope's Nuntio, Father Petre, and caused the Broad Seal to be thrown into
the Thames, he only showed this Complaisance, to Gain Time for his own
Departure into France after them.

What a fair Opportunity was now, at the very last, put into the late King's
Hands, to have Redeemed his Honor, Settled the Nation, and prevented all ill
Consequences to his Person, and Affairs, if he had pursued his own proposed
Methods for an Accommodation, and kept his Voluntary Promises; but he would
not. So that we can solve these Self-sought Evils no otherwise, but by saying,

What Heaven, in the Eternal Council of his own Will, has Decreed, can never be
Revoked; and that for the Accomplishing God's Divine Pleasure, Men act directly
contrary to their own Interests, which has been notorious in the whole Conduct
of this Unhappy Prince, and has been Jocosely observed by others.

I remember to have seen a Letter written into France, from Ireland, by a
French Commander there, giving an Account of the late King James's Management
of his Affairs in that Kingdom, wherein he expresses himself after this manner,
That if (the late) King James had as many Kingdoms to lose as are numbered in
Europe, his own Conduct would forfeit them all; for if he had Twenty
Counselors, and Nineteen of them were Men of approved Wisdom, and Integrety,
and but one Fool, and senseless Person among them, he would certainly follow the
advice of that blind Bayard, in opposition to all the other Sages. But,

Without reflecting upon his Counselors, the late King confirmed the French
Gentleman's Opinion of himself, in pursuing the False and Destructive Opinions
of those that advised him to withdraw himself, against the wholesome Counsels
of so many Wise Men, that advised Calling of a Parliament, in order to his own,
and the Nation's future Happiness; and made it appear a Project so weak, and
silly, that there seems something of a Divine Infatuation in it.

But he had promised the Queen, and, as some say, taken the Sacrament upon it,
to follow her; and thought fit rather to break his Promise with a whole Nation,
than not humor a pettish Woman: Go he must, go he will, let whatever will be
the Consequence of it: And therefore, to do all the Mischief he could before he
went, and leave the Realm in all the Confusion was possible;

He Ordered all those Writs for the Sitting of a Parliament that were not sent
out, to be burnt, and a Caveat to be Entered against the making use of those
that were sent out; and about the same time sent Orders to the Earl of
Feversham to Disband the Army, and Dismiss the Soldiers, which was done
accordingly: And then the late King made his first Attempt to leave the Kingdom.

How could the Jesuits have done their King a greater Injury, than in
persuading him to a continual Breach of his Promises, which exposed his Honor
and Integrity to common Censure, and drew the Contempt of the whole Nation upon
him, as a Prince never to be trusted! At his first Accession to the Throne, one
of the Things his Favorites magnified him for, was, for being True to his
Word; but he resolved to prove the contrary, and break it in every Instance.

He promised to protect the Church of England, and maintain the Protestant
Religion, when his whole Design was to destroy both, and declared it in every,
Action! He promised to Govern by Law, and not Arbitrarily; and at the same time
was Investing himself, and his Ministers, with a Power to destroy them! He
promised an equal Distribution of his Favors; and that he would serve himself,
and the Government, indifferently, with the Use of All his Subects; yet set up
Papists, to crush the Protestants! And when driven to the last Extremity, when
his All was at Stake, He promised to Call a Parliament, when he was resolved it
should have no Effect; and therefore burnt the Writs, to hinder their Sitting;
He promised, by this Means, to secure the Peace and Happiness of the Kingdom;
when he had resolved beforehand, to withdraw himself, and leave it in
Confusion!

Of these Riddles, and Self-Contradictions, we had continual Experience from
his Creatures also; who, when they were under any Necessity of serving
themselves by the Credulity of Protestants, flap'd us in the Mouth with their
King's Justness to his Word; but when the Fish was caught, threw away the Net,
and left the Protestants to repent their Easiness at leisure. So that Doctor
Cartwright had the only true Notion of a Popish King's Promises, when in a
Sermon Preached at his Deanary of Rippon, he told his Auditors, that the late
King's Promises were Donatives, and ought not to be too strictly examined, or
charged upon him; but that we must leave His Majesty to explain his own
Meaning: For which, and other like Services, he was rewarded with the
Bishopric of Chester: And the late King did the Doctor the Honor to Copy his
Original, and suffered neither Truth, Faith, nor Sincerity, to accompany any of
his Promises made to his good Protestant Subjects.

Nay, if the late King would at any time have kept his Word, he could not; for
by putting himself under the Power of the Roman Church, he made it as
impossible for him to keep his Faith with Protestants, as it was for Sygismond
the Emperor to prevent the Burning of Jerome of Prague, (to whom he had granted
Safe Conduct,) when the Council of Constance had a Mind to Sacrifice him, as a
Contumacious Heretic.

Delays being dangerous, and the late King's Tricking evident, His Highness the
Prince of Orange, by the Advice and Consent of the Body of the Nation, took up
a Resolution of sending out his Circular Letters to all Parts of the Kingdom,
to choose Members for a Convention of the Estates of the Kingdom, to Meet at
Westminster, and settle the Affairs of the Nation; but before the appointed
time of their Session came, News was brought, That the late King endeavoring
to make his Escape, was taken in December. 12.
Kent, and brought (with Sir Edward Hales, and Mr. la Baddy,) to Feversham, in
that Country. Whereupon, some Lords (by what Politics I am a Stranger to) sent
the Lords Feversham, Ailesbury, Yarmouth and Middleton, to desire the late King
to return to London; which he complied with: Came to Whitehall on December. 14
Sunday in the Evening, and on December. 18.
Thursday following summoned a Council:

And to show he Returned with the same Principles, and Resolutions, that he
went away with, though he had then a lucky Opportunity to Ingratiate himself with
his Protestant Subjects, by doing some Pleasing and Popular Act in favor of
them, and their Religion; directly on the contrary, as if he courted his own
Ruin, all he did in that Last Act of his Government, was showing his Respect
and Zeal for the Popish Interest; and as if he had come back for no other End,
but to serve the Papists, made an Order of Council to prohibit Pulling down
their Houses, and despoiling them of their Goods, by the Tumultuous Rabble;
which, though it was Good, and Commendable in it self, yet was needless in
respect of the late King, because the Committee of Lords had, by a Public
Order, taken Care in that Matter December. 14.
before his Return to London. To this Order in favor of the Papists, he added
another, in Discharging Dr. Leighton, a Popish Bishop, out of Newgate. So that
instead of Reforming Abuses at his Return, by Shipping off Priests and Jesuits,
Purging his Council, Disclaiming his Arbitrary and Dispencing Power, Pulling
down Popish Meeting-places, Disarming Papists, and Encouraging Protestants,
which under his present Circumstances, might have been, in Justice, and Reason,
expected from him; we found nothing but an Invincible Resolution to persevere
in his former Illegal Courses, and make the Nation know, that as soon as he had
Power, all things should run in the same Popish, Arbitrary Channel as he left
them in; and that our Chains should be made Heavier, by our late Struggling to
shake them off.

A former Testimony of his Resolutions to favor Papists, and advance their
Religion upon every Smile of Providence, was conspicuous, in sending the Bishop
of Winchester to restore Magdalen-College to the Protestants when he heard the
Prince of Orange was coming; but hearing a Storm had made it unlikely for His
Highness to come that Winter, the late King immediately recalled the Bishop,
and continued the Papists in Possession of the College, till the Certainty of
the Prince's being Landed, returned the Bishop, to complete that Work; which
never would have been done, if Necessity had not compelled the late King to do
it then, in hopes to persuade the Nation he would change his Measures.

Now almost all the Garrisons, Forts, and Places of Strength, in England were
put into the Prince's Hands; the Generality of the Nobility and Gentry, and
City of London, had sent the Prince their Submission, put themselves under his
Conduct, and invited him forthwith to come to London, and take upon him the
Care of the City and Kingdom: Which being known by the late King, he also
Invited the Prince of Orange to come to St. James's, and bring with him what
Number of Troops he pleased.

The Prince of Orange communicated the late King's Letter to the Peers then at
Windsor, who concluded, that the Shortness of the Time could admit no better
Expedient, than that the late King might be desired to remove to some Place
within a reasonable Distance from London. Ham was pitched upon as most
convenient; and Notice was sent of it to the late King, by three Noble Peers,
accordingly. But the Lords at Windsor hearing that Whitehall was again crowded
with Irish-men, Priests, Jesuits, and Papists, did not think it Reasonable the
Prince of Orange should accept the late King's Invitation, and venture his
Person near a Place haunted with such Bloody-minded and Profligate Wretches,
till the Prince's own Guards had taken Possession of the Posts about Whitehall,
to prevent that Danger.

Removing and placing the Guards, made it late before the Lords could deliver
the Message they brought from Windsor, viz. That the late King would Remove to
Ham: Which, at his own Desire, and I suppose to facilitate his Purpose of going
into France, (though that was a Secret unknown to others,) was changed to
Rochester. There the late King continued a while; but resolving to be Nothing,
unless he might be Absolute; like Children that have lost their Favorite
Play-thing, throw away all the rest in a Fit of Pettishness; so he went into
France, left England very abruptly, and the Convention took that Opportunity of
parting with him Fairly.

Thus James the Second Abdicating the Government by other Previous Actions, as
well as his Flight, yielded his vacant Throne to the Pr. of Orange; and if His
Highness had Ascended it without any other Ceremony, as some Kings of this
Nation have done before him on the like Occasion, none could have blamed him
for making use of the Advantage his Sword had gained him; But as he came to
Redress the Grievances of the Nation, by Calling a Free Parliament, so he would
abide by their Determination in what concerned his own Person, and not by any
Rash or Precipitate Action, seem to cross the End of his Coming, which was to
have all Things settled according to Law; and therefore he left that, and all
other our Affairs, to be settled by the approaching Parliament.

In the mean time, the Prince Advised with the Lords, how to pursue the Ends of
his Declaration in Calling a Free Parliament, for the Preservation of the
Protestant Religion, Restoring the Rights and Liberties of the Kingdom, and
Settling them so firmly, that they might not lie in danger of being again
Subverted.

To Answer this Great End, in Settling the Nation by a Parliamentary Proceeding,
the Lords Spiritual and Temporal Assembled in their House at December. 22
Westminster; and being agreed on the Particulars, Humbly desire December. 25.
His Highness the Prince of Orange to take upon him the Administration of
Public Affairs, both Civil, and Military, and the Disposal of the Public
Revenue, for the Preservation of the Religion, Laws, Liberties and Properties,
and the Peace of the Nation: And that His Highness would take into his
particular Care the present Condition of Ireland; and endeavor, by the most
speedy and effectual Means, to prevent the Dangers threatening that Kingdom. All
which their Lordships requested His Highness to undertake, and exercise, till
the Meeting of the intended Convention on the 22th of January ensuing; and
presented it to His Highness (with their Proposals about Calling a Parliament)
at St. James's, December the 25th, 1688. To which His Highness was pleased to
return this Answer to the Peers, assembled at the same place on December the
28th following.

My LORDS,
I Have considered of your Advice; and, as far as I am able, I will endeavor
to secure the Peace of the Nation, until the Meeting of the Convention in
January next; for the Meeting whereof I will forthwith issue out Letters
according to your Desire. I will also take care to apply the Public Revenue to
the most proper Uses that the present Affairs require; and likewise endeavor
to put Ireland into such a Condition, that the Protestant Religion may be
maintained in that Kingdom: And I assure you, that as I came hither for the
Preservation of the Protestant Religion, and the Laws and Liberties of this
Kingdom, so I shall always be ready to expose my self to any Hazard, for the
Defense of the same.


His Highness's Letters being dispersed, the Election of Members for the
Convention was carried on with all the Expedition and Freedom imaginable, and
the Temper of the Nation fully discovered in the Choice they made. The 22th of
January, 1688. both Houses met again; and having chosen their Speakers, the
following Letter from His Highness the Prince of Orange was Read in both Houses.

My LORDS,
I Have endeavored, to the utmost of my Power, to perform what was desired
from me, in order to the public Peace, and Safety; and I do not know that any
thing has been omitted, which might have tended to the Preservation of them,
since the Administration of Affairs was put into my Hands. It now lies upon you
to lay the Foundations of a firm Security for your Religion, your Laws, and
your Liberties.

I do not doubt, but that by such a full and free Representative of the Nation
as is now met, the Ends of my Declaration will be attained: And since it has
pleased God hitherto to bless my good Intentions with so great Success, I trust
in him, that he will complete his own Work, by sending a Spirit of Peace and
Union to influence your Counsels, that no Interruption may be given to a happy
and lasting Settlement.

The dangerous Condition of the Protestants in Ireland require a large and
speedy Succor: And the present State of Things Abroad oblige me to tell you,
that next to the Danger of Unseasonable Divisions amongst your selves, nothing
can be so fatal as too great Delay in your Consultations. The States, by whom I
have been enabled to rescue this Nation, may suddenly feel the ill Effects of
it, both by being too long deprived of the Service of their Troops which are
nowhere, and of your Early Assistance against a powerful Enemy, who has
Declared a War against them. And as England is, by Treaty, already engaged to
help them upon such Exigencies, so I am confident that their Cheerful
Concurrence to preserve this Kingdom, with so much Hazard to themselves, will
meet with all the Returns of Friendship and Assistance which may be expected
from you, as Protestants, and Englishmen, whenever their Condition shall
require it.

Given at St. James's, the 22th of January, 1688. Will. H. P. d' Orange.


The Two Houses, under a deep Sense of their Dangers, and Deliverance, in the
first place, by mutual Consent, expressed their Thankfulness to God, by
appointing a Day of Public Thanksgiving throughout the Kingdom; and to His
Highness, as the Glorious Instrument of the Great Deliverance of this Kingdom
from Popery and Arbitrary Power, in the following Address, which was presented
to the Prince of Orange, the 22th of January, 1688. in these Words:

Die Martis, 22 Jan. School. The Address of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
Commons, Assembled at Westminister, in this present Convention, to His Highness
the Prince of Orange.
WE the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, Assembled at Westminster,
being highly sensible of the great Deliverance of this Kingdom, from Popery,
and Arbitrary Power; and that our Preservation is, next under God, owing to
your Highness, do return our most humble Thanks and Acknowledgments to your
Highness, as the Glorious Instrument of so great a Blessing.

We do further acknowledge the great Care your Highness has been pleased to
take in the Administration of the Public Affairs of the Kingdom, to this time:
And we do most humbly desire your Highness, that you will take upon you the
Administration of Public Affairs, both Civil and Military, and the Disposal of
the Public Revenue, for the Preservation of our Religion, Rights, Laws,
Liberties and Properties, and of the Peace of the Nation. And that your
Highness will take into your particular Care the present State of Ireland, and
endeavor, by the most speedy and effectual Means, to prevent the Dangers that
threaten that Kingdom. All which we make our Request to your Highness to
undertake and Exercise, till further Application shall be made by us, which
shall be expedited with all convenient Speed: And we shall also use our utmost
Endeavaurs to give Dispatch to the Matters recommended to us by your Highness's
Letter.


To which Address, presented by both Houses at St. James's, His Highness the
Prince of Orange made this Reply the same Day.

My Lords and Gentlemen,
I Am glad that what I have done, has pleased you: And since you desire me to
continue the Administration of Affairs, I am willing to accept it. I must
recommend to you the Consideration of Affairs Abroad, which makes it fit for
you to expedite your Business; not only for making a Settlement at home, upon a
good Foundation; but for the Safety of all Europe.


The Lords having declared by a Vote of that House, That Popery was
Inconsistent with the Government of England, the Commons, upon the 28th of
January, passed the following Vote, viz.

Resolved,
THat King James the Second having endeavored to Subvert the Constitution of
this Kingdom, by breaking the Original Contract between King and People; and by
the Advice of Jesuits, and other Wicked Persons, having withdrawn himself out
of this Kingdom, has Abdicated the Government, and that the Throne is thereby
Vacant.

This Vote occasioned several Conferences between the two Houses of Lords and
Commons, in the Painted Chamber at Westminster; (the Substance whereof, as they
are transmitted (...) Debate at large between the House of Lords and House of
C^^^^^^.
to us, will be occasionally produced in the Sequel.) But on the 7th of
February, the Lords sending a Message to the Commons, that they had Agreed to
the Vote sent them up on the 28th of January last, without any Alterations, on
the 12th of February following both Houses Unanimously Agreed to Declare as
follows.

The Declaration of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, Assembled at
Westminster.
Whereas the late King James the Second, by the Assistance of diverse Evil
Counselors, Judges and Ministers, employed by him, did endeavor to Subject
and Extirpate the Protestant Religion, and the Laws and Liberties of this
Kingdom;

By Assuming and Exercising a Power of Dispencing with, and Suspending of Laws,
and the Execution of Laws, without Consent of Parliament.

By Committing and Persecuting diverse Worthy Prelates, for humbly Petitioning
to be excused from Concurring to the said Assumed Power.

By Issuing, and Causing to be Executed, a Commission under the Broad Seal, for
Erecting a Court, called The Court of Commission for Ecclesiastical Affairs.

By Levying Money for and to the Use of the Crown by Pretense of Prerogative,
for other Time, and in other Manner, than the same was Granted by Parliament.

By Raising and Keeping a Standing Army within the Kingdom in Time of Peace,
without Consent of Parliament; and Quartering of Soldiers contrary to Law.

By Causing several good Subjects, being Protestants, to be Dis-arm'd, at the
same time when Papists were both Armed and Employed contrary to Law.

By Violating the Freedom of Elections of Members to Serve in Parliament.

By Prosecutions in the Court of King's Bench, for Matters and Causes
Cognizable only in Parliament, and by diverse other Arbitrary and Illegal
Courses.

And whereas of late Years, Partial, Corrupt and Unqualify'd Persons have been
Returned, and Served on Juries, in Trials; and particularly, diverse Jurors
Served in Trials for High Treason, which were not Freeholders.

And Excessive Bail had been Required of Persons Committed in Criminal Causes,
to Elude the Benefit of the Laws made for the Liberty of the Subject.

And Excessive Fines have been Imposed.

And Illegal and Cruel Punishments Inflicted.

And several Grants and Promises made of Fines and Forfeitures, before any
Conviction, or Judgment against the the Persons upon whom the same were to be
Levied.

All which are utterly and directly contrary to the known Laws and Statutes,
and Freedom of this Realm.

And whereas the late King James the Second having Abdicated the Government,
and the Throne being thereby Vacant;

His Highness the Prince of Orange (whom it has pleased Almighty God to make
the Glorious Instrument of Delivering this Kingdom from Popery and Arbitrary
Power) did (by the Advice of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and diverse
Principal Persons of the Commons) cause Letters to be written to the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, being Protestants; and other Letters to the several
Counties, Cities, Universities, Boroughs and Cinque Ports, for the Choosing
such Persons to represent them, as were of Right to be sent to Parliament, to
Meet, and Sit at Westminster, upon the 22th Day of January, 1688. in order to
such an Establishment, as that their Religion, Laws and Liberties might not
again be in danger of being Subverted: Upon which Letters, Elections have been
made.

And thereupon, the said Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, pursuant to
their respective Letters, and Elections, being now Assembled in a Full and Free
Representative of this Nation, taking into their most Serious Consideration the
best Means for attaining the Ends aforesaid, do in the first place, (as their
Ancestors, in like Cases, have formerly done,) for the Vindicating and
Asserting their Ancient Rights and Liberties, Declare,

That the Pretended Power of Suspending of Laws, or the Execution of Laws, by
Regal Authority, without Consent of Parliament, is Illegal.

That the Pretended Power of Dispencing with Laws, or the Exercise of Laws, by
Regal Authority, as has been Assumed and Practiced of late, is Illegal.

That the Commission for Erecting the late Court of Commissioners for
Ecclesiastical Causes, and all other Commissions and Courts of the like nature,
are Illegal, and Pernicious.

That Levying of Money to or for the Use of the Crown, by Pretense of
Prerogative, without Grant of Parliament, for a longer Time, or in other
Manner, than the same is or shall be Granted, is Illegal.

That it is the Right of the Subject to Petition the King; and all Commitments
and Prosecutions for such Petitioning, is Illegal.

That the Raising or Keeping a Standing Army within the Kingdom in Time of
Peace, unless it be by Consent of Parliament, is against Law.

That the Subjects, being Protestants, may have Arms for their Defense,
suitable to their Condition, and as Allowed by Law.

That the Election of Members of Parliament ought to be Free.

That the Freedom of Speech, and Debates or Proceedings in Parliament, ought
not to be Impeached or Questioned in any Court, or Place, out of Parliament.

That Excessive Bail ought not to be Required, nor Excessive Fines Imposed, nor
Cruel and Unusual Punishments Inflicted.

That Jurors ought to be duly Impannell'd, and Returned; and Jurors which Pass
upon Men in Trials for High Treason, ought to be Freeholders.

That all Grants, and Promises of Fines, and Forfeitures, of particular
Persons, before Conviction, are Illegal, and Void.

That for Redress of all Grievances, and for the Amending, Strengthening and
Preserving of the Laws, Parliaments ought to be held frequently.

And they do Claim, Demand, and Insist upon all, and singular the Premises, as
their Undoubted Rights and Liberties; and that no Declarations, Judgments,
Doings, or Proceedings, to the Prejudice of the People in any of the said
Premises, ought in any wise to be drawn hereafter into Consequence, or Example.

To which Demand of their Rights they are particularly Encouraged by the
Declaration of His Highness the Prince of Orange, as being the only Means for
Obtaining a full Redress and Remedy therein.

Having therefore an Entire Confidence that His said Highness the Prince of
Orange will perfect the Deliverance so far advanced by him, and will still
preserve them from the Violation of their Rights, which they have here
Asserted, and from all other Attempts upon their Religion, Rights and Liberties;

The said Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, Assembled at Westminster,
do Resolve,

That William and Mary, Prince and Princess of Orange, be, and be Declared King
and Queen of England, France and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto
belonging; to Hold the Crown and Royal Dignity of the said Kingdoms, and
Dominions, to them the said Prince and Princess, during their Lives, and the
Life of the Survivor of them; And that the Sole and Full Exercise of the Regal
Power be only in, and Executed by the said Prince of Orange, in the Names of
the said Prince and Princess, during their Joint Lives: And after their
Deceases, the said Crown and Royal Dignity of the said Kingdoms, and Dominions,
to be to the Heirs of the Body of the said Princess; and for Default of such
Issue, to the Princess Anne of Denmark, and the Heirs of her Body; and for
Default of such Issue, to the Heirs of the Body of the said Prince of Orange.

And the said Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, do Pray the said
Prince and Princess of Orange to Accept the same accordingly.

This Offer being made in due Form, and Accepted by the Prince and Princess of
Orange, now our Gracious King William, and the late Queen Mary of Blessed
Memory, on the 13th Day of February, 1688. the Lords and Commons ordered the
following Proclamation to be Published, and Made.

WHereas it has pleased Almighty God, in his great Mercy to this Kingdom, to
vouchsafe us a Miraculous Deliverance from Popery and Arbitrary Power; and that
our Preservation is due, next under God, to the Resolution and Conduct of His
Highness the Prince of Orange, whom God has chosen to be the Glorious
Instrument of such an Inestimable Happiness to us, and our Posterity; and being
highly sensible, and fully persuaded of the Great and Eminent Virtues of Her
Highness the Princess of Orange, whose Zeal for the Protestant Religion will,
no doubt, bring a Blessing along with her, upon this Nation. And whereas the
Lords and Commons now Assembled at Westminster, have made a Declaration, and
presented the same to the said Prince and Princess of Orange, and therein
desired them to accept the Crown; who have accepted the same accordingly: We
therefore the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, together with the Lord
Mayor and Citizens of London, and others of the Commons of this Realm, do with
full Consent, Publish and Proclaim, according to the said Declaration, William
and Mary, Prince and Princess of Orange, to be King and Queen of England,
France and Ireland, with all the Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging;
who are accordingly so to be Owned, Deemed and Taken by all the People of the
aforesaid Realms and Dominions; who are from henceforward, bound to acknowledge
and pay unto them all Faith, and True Allegiance; Beseeching God, by whom Kings
Reign, to Bless King William and Queen Mary with Long and Happy Years to Reign
over us.

God save King WILLIAM and Queen MARY. Joh. Brown, Cler. Parl.

These Ample and Affectionate Demonstrations of the Nation's Gratitude were as
Kindly received by the King and Queen, as they were Dutifully offered by their
Subjects: And thus the King was pleased to express himself upon the Notice of
it, to the Lords and Commons.

My Lords and Gentlemen,
THis is certainly the greatest Proof of the Trust you have in Us, that can be
given, which is the Thing that makes Us value it the more; and We thankfully
accept what you have offered. And as I had no other Intentious in my coming
hither, than to preserve your Religion, Laws and Liberties, so you may be sure
that I shall endeavor to support them, and shall be willing to do any thing
that shall be for the Good of the Kingdom, and to do all that is in My Power to
advance the Welfare and Glory of the Nation.


And now, with what Inexpressible Joy, and Entire Satisfaction, the whole
Nation entertained Their Majesty's Accession to the Throne; and seeing those
Illustrious Princes that had been hitherto their Hopes, and Desires, now become
their Glory, and Crown of Rejoicing, is easier to imagine, than delineate; and
therefore I must content the Reader, by only saying, that nothing was omitted,
that might express a True and Unfeigned Joy, upon that Extraordinary Occasion.

Thus have I showed how by a continual Series of Illegal Actions, the late King
proceeded to Abdicate and Renounce the Government of these Kingdoms, till he
completed it by leaving the Realm: And also, what an Inevitable Necessity
there was at that Conjuncture, and as Affairs then stood, to supply the Vacancy
of the Throne by the Inauguration of that Meritorious Prince that now enjoys
it. And though there needs no other Reasons to satisfy the Scrupulous, and
command a quiet Submission, than that it was done purely for the Welfare of the
Nation, and was settled by Lawful Authority; yet because the Enemies of our
Peace and Settlement take too great a Liberty to Asperse these Proceedings, and
Amuse the Unthinking and Unsteady People with contrary Opinions, I hope 'twill
be pardonable to Administer an Antidote against the Infection of Virulent
Tongues, and Seditious Practices, and Reconcile those to Reason, and their
Duty, that have been, or still do lie in danger of being perverted by the
Sophistry of a Turbulent Faction. And this I shall endeavor, by showing, that
the late King,

1. Did Voluntarily Abdicate the Government.

2. That the Proceedings of the Convention of the Estates were Just, and
Necessary. That,

3. King William's Title to the Crown is Indisputable. And,

4. The Obedience of his Subjects, their Indispensible Duty.

The late King was under an Obligation, by virtue of the Original Contract
between the King and People, (which Compact is Imbody'd in our Constitution,
Implied in our Laws, and Runs through all our Histories,) his Coronation Oath,
and the Trust reposed in him by his People, to govern according to the Tenor
of our Laws, as has been already largely proved: But on the contrary, he broke
all the Fundamental Laws, fell foul upon the very Essence of the Constitution
it self, and gave no Quarter to any thing that opposed his Arbitrary
Usurpation. And was not this a public Declaration that he would not be kept
within the Bounds of Law, nor hold his Kingly Office upon those Terms?

The Original Contract made him a Legal King; but if he might not act the part
of a Tyrant, he would be nothing at all. He was obliged by Law to protect and
defend the Protestant Religion; but by his unfortunate Persuasion in Religion,
and his moderate Affectation of Arbitrary Power, he thought himself concerned
to Suspend the Laws that were the Barriers to secure it, and to treat it as the
Northern Heresy.

What was his Actual Suspending and Annulling Laws, without Consent of
Parliament, but a necessary Implication in Common Sense, as well as Legal
Acceptance, that he Renounced his Kingly Office? As for his Departure out of
the Kingdom, though I have already proved it was a Plot of his own laying, in
hopes to Involve the Nation in greater Confusions than his own Conduct had
already reduced it to; yet in this Case it is not material whether it was
Voluntary, or Involuntary, since his Withdrawing himself was but a Continuation
of his former Actings, wherein he declared he would not govern by those Laws
that made him King of England, and was an express Renunciation of his Regal
Authority.

To say that Abdication implies a Formal Renunciation by Deed, is to mistake
the Case; for in the Common Law of England, and in the Civil Law, and in Common
Acceptance, there are Express Acts of Renunciation, that are not by Deeds.
Debate between Lords and Commons, page 35, 36.
The Government and Magistracy are under a Trust; and Acting contrary to that
Trust, is a Renunciation of that Trust, though it be not a Renouncing by a
Formanl Deed; for it is a plain Declaration by Act and Deed, though not in
Writing, that he who has the Trust, and acting contrary, is a Disclaimer of
the Trust; especially if the Actings be such as are Inconsistent with and
Subversive of this Trust: For how can a Man, in Reason or Sense, express a
greater Renunciation of a Trust, than by the constant Declarations of his
Actions to be quite contrary to that Trust; and therefore must be construed an
Abdication and Formal Resignation of it.

That a King may Renounce his Kingship, may be made out by Law, and Fact, as
well as any other Renunciation: And that it may, and has been, will be no
Difficulty to to make out, by Instances in all Countries not only where the
Crown is, or was Elective: but also where it was Hereditary, and Successive.

Debate aforesaid, p. 76.
If a King will Resign, or Renounce, he may do so; as particularly, Charles the
First did: It Is an Act of the Will, and consequently in his Power to do as he
thinks fit: And the late King gave manifest Declarations of his Resolutions to
do it in several Instances, as has been particularly showed already. Grotius,
and all other Authors that treat of this Matter, and the Nature of it, do
agree, That if there be any Word or Action that does sufficiently manifest the
Intention of the Mind, and Will, to part with his Office; that will amount to
an Abdication, or Renouncing.

Now had King James the Second came into Idem, p. ^7.^8.
an Assembly of Lords and Commons in Parliament, and expressed himself in
Writing, or Words, to this purpose; I was born an Heir to the Crown of England,
which is a Government limited by Laws, made in full Parliament, by King,
Nobles, and Commonalty; and upon the Death of my last Predecessor I am in
Possession of the Throne; and, now I find I cannot make Laws without the
Consent of the Lords, and Representatives of the Commons in Parliament: I
cannot suspend Laws that have been so made, without the Consent of my People.
This, indeed, is the Title of Kingship I hold by Original Contract, and the
Fundamental Constitution of the Government; and my Succession to, and
Possession of the Crown, on these Terms, is part of that Contract. This part of
the Contract I am Weary of, I do Renounce it, I will not be obliged to observe
it; I will not execute the Laws that have been made, nor suffer others to be
made, as my People shall desire, for their Security in Religion, Liberty and
Property; which are the two main Parts of the Kingly Office in this Nation. I
say, suppose he had so expressed himself, doubtless this had been a plain
Renouncing of that Legal Regular Title which came to him by Descent: If then
he, by particular Acts, such as are enumerated in the Vote of the Convention,
of the 27th of January, he has declared as much, or more than these Words can
amount to, then he has thereby Declared his Will to Renounce the Government: He
has by the Acts beforementioned, manifestly declared that he will not govern
according to the Laws made; nay, he cannot do so, for he is under a strict
Obligation, (yea, the strictest,) and Superior to that of the Original Compact
between King and People, to Act contrary to the Laws, or to Suspend them. This
did amount to a manifest Declaration of his Will, that he would no longer
retain the Exercise of his Kingly Power, as it was Limited, and Restrained; and
sufficiently declared his Renouncing the very Office. And his Actings declared,
quo Animo, that he went away because he could no longer pursue, nor accomplish
what he designed, and was so strongly obliged to, that the Splendor of three
Crowns could never divert him from it.

It was an Abdication in the highest Instances: Not a particular Law was
violated; but he fell upon the whole Constitution, in the very Foundation of
the Legislature. Not only particular Persons were injured; but the whole Frame
of the Kingdom, the Protestant Religion, and our Laws and Liberties were all in
danger of being Subverted. And which aggravates the Circumstances, the late
King himself, who had the Administration Entrusted to him, was the Author, and
Agent in it: And when he cold no longer afflict us himself, went away with
Design to obtain Foreign Forces, to compel our Submission to his Arbitrary
Power. Now because the late King had thus Violated the Constitution, by which
the Law stood as the Rule both of the King's Government, and the People's
Obedience, therefore it was judged an Abdication to all Intents and Purposes,
and that by his Abdication the Throne became Vacant.

Nothing less than Things grown to such Extremities could warrant these
Proceedings; for, God forbid every Violation of the Law, or Deviation from it,
should be accounted an Abdication of the Government: The Thoughts of such a
Severity upon Debate between the Lords and Common, page 86.
Crowned Heads, is abhorred by all Good Men. For when a King breaks the Laws in
some few particular Instances, it is sufficient to take an Account of it from
those Ill Ministers that were Instrumental in it; Why such a thing was done,
contrary to Law? Why such a Law was not put in Execution by them, whose Duty it
was to see it done?

In Ordinary Cases of Breaking the Laws, you have Remedy in Ordinary Courts of
Justice; and in Extraordinary Cases, in the Extraordinary Court of
Parliamentary Proceedings: But in our Case, where we were left without Redress,
the Malefactor being both a Party, and Judge of his own Breaches of Law, made
Extreme Remedies absolutely necessary, and has been always practiced upon the
like Emergencies. For,

The Great Council, or Assembly of the Estates of this Kingdom, from the first
Institution of the Government, had an Inherent Right to Assemble themselves in
all Cases of Necessity; such as Abdications, Depositions, Disputable Titles to
the Crown, Settling the Successions, and to supply the Vacancy of the Throne, as
the Example of former Times, and their own Prudence should direct them. And,
truly, it would be very absurd to imagine that the Legislative Power was so
streighten'd, that it had no Right to provide against Unforeseen Accidents that
might happen; or that where the Old Laws seemed opposite to the public Good,
or were wholly silent, as not foreseeing every extraordinary Event, they could
not supply that Defect, by making Quae de novo cinergunt novo indigent auxilio.
New Ones that might reach the present Circumstances of Affairs, or Extend and
Explain the Old ones, as the Necessity of the State required.

Laws themselves, in time, may grow pernicious; and though well intended at their
first Promulgation, as Things might after happen, would be dangerous to be
Retained: Therefore on all such Occasions, the Assembly of Estates have an
Indubitable Right to wave the Letter of the Law, and explain them, or make New
ones, according to Equity; that is, according to what the precedent Legislators
would have done, if they had Foreseen what then had come to pass.

Private Persons are obliged to observe the Letter of the Law; but Public
Estates are not under such a Confinement, but for the Safety of the Nation,
must respect the Intention of the Law; because the Letter of the Law, by Length
of Time, or a General Corruption of Manners, may seem to thwart the Common
Interest; but the Intention of the Law always respects the public Good, and is
never against it. This is done every Day in Courts of Equity, and ought never
to be omitted for the Preservation of a Kingdom, where Laws Unrepeal'd, and
whose Consequences were not dreamt of, seem to make Tyranny Lawful. And
therefore the Convention of Estates, in Shutting the Door against James the
Second, and making it fast after him by an Act of State, who had first excluded
himself, and settling the Government on the Foot it now stands, did no more than
Assert their own Right, and prevent the Mischiefs that have attended the
Mis-construction of the Intention of some Laws in Force.

Now that the Estates of the Kingdom have such a Right, is Incontestible in the
Opinion of our Adversaries; yet they deny that the Convention had such a Power,
because they were not Convened by the late King's Authority. A frivolous
Objection, and returns upon the Head of that deluded Faction. For

This Defect, if it were one, was not the Nation's Fault, but lies wholly upon
the late King: He was Sought to, Addressed and Petitioned to Call a Parliament:
It was the great Importance of the Prince's Declaration: He often promised it,
and by Proclamation made a Feint of keeping his Word, yet at last burnt the
Writs, and declared positively he would not do it.

Could the Nation compel him to do what he would not? Must the Kingdom be
Ruined for want of a Formality that was not in their Power to compass? Must a
Glorious Opportunity of Settling the Kingdom be lost for want of a Punctilio,
that yet was answered in the Intent of it? Must the Nation be be blamed for
helping themselves, when the late King refused it? No, this would be very loose
Reasoning; and the Thread is of too course a Spinning, to pass upon the
Thinking Part of Mankind. Had they Objected against the Qualification of the
Members, the Want of Freedom in their Election, or showed any Unreasonableness
in the Action, they had said something worthy of Answer; but since they could
not, I shall go on, and prove it Just, Necessary, and Agreeable to the Practice
of All Nations.

The Laws of God, Nature and Nations justify the Deposing of a Prince whose
Arbitrary Government is not only Inconsistent with, but Destructive to the
Kingdom over which he Presides. To name no other Instances in the Old
Testament, Rehoboam and Jeroboam are Examples of Divine Vengeance for their
Tyranny, and their Stories are Argumentative. The Jews asserted the Lawfulness
of Resisting and Dethroning their Kings in many Cases, Joseph. l. 4. c. 8.
especially in their Wars with Antiochus Epiphanes; and the St. Aug. libr.
cont. Adem 1.17.
Christians followed those Examples, without thinking their Religion obliged
them, by a Childish Submission, to yield up their Natural and Legal Rights, and
consent to their own Ruin.

How unreasonable would it be to imagine that a whole Kingdom should deprive it
self of the Right of Deposing a Tyrant, and preserving themselves: since
Principio generi animantium omni est a Natura tributum, ut se, vita, corpusque
tueatur, declinetque ea, quae noscitura videantur. Cicero de Offic.
Nature has communicated this Right to all Rational Creatures, together with
their Being, which they can neither give away themselves, nor can be justly
taken from them by others; as I have already proved in part, and shall do it
beyond Contradiction in the following Pages; and therefore shall descend to
show you, that the Deposing the late King is Warranted by the Practice of other
Nations, as well as our own in Former Ages.

The Power of the Emperor of Germany is Limited in many Particulars: He cannot
alter their Fundamental Laws, nor make the Empire Hereditary; and the College
of the Princes Electors may Depose him for Male Administration, as they did
Lewis the Good, in the Year 833. Which Act was always looked upon as the Right
of the Empire, in the Opinion of the German Lawyers; and so is transmitted to
Posterity be the best of their Lampadius, Diderick, Conring. Lambert.
Schafnaburg, Aventin. l. 7. Annal. and Cuspin. in Vita Wincesl. and Carpsor. de
Leg. Reg. Imperat. Germaniae and Imperial. Capitular.
Writers. One of the Charges against Lewis was, that he had broken his
Coronation Oath, and Ruled by Maxims of his own, contrary the Established Laws
of the Empire. The Estates of the Empire also at another time Warred against
the Emperor Henry the Fourth for the same Cause, and at length Deposed him in a
Solemn Assembly. A later Instance of the same People was, in Deposing
Wenceslaus, in the Year 1400. And he that will give himself the Satisfaction of
Reading the Articles Exhibited against him, by the Electors of the Empire, will
be tempted to think that James the Second had transcribed them, as the Rules of
his Despotick Government, they agreed so exactly with it, from the Beginning,
to the fatal End of it.

The Monarchical Government of Poland being extinct at the Death of Cromer.
King Lech, it was changed by the States, into a Government of Twelve Palatins;
who abusing their Authority, were all Deposed, and Lesko Elected King; and he
withdrawing himself out of the Kingdom, to secure himself against the Fury of
the Tartars, was for that Reason Deposed, and a new King, Elected. So was Henry
the Second, Duke of Anjou, deposed by the Poles by the Government of Poland for
leaving that Kingdom. And the great Statesman Bodin tells us, 'twas expressly
inserted as a Condition in that King's Coronation Oath, when he was Elected
King of Poland, that if he broke his Oath, and violated the Laws, the People of
that Kingdom should not be obliged to pay him Obedience; and these two Cases
are Parallel in Fact with the late King James's, in Deserting the Kingdom of
England.

The Fundamental Laws of Hungary Bonfin. decad 4. lib. 9. C. 11.
Restrain and Limit the Power of their Kings by a Coronation Oath, expressly
conditional; and have given so many Instances of their Right to Depose them
Chalcondil. Hist. l. 2. p. 120.
that 'twere lost labor to Recite them, having referred to the Authors that
Treat on that Subject.

In Spain we find Peter of Castile Deposed for a Suppositious Birth, and Philip
of Arragon for Incontinency. Indeed the Nobility, and Commonality of that
Kingdom, have formerly took such a Power, and Liberty, in Censuring the
Actions, and Deposing their Kings, for slight and trivial Causes, that they are
not fit to be reckoned among the material Instances of other Nations, in cases
of Certain and extreme Necessity.

In the ancient Kingdoms of Denmark, Pontanus l. 8. c. 9.
Sweden and Norway, which are all of Gothic Original, the meanest people had a
Voice in the Elections of their Kings; and if mistaken in their Choice they
Deposed him, and chose another; still giving preference to the Royal Family, if
there were any of them qualified. Sometimes they wholly neglected that Method,
and Elected the Brave and Valiant Hero that had signalized his Kindness and
Courage in the Expulsion of a Tyrant, and Rescuing their Privileges out of the
hands of an Oppressor. And sometimes they chose a private Person, whose Eminent
Parts and Probity had marked out as worthy of that Dignity, which himself never
thought on. Give me leave to give you a Remarkable Instance in the Kingdom of
Sweden, of the Tyranny of an Absolute Monarch.

Christern the Second King of Denmark, obtained the Crown of Sweden by
Conquest; and looking upon the Ancient Privileges of those Subjects, as
Inconsistent with his Royal Dignity, quickly came to Resolutions of destroying
of the Senators, and Principal Noblemen, that he thought Enemies of his
Imperial Arbitrary Power; and to facilitate the execution of his barbarous
Decree, he put on a Kinder Visage than he commonly wore, suffering no Cloud to
possess his Royal Brow, but appeared in show of Respect and Kindness, that he
might oblige them to trust, that before suspected him. Under this Visor of
Friendship and Affability, he invites the Lords to a magnificent Feast at
Stockholm, where two days together they were splendidly treated, and the third
day basely Murdered.

This surprising bloody start from a King to a Tyrant so terrified the Nation,
that it put them upon freeing themselves; and whilst they were revolving
various Means to Accomplish it, a Deliverer appears in the Person of Gustavus
Ericson, descended from the Ancient Kings of Sweden, and Nephew to King
Canutson, who so effectually checked the Tyrant, that Christern who had
Abdicated the Government by his continued Tyranny, was so Hated by his
Subjects, Deserted by his Soldiers, and beaten by his Rival, that he
consummated his Abdication by flying out of the Kingdom, and Gustavus the
Generous Deliverer, by a Convention of the Estates Peterson in Chronic. Holsat
l. 8.
was Elected and Crowned King of Sweden, which he Governed happily all the days
of his Life

I am sensible that some will tell me that things are now otherwise than I have
related of Denmark, and that the Government there is an Absolute Monarchy; to
which I reply, Let them take it for their pains. I did not speak of things as
they are now perverted by Fear and Force; but as they were Originally
constituted, and dare promise him that will give himself the pleasure of
reading the English History of the State of that Kingdom, he will not think the
Model ought to be transported into England.

Portugal, by telling Alphonsus the Third, that if he would not adict himself
to the Affairs of the History Portual in Reign Alphons. 3. l. 6. and Ordin.
Portugal. 17. l. 2. Sect. 3. 4. 5. 6.
Kingdom, the Estates of the Realm would Depose him, and Elect another King;
and by Banishing their late Monarch for the barbarous Effect of his Frenzy,
have fully declared their Opinions in that Matter.

When the Kings of France abused their Authority, that Nation afferted their
Right; as in Deposing Childeric, Father of Greg. Tower, l. 2. c 11.
Clowis; and in the same manner proceeded against another Childeric, in the
Eighth Century. And if we descend to the Race of Charles the Great, their
Histories will inform us that Louis, Surnamed The Good, was Dopos'd by a
General Assembly of the Estates at Thionville; and the Articles on which they
proceeded to his Deposition are to be read in Baronius and du Chesne le Comte.
After him, the Estates Deposed Charles the Gross, and Charles the Simple; and
stood so much upon their Right to do it, that when in another Instance they
were threatened by Pope Adrian the Second with Excommunication, they sent him
word, They would defend their Privileges, and their Liberties, unto Death.

In the Second Race of their Kings, notwithstanding Charles of Lorrain was
Guil. de Nanz. ad an. 987.
Heir to Lewis the Fifth, and consequently ought to have enjoyed the Crown of
France; yet the Estates laid him aside, (for no other Reason, but because he
was suspected to be in the German Interest, who were Enemies to France,) and
gave the Crown to Hugh Capet.

Henry the Third, that had been Deposed in Poland, was also Deposed in France
by Advice of the Sorbonne, and the greatest part of the Estates. When Theodore
the Second attempted to make himself Master of the Lives and Estates of his
Subjects, they ^^se against him, Deposed him, Shaved him, thrust him into a
Monastery, and placed his Brother Chilpric in the Throne. In the Time of
Charles the Simple (mentioned before) finding him unfit to encounter the
Insults of the Normans, the Estates conferred the Soverignty on Lewis, and
Charlemain; who though of the same Blood, had not the same Right to the Crown.
And it is but consulting their own Important Maxims, published by Mr. Joly, in
1663 Can. d' Egles Paris.
Histories, to show that that Nation was always in Possession of the Right of
Explaining, Limiting, Extending and Altering the Succession, as often as their
Circumstances required it. And truly I cannot but wonder the French Jesuits,
who in favor of the late King James, have so slovenly Railed against our Pere
d'Orleans Hist. Revol. d'Angleterre.
Convention of Estates for Deposing him, dare bespatter the Judgment of their
Infallible Pope Zachary, whose Opinion being asked by the French Lords about
the Lawfulness of Deposing King Childeric, answered, That the French were
discharged of their Oath of Fidelity to Childeric, since he had not acquitted
himself toward them as he had solemnly promised; the Nature of Conditional
Contracts being such, that where one Party does not perform his Covenant, the
other are absolved from theirs. Which Advice being approved, the Lords and
Great Men of the Kingdom Assemble at Soissons, Depose Childeric, and Elect
Pepin to be their King. But above all, I am amazed to hear the Advice de
Refugies, p. 60.
French Missionaries, and other Writers, so openly and scandalously Declaim
against Dethroning Kings, when the very Monarch that now enjoys the Crown of
France, wears the Crown in Consequence, and by Right of such Depositions. Nay,

It would be no hard matter to prove that almost all the Governments in the
World owe their Settlements to Conventions of Estates, Assembled and Authorized
by a Necessity of providing for the Public Safety.

So that the Conventional Parliament of England, in Deposing James the Second,
made no Incroachment upon the Rights of Kings, nor Violation of the Law of God,
of Nature, or the Law of Nations; but agreeably to all these Laws, Asserted
their own Rights, in taking more Care for the Safety of a whole Kingdom, than
the Pretentions of a Single Person who endeavored to destroy it. And in this
they did but follow the Practice of former Ages in their own Country, as will
appear by and by, in the following Examples.

God has invested Kings with a Power to do Justice, but not to commit
Violences; and therefore, when they wilfully convert their Authority into a
Power of Destruction, as James the Second did, Subjects have a Right by the Law
of Nature to Repel Force by Force; for the Necessity of Public Safety is a Law
so Sacred, that it Abolisheth all others that oppose it, and Justifies all the
Revolutions and Settlements in the World that are built upon that Foundation.

It is the First and greatest Obligation of Mankind, to procure and promote the
Welfare of the Body whereof they are Members; which if every one would think
himself obliged to do, there would be a Circulation of Safety and Prosperity
through the whole. Eaque lege notus sis, ut ea habeas principia naturae quibus
parere, and quae semper sequi debeas ut utilitas, tua, communis utilitas sit:
vicissimque communis utilitas, tua sit.
Cicero, lib. 3. expresses this to the Life, in saying, That we are born under
a Law, and instructed by the Principles of Nature, that oblige us to prefer the
Common Good before our own, so that at length the Common Good may be our own
Advantage also. With a single Respect to this Common and Mutual Good, the Light
of Reason shining in Wiser Heathens, (which yet shines brighter in Christians
exalted by Revelation,) dictated the Necessity of Government, as an Instrument
without which it could not possibly be attained. Fair, Useful, Just and Equal
Rules of Conversation were by Common Consent agreed on; and some One, or More
Persons, Renowned for Wisdom, Probity and Courage, were Entrusted, and
Empowered to Enforce, as Occasion should require, the Community to observe
them: Which Ruler was bound by Mutual Compact to govern by the Rules agreed on,
and under that Condition the People gave their Oaths to obey him. So that those
People that think themselves bound by their Oaths to an Absolute Obedience to
their Prince, without Reserve, forget that the Rulers Office is merely Relative
to their People's Welfare; and they also forget their first Obligation, to seek
the Good of the Community.

If a Ruler act contrary to his Trust, by setting aside the Laws of the
Constitution made and agreed on by Prince and People, as necessary for the
Conservation of every Individual Person; and by excercising an Arbitrary Power
of his Own Erecting, evidently seeks the Ruin of that Body he ought to
preserve, the Necessary Defense of themselves is no Offense against the Nature
of Government, (which was Originally Instituted for the Preservation, and not
for the Destruction of the Society,) and therefore cannot be looked upon as
Criminal.

The Judgment of the great Melancton concerning Government, in his Exposition
on the Fifth Commandment, will clear this Point: In regard (says he) something
will go amiss in every Society, for the Love of Peace we must bear with many
Faults of our Princes; and so long as they design well in the main, though they
fall into Mistakes, we ought to bear them with Patience, and hide their
Frailties as much as possibly we can. But of a Tyrant he says, a few Lines
before, Nec praetextu operis Divini excusanda aut tuenda sunt vitia, nec
propter loci dignitatem tolerandae sunt manifestae and Atroces injuriae
impietates, and flagitiosae libidines Tyrannorum sine fine grassantium; sed
reliqua politia, cui Deus gladium dedit, recte facit, cum Caligulas, Nerones
and similia portenta removent a Gubernatione.
That the Pretense of a Divine Right can neither excuse or justify his Crimes,
nor the Dignity of his Office tolerate him to exercise a Wicked and Wilful
Tyranny; but when his Impieties and Injuries to his People are evident, and
unsufferable, the Powers to whom God has, in such an Extremity, committed the
Sword to protect and deliver an Oppressed Nation, may remove him from the
Government, as the Romans did Caligula, Nero, and other Monsters of Cruelty,
who were not only Enemies to the Commonwealth, but to all Mankind.

Indeed, when an Absolute Government has, for the Sins of the People, taken
firm Rooting, (which, Thanks be to God, was not England's Case,) I deny not but
such as were born under it, ought to be content with their Servile Condition,
till Heaven is prevailed with by their Prayers and Piety, to release them from
Thraldom: But in a Free Estate the Case stands as is before rehearsed.

Polanus, in proposing the Question, whether we ought to obey an Absolute and
Tyrannical Prince, exactly answers the Case of England under the Reign of the
late King James; saying, We must distinguish between an Absolute, and a Limited
Monarchy; in the former it must be born with, because the Prince does but
exercise his own Authority, like Nebuchadnezzar: But Sed si Rex seu Princeps
habeat limitatum, and adstrictum certis conditionibus, in quas juravit, seu
quas se promisit servaturum, Penes Status aut Primores Regni, seu Principatus
est coercere Regis seu Principis Tyrannidem and immanitatem. Syntag. lib. 10.
cap. 62.
if the King or Prince governs in a Limited Monarchy, where he receives his
Crown on certain Conditions, which he promises and swears to observe; but
instead of it, breaks his Oath, and sets up a Despotick Power, unknown to the
Constitution, and Inconsistent with the Safety of it, the Estates of the
Kingdom may depose him from his Royal Dignity. And this is Melancton's meaning
also, as may be collected from his Words already cited, cui Deus gladium dedit,
to whom God has given the Authority.

The Case thus stated, makes England unconcerned in the Deep Submissions of the
Primitive Christians, who though they had Power, made no use of it to free
themselves, by throwing off their Tyrannical Emperors: Their Lots fell to them
under an Absolute Government, and they remained contented with the Dispensation
of God's All-wise Providence: But may I not be permitted to say, their Natural
Liberty to cast off their heavy Yoke was restrained by Christian Prudence? The
Church was yet in too narrow a Room, but was intended by God Almighty to be
spread through the other Parts of the World; and therefore Rulers would have been
far more averse from admitting the Propagators of it into their Territories, if
the Christians had contracted the Imputation of Turbulency by standing upon
their Natural Right to defend themselves; whereas their Lamb-like Deportment
gave them an easier Access to all Places and Persons. And if their Forbearance
and Patience was the Fruit of this sole Prudential Consideration, their
Successors are not so much obliged to the same Course, in those Countries where
Crowns and Sceptres have submitted to the Cross, and the Christian Religion has
obtained a Civil Right of Protection, and Immunity from Persecution; for then
they ought not, they cannot relinquish this Right, no more than they can
destroy themselves, or suffer Violence and Cruelty to destroy the Innocent. And
what is said of the Christian Religion in reference to Paganism, holds also
true between the Reformed Religion and Popery. But

The great Objection, which they call Unanswerable, is yet behind, viz. That a
King, in Scripture Language, is called a Father; to honor a Father is the
Fifth Commandment, and therefore the Obedience of a Subject is as immutably
fastened to him, whatever his Miscarriages are, as that of a Natural Son to a
Vicious, Barbarous Parent. A powerful Objection, which is always in their
Mouths on a double Account. But if I can prove that a Natural Father may lose
his Claim to his Son's Obedience, their King's Right to our Obedience must fall
with it, and proves his Abdication Lawful; which I shall attempt by giving
these several Things in Answer, all grounded upon no mean Authorities. And
First,

1. The Appellation Father only describes the Nature of the Kingly Office,
which is the Tender Care, and Studious Regard, he ought to exercise for the
Safety and Prosperity of his Subjects. It tells not what he always is, but what
he always should be: And while he carries it to his People as a Father, it is
no less than a Damnable Sin, not to pay him a Filial Obedience. But whether the
late King James had any Claim to our Duty upon that Consideration, I leave it
to the Reader, who by this time has had a Glimpse of his Conversation. Secondly,

Our Obligation to obey Natural Parents, must give place to our Endeavors to
preserve our Country. Cicero saw this by the Light of Nature, and therefore
says, Quid si Tyranidem auc^pare, si patriam prodere conabitur Pater? Selebitne
filius? Imo vero obsecrabit patrem ne id faciat: si nihil proficiet; accusabit,
minabitur etiam: ad extremum, si ad pernitiem Patriae res spectabit, Patriae
salutem ante^on^t saluti patris.
If a Father acts the part of a Tyrant, and endeavors the Destruction of his
Country, the Son may lawfully oppose him; and if he will not be reclaimed, and
brought to Reason, the Son may accuse him, threaten him with Punishment, or
confine him; being obliged to prefer the Safety of his own Country, before the
private Satisfaction of his Father. Thirdly,

3. A Natural Father, by repeated Acts of Barbarity and Cruelty upon his Son
alone, may forfeit all Just Claims to his Son's Filial Obedience. Let us put
the Case; A Man who lives near the Sea, harbors and cherishes in his Mind a
perfect Hatred of his Son, upon Contrariety in Religion, or some other Cause;
and in the Heat of his Fury, resolves to destroy him; (History will warrant
this Supposition;) and therefore, to prevent the Eye, and Censure of the World,
privately binds him, puts him in a Chest, and carries him to the Seaside at
Low Water Mark, that the Returning Flood may carry him to his Death: I also
suppose, that after the Son has floated a while in this helpless, hopeless
Condition, a Ship or Boat coming by, the Mariners take him up, and save that
Life which his Father Intentionally, and Actually, thought he had made away. In
this Case, The Father can never have any Right to his Son's After-Obedience,
because he endeavored to destroy that Being wherein the Relation and Duty was
founded: And is a good Argument to oblige us to a Grateful and Dutiful Return
to our Great Deliverer, King William; but utterly destroys the Pretense of a
Paternal Right in the late King James, after he had converted his Power of
Preservation into a Power of Desolation, and Destruction; because he had
destroyed the Relation on which our Duty was Originally founded, and without
which he had no Claim to it.

In such, and Easier Cases than now is put, Wise Men, for above a Thousand
Years together, have judged that such Cruel Fathers have lost all Just Title to
their Abused Children, as may be read in the Decrees of the Emperors
Valentinianus, Valens, and Gratianus, directed to Probus the Prefect, Recorded
by Justinianus Codicis liber octavus, Tit. 52. and in the Decree of Justinian
the Emperor, directed to Demosthenes, his Praetorian Prefect. By all which it
appears, that a Man's exposing his own Child in a Box, or Basket, on the
Highway, at a Stranger's Door, or elsewhere, where he is sure to perish, unless
some Charitable Hand by chance takes him up, and preserves him, amounts in
Sound Judgment to the Forfeiture of his Claim to their future Obedience,
(supposing their Casual Preservation,) notwithstanding the firm Ties of Nature
and Property.

All the great Interpreters of the Civil Law, from Justinian hitherto, have
approved the afore-cited Judgment: Baldus, Salycetus, and others, have done it
of old; and the latter Swarms of Civilians, Hermannius, Vulteius. Harpprectus,
etc. have given their Assent to it: All which I shall wave, and only recite the
Words of Hadrianus Saravia, who, though a Stranger, was, in respect of his great
Learning; preferred here by Queen Elizabeth. He expresses the Sense of all the
rest, in his First Book de Imperandi Authoritate, and Christiana Obedientia, in
saying, that Qui recens natos Infantes abjiciunt feris devorandos, aut a quovis
tollendos, omne jus paternum simul objeciunt. Nihil enim genuisse promerentur,
nisi Natos educaverint. Cap. 2.
if Parents grow so unnatural and cruel to the Issue of their own Loins, as to
expose them to Wild Beasts, or by other Cruelties endeavor to deprive them of
their Lives, they forfeit all kind of Paternal Right to, and Authority over
their Children, because they had divested themselves of Humanity, and not
answered the End for which God and Nature designed them; which was, to educate
and preserve their Children, but not do them any Injury. So that the Inference
from these Premises will utterly overthrow the Objection of our Adversaries,
in favor of the late King James.

For if a Patron that out of a Principle of Cruelty exposes the Life of his
Slave, makes a Forfeiture of his Property in him, much more may a Prince for
the same Reason forfeit all his Interest in his Freeborn Subjects. And if a
Natural Father, who seeks the Destruction of his Son, does therefore lose all
just Claim to that Son's Obedience, much more may a Prince: who is but a Casul,
Political Father, and is invested with that Relation only by Agreement, and
Compact, may a Fortiori, for the same Reason make a just Forfeiture, and lose
all just Claim to the Obedience of his Political Children.

So that the Convention of the Estates Assembled at Westminster, in Deposing
the late King, and conferring the Crown upon our Gracious King William the
Third, have done nothing against the late King James but what they were
necessitated to do, and what they are justified in doing by the greatest
Authorities in the Christian World.

At the late King's Going off, and making no manner of Provision for the
Administration of the Government, the Nation seemed to be in the same Condition
they were in when the Original Contract was first made; and the same Care was
requisite to settle the Distracted Affairs of the Realm, under that Confusion
wherein he left it, as if we never had been blessed with any Settlement at all;
and consequently, the Convention, upon the Vacancy of the Throne, had Power to
Model Things as the present Circumstances of the Public exacted, without being
confined to the Presidents of former Ages; and yet so great was the Modesty of
that Venerable Assembly, and their Care to prevent Innovations, that they did
nothing but what had been already done upon the like Occasion many Hundred
Years before.

How the Clergy, the Barons, and the Commons deported themselves toward King
John five Hundred Years ago, and Deposing him, and Electing Lewis of France, I
have already acquainted you; and therefore shall say no more here, than that
the Grounds of their Proceedings were for Re-gaining those Franchises that were
notoriously invaded by that Arbitrary Prince, and are contained in the Great
Charter of England.

King Edward the Second, tracing the same Arbitrary Methods, the Barons send
him word, That Trussell 's Hist p. 2^6.
unless he put away Pierce Gaveston, that corrupted his Counsels, and
squandered his Revenue, and also addicted himself to Govern by the Laws of the
Land, they would, with one Consent, Rise in Arms against him, as a Perjured
Person. And so they did, and Beheaded his Minion Gaveston, notwithstanding the
King's earnest Solicitation for his Life. The same Fate attended the Spencers:
And a Parliament being called without his Consent, at length himself was
Deposed; who confessed the Sentence of his Deposition was just, that he was
sorry he had so offended the State as they should utterly Reject him; but gave
the Parliament Thanks that they were so Trussell 's Hist. p. 218.
gracious to him, as to Elect his Eldest Son their King.

King Richard the Second being lapsed into the same Misfortune of Affecting a
Tyrannical Government, the Lords and Commons declare unto him, (then at
Eltham,) That Knighton, An. 1386.
in case he would not be governed by the Laws, Statutes, and Laudable Customs
and Ordinances of the Realm, and the Wholesome Advice of the Lords and Peers,
but in a Headstrong Way, would exercise his own Will; they would Depose him
from his Regal Throne, and promote some Kinsman of his of the Royal Family, to
the Throne of the Kingdom in his stead. But this Warning having no Effect, at
length a Parliament is Called, without the King's Consent, or Approbation, by
Henry Duke of Lancaster. They required him to Resign his Crown, which though he
condescended to, and actually performed it as directed, yet the Trussell, l. 2.
p. 43.
Parliament then Sitting, thinking this Abdication not sufficient to build
upon, because the Writing might be the Effect of Fear, and so not Voluntary,
and Spontaneous; they thereupon proceed to a Formal Deposition, in the Names of
all the Commons of England, upon the Articles Exhibited against him, which
consisted of Twenty nine Particulars, and the greatest part of them relating to
the Affairs of that Time, in which this Age is not concerned: I have contracted
them into a narrower Compass than in the Trussell's Hist.
Original, without omitting any thing that is material; and are what follows,
viz.

That King Richard the Second wasted the Treasure of the Realm. That he
Impeached several Great Lords of High Treason, that Acted for the Good of the
Kingdom by Order of Parliament. That he perverted the Course of Justice, and
took away the Lives and Estates of certain Noblemen, without Form of Law. That
he affirmed All Law lay in his Head, and Breast; and that all the Lives and
Estates of his Subjects were in his Hands, to dispose of at pleasure. That he
put out diverse Knights and Burgesses Legally Elected, and put in others of his
own Choice to serve his Turn. That he Raised Taxes contrary to Law, and his own
Oath. And Banished the Archbishop of Canterbury without Just Cause, or Legal
Judgment pronounced against him.

For these Reasons he was formally Deposed by Parliament, who at the same time
Consented that Henry Duke of Lancaster should be Crowned King, though the Right
of Blood was in Edmund Earl of March, because (now) Henry the Fourth had
signalized himself in Delivering the Nation from the Tyranny of Richard the
Second. And after the same manner, though with a more Free and Absolute Election,
proceeded the late Convention of Estates, in Deposing James the Second, and
filling the Vacant Throne with our present Monarch, William the Third, who,
under God, was the Glorious and Happy Instrument of Freeing England from the
Tyranny of the late King. These Proceedings I have already proved to be
consentaneous to all Laws: And to confirm it, shall only add,

That amongst all the Unfortunate Princes that have been laid aside by their
Subjects, none were more justly Dethroned, than James the Second.

We read of some Princes that were Deposed because they were Infected with the
Leprosy; but I think none will pretend that Leprosy under the Law was as
Incompatible with the Government, as Tyranny, and Setting up of Idolatry, was
at this Juncture; for that Disease was not in the power of Oziah to help, but
Tyranny was the Efflux of the late King's Arbitrary Will, and the Gratification
of his Sensual Appetite. Besides, Leprosy is but a Disease in the Body; but
Tyranny, in the Soul. Leprosy was but a Ceremonial Evil; but, according to
this manner of Speaking, Tyranny is a Moral Evil. Leprosy does but infect;
Tyranny destroys.

King Childeric of France was Deposed for Slothfulness, and neglecting the
Affairs of the Kingdom; and it it must be acknowledged, this shameful
Inactivity, to which the Kings of France were then accustomed, was grown very
disadvantageous to the Government: But France was not in danger of perishing by
his Idleness; and England was on the very Moment of being destroyed by the late
King's Tyranny, and Subversion of the Laws: And so much Difference as there was
between doing Nothing, and endeavoring to Ruin All, so much Difference was
there between the Dethronement of Childeric, and that of James the Second.

There have been Kings Deposed for Involuntary Absence upon certain Occasions;
but that cannot stand in Competition with the late King's wilful Renunciation
of the Government, by refusing to Govern by the Laws of the Constitution, and
his Voluntary Deserting the Kingdom, when no Force compelled him to it. Was
there ever any Mention of Introducing another King, till the Throne stood empty
by the late King's going away? Did ever so Great a People comport themselves
with so little Disorder, when they were Lawless, and without a Government? And
was it not high time to provide for the Safety of the Nation, when he that
should have Governed it, had voluntarily left it; and not only so, but left it
in the greatest Confusion he could possibly reduce it to; and went off, only to
procure a Foreign Army to Conquer and Subdue the whole Nation into Slavery; and
professed himself an open and Hostile Enemy to the Kingdom. Was the Absence of a
Prince to be compared with these Extravagancies? Were they any longer to be
submitted to, when there was no Hope of Amendment? They that assert such
Contradictions, and Improbabilities, might as well affirm that a Fever was a
Recipe for Health; and the Plague a Medicine for Long Life; and would gain
Credit as soon to one, as they can do to the other.

Subjects have Renounced their Kings for Usurping a Power to treat them as they
pleased, as was the Case of Rehoboam and Jeroboam: But what is Arbitrary Power,
(though bad enough too,) when compared with an Actual Necessity of Destroying the
Nation; and that Necessity imposed upon the Prince by his Conscience, under the
Expectation of Eternal Rewards in the World to come. There may be Hopes of
Reclaiming a Prince from the Evil Counsel of Others; but there is no dividing a
Man from himself.

In culpa est Animus, Hor. lib. 1. ep. 14.
qui se non effugit unquam.
In James the Second's Mind, the Fault did lie,
That never from it self could fly.
Constantius Copronimus was Deposed for Impiety; but that being a Personal
Evil, affected the Public only by the Ill Consequences of a Regale Example:
And Impiety was never the Parent of so many Cruelties, as the Superstition we
are speaking of has been amongst us. Atheism and Infidelity are Sins of the
highest nature; but never were guilty of Shedding so much Humane Blood, as
Superstition. And therefore Princes have not been thought so Justly to deserve
a Deprivation, and the Loss of their Crowns and Countries, as a Prince
Superstitiously devoted to a False Religion, who thinks his Actions Pious at
the same time that he is Que est facto pius est sceleratus eodem.
committing the greatest Wickedness, and Crudelitas nobilitata Religione.
rendering himself Infamous by Inglorious Cruelties to his Subjects: Which we
had Cause to dread, for, Lucret. l. 5.
-- Saepius olim,
Religio peperit Scelerosa, atque Impia facta.
-- In our Forefathers Times,
Religion did commit the foulest Crimes.


Some Princes have been Deposed for Cruelty, but their Cruelty not to be
compared with his; for a Transient Cruelty was always thought more tolerable
than one that was Durable! A particular, rather than a public Mischief! A
Cruelty hated by all the World, as appearing in its own Likeness frightful,
rather than a Cruelty hidden under the pretext of Piety and Religion! A Cruelty
which destroys the Body only, rather than a Cruelty that destroys both Body and
Soul at the same time! A tolerable Cruelty and Oppression, before a Cruelty
advanced before we are aware into an Inviolable Law of the Kingdom, and may be
justly named an Immortale odium and nunquam Sanabile Vulnus. Juvenal. Sat. 13.
Immortal Hatred, and an Incurable Wound, in the Body Politic, that threatens
Destruction to the whole Nation. Such was the Tyranny of the late King, whose
Outside was Devotion, and Inside Destruction; for though in the general
Representation of Things he seemed but to take off the Penal Laws against
Papists, yet in the Distinct Idea he designed to execute the Penal Decrees of
the Church of Rome against Protestants; which was visible in setting up Popish
Magistrates, who think themselves obliged to work our Ruin. And in these
covered Designs he exceeded most of the Tyrants that went before him, who were
contented to abuse their Subjects themselves, without endowing their Inferior
Magistrates with a Supreme Power for the same Purposes.

Nero killed his Mother and Brother, and most of his Honest Courtiers; but did
not command his Governors of Provinces to follow his wicked Example. Astiages
gave his Favorite the Head of his Son to eat; but did not impose upon his
Lieutenants a Necessity of Imitating him in his Barbarous Repasts. The Roman
Emperors persecuted the Primitive Christians with all manner of Cruelties; but
we do not find that they were so obliged in Conscience to do it, that they put
it out of their power to show them any Mercy: But that Popery does it, is known
to Heaven and Earth, and they must pull out their Eyes that will not perceive
it.

So that our Adversaries must consent, that the Proceedings of the late
Convention of Estates, in Deposing James the Second, were the most Natural,
Just, Necessary, and Lawful, that ever was, or can be, on the like Occasion.
And they have nothing left them to object, unless they can prove that the Laws
of which we have spoken, were not of great Consequence to the Nation, or that
the late King did not break them, since I have already proved that no Prince
can have such an Absolute Right to a Crown, but for the Safety of a Kingdom, he
may be Dethroned. For,

By the same Reason that he may Lose it to a Conqueror, or Resign it to a
Successor, he may Abdicate it. Otherwise, the very End of Government would be
lost, if the Prince that endeavors to subvert the Kingdom does not at the same
time forfeit his own Right to it. And therefore the Convention of Estates, who
blessed the Nation with the present Settlement, had been Justifiable, though
they had failed of Success, the late King having long before ceased to be a
Legal King of England.

My next Undertaking is, to show that King William the Third, now in the Throne
of his Ancestors, is Rightful and Lawful King of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, and the Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging. And to prove
this beyond all possibility of Dispute, though I need use no other Argument, than
that he is King by the Unanimous Vote, and Universal Election of the People;
Confirmed and Recognized by the same Authority and Law of England, by which all
his Royal Predecessors enjoyed the Imperial Crowns of these Kingdoms; besides
the Undoubted Right of his Excellent Princess, and his own Right of Blood; and
that the Submission of the People, and Determination of the Estates of the
Kingdom, grounded not only upon the Supreme Law of Public Good, but also upon
the Known, and Declared Positive Laws and Constitutions of this Government, as
there has been Occasion in all Ages, from the first Foundation of this Limited
Monarchy; and that this is Conclusive to all Private Subjects: Yet because we
ought to Resolve Cases here, that may stand with the Reason of Mankind, when
they are debated abroad; and that some that have writ on the Behalf of the
Government, by their weak and precarious Arguments, have set up diverse Titles
that make it look like a Fanciful Chimera, or built upon a Sandy or Fictitious
Bottom; and have more disparaged the Revolution by their Impertinencies, than
all that have exercised their Pens, or Spleens, against it. I crave Leave to be
a little more particular upon it.

The Crown of England, as placed on the Head of our Dread Sovereign William the
Third, stands Firm and Immovable there, on the Right of the Case, and the
Reason of the Thing, without the Props of Art, Oratory, or Learning, to support
it. Shuffling between Providential Settlement, Conquest, and Topping
Protections of Power, scandalize the King's Legal Title, and mis-lead his
Subjects. Let but the Matter express it self plainly, and it will carry an
Entire Conviction and Satisfaction with it, in its own Genuine Phrase, and
Designment.

It Is truly and plainly stated in the Prince of Orange's Declaration; and is
neither more, nor less, than what briefly follows.

James the Second, directly contrary to his Coronation Oath, breaks through all
the Established Laws of the Land, Invades and Subverts the Religious and Civil
Rights, Liberties, Privileges and Properties of his Subjects, which he solemnly
Swore to Protect and Defend; and in an Arbitrary and Tyrannical Manner,
Dissolves the Constitution of Church and State, by Usurping a Power unknown to
the Constitution, and as Inconsistent with it, as Light with Darkness. His
Subjects perceiving All going to Ruin, having first used all Means to Reclaim
him, but to no purpose, Assume their Natural Right, in Defense of their Laws,
their Lives, their Religion; and to preserve them Entire, oppose the Violent
and Arbitrary Methods of the late King, and apply themselves to the Prince of
Orange, our now Gracious King, who had a Just Expectation of a Right to the
Crown; and humbly pray His Highness to assist them in Recovering and Defending
their Legal Rights, together with his own Title to the Succession; both
apparently Invaded, and endeavoring to be Destroyed by Clandestine Methods.

This Illustrious Prince gives the People Assistance, and by the Blessing of
God, and the Mutual Appearance of the Nation for their Self-Defence and
Preservation, James the Second, Conscious of his own Guilt in endeavoring to
subvert the Constitution, and breaking the Original Contract between King and
People, and that by the Advice of Jesuits, and other Wicked People, he had
Violated the Fundamental Laws, and thereby Abdicated the Government; he leaves
the Kingdom. Upon which Vacancy of the Throne, His Highness the Prince of
Orange, together with his Royal Consort of ever Blessed Memory, the next
Indisputable Heir to the Crown, in a Full and Free Representation of the whole
Community, and Body of the Kingdom, is, and are, Declared and Constituted King
and Queen of England etc.

Now, since it is visible that the late King James was fled, and that it was
absolutely necessary the Government should be supplied, and some other King
placed in the Throne, who accepting the Crown upon the Conditions tendered with
it, would give Assurance of Governing by the Laws of the Constitution, and
secure our Happiness under him, there can remain no reasonable Objection
against his Title. Besides,

His Sacred Majesty King William the Third, in a more especial manner is God's
King, as being appointed by his Providence, (by whom Kings Reign,) assisted by
his Almighty Power, and the Glorious Instrument in his Hand, to Enterprise and
Accomplish such a Deliverance, as in common Gratitude, without Respect to other
Right, in all Nations of the World has been constantly Rewarded with a Crown;
and more particularly in England, upon that Respect Alone, has justly meritted
the Sovereignty.

His present Majesty is also God's King, as being the Wise and Valiant Champion
of all the Reformed Churches in Europe; and who with his Sword, his Head, and
Heart, fights for Christ's Religion, and to rescue the Professors of it from
mighty Combinations to destroy them Root and Branch. In which Great and
Glorious Work, God Almighty has signally owned him as his Anointed King, in
preserving his Sacred Person in the Open Dangers of Wars, and from the many
Close and Barbarous Conspiracies of Ungrateful Regicides.

He is also the People's King, as being their Voluntary Choice when they had no
King; and Established by those Laws that were of their own making, and the
Precedents of their Forefathers on the like Occasions: For, to rise no higher
than the Norman Race, William the Second, Henry the First, King John, King
Stephen, Henry the Fourth, Henry the Fifth, Henry the Sixth, and Henry the
Seventh, had no other Title but the Consent, Election of the People, and a
Parliamentary Recognition of their Rights: But King William the Third's Right
is not only Recognized by a Statute Law, but his Person and Right is Guarded by
an Act of Assotiation, wherein all his Subjects have obliged themselves to
Defend him with their Lives and Fortunes, and to Revenge the Injury of his
Person upon all the Agressors. And what could be more done to declare his
Right, and engage our Obedience.

It Is the Rarity of these Things happening, and a general Ignorance in the
History of Precedent Times, that makes such Proceedings seem strange and
unaccountable to those who have been Nursed up in Slavish Notions, and
apprehend not the Necessity of those Overtures against King James the Second,
and Supplying the Throne by the Coronation of William the Third. For,

Our present King William came into as Empty a Throne as the late King James
himself did; a Civil Death in the Eye of the Law, making as effectual a Vacancy
as a Natural Death; and therefore King William had the same Forms of
Investiture, as if his Abdicated Predecessor had left the World, as well as his
Native Country. Why then should Men create themselves Trouble, or disquiet
their own and other Men's Consciences, by Vexatious Disputes against the Divine
Will, Positive Laws, and the Concurrence of a whole Nation. Solomon was not
David's Heir, and yet he Reigned and was Obeyed with good Conscience. Joram was
Ahab's Son, but Jehu succeeded King: Joram had a Right from Ahab, but Jehu from
God. Ishbosheth had Right by Descent from Saul, but David was made King: And
'twas for the sake of Religion that they were thus Placed, and Displaced. In
France, Childeric was Deposed, and Egidius, or Gillon, a mere Stranger, (but in
Reputation for Probity and Wisdom,) was Elected in his stead. Pepin was Elected
King, and Thierry Deposed. Pepin, Grandson to the former, was by Parliament
Crowned King, though there was of that Marovinian Race in Being. Charlemain's and
Hugh Capet's best, if not only Title, was the Choice of the People. So that I
wonder the French Writers should question the Legality of the late Revolution
in England, since if we look back into the Original of other Kings, and how
they came to their Crowns,

King William's Title to the Crown of England is as good as the best, and much
better than some now Reigning in Europe; for if all the Monarchs and
Governments in Europe that have succeeded such Depositions, or Abdications,
have been Unlawful, and Usurped, there is not one Monarch or Government in all
Europe, nay, scarce in the whole World, that can say they have a Lawful
Authority, but must acknowledge (according to the Doctrine of D' Orleance) that
they are all Usurpers: Which I wonder he had the Confidence to Assert, since he
cannot be ignorant that the French Kings enjoy their Crowns in Consequence of
the Abdications and Depositions of their Predecessors, and the People's
Elections which succeeded those Dethronements.

So that King William 's Title to the Crown of England, is as good as King
Lewis's to France, if not better; for their own Historians give great Suspicion
of Unfair Dealings, and Sly Practices in the Elections of some of the French
Kings; but neither Envy it self, nor the most Inveterate of all our Enemies,
could ever object it against King William, that by any Acts of Force, or Arts
of Corruption, he endeavored to work on the Members of either House, to labor
his own Advancement; but that it was the Free Election of the Majority, after
long Debates and Consultations on other Expedients.

His Majesty did not, like King Harold, lay Violent Hands upon a Crown; but
only Accepted it when it was Offered: And, which shows his Goodness and
Justice, he received it too on the Conditions that were offered with it; which
gives us a lasting Assurance of the Regularity of his Government.

His Virtue and his Merit recommended him to England, by their Free Election he
was made King, and that is the Right he Claims by; and being the most
Righteous, and Lawful, that can be without a Miracle, it makes out Allegiance
and Obedience to him become our Indispencible Duty. But

That which I but hinted before, and now comes to Crown all the rest, and put
it quite out of Dispute for ever, is, It was God's Doing, the Immediate Hand of
Heaven was in it: And, truly, nothing less could have accomplished such
Miraculous Things.

We all know what the Nation Felt, and Feared; the Overturning of this Church,
and the Subverting this Government. Now all this being stopped, our Religion
secured, our Temporalities safe, and a Check put to the Spirit of Persecution,
and all in so short a Time, must be ascribed to an Almighty Power and Goodness.

That when the Design of our Deliverance was Formed, and Essaying, there should
be so extraordinary a Concurrence of all Favorable Accidents, and disposing
all Men's Minds the same Way: That the Precipitation and Folly of our
Persecutors in opening their Ill Designs so Early, and the Unrelenting Cruelty
put in practice in a Neighboring Kingdom, should send us over so many Thousand
Witnesses to awaken us, and show us what we were to expect when that Bloody
Religion became Triumphant amongst us; and what all Oaths, Promises and Laws
should signify, as soon as they could break through them: And that this should
happen at the same time when the late King was Suspending Laws, in favor of
the Papists: That our Enemies should go on so fast, and Barefaced: That they
should grasp so much at once, and suffer the Hook to be so ill covered when the
Bait was thrown out: And that all their Designs should be blasted by
themselves, must be ascribed to the Eternal, who brings to Light the hidden
Things of Darkness, and suffers the Wicked to be taken in the Snare they
prepared for others. Further,

That the great Supporter of Persecution should start a Quarrel with the Head
of that Mystical Babylon, and divert his Force to a New War, (an unjust one to
be sure since he began it:) And so many great Princes should Unite, to Stop his
Carier, and preserve Europe: That so great an Army as the late King had Raised,
from whom our present King might expect a stout Opposition, should voluntarily
Desert, grow Supine, and comply with Reason, and the Good of the Nation: That
such a Divided People should so Unanimously Concur in in Electing the same
Person to be their King; and that this mighty Deliverance should be perfected
without Shedding of Blood, agreeable to the Proposals and Intentions of our
Great Deliverer, the Laws of the Land, and the present and future Tranquillity
of the whole Nation; must be the Lord's Doing, and ought to be Commemorated to
his Eternal Glory, and Accompanied with a Grateful Retribution, and Dutiful
Obedience to our Gracious King, who has done such great Things for us: Which
is the last Particular.

It Is, doubtless, one of the most palpable Signs of a Base, Profligate Nature,
not to be obliged by Favors: 'Twould be an Injury to a Beast, to call him
Ungrateful: That Epithet no Being can deserve? but one that is degenerated into
something more Vile than the worst of Animals, that has broke through all that
is Modest, Ingenious, and Tender and Apprehensive in Humane Nature. And for the
Noble Creature Man to be guilty of Ingratitude, in Offending our Deliverer, or
Dishonouring our Sovereign, by any Rash or Unadvised Words or Actions, who
saved us from Ruin, who snatched us from the Brink of Destruction: To return
him Evil for Good, to requite his Favors with Indignities; to Diminish his
Power, by taking too much upon themselves; to Mis-represent his Gracious
Intention, or Lessen or Detract from his Goodness, is to sink below
Comprehension, and render himself unworthy of the Blackest Thought!

With what Emotion, and Grief of Mind then can we think of those that are
already grown so Insensible of their past Dangers, and forgetting the Mercy of
their Deliverance, abuse Modest Ears with Invidious Reflections upon the
Supreme and Subordinate Authority they ought to obey! How is Conversation
Sour'd by those Animals, that, like Tame Ducks, are always dabling in Nasty
Gutturs, that Espy and Publish all Men's Faults but their own; and can no more
rest from Reproaching their Superiors, than a Crow from feeding on Carrion!
Jealousies, like Bull-Rushes, grow out of the Mud of their own Brains; and
their Suspicious and Ungrounded Glances discover more Rancour, than direct
Contumelies.

They boast of their Affection, and mighty Services done for the Government,
yet do their utmost to make it Contemptible. Some of them carry their Fire in
Dark-Lantherns, sigh out their Sorrows for Mis-managements, deplore the Danger
that hangs over us, and persuade the World that every thing is out of Order,
because themselves are out of Office. Others Rail outright, and carry the
Brands Ends open in their Mouths to kindle Combustions, and, Archimago-like,
make Variance between the Head and the Body, upon no other Ground than
Obloquies, Suspicions and Fears, those Brats of Rotten Fame, that have no
Father but their own Invention. These are

A sort of Men, Illuminated into a kind of Distraction, whom nothing can
please, and what any thing cannot but displease; ever constant to their Old
Dislikes, and the Beginning of New Wishes; and who, like the Bay of Biscay, are
always Rough and Angry let the Wind blow where it will: Talk of Loyalty and
Obedience, you raise their Passion, and they call you Tory: If you talk Well of
all Men, they call you a Trimmer: Speak of preserving a due Temperament in the
State, they call you a Whig, or Republican: And say nothing, and they proclaim
you a Fool because you are not a Busie-Body.

What a strange Pass are Things brought to by carrying all Things into
Extremities! Some Men, by Overstraining the Doctrine of Obedience, made it
Contemptible. Must we therefore wholly lay aside that Evangelical Precept?
Because we are not obliged to obey a Tyrant, must we therefore dispute away our
Duty to the King, and make our Submission as Arbitrary as the Power we
declaimed against? Because we ought not to submit to a Destroyer, must we not
obey our Preserver? Because a more than ordinary Liberty of Censuring Public
Affairs was assumed in our late Times of Confusion and Disorder, must that
Pragmatical Humor be continued, to create new Jealousies and Disturbances, now
the State is settled, a Good King in the Throne, and Justice equally
Administered through the whole Kingdom? No! Sure it is time for these
Over-active State-menders to comport themselves with more Modesty and Decency
to the Government, to bind their Tongues to the Good Behavior, to Restrain
Seditious Discourses, and Intermedling in Public Affairs; to study to be
Quiet, and do their own Business; to fear God, honor and obey the King: For
whatever they think of it, or however it may have been abused, or mis-apply'd,
in former Reigns, Obedience to Princes is the Doctrine of the Bible, and the
Indispencible Duty of Subjects to their Sovereign: And therefore upon that Head
I will here endeavor to settle it.

You cannot be ignorant what a Character our Enemies give us, viz. That we are
as Unchangeable as the Wind, and as Unconstant and Quarrelsome as the Waves of
the Sea, that are always Fluctuating, and dashing themselves to pieces.
Fickleness is the Reproach of our Nation abroad, and has rendered us Vile and
Cheap amongst other Nations.

Now an Opportunity is put into our Hands to confute those Prejudices, by a
Stability in our Allegiance to such a King, and Subjection to such a
Government, as all Europe admire and envy us for.

Now we have an Advantage to show our Complaints again the late King were True,
and that the Causes of them were Real; and may gain a Reputation of our
Conduct, when we show by our Actions, that as we had the Prudence to change so
much for the better, so we have the Wisdom to know when we are well, and the
Honesty to continue so.

The Papists reproach our Religion with Disloyalty; and therefore, after we
have struggled so hard to keep it, we ought to show it was worth Contending
for, and wipe off that Aspertion, by extolling its Virtue, because, amongst
other Excellencies, it obliges us to a Fermety in our Allegiance, beyond all
other Motives in the World; and that upon a Religious Foundation chiefly, we
build and maintain our Duty to the King; and though Lower Considerations have
sometimes their Place, and Value, yet that the Grand and Durable Obligations
spring from those Sacred Maxims. And I the rather press it to you upon this
Score, because it will justify you before God, make you appear truly Religious
and Reasonable before Men, and will be thought best Subjects by the King,
because your Loyalty is the Fruit of your Religion.

As for Interest, it is so Uncertain and Changeable a Thing, that it gives a
Prince no Security in Relying upon that Topic; nor a Subject can scarce trust
himself with it. For the same Reasons that now Induce Men to be Loyal, may, if
the Scene should change, a better Offer ^e made, and a Pardon enclosed, prevail
with the same Persons to be Rebels and Traitors.

Those that followed our Blessed Savior for the Loaves, whereof they eat, and
were filled, soon forsook him: And those that adhere to our King, only as Rats
and Mice do a Barn because there is Grain in it, are in danger of Deserting him
as soon as they find their Expectations frustrated. Things are but at an Ill
pass when Subjects Loyalty continues no longer than while they are Obliged by
Favors; and when every froward Person shall set up against the Court, if he be
not Advanced and Rewarded, as his own Ambition and Avarice tells him he ought
to be.

Gratitude and Thankfulness to a Prince are eternally due from his Subjects,
and is a good Foundation to build our Obedience upon; but we have sorrowfully
experienced that some Men's Loyalty have expired with their Shouts and
Acclamations, or at least but the Loss of an Employment; and all the Reason
that can be given for it, is, because their Duty was not grounded upon Religion
and Conscience.

The People of England have been always great Pretenders to both; and now if
they have not so long wrangl'd about these Things that they have quite lost
them, and have had God and Conscience so long in their Mouths that their Hearts
have almost forgotten there are any such Thing; it now concerns them who have
seen so many visible Interpositions of Providence in behalf of our King, our
Church, and our Nation, those strange and sudden Changes of Things, and such a
mighty Deliverance effected, which nothing but the Right Hand of God could
bring to pass; it concerns them (I say) to show that they have a true Sense of
Religion and Conscience, in practicing an Uninteressed and Undissembled
Obedience to their Sovereign Lord King William; for this is all the Requital
and Compensation they can make to His Majesty for all his Favors, and Care of
them, and would in some measure sweeten and aleviate the Burden of them.

Shall I be allowed to say one thing without Offense, or Imputation of
Flattery; That if ever any King might expect Cheerful Obedience from us for his
Own sake, or claim it for God's sake, King William that now Governs us may do
it justly; His Majesty's Great and Glorious Undertaking, His Indefatigable
Pains, His Toilsom Days, His Restless Nights, His Anxious Cares in preventing
the Designs of Ambitious Rival Princes, His Rare and Distinguished Wisdom and
Conduct, has blessed us with so happy a Change, that even our Interest combines
with our Duty, and is complicated with it.

Blessed be God, we have now a King that is a Defender of our Faith, a
Sovereign to whom it has so far approved it self, as he has given the Nation
all imaginable Security of our Religion, Laws and Properties, and that they
shall never be again in danger of being deprived of them for the future; in
which all good Men Rejoice and Triumph, and no Men doubt the Sincerity of it,
but those whose own Guilt renders them always Suspicious, and Diffident of all
Mankind. Add hereto, that as His Majesty's Personal Merits has engaged our
Obedience, so are we also obliged to it by that Singular Providence that has
still attended, and Miracles of it guarded his Sacred Person through all the
Fatigues and Dangers of War, and set His Majesty on a steady Throne in Peace.

How Plain and Visible then is the Argument for Obedience to his Sovereignty in
our Case? And how effectually ought it to work upon this Generation, when the
greatest Favors and Kindnesses on Earth Invite, and when Miracles from Heaven
command our Duty and Obedience to him.

Thus are we obliged to obey King William for his own sake: It remains also as
a Duty upon us, that we obey His Majesty for God's sake, and that, I hope, will
keep it firm in this wavering Generation: I mean, when our Subjection is
founded where it truly ought to be, viz. upon Reasons of Religion, upon
Principles of Conscience, and Duty to God; which St. Peter calls Submitting for
the Lord's sake. And I hope I need not dwell long upon this Head amongst
Christians; for if the plain Principles of the New Testament may be allowed to
be a Rule of Conscience, and God's immediate Commands do lay any Obligations
upon us, then it is evident that Men are as immediately tied to the Duty of
Obedience to their Prince in point of Conscience, as to any other Duty
whatsoever. Let Conscience be as Free as Men assert it to be, and Accountable
to God only, yet it cannot be dispensed withal in this Duty: For if Government
be God's Institution, Kings his Vicegerents, and that he has charged all Men
to be obedient to them, and their Lawful Commands, upon pain of Damnation, and
his highest Displeasure; then I am sure, if Conscience be an honest Respect to
God and his Laws, it must necessarily oblige all Men in this Instance. If St.
Paul and St. Peter understood the Obligation of Conscience, or were able to
direct the Obedience of it, no more need be added on this Subject, than to
desire Men to open their Bibles, and Read their Duty from those Apostles; though
if need were, I might appeal to the Old Testament, the Doctrine and Example of
the Blessed Jesus in the New, the Consonant Doctrine, and Practice too, of the
Ancient and Best Christians, to Vouch the Truth of Obedience to Kings for the
Lord's sake: And therefore I shall close up this Discourse with my Hearty Wishes

That God Almighty would please to Bless, Preserve, Protect and Keep King
William, that we may long enjoy him, and all those Great and Invaluable
Blessings which, by him, God has vouchsafed to us: And that God would so Rule
the Heart of his Chosen Servant William, our King and Governor, that he
knowing whose Minister he is, may above all things seek his Honor and Glory:
And that we, and all his Subjects, duly considering whose Authority he has,
may faithfully Serve, Honor, and Humbly Obey him, in God, and for God,
according to his Blessed Word and Ordinance.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
A True History of the several Designs and Conspiracies against His Majesty's
Person and Government; As they were continually carried on from 1688, to 1697.
Containing Matters Extracted from Original Papers, Depositions of the
Witnesses, and Authentic Records; as appears by the References to the
Appendix, wherein they are Digested. Published with no other Design than to
acquaint the English Nation, that notwithstanding the present Posture of
Affairs, our Enemies are still so Many, Restless and Designing, that all
Imaginable Care ought to be taken for the Defense and Safety of His MAJESTY and
His Three Kingdoms. By the same Author. Sold by Abel Roper, at the Black Boy,
against St. Dunstan's Church, in Fleet Street.


