Light broke forth in WALES, Expelling DARKNESS; OR THE Englishman's Love to
the Ancient Britains. BEING An ANSWER to a BOOK, Entitled, Children's Baptism
from Heaven; published in the Welsh Tongue, by Mr. James Owen. Wherein his
Twelve Arguments, for the baptizing of the Children of the Faithful, are
examined and confuted, and Infant Baptism overthrown. Also proving that
Baptizing is Dipping the whole Body in Water, in the Name of the Father, etc.
And that Believers are only the Subjects of Baptism. In which the
Anti-pedo-baptists are cleared from all those unjust Reproaches and Calumnies,
cast upon them by the said Mr. Owen.

By BENJAMIN KEACH.

Bernard Sermon. 66. in Cantica. Irrident nos quia Baptizamus infantes, quod
oramus pro mortuis, quod sanctorum suffragia postulamus.

Mat. 3. 16. End Jesus gedoopt zijnde, is terstont opgeklomen yet hit Water.

Taken out of the Dutch Testament; in English thus, And when Jesus was dipped,
he came out of the Water.

London, Printed, and sold by William Marshal at the Bible in Newgate-street,
1696.

To all Godly Christians who are Pedobaptists, in South and North-VVales,
Grace, Mercy, and Peace from God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ.
You Worthy Brethren, and Ancient Britains,
I Kindly salute you in the Bowels of Christian Love, and Sincere Affections; I
cannot but love all who have the Image of my Heavenly Father stamped upon their
Souls: It Is not your Opinion of Pedo-Baptism (tho an Error) that shall alienate
my Heart from you, nor restrain that Catholic Love that should run in all the
Veins of every one that is born of God; tho I am an Enemy to your Opinion and
Practice, in that case, yet a dear Lover of your Persons, and precious Souls.
And I have so much Charity to believe, that it is through Ignorance you err in
that Matter, and that God has for some wise ends hid the truth of his Holy
Ordinance of Gospel-Baptism at present from you; and do hope, did you see
otherwise, you would practice otherwise, Charity thinks no evil, etc. 1 Cor.
13. One Reason o^ my writing this Epistle to you is to answer what Mr. James
Owen in his Epistle to his late Treatise has wrote unto you, in which there
are several Positions and ^^sound Notions laid down and asserted by him, which
I am persuaded I ought to detect and witness against, as well as answer his
Book, which are not only contained in his Epistle to you, but that also to the
Reverend Mr. Samuel Jones.

To confirm Infant Baptism upon the Covenant of Grace, he asserts, in his
Epistle to Mr. Jones, these words, viz. I being desired and importuned by you
to maintain this present Truth which se^teth forth Infants Right unto the
Privileges of the New Covenant, a Truth builded upon the Foundation of the
Apostles and Prophets, even as ancient as the Covenant of Grace, which was made
with Adam and his Seed, etc.

Answ. Does Mr. Owen think that we deny that any our Children have right to the
Covenant of Grace? God forbid; the Controversy lies not there: for all our
Children that are elected, are decretively in the Covenant of Grace, also
vertually by the Death and Merits of Jesus Christ, and also actually they are
and shall be in it when they believe, or when they have Union with Christ; but
that the Children of the Faithful as such, or (as so considered) are in the
Covenant of Grace, we do utterly deny.

2. If the Covenant of Grace was made with Adam, and his Natural Seed as such,
will it not follow that he owns Universal Salvation?

Can any Perish that are in the Covenant of Grace? Is not that an everlasting
Covenant, well ordered in all things and ^^re? 2 Samuel 23. 5. and is not the
Promise sure to all the seed? Romans 4. 16. it being not only confirmed to them
all by the Promise, but also by the Oath of God, Heb. 6. 13 -- 18. 17. But,

3. Does not the Covenant and Promise to Adam run only to Christ Jesus, or
referr to him, who is there meant by the Seed of the Woman? True, we will allow
that it comprehends also all the Elect of God, in a large sense; but
primarily and directly to Christ personally considered. But can any think this
Promise is limited to the Carnal Seed of Believers or runs so? My Brethren,
There are two Seeds, the one is called, The Seed of the Woman, which we affirm,
is only Christ and all the Elect in him; and to all these the Covenant of Grace
does appertain, and to no more, as to the Special Blessings and Privileges
thereof. The other are called, The Seed of the Serpent, who are the Ungodly;
which proceed some of them from the Loins of the Faithful, as well as from the
Loins of the Wicked; for as some Unbelievers Seed are in the Election of Grace,
so some of the Seed of Believers are none of the Elect.

But to proceed, says he, if the Children of the Faithful, are out of the
Covenant of Grace, they have no Hope, and are without God in the World.

Answ. We, and all our Children, by Nature were dead in Sins and Trespasses,
and Children of Wrath, as others; and so without Hope and without God in the
World, Ephesians. 2. 13. before we Believed, this was our Condition, and are not our
Children naturally in this state?

But, what tho? yet when God calls them, renews them, and translates them, out
of the First-Adam, and grafts them into the Second-Adam, they have the same
Hope, and the same God to be their God, as we have,

Again, He says, Doubtless, the First Covenant does condemn them because of
Original Sin, and if without interest in the Covenant of Grace, the Wrath of
God abides on them; but God forbid that we should think there is more Virtue in
the First-Adam to Condemnation, than there is in the Second Adam to Save.

Answ. The case is plain, the First-Adam, and all his, as so considered, were
lost, being Children of Wrath and of Condemnation: And the Second-Adam, and all
his, are, or shall be saved, being Children of the Promise, and of Eternal
Salvation. But does Mr. Owen think, that all the Children of the Faithful, as
such, are the Seed or Children of the Second-Adam?

I say again, Are all our Children in the Election of Grace, or does Election
run only in that Line?

If the First-Adam had stood, we and our Children would have stood: Does Faith
in the Second-Adam, make the Condition of our Children worser than it should be
through the Obedience of the First- Adam?

Answ. Must God save all the Children of the First-Adam by the Obedience of the
Second, because, if Adam had stood none of his Children had fallen? What
Doctrine is this? You out do all the Arminians I have yet met with, but O! the
Riches of God's Sovereign Grace, to any of the lost Seed of Rebellious Mankind.

If this you intend not, yet is every Believer a like common or public Head to
his natural Offspring, as Adam was to his? Christ only is the public Head of
his Seed; a Believer's Faith objectively justifies and saves himself only, not
his Children. Could Reverend Mr. Jones find no better a Pen to defend his Cause
of Pedo-Baptism? My Faith may be said to unite me to Christ; but does it also
unite my Child to Christ? Whatsoever good Children do receive from their
believing Parents, besure the Parent's Faith does not render his Child a
Believer, but however my Faith does not make the Condition of my Child worser
than it was, and it may not make the Condition of my Child better; for all the
good Counsel, Education, good Example and Prayers; some Children have from
their Godly Parents, they make them not the better, It Is not in him that
wills, nor in him that runs, but in God that shows Mercy.

You intimate what Cause there is of bitter Sorrow in the Churches of God, that
the Major part of their Children are out off from the Covenant of Salvation.

Answ. Our Doctrine cuts off not one Child of any Believer that is in the
Covenant of Salvation; if God has elected the major part of the Children of
the Faithful, we say they shall be saved: It Is impossible for any to cut off
one of God's Elect. But what is this to their Children, as such, or to the
positive Right any of our Infants have to Baptism? Do you cut off your Infants
from the Covenant of Salvation, because you will not give them the Blood of the
Covenant (I mean the Lord's Supper)?

Brethren, Both the Sacraments are Ordinances that are of mere positive Right,
viz. depending (as to the Subjects and all Matters thereunto belonging) upon
the Sovereign Will and Pleasure of the Lord Jesus, the great Lawgiver; and as
they that come to one Ordinance are to examine themselves and to discern the
Lord's Body: So all they that come to the other are to believe in Christ, and
to repent from dead Works.

You mistake, it is not the Eternal Covenant of Grace that you say you stand up
in the Gap to maintain, but you strive to introduce, in Gospel Times, an
external relative Covenant according to the Flesh, like that Covenant of
Peculiarity, which God made with Abraham and his Natural Seed, as he was a
public Head and Father of the whole House of Israel, or of the National,
Political and Typical Church of the Jews: Nay, you would fain have all the Seed
of Believers to be in that Covenant, that peculiarly and absolutely did belong
to the Natural Seed of Abraham, as such, and none else. Now it is this thing
which we deny; we say that there was a twofold Covenant made with Abraham,
signified by Sarah and Agar: And tho there was Grace and Mercy in both, yet the
Covenant of Grace or Free Promise was not made to Seeds, as of many, i. e. not
to all the natural Seed of Abraham, or Seed of Believers, as such, but
primarily it was made to Christ, and in him to all the Elect, who alone are in
the Eternal Covenant of Grace: That the Election takes hold both of some of
Believers Seed and some of the Seed of Unbelievers is evident; and tho God may
comprehend in his Eternal Love more of our Seed than of the Seed of
Unbelievers, yet I have proved in this Treatise and Reply to Mr. Owen, that the
Covenant of Grace and the Election of God runs nor to the Seed of the Faithful,
as such; and also that Believers Seed nor Unbelievers Seed, until they believe
in Christ, ought to be baptized, nor taken into the Visible Church; because
it is not the Covenant of Grace. considered as such, that gives any Person a
Right to Baptism, but the mere positive Command of our Lord Jesus Christ; whose
express Command and Commission injoins none to be baptized but such who are
Believers, or such who are discipled by preaching the Word, Mat. 28. 19, 20.
Mark 16. 16. John 4. 1. Acts 2. 37. Acts 8. 12, 14. Acts 8. 37. Acts 10. 47.
Acts 16. 30, 31. Acts 18. 8. Romans 6. 3, 4.

Mr. Owen tells Mr. Jones, who he says has the Tongue of the Learned, that his
desire was that he would be a Disputant for those Weaklings who are not able to
dispute for themselves.

Reply. He tells us one while that Mr. Jones desired and importuned him to
write his Treatise, and at another time he says his Will and Desire was that
Mr. Jones should do it.

As touching the Reverend Mr. Samuel Jones, I have had such an account of him,
by a Worthy Minister, that I am fully satisfied, that had he wrote on this
Subject, we should have had no such bitter Reflections or ill Treatment as we
meet withal from this Man: He has dipped his Pen into Gall and Wormwood, and
has made work for Repentance; besides, I am informed that Mr. Jones neither
put him upon this Work nor approves of it, tho perhaps when he saw his
Forwardness, he might say Go on and do it.

Sirs, those Weaklings he means need no such a Disputant, he has done them no
service, nor the Church of God either; we throw none of them out of that
Eternal Covenant of which he speaks, nor can Men nor Angels do it; such of our
Infants that are in the Eternal Covenant are safe enough: But we deny that our
Infants are in that Covenant of Peculiarity which God made with Abraham and his
natural Seed, as such. And this I doubt not but you will find in the ensuing
Answer sufficiently proved. Moreover,

(He says) He stands up in the gap to maintain the Eternal Covenant which God
made with the Faithful and their Seed. -- Great is the Truth, and it will
overcome.

Reply. He should not boast before he puts off his Armor; that may be a Truth
in a Man's Opinion, which is a gross Error in it self. You will, when you have
read our Answer, the better judge whether he has proved the Baptism of Infants
to be from Heaven, as in the Title of his Book he asserts it is. He farther
says,

We are Fathers, and the Law of Nature teaches us to preserve the Inheritance
of our Children.

Reply. Our Affections are not less to our Children than his; we are Fathers
also, but are not willing to give an Inheritance to our Children which of right
belongs not unto them.

Grace, nor gracious Privileges, in the New Covenant, come to be the
Inheritance of our Children, in a Natural way, as they are our Offspring; tho
evident it is in the Covenant of Peculiarity God made with Abraham, the Jews
and their Seed, as such, had an Inheritance given them by the Lord, i. e. many
Legal and External Privileges, besides the Land of Canaan, which Circumcision
was a Token or Sign of; but we and our Children have no right to that
Inheritance: They had the Shadow, we and our Children that believe have the
Substance; they had the Shell, we the Kernel: The true Inheritance is by Faith,
that it might appear to be of Grace, and not in Circumcision, nor in Baptism,
but by Faith only. Therefore when our Children are called of God, or do believe
in Christ, they have right to the Inheritance which Baptism is a sign of; and
what signifies the sign without the thing signified? You our Brethren the
Pedo-baptists give your Children the Name, but not the Nature of Christ; what
is the lofty Title of Earl, or Duke, and no Estate suitable to that fancied
Honor?

Mr. Owen says, We are Stewards over the House of God, and we ought to protect
the Feeble and Afflicted; we are Shepherds, and our duty is to provide for the
Lambs of the Flock, lest any cast them out of the Fold.

Reply. It is required in Stewards that they be Faithful, and to see that they
give no portion of their Masters Goods to any, but to such he has directed and
commanded them so to do: Now Christ has commanded his Stewards, or Ministers,
no more to give Infants the Holy Ordinance of Baptism than the Lord's Supper.
He therefore that does it, let him answer it when our Lord comes.

2. Are our Infants Lambs in Christ's Fold, or feeble and afflicted Christians
in Christ's Spiritual Family? Infants are committed to Ministers care, who are
Natural Fathers, but not as Ministers; God never made his Ministers, Stewards
to take care of, and to be Nurses of little Infants: True, ^ew born Babes in
Christ, or Babes in Grace, they are to provide for, and take the care of; those
Lambs they must see not cast out of Christ's Fold, when they are received in by
Baptism, etc.

We are Builders, says he, and we ought to build the VValls of Jerusalem,
working with one Hand in the Work, and with the other holding a VVeapon, Neh.
4. 17. And we must not reject those small or little Stones, which the Father
received into the old Building, whom the Son received into the new Building,
and will be received by the Holy Ghost, Mat. 19. Luke 1. 44. who makes them
lively Stones of Jerusalem that is Above, and these Stones by some are cast
into an unclean place without the City, Levit. 14. 40. God does raise up
Children unto Abraham, See Mat. 3. 9.

Reply. Because the old Jerusalem, by God's appointment, was built with dead
Stones which was a Type of the New, will he, without Christ's Authority, build
his New and Spiritual Jerusalem with such Materials? We deny not but that God
did receive Infants, as such, into his old Building: But does not St. Peter
tell us, the Gospel-Temple is built up with Spiritual Stones, lively, or living
Stones, i. e. Men and Women spiritually quickened by Divine Grace, or renewed
by the Holy Spirit. Let him prove, if he can, that Christ received into the
Gospel Church any one Infant; and tho we deny not but elect Infants that die
may be lively Stones in Jerusalem Above, I mean Heaven; yet it follows no more
from thence that Infants ought to be baptized, than that they ought to partake
of the Lord's Supper. Moreover, evident it is, that John in Mat. 3. 9. (the
Text Mr. Owen quotes) does deny such to have a right to Baptism that were the
Seed or Children of Abraham according to the Flesh; Think not to say within
your selves, we have Abraham to our Father. The Covenant of Peculiarity God
made with Abraham, tho it gave right to his Male-Infants to Circumcision, yet
it gives no right to Gospel-Baptism to any, either Young or Old, Male nor
Female. God can raise up of Stones Children to Abraham, i. e. such that have no
Descent from Abraham: So that it appears Fleshly Descent in Gospel Times,
signifies not any thing as to Gospel-Church-Membership.

Worthy Britains, Search the Scriptures, and be not mistaken about the Covenant
God made with Abraham; you will find the Covenant of Grace was one and the same
from the beginning, and it was always held forth by way of a Free Promise,
first to Adam, and so to Abraham, etc. but there was a Covenant made with Noah,
and tho it was full of Mercy to him and all Mankind, yet that was not simply in
it self the Covenant of Grace: So also there was a Covenant made with Abraham
and his Natural Seed, as such, which we call a Covenant of Peculiarity, or,
which peculiarly did appertain to his Natural Seed or Offspring; to which
Covenant Circumcision did belong, which was distinct to the Free Promise, or
Covenant of Grace, which God made with him, and with all the Elect in him. You
may assure your selves that that Covenant in which there was mutual
Restipulation between God and Abraham and his Carnal Seed, or between God and
the whole House of Israel (and upon the Condition of Obedience thereunto, Life,
length of Days, and the Earthly Canaan was promised, and upon their
Disobedience Temporal Death was threatened) was not the Covenant of Grace, tho
it might be given in subserviency to the Gospel Covenant, or the Covenant of
Faith: And so it was as a Schoolmaster to bring them to Christ. It Is only the
Holy Spirit, through Faith, that actually intiles us or our Children to the
Covenant of Grace: We must believe, and our Children must believe, before
either we or they can be actually in this Blessed Covenant, so as to have right
to Baptism, I mean such of them that live, etc.

Also know, as I said before, that it is not the Covenant of Grace simply
considered in it self that gives any Person a right to Gospel-Baptism, but the
mere positive and express Command, Will and Pleasure of Christ the only
Lawgiver: For the Covenant of Grace gave no Godly Man or his Male-Children, in
Abraham's Time, or before or after, any right to Circumcision, but only God's
Command to Abraham, which ran to those that proceeded from Abraham's Loins, or
were bought with his Money. Brethren, Can any think that Abraham could purchase
Men with Money, and that way bring them into the Covenant of Grace? No, it is
nothing but the Purchase of Christ's Blood can do that.

In a word it is evident, that should we grant all that Mr. Owen and other
Pedo-Baptists say, That all the Children of Believers were in very deed in the
Covenant of Grace; yet it would not follow from thence, that our Infants should
be baptized, any more than that they ought to have the Lord's Supper given to
them, as I said before; because both those Ordinances (as Circumcision was) are
absolutely of mere positive Right: Therefore we must know that it is the Will
and Command of Christ in the New Testament, that Infants ought to be baptized,
if they have right thereunto; but since there is not the least Intimation
given, in all God's Word, that it is his Pleasure they should be baptized, it
must be a piece of Will Worship to do it.

Object. But whereas it is objected, it may be gathered from Consequences that
it is our Duty to baptize them.

I answer, In point of instituted Worship, or for any mere positive Legal or
Gospel Ordinance, there ought to be an express Precept; tho we grant that many
Doctrinal Truths may be drawn or inferred by Consequences from many Texts of
Scripture. See Reverend Mr. Greenhil, on Ezekiel. chap. 11. Vol. 2. p. 412. What
is clearly held out unto us in the Gospel (says he) let us consent in, and
walk answerably; in what is dark and doubtful let us forbear each other, and
stay till God reveals more. If we cannot unite in all, let us unite in what is
clear. Things Fundamental are clearest laid down in the word; they are expressly
commanded or held forth in Scripture, whether they are Matters of Faith or
Practice, they are not drawn out by remote Consequences, and strength of Men's
Parts, but immediately from or in the Word. Thus Mr. Greenhill. Now we all
agree that Baptism, tho it be not a Fundamental of Salvation, yet it is a
Fundamental of Church-Constitution; there can be no true, right, orderly
Gospel Church, without Baptism. Therefore it is necessary that this should be
laid down plainly in the Word of God; and so it is. We must first be made
Disciples, and then be baptized, Mat. 28. 19, 20. John 4. 1. first believe, and
then be baptized, Mark 16. 16. Repent and be baptized, Acts 2. 37. If thou
believe thou may, Acts 8. 37. Can any Man forbid Water, that these should
not be baptized? Acts 10. 47. When they believed Philip, preaching the things
concerning the Kingdom of Grd, and the Name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized
both Men and Women, Acts 8. 12. So Acts 16. 30, 31. Acts 18. 8. Romans 6. 3, 4.

And as touching those Consequences that Mr. Owen and others draw from some
Scriptures, to prove Infants Baptism, you will find in the ensuing Answer,
those Consequences do not arise naturally from those Texts, but are only his
own ungrounded Suppositions, and mistaken Apprehensions. Mr. Owen, in his
Epistle to the Courteous Welshmen, says, The greatest part of the true Church
judge that the Children of the Faithful have a right to Baptism, because they
are in the Covenant of God: This Opinion is agreeable to the Scriptures, as it
appears, says he, in this Book.

Reply. What Covenant is it he means? Our Children, as such, are in, I know
not, they are not in the Covenant of Grace; for if all the Children of the
Faithful were in the Covenant of Grace, they must be all saved: This I have in
this Treatise fully proved, there is none can fall finally away that are in
this Covenant. Besides, if they were in the Covenant of Grace, why must they
have Baptism administered to them from this foot of Account, and not the Lord's
Supper, and all other Privileges of the Church?

2. They are not in the Covenant of Peculiarity God made with Abraham's Natural
Seed, as such, or with the whole House of Israel; for that was a Typical
Covenant, and is taken away.

Mr. Owen says, they are in the outward Dispensation of the Covenant of Grace.

Rep. Let him prove, if he can, that the Children of Believers have more
Privileges, by the outward Dispensation of the Gospel, than the Children of
Unbelievers have where the Gospel is preached. Those who lived under the
outward Dispensation of the Law, who believed in Christ to come, or were
elected, were in the Covenant of Grace, and none but they only; and so it is
now, none but the Elect, and such that believe, are in the Covenant of Grace.

Will Mr. Owen seal all New Covenant-Blessings to all his Natural Seed, whether
elected or not elected, since the inward and Spiritual Blessings of the said
Covenant, by his own words, belong only to the Elect?

Mr. Owen bids you to seek for a meek and humble, and self-denying Spirit.

Reply. This Counsel is good, therefore be not too confident you are in the
Right; your Teachers are but Men, and God may, for some Reasons best known to
himself, hide Believers Baptism at present from them.

He bids you also to beware of a distempered Zeal, that is not after Knowledge;
it is (says he) a Wildfire that wastes Churches and Countries, etc.

Reply. Such, I fear, has been that Zeal he and others have showed for
Infant Baptism: For it will appear, I hope, in this Treatise, that his Zeal is
not according to the knowledge of God's Word.

Despise not (says Mr. Owen) thy Faithful Teachers, obey them, and submit to
them, for they watch for thy Soul.

Reply. As you ought not to despise your Teachers, but to submit to them in the
Lord; so you ought not to Idolize them, nor follow them any farther than they
follow Christ: For you must know, that Men, tho Ministers, are not your Rule of
Faith and Practice, but God's Word. Moreover, know that you must give an
account of your selves to God, others will not be suffered to speak for you at
the Great Day.

He bids you look upon little Children, as part of their Natural Parents, and
comprehended in the Promise made unto good Parents.

1. Reply. This he has also asserted elsewhere in his Book, which you will
find answered in this.

2. Strange! Are Children part of their Parents, so that when the Parents
believe the Children believe, and when the Parents obey God's Command the
Children obey it also, and when the Parents have a Promise of Pardon and Peace,
the Children have right to the same Promise? What strange Doctrine in this!

Are not we and our Children distinct Persons? Shall not a whole Believer be
saved? I profess I cannot well see that it can be so, if any of our Children
who are a part of us do perish for ever.

And does it follow, because in the Covenant of Peculiarity God made with the
whole House of Israel, the Parents and Children were comprehended, therefore
they must be all comprehended in the Covenant of Grace also, and made Members
of the Gospel Church? He cites Deuteronomy. 4. 37, 40. And because be loved thy
Fathers, therefore he chose their Seed after them. What of this? Mr. Owen can
never prove that God has chosen any one Nation, both Parents and Children,
since that time, to be a peculiar People in a Covenant Relation with himself,
as he chose the Natural Seed of Abraham; it was a Typical Church, and figured
forth the true Spiritual Seed or true Israel of God: Therefore that
Church State ceased at the Death of Christ, when the Partition Wall was broken
down. And the extent of the Promise now, and Gospel-(...) ^es, only runs to
Believers and to their Children (...), or who do believe, whether Jews or
Gentiles, (...) and to no more.

Under (...) Mr. Owen) the extent of God's Cove^ ^ople; his Covenant is with
them and their (...) was the Covenant of Grace which God made (...) Genesis 3. 15.
and 4. 25. And the Covenant (...) ^ade with Noah, Genesis 9. 9. with Abraham, Genesis
17. 7. (...) Isaac, Genesis 28. 4. and with Jacob, Genesis 35. 12. And in the same
manner was his Covenant with David and his Seed, 2 Samuel 7. 12. and 22. 51. in
this Eternal Covenant he rejoiced on his Deathbed, 2 Samuel 23. 5.

Rep. Here are a heap of words in a confused manner wrapped up together, without
distinguishing one Covenant from another, and without distinguishing between
Seed and Seed.

2. If the Covenant of Grace God made with Adam, was also to all his Seed, How
happy is the whole World? All are Adam's Natural Seed. Be sure that was the
Covenant of Grace, and the first discovery of it; and this runs only to Christ,
the Seed of the Woman, and to all the Elect in him; not to the Seed of the
Serpent who were nevertheless Adam's Natural Seed, as I showed you before.

3. God's Covenant with Noah had Grace in it, and he was in the Covenant of
Grace himself; but that Covenant, Genesis 9. 9. was also made with all the World,
and with the Beasts of the Field, and Fowls of Heaven, even with every Living
Creature. Yet we will acknowledge thus much, i. e. that all Covenants God made
with Man since the Fall, originally did spring from his special Love to his
Elect, and New Covenant-Grace designed for them; and so they were chiefly for
their Sakes: But every distinct Covenant we read of was not material, and
formally the Covenant of Grace.

4. The Covenants with Abraham and his Seed, I have proved in this Answer to
Mr. Owen, was Twofold, as he was a twofold Father, Head and Representative, and
had a twofold Seed. (1.) The Covenant or Free-Promise of Grace God made with
him, the Apostle proves was not made to Seeds, as of many, but to thy Seed,
that is Christ, Gal. 3. 16. If any Man be in Christ, he is one of Abraham' s
Seed, and an Heir according to the Promise, ver. 29. (2.) The Covenant of
Peculiarity God made with Abraham and his Seed, we deny not, refers to all his
Nature. I Seed, or Fleshly Seed, as such, to which Circumcision did appertain:
But this will do the Pedo-Baptists no service. The Covenant God made with David
runs primarily to Christ, and in him to all the Elect; this is the Eternal
Covenant indeed.

Mr. Owen says, The Evangelical Prophet foretells that the Covenant of Grace
should be of the same extent under the Gospel, even as it was from the
Beginning, Isa. 66. 22. For as the new Heavens shall remain before me, so shall
your Seed remain. God's Covenant with the Seed of the Faithful is so steadfast
as the new Heavens and the new Earth.

1. Reply. This all Men know only refers to the Elect Seed, and not to the Seed
of the Faithful, as such.

2. We deny not but the Covenant of Grace is of the same extent in the
Gospel-Days as it was from the Beginning. But from the Beginning none were
truly and really in the Covenant of Grace, but the Elect of God only.

But what Mr. Owen, in the close of his second Epistle, has said, may open the
Eyes of his Reader, tho his own be shut. Take his words.

Distinguish between the outward Dispensation of the Covenant and the inward
Dispensation thereof, Romans 9. 4, 8. All the Seed of Abraham was in the outward
Dispensation, and the Seal of the Covenant belonged unto them; but none were in
the inward Dispensation, save the Elect only.

Reply. Are not all Men in the World, especially where the Gospel is preached,
in or under the outward Dispensation of the Gospel, or Covenant of Grace? Sure
none can deny this. But does Baptism therefore belong to them all? All the
Natural Seed of Abraham we acknowledge were in the outward Dispensation of the
Law, or Covenant of Peculiarity God made with him; and had great external
Privileges thereby, which in some things much differed from the Privileges of
such who are under the Dispensation of the Gospel: But let them be what they
will, the outward Dispensation of the Gospel of Grace, does belong as far forth
to Unbelievers and their Children, as to the Children of Believers: For what is
that more than the Privilege of reading and hearing the Gospel preached, or
attending on the Word, in Christian Assemblies?

2. I ask Mr. Owen how he can prove that the Seal of the Covenant of Grace does
belong to them who are only in the outward Dispensation of the Gospel? This may
seem strange to all thinking Men. They whom the Seal of the Covenant of Grace
belongs unto, are assured of all of the peculiar Immunities, Blessings, and
Privileges thereof, as pardon of Sin, Justification, Adoption, and Eternal Life.

3. Tho I own no Seal, or nothing to be a Seal of the Covenant of Grace, save
the Holy Spirit; Yet, was Baptism the Seal of it, as Mr. Owen supposes,
certainly it must (if it were so) seal to the Person baptized all those
Spiritual Blessings or inward Graces signified thereby; or otherwise the Seal
would be an insignificant thing, and the Party sealed would but be cheated or
deceived: He may think he has some great Matter sealed to him, when in truth
he has nothing sealed thereby. Pray ask this Man what it is that Baptism seals
to Infants?

4. But is it so indeed, Are none in the inward part of the Covenant of Grace,
or in the inward Dispensation of the the Gospel, but the Elect; then I infer
that the Children of the Faithful, as such, are not in the Covenant of Grace,
i. e. the Spiritual Blessings or Fatness of that Covenant does not belong to
them, as such, but only to such of them as are elected, or who do believe, or
are brought under special Vocation by the Holy Spirit. And these things being
so, to what purpose is it for this Man, and other Pedo-Baptists, to make such a
Noise about the Children of Believers, as such, being in the Covenant of Grace?
whereas he confesses none are indeed in it but the Elect. I cannot see it is
any thing he and others contend for, in pleading for Infant Baptism, but only a
Christian-Name, or some outward thing, the inward Grace not belonging to any
but to the Elect only; and who they are cannot be known till each Person comes
to Age, and is called by the Lord: For it is only by effectual Calling that the
Election of Persons is known to themselves or others.

But to conclude, Let me add a word or two to you Pedo-Baptists that are sound
in the Doctrine of Free Grace, and Free Justification by Christ's Righteousness
alone.

First, May it not be worth your most serious Thoughts, to consider how the
Doctrine of Pedo-Baptism is a direct Violation of that Holy Precept of our
Blessed Savior, Mar. 5. 33, 34. It has been said of them of old Time, Thou
shall not forswear thy self, but shall perform to the Lord thine Oaths. But I
say unto you, swear not at all, etc. All voluntary and promisary Oaths and
Vows, and Religious Covenants, (as well as vain Swearing) is directly thereby
forbid, and therefore sinful. Now tho we grant that the true Baptismal Covenant
is of Divine Institution, yet since that only obliges those that are the true
Subjects thereof, viz. Believers: It follows that that Vow or Covenant you
bring your poor Babes under, being wholly without Divine Authority, it is
therefore voluntary, and so forbid, and sinful.

Secondly, It is also directly repugnant to those Precepts, Add not to his
Word, lest he reprove thee, etc.

Thirdly, Consider that Infants Baptismal Covenant is also directly repugnant
to the nature of the Covenant of Grace, rendering the Covenant of Grace to be of
the same nature of the Covenant of Peculiarity God made with Abraham and his
Natural Seed, as such, and so suits only with the Baxterian Errors, and Mr.
William's New Scheme, which renders the Covenant of Grace conditional,
according to the Covenant of Works. Take Mr. Baxter's words, viz. The Condition
of the Covenant of Grace, by which we have right to the Benefits of it, is our
Faith (mark it) or Christianity, as it is meant by Christ in the Baptismal
Covenant, viz. to give up our selves in Covenant, believing in God the Father,
Son and Holy Ghost, renouncing the Contraries; and that through this consent to
the Christian Covenant (called Faith alone) is the full condition of our first
right to the Benefits of that Covenant (of which Justification) is one.
Baxter's Fourth Proposit. in his Preface to Dr. Tully.

1. From hence note, as Mr. Troughton observes, Mr. Baxter does not say that
Christ's Righteousness, apprehended by Faith, does justify us; but Faith in a
comprehensive Sense, as it includes Obedience to God, according to this
Covenant. It appears that the Belief and Practice of the Christian Religion,
upon performance of their Infant Baptismal-Covenant, is that Righteousness by
which they are justified, as the purport of Mr. Baxter's Sense.

2. From hence also, it appears that the Spring or Rise of this grand Baxterian
Error is from Infants-Baptismal Covenant; therefore, Brethren, it is time to
consider the danger of this unwarrantable Practice and evil Innovation.

D. Williams confirms Mr. Baxter's Notion: Take his words, What does the
Covenant bind thee to (speaking of Infants Baptismal-Covenant)? His Answer is,
To be the Lord's; in sincere Care, to know, love, believe, obey, worship and
serve him all my days, and to depend on God, through Christ, for all Happiness,
Romans 6. 4.

Quest. What if a Child, through the love of Sin, or vanity of Mind, will not
agree to this Covenant?

I answer, (says he) He then rejects Christ our Savior, and renounceth the
Blessings of the Gospel.

Quest. Is it a great Sin to refuse to agree to the Covenant to which thy
Baptism engaged thee?

He answers, It is the damning Sin, and the Heart of all Sin, Mr. Williams's
Book, called The Vanity of Youth, page 131.

1 Reply. From hence it appears, that Mr. Baxter and Mr. Williams plainly
declare that the terms and condition of the Covenant of Grace, which must be
performed by such that would be justified, is to perform this Infant
Baptismal-Covenant, viz. sincerely to love, believe, obey, worship and serve
the Lord; not Faith only whereby we receive Christ, rely on Christ, but the
whole of that Obedience to which they were obliged by their Infant Baptism.

2. Observe also, that it appears according to these Men, that Unbelief is not
the condemning Sin, but the nonperformance of this Baptismal-Covenant.

3. How are these Men left of God, to darkness of their own Minds, not only to
affirm the Conditionality of the Covenant of Grace, rendering it no better than
a new Covenant of Works, but also to make this devised and voluntary Infant
Baptismal-Covenant to be the only Condition of it, and of our Justification in
the sight of God?

4. Moreover, They bring their poor Babes (without any Authority from Christ)
under a Covenant, and charge them with Perjury if they break it, when grown up;
(it they perform it they shall be pardoned, justified and saved) but they must
be damned if they answer not the Rule of the Promise, or Baptismal-Covenant,
which is to repent, to be regenerated, and so answer their new Law of Faith and
sincere Obedience: So that in this Covenant lies the Conditionality of their
Covenant of Grace. For no other formal Covenant is proposed by them to the
People, unless they are for Mr. Joseph Allen's voluntary Covenant, contrived
out of his own Head, and proposed to all devout Adult Persons to enter into,
which no doubt is forbid by our Savior as sinful: (he was a well-meaning Man.)
And the Truth is, his devised Covenant seems more plausible and reasonable than
Infants Baptismal-Covenant, because he would have none but such enter into his
Covenant who are Adult Persons; besides, it must be with their own free
Consent, whereas Children are brought into theirs, without their knowledge or
consent, and are obliged to do those things which they have no power to
perform: And as it is not required by the Lord, so God has made no Promise to
them, of Grace and Assistance, to discharge the Obligation thereof.

Fourthly, To conclude, It is easy to gather from whence their Mistake does
arise about this Baptismal-Covenant, which evidently appears to be from their
applying it to false Subjects; (and so to bind such to perform those things
which Christ never ordained Baptism to do,) viz. such that are in their Natural
State, or who when baptized believed not, nor were capable so to do; for your
Brethren the Pedo-Baptists tell you that Baptism obliges such as are baptized
to believe, and to become new Creatures, not that they were such that then did
believe, etc. And from hence it follows, that it is one of those Works or
Acts of Obedience that go before Faith, and therefore a dead Work, and pleases
not God (as well as not required of him); for all Works before Faith, or Union
with Christ, are dead Works, they not proceeding from a Spiritual Vital
Principle.

It therefore appears from hence, that Infant's Baptismal-Covenant is directly
also repugnant to Christ's true Baptismal-Covenant: For evident it is, that
Christ's Baptism only belongs to Believers who are renewed, regenerated, and
have Union with Christ, and so in a justified State before baptized: Our
Baptism does not oblige us to believe and to be regenerated, or to die to Sin,
as such that were not dead before; but it is a sign of that Faith and Death
unto Sin we had when we were baptized, or to show that we were then dead to
Sin, etc. How shall we that are dead to Sin, live any longer therein? Know ye
not that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ, were baptized into
his Death? Or as being dead with him, Therefore we are buried with him into
Death, Romans 6. 2, 3, 4. Not buried alive or whilst dead in Sin: No, but as
being dead to Sin. Not to oblige us to be regenerated, but, as Persons who are
regenerated before, buried in Baptism. And the Covenant of Baptism is, to walk
in newness of Life, as being before quickened, That like as Christ was raised
from the dead by the Glory of the Father, so we should walk in newness of Life.

I find Mr. Richard Baxter also says, Baptism is a sign of present
Regeneration, not future. Now, how inconsistent is this Infant
Baptismal-Covenant to the Covenant of Grace, and also to the nature of that
Baptismal-Covenant, Believers, or true justified Persons, enter into when
baptized, according to Christ's Institution? Nothing can be more clear than
this, viz. that Infant's Baptismal-Covenant is of the same nature with the
Covenant of Circumcision, viz. a conditional legal Covenant, Do this, and thou
shall live; perform the Obligation, and thou shall be justified, but do it not,
and you shall be damned, or be cut off: So that Infant Baptism established the
old legal conditional Covenant. Let such who hold the Doctrine of Free Grace
consider it; and also see whether it does not render the Covenant of Grace
different in its nature in respect had to Believers themselves, and to their
Children: For Believers themselves receive Christ as Sinners, by Faith only,
without any previous Qualification, or promissory Covenant, that Christ has
obliged them to enter into: But their Infants are put upon previous conditional
Qualifications, which must be performed by them before justified. Indeed had
Christ ordained Baptism to oblige us to believe, to repent, to die to Sin, to
be regenerate, as the Pedo-Baptist speak of their Baptism does do, it was
something to their purpose, but the contrary plainly appears. Were these things
carefully considered, I am sure Infant Baptism would fall to the ground; for
the nature of their pretended Baptismal Covenant is quite repugnant to the true
Baptismal Covenant Christ instituted, therefore pernicious: Besides, how are
those baptized Infants in the Covenant of Grace, (as Mr. Owen and others say)
and yet Baptism (as to the main Des^^n and End of it in their cloudy Conceits
and Apprehensions) is to oblige them to believe, etc. that they may actually be
in the Covenant of Grace. The good Lord give you Understanding in all things,
and bless to your Profit what I have wrote, and praise God for that Readiness
that was in your Brethren and Countrymen to be at the great Charge of the
Publication of this Answer to Mr. Owen. He says, in the Title of his Book,
Childrens Baptism is from Heaven. Strange! yet no where instituted, nor any
Authority for it, or ever owned from Heaven; certainly you will find it is of
Men, and sprang out of the Antichristian Apostasy. Search the Scripture, be
like the Noble Bereans, Acts 16. 11. Who with all Readiness of Mind received
the Truth, and searched the Scriptures daily, whether those things were so.
Brethren, I shall add no more, but commit you to God, and entreat you to read
this Book over and over without Prejudice; and if you receive any Light by it,
give God the Glory, for I desire to be nothing; yet am willing still to serve
you, and the Interest of Christ, who shall subscribe my self your Servant for
Jesus Sake,

So^thwark, London this 11th of the 11th Month 1606 Benj. Keach.

To all Godly Anti-pedo-baptists, especially to them in South and North Wales;
the Author of this Treatise wishes Grace, Mercy and Peace from God the Father,
and our Lord Jesus Christ.
Beloved in our dear Redeemer,
AT your desire, I have (as the Lord has helped me) answered Mr. James Owen' s
Book, in which he has cast many false and slanderous Reflections on you and
all other Anti-Pedo-Baptists; but I have forborne returning Railing for Railing,
tho perhaps some of my Words may seem a little too sharp, but his way of
Writing called for it: I hope the Translators of his Book first out of Welsh
into Engiish, and again the Translation of my Answer out of English into Welsh
is done faithfully, if it be according to the true Sense and Purport of his
Words and Meaning; the different placing of Words he can have no ground to
cavil at, but of that I am not capable to judge, because I understand not the
Welsh Tongue.

He seems to reflect very severely upon some of your Conversations, as if you
wanted that true Piety that becomes your Holy Profession, and also as if you
wanted Charity; but I hope it is his own uncharitable Spirit that led him out
thus to write, and that you are People who rest not on the Form of Godliness,
without the Power, and that you also love all in whom you see the Image of
Christ: The Truth is, he of all Men might have forborne such a Charge,
considering how short himself appears in that respect, having labored to cast
you and all Anti-Pedo-Baptists out of the Universal Church, and charge us who
dipp believing Men and Women in the Name, etc. with Adultery and Murder. O that
the Lord would open his Eyes and give him true Repentance.

Brethren, this Answer has swelled much bigger than you expected, which I am
my self troubled at: But pray pardon me in this case.

Because this Controversy was never before printed in the Welsh Tongue, as I am
informed (as it is here) I was therefore willing the Godly in Wales, or any of
the Ancient Britains that desired Information herein, might see the main
Arguments that other Pedo-Baptists have brought for Infant Baptism fully
answered: The Substance therefore of Mr. Burkitt' s late Book is in this also
answered, and diverse others; nay, there is scarcely an Argument that has been
brought for Infant Baptism formerly, or of late, but it is here answered: Also,
I have, in following Mr. Owen in his Repetitions, been forced to repeat some
things often which may add to the Bulk; but they being chiefly some of the main
Points, I did it on purpose, to the end they might have the greater Influence
upon the Reader. Moreover, I have showed that most of Mr. Owen' s Arguments for
the baptizing of Children, tend every way as forcibly to prove they ought to
partake of the Lord's Supper also; which I desire may be carefully weighed and
considered: I have often repeated that on purpose.

And now to conclude, Let me desire you to labor to adorn the Holy Gospel you
profess, with a suitable and becoming Conversation; it is not an External
Ordinance that signifies any thing, without true Faith and a Godly Life. You
have Lamps, but O see you have Oil in your Vessels; not that I blame you for
your great Zeal for this precious, tho despised Truth of Christ, considering
what a Glorious and Illustrious Institution or Blessed Ordinance it is, as
appears,

1. By the Obedience of our Blessed Savior himself unto it, which puts a great
Luster and Glory upon it.

2. In that it is called a fulfilling of that Righteousness which the Holy
Gospel calls for; and such who fail herein are imperfect touching their doing
the whole Will of God.

3. In that it was so gloriously owned at the Baptism of our Savior, by the
Father, nay by the whole Trinity. By the Father, by a Voice from Heaven: The
Son by his actual Obedience to it as our Example, when we believe: The Holy
Ghost by descending like a Dove, in a visible manner, and resting upon our
Blessed Lord; this was the time when he was gloriously sealed, Mat. 3. 16, 17.

4. In that hereby all baptized Believers do signify their steadfast Faith in
the Blessed Trinity, and do devote themselves to serve and worship the Three
Persons in the Godhead, Mat. 28. 19, 20.

5. Because it does so clearly bold forth and confirm us in the steadfast Belief
of the Death, Burial and Resurrection of Jesus Christ, and of our Resurrection
at the last Day, Romans 6. 3, 4.

6. Also considering the many great and gracious Promises made to such
Believers who are baptized, as Mark 16. 16. Acts 2. 37, 38.

7. Considering what a significant Ordinance it is, in respect had to that
Death to Sin and Vivification to a new Life, in all its true and proper
Subjects, together with that Obligation it lays them under, Romans 6. 3, 4. Col.
2. 12, 13.

8. That it is particularly called the Counsel of God, and such who refused to
be baptized, are left on Sacred Record under that black Odium of rejecting the
Counsel of God, Luke 7. 30.

9. It Is a great Ordinance, appears in that it is an Initiatory Ordinance into
the Visible Church, Acts 2. 41, 42.

10. In that those who were baptized with the Holy Spirit, were nevertheless
commanded to be baptized with Water, Acts 10. 48.

The highest Gifts of the Spirit cannot exempt Persons from their Obedience
hereunto: Moreover, we have herein also Fellowship with Christ in his Death and
Resurrection. Therefore let none rob you of Christ's own Baptism; be not
cheated with a listle filthy Dross, of Christ's pure Gold, nor endure to see
your Lord's Wine mixed with filthy Puddle-Water: Yet carry it with all Christian
Charity, Love and Humility toward all Godly Christians that differ in this
Matter from you, and strive to walk as you are obliged by your Holy Baptism to
do; then will God have Glory, and you have Peace; to whose Holy Care, Blessing,
and Protection, I shall commit you; and remain your unworthy Brother, in the
Sacred Bonds of the Gospel,

Benj. Keach.

A TABLE of diverse Authors cited in this Treatise in each Chapter, and under
many particular Heads.
First, THAT Baptizing is to dip as to the literal, proper, and genuine
Signification of the Greek Word; and asserted so to be by these Authors
following, as cited in this Treatise, Chap. 1. chap. 2. chap. 3. chap. 4.
Casaubon, quoted by Dr. Du Veil on Acts, Chap. 1. ver. 5. page 10, 11. cited in
this Treatise. Chap. 1. p. 4. O'ecumenius on Acts 2. ver. 2. quoted also by Dr.
Du Veil on Acts, p. 11. cited in this Book. Chap. 1. p. 4. Scapula and
Stephens; see their Lexicons cited in this Treatise. Chap. 3. p. 12. Grotius,
Pasor, Vossius,
quoted by Mr. H. D. his second Edition of his Treatise, p. 182. Mincaeus, in
his Dictionary. Dr. Du Veil, in his literal Exposition of the Acts, Chap. 1. 5.
and his Exposit. on Mat. 3. 5. Leigh, in his Critica Sacra; all cited in this
Book. Chap. 3. page 12. Bullinger, Zanchy, Spanhemius, Erasmus,
See Mr. Leigh; Critica sacra: and Dr. Du Veil, on Acts. cited in this Book, p.
12. Cajetan upon Mat. 3. 5. cited in this Book. Chap. 4. p. 20. Salmasius in
his Book Deprim, p. 193. see his Notes upon Sulpitius Severus, cited in this
Treatise, Chap. 3. p. 13. lin. 1. Beza. on Matthew. 3. 11. cited in this Book, p.
13. Seldom, De Jure Not. etc. L. 2. c. 2. cited in this Treatise, p. 13.
Ainsworth upon Levit. Chap. 11. 32. cited in this Treatise, p. 13. What is
cited p. 13, 14. of Luther the German, and John Bugenhagius, is taken out of
Dr. Du Veil. p 76. Dan. Rogers in his Treatise of Sacraments, Part 1. Chap. 8.
p. 177. cited in this Treatise, p. 13. Synod of Celichyth, Anno 816. as quoted
by Dr. Du Veil on the Acts Chap. 2. p. 75, 76, 77. cited in this Book, Chap. 3.
p. 13. Dan. Rogers Treatise of the Sacraments, P. 1. Chap. 5. cited here, p.
19. Dr. Jer. Tailor Ductor Dubit. l. 3. c. 4. Numb. 9. Rule of Conscience. l.
3. c. 4. cited in this Book, p. 13, 14. Zepper, quoted by the same Doctor.
Sylvester Squropulus also quoted by Dr. Du Veil on Act. 2. cited in this
Treatise, p. 13. St. Ambrose, Lib. de Initiandis, and as quoted by Sir Norton
Knatchbul in his Notes Printed at Oxon, 1677. also quoted by Dr. Du Veil on
Act. 2. p. 78. Musculus on Matthew. 3. 5. cited here, p. 20. Luther, Latin Tom.
1. Fol. 71. cited in this Book, Chap. 3. p. 14. John Bugenhagius Pomeranus, as
quoted by Dr. Du Veil, out of a Book Printed in the German Tongue, Printed
1542. cited in this Treatise, p. 14. Mr. Joseph Mede, Diatrib. on Titus 3. 2.
cited here Chap. 3. p. 15. Casaubon on Matthew. 3. 11. cited here in p. 19.
Chamier Pan. Cathol. Tom. 4. l. 5. c. 2. Ser. 6. cited in this Book, p. 15.
Diodate on Matthew. 3. Dr. Hammond in his Annot. on Matthew. 3. 10. cited here, p.
15. Mr. Pool's Annot. on Mat. 3. 6. Mat. 28. 2. John 3. 23. cited in this Book,
p. 16. Mr. Ball in his Catechism, cited here, p. 16. Dutch Testament, on Mat.
3. 16. cited here, p. 16. Secondly, That Baptism is dipping or burying of the
whole Body in Water, to represent the Death, Burial, and Resurrection of
Christ, and our Death to Sin and Vivification to a new Life. Authors that
assert this follow. Assembly in their Annotations on Romans 6. 3, 4. Pool's
Annotations on Romans 6. 3, 4. here cited Chap. 5. p. 29, 30. Tilenus in his
Disputation, p. 886, 889, 890. all cited in this Book, Chap. 4, 5. p. 30, 31.
Piscator cited in this Treatise, p. 17. Cajetan upon Romans 6. 3, 4. cited in
this Treatise, Chap. 5. p. 29, 30. Keckerman, Syst. Theol. l. 3. c. 8. cited in
this Book, p. 31. St. Ambrose, Basil the Great, Basil Seleucia, Chrysostom,
Lactant. Bernard, Justin Martyn,
All quoted by Sir Norton Knatchbull, see his Book cited in this Treatise, p.
35, 36, 37. Ignatius Epist. ad Tral. id Epist. ad Philadelph. Dr. Cave's
Primitive Christianity, p. 320. cited in this Treatise, p. 22. Dally on the
Fathers, L. 2. p. 148. cited in this Book, p. 32. Paraeus upon Ursin, p. 375.
cited in this Treatise, p. 33. Mr. Perkins on Galat. Vol. 2. chap. 3. p. 257.
Vol. 1. chap. 33. p. 74. Dr. Sharp, present Archbishop of York, see his Sermon
on Phil. 3. 10. p. 9. Dr. Fowler, present Lord Bishop of Gloucester, in his
Book, Design of Christianity, p. 90. Dr. Sherlock, Dean of Paul's, Charity
without Usury, p. 1. cited here, p. 38, 39. Dr. Tillotson, Late Archbishop of
Canterbury, in his Book, Sermons on several Occasions, the fifth Edition, p.
188, 189. cited here, p. 39. Anonymous French Author, cited by Dr. Du Veil on
Acts, p. 292, 293. Calvin, L. 4. c. 16. cited in this Book, Chap. 5. p. 41.
Zanchy on Col. 2. 12. cited in this Book, Chap. 5. p. 41. Thirdly, Baptism is
Dipping, according to the purport of those Typical Baptisms spoken of in the
Scripture. Authors that assert this. Sir Norton Knatchbull, see the quotations
before cited, upon this account, in this Book, p. 43. Pool's Annotations on 1
Cor. 10. 1, 2, 3. Thomas Aquinas, as quoted by Dr. Du Veil, cited here, p. 35.
Fourthly, Baptism is Dipping of the whole Body in Water, according to the
purport of those Metaphorical Baptisms spoken of in the Scripture. Authors that
assert this, mentioned in this Treatise. Casaubon, as quoted by Dr. Du Veil, on
Act. 1. 5. p. 10. cited in this Treatise, p. 44. Oecumenius on Act. 2. cited
here, p. 44. Vossius. Pool's Annotations on Matthew. 20. 22. both cited in this
Book, p. 44. In Chapter 8. concerning Christ's Commission, two Authors are
mentioned, p. 97, 98. Mr. Perkins on Gal. Vol. 2. Chap. 3. p. 25. Mr. Baxter' s
Right of Baptism, p. 149, 150. In Chap. 9. p. 119, etc. You have an account of
the Authors who Assert that the Holiness mentioned 1 Cor. 7. 14. is Matrimonial
Holiness. Jerome. Chameri, Sect. 50. Sic Ambrosius. Thomas. Anselmus. Suarez.
Melancthon in his Commentary upon this place of Scripture, viz. 1. Cor. 7. 14.
Camerarius. Musculus, in his Comment on 1 Cor. 7. 14. Camera. Erasmus upon the
place, viz. 1 Cor. 7. 14.
THE TABLE OF THE CHIEF HEADS.
CHAP. I. REmarks on Mr. Owen's first Chapter, s^ewing his abuse of the Text
Heb. 9. 19 opening the proper Signification of the Greek word Baptizo Page 1.
to 5 CHAP. II. Mr. Owen's Argument for the Continuation of Baptism, turned
against his Insant Baptism Page 5. to 9 CHAP. III. Proving Baptism is
Immersion, or Baptizing is Dipping, from the proper signification of the Greek
word Page 9. to 16 CHAP. IV. Proving Baptizing is Dipping, from the Practice of
John Baptist, Christ and his Apostles Page 17. to 20 CHAP. V. Proving Baptizing
is dipping the whole Body in Water, from the signification of Baptism Page 20,
to 44 CHAP. VI. Mr Owen's Argument for Infant Baptism, from the Covenant God
made with Abraham, answered Page 45. to 79 CHAP. VII. Mr. Owen's Arguments to
prove Infant Baptism from Circumcision, answered Page 80. to 96 CHAP. VIII. Mr.
Owen's Argument taken from Christ's Commission, Matthew. 28. 19, 20. answered
Page 96. to 108 CHAP. IX. Proving the holiness spoken 1 Cor. 7. 14. Else were
your children unclean; but now they are holy: is not Federal or Spiritual
holiness, but the holiness of Legitimative or Matrimonial holiness Page 109. to
125 CHAP. X. Opening the purport of that Text of Christ's Blessing little
Children, in answer to Mr. Owen's Argument taken from thence for Infant Baptism
Page 125. to 134 CHAP. XI. Opening the nature of that holiness, Romans 11. 16. If
the root be holy, so are the branches, and Mr. Owen's Argument for Infant
Baptism from thence, answered, Page 134. to 147 CHAP. XII. In answer to Mr.
Owen's 10th. Chapter and his Argument, that Children can partake of those
things prefigured in Baptism, Page 147. to 154 CHAP. XIII. In answer to Mr.
Owen's Arguments for Infant Baptism, from those Tipical Baptisms under the Law
or Old Testament, Page 154. to 170 CHAP. XIV. In answer to Mr. Owen's Argument
for Infant Baptism, from John Baptist's Baptizing (all the people of the Jews
as he asserteth) Page 171. to 188 CHAP. XVI. In answer to Mr. Owen's 13th.
Chap. concerning those whole households said to be Baptized in the New
Testament, P. 189. to 213 CHAP. XVII. In answer to Mr. Owen's 14th. Chapter
about the Baptism of Infants in the first Centuries after the Apostles, proving
no Infants Baptized in the two first Centuries Page 214. to 227 CHAP. XVIII.
Proving Infant Baptism no excellent way to Plant the Christian Religion, in
answer to Mr. Owen's 15th. Chapter; showing it was only contrived to uphold
National Churches, and so a sinful practice Page 228. to 239 CHAP. XIX. In
which those Objections Mr. Owen mentioned against Infant Baptism, as brought by
us, are considered; with a Reply to his Answers Page 234. to 237 CHAP. XX. In
answer to Mr. Owen's Slanders and Reproaches cast upon the Antipedobaptists,
proving Dipping Believers in Christ's name does not render us guilty of Murder
and Adultery: and Infant Baptism further proved a very sinful practice, P. 238.
to 262 CHAP. XXI. Showing that there is no Blessing to be expected in Infant
Baptism; with an answer to Mr. Burket, and Mr. Daniel Williams, in his Book
called Vanity of Youth, P. 263. to 276 CHAP. XXII. In Answer to Mr. James
Owen's 18th Chapter, wherein he shows the Duty of Parents to their Children,
proving, in opposition to what he says, that Parents ought not to consecrate
their Infants to the Lord by Baptism. Page 276 to 280 CHAP. XXIII. In answer to
Mr. James Owen's 19th Chapter, wherein he gives advice to Children, with an
answer to his Queries, that he would have the Anti-pedobaptists to reply unto
Page 280 to 293 CHAP. XXIV. Containing some practical Use of the whole
Treatise, with seasonable Counsel to Parents Page 293 to 298 CHAP. XXV.
Containing several Queries for Mr. James Owen to answer Page 298 to 305 CHAP.
XXVI. Containing diverse Arguments to disprove Pedo-baptism, and to prove the
Baptism of Believers; which Mr. Owen is desired to answer when he writes again.
Page 305 to the end.
By reason this Treatise was printed at several Presses, the Author could not
attend them, whereby many Faults have escaped, and Mispointings, which spoils
the Sense.
ERRATA.
PAge 7. Line 27. add, in all that live. P. 12. l. 23. for of way, read way of.
P. 13. l. 26. for page 5, 6, 7. read page 75, 76, 27. being Citations out of
Dr. Du Veil. P. 16. l. 5. for John read Matthew. P. 34. l. 10. for and read
but. P. 31. l. 3. for almost all read many. P. 45. Chap. 5. read Chap. 6. P 46.
l. 37. read his Natural Seed. P. 48. l. 17. add as such, i e. his Spiritual
Seed as such. P. 5. l. 2. blot out all. P. 50. l. 20. for many read any. P. 51.
l. 9. and 15. for a Covenant read the Covenant. P. 51. l. 11. read the
Infant Seed of believing Gentiles as such. P. 51. l. 22. for a Covenant read
the Covenant. P. 51. l. 41. for 1st. read 2d. P. 52. l. 41. for a Covenant read
the Covenant. P. 53. l. 39. read Gospel Church and Covenant, and so l. 40. P.
54. l. 16. for a Covenant read the Covenant. Note, If in any other place you
find a Covenant read the Covenant. P. 56. l. 43 for Preservation read
Perseverance. P. 57. l. 28. blot out it was a sign of. for page 56. read 59. P.
59. l. 9. for Land read Law. P. 61. l. 3. blot out for. P. 62. l. 37. blot out
now. P. 63. for this is read is this. P. 65. l. 3. blot out all, and for
Churches read Church. P. 67. l. 40. for and read but. P. 68. read are not
straiter. P. 73. l. 33. for has read has. P. 75. l. 28. for theirs read the.
P. 75. l. 29. for their read the. P. 77. l. 17. (i. e. as such) should be in a
Parenthesis. P. 84. l. 3. blot out any. P. 86. in the Contents of Chap. vii.
for first read fifth. P. 88. l. 3. blot out from. P. 99. for with the Gentiles
read and their Children. P. 89. l. 31. for same read thing. P. 105. l. 37. for
pai read pain. P. 112. l. 28. for and read but. P. 117. l. 19. for with read
without. P. 118. l. 3. for Mat. read Mal. P. 120. l. 20. blot out so, read and
since, etc. P. 201. l. 40. for he that believes shall not be damned, read he
that believes not shall be damned. P. 250. l. 15. for verse. 34. read 3, 4. P.
264. l. 2. for born in Sin, read born again. P. 264. l. 4. blot out do. P. 266.
l. 40. for Christian read Children. P. 239. l. 33. for Lord read Lords. P. 293.
l. 21. read an external Rite.

CHAP. I.
In answer to what Mr. Owen has said in his first Chapter.

SIR,
AS to what you say about the Tree of Life, and Tree of Knowledge, that they
were Seals of the two Covenants, viz. of the Covenant of Works, and of the
Covenant of Grace, or free Promise of God, it is far fetched and very doubtful,
and as little to the Purpose for which you mention them; therefore I shall pass
that by.

2dly. As touching Circumcision being a dark Shadow of the Old Covenant under
the Old Dispensation, it may be granted; but that it was the Seal of the
Covenant of Grace (which you affirm elsewhere in your Book) I do deny, it being
only a Seal of Abraham's Faith, even of that Faith he had, being yet
Uncircumcised, and also that he should be the Father of all that should believe.

3dly. You say well that those dark Shadows, viz. Circumcision, etc. are
abolished; the Substance being come, that Yoke of Bondage is taken away: which
proves Circumcision did not appertain to the Covenant of Grace, as the Seal of
it, in common to all Believers; for the breaking off of a Seal cancels the
Covenant to which it was prefixed, as all Men know: So that nothing can be more
clear than this, that Circumcision, if it was a Seal of any Covenant, (as you
conceive it was) it was a Seal of the Covenant of Works, which neither our
Fathers nor we were able to bear, in regard it obliged all that were
circumcised to keep perfectly the whole Law, Gal. 5. 3.

4thly. You say, Christ has ordained in the Gospel a light and easy Burden,
viz. Baptism, and the Lord's Supper. These two are the only. Sacraments, you
say, of the Gospel. This is granted and owned, herein we do not differ.

5thly. You say, Baptism signifies our Spiritual Birth, the Lord's Supper our
Spiritual Growth and Nourishment. This we grant also, and therefore we say
Baptism cannot belong to Infants, because they are not in an ordinary way
capable of Regeneration (tho we deny not that those elect Infants that die, are
renewed quoad illorum naturas, but we know not which they are; if we did, yet
we ought not to baptize them, because we have no Precept or Precedent so to do:
we might therefore as well and by as good Authority, give them the Lord's
Supper as B^ptism, which the ancient Fathers, when first Pedo-baptism was, by
Human Authority, introduced into the Church (you know) did for near four
hundred Years, till the latter end of the Sixth Century.)

6thly. You say, Baptism, according to the Signification of the Word, is
Washing; and therefore the Apostle says, saved us by the washing of
Regeneration, Tit. 3. 5. (...) is rendered, in Heb. 9. 10. in diverse Baptisms,
those were not only by dipping under Water, but by sprinkling Water on those
baptized, as the Apostle teaches Heb. 9. 19. he took the Blood of the Calves,
and of Goats, with Water, and sprinkled the Book and all the People. That which
the Apostle (you say) called Baptism in Ver. 10. is in this Verse called the
Sprinkling of Water, etc.

Answ. 1. I answer, tho the Word (...), in a remote Sense, does take in
Washing^ yet I challenge you and all that know (or pretend to know) the Greek
Tongue, whether in every place in the New Testament where the Word is
mentioned, or any Derivative from it, (as it refers to Christ's Ordinance of
Baptism) it does not directly and properly signify Immersion, and accordingly
rendered by Beza in his Translation.

2dly. You greatly wrong that Text, Heb. 9. 19. where the Apostle speaks of
sprinkling the Blood of Calves, and of Goats with Water, etc. by saying he
refers to Ver. 10. where the Apostle speaks of Diverse Washings; and in thus
doing, you do not only abuse the Sacred Text, but you wrong your own Soul and
Conscience, and the People also. Sir, do you find the Greek Word (...) (which
is in ver. 10.) in ver. 19. where sprinkling is mentioned? or is it not in ver.
13, 19. as also 1 Pet. 1. 2. (...)? We may modestly affirm that no Greek
Author, whether Heathenish or Christian, has ever put Baptizing for Sprinkling,
or used those Words promiscuously; for as in these Scriptures you have cited,
Heb. 9. 13, 19, 21. it is always translated Sprinkling, so there is not one
place in Scripture wherein the Word (...) is rendered Baptism, nor is there one
Scripture where (...) is rendered Sprinkling. And therefore, tho sometimes the
Greek Word does signify in a remote Sense, Washing, yet it is primarily such a
washing as is by dipping or plunging, as I said before: And thus Mr. Wilson, in
his Dictionary, renders (...) a (...), tingo, etc. to dip or plunge into the
Water; and signifies, says he, primarily such a washing as is used in Bucks,
where Linen is plunged or dipped; tho in a remote Sense, he hints, it signifies
other kind of washing; but it does not so in the Holy Scripture where the Word
is used, as referring to Christ's Ordinance of Baptizing.

3dly. You say, Water Baptism, i. e. the Washing of the Flesh, signifies the
Washing of the Spirit, and therefore the Apostle Peter says, Even Baptism does
now save us, not the putting away the Filth of the Flesh, but the answer of a
good Conscience toward God, by the Resurrection of Christ.

Answ. I answer, you confound Regeneration with Baptism; the washing of
Regeneration is not the washing of Baptism: Baptism regenerates no Person. But
you seem to follow the ancient erroneous Fathers who concluded no Person could
be saved unless baptized, abusing that Text Joh. 3. 5. Unless a Man be born
again of Water and of the Spirit he cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven;
taking Water there for Baptism. In like sort they abused that Text John 6. 53.
Except ye eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his Blood, ye have no Life
in you; and from thence they gave Infants the Lord's Supper also.

But suppose that Baptism does signify, or is a figure of the washing of
Regeneration, yet sprinkling is no form of washing; but all know dipping is,
and the safest way of washing.

2dly. You mention Fier^ Baptism, or the Baptism of the Holy Ghost, and Fire,
Mat. 3. 11. This Scripture, you say, was fulfilled when the Holy Ghost came
upon the Disciples in the appearance of Fiery Tongues, Acts 2. 3. This Baptism
was not (say you) by plunging in Fire, but by sprinkling or pouring of Fire
(you mean the Holy Spirit) upon them, which sat upon each of them; which is a
Fiery washing which purifieth the Soul, etc.

I answer, Tho the Baptism of the Spirit was by pouring forth of the Spirit,
yet they were overwhelmed, or immersed with it; like as Dust may be poured upon
a dead Corpse, until it is covered all over, or quite buried therein: So the
Baptism of the Holy Ghost, at the Day of Pentecost, signifies the miraculous
Effusion of the Holy Ghost. The Greek Word (...), says the Learned Casaubon,
is to dip, pl^^ge, etc. in which sense, says he, the Apostles might be truly
said to have been baptized, for the House in which this was done was filled
with the Holy Ghost; so that the Apostles might seem to have been plunged into
it as in a large Fish Pond. Sir, it is not the sprink ing of the Spirit that is
the Baptism of the Spirit, for they had doubtless some sprinklings of the
Spirit before they were baptized with it. Moreover, Oecumenius on Acts 2.
says, A Wind filled the whole House that it seemed like a Fish Pond, because
'twas promised to the Apostles that they should be baptized with the Holy
Spirit. Thus you may see, that this no ways helps you to make Sprinkling, or
Rantizing, Baptism.

3dly. You mention the Baptism of Blood, or Sufferings: I will repeat your
Words, -- Baptism of Blood; of this Baptism does Christ ask the Children of
Zebedee, Are you able to drink of the Cup that I drink of, and to be baptized
with the Baptism that I am baptized with? Mat. 20. 22. This Cup and this
Baptism are the same, viz. the Sufferings of Christ, of which his Disciples
were to be Partakers.

You intimate that Baptism is a Witness of our Spiritual Resurrection, and of
our Resurrection at the last Day; you mention 1 Cor. 15. 29, etc.

Answ. Therefore, say I, it must be so administered, as it may represent our
Rising again: First, from a Death in Sin to a Life in Grace: And, Secondly,
from the Dead, or out of our Graves in the Earth, at the last Day: But
Sprinkling does not this, cannot do this. In sprinkling a little Water on the
Face, there is no resemblance or representation of rising up out of the Grave
of Sin, or from the Dead, nor out of the Grave a^ the last Day; the Baptism of
Sufferings signifies great Afflictions, and from the Literal Signification of
(...), great Afflictions or Troubles are taken for, and figurately called
Baptism, as Vossius shows: Not every light Affliction is the Baptism of
Afflictions; but like that of David, Psalm. 32. 6. He drew me out of deep
Waters. Hence great Afflictions are called Waves, Thy Waves and thy Billows are
gone over me, Psalm. 42. 7. See Pool's Annotations on Mat. 20. 22. To be
baptized is, says he, to be dipped in water, Metaphorically to be plunged in
Afflictions. So that neither of these Metaphorical Baptisms will do you any
Service, to justify your Tradition of sprinkling, or pouring a little Water,
but contrariwise quite overthrows your pretended Baptism. As to what you say,
in the next place, of your three manner of ways of the Administration of
Baptism in your first Chapter, it does not concern our present Purpose; it is
true, John the Baptist baptized into him that was to come, so in that respect
it differed from the Administration of it after the Death and Resurrection of
our blessed Lord: and no doubt from the Commission it appears Baptism was to be
administered to the end of the World into the Name of the Father, Son, and holy
Spirit, and no other ways.

CHAP II.
Containing some Remarks upon Mr. Owen's second Chapter.

AS to what you have wrote in your second Chapter, about the Continuation of
Water Baptism in the Church until Christ's coming the second time, or to the
end of the World; I approve generally of your Arguments, and in that matter we
are of your mind, tho much more might be added to confirm that great Truth: but
pray, Sir, remember, it is Christ's Baptism of Believers, which he only
instituted, that does remain, not Infants Baptism, much less Infants Rantism,
which was neither instituted nor allowed by our blessed Lord. And because some
of your Arguments for the Continuation of Baptism, mentioned in your second
Chapter, tend to overthrow your Infant Baptism, I shall make some Remarks upon
them.

They are taken from your 4th Proof, you argue thus, viz. Water Baptism is to
continue in the Church, if we consider the Ends of it.

1. You say Christ has ordained Baptism to be a Sign of our Repentance, and
therefore it is called the Baptism of our Repentance, Mark 1. 4. Repentance is a
remaining Duty, therefore the Baptism of Repentance is to remain.

Remark. If Baptism be a si^n of Repentance to the Person baptized, then the
Person baptized ought to be a Person capable to repent, and when baptized, to
have what is signified therein: but Infants as such have not the Grace of
Repentance when baptized, so they are not capable to repent.

2dly You say, It is an Evidence of our Faith in Christ, Mark 16. 16. Acts 8.
37, 38. and therefore it is to remain as long as Faith is to remain on the
Earth.

Remark. If Baptism is an Evidence of our Faith in Christ, then it must only
belong to Believers. How can it be an Evidence of Faith in Infants who are not
capable to believe? they know not the Object of Faith, nor can they exert any
Act of Faith. It must be an Evidence to the Subject when baptized, and so the
Scriptures you cite hold forth: He that believes and is baptized, shall be
saved, Mark 16. 16. it does not say, he that is baptized and believes. If thou
believe with all thy Heart thou may: Not if thou shall believe hereafter,
but if thou do believe now. It appertains to such who have Faith when
baptized, and it evidences such a Faith to the Person; nay Faith is required of
them before they are to be baptized. And so says the Church of England.

3dly. You say, It is the Bond of Holiness, 1 Pet. 3. 21. the Apostle exhorts
the Christians to be dead unto Sin, and alive unto Righteousness. There is a
Virtue in the Ordinances of God answerable to the End for which they are
ordained, etc.

Remark. Still, Reader, know that it is a Bond to the Adult only, Infants are
not able to die to Sin, nor live unto Holiness: They cannot answer a good
Conscience by the Resurrection of Christ from the dead. Ordinances have no more
Virtue in them to an Infant, than if you should water a dead Tree. There can be
no increase in Holiness without the Grace of Holiness in the Habit be first
infused; and if the Seed of Holiness be [first] infused in Infants before
Baptism, or in Baptism, that Seed would remain in them, and appear as soon as
they come to Understanding, 1 John 3. 9. But that any such Seed or vital
Principle is either way in Infants as such, whether Infants of Believers, or
others, appears not; but contrary-wise, nothing appears in them when grown up,
but the cursed Seed of Sin, and so it will until their Natures be changed by
Divine Grace.

4thly. You say, Baptism is a sign of Union with Christ, we were baptized into
him: For as many of you as have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ;
Gal. 3. 27. Again, the Apostle says, We are all baptized into one Body, 1 Cor.
12. 13. Christ is the Head of the Body, the Faithful are the Members, those
that are in everlasting Union with him, which is signified in Baptism: Can they
desire to be in one Body with Christ, who are not willing to be baptized into
this Union?

Remark. Have Infants, as such, Union with Christ? If they have, they would all
partake of the Blessings of that Union, and be all saved, because the Branch
that is savingly united to the Vine Christ, partakes of the Virtue that is in
him; and it is an indissolvable Union, like that between the Father and the
Son, John 17. 21, 23. You say the Union is everlasting, and this is signified
in Baptism. Now what is the Sign without the Thing signified? Sir, no doubt
elect Infants that die have Union with Christ in a way we are ignorant of, but
what is this to the Infants of Believers as such? I will appeal to your own
Conscience, whether you believe any one Infant you baptize, (or rather rantize,
or sprinkle) that lives, has spiritual Union with Christ, before, or in
Baptism, or Rantism; for if they had, they do not after they are grown up need
any inspired Habit, or the Seed of Grace to be infused into them, in order to
such Union. Without Faith there is no Union with Christ, and there can be no
Faith without Knowledge; there is no spiritual Marriage to Christ without a
Consent, which Infants are not capable of. Moreover, why do you speak of
Persons being not willing to be baptized, when the Subject of Baptism you
contend for is a poor ignorant Babe? Can Infants be willing? Sir, what you
speak has weight in it to the Adult, to Believers, but signifies nothing for
the Continuation of Baptism to Infants, but rather that it ought to be
rejected, as not being of God.

5thly. You say, Baptism signifies Remission of Sins, Mark 1. 4. Be baptized
every one of you (says Peter) in the Name of Jesus Christ for the Remission of
Sins. So Ananias said unto Paul, Arise, and be baptized, and wash away thy
Sins, calling upon the Name of the Lord; Acts 22. 16. and are not they, say
you, unthankful to the Grace of G^ which offers them a Seal of Absolution,
and they ^ll not receive it? etc.

Remark. Baptism is a sign of Remission of Sin to none but Believers, who have
Repentance: and therefore Peter exhorted those Jews, first to repent; Repent,
and be baptized every one of you in the Name of Jesus Christ, for the Remission
of Sins. Such only here have the Promise of Remission that do and can repent,
and to such only ought the Sign to be given, who have the Thing signified,
which are not Infants but Believers. Is Absolution and the Seal of it offered
unto Infants, and do they refuse to receive it? Sir, were your Eyes opened you
would soon see you apply all you say to the wrong Subjects. You exhort the
Subjects of Baptism to be thankful, le^t they despise the Seal of Pardon. Now
take from your Reasoning this following Argument, viz. Such Persons that
Baptism belongs unto, may neglect and despise the Ordinance and Seal of Pardon;
but Infants cannot neglect or despise the Ordinance and Seal of Pardon: Ergo,
Baptism does not belong to Infants.

6thly. Baptism is, you say, a Condition of the Promise of Salvation; He that
believes and is baptized, shall be ^d; Mark 16. 16. It Is true, say you, the
Promise is not only to Baptism, nor is it also to Faith only, but to Faith and
Baptism. Do thou not desire to be saved? Why then despisest thou one of the
Means of Salvation? Thou say, if I believe I shall be saved, tho not baptized
with Water; Christ says otherwise, that thou must believe and be baptized, if
thou will be saved: It Is true, the Apostle says to the Jailer, Believe on the
Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved, Acts 16. 31, 32. but so soon as he
believed, he was baptized. The Unbelief and Haughtiness of thy Heart makes
thee to reject this holy Ordinance, etc.

Remark. How can you make Baptism a Condition of Salvation to Infants who are
no ways capable to answer it? neither Faith nor Baptism is required of them,
nor are their Parents commanded to baptize them: But it is true, such as
believe, are required to be baptized; and such as reject it, and will not be
baptized, tho the proper Subjects, do reject the Counsel of God, and may
endanger their Salvation; or at least it calls into question (if convinced of
it, i. (...). that it is their Duty) the truth of their Grace, that they
neither unfeignedly believe in, nor love Jesus Christ: therefore (Sir) so soon
as a Child is grown up and does believe, he should be baptized, not before; for
we have a perfect Rule to walk by.

Arg. 2. Where there is no Law, there is no Transgression:

But there is no Law to baptize Infants: Ergo, It is no Transgression not to
baptize them.

Where God has no Mouth to speak, we should have no Ear to hear.

Arg. 3. To act in the Service of God without Authority from his Word, is a Sin:

But they that baptize Infants do act in the Service of God without Authority
from his Word: Ergo, It is a Sin to baptize Infants.

Would not Abraham have sinned if he had circumcised his Females, or to have
circumcised his Males on the 7th or 9th day, because the express. Command was
to Males, and on the eighth day? so the express Command of Christ is, to be
baptized when made Disciples, if we believe, if we repent, or when we believe,
and bring forth Fruits meet for Repentance. You add, That they that despise
Water Baptism, despise not John's Baptism, but the Baptism of Christ, therefore
their Sin is the greater.

Remark. But they that despise and slight the Baptism of Infants, despise
neither the Baptism of John nor Christ; because neither John nor our blessed
Savior commanded Infants to be baptized, nor did they ever baptize one Child
as we read of; if you can prove they did do it, we will say no more. but will
soon baptize our Children. Thus I have done with all I thought necessary to
remark, or take notice of that is contained in your second Chapter.

CHAP. III.
Showing Baptizing is Dipping, not sprinkling nor pouring a little Water.

SIR,
AS to what is contained in the second Chapter of your Book concerning the
Continuation of Christ's Baptism of Water in the Church, I shall say no more to
that, in that we agree, and are one: but we differ about what Baptism of Water
is; you would have it to be Sprinkling, which indeed is not Baptism but
Rantism, for that you know is the Greek Word for Sprinkling.

2. As also we differ about the true and proper Subjects of it, according to
our Savior's Institution; and since you begin with that you call the Manner or
external Form of Administration of Baptism, I shall follow you herein, and
shall first repeat your Words, and then reply. Thus you begin, viz.

Some judge that the whole Body ought to be dipped in Water, and all other ways
to be unlawful.

Others judge (say you) the sprinkling of Water on the Face of him that is
baptized to be sufficient, especially in these cold Climates; for even as in
the other Sacrament of the Lord's Supper there is one Mo^sel of Bread, and one
Spoonful of Wine sufficient for to signify the Spiritual Food that is had in
Christ; even so in the Sacrament of Baptism, the sprinkling of a little Water
on him that is baptized, signifies the Virtue of the Blood of Christ as
effectually as Rivers of Water.

I answer; Certainly you cannot be ignorant of what many learned Pedo-baptists
have said in Opposition to what you here speak; for tho both the holy
Sacraments are very significant of Christ's Sufferings, and of those spiritual
Benefits we receive from him, yet they are of different Signification.

First; The Sacrament of the Lord's Supper holds forth in a lively Figure, the
breaking of Christ's Body, and the pouring forth of his precious Blood; and
this indeed may as well he represented by a small quantity of Bread and Wine as
by much, yet a little Water will not serve in Baptism.

1. Because '^is positively said, that John was baptizing in Enon near Salim,
(John 3. 23.) because there was much Water there. Certainly the Holy Ghost
would not have given this as the Reason why John baptized near Enon, viz.
because there was much Water in that place, if a little Water, namely a
Spoonful or two, would have been sufficient, or two or three Quarts: It seems
plainly deducible from this Text, it cannot be administered with a little Water,
but contrariwise it does require much Water.

Secondly; Pray consider, that as the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper holds
forth, or represents (symbolically) the breaking of the Body of Christ, and the
shedding of his Blood, (and to that purpose it was in part instituted) even so
the Sacrament of Baptism holds forth in as lively Figure, that our blessed Lord
was dead, buried, and rose again; and to this end this holy Ordinance was also
instituted, as also to show forth our Death unto Sin, and Vivification to
Newness of Life, as by and by shall be abundantly proved, both from the holy
Scriptures, and a multitude of learned Men that hold Infant Baptism: therefore
since a little Water cannot in this Ordinance represent Christ's Burial and
Resurrection, it follows directly that a little Water will not serve to baptize
Persons in, but that it must be administered in Rivers, Ponds, or places where
there is much Water, i. e. so much Water as that the Body may be buried or
covered all over therein. But to proceed, you say, Neither is dipping or
sprinkling essential unto this Ordinance, but washing with Water, or putting
Water on the Body; for the word Baptism signifies in the Greek washing with
Water, as we cited (say you) from Heb. 9. 10.

Answ. I answer, now you have given away your Cause at once (or I am mistaken);
for if neither dipping nor sprinkling be essential unto this Ordinance, but
washing, what is become of your Baptism? Sir, all dipping in Water is washing,
tho all washing is not dipping; in that you hurt us not, but your sprinkling is
not washing. If a Woman should sprinkle her foul Linen with a few drops of
Water, would that be deemed a washing of them? Again, if Sprinkling be not
essential to Baptism, you have no Baptism at all; take away the Body of a Tree,
and there is no Tree. That thing cannot be where the essential part of it is
wanting. And now that the Greek Word (...) does signify dipping, and such a
washing as is by dipping, we shall plainly show, evince, and demonstrate, and
confirm it by such Arguments and Authors that no unprejudiced sober Person can
any longer well remain doubtful about this matter, and then we will examine
your Objections.

I shall prove baptizing, or (...), is not sprinkling, nor pouring of Water
upon the Body, but dipping or plunging the Body all over in Water: and that,

1st. From the proper, literal and direct Signification of the Greek Word
Baptizo, and the Testimonies of Learned Men.

2dly. From the Practice of Primitive Times.

3dly. From the Consideration of what is signified and represented in Baptism.

4thly. From those Typical Baptisms spoken of in the Scriptures.

5thly. From the nature of those Metaphorical Baptisms mentioned, viz. the
Baptism of the Spirit, and that of Afflictions.

To proceed to prove the first:

Scapula and Stephens, two as great Masters of the Greek Tongue as most we
have, do tell you in their Lexicons, that (...) baptizo, from (...) bapto,
signifies mergo, immergo, item tingo quod fit immergendo, inficere, imbuere,
viz. to dip, plunge, overwhelm, put under, cover over, to dye in Color, which
is done by plunging.

Grotius says it signifies to dip over Head and Ears.

Pasor, an Immersion, dipping or Submersion.

Vossius says it implies a washing the whole Body.

Mincaeus in his Dictionary says that (...) a (...), is in the Latin
Baptismus, in Dutch Doopsit or Doopen, Baptismus or Baptism, to dive or duck in
Water, and the same with the Hebrew (...) Tabal, which the Septuagint, or
Seventy Interpreters render (...) baptizo, to dip. This Casa^bon says was the
right of way Baptizing, that Persons were plunged into the Water, which the
very word Baptizo sufficiently demonstrates, which as it does not extend so far
as to sink down to the bottom to the hurt of the Person, so it is not to swim
upon the Superficies of the Water. Baptism ought to be administered by plunging
the whole Body into the Water.

The late famous, and most learned in all the Oriental Tongues, Dr. Du-Veil, in
his literal Explanation of the Acts, Chap. 1. 5. says the word (...) baptizo,
is to dip, as if it were to dye Colors; and any Dyer will tell you if there is
any small bit of Cloth not dipped, it is not dyed.

Leigh in his Critica Sa^r^, says, the native and proper Signification of the
word is to dip into the Water, or plunge under Water; Mat. 3. 6. Acts 8. 38.
for which also he quotes Casa^bon, Bullinger, Zanchy, Spanhemius: he says
witha^ that some would have it signify washing, which Sense (...), he says,
opposed, affirming that it was not otherwise so than by Consequence; for the
proper Signification was such a dipping or plunging as Dyers use for dying of
Cloth.

Salmasius says, That is not Baptism which they give to Children, but Rantism.

Beza on Mat. 3. 11. says the word (...) baptizo, signifies to dye by dipping
or washing.

Seldom says that the Jews took that Baptism wherein the whole Body was not
baptized, to be void.

Ainsworth speaks to the same purpose, as I shall show you.

Mr. Daniel Rogers says, that a Minister is to dip in Water the Party baptized,
as the meetest Act, the word Baptizo notes it; for, says he, the Greeks wanted
not words to express any other Act besides dipping, if the Institution could
bear it: What Resemblance of the Burial and Resurrection of Christ is in
sprinkling? [mark that!] all Antiquity and Scripture (says he) confirms that
it was dipping.

If you would, says Dr. Du-Veil, attend to the proper Signification of the
word; in the Synod of Caelichyth, Anno 816. where Wolfred Archbishop of
Canterbury presided: Let, says he, the Presbyters beware that when they
administer the Sacrament of Baptism, they do not pour Water upon the Heads of
the Infants, but let them be always plunged in the Font according to the
Example of the Son of God himself, who was plunged in the Waters of Jordan.
Thus must the Ceremony be performed according to order: See Dr. Du-Veil on the
Acts, Chap. 2. p. 5, 6, 7.

The said learned Doctor says in the same place, The constant Practice of the
universal Church till the time of Clement V. who was crowned Pope Anno 1305,
under whom, first of all, the second Synod of Ravenna approved the Abuse
brought into some Churches about an hundred Years before, that Baptism without
any necessity should be administered by Aspersion. Hence it came to pass, that
contrary to the Analogy, or intended Mystical Signification of this Sacrament,
all the West, for the most part, has in this Age the use of Rantism, that is
Sprinkling instead of Baptism, as Zepper speaks, to the great Scandal of the
Greeks and Russians, who to this day plunge into the Water those they baptize,
and deny any one to be rightly baptized, who is not plunged into the Water,
according to the Precept of Christ, as we find in Sylvester Squropulus.

Dr. Tailor says, The Custom of the Ancient Church was not Sprinkling, but
Immersion, in pursuance of the Sense of the word Baptizing, and the Commandment
and Example of our blessed Savior.

Salmasius in his Notes of diverse upon Sulpitius Severus, says, that the word
(...) signifies Immersion, not Sprinkling. Nor did the Ancients otherwise
baptize than by single or treble Immersion, as in the Greek Church to this day;
says he, the Person to be baptized is plunged over Head and Ears. The same
thing does Peter Avetabolis testify of the Asian Christians inhabiting Iberia
and Colchi.

St. Ambrose says, Water is that wherein the Body is plunged, to wash all Sin
away, there all Vice is buried.

In a Book inscribed, Reformation of Ecclesiastical Laws. printed at London,
1641. it is expressed in these words: While we are plunged in the Water, the
Death and Burial of Christ is recommended to us, that we openly testify that
Sin lies dead and buried in us.

The Raman Order, published by the Writers concerning Ecclesiastical
^eremoni^s, says, the Presbyters enter into the Fountain Within unto the Water,
and the Males are first baptized, and then the Femaies.

Luther says, The Name of Baptism is a Greek Word, it may be termed Dipping
when we dip something in Water, that it may be wholly covered with Water; and
although (says he) that Custom is now altogether abolished among the most part,
for neither do they dip the whole Children, but only sprinkle them with a
little Water, they ought nevertheless to be dipped, and presently drawn out
again.

The Germans also call Baptism Ta^ff from Deepness, which they call Tieff in
their Tongue; as if it were meet (says our Author) that those be dipped deeply
who are baptized.

John Bugenhagius Pomeranus (both a Fellow and Successor in the Ministry of
Luther at Wittenburgh, whom Thuanus and Zanchias witness to have been a very
moderate, godly and learned Man) affirms, that he was desired to be a VVitness
at Hamburgh in the Year 1529. that when he had seen the Minister only sprinkle
the Infant wrapped in Swadling-Clothes on the top of the Head, he was amazed,
because he neither had heard or seen, or saw any such thing, nor yet read in
any History, except in case of necessity in Bedridden Persons.

Hence in a General Assembly therefore of all the Ministers that were convened,
he did ask of a certain Minister (John Frize by Name, who was sometimes
Minister of Lubec) how the Sacrament of Baptism was administered at Lubec? who
for his Piety and Candor, did answer, that Infants were baptized naked at
Lubec, after the same fashion altogether as in Germany; but from whence and how
that peculiar manner of baptizing had crept into Hamburgh he was ignorant. At
length they did agree among themselves that the Judgment of Luther and of the
Divines at Wittenburg should be demanded about this Point; which thing being
done, Luther wrote back to Hamburgh, that the Sprinkling was an Abuse they
ought to remove. Thus plunging was restored at Hamburgh, yet is that Climate
cooler than onrs.

Mr. Jos. Mede says there was no such thing as Sprinkling or Rantism [mark!]
used in Baptism in the Apostles days, nor many Ages after. He had spoken more
properly if he had said, there was no Rantism used in the Apostles days, but
Baptism, than to say no Rantism used in Baptism, since he well knew they are
two distinct and different Acts: It cannot be Baptism at all, if it be only
Rantism or Sprinkling, Immersion or Dipping being the very thing, not an
Accident, as I hinted, but an Essential so absolutely necessary, that it cannot
be the Act or Ordinance without it.

If I command my Maid to dip my Handkerchief into the Water, and she only takes
a little Water in her Hand and sprinkles a few drops upon it, does she do what
I command her? was that the thing, or is it not another Act? Even so it is here,
you do not the thing, you rantise and baptize none unless you dip them into the
Water.

Chamier also faith, the ancient use of Baptism was to dip the whole Body into
the Element, therefore did John baptize in a River.

Dr. Hammond in his Annotations upon John 13. 10. says, that (...) signifies
an Immersion, or washing the whole Body, and which answers to the Hebrew Word
(...) used for dipping in the Old Testament, and therefore tells us upon Mat.
3. that John baptized in a River, viz. in Jordan, Mark 1. 5. in a Confluence of
Water, John 3. 23. because it is said there was much Water, which the Greeks
called the Lakes where they used to wash: Also, says he, the Ancients called
their Baptisterions, or the Vessels containing their Baptismal Water,
Columbethras, viz. swimming or diving places, being very large, with Partitions
for Men and Women.

The Learned Mr. Pool (or those Learned and Reverend Divines concerned in
perfecting his most excellent Annotations on the holy Bible) says, a great part
of those who went out to hear John, were baptized, that is, dipped in Jordan,
on John 3. 6. and on Mat. 28. 20. say they, the first Baptism of which we read
in Holy Writ, was dipping the Person baptized.

The Dutch Translation according to their Language reads it dipping.

Mat. 3. 16. End Jesus Gedoopt zijn de is terstont Opgeklomen vit hit w^er.
And when Jesus was dipped, he came out of the Water. And Ver. 6. End wierden
van hemge doopt in de Jordan. And were dipped of him in Jordan. Hence they
called John the Baptist John the Dipper. In Verse 1. End in die dayen quam
Jonnes de dooper predikenn in de woeffijue van Judea. In English thus: In those
days came John the Dipper preaching in the Wilderness of Judea. Had our
Translators translated the Greek word into our English Tongue as the Dutch have
done it into theirs, it would have been read in our Bible John the Dipper; and,
for baptizing them in the Name of the Father, etc. it would have been read
dipping them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost,
and then the People would not have been deceived; but they have not translated
the Greek word at all, but left it in its Original Language: What difference is
there between Baptism and the Greek word Baptisma?

Mr. Ball in his Catechism does not only say Faith was required of such who did
desire Baptism, but also that the Party baptized was washed by dipping, etc.
But to close with this, I argue thus, viz.

Since our Savior sent his Disciples (to teach and baptize, or dip in the
Name, etc.) into all Nations, viz. into cold Countries as well as hot; and
seeing Infants tender Bodies cannot bear dipping, without palpable danger of
their Lives, it follows clearly that they are none of the Subjects Christ
commanded to be dipped in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost.

To conclude with this, take one Argument, viz. If the proper, literal and
genuine Signification of the Greek word baptizo is dipping, or to dip, then
sprinkling is not baptizing: But the proper, literal and genuine Signification
of the Greek word baptizo is dipping, or to dip: Ergo, Sprinkling is not
Baptizing.

CHAP. IV.
Proving Baptism is Dipping, by the Practice of John Baptist, Christ and his
Apostles.

2dly. FRom the Practice of the Primitive Times. I have already showed, that
John Baptist baptized in the River Jordan, who was the first that received
Commission to baptize. And Diodate on Mat. 3. says he plunged them in Water.

Piscator also says, the ancient manner of baptizing was, that the whole Body
was dipped into the Water.

So says the Assembly in their Annotations.

Nav, say I, it had been a vain and needless thing for them to go to Rivers to
baptize, if it had been only to sprinkle a little Water on the Face; for a
Quart of Water might have served to have rantized a great number.

And had Sprinkling or Rantizing been the Ordinance, there is no Reason left to
conceive why they should go to Rivers; nor would the Spirit of God have given
that as the Reason why John baptized in Enon near Salim, viz. because there was
much Water, John 3. 23.

But some strive to contradict the Holy Ghost, by making People believe there
was not much Water in that place.

Because the Original reads not (...) much Water, but (...), many Waters; that
is (say they) many S^ms or Rivolets.

Answer. What difference is there between much Water, and many Waters? If they
were Streams and Rivolets, tho not deep, yet if they were but a little while
stopped with a Dam, they would soon rise to be deep enough to swim in, as
Experience shows: But it is enough, there he baptized, says the Holy Spirit,
for there was much Water, or many Waters; there [for, or because] intimating
plainly, that the Ordinance could not be administered with a little Water, but
that it required many Waters, or much Water, a great deal more than a Basin
could hold, or you hold in your Hand.

2. But it is objected, Sandy's Travels tell us that they were so shallow, as
not to reach above the Ankles.

Answ. 1. Must we believe God's Word, or a lying Traveller? the Scripture says
there was much Water, or many Waters, and he says there was but a little.

2. In some shallow Rivolets we daily see, that in some places the Water is
deep, and might it not be so in that? and this Traveller might not so curiously
search or examine the matter.

3. Or might there not be a great Confluence of Water then, (as Dr. Hammond
words it) and yet but little or shallow Water now, or when Sandys was there?
Time alters Rivers as well, as other things. But if any seek after this manner
to contradict the sacred Text, to defend their Childish Practice of Rantism,
they deserve greatly to be blamed.

Take this Argument.

If the Holy Ghost gives it as the Reason why John baptized in Enon near Salim,
viz. because there was much Water; then a little Water will not serve to
baptize in.

But the Holy Ghost gives this as the Reason why John baptized in Enon near
Salim, viz. because there was much Water: Ergo, a little Water will not serve
to baptize in.

2dly. But to proceed; Mark 1. 9. it is said Jesus was baptized of John in
Jordan. Now says a Learned Man on the place, It had been Nonsense for St. Mark
to say, that Jesus was baptized in Jordan, if he had been sprinkled, because
the Greek reads it (...), into Jordan: Could Jesus be said to be sprinkled into
the River Jordan? it is proper to say he was dipped into Jordan, and that is and
was the Act, and nothing else besure.

3dly. They went down both into the Water, both Philip and the Eunuch, Acts 8.
What need had there been for them so to have done, had Baptism been sprinkling?
Sure Philip would not have put that Noble Person (who was a Man of great
Authority under Ca^dace Queen of the Ethiopians) to that great trouble to come
out of his Chariot, (if to sprinkle a little Water on his Face might have done)
and to go down into the Water and dip him: Sure Philip would on this occasion
have dispensed with Immersion, and let Aspersion or Rantism have served,
considering he was a great Person, and on a journey; he might have fetched a
little Water in his Hand or otherwise, and have sprinkled him in his Chariot,
as some Ministers do now in their public Places of Worship; and thus Men make
void the Command of Christ by their Traditions to the abuse of Christian
Baptism, and Reproach of us that keep to his sacred Institution.

Mr. Daniel Rogers, a most worthy Writer, says in a Treatise of his, It ought
to be the Church's part to cleave to the Institution, which is dipping,
especially it being not lest Arbitrary by our Church to the Discretion of the
Minister, but required to dip or dive. And further says, That he betrays the
Church, whose Minister he is, to a disordered Error, if he cleave not to the
Institution.

O, what abundance of Betrayers of the Truth and of Churches too, have we in
these as well as in former days! How little is the Institution of Christ, or
Practice of the Primitive Churches minded by many good Men? Where is the Spirit
of Reformation? And doubtless that famous Author, and Learned Critic in the
Greek Tongue, Casanbon. was in the right: Take his words.

I doubt not (says he) but, contrary to our Church's Intention, this Error
having once crept in, is maintained still, by the carnal Ease of such, as
looking more at themselves than at God, stretch the Liberty of the Church in
this case, deeper and further than either the Church her self would, or the
Solemness of this Sacrament may well and safely admit. Afterward he says, I
consess my self unconvinced by Demonstrations of Scripture for Infants
sprinkling.

The truth is, the Church gave too great Liberty; she had no Power to alter in
the least matter, but to have kept exactly to the Institution. She says dipping
[or sprinkling] that spoils all, that Addition gives Encouragement: Who will
dip the Person, that can believe the Church that sprinkling may serve? And O!
how hard is it to retract an Error which has been so long, and so generally
received, especially when Carnal Ease and Profit attends the keeping of it up!
and also when the true way of baptizing is reproached, and looked upon to be so
contemptible a Practice, and those who own it, and dare not act otherwise,
vilified and reproached (by many) with the scurrilous Name of Anabaptists, etc.
although we are as much against rebaptizing as any People in the World can be.

The Learned Cajetan upon Mat. 3. 5. says, Christ ascended out of the Water,
therefore Christ was baptized by John, not by sprinkling or pouring Water upon
him, but by Immersion, that is, by dipping or Plunging into the Water.

Moreover, Musculus on Mat. 3. calls Baptism dipping, and says the Parties
baptized were dipped, not sprinkled.

To close with this, take one Argument.

If the Baptizer and the Baptized in the days of Christ and his Apostles, went
both down into the Water, and the Person baptized was dipped, then is Baptism
not Sprinkling but Dipping.

But the Baptizer and the Baptized in the days of Christ and his Apostles, went
both down into the Water, and the Person baptized was dipped.

Ergo, Baptism is not Sprinkling but Dipping.

CHAP. V.
Proving that Baptism is plunging or burying in Water the whole Body, in the
Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: Wherein Mr. Owen's
Arguments for sprinkling, and his Objections against Immersion or Dipping, are
fully answered.

REader, thou may see that tho the remote Sense of the common word (...), may
refer to pouring of Water, yet the proper and genuine Sense of that word is
dipping, or such a washing as is by dipping, which is abundantly proved, as you
have heard, both by the Scriptures and Consent of a great Cloud of Witnesses
amongst the Learned, both An^nt and Modern: Therefore what (...). (...) says
in the beginning of his third Chapter, viz.

That it is uncertain, whether in the New Testament, the Apostles baptized by
dipping or sprinkling, is not true, it being evident it was by dipping and no
other way. For wherever the word Baptism is used (I say again) in the New
Testament, as it refers to Christ's Ordinance of Baptism, it signifies dipping
or plunging into the Water; nor can he prove the Jews washed their Hands and
Cups only by pouring Water on them: tho Elijah might have Water poured on his
Hand, we commonly wash our Hands and Cups by dipping them into the Water. And
so did the Jews as Mr. Ainsworth affirms.

2dly. Sir, what you say concerning that Typical Baptism in the Cloud and Sea,
you have heard also fully answered, and that makes not for sprinkling nor
pouring. But more to that hereafter.

3dly. What you say concerning the Signification of Baptism, that it holds
forth two things, 1. The Blood of Christ; 2. The Spirit of Christ, is far
fetched: for the Lord's Supper holds forth the Blood of Christ; and we have no
Ordinance ordained by Christ to hold forth in a Figure the sprinkling or
pouring forth of the Spirit; if Man has invented such a thing, so be it. The
Papists found out seven Sacraments with their significant Signs, as they tell
you, and they have the same Parity of Reason to maintain their Sacraments
without any Warrant from God's Word, as our Pedobaptists have for their
baptizing, or rather rantizing or sprinkling of Babes. True, the Apostle speaks
of sprinkling of the Blood of Jesus, but Baptism is no Figure of that, as you
have heard, but primarily of the Death, ^urial and Resurrection of Jesus Christ.

Sir, you say, Sprinkling is lawful, because it is very probable that the
Apostles themselves did baptize by pouring or sprinkling Water. Acts 2. 41.
Then they that gladly received the word, were baptized; and the same day there
were added unto them three thousand Souls. It is not, you say, very probable
that these three thousand were plunged over Head and Ears in Water; How could
Peter, and the rest of the Apostles, even twelve Men, baptize three thousand in
one day, yea in one half day? how could they change their Apparel? etc.

Answ. 1. I answer, wonder no more how three thousand Persons should be
baptized, i. e. dipped, in that short time; it is sufficient for any Christian
to believe it, because the Holy Ghost have said it.

2. But whereas you say there were but twelve Men to administer it, that is not
true, there were the seventy Disciples no doubt with them, who were Ministers,
and there might very probably be many more.

3. However, since Baptism is Immersion, i. e. dipping, and the Text says they
were baptized, it follows they were dipped into the Water. What you say about
Ananias baptizing Paul, and of Paul's baptizing the Jailer, proves nothing,
it is mere stuff that deserves no Answer.

You say Paul was baptized in his Lodging when he was sick.

Answ. It is not said he was sick, nor that he was baptized in his Lodging,
read the Text again; true, it is said after he was baptized he received
Strength. I have known multitudes of weak Persons baptized by dipping in frosty
Weather, in our cold Climate, and never took any harm thereby.

We say Baptism is Dipping, and among many other Reasons, we argue it must
needs be so administered, because John the Baptist baptized in Jordan, and in
Enon near Salim, because there was much Water there; Mat. 3. 13. John 3. 23.

You answer, If some were baptized by dipping, others were baptized by pouring
Water on them, as we proved (say you) before, therefore both ways are lawful.

I answer; 1. It Is well our way of dipping is owned by you as lawful and a
right way; then do you and all others take heed how you speak against us, who
so administer the holy Ordinance of Baptism; it appears we err not in so doing
by your own Confesson.

2. But whereas you say you have proved, that some were in the Primitive Time
baptized by pouring Water on them, we have showed your Proofs to be too short
and invalid.

3. The way of the Administration of Christ's sacred Ordinance was but one and
the same in all the Churches of the Saints; and if some were baptized by
dipping, and others by sprinkling, or pouring Water upon them, then the
Ordinance must have different Significations, which could not be answered on
some Persons, unless (...) they were both dipped and sprinkled, and had water
poured upon them, which is preposterous to imagine: for such that were dipped
or buried under the Water, were thereby made in Sign and Signification
conformable to the Death, Burial and Resurrection of Christ, which we have so
fully proved to be one great End of Baptism, that it cannot be den^ed; and such
who were only sprinkled, they were taught thereby the sprinkling of Christ's
Blood, and of the Spirit, as you would have the Ordinance to signify, without
any ground from God's Word.

Now how unlikely it is that both these ways were used, this being considered,
I shall leave to all wise and considerate Persons to think upon.

You say in the next place, That the Scripture does not say in any place, when
they were baptized they were dipped: If (say you) those that are against
sprinkling, say that they gather so much by Consequence from the forecited
Scriptures, they ought to remember their rejecting Scriptural Consequences when
they are used by us for proving Infant Baptism, etc.

Answ. If I had not a Learned Man to deal with, I should not marvel. Sir, Is
not Baptisin a Greek Word? What difference between Baptism and Baptisma? Is
not (...) a (...) Greek? and is it not in English to dip? What need of
Consequences here? Had our Translators truly translated that word, they must
have rendered it as the Dutch have, as I mentioned before, viz. End Jesus
gedoopt zijnde, is ter-stont opgeklomen vit hit wter: and when Jesus was
dipped, he came out of the Water; Mat. 3. 16. and ver. 6. End wierden van
hemge doopt in de Jordan; And were dipped of him in Jordan: Hence the Dutch
call John the Baptist, John the Dooper, John the Dipper. As to your
Consequences, we always deny that they are genuine, or naturally drawn from
those Scriptures to which you refer. But whereas you say we have nothing for
dipping which is of the Essence of Baptism, as we do affirm it is, but
Consequences, it is too bold an Assertion, not being true, as by this time my
honest Country men may see, if they are impartial Persons.

They think (say you) that John baptized by dipping, because he baptized in
Jordan; they can never prove that was the Cause, for the Scripture does not say
what was the occasion why he baptized in Jordon.

Answ. Sir, look into your Greek Testament once again, and read Mark 1. 9.
(...), into Jordan; Would it be proper to say he sprinkled them, or poured
Water on them into Jordan? It is proper to say he dipped them into Jordan, and
that is Baptism, and nothing else, as it refers to Christ's Ordinance, viz. a
washing by dipping or plunging into Jordan, or into the Water.

2. Tho the Scripture does not say in so many words, that that was the occasion
of John's baptizing into Jordan: Yet, Sir, remember and tremble at that Text,
John 3. 23. for there it is by the Holy Ghost given as the Reason why John
baptized in Enon near Salim, viz. because there was much Water there; plainly
denoting that a little Water will not serve to administer holy Baptism, but so
much as will cover or bury the whole Body.

You add,

It being very doubtful whether those People that came unto him were dipped or
plunged; for there went out unto him Jerusalem and all Judea, and all the
Regions round about Jordan, and were baptized by him: We cannot judge (you say)
that he baptized less than an hundred thousand Men and Women, etc. there were
(you say) much more People in those Countries; but it being impossible for him
to dip or plunge so many Men in so short time of his Ministry, which continued
but three Years, and of these three Years he lay in Prison half a Year, so that
he did neither preach or baptize but for two Years and a half. Vid. Lightf.
vol. I. p. 234.

If he had baptized fifty every day on these two Years and a half, which is not
probable he could do, the whole you say is but forty five thousand six hundred
and twenty five, but he baptized much more, which could not be done by dipping
or plunging; therefore it is reasonable for us (you say) to judge that he
sprinkled or poured Water on them, etc.

Answ. As to what you say here, it seems very strange to me, that you should
once imagine that John baptized all the People universally in Jerusalem and
Judea, without Exception: Why did not you put in all the Infants too as well as
Men and Women? I had lately to do with one Mr. Exel, who asserted that in a
Treatise of his, which, with Shame enough to him, I gave an Answer unto. I am
sorry you have no better Skill in Scripture-Rhetorick, where frequently, per
Synecdochen vel totius, vel partis, a part is put for the whole, or the whole
for the part, as it is said, God would have all Men to be saved, i. e. some of
all sorts and degrees, as Kings, Noblemen, Old, Young, Rich, Poor, etc. So
it is said Christ, when he was lifted up he would draw all Men unto him, (...),
Joh. 12. 32. Does he mean every individual Person, or some of all sorts, of
Jews and Gentiles? So Paul says, All seek their own, etc.

Vid. Glassi Illerici Philolog. Sacr. and also our late Annotators, the word or
term [All] (they tell you) is here twice repeated, Mat. 3. 5. (...), etc. it is
enough to let us know that in Scripture it is signisicative no farther than
many; for, say they, it cannot be imagined that every individual Person in
Jerusalem, and all the Regions round about Jordan went to hear John the Baptist.

2. You forget that Text, John 3. 26. Behold him that thou bear witness of,
etc. the same baptizeth, and All Men come unto him, (...), i. e. to Jesus
Christ. Also it is said, John 4. 1, 2. That Jesus made and baptized more
Disciples than John. If John baptized them all, and Jesus baptized them all,
then they were all twice baptized, or all rebaptized, and if so, were indeed
properly all Ana-baptists.

Sir, in both places it intends but some. You worthy and beloved Britains, take
heed how you are led by a Man that argues so preposterously; I doubt not but he
may be a good Man, but under a Cloud of Darkness.

3. Sir, how Dr. Lightfoot or you can prove, that John preached but two Years
and a half, I see not; but had he every day baptized an hundred, he might with
much Ease have done it in the space of four hours time, or thereabouts: But
alas! neither he nor our Savior had so many Disciples as you imagine; the
Number of the Disciples after the Resurrection of Christ, as we read, Acts 1.
were but an hundred and twenty that were together, perhaps there might be some
few more in some other parts.

4. But you, I perceive, contradict the Holy Ghost in saying, that John
sprinkled them, i. e. rantized them; for Ran^izing in the Original (as I
presume you know) is sprinkling in English. Sir, I appeal to your Conscience,
whether it be not so: Sprinkling and pouring is one thing, and baptizing
another, and a quite different Act. I affirm Sprinkling is not Baptizing, say
what you will.

You in the next place, mention that which we object concerning Philip and the
Eunuch, who went both down into the Water when the Eunuch was baptized. To this
you answer and say, How does that follow? Could they not go into the Water
without plunging in it? We read in Genesis 24. 45. (say you) that Rebecca went
down into the Well, Does it follow that she was plunged in it? You will say of
your Maidservant, when she goes to draw Water, she went down into the River,
your meaning is not that she was plunged there.

I answer, Rebecca might properly be said to go down into the Well, because in
some Wells there are several Steps or Stairs before we come to the Water; it is
not said she went into the Water. Also who of us could say when our
Servant-Maid went to draw Water, or fetch Water from a River, she went into the
River? if any do say so, they speak not truly, but indeed do lie. Sir, take
heed what you say, the Holy Ghost does not say they went down to the Water, but
(...), both went down into the Water, and he baptized him, i. e. dipped him,
not rantiz'd him.

You bring in our Objection against your Sprinkling taken from Romans 6. 3, 4.
Col. 2. 12, 13. viz. we are said to be buried with Christ in Baptism into
Death. To this you say, We bury by casting Earth on the Body, and the pouring
of Water, you say, does represent it; it cannot be said one was buried that was
fallen under Water or Earth, unless he remains there for a time: he that
descends into a Coal-pit is under the Earth, but is not buried by reason he
comes out from thence immediately; dipping therefore does not signify a
Burial, unless he that is dipped remains for a time under the Water.

I answer; It Is true, we do bury by casting Earth on the dead Body, but it is so
much Earth as covers the Corpse all over, or else it is not buried. So if you
pour Water on a Child until it is covered all over in Water, it may truly be
said that Child was buried in the Water, although the burying in Baptism is not by
pouring Water in great abundance until it is covered, but by going into the
Water and there to be dipped, or plunged all over, so that all may see the Body
is buried under Water, as truly, symbolically, and as properly as if it had
been buried in the Water. Or,

2. Tho a Person be laid in the Grave, and covered all over with Earth, tho it
be but two Minutes, he may as truly and properly be said to be buried, as he
that lies there three Days, or a thousand Years. But you would have Baptism to
be no proper Representation of a Burial, unless the Person baptized lies so
long till he be drowned. Sir, Baptism does represent the Death of Christ, and
of the old Man, or Body of Sin, which is as sufficiently held forth by a Minute
or two, as by many Days.

3. And now, utterly to put to silence your vain Objections, I shall give the
Sense of a whole Cloud of Witnesses, as to the proper Exposition of those
Texts, Romans 6. 3, 4. Col. 2. 12, 13. by and by; but if my honest Countrymen do
think you have given a better Sense of the Words than all those Learned Men, I
will say no more.

You say, the Resemblance then between Baptism does not stand in the dipping of
the Body so much as in the End of the Ordinance, in making us Partakers of
Christ's Death, of his Life, and of his Ascension, and of his sitting on the
Right hand of God.

Baptism makes us to be planted together in the Likeness of his Death; yet
there are none, you say, that plants Bodies in Water by baptizing them, Romans 6.
5.

Answ. We shall in our next Chapter finally determine this great Point, and
plainly show you by manifest Arguments, together with the joint Consent and
Agreement of a multitude of Learned Men, that were and are Pedo-baptists, that
the Resemblance between Death, Burial and Resurrection, and Baptism, does stand
in the outward Sign of Dipping, as well as in our partaking of the Blessing of
Christ's Death, Burial and Resurrection. All know in the Ordinance of the
Lord's Supper the Signs are significant, and no true Protestant will admit of
such an Administration of it, in which the breaking of Christ's Body, and the
shedding of his Blood is not clearly represented to the sight of our Eyes. Why
is the Popish way of the Administration rejected, who deny the Laity the Cup,
if there ought not to be an exact keeping to the direct Signs, as well as to
bear in Mind the Thing signified thereby? Nay, Sir, I find you in your third
Chapter to justify your sprinkling stiffly, by arguing for an Agreement between
the Sign and the Thing signined, and that Baptism was not ordained to be a Sign
or Symbol of the sprinkling Christ's Blood, but of his Death, Burial and
Resurrection: It shall (God assisting) be further demonstrated.

Now let this be considered, That as in the Lord's Supper it is such a quantity
of Bread and Wine that is to be used, that may represent his Body broken, and
his Blood shed; and as that Sacrament was appointed to that very end and
purpose, so in like manner we also say, so much Water must be used as may
represent the Death, Burial and Resurrection of our blessed Savior. But one
Mr. Burkitt, a Pedo-baptist, says in his Treatise of Infant Baptism, That in
the Sacraments it is not the quantity of Elements, but the Significancy of them
that ought to be attended to; in Circumcision (says he) it was not the
quantity of Flesh cut off, so much as the Signification of it, etc. and you
seem to express your self to the same purpose.

Answ. To which I returned him this Answer, viz. There must be so much Bread
and Wine in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, that may represent Christ's
Body broken, and so much Wine as may in Sign as well as Signification held
forth the pouring forth of Christ's precious Blood, or else the End of Christ
is not answered in that Sacrament; and so likewise must the Burial and
Resurrection of Christ be in Sign, as well as our Death to Sin and rising again
to Newness of Life is represented in holy Baptism.

Should the People of Israel in Circumcision only have cut off a little bit of
the Foreskin of the Flesh, and not round quite off, or only have paired off
the Nails of their Childrens Fingers with a little Skin with it, would that
have answered the Mind of God in that Rite, or they have been born with in
pleading it might as well answer Circumcision in Signification? But the Vanity
and Sinfulness of this Assertion of Mr. Burkitt's and yours will yet be now
further laid open in this Chapter; only there is one thing before I proceed on
that I shall add a word or two unto, as touching what you say concerning those
Washings that were used under the Law, which are called Baptisms, which you say
were done by sprinkling, which is not true; we utterly deny any of those
Washings which are called Baptisms were either sprinkling or pouring of Water
on them, but total dipping of their whole Body. And so the Reverend Mr.
Ainsworth, a Man very Learned in all Jewish Rites and Ceremonies, affirms, on
Levit. 11. 31. see his Annotat. on that Text, these are his words, viz. All
that are unclean, whether Men or Vessels, are not cleansed but by dipping or
baptizing in Water; and wheresoever the Law speaks of washing a Man's Flesh,
or washing of Clothes for Uncleanness, it is not but by dipping the whole Body
therein. And whether they be Men or Vessels, there may not be any thing between
them and the Water to keep them asunder, as Clay, Pitch, or the like that
cleaves to the Body or Vessel; if there be, then, says he, they are unclean,
and their washing profits them not. He cites for this Maim Mikvaoeh, c. 1..
12.

Sir, what is become of your sprinkling of Cups, Pots and Brazen Vessels among
the Jews, when it is said they washed or baptized them? it appears their way in
washing was total dipping, or else they were not clean. And now to proceed to
prove Christ's Baptism in Water is by Immersion, by Dipping, to represent in
Sign his Death, Burial and Resurrection, and in Signification to hold forth our
Death unto Sin and rising again to walk in Newness of Life who are baptized, I
shall add it in this place,

First, From the Scripture.

Secondly, By the Consent; Agreement and Arguments of a Cloud of Witnesses,
both Ancient Fathers and Modern Divines, and worthy Protestant Writers.

1. The first Scripture is, Romans 6. 3, 4, 5, 6. Therefore we are buried with
him in Baptism, etc. The Saints or whole Church of the Romans were to reckon
themselves dead to Sin, and bound to live no longer therein, and that because
by Baptism (as in a lively Figure) they held forth the same thing; so that it
appears Baptism has a twofold Signification.

(1.) There is in it, when truly and rightly administered, not only a
Representation of Christ's Burial and Resurrection, but,

(2.) Also it signifies our Death unto Sin, and our rising again to walk in
Newness of Life; and indeed the Apostle makes use of this as an Argument to
press Newness of Life (the thing signified in Baptism) upon them all, as if he
should say, As many of us as are baptized must know this, that we are baptized
into Christ's Death, and therefore must die to Sin and live a new Life: But we
have all been baptized, or buried with him in Baptism, therefore must all of us
die to Sin and live a new Life.

Our late Annotators on the place say thus, He seems to allude to the manner of
baptizing in those warm Countries, which was, say they, to dip or plunge the
Party baptized, and as it were to bury him for a while under Water. Cajetan
upon the same Text says, We are buried with Christ by Baptism unto Death; by
our burying he declares our Death by the Ceremony of Baptism, because he (that
is, the Party baptized) is put under Water; and by this carries a Similitude of
him that was buried, who was put under the Earth. Now because none are buried
but dead Men, from this very thing that we are buried in Baptism, we are
assimilated to Christ buried, or when he was buried.

The Assembly (...) their Annotations on this Text of Scripture, say likewise
thus, viz. In this Phrase the Apostle s^s to allude to the ancient manner of
baptizing, which (...) to dip the Party baptized, and as it were to bury them
under Water for a while, and then raise them up again out of it, to represent
the Burial of the Old Man, and the Resurrection to Newness of Life. The same
says Diodate.

Tilenus, a great Protestant Writer, speaks fully in this case: Baptism, says
he, is the first Sacrament of the New Testament instituted by Christ, in which
there is an exact Analogy between the Sign and the Thing signified. The outward
Rite in Baptism is threefold.

1. Immersion into the Water. 2. Aciding under the Water. 3. A Resurrection out
of the Water.
The Form of Baptism, viz. External and Essential, is no other than an
Analogical Proportion, which the Signs keep with the Thing signified thereby:
For the Property of the Water washing away the Defilements of the Body, does in
a most suitable Similitude, set forth the Efficacy of Christ's Blood in blotting
out of Sin; so dipping into the Water, in a most lively Similitude sets forth
the Mortification of the old Man, and rising out of the Water the Vivification
of the new Man: The same plunging into the Water, says he, holds forth to us
that horrible Gulf of Divine Justice, in which Christ, for our sakes, for a
while was in a manner swallowed up; abiding under the Water, (how little time
soever) denotes his Descent into Hell, even the very deepest of Lifelesness,
lying in the sealed or guarded Sepulcher, where he was accounted as one dead.
Rising out of the Water, holds forth to us a lively Similitude of that
Conquest which this dead Man got over Death. In like manner, says he, it is
therefore meet that we being baptized into his Death, and buried with him,
should rise also with him, to go on in a new Life. Thus far

And let all thinking and serious Christians carefully consider, since this
sacred Ordinance was appointed to be thus significant, as this and other
Learned Men observe, what a sad and lamentable thing it is, that the true
Baptism should be changed from dipping into sprinkling, which neither does nor
can hold forth these great Mysteries, for which purpose our Savior ordained
it: For it is evident Rantism or Sprinkling does not bear any Proportion to
these Mysteries, nor can they be signified thereby. What Figure of a Burial of
Christ, or of the old Man is there in sprinkling a few drops of Water on a
Person's Face? Or what Representation is there in that Act of a Resurrection?
O, how is Christ's holy Baptism abused by this devised Rantism, and the
Signification thereof destroyed! the Lord open your Eyes, or the Eyes of my
godly and impartial Reader. This shows you clearly what Christ's true Baptism
is, as also the true Subject. But to proceed.

St. Ambrose says, Water is that wherein the Body is plunged, to wash away
all Sins; there all Sins, says he, are buried. We suppose he means it is a Sign
of this, i. e. that all Sin is buried.

Moreover Chrysostom says, that the Old Man is buried and drowned in the
Immersion under Water; and when the baptized Person is afterward raised up out
of the Water, it represents the Resurrection of the New Man to Newness of Life;
and therefore concludes the contrary Custom, being not only against
Ecclesiastical Law, but against the Analogy and Mystical Signification of the
Sacrament, is not to be complied with.

It has been too long, as I have formerly noted, God grant Men more Light to
see their Error, and abhor to do so any more.

Kecker says, That Immersion, not Aspersion, was the first Institution of
Baptism, as it does, says he, plainly appear from Romans 6. 3. And say I, Where
has Christ since the first Institution, instituted Aspersion, or Sprinkling in
the stead or room of Immersion or Dipping; or given Orders to change that
significant Sign into the insignificant Foppery of Sprinkling? Ought not we to
keep the Ordinances as they were first instituted and given to the Saints? Is
not God's Word to be our Rule in all Points of Faith and Practice to the End of
the World? Has Christ given any Men or Church a Dispensation to change his Laws
and Ordinances, or make them void by these Traditions, or set up their Post by
his Post?

How does God complain by the Prophets against his People of old, for presuming
to change his Laws, Deuteronomy. 12. 13? God gave particular Command to make an Altar
of Gold to offer Incense, Exodus 40. 5. and he commanded, Exodus 20. 24, 25. that
his Altar should be made of Earth or rough Stone: but in Isa. 65. 3. he
reproves their horrid Transgressions and Disobedience, in acting contrary to
his express Institution. A People (says God) that provokes me to Anger
continually to my Face, that sacrifices in Gardens, and burns Incense upon
Altars of Brick. You may think that was no great Error, instead of Gold or
Stone, to make Altars of Brick: but what says God? they for this, etc. provoke
me continually to my Face. O tremble ye who adventure to transgress God's
Precept in as bad or worse a manner! Who commanded you to baptize or dip
Believers in the Name of the Father, etc. and you rantize or sprinkle Infants?
A^as, you know not how you hereby provoke God! although he is yet silent, and does
not manifest his Displeasure, yet know he is a jealous God and has the like
Zeal for his Gospel-Institutions, as ever he had of those under the Law, and
may manifest it too in his own time. But to proceed, and call in for more
Witnesses against your Practice.

Daill^ on the Fathers says, that it was a Custom heretofore in the ancient
Church to plunge those they baptized over Head and E^s in the Water: And,
says he, Tertullian in his third Book de (...). Mil. Cyprian in his seventieth
Epistle, p. 211, etc. and others testify it.

Dr. Cave says, that the Party baptized was wholly immerged, or put under the
Water, which was the almost constant and universal Custom of those Times,
whereby they did most notably and significantly express the great Ends and
Effects of Baptism: For as in immerging there are in a manner three several
Acts; the putting the Person into the Water, his abiuing under the Water, and
his rising up again, thereby representing Christ's Death, Burial, and
Resurrection, and in our Conformity thereupto, our dying to Sin, the
Destruction of its Power, and our Resurrection to a new course of Life; So by
the Person's being put into the Water, was lively represented the putting off
the Body of the Sins of the Flesh, etc. by his being under it (which is a kind
of Burial into the Water) his entering into a State of Death or Mortification,
like as Christ remained for sometime under the State or Power of Death:
therefore it is said, As many as are baptized into Christ, are baptized into his
Death, etc. And then by Immersion, or rising up out of the Water, is signified
his entering upon a new course of Life; that like as Christ was raised up by
the Glory of the Father, so we should walk in Newness of Life. Thus Dr. Cave.

We are said, says Pa^raeus, to die, and to be buried with Christ in Baptism.
And further shows, that the external Act of being buried in Water is a lively
Emblem of the internal Work of Regeneration.

St. Bernard says, Immersion is a Representation of Christ's Death and Burial.

Against all these Testimonies and multitudes more of the best and most Learned
Writers, Mr. Burkitt objects as follows, and you seem to argue after the same
manner; these are his words, viz.

If Baptism administered by pouring Water on the Face (representing the whole
Person) does answer the Use and End of Baptism, as well as when administered by
aipping or pl^nging, then dipping is not essentially and absolutely necessary
in the Act of baptizing: but the one answers the Use and End of baptizing as
well as the other, therefore the one cannot be more essential than the other.

What is the End and Use of Baptism, but to represent to our Minds (...)
Effusion of Christ's Blood for to take away the Guilt of Sin, and the pouring
forth of the Spirit for the purging away the Filth of it? Now (says he, and you
to the same purpose) the sprinkling of the Blood of Christ, and the pouring
forth of the holy Spirit upon the Infant, are more fully and plainly
represented by Baptism as administered by sprinkling than by dipping. He says
further, That if the inward and spiritual Grace signified by Baptism be more
lively represented by sprinkling than by dipping, then surely sprinkling is not
only lawful, but more expedient than dipping: but the inward and spiritual
Grace signified by Baptism, to wit, the cleansing the Soul by the Grace and
Spirit of Christ, is more lively represented by sprinkling than by dipping;
therefore more expedient, and accordingly we find Almighty God himself often
expressing the Mercy of Sanctification by this Action; Ezekiel. 36, 25 Theu will I
sprinkle clean Water upon you, and ye shall be clean, etc.

Ansew. 1. To this I answer, where the Thing signified is not, the Sign is a
nullity; but your Thing signified in sprinkling Water on the Face of an
Infant, viz. the holy Spirit and Graces of it, does not appear in those Infants
you so sprinkle: Ergo, Your Sign is a nullity. If Grace was in them so much as
in the Habit of it, when they are grown up the Act and Fruits of the Spirit and
Faith would show themselves; for Grace is an active and lively Principle
wherever it is infused.

2. And I positively deny that the End and Use of Baptism is or can be
represented by sprinkling or pouring of Water; but by what I have said and
produced, by the Testimony of the Scripture, and almost all Learned Men, both
Ancient Fathers, and Modern Divines, I have fully showed the contrary.

3. I thought the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper had been instituted by Christ,
to signify the Effusion, or pouring forth his precious Blood, and not Baptism.
Will you confound the Use and End of one Sacrament with the other, to maintain
your own Innovation and Abuse of Christ's holy Baptism?

4. Might not the Jews, who instead of making Altars of Gold or Stone, made
them Altars of Brick, say, that Altars of Brick might serve as well to answer
the Use and End of burning Incense? Nay, may be they might say, they had not
the other to do it, and therefore built their Altars of Brick: But would this
Pretense do? No, no, what says the Almighty God? They provoke me continually
to my Face. Also might not others argue thus about the Sacrament of the Supper,
viz. What need we have Wine? If we use Mum or some other Red Liquor, instead
of the Fruit of the Grape, it will answer the Use and End of that Sacrament as
well as Wine. O, whither would this lead us!

5. We utterly deny that Baptism was ordained or instituted by Christ to
signify either the pouring forth of his Blood, or the pouring forth of the holy
Spirit, and must tell you, that you affirm what you please, without any Proof
from God's Word. But by the way, let the Reader observe how you go from
sprinkling to pouring Water on the Face of Infants. I question whether you
ever do so or not; but if you should, that would be no more Christ's Baptism
than sprinkling.

You are not to devise new Signs or Symbols of Spiritual Mysteries, of which
God speaks nothing in his Word, nor ever instituted to such Ends. I affirm he
has appointed no Rite or Ordinance in the Gospel to represent the sprinkling or
pouring forth of the holy Spirit. The Papists have (you know) seven Sacraments,
and they tell us of the Use and End of them, and how wonderfully significant
they are, and yet all the Use and Signification of them were the Contrivances
of their own wicked Hearts: And I must tell you that they prove what they do
and say for their Sacraments as well as you do. As to what you speak of pouring
or sprinkling, take what Tho. Aquinas most excellently has said on this
account. It belongs to the Signifier (says he) to determine what Sign is to be
used for the Signification: But God it is, who by things sensible, signifies
spiritual things in the Sacrament.

Christ has ordained Baptism to be a Sign, Symbol, or lively Representation of
his own Death, Burial and Resurrection, as I have proved and confirmed by a
Cloud of Witnesses. Will God endure or suffer Men (think you) to invent out of
their own Brains, new Signs and Symbols of Divine Gospel-Mysteries, and then
father them upon him, and call them his Ordinances? Nay, more, be so bold as to
say, these are more useful, and answer better the End of God, than those which
he himself instituted? For thus you and other Pedo-baptists speak of
Sprinkling, viz. it is not only lawful, but more expedient than Dipping. And
hereby you seem to teach God Wisdom, or to magnify yours above his. Be
astonished, O Heavens! Be thou horribly amazed, O Earth! Were ever any Men thus
bold before? First, You contrive a new Rite, and new Significations of it,
which God never appointed to represent such things, and then say, it is more
expedient than Christ's Ordinance of dipping, which was instituted by him for
other Ends and Significations; whereas the whole Body of all learned Men and
Christians, witness to and testify the contrary.

Pray take what Sir Norton K^atchbul has wrote, in direct opposition to what
you affirm. Says he,

Baptism, which now saves us by Water (speaking of the Text, in 1 Pet. 3. 21.)
that is, by the assistance of Water, and is antitypical of the Ark of Noah,
does not signify the laying down the Filth of the Flesh, but the Covenant of a
good Conscience toward God, while we are plunged in the Water, which is to
testify our Belief of the Resurrection of Jesus Christ; so that there is a
manifest Antithesis between these words, by Water, and by the Resurrection. Nor
is (says he) the Elegancy of it displeasing. As if he should say, the Ark of
Noah, not the Flood, was a Type of Baptism, and Baptism was an Antitype of the
Ark: Not as if Baptism is a washing away of the Filth of the Flesh by Water,
wherein it answers not at all to the Ark; but as it is the Covenant of a good
Conscience toward God by the Resurrection of Christ, in the belief of which
Resurrection we are saved, as they were saved by the Ark of Noah; for the Ark
and Baptism were both a Type and Figure of the Resurrection: so that the proper
End [mark] of Baptism ought not to be understood as if it were a Sign of the
wishing away of Sin, (although it be thus oftentimes taken Metonymially in the
New Testament, and by the Fathers) but a particular Signal of the Resurrection,
by Faith in the Resurrection of Christ, of which Baptism is a lively and
emphatical Figure, as also was the Ark, out of which No^h returned as from a
Sepulcher, to a new Life; and therefore not unaptly called by Philo, the
Captain of the new Creation; and the Whale's Belly, out of which Jonas, after a
Burial of three days, was set at liberty; and the Cloud, and the Red Sea, in
which the People of Israel are said to have been baptized, i. e. not washed
[mark] but buried: for they were all Types of the same thing as Baptism, viz.
not the washing away of Sin, but of the Death and Resurrection of Christ, and
our own; to which the Apostles, the Fathers, the Scholasticks, [mark] and all
Interpreters agree. The thing (says he) is so apparent, as not to need any
Testimonies; but because there are not a few who do not vulgarly teach this
Doctrine, it will not be superfluous to produce some of those innumerable
Testimonies, that I may (says he) not seem to speak without Book. And,

First, Let us begin with St. Paul, Romans 6. 3. Know ye not, that so many of you
that have been baptized into Christ, were baptized into his Death? Therefore we
are buried with him in Baptism into his Death, etc. Else what shall they do
that are baptized for the Dead, if the Dead rise not? As if he had said, If
there be no Resurrection, why are we baptized? In vain does the Church use the
Symbol of Baptism, if there be no Resurrection. The like Testimonies frequently
occur among the Fathers (says he).

Ignatius says, That believing in his Death, we may be made Partakers of his
Resurrection by Baptism. Baptism was given in Memory of the Death of our Lord,
we perform the Symbols of his Death [mark] not of pouring forth his Blood, or
holy Spirit, or sprinkling the Spirit on us, or the Blood of Christ: No, no,
this, that Author says, is not signified in Baptism, but the Burial and
Resurrection of Christ, which sprinkling no manner of ways can represent.

Justin Martyr says, We know but one saving Baptism, in regard there is but
one Resurrection from the dead, of which Baptism is an Image.

And from hence, say I, we know not Infants Rantism or Sprinkling, for this is
none of Christ's true Baptism. Christ's Baptism is but one, and it is that of
Believers, and it is not sprinkling but dipping, to signify Christ's Burial and
Resurrection. He goes on and cites other Authors.

Hear Paul exclaiming, They past through the Sea, and were all baptized in the
Cloud and in the Sea.

He calls Baptism the Passage of the Sea, for it was a flight of Death caused
by Water.

To be baptized, and so plunged, and to return up and rise out of the Water, is
a Symbol of the Descent into the Grave, and returning from thence.

Baptism is a Pledge and Representation of the Resurrection: Baptism is an
Earnest of the Resurrection: Immersion is a Representation of Death and Burial.
Innumerable are the Testimonies (says Sir Norton) which might be added, but
these I think sufficient to prove, that Baptism is an Image of the Death and
Resurrection of Christ (from whence we acknowledge the Mystery of our Religion,
says he, Christ's Deity and Humanity) and of the Faithful, who are baptized in
his Faith, from Death in Sin to Newness of Life, which if they lead in this
World, they have a most assured Hope, that being dead, they shall hereafter
rise to Glory with Christ.

Thus Sir Norton Knatchbul, a worthy Knight.

Mr. Perkins says, The dipping of the Body signifies Mortification, or
Fellowship with Christ in his Death; the staying under the Water signifies the
Burial of Sin, and coming out of the Water, the Resurrection from Sin to
Newness of Life. In another Treatise of his, he says, the ancient Custom of
baptizing, was to dip, as it were to dive all the Body of the baptized in
Water; Romans 6. Council of Laodicea and Neocesarea.

And here let me add what Reverend Dr. Sharp (the present Archbishop of York)
has lately delivered in a Sermon preached before the Queen's Majesty on
Easter Day, March the 27th, 1692.

And this in ancient Times was taught every Christian (says he) in and by his
Baptism: Whenever a Person was baptized, he was not only to profess his Faith
in Christ's Death and Resurrection, but he was also to look upon himself as
obliged in Correspondence therewith, to mortify his former carnal Affections,
and to enter upon a new State of Life.

And the very form of Baptism (says he) did lively represent this Obligation
to them: For what did their being plunged under Water signify, but their
undertaking in Imitation of Christ's Death and Burial, to forsake all their
former evil Courses? as their ascending out of the Water did their Engagement
to lead a holy, spiritual Life. This our Apostle does more than once declare to
us: thus Romans 6. 3, 4. We are buried (says he) with Christ by Baptism unto
Death, that like as Christ was raised up by the Glory of the Father, so we
should walk in Newness of Life.

Thus far Dr. Sharp, his Sermon on Phil. 3. 10. page 9.

Dr. Fowler (now Lord Bishop of Gloucester) on Romans 6. 3, 4. says, Christians
being plunged into the Water, signifies their undertaking and obliging
themselves in a spiritual Sense, to be buried with Jesus Christ in an utter
renouncing and forsaking all their Sins, that so answering to his Resurrection,
they may live a holy and a godly Life. Design of Christianity, p. 90.

Also Dr. Sherlock (Dean of St. Paul's) on Romans 6. 3, 4. says, Our Conformity
to the Death and Resurrection of our Savior consists in dying to Sin, and
walking in Newness of Life: Which, says he, St. Paul tells us, is represented
by the external Ceremony of Baptism, and rising out of his watery Grave, a new
born Creature. Charity without Usury, p. 1.

And unto these, let me add what the Pious and Reverend Dr. Tillotson (late
Archbishop of Canterbury) has wrote; speaking of the same Text, Romans 6. 3, 4.
Anciently, says he, those who were baptized put off their Garments, which
signified their putting off the Body of Sin, and were immersed and buried in
the Water, to represent the Death of Sin; and then did rise up again out of the
Water to signify their Entrance upon a new Life. And to these Customs the
Apostle alludes, when he says, How shall we that are dead to Sin, live any
longer therein? Know ye not that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus
Christ, were baptized into his Death? etc.

1. It Is a hard case, you neither will believe the holy Scripture, the Ancient
Fathers and Modern Divines, nor other learned Prelates of the Church of
England, who are yet living; but, contrary to the nature and tendency of holy
Baptism, plead for Sprinkling and condemn Dipping, and cast Reproach upon it,
and say also, that the Thing signified thereby, is the pouring forth of
Christ's Blood, or the sprinkling and pouring out of the holy Spirit,
notwithstanding we prove from the Scripture, and with the Testimony of all
these great Men, that Baptism signifies the Death, Burial and Resurrection of
Jesus Christ, and not any of those things you affirm as your own Conceit,
without the Testimony of any learned or approved Author.

Therefore, Sir, that Baptism is any thing else than dipping, plunging or
washing, which is done by dipping, we do utterly deny: For as the cutting off a
little bit of the Foreskin of the Flesh, or not the twentieth part round, is
not Circumcision; so sprinkling a little Water on the Face is not Baptism.

True, you call it Baptism, and will do so, tho it is nothing less nor more than
Rantism, it is, not the Thing, nor does it answer in Signification. I may tell
you again, that the Jews instead of circumcising the Foreskin of their
Childrens Flesh, might have as well presumed to dispense with that, and only
have paired off the Nails of the Fingers of their Male Infants, and have called
that Circumcision, as you may call sprinkling or pouring a little Water,
Baptism. But may be you will say, in Circumcision they we^^ to draw Blood, so say
I, they might in cutting the Nails of their Childrens Fingers; nay, and they
might better plead, that the Things signified in Circumcision, might be as well
answered in that new Device (the Nails being a sort of Excrement they might say
signified the taking away the Filth of Sin, or Corruption of Nature) as the
great Mysteries signified by Baptism or Dipping, can be represented by
sprinkling or pouring.

Furthermore, they might possibly plead the same Pretenses you do, viz. The
cutting off the Foreskin of the Flesh put the Infants to great Pain; nay, may
be they might fancy it would cost them their Lives; nay, call it Murder, and
therefore let pairing of their Nails serve: As you it seems fear dipping would
endanger the Lives of Infants, and therefore make sprinkling to serve instead
thereof. But to proceed.

2. I am in amaze to see these Men speak so fully and clearly to this glorious
Truth, (i. e. that the great thing Christ ordained Baptism to represent, is his
Death, Burial and Resurrection, together with the baptized Person's Death to
Sin, and his rising again to walk in Newness of Life) and yet both those
shameful Abuses amongst you and other Churches are not rectified, viz.

1. That Sprinkling, which does not, cannot answer or represent those
Gospel-Mysteries, should not be rejected.

2. That Infants should be once deemed the proper Subjects of Baptism, since
nothing of a Death to Sin, nor rising again to walk in Newness of Life, can
appear in them. For, as the Learned observe, Baptism is a Symbol of present,
not future Regeneration: It Is an outward Sign of that inward Death unto Sin,
which the Party baptized passed under then, or ought to have done, when (or
before) he is baptized. They then professed themselves to be dead to Sin, i. e.
even when they were buried with Christ in their Baptism; for the Argument of
the Apostle lies in that respect: How shall we that are dead unto Sin, live any
longer (...)? Knowing that so many of (...) who have been baptized into Christ,
were baptized into his Death, both in Sign and Signification: And therefore, as
Dr. Sherlock says, rising out of that watery Grave a new born Creature, denotes
not only what they should be hereafter, but what they were actually at that
time. So that as this Text, and Arguments drawn therefrom, utterly condemn
Sprinkling as not being Christ's Baptism, so it excludes Infants from being the
Subjects thereof, because in them appears no such Death to Sin, nor can they be
said to come out of that watery Grave as new born Creatures. To these
Testimonies I shall only add one or two more.

See that most learned Anonymous French Writer, in his Answer to the famous
Bishop of Meaux; It Is most certain (says he) that Baptism has not hitherto
been administered otherwise than by sprinkling, by the most of Protestants; but
truly this sprinkling is an Abuse. This Custom, which, without an accurate
Examination they have retained from the Romish Church, in like manner as many
other things, makes their Baptism very defective. It corrupts its Institution
and ancient Use, and that Nearness of Similitude which is needful should be
betwixt it and Faith, Repentance and Regeneration. This Reflection of Mr.
Bossuet deserves to be seriously considered, to wit (says he) that this use
of plunging has continued for the space of a whole thousand and three hundred
Years: Hence we may understand that we did not carefully, as it was meet,
examine things which we have received from the Roman Church.

Calvin says, That Baptism is a form or way of Burial; and none but such as
are already dead to Sin, or have repented from dead Works, are to be buried.

From these words I note;

1. That Sprinkling is not the form of Baptism, because not the form of a
Burial.

2. That Infants are not the true Subjects of Baptism, because not such as are
already dead to Sin, or have repented from dead Works; and indeed as they are
not able, they are not required so to do by Christ.

The last Author I shall quote is learned Zanchy, There are two Parts, says
he, in Regeneration, Mortification and Vi^ification; that is called a Burial
with Christ, this (is called) a Resurrection with Christ. The Sacrament of both
these is Baptism in which we are overwhelmed, or buried, and after that do come
forth and rise again. It may not be said truly, but sacramentally of all that
are baptized, that they are buried with Christ, and raised with him, but only
of such as have true Faith.

Now we may appeal to all the World, whether Zanchy and all the rest do not
clearly and evidently testify the same thing that we assert, viz. That Baptism
is and can be no other Act than Immersion or Dipping, since Sprinkling, all
must confess, does not represent in a lively Figure, the Burial and
Resurrection of Christ, nor our dying or being dead to Sin, and Vivification to
Newness of Life, says he, Sacramentally, i. e. Analogically, in respect of the
near Resemblance between Baptism, and a Death and Resurrection.

And this, I say, cannot be said of them that are sprinkled only; for if, in
respect of Mortification and Vivification, they may be denominated buried and
raised with Christ, (which cannot be said of Infants) yet that outward Rite or
Sign cannot denominate them so much as Sacramentally buried and raised with
Christ: for there is not so much as any likeness of such things in it; but in
true Baptism, viz. total dipping the Body in Water, and raising it again, there
is a lively Figure held forth to our very sight. And as Zanchy says, It cannot
be said of all, nor indeed of any, that they are thus sacramentally dead,
buried and risen with Christ, but only of such as have true Faith. Therefore
Infants are excluded by his own Argument.

What you say, that none plant Bodies in Water by baptizing them, seems
strange, and not the words of a learned Man; because dipping is a Figure of
planting us into Christ spiritually, and of Christ's Death and Resurrection,
must the Body of a Man be a Tree? None graft Bodies into a Vine, yet the
grafting of a Person into Christ is represented by that Allusion, or
Metaphorical Expression: Must the Sign and the Thing signified be all one and
the same thing?

Thus we see, in opposition to what you say, in the close of your third
Chapter, that it is very plain and manifest, that dipping is absolutely
necessary, and of the Essence of Baptism, it is (...). Alas, Sir, in all the New
Testament where we read of sprinkling, the Greek (as I said before) renders it
rantizing, not baptizing: (...) Christ has ordained Rantism, to represent the
sprinkling of his Blood, or the sprinkling of his Spirit, prove it; we deny it,
and have sufficiently proved he has appointed Baptism to represent his Death,
Burial and Resurrection, and that sprinkling is not baptizing. But for a
farther Satisfaction of the impartial Reader take a few Syllogistical Arguments.

Arg. 1. If Baptism was ordained to represent the Death, Burial and
Resurrection of Christ in a lively Figure; then Sprinkling cannot be Christ's
true Baptism: But Baptism was ordained to represent the Death, Burial and
Resurrection of Christ in a lively Figure; therefore Sprinkling cannot be
Christ's true Baptism.

This Argument we have proved to be true in every part of it.

Arg. 2. If Baptism was appointed to hold forth or represent in a lively Figure
the Person's Death to Sin who is baptized, or his present Regeneration, not
future, and his rising again to walk in Newness of Life; then Infants cannot be
the Subjects thereof. But Baptism was appointed to hold forth, or represent in
a lively Figure the Person's Death to Sin who is baptized, or his present
Regeneration, not future, and his rising again to walk in Newness of Life:
Therefore Infants are not the Subjects thereof.

4. There is yet one Proof further to make it yet clearer, that Baptism is
dipping or plunging, and nothing else, and that is taken from those Typical
Baptisms spoken of in the holy Scripture.

(1.) That of the Red Sea, wherein the Fathers were buried as it were unto
Moses in the Sea, and under the Cloud. See Pool's Annotations on the Place.

Others, says he, (more properly) think the Apostle uses this Term in regard of
the great Analogy betwixt Baptism (as it was used) the Person going down into
the Waters, and being dipped in them, and the Israelites going down into the
Sea, the great Receptable of Water; tho the Water at that time was gathered on
heaps on the other side of them, yet they seemed buried in the Water, as
Persons seemed buried in the Water were in that Age when they were baptized.

(2.) The second Typical Baptism was that of Noah's Ark: See Sir Norton
Knatchbull, whom I quoted before, says he, Noah's Ark and Baptism were both a
Type and Figure of the Resurrection, not a Sign of the washing away of Sin, tho
so taken metonymically, but a particular Signal of the Resurrection of Christ.
Of this again, says he, is Baptism a lively and emphatical Figure, as also was
the Ark of Noah, out of which he returned, as from a Sepulcher. From hence I
infer this Argument following.

Arg. 3. If those Typical Baptisms spoken of in the Scriptures, signified
Immersion, or an Overwhelming, or a Burial; then is Sprinkling no true Baptism:
But those Typical Baptisms, etc. did signify Immersion, or an Overwhelming, or
a Burial; Therefore Sprinkling is no true Baptism.

Again, that Baptism is dipping or plunging, or a being buried in the Water,
appears by those Metaphorical Baptisms we read of, which are twofold.

1st. The Baptism of the Holy Spirit.

2dly. The Baptism of Afflictions.

1st. Says John the Baptist, I indeed baptize you with Water, but he shall
baptize you with the holy Spirit and Fire. Now it is not the sanctifying Gifts
of the Spirit which every Godly Person receives, that is the Baptism of the
Spirit; but, as the Learned observe, the miraculous Effusions of the holy
Spirit, like that at Pentecost, Acts 1. 4, 5. shall be baptized. The Greek word
(...), says Casaubon, is to dip or plunge, etc. in which Sense, says he, the
Apostles might be truly said to have been baptized; for the House in which this
was done was filled with the Holy Ghost. So that the Apostles might seem to
have been plunged into it, as in a large Fish Pond. It Is not a sprinkling of
the Spirit that is the Baptism of the Spirit: for so doubtless the Apostles had
the Spirit before they were said to be baptized with it.

Oecumenius on Acts 2. says, A Wind filled the whole House that it seemed like
a Fish Pond, because it was promised to the Apostles, that they should be
baptized with the Holy Ghost.

2dly. We read of the Baptism of Afflictions. I have a Baptism to be baptized
with, and how am I strai^ned till it be accomplished! From the literal
Signification of the word baptiz^, immergo, as I showed before, to plunge
under, overwhelm, great Afflictions come to be called Baptism, and signifies,
as Vossius shows, not every light Affliction, but like that of David, Psalm. 32.
6. he drew me out of the deep Waters. Hence great Afflictions are called Waves;
Thy Wazes and thy Billows are gone over me, Psalm. 42. 7. It Is spoken of
Christ's Sufferings, who was as it were drowned, drenched, or overwhelmed in
Afflictions and Sufferings: Every small Affliction is not the Baptism of
Afflictions, but great and deep Afflictions, suffering even unto Blood and
Death.

Pool's Annotations say, to be baptized is to be dipped in Water,
metaphorically to be plunged in Afflictions.

I shall close this also with another Argument.

Arg. 4. If those Metaphorical Baptisms which we read of in God's Word (as the
Baptism of the Spirit, and of Afflictions and Sufferings) are taken from the
literal and genuine Signification of the Greek word (...) immergo, which
signifies to dip; then sprinkling is not baptizing: but the former is true;
Ergo, sprinkling is not baptizing.

CHAP. V.
Wherein Mr. Owen's Argument for Infant Baptism, taken from the Covenant God
made with Abraham, is examined, and totally confuted.

SIR,
YOu in your fourth Chapter come to consider and enquire who are the proper
Subjects of Baptism, or who they are that ought to be baptized. And first, you
say, that Baptism does not belong to all Men, but to the Faithful and their
Seed: He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved; Mark 16. 16. When the
Eunuch asked Philip, See, here is Water, what does hinder me to be baptized? He
answered, If thou believe with all thy Heart, thou may; Acts 8. It is
plain, say you, that Baptism belongs to them that believe: but say you, how
does it appear that Baptism does belong to the Seed of such? that will appear,
you say,

1. From God's Covenant. 2. From Circumcision under the Law. 3. From Christ's
Command to baptize all Nations. 4. Because they are holy. 5. Because Christ
blessed them. 6. Because the Gentiles were ingrafted into the Privileges of the
Jews. 7. Because they can partake of that which is signified by Baptism. 8.
From the form of Baptism under the Law. 9. Because John baptized Infants
according to the Practice of the Jewish Church. 10. Because the Apostles
baptized whole Houses. 11. Because the Christian Church baptized Infants in
every Age. 12. Because it is a virtuous means to plant the Christian Religion.
Sir, I shall examine all your Grounds, and answer each of your Argumenrs in
order: And first of all, that of the Covenant with Abraham. You argue thus,
viz. Abraham and his Seed were under the Covenant of Grace, we the Gentiles are
a Seed to Abraham, and the Covenant of Grace belongs as extensively unto us
as it did to Abraham, even to us and to our Children; and if the Children of
the Faithful are in the Covenant of Grace, can any Man forbid them the Seal of
the Covenant, viz. Baptism?

Answ. 1. I answer, it is well, you cannot deny that Baptism belongs to the
Faithful, viz. to Believers; we then are right who baptize such: and if Faith
both in order of Words, and in order of Practice in the Apostolical Days,
preceded Baptism, then none but Believers ought to be baptized; but, by your
own Confession, Faith both in order of Words and Practice in the Apostolical
Days did precede Baptism; it is not he that is baptized, and afterward
believes, but contrary ways, he that believes and is baptized. Faith is
required as prerequisite to Baptism, in all that Christ enjoins Baptism upon,
which Infants are not capable of.

2. As to your first Argument for Believers Seed to be baptized, from the
Covenant made with Abraham, I shall show it is invalid, and will do you no
Service.

First, Because there was a twofold Covenant made with Abraham, one with his
Natural Seed, as such, the other with his true Spiritual, as such: So that what
you say that Abraham and his Seed were in the Covenant of Grace, viz. his
Spiritual Seed, is not denied by us; but that all his Natural were in the
Covenant of Grace the Apostle denies, and shows the contrary, Romans 9. 6, 7, 8.

Now if I prove there were two Covenants made with Abraham, what is become of
all you have said in respect of this matter? And that it is so, let what
follows be considered.

1. We affirm, that the Covenant of Grace and the Covenant of Circumcision made
with Abraham is not the same or one entire Covenant.

2. We shall consider whether there be the same reason of Circumcision and of
Baptism.

1st. We say there was a Covenant of Grace, or Gospel Covenant made with
Abraham, and all Believers in him, or all his true Spiritual Seed.

2dly. But the Covenant of Circumcision, or that Covenant God made with his
Natural Seed, as such, was a distinct Covenant from the Covenant of Grace;
these two Covenants were signified to Abraham by Sarah and Hagar, as the
Apostle shows in plain words, Gal. 4. 24. Which things are an Allegory; for
these are the two Covenants, etc. And now fully and plainly to prove this great
Truth, viz. that there were two Covenants made with Abraham, take this Argument.

Arg. If the Covenants take their Denomination from the Promises, and the
Promises are distinct, viz. some Evangelical, belonging to those that the
Gospel belongs unto; and others Domestic or Civil Promises, especially and
absolutely respecting the House, and Natural Seed of Abraham and Policy of
Israel; then there were two Covenants made with Abraham: but this is so; Ergo,
etc. To make it clear, and prove it, it is evident that that Promise was
Evangelical, belonging to the Gospel Covenant made with Abraham, Genesis 17. 5. I
have made thee a Father of many Nations: And so is that Promise, Genesis 15. 5. So
shall thy Seed be: in which it is promised that there shall be of the Nations
many, or a great number, that shall be Abraham's Spiritual Children by
believing, Romans 4. 17, 18. Also it was Evangelical, which we find in Genesis 12.
3. And in thy Seed shall all the Kindreds of the Earth be blessed. These it is
evident respect all Gospel-Believers, who are the Spiritual Seed of Abraham:
See Gal. 3. 8. And the Scripture foreseeing that God would justify the Heathen
through Faith, preached the Gospel to Abraham, saying, In thee shall All the
Nations of the Earth be blessed. And more directly to Christ, who is the Seed
of Abraham, as Gal. 3. 16. Now to Abraham and his Seed were the Promises made:
He says not, And to Seeds, as of many, but as of one, and to thy Seed, which
is Christ; that is, to Christ as the Head and Surety of the Covenant of Grace;
and so primarily and directly to him, and then in him to all who are his,
according to that Gal. 3. 29. And if you be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's
Seed, and Heirs according to the Promise. See also Acts 2. 25.

2. Moreover, that the Domestic and Civil Promises were many, is plain: As, 1.
Of multiplying the Seed of Abraham. 2. The Birth of Isaac. 3. Of the
Continuation of the Covenant with Isaac. 4. Of the coming of Christ out of
Isaac. 5. The Bondage of the Israelites in Egypt, and their Deliverance out
from thence, and of their possessing the Land of Canaan, Gen 15. 18. Genesis 17.
8. And I will give unto thee, and to ^^y Seed after thee, the Land wherein thou
art a Stranger, (...) the Land of Canaan, for an everlasting Possession; and I
will be their God. So Genesis 15. 18. In that same day God made a Covenant with
Abraham, saying; Unto thy Seed have I given this Land, from the River of Egypt
unto the great River Eup^rates. Can you be so ignorant as to affirm, this
Covenant-Contract made with Abraham, was made with the Natural Seed of
believing Gentiles? Nay, or that it was made to Abraham's Spiritual Seed?
Compare these Scriptures with Acts 7. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. and thus it appears, the
Covenant made with Abraham is a mixed Covenant, or a twofold Covenant, one made
with his Natural Seed, the other with his Spiritual ^eed: and this is fully
signified by Sarah and Hagar, the Free Woman and Bond Woman, and their S^ns
Isaac and Ishmael, Gal 4. 22.

Secondly; The Seed of Abraham is many ways so called,

1. Christ is called the Seed of Abraham, as I said before, Gal. 3. 16. by way
of Emmency, as he is the Head, and Surety of the Gospel Covenant. 2. All the
Elect, Romans 9. 7. all Believers, Romans 4. 11, 12, 16, 17, 18. Gal 3. 29. If ye
be in Christ, then are ye Abraham's Seed, and Heirs according to the Promise.
3. There was a Natura Seed of Abraham, to whom the Inheritance did accure, this
was Isaac, Genesis 21. 22. 4. We read or another Natural Seed of Abraham to whom
the Inheritance, it is positively said, did not belong, as Ishmael and the Sons
of Keturah, Genesis 15. 5.
But now can the Infant Seed of Believers, as such, be said to be the Seed of
Abraham in any of these four respects? Add if you can a fifth.

(1.) As the Promise refers to Christ (so they cannot be (...)) who is
Abraham's in a special manner, to whom God promised he would be a God to, and
impart all Blessings of the Covenant unto, according to that glorious Compact
or Covenant of Redemption made between him and the Father before the World
began, upon the account of his blessed Undertaking as a Mediator and Surety,
that so he might impart all those purchased Blessings and Privileges to all who
believe in him, or were given to him by the Father.

(2.) As the Promise refers to the Elect Seed, as such, who had the Faith of
Abraham, and (...) in his Steps, it cannot include the Infant Seed o^ believing
Gentiles, as such.

(3.) As the Promise refers to Isaac, who was Abraham's own natural Son
according to the Flesh, as well as according to the Promise, they are not the
Seed of Abraham.

(4.) As Ishmael and the Sons of Keturah were the Seed of Abraham; so the
Infant Seed of believing Gentiles are not the Seed of Abraham. If you can ^dd a
fifth sort of Abraham's Seed (I mean such who are so called) from the
Scripture, pray do when you write again.

Arg. From hence I thus argue: I^ the Children of believing Gentiles, as such,
are not the Natural Seed, nor the Spiritual Seed of Abraham, then they can have
no right to Baptism or Church Membership, ^y virtue of any Covenant-Transaction
God made with Abraham.

But the Children of ^eving Gentiles, a^ such, are not the Natural Seed, nor
Spiritual Seed of Abraham: Ergo, They can have no right to Bapti^^ nor
Church Membership, ^y virtue of any Covenant Transaction God made with Abraham.

It is affirmed by some, that the Children of Believers are the Spiritual Seed
of Abraham, till they by actual Sin, unrepented of, are otherwise.

Answ. 1. T^ which I answer. Then some of the true Spiritual Seed of Abraham
may perish eternally, and the Promise is not sure ^o all his Spiritual Seed; it
is directly contrary to w^^t S. Paul affirms in Romans 4. 16. Therefore it is of
Faith that it might be by Grace; to the end the Promise might be ^^re to all
the Seed not to that only which is of the Law, but to that also which is of the
Faith of Abraham, who is the Father of (...).

From w^ence I argue:

Arg. 2. All they that are in that Gospel Covenant which God made with Abraham,
or who are his true Spiritual Seed, have the Promise of Everlasting Life made
sure to them: But all the Infant Seed of Believers, as such, have not the
Promise of Everlasting Life made sure to them; Ergo, The Infant Seed of
Believers, as such, are not in that Gospel Covenant God made with Abraham, nor
his true Spiritual Seed. Take another.

Arg. 3. If all the true Spiritual Seed of Abraham have the Faith of Abraham,
and walk in the steps of Abraham, even that Faith Abraham had before he was
circumcised; then the Infant Seed of Believers, as such, are not the Spiritual
Seed of Abraham.

But the true Spiritual Seed of Abraham have the Faith of Abraham, and walk in
the steps of Abraham, even that Faith Abraham had before he was circumcised:
Ergo, The Infant Seed of Believers, as such, are not the true Spiritual Seed of
Abraham.

As to the Major, see Romans 4. 11, 12.

The Minor cannot be denied: No Man in his right Wits will affirm, the Infants
of Believers, as such, have the Faith Abraham had before he was circumcised;
nor do many of them; nor can they walk in the steps of Abraham, having not his
Faith.

If any object and say, If Infants of Believers are not included in that
Covenant made with Abraham, how can any of them who die in their Infancy be
saved?

I answer, 1. Cannot God save dying Infants unless they were included in the
Covenant made with Abraham? How then could the dying Infants of the Godly, who
lived before that Covenant was made with Abraham, be saved?

God has many ways, through Christ's Undertakings, to save dying Infants, as
Dr. Tailor notes, which we know not of: Secret things belong to God, and
revealed things to us.

2. Were they in any sense included in that Covenant made with Abraham, tho not
accounted for his Natural or Spiritual Seed, yet it would not follow from
thence that they ought to be baptized; because the Females who were truly
Abraham's Natural Seed, and some of them might be his Spiritual Seed too, yet
were not circumcised, no more than the Male Children of the Godly were before
Abraham's time, etc.

3. Were they in Covenant as they are the Natural Seed of Believers? Then
Baptism however does not bring them into the Covenant; and if so, their State
is good, whether baptized or no: And if Baptism brings them into the Covenant
of Grace, and makes the Covenant sure unto them, then it would follow that it is
in the Power of Men, either to bring their Children into the Covenant of Grace,
or keep them out; and that it is in effect to say, Parents have Power to save
or destroy their Children: and how absurd that is, I will leave to all
impartial Men to judge.

I shall, in the next place, prove, that the Covenant of Circumcision was not a
Covenant of Grace, or Faith, and therefore does not concern the Infant Seed of
believing Gentiles.

1. I argue thus: That Covenant that was made to separate the Natural Seed of
Abraham from all other Nations of the World, and made sure unto them the
Earthly Promise of the Possession of the Land of Canaan, could not be a
Covenant of Grace, which concerns the Infant Seed of Believers under the Gospel.

But the Covenant of Circumcision was made to separate the Natural Seed of
Abraham from all other Nations of the World, and made sure unto them the
Earthly Promise of the Possession of the Land of Canaan: Ergo, The Covenant of
Circumcision could not be a Covenant of Grace, which concerns the Infants of
Believers under the Gospel.

The Major cannot be denied, because the Gospel, or second Covenant is
established upon no such Earthly Promises as the Covenant of Circumcision was,
not that we should have an Earthly Kingdom, or possess the Land of Canaan; but
it is established on better Promises than these, as Heb. 8. 6. Also if that
Covenant concerned us, or our Children, who are Gentiles, then the Gentiles had
equal Right to that Earthly Inheritance; and then were not the Natural Seed of
Abraham separated from all other People upon the account of that Earthly
Blessing as their Possession only.

As to the Minor, see Genesis 17. I will establish my Covenant between me and
thee, ver. 7. And I will give unto thee, and thy Seed after thee, the Land
wherein thou art a Stranger, all the Land of Canaan for an everlasting
Possession; and I will be thy God, ver. 8. This is my Covenant, which ye shall
keep between me and you, and thy Seed after thee; every Man-Child among you
shall be circumcised, ver. 10.

1st. There were some who were circumcised, to whom the Promise of the
Gospel Covenant God made with Abraham did not belong, as Ishmael, Esau, etc.
God expressly said, that his Covenant (i. e. the Covenant of Grace) was not
established with Ishmael, but with Isaac, and yet the Covenant of Circumcision
belonged to Ishmael as well as to Isaac. See Genesis 17. 20, 21. As for Ishmael, I
have heard thee: behold. I have blessed him, etc. But my Covenant will I
establish with Isaac, whom Sarah shall bear unto thee, etc. Compare this with
Romans 7. 8, 9. Not because they are the Seed of Abraham, are they all Children:
that is, Children of the Covenant of Grace, or the Children of God; but the
Children of the Promise are co^d for thy Seed: See Gal 4. 29, 30. Nay, all that
were in Abraham's House, whether born there or Strangers, or such who were
bought with his Money, were circumcited: But will you say, all these were in
the Gospel Covenant God made with him?

Moreover, there were other Persons in Abraham's House, who no doubt might some
of them be in the Covenant of Grace, and had the Promises belonging to them,
who were nevertheless not circumcised, namely, the Females; also Male-Infants
dying before the eighth day coming from Abraham. Moreover, other Godly Men who
were not of Abraham's Family, yet lived in his time, as Melchisedec, Lot, Job
etc. none of these had right to be circumcised. But if any object, and say, the
Females were circumcised in the Males: I answer with Mr. Tombs, it is without
Proof; and by like, nay perhaps greater Reason it may be said, that the
Children of Believers are baptized in the Persons of their Parents, and
therefore are not to be baptized in their own Persons. Also it is apparent that
the Jews comprehended in that Covenant made with Abraham, and circumcised
accordingly, were nevertheless not admitted to Baptism upon that root of
account; which, had the Covenant of Circumcision been a Gospel Covenant, i. e.
of the same nature, I see no Reason why ^ohn Baptist should deny their
Argument, i. e. We are Abraham's Seed, etc. Hence it plainly appears, that the
right Evangelical Promises were not the adequate (...) o^ Circumcision; but, as
I have before said, (...) Precept or express command of God to Abraham And from
hence I shall infer this third Argument.

A^g. 3. That Covenant that was made with, or did belou, unto the Fleshly Seed
of Abraham, and ungodly ones as well as the godly, was not a Covenant of Grace,
or Gospel Covenant.

But the Covenant of Circumcision was made with, or did belong to the Fleshly
Seed of Abraham, as Ishmael, Esau, and all the Lineal Seed of Abraham, who were
ungodly, as well as to the godly: Ergo, The Covenant of Cirumcision was not a
Covenant of Grace, or Gospel Covenant.

Arg. 4 If all who are in the Covenant of Grace, or Gospel Covenant, do know
the Lord from the greatest to the least of them; then the Covenant of
Circumcision could not be the Covenant of Grace, or Gospel Covenant.

But all who are in the Covenant of Grace, or Gospel Covenant, do know the Lord
from the greatest to the least of them: Ergo, The Covenant of Circumcision was
not the Covenant of Grace.

This Argument is fully proved by that in Jer. 31. 32; 33, 34 speaking of the
new Covenant which God would make with the House of Israel, which should not be
according to the old, he goes on and tells us what God would do in the
Gospel-day. That he would put his Law into their inward Parts, and write it in
their Hearts. And they shall teach no more every Man his Neighbor, and every
Man his Brother, saying, Know the Lord; for they shall all know me, from the
least of them unto the greatest of them, says the Lord, etc.

And indeed in this very respect the Gospel Covenant is not according to the
old, as the Lord said it should not be, as well as in diverse other cases: For
many of those who were in the old Covenant (to which Circumcision did
appertain) were Infants, though all of them were not taken in by Circumcision;
for Female Infants were received into that old Covenant without it. Now these
Children who were taken into Covenant, did not know the Lord: Infants having no
Understanding, know not their Righthand from their Left, it is therefore
impossible they should know the Lord; and therefore there was a necessity,
after they were in that Covenant, that they should be taught to know the Lord:
First, That God is, and what a God he is, and so to know him as to fear him,
and serve him in Sincerity.

But in the Gospel Covenant God promised it should be otherwise, all who were
received into that Covenant should be Adult Persons, or such who did know the
Lord: which plainly implies no ignorant Infant should be taken into that
Covenant, and be a Member of that Church State; for it so, then it would
follow, such would have the like need to be taught to know the Lord, as they
had in the old Covenant Church State. And remarkable it is, that this Text does
clearly intimate, that all who should be taken into the Gospel Covenant, or
Gospel Church, should be discipled or taught, first to know God; for to be
taught or discipled is all one and the same thing, which agrees with Christ's
great Commission, Mat. 28. 19, 20. where he gave Direction: who, or what kind
of Persons they were to be that he would have his Apostles receive into his
Gospel Church; and that they should be all of them, first taught, or made
Disciples, and, as such, be baptized, is clearly declared. Now that this Text
in Jer. 31. refers to the Gospel Covenant is evident. see Heb. 8. 7, 8, 9, 10.

Arg. 5. That Covenant that was a part or branch of the old Covenant, or
Covenant of Works, was not a Covenant of Grace, or Gospel Covenant.

But the Covenant of Circumcision was a part or branch of the old Covenant, or
Covenant of Works; Ergo, The Covenant of Circumcision was not a Covenant of
Grace, or Gospel Covenant.

The Major cannot be denied.

The Minor is easily proved. That which bound or obliged all those who were
under it, or did it, to keep the whole Law, and was also abrogated, or taken
away by Christ, with all the other Rites and Shadows of the old Covenant, was a
part or branch of the said old Covenant. But Circumcision bound or obliged all
who were circumcised to keep the whole Law, and also the same Rite of
Circumcision was abrogated, with all other Rites and Shadows of the old
Covenant by Christ: Ergo, Circumcision was a part or branch of the old
Covenant; see Gal. 5. 3. I testify to every Man that is circumcised, that he is
a Debtor to keep the whole Law.

Arg. 6. The Covenant which was in its nature and quality as much a Covenant of
Works, as that made with Adam, or the Sinai-Covenant, was not a Covenant of
Grace, or Gospel Covenant, whereof Christ is the Mediator.

But the Covenant of Circumcision was in its nature and quality as much a
Covenant of Works, as that Covenant made with Adam, or the Sinai-Covenant:
Ergo, The Covenant of Circumcision was not a Covenant of Grace, or
Gospel Covenant. Read Reverend Mr. Philip Cary's Defense and Proof of the
Substance of this Argument, in his just Reply to Mr. John Flavel, p. 59, 60.
Thus he says (and doubtless speaks the Truth) viz.

That Adam's Covenant was a Covenant of Works, cannot rationally be denied; for
as much as Life was implicitly promised to him on his Obedience, and Death was
explicitly threatened in case of Disobedience; upon these Terms he was to stand
or fall. And that the Sinai-Covenant was of the same nature, he has in the
said Treatise clearly proved, both of them requiring perfect Obedience, and
neither of them admitting of Faith in a Redeemer. The Sinai Covenant commanded
perfect Obedience under the pain of a Curse; Cursed is every one that
continues not in all things that are written in the Book of the Law, to do
them; Gal. 3. 10.

It accepted (as he shows) of no short Endeavors, nor gave any Strength, and
is called a Ministration of Death and of Condemnation, 2 Cor. 3. And moreover
it is called in express Terms, the old Covenant which God made with the Children
of Israel when he brought them up out of the Land of Egypt, Heb. 8. 9. Also the
new Covenant is said to be directly contrary unto it, or not according to it,
but opposed thereto, and that there was no Righteousness by it, nor Life: for,
as the Apostle shows, if there had, Christ is dead in vain; and besides, the
Apostle says it is done away. Now all these things being considered, Mr. Flavel
it is evident does but beat the Air, and darken Counsel; and all that he has
said in his last Book in Answer to that worthy Gentleman Mr. Carry, deserves no
farther Answer.

Now, says he, that the Covenant of Circumcision is of the same stamp, is
evident: for tho God promised to be a God to Abraham and to his Seed, Genesis 17.
7, 8. as he did also in the Sinai-Covenant to the same People in the
Wilderness; yet still it was on condition of Obedience, with an answerable
Threatening in case of Disobedience; Ver. 9, 10. Thou shall keep my Covenant
therefore, thou, and thy Seed after thee, in their Generations. This is my
Covenant, which ye shall keep between me and you, and thy Seed after thee:
Every Man-Child shall be circumcised. Ver. 14. The uncircumcised Male Child,
whose Flesh of his Foreskin is not circumcised, that Soul shall be cut off from
his People: he has broken my Covenant. The same Terms, says he, with the
former. Besides, it is evident that Circumcision indispensably obliged all that
were under it to a perfect universal Obedience to the whole revealed Will o^
God, a ^ed before, Gal. 5. 3.

And as the Term were the same, so were the Promises; that which was the great
Promise of the Covenant of Circumcision, was the Land of Canaan, and God to be
their God, in fulfilling that Earthly Promise to Abraham's Natural Seed, upon
the Condition of keeping that Covenant on their parts.

That which Mr. Flavel has said in his last Reply (in his Book, called, A
succinct and seasonable Discourse) to Mr. Carry, is mainly to prove that there
is but one Covenant of Works p 217, 218, etc.

To which I answer by way of Concession; yet you must say, that Covenant had
several Ministrations, and Additions, as had also the Covenant of Grace;
because the Covenant of Works was made with Adam, by which he stood in the time
of his innocence justified and accepted by virtue thereof.

Could not God give such a second Ministration or Transcript of his righteous
and holy Law, tho not to Justification, yet to aggravate his Sin, and to his
just Condemnation? And does not St. Paul assert the same thing? Romans 3 1^, 20,
compared with Romans 7. 13. That Sin by the Commandment (or Law) might become
exceeding sinful: So Gal. 3. 19. Nay, I will (...) always when the Scriptures
of the New Testament speak of the old Covenant, or first Covenant, or Covenant
of Works, it passes by in silence the Covenant made with Adam, and more
immediately and directly applies to the Sinai Covenant, and to the Covenant of
Circumcision, as all careful Readers, who read the Epistles to the Romans,
Galatians, and to the Hebrews, may clearly find. But to proceed; Tho we say
there is but one Covenant of Grace, yet it is evident there were several
distinct Ministrations of it, or Additions to it; and we say, the Promise of
the Gospel, or Gospel Covenant, was the same in all Ages, in respect of things
promised, with the nature and quality thereof, which is a ^ree and absolute
Covenant, without Works, or any Conditions or foreseen A^^s of Righteousness,
or any thing to be done by the Creature, Romans 4. 5. The Substance and Essential
Part of this Covenant is Christ Faith, a new Heart, Regeneration, Remission of
Sins, Sanctification, Preservation, and Everlasting Life. Yet this Evangelical
Covenant had diverse Forms or Transcripts of it, which ^ified those things, and
various Sanctions by which it was given forth and confirmed. To Adam the
Promise was made, under the Name of the Seed of the Women bruising the Head of
the Serpent; to Enoch, Noah, etc. in other Forms; to Abraham, under the Name of
his Seed, in whom all the Nations of the Earth should be blessed; to Moses; by
the Name of a great Prophet of his Brethren like unto him; and it was also
signified to him under dark Shadows and Sacrifices: unto David under the Name
of a Successor in his Kingdom: In the New Testament in plain words, We all,
with open face, beholding as in a Glass the Glory of the Lord; 2 Cor. 3. 18.

But now, because there were so many Additions of the Gospel-Promise and new
Covenant, are there so many new Covenants? This being so, Mr. Flavel has done
nothing to remove Mr. Cary's Arguments, but they stand as a Rock. Take another
of them.

Arg. 7. That Covenant in which Faith was not reckoned to Abraham or
Righteousness, could not be a Gospel Covenant, or a Covenant of Grace:

But the Scripture is express, that Faith was not reckoned to Abraham for
Righteousness when he was circumcised, but in Uncircumcision, Romans 4. 9, 10.

Ergo, The Covenant of Circumcision was not a Gospel Covenant, or a Covenant of
Grace.

Arg. 8 That Law or Covenant which is contradistinguished, or opposed to the
Righteousness of Faith, could not be a Covenant of Faith, or a Gospel Covenant.

But the Law or Covenant of Circumcision is by the Apostle plainly opposed to,
or contradistinguished unto the Righteousness of Faith, Romans 4. 13.

Ergo, The Law or Covenant of Circumcision was not a Gospel Covenant. And from
hence Mr. Carry argues thus, By the way, says he, let it be observed, in
reference to the two foregoing Arguments which I have already proved, that that
Covenant that is not of Faith, must be a Covenant of Works, there being no
Medium betwixt them, and consequently must be the same for Substance with that
made with Adam, and that on Mount Sinai with the Children of Israel.

Arg. 9. That Covenant that is plainly represented to us in Scripture as a
Bondage-Covenant, in and by which there was imposed such a Yoke upon the Necks
of the Jews, which neither those in the Apostles time, nor their Fathers were
able to bear, could be no other than a Covenant of Works, and not of Grace.

But the Scriptures do plainly represent such was the nature of the Covenant of
Circumcision, Acts 15. 10. Gal. 5. 1, 2, 3. Ergo, The Covenant of Circumcision
was not a Gospel Covenant, but a Covenant of Works. Thus Mr. Carry argues also:
And thus we have proved from God's Word, and sound Arguments, that the Covenant
of Circumcision was not a Gospel Covenant.

Object. But lest any should think that we shut out all dying Infants from
having any Benefit by Christ.

Answ. I answer, I doubt not but God might comprehend them in-that glorious
Covenant or Compact made between him and, our Surety in the Covenant of
Redemption: But, as I said before, secret things belong to God.

But let me here add one word or two further, i. e. Circumcision, you say, was
a Privilege: so we say too, but not such a Privilege as you do imagine.

1. It does profit as a Privilege, because it was given as a Token or a Sign to
Abraham's Natural Seed, that they should have the Land of Canaan for an
everlasting Possession.

2. As a Token or Sign to them of the giving forth of the Law on Mount Sinai.
He dealt his Laws and Statutes to Israel, he did not so to any other Nation;
this Rite could not therefore be a Gospel-Rite, nor the Covenant it was a Sign
of a Gospel Covenant, in which the Gentile Christians are concerned. And thus
Paul argues, Romans 31. What Advantage then has the Jew? or what Profit is there
in Circumcision? Ver. 2. Much every way; chiefly, because unto them were
committed the Oracles of God. You may soon know the nature of that Covenant
made with Abraham's Natural Seed, and of Circumcision which was a Sign of it;
the chiefest Privilege which attended it, was the giving to them, i. e. the
People of Israel, the Law of the Ten Commandments.

3. Circumcision, by the Doctrine of St. Paul, was a Privilege if they kep: the
Law: For Circumcision verily profits, if thou keep the Law; but if thou be
a Breaker of the Law, thy Circumcision is made Uncircumcision, or a Nullity,
and profits thee nothing; that is, if thou keep not the Law perfectly. And
thus speak our late Annotators on the place, If thou [Jew] keep the Law
perfectly, to which Circumcision obliges, Gal. 5. 3. If otherwise thou
transgressest the Law, thy Circumcision avails thee nothing, it gives thee no
Privilege above the uncircumcised. What is now become (this being so) of that
mighty Privilege Abraham's Seed (as such) had by Circumcision, if the chief
Profit or Privilege was, because unto them the Land should be given, which
could not give Life, but was a Covenant of Works? then the chiefest Profit lay
not in it, as it was an Ordinance of Initiation into the Church: sure, had Paul
been of the Judgment of Pedo-baptists, he would have rather past by that
Privilege, when he spoke of Circumcision, which he calls the chief, and have
said, chiefly in that it was a Seal of Church Membership. But since he speaks
the quite contrary, who shall we believe, you, or the great Apostle of the
Gentiles? And evident it is, he confirms the same Doctrine, Gal. 5. 3. For I
testify to every Man that is circumcised, that he is a Debtor to keep the whole
Law. And hence it is said to be a Yoke of Bondage which neither they nor their
Fathers could bear, Acts 15. because it obliged them to universal O^edience, or
to keep the Law perfectly, and brought them under a Curse if they did not, Gal.
3. 10.

These things considered, fully show of what stamp and nature Circumcition was,
together with that Covenant to which it did appertain.

You sav the Covenant made with Abraham did include Spiritual Blessings.

And I grant the Covenant of Grace made with Abraham principally included
Spiritual Blessings; but the Covenant with his Natural Seed, as such, did not
include Spiritual Blessings: All Spiritual Blessings are made in Christ, and to
none but to the Elect in him. Moreover, we deny not but the Covenant of
Circumcision was made as well with Abraham's Spiritual Seed that sprang from
his Loins, as unto his Carnal Seed; and so Circumcision and the Land of Canaan
were of use to his Spiritual Seed, as the one typified the Circumcision of the
Heart, and the other the Celestial Rest.

You say that Infants were always in the Covenant of Grace; and to proveit, you
mention Act. 2 38, 39. Repent, and be baptized every one os you, etc. For the
Promise is to you, and to your Children, etc.

Answ. Do we deny that the Promise of Pardon and of the holy Spirit does belong
to our Children or Offspring that ^o believe, or are called by the Lord? We
grant it readily, but we do deny that this Promise here refers to our Seed as
such. Dr. Tailor, late Bishop of Down, on this Text says,

And to your Children, that is, to you and to your Posterity, to you and to
your Children, when they are of the same Capacity in which you are, effectually
receptive of the Promise; but (says he) if whenever the word [Children] is
used in Scripture, we should by Children understand Infants, we must believe
that in all Israel there were no Men, but all ^ere Infants; and if that had
been true, it had been the greater Wonder they should overcome the Anakims, and
beat the King of Moab, and march so far, and discourse so well, for they were
all called the Children of Israel

The Promise appertains not to Infants in that Capacity and Consistence, but
only by the Title of their being Reasonable Creatures, and when they come to
act Faith, of which by Nature they have the Faculty. If it did, yet Baptism
(says he) is not the Means of conveying the Holy Ghost; for when Peter says,
Repent and be baptized, and ye shall receive the holy Spirit, it signifies no
more than this; First, Be baptized, and then by Imposition of Hands, etc. which
was another Mystery and Rite, ye shall receive the Promise of the Father, etc.
But then, says he, from hence to argue, that wherever there is a Capacity of
receiving the same Grace, there also the same Sign is to be administered, and
from hence to inser Pedo-baptism, is an argument very fall^cious, upon several
Grounds. 1. Because Baptism is not the Sign of the Holy Ghost, but by another
Mystery, it was conveyed ordinarily and extraordinarily, (that is, by laying on
of Hands, as the Doctor mentioned before). 2. If the Supposition were true, the
Proposition built upon it is false; for, says he, they that were capable of
the same Grace, are not always capable of the same Sign; for Women under the
Law of Moses, although they were capable of the Righteousness of Faith, yet they
were not capable of the Sign of Circumcision; for God does not always convey
his Grace in the same manner.

Thus far Reverend Dr. Jer. Tailor, Lib. of Proph. p. 234, 235.

For what the Bishop has said answers all you affirm on this Text for Infants
Baptism. The Promise of the Spirit we grant runs to Believers, and to all their
believing Seed and Offspring, be they Jews or Gentiles; and this Text proves
nothing more. It did not belong to the Jews Seed, as such, but only to their
Children that did believe, and so it does to the Gentiles, that were sometimes
afar off, that believe, and to their Children that God shall also call, as he
does call their Parents.

That which you seem to affirm from this Text is this, viz. that there is such
a Covenant made with Gentile Believers, and with every particular Believer, and
his Carnal Seed, as God made with Abraham, which is strange Divinity. We have
proved that there was a Covenant of Peculiarity made with Abraham and his
Natural Seed, to which Circumcision did belong, and by virtue of that Covenant,
as appertaining to the Flesh. There was under the Law a knowing of Men, the
Jews in that Legal and External Covenant had the Preference above the Gentiles;
but that Covenant is taken away, and that Partition Wall is pulled do^n, and
now the Jews have no Advantage upon that account above the Gentiles, or the
Gentiles above the Jews, old things being passed away, and old Church State and
Church Membership gone; so that all you say upon this Scripture and Argument
signifies nothing.

And remarkable it is that Peter spoke these words to the Jews, The Promise is
to you and your Children, etc. But to say, the Promise runs to them and to
their Infants, as to Baptism and Church Membership under the Gospel, as
Circumcision and Legal Church Membership did under the Law, is notoriously
faise; none of the Jews Children were allowed Baptism, or received into the
Gospel Church, but only such that did believe, nor of the Gentiles neither;
when their Children believe, or are called, then they may be baptized, and they
have right to the Promise of the holy Spirit.

The Promise and Blessing of Abraham, you say, comes on the Gentiles through
Christ, and by Faith, therefore, say I, not in a fleshly Line, and by
Birth-Privilege

You say, Abraham's Blessing was not Personal unto him and unto his Seed, this
Blessing came upon the believing Gentiles, therefore, say you, it must come on
the Faithful, and on their Seed; for it cannot be termed Abraham's Blessing if
it come not upon the Gentiles in an essential form to Abraham's Covenant; that
is, I will be a God unto thee, and to thy Seed, unless this Blessing come upon
the Gentiles in the same manner, and in the same Enlargement, it being not
Abraham's Blessing, but a part of it, being cut in the middle. I will be a God
to you Gentiles, but not to your Seed; is this Abraham's Blessing, how unlike
to it? there is a great difference between an Estate settled on a real Man, and
that being also settled on his Children.

Answ. 1. You talk ^s if you were ignorant what Abraham's Blessing was, the
Blessing of Abraham was not the External Privileges of the Covenant of Grace
(which it seems is all you plead f^r about your Infant Seed) but the spiritu^l
Part an^ Blessing of the Covenant, namely, Justification, Pardon of Sin,
Adoption, and Eternal Life.

2* As to Abraham's Seed, does not the Apostle tell you, that, To Ab^aham and
to his Seed the Promise was made: He says not, to Seeds, as of many, but to
thy Seed, which is Christ; Gal 3 16 Now you contend for Seeds, as of many, even
to all the fleshly Seed of Abraham, and fleshly Seed of all Believers Sir, no
Gentiles but such as are Christ's, (...) ^braham's Seed; none but such that
believe, and h^ve Abraham's Faith.

The ^nheri^ance, which is God to be our God by way of special Interest, (...)
settled upon all Believers, and their Children that have the same Faith, not
their Carnal Seed as such, but only God's Elect Ones.

3. I have proved (it is true) that there was a Legal and External Covenant
made with Abraham, and his Fleshly Seed, in which Covenant God was said to be
the God of the whole House of Israel, and was bound to them; but that Covenant
is abolished and the new Covenant is not according to that, but quite
different, the Fleshly Seed are not in a Relative External Covenant: (...)
Christ's Gospel Church is not National. This being considered, it appears, that
wh^t you say concerning Abraham being the Father of the Gentiles, signifies
nothing for your purpose; for he was not the Father of any Gentiles, but of
such that believe in Christ, or Elect Ones; and this you seem to acknowledge in
these words, viz. the believing Gentiles are a Seed to Abraham, Gal. 3. 29.
But, Sir, what is this to the Business? prove if you can, that the* fleshly Seed
of Gentile Believers, as such, are a Seed to Abraham, for it is that which we
utterly deny, and on that foot of account the whole Controversy depends. You
say the Children of the Flesh are not accounted to be the Children of God, when
they break their Covenant with God; and John Baptist calls such a Generation
of Vipers.

Answ. 1. This is the sense of the Apostle, strange! Can those that are the
Children of the Covenant of Grace, cease to be such? May the Children of God
degenerate into Dogs, Wolves, and Vipers? I thought that such as are God's
Children, or Heirs according to the promised Covenant of Grace made with
Abraham can never cease being the Children of God; how else is the Promise sure
to all Abraham's Spiritual Seed? Do not all the Children of God partake of
God's Divine Nature, and are not they all Heirs of God? Are you an Arminian? Do
you plead for final falling out of God's Covenant, or from a State of true
Grace? that must follow what you say here, or your Argument is gone and lost
for ever.

2. Reader, it is plain that Ishmael, Esau, etc. and many more of Abraham's
Natural Seed, nay all, as such, or ^s so simply considered, were not accounted
for his Spiritual Seed, or the Children of God, but only such that are God's
Elect Ones, or such as believe in Christ: and it is plain that none of the true
Children of God can degenerate so as to cease being his Children; I mean, they
cannot fall totally and finally from a State of Grace, and become Vipers, etc.
as Mr. Owen acknowledges some of Abraham's Seed did, which clearly shows that
those Jews never were in the Covenant of Grace God made with Abraham; But, say
you, they were nevertheless in the outward Dispensation of God's Covenant, etc.

Answ. 1. True, the Privileges of Abraham's Natural Seed, as such, were great,
as to outward Rites and Prerogatives; the Covenant did appertain to them [mark
it!] (Covenants) there were two Covenants, it is not said Covenant. 1. They had
right to all the External Privileges of the Legal Covenant; and the outward
Dispensation of the Gospel, and Adoption by Faith was first to be offered unto
them, but neither they nor their Children, as such, had right to Justification,
Adoption, etc. or any outward Rite or Sacrament of the Gospel; no, not until
they did believe, and had the things signified in the Sacrament. But,

2 That Covenant that gave Abraham's Natural Seed, as such, a Prerogative above
the Gentiles, was that Partition Wall that is now broken down, ((...) antea) i.
e. that Covenant is abolished, and Jews and Gentiles stand now upon equal
ground; here are not fleshly Privileges now that one has above the other; no
knowing of Men nor things after the Flesh, or by Birth in a fleshly way,
through or by reason of an Externa Covenant, as under the Law. You argue as
many (...) have done before you, Children of Believers were once in Covenant,
who dares be so bold as to say they are cast out?

Answ. 1 (...) being once Members of the Jewish Church both not prove they were
ever Members of the Gospel Church: The Male Infants of God's Priests under the
old ^ov^^an, when grown up, had other Privileges, if we must ^all ^umcision
(...) Privilege, which the Sons of Christ's Ministers have no right to under the
Gospel, and yet no where in express words in the New Testament excluded from
that Privilege.

2. But I have proved the Covenant for Infants Incovenanting under the Law, was
no Gospel Covenant and so concern not (...) Infant.

3. According to that Maxim, Omnis privatio intimat habitum; you know that
every Dispossession implies a Possession: Infants therefore cannot (...) cast
out of the Gospel Church, (...) one they can be proved they were admitted. If
you or an^ Man living can tell us in what visible Administration h^ were
admitted hurch Members before Abraham's days, which was above 2000 Years, you
say somewhat: you (...) they were always in Covenant.

Mr. (...) makes mention of a two^ Covenant. 1. In relation to El^ion. 2. To
(...) in Covenant in fa^ie visibilis Ecclesiae. To this I answer; The Covenant
of Circumcision belonged to the Children of the Flesh, to Ihmael, and Esau, as
well as (...), who were not in the Election of Grace: therefore all those who
were circum^ised were not so in Covenant. Children of Unbelievers may be in
that sense in Covenant as well as Children of Believers, as many of them
afterward prove to be, nay may be more of them than of the Children of
Believers.

2. As touching Infants being in Covenant in facie visibilis Ecclesiae, in the
face of a visible Church. I answer; Tho they were so in all the Jewish Churches
under the old Covenant, some with Circumcision were brought in, and some
without it; yet that Covenant and Covenant-Seed are (as I have and shall yet
prove) cast out, which will be a final Answer.

Thus I argue;

If the Covenant for incovenanting of Infants was the old Covenant signified by
Hagar, and that Covenant-Seed signified by Ishmael are cast out; then the
Natural or Fleshly Seed of Believers are cast out, or not to be admitted into
the Gospel Church.

But the Covenant for incovenanting of Infants was the old Covenant signified
by Hagar, and that Covenant-Seed signified by Ishmael are cast out.

Ergo, The Natural or Fleshly Seed of Believers are cast out, or not to be
admitted into the Gospel Church. See Gal. 4. 22, 23, 24, 25, 26. For it is
written that Abraham had two Sons, the one by a Bondwoman, the other by a
Freewoman. Ver. 24. Which things are an Allegory; for these are the two
Covenants; the one from Mount Sinai, which gendereth to Bondage, which is
Hagar, etc. Ver. 30. Nevertheless, what says the Scripture? Cast out the
Bondwoman and her Son* for the Son of the Bondwoman shall not be Heir with
the Son of the Freewoman.

1. By Hagar is meant, all agree, the old Covenant; and by casting her out, is
held forth the abolishing, or taking away of the old Covenant. He took away the
first, that he might establish the second; Heb. 10. 9.

2. By Ishmael is meant the Natural Seed of Abraham, and so the Natural Seed of
all Godly Men of his Race that succeeded him, who were Members of that Church.
And as the late Annotators note, by this place is signified the total
Destruction of the Jewish Church, which consisted of Parents and their
Children, or the whole Nation of Israel. This Church and Church-Seed, and
manner of Church Membership is cast out and gone for ever.

We say that Children were once admitted Members of the Jewish Church; but
evident it is, that God has now quite pulled down, and razed that House to the
Foundation thereof, I mean that National Church of the Jews, and broke up
Housekeeping, and turned the Bondwoman and her Son, i. e. the Fleshly Seed or
Natural Offspring of Abraham, out of Doors; the natural Branches are broken
off, and God has now built him a new and more glorious, and Spiritual House
under the Gospel, into which he admitted none as his Household Servants, to
dwell in this his Spiritual Family, or Gospel Church, but Believers only, or
such as profess themselves so to be. Ye, says St. Peter, as lively Stones are
built up a spiritual House, etc. and that the old House, the Jewish
Church State, with all the Appurtenances, Rites and Privileges of it are
abolished, or pulled down, and a new own built and set up, into which Infants
are not to be admitted, is very evident: Heb. 7. 12. For the Priesthood being
changed, there is made of necessity a Change also of the whole Law, which must
needs include Circumcision, with all Appurtenances and Privileges belonging to
it. And therefore as Infant Church Membership came in with the Law of
Circumcision, and as a direct part of the old Covenant or old Law; so likewise
plain it is that it went out, and was disannulled with it.

Take again my former Simily, viz. What Privileges soever are given to any
Person by an Act of Parliament, which said Law was to continue so long in force
and no longer, than when that time was expired; and another Parliament makes a
new Law, where many things are contained that were in the last Law, but those
diverse Privileges given to those Persons in the former Law are left out in this
latter Act: would it not be a piece of Folly for any of them to plead those
Privileges by virtue of a Law that is gone, and now not in any force? But to
come a little nearer the case in a more apt Simily: Suppose a Man should have a
Legacy bequeathed to him by the Will and Testament of his Friend, and yet
afterward his Friend sees good to make another Will, which is his last Will
and Testament, and in this last Will and Testament he leaves him quite out, not
mentioning his Name, bequeathing no such Legacy to him; would it not be Folly
in him to sue for that Legacy left him in the first Will and Testament?

Sir, the Case is thus in hand, we read of two Covenants or Testaments, an old
and a new, a first and a second. Now in the old Will or old Testament, Infants
were admitted to this Privilege of Church Membership in that Legal or National
Church of the Jews; and National Church-Privileges are now made null and void
by the Gospel Covenant, which is Christ's last Will and Testament, in which
Infant Church Membership is quite left out, their Names not being mentioned, as
having right to any Gospel-Ordinance, as Baptism, the Lord's Supper, etc.

If we would know the Mind of God herein, we must of necessity have recourse to
Christ's last Will and Testament. Since the Gospel is so called, and that the
first or old one is taken away, and there is no Man can prove any one old Rite
that did appertain to the Natural Offspring of Abraham, or Believers, remains
to them, which is not mentioned in the new of last Will or Testament of Jesus
Christ; it is plain they had (or leastwise some of them) other external
Privileges besides that of Circumcision, and yet I see no Man contend for any
one Rite, but only this they call the Seal of the Covenant. Why might not
Ministers plead for all their Sons to have right to the Ministry, since that
Privilege was given them in the Old Testament; and that all Male-Children that
open the Womb to be holy to the Lord, which Blessings belonged to them under
the Law, and also plead for the Tenths and First Fruits? etc.

I desire you and all Pedo-baptists carefully to consider and weigh what I have
said; I have showed you and them how Infants, who were once in Covenant, i. e.
in the Jewish or old Covenant, are cast out, or left out; for indeed they were
never admitted into the New Testament-Church; but since they are not put in,
and the old Covenant, and old Church Membership are cast out and gone, in vain
it is for any to plead their Right by an abrogated Law. Besides,

You say, Circumcision was the Seal of that Covenant, by virtue of which
Infants had Right to Church Membership: if so, it is evident that Covenant is
gone, because it is cancelled; for the tearing off, or breaking off the Seal, we
all look upon as cancelling a Covenant.

That Circumcision (the Seal as you call it) is broken off, I am sure you
cannot deny; Sir, what is then become of your Covenant for incovenanting
Children?

Object. But may be you will object and say, that you do not contend for that
particular Rite or Institution of a visible Church Membership of Infants,
perpetual in all Ages, and an indefinite Seal.

Reply 1. How does it appear the Infants of the Godly before Abraham's time,
had any Right to visible Church Membership, or what Seal had they?

2. Such a Right is a mere Figment-like Idea Platonica. All Institutions merely
positive are of such Rite in particular, and an initial Seal is merely
positive, as Signs that are not natural, but by the Will of the Appointer; and
therefore there is no initial Seal indefinite.

Sir, now you have no way left, but to see since the old Covenant is cancelled,
whether you can find the Baptism of Infants in the New Testament, and there
taught, laid down and prefixed to it, as Circumcision was to the Old? Do that
and you do all; do not that, and all you do is just nothing. You with others
seem to say that the Privileges of the Gospel are straiter and narrower than
those of the Law.

Answ. If you once imagine, that the outward or external Privileges of the
Gospel are larger, or so large as those were under the Law, you are greatly
mistaken. The Jews and Jewish Teachers or Priests had many external Privileges,
which Christians and Ministers under the Gospel have not; they had a lovely
Country promised to them, a Land that flowed with Milk and Honey: outward
Peace, Riches, and gathering of Wealth, where Privileges belonged to them; but
we under the Gospel have no such Privileges, but are to expect Persecution, and
what not? Yet our Privileges are better and greater, tho more spiritual; it is a
Covenant established upon better Promises: Our Children, when grown up, sit
under the clear and glorious Light of the Gospel, which they and theirs then
held forth but in dark Shadows.

Moreover, then the Church State was confined to the Natural Seed of Abraham,
etc. but now all in all Nations who repent and believe the Gospel; the poor
Gentiles are now become fellow-Heirs indeed. Our spiritual Privileges do
infinitely excel theirs, but not in Externals; now are greater Infusions of the
Holy Spirit.

O, Sir, what Privileges had the Gentiles or their Children then! is not the
case mended with us?

Again, it is objected by some Pedo-baptists, If it were the Will of God,
Infants under the Gospel should be reckoned as out of his Covenant who were in
Covenant, then it follows, say they, that our Savior was unfaithful, or
forgetful to his Church, in that he never acquainted her with this Alteration;
but not one word by way of Prohibition do we find in all the New Testament:
from whence we may conclude, that Christ's not repealing the Practice of
initiating Infants, nor forbidding their Admission into the Church by Baptism,
etc.

Answ. 1. I answer, Had it been the Will of God that Infants should under the
Gospel be admitted into the Church by Baptism, Christ, you might rather say,
had been forgetful or unfaithful in not giving the least Intimation of his Mind
and Pleasure therein, who declared all things plainly from the Father, and was
faithful as a Son over his own House.

2. That which is not contained in his last Will and Testament in this and
other matters, is sufficient to declare his Mind and Will in the Negative. And
so you know it is in all last Wills and Testaments among Men, if it be not
expressed in the Affirmative, it needs not be expressed in the Negative; and if
not, because it is not forbidden it may be done, so may an hundred things more;
nay many Jewish Rites, and Popish Innovations too, for where are they forbid?
The Sum therefore of my Answer is this: The Privileges, which are ^ites,
Ordinances, or Sacraments, are not so many as you would have, or so many as the
Jews of old had; nor are they to be administered according as they fancy or
approve of, or according to their Reasonings, but according to God's express
Appointment. Rightly does Mr. Ball in his -- Book speak, Posit. 3, 4. page 38.
But in whatsoever Circumcision and Baptism do agree or differ, we must look to
the Institution, and neither stretch it wider, nor draw it narrower than the
Lord had made it: for he is the Instituter of the Sacraments according to his
good Pleasure; and it is our part to learn of him, both to whom, how, and to
what end the Sacraments are to be administered, how they agree and wherein they
differ: In all which we must affirm nothing but what God has taught us, and as
he has taught us.

Were it not thus, how could we deny or oppose the Papists seven Sacraments? or
condemn Salt, Oil, Spittle to be used in Baptism, which they use in it, seeing
these are not forbid? But well says Tertullian, Is it lawful because it is not
forbidden? it is therefore unlawful because it is not commanded.

It Is further suggested by the Pedo-baptists by way of Objection, viz. That it
lays a mighty Stumbling Block (I mean the Baptist Principle) in the way of the
Jews Conversion to Christianity: Will this, say they, encourage a Jew's
Conversion to embrace the Religion of Jesus, to tell him of the high and
glorious Privileges that he shall be interested in himself upon his believing
on him, but for his Children they are c^st out?

Answ. Did this stumble them in the Apostolical Days, who were told that
Circumcision availed nothing, nor Uncircumcision? The truth is, if Circumcision
availed nothing, but was a Yoke of Bondage, then why should that stumble them?
It might be a greater Stumbling Block in their way, to tell them their
Church State, and all their Privileges are now gone, and now they must not look
upon themselves better than the Gentiles; no more Scepter in Judah, no Land of
Canaan, no Temple, no High Priest, the Levites Sons, as such, now no more
Ministers, no Succession of Priesthood: What of all this, when they hear of
better Privileges for them? and that their Infants who die may go to Heaven,
tho not circumcised, nor baptized? And if they live to be Men and Women, and do
believe, (or God please to call them) the Promise of Pardon of Sin, and of the
Holy Spirit is to them, and that they shall be saved Act. 2. 39. Are not they
and all others told, that old things are passed away, and all things are become
new? etc. 2 Cor. 5. 16. Wherefore henceforth we know no Man after the Flesh. It
seems then that heretofore there had been a knowledge of Persons after the
Flesh, and it is plain there was, because the Jews were of the Natural or
Fleshly Seed of Abraham, and were therefore all of them admitted to the
Privilege of external Church Membership, while others were exempted: But we see
the Apostle resolves henceforth to disclaim any such Value, Esteem, Preference,
or Knowledge of them, or any others upon the account of mere fleshly Descent:
And to this very purpose immediately subjoins in the following Verse, Therefore
if any Man b^ in Christ, he is a new Creature: old things now are past away,
and all things are become new: the old Church and old Church Membership,
Privileges, Rites and Ordinances; and a new Church State, new Ordinances, new
Rites, a new Seed, and a new way of Introduction unto the Participation of
Gospel-Privileges and Church Membership; and if this should stumble them, who
can help it? we know they have stumbled upon as bad a Rock as this.

Moreover, denying Infants any Right to Gospel Ordinances, cannot fill the
Mouths of Jewish Children with clamorous and passionate Complaints against
Christianity, because they could not see Jewish Children had such benefit by
Circumcision as you intimate: No, no, they must yield to the Sovereign Will of
the great Lord, and plead for no more Privileges, nor any otherwise than he
seems good to ordain and appoint.

I am sure if what you and other Pedo-baptists say was true, it is enough to
fill the Mouths of poor Unbelievers Children among us who are Gentiles, with
clamorous Complaints against their Parents, if they did regard what you say;
and doubtless there are more of them, I mean, more Children born of Ungodly
Parents, than such born of Godly Parents: And what may they say, and how may
they expostulate their own Condition? Alas! alas! sad is our State, our Parents
were wicked and ungodly People, and we are by that means left of God; to us
belongs no Covenant, no Sacraments, nor hopes of Mercy; God has taken none but
the Children of godly Persons into Covenant! We are baptized, alas! but had no
right to it; our Condition is as bad as the State of the Children of Pagans and
Turks! Sir, if People did consider well the Purport of this Doctrine, they must
needs have their Hearts rise against all the Broachers of it: Nay, all or most
Children may be in doubt, whether their Parents were truly Godly, and so in
Covenant or not; for if not, you must fly to some other Argument to prove their
Baptism and Church-Privileges, than that of their Parents being in Covenant.
True, the case under the Law was another thing; for if their Parents were Jews,
or the Natural Seed of Abraham, whether Godly or not, yet they knew they had
right to those external Privileges.

I have seen some Arguments framed by a Pedo-baptist, in order to the proving
that the Covenant made with Abraham, was a Covenant of Grace; and he endeavors
to prove the same, 1. From the Language and Expression of it. 2. From the
Duration of it. 3. From the Blessings by it.

1. The Language and Expression of it, Genesis 17. 7. I will be a God unto thee,
and to thy Seed after thee. Now (say they) is not this a pure Gospel-Phrase,
and shows it to be a Covenant with Abraham in Christ? I pray how comes the
Almighty God (who, upon the breach of the Covenant of Works made with us in
Adam, became our enraged Enemy) to be a God unto fallen Man, any other ways
than by a Mediator? etc.

Answ. 1. I have proved that there was a twofold Covenant made with Abraham,
and I deny not but the Covenant of Grace made in Christ was promised to
Abraham, which takes in only the true Spiritual Seed, and to all those God is
in a special manner become a God unto.

2. Evident it is, all manner of God's covenanting Transactions since the Fall,
of what nature soever, have been no other ways than through the Interposition
of a Mediator, as that with Noah about the Flood, etc. Genesis 9. 8, 9. in that
God showed himself to be the God of the whole World, and so he is by Creation
and Providence; yet it does not follow that Covenant was the Covenant of Grace;
or that God has received them into special Favor with himself. So when God
gave out that fiery Law on Mount Sinai, he told them, Exodus 20. 2. I am the
Lord your God, etc. this was the very Introduction to that part of the Law
which was written in Stone; but nevertheless the Apostle expressly calls it, a
Ministration of Death and Condemnation, 2 Cor. 3. 7, 8. and that it killed and
could not give Life. Now must this be a Covenant of Faith or Grace? How is it
then that the Apostle Paul says, the Law is not of Faith; also the Covenant of
Grace gives Life? But I argue thus, The Law could not give Life; Ergo, The Law
was not a Covenant of Grace. So much for the first Note or Observation.

2. The second Observation is, The Duration or Continuance of this Covenant
made with Abraham, the Lord calls ^t an Everlasting Covenant, etc.

Answ. This might have been left out, only it adds to the Number: this is
answered by the Objector himself (be he who he will) in saying the Hebrew word
for Everlasting, sometimes signifies no more than a long Continuance of Time:
We know it very well; and those Mosaical Rites that ended in Christ, are said
to be for everlasting. But when the Lord says he will be a Person's God for
ever and ever, or everlastingly, it denotes his being so to all Eternity: But
God never said he would be the God everlastingly, or to all Eternity, to all
who were concerned in the Covenant of Circumcision; nor was he Ishmael's God
so, tho circumcised; and has he not cast off that whole Nation of the Jews,
with whom he made that Covenant? and is not so their God now, tho he is, I
confess, to all Eternity, or everlastingly, the God of all Abraham's Spiritual
Seed; viz. all true Believers in Christ.

3. The third and last Argument or Note to prove the Covenant of Circumcision a
Covenant of Grace, is taken from the Benefits and Blessings conveyed by it. To
be a God unto him, and to his Seed, and that everlastingly, is a most
comprehensive Gospel-Blessing; for hereby (say they) God gives a Person an
Interest in all that he is, and in all that he has, so far as can be
communicated to a Creature. This Blessing promised to Abraham comprehends
Christ, Grace, Holiness here, and Glory and Happiness hereafter. And
accordingly we find the Apostle, Heb. 8. uses the same Expression with this of
God's to Abraham, I will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a People.

Answ. This is idem, and bis idem culpandum est, the same again which is
already answered. Is God everlastingly a God to Abraham and to all his Fleshly
Seed, and to Believers, who are the Spiritual Seed of Abraham, and to all their
Fleshly Seed; I say, is this so? Does God give himself, all he is, and all he
has, to every Believer, and to all his Fleshly Seed? Have all their Children,
or every one of them, Christ, Grace, Holiness here, and Glory and eternal
Happiness hereafter? Or, are they not to be justly blamed who jumble things so
confusedly together? It Is true, the Covenant of Grace made with Abraham, and
all his true Spiritual Seed (who are the Elect) have Interest in all God is,
and has, so far as it can be communicated to Creatures; and we know they have
Christ (as well as are Christ's, as Paul notes, Gal. 4.) and Grace here, and
shall have Glory hereafter. But a multitude of Abraham's Natural Offspring,
and the Natural Offspring of Believers has neither Christ nor Grace, nor shall
be saved, but perish eternally. Therefore this may serve for an Answer, with
what I have proved before, touching the nature of that twofold Covenant made
with Abraham.

Let us come to what is further asserted:

If the Covenant which God made with Abraham be one and the same with the
Covenant of Grace, then our Infant Seed have right to Baptism.

Answ. This has been urged before, and I have already answered it, only I shall
add a Passage or two of Martin Luther's.

Paul therefore concludes with this Sentence (says he) They which are of
Faith, are the Children of Abraham: That Corporal Birth, or Carnal Seed makes
not the Children of Abraham before God. As if he would say, there is none
before God accounted as the Child of this Abraham (who is the Servant of God,
whom God has chosen and made righteous by Faith) through Carnal Generation,
but such Children must be given before God as he was a Father, but he was a
Father of Faith, was justified and pleased God; not because he could beget
Children after the Flesh, not because he had Circumcision under the Law, but
because he believed in God. He therefore that will be a Child of the believing
Abraham, must also himself believe, or else he is not a Child of the Elect, the
believing and the justified Abraham, but only the begetting Abraham, which is
nothing else but a Man, conceived, born and wrapped in Sin, without the
Forgiveness of Sin, without Faith, without the Holy Ghost, as another Man is,
and therefore condemned: such also are the Children carnally begotten of him,
having nothing in them like unto their Father, but Flesh and Blood, Sin and
Death; therefore these are all damned. This glorious boasting then we are the
Seed of Abraham, is to no purpose. Thus far, and much more to the same purpose
he excellently debates upon.

Mr. Perkins on the Galatians, concerning the Covenant m^de with Abraham: The
Seed of Abraham (says he) is the Seed not of the Flesh, but of the Promise:
And this Seed is first Christ, and then all that believe in Christ; for all
these are given to Abraham by Promise and Election of God. Moreover, this Seed
is not many, (as Paul observes) but one. It is objected, that the word Seed is
a Name collective, and signifies the whole Posterity of Abraham. Answ. It does
sometimes (says he) but not always; for Eve says of S^th, God has given me
another Seed. Again (he says) this one particular Seed of Abraham, is Christ
Jesus, here called by the Name Christ, first and principally the Mediator; and
then, secondarily, all Jews and Gentiles believing that are fit and grafted
into Christ by Faith. St. Paul says, the Children of the Flesh, these are not
the Children of God; but the Children of the Promise are the Seed of Abraham,
Romans 9. 8.

Now this Covenant we grant thus made with Abraham, is one and the same with
the Covenant of Grace; but what does this signify to the Infants, or Fleshly
Seed of Believers, as such? And thus I shall pass to your next Argument.

You say, the Children of the Faithful are in God's Covenant, because Christ is
the Mediator of a better Covenant, which was established upon better Promises,
Heb. 8. 6, etc. But, say you, if the Children of the Faithful are excluded from
the Covenant, then the Covenant is worse, and not a better Covenant? It was a
great Prerogative of Children being in Covenant, Romans 9. 4. for the Promises of
God belonged to them; but if the Covenant be shortened in Privileges, how is it
a better Covenant? etc.

Answ. 1. I answer; It is granted by us that the Children of the Jews, whether
they were believing Jews, or unbelieving Jews, godly Persons or ungodly
Persons, they were in that external Covenant God made with Abraham's Natural
Seed, as such, or with the whole House of Israel under the Old Testament, or
old Covenant: But the Promises and that Covenant then ran not to the Seed of
believing Jews only, but if they were Abraham's Seed, I mean his Natural Seed,
whether Believers or Unbelievers. Circumcision belonged to the Male-Infants, as
such, and all other external Privileges, but the Covenant of Grace made with
Abraham ran only then as it runs now, viz. to all the Elect only, not to their
Carnal Seed, as such, but to their Spiritual Seed. If you are a Believer, you
are in the Covenant of Grace; and if your Child in Infancy be one of God's
Elect, that decretively is in the same Covenant of Grace, but not actually
until it does believe, and has actual Union with Christ by Faith, and partakes
of the holy Spirit, which is the Bond of that Union, and Seal of the Covenant
of Grace. No external Rite can be the Seal of the Spiritual Covenant. If
therefore Circumcision was a Seal of any Covenant, it was the External and
Legal Covenant: tho Abraham, it is true, received it as the Seal of the
Righteousness of his Faith, even of that Faith he had being uncircumcised; and
in that sense it could be a Seal to no other Person but to Abraham only: for
who besides him had the Righteousness of Faith before they were circumcised,
and that they should be Fathers to all that believed, not only of believing
Jews, but believing Gentiles also? for so ran the Covenant of the Righteousness
of Faith God made with Abraham. And has God made such a Covenant with you, or
with any Believer now? Or, is there any such Covenant-Head under the Gospel,
save Jesus Christ alone? Abraham was but a Typical Father; the Covenant made
with him and his Natural Seed, as such, typified Christ, and all his Spiritual
Seed.

2. We have proved in the Legal or Old Covenant, there were many other external
Privileges besides Circumcision, and external visible Church Membership,
several of which we have mentioned; to which we may add, they had a right to
the Land of Canaan, and to a Civil Government and Governors among themselves,
or a Political Commonwealth, as also a right to a glorious external Temple.
But, Sir, is the Gospel Covenant worse than that Legal Covenant, because we and
our Children have not such Promises and external Privileges? Certainly if God
pleases to open your Eyes, you will soon see and confess your Mistake. Besides,
the Apostle calling it a better Covenant, and better Promises, clearly shows
they are not external Privileges, but spiritual: and so in that sense I have
proved the Privileges and Promises of the Covenant of Grace, do far exceed the
Privileges the Jews had then; and our Childrens Privileges are greater also,
tho not to be received as Members into the Gospel Church till they do believe.

You say, the Covenant of Grace that God made with Abraham was an immutable
Covenant, it was confirmed by an Oath, Heb. 6. 13, 17, etc. therefore if the
Children are excluded the Covenant (you say) it is mutable; and if so, what is
become of the Oath and the Promises of God? Where is the strong Consolation?
Where is the Immutability of God's Counsel? Therefore (say you) those that do
cast out the Children of the Faithful from the Covenant of Grace, etc. weaken
their Consolation, and nullify the eternal Covenant, and make God a Liar, 1
John 5. 10.

Answ. 1. I answer; Here you charge us home, and lay horrid Evil at our Doors,
that do deny the Children of Believers, as such, to be in the Covenant of
Grace: but how unjustly and unrighteously we are charged by you, I shall, God
assisting, make appear.

2. Sir, Are all Believers Children in the Covenant of Grace? I affirm, and
will stand by it, if so, they shall all be saved, because all and every Soul
that was, or is in the Covenant of Grace made with Abraham, shall be saved,
because it is an immutable Covenant, and God's Promise and Oath are passed to
secure them of Eternal Life. Sir, the Natural Seed of Abraham, as such, never
had any ground of strong Consolation; God never made a Promise, and bound it
with an Oath, that they should all be saved; I speak of Abraham's Fleshly Seed,
as so considered, or as such; for if he had made such an immutable Covenant
with them, and confirmed it by his Oath, What is become of his Promises and
Oath, since he has cast off Abraham's Natural Seed? O how preposterously you
argue! See Romans 9. 6. Not as tho the Word of God has taken none Effect: For
they are not all Israel which are of Israel: Neither because they are the Seed
of Abraham are they all Children; but in Isaac shall thy Seed be called, i. e.
They that are the Children of the Flesh, i. e. as such, these are not the
Children of God; but the Children of the Promise are counted for the Seed. Sir,
this Text says as much as we do affirm. The Spiritual Seed of Abraham, viz. all
the Elect of God, or Believers only, are in the immutable Covenant, and have
strong Consolation; but who can tell or know who they are that are God's Elect
Ones until they believe, or are under effectual Vocation? and that Election
runs only to Believers Seed, as such, you will not say: For many Children of
Unbelievers we se^ daily are in God's eternal Election by their special
Vocation, and many Children of Believers are not elected, because never called..

2. Were it the immutable Counsel of God, that all Believers Children should be
called, adopted, justified and eternally saved, you had said something, and
then all their Natural Seed might have strong Consolation indeed. But alas,
alas, how many Godly Men's Children prove wicked and ungodly, and so live and
die! Were these such, think you, that ever were in the Covenant of Grace God
ma^e with Abraham? Had they ever any ground of strong Consolation?

3. Come, Sir, the Odium falls on your self. I argue thus: If all the Children
of Believers are in the Covenant of Grace God made with Abraham, and yet many
of them eternally perish, what then is become of the immutable and everlasting
Covenant of Grace? nay of the Promises and Oath of God? and also of the
Doctrine of final Perseverance? O what Shame do you Pedo-baptists bring upon
your selves, by arguing after this blind manner for your Babes Baptism!

4. But perhaps you will say, you argue for the external Privileges of the
Covenant of Grace to belong to your Children, as such, and not the spiritual
and special Blessings of it.

Answ. If so, the case is still worse: for then it will follow, that God in the
Covenant of Grace has by his Promise and Oath, and Immutability of his
Counsel, given to all Persons ground of strong Consolation, that only have a
share in the outward Rites and external Parts of the Covenant of Grace.

Sir, deliver your self as well as you can from being ground to pieces between
these two Millstones.

But why must your Children only have but part of the external Privileges of
the Covenant of Grace, who only partake of Baptism, and not of the
Lord's Supper? Is not Faith required of all such that ought to be baptized, as
well as it i^ required in all that partake of the Lord's Supper to examine
themselves? neither of which Infants are capable to do.

It i^ manifest that the Children of the Faithful, as such, are not in the
Covenant of Grace God made with Abraham; but that there was a twofold Covenant
made with him, and that the Covenant of Grace only appertains to the Elect of
God, whether they be Children of Believers or Children of Unbeliever^, which is
not known to us until they are grown up, and are brought by the Spirit of God
under special Vocation and Regeneration; and that they are the Adult only, viz.
such as believe, that have right to Baptism, but that not by virtue of the
Covenant of Grace, but by virtue of the positive Command of Christ in the New
Testament. Sir, you mistake again, it was not by virtue of the Covenant of
Grace, that Persons had right to Circumcision; for if so, then Lot, and
Melchisedec, and Abraham's Males as soon as they were born had a right to it,
as also his Females; nothing gave right to Abraham's Male-Infan^s to
Circumcision but the mere positive Command of God to him, which extended only
to those Males in his own House, or bought with his Money, and not till the
eighth day: for such that died before the eighth day, tho Males, had no right
to be circumcised, nor had his Females any right thereto; so none but
Believers, when they can give an account of their Faith, by virtue of Christ's
express and positive Command, ought to be baptized. Pray remember the Covenant
of Grace, as such, gives no right to Baptism; for if it did, all Believers or
Elect Persons had right to it from the first Introduction or Declaration of it
to Adam upon the Fall. No, no, it is a pure Gospel-Ordinance, and merely
positive, and only depends upon the Will and Pleasure of the Lawgiver, Jesus
Christ.

Honored Britains, who inhabit North and South Wales, let me entreat you to
consider how false the Conclusion is that Mr. Owen draws, concerning the Right
the Infants of the Faithful have to Baptism; namely, that if they are in the
Covenant of Grace, then they ought to be baptized: For as he, nor no Man else
can prove, the Infants of Believers, as such, are in the Covenant of Grace; so
it would not follow, were that granted, that they ought to be baptized, it
being not the Covenant of Grace, but the express and positive Command of Christ
that gives Persons just Right thereunto. Suppose Christ had not commanded
Believers to be baptized, would any Man have adventured to baptize them, or
conclude it was their Duty because they were in Covenant with God? Or would
Abraham have been circumcised himself, because in the Covenant of Grace, had he
not received a positive Command so to be? Certainly he was long in the Covenant
of Grace before he was circumcised, and did not sin thereby, because God had
not given that Precept to him until he was old.

Moreover, it was the express Command of God that gave right to his
Male-Infants to be circumcised, and not only those of his Seed that were in the
Covenant of Grace, but Ishmael, and others who were not Children of the
Promise, or in the Covenant of Grace, were circumcised, and also it was not
Lot's Duty, tho in the Covenant of Grace, to be circumcised, because not one
that dwelt in Abraham's Family, or his Natural Seed, nor commanded by the Lord
to be circumcised, or to circumcise his Infants.

CHAP. VII.
Proving Infant Baptism is not lawful, because Circumcision under the Law
belonged unto the Male-Infants of the Jews, containing an Answer to Mr. James
Owen's first Chapter.

IF, say you, Circumcision under the Law belonged unto Infants, then Baptism
under the Gospel belongs unto them; for even as Circumcision was, so Baptism
is the Seal of the same Covenant of Grace, and signifies the same things.

Answ. 1. I answer; If Circumcision did not belong to Infants under the Law,
any otherwise than by express and positive Command of God, which gave them
right thereto; then if God has not commanded Believers to baptize their
Infants, it is not their Duty to baptize them, but their Sin if they do it. But
I have proved it was the express Command of God only that gave Male-Infants
proceeding from Abraham's Lo^^s Authority to be circumcised; and God has given
no such Command to Believers to baptize their Infants; therefore Baptism does
not belong to the Infants of Believers, as such, under the Gospel, as
Circumcision did belong to Male-Infants under the Law.

2. I have proved Circumcision was not the Seal of the Covenant of Grace, tho
it was a Seal to Abraham of the Righteousness of his own Faith, yea of that
Faith he had being not circumcised. A Seal I have showed gives an undoubted
Right of all those Blessings and Privileges to those Persons to whom the said
Covenant is sealed, and so it did to Abraham: but it was no Seal of the
Blessings of the Covenant of Grace to Ishmael, Esau, and many thousands more
who were commanded to be circumcised. Were this therefore true that Mr. Owen
asserts, That Circumcision was a Seal of the Covenant of Grace to all that were
circumcised in Infancy, then they were all saved, even all the Males that
proceeded from Abraham's Loins, many of which proved as vile and wicked Men as
most that ever lived in the World. Nor, Reader, is Baptism a Seal of the
Covenant of Grace under the Gospel; for if so, it would seal all
Gospel-Blessings to all Persons that are baptized: who then (were it so) but
would be baptized, and baptize his Children? Brethren, the holy Spirit only is
the Seal of the Covenant of Grace, or Gospel Covenant, vid. Ephesians. 1: 13, 14.
cap. 4. 10.

You proceed, to show in several respects, that Circumcision and Baptism
signify the same things.

1. You say, because Original Corruption comes by Natural Generation. 2.
Because we are born in Uncleanness, we must be washed in our Infancy.
Answ. 1. Supposing that Circumcision did, and Baptism does signify the
Corruption or Filthiness of Original Sin, or Uncleanness; must we therefore
baptize our Infants without any Authority, Command or Example in God's Word?

2. Does Baptism wash away Original Corruption? I know the Papists assert it
does do this, but how do they or you prove it? Baptism, St. Peter says, does
not wash away the Filthiness of the Flesh, or Corruption of Natural Pollution,
1 Pet. 3. 21.

3. Your Reverend Brother Mr. Stephen Charnock fully proves that Baptism is not
Regeneration, that cannot cleanse from Sin. Answer his Arguments in his Book of
Regeneration. What tho those Baptists in Germany you speak of, understood that
the ancient erring Fathers that introduced Infant Baptism, did bring it in to
wash away Original Sin; Cannot Christ cleanse Elect dying Infants from Original
Sin by virtue of his Blood, in a way unknown unto us? Must we deny Original
Sin, or own Infant Baptism does cleanse from it? Strange Divinity! you prove
nothing.

4. You say, all were not regenerated in Circumcision, but God blessed his own
Ordinance in his own time, for the Regeneration of his Elect, etc. So say you,
not that all are regenerated in Baptism, but because Baptism shows the
necessity of Regeneration, and being effectual in time unto all those that are
elected, for working Regeneration in them.

Answ. 1. You say, all were not regenerated in Circumcision, and so, not that
all are, say you, regenerated in Baptism, etc.

Sir, take heed you do not deceive the Souls of People. I deny that ever any
one Soul was regenerated in Infancy, either in Circumcision or Baptism; nor did
God ever ordain either of those external Ordinances to regenerate young or old.

2. I know the Scripture, and worthy Divines hold forth that Baptism is a Sign
of present Regeneration; they that ought to be baptized, i. e. Believers, do
rise out of the watery Grave, as Dr. Sherlock asserts, new born Creatures; but
thus do not Infants whom you baptize, or rather rantize.

3. Prove, if you can, that God ever blessed Circumcision or Baptism to the
Regeneration of any Elect Infants when grown up: But if none but Elect Infants
are the Subjects of Baptism, why do you baptize, as you call it, all the
Infants of Believers? Are all their Children elected, and none but theirs? Are
not many Children of Unbelievers elected? Why then are such not to be baptized,
as well as the Children of the Faithful?

Sir, we know not who are elected till called, and Baptism belongs to none but
such who can make a Profession of their Faith, and give Evidence of effectual
Calling, and present Regeneration. You write but your own Fantasy, not God's
unerring and certain Truth.

4. You say, Abraham's Heart was circumcised, before the Flesh of his
Foreskin; but you intimate his Childrens Flesh was circumcised before their
Hearts were circumcised. In the same manner, you say, our Ancestors the
Gentiles, were first Fruits unto Christ, and were regenerated before baptized;
but their Seed are baptized before they are regenerated. To Abraham, you say,
it was a Seal of the Covenant of Grace he had, and of the Righteousness of his
Faith before circumcised; but to his Seed it was a Sign of the Righteousness of
Faith they were bound to receive for Justification, after they were
circumcised: and so you speak of Believers Seed in respect of Baptism.

Answ. 1. I answer; Abraham only received Circumcision as a Seal of the
Righteousness of his Faith, etc. But prove that Circumcision did bind all his
Children to receive by Faith Justification: it is a bold Assertion. I have
proved, that Circumcision did not appertain to the Covenant of Grace, but to
the external or fleshly Covenant God made with Abraham, and in him with the
whole Nation of the Jews: and therefore it is positively affirmed by the
Apostle, That such that were circumcised were bound to keep the whole Law, Gal.
5. 3. not to receive by Faith Justification. Your Parallel between Circumcision
and Baptism ('it is true) well futes with the Human Contrivance of those that
first invented Infant Baptism, who would thereby fain make the Gospel Church
National, as the Jewish Church was, and confirm the old Church-Right and
Church Membership, which is taken away, and a new Church State erected, which
does not consist of Believers, and their Carnal Seed, as such, but only of the
Spiritual Seed of Abraham, who are Believers or living Stones, who are built up
a Spiritual House, 1 Pet. 2. 5, 6. The Gospel Church is not National but
Congregational, say what you please to the contrary.

2. Therefore as the Faithful at first among the Gentiles and Jews too,
received Baptism as Believers, being regenerated before baptized, so must we
unless you have a new Gospel, or fresh Authority to change the Administration
of Gospel Ordinances, and the Gospel Church. I thought the Water as it just
came forth of the Fountain was most pure, you do but plead for the muddy Water
that has run through the Popish Stream.

You say, Circumcision was a Sign of Admission into the Church of God, every
Male did come in through that Door; the uncircumcised had no right to the
Privileges of the visible Church. So you would have Baptism to run.

Answ. 1. It Is not true what you say, Circumcision was not the Door into the
Jewish Church, they were all born Members of that National Church, and
therefore their Females were as truly Members (that were not required to be
circumcised) as their Males.

2. Tho we grant Baptism is the initiating Ordinance into the Gospel Church,
yet it admits of no Members but Believers only; if any others upon a false
Faith get into it, they have no just Right thereto, and, when discovered, are
to be put out.

3. Sir, tremble at the Thoughts of what you say! It is not we, but Christ in
his Blessed Gospel, that excludes Infants, or the Natural Seed of Believers, as
such, from being Members of the Gospel Church; he has shut up that Door, viz.
by Generation, i. e. being the Seed of Abraham, or Seed of Believers, as such,
and has opened the Door of Regeneration: It Is we that believe, and our
Children that the Lord our God shall call, and none else.

4. Sir, Circumcision was so far from being any such a Privilege as you
intimate, that the Apostle calls it such a Yoke of Bondage, that neither they
nor their Fathers were able to bear, Act. 15. And in Answer to what you say, p.
It was not for their Sin, nor the Sin of their Parents that Infants are
excluded, or not received into the Gospel Church, but because it was the good
Pleasure of God to erect another, and more spiritual Church State, and to
remove the old Way, and Typical Church State of Israel.

5. Therefore for you to intimate as if we were so unnatural, as to cast our
Children out of God's House, is not to be endured; it does but reflect on the
Wisdom of God: we are more faithful to our Children (and not like the Ostritch)
than you, for we would not allow them that Right which God has not; nor make
them think in Baptism they were regenerated and made Members of God's Church,
and so deceive, and put them upon a Temptation not to seek out for any other
Regeneration, and Gospel-Right to Church Membership.

You say, Circumcision was an Obligation to put off the Body of the Sins of the
Flesh, and, say you, Baptism puts us under the same Obligation, etc.

Answ. Baptism can oblige none to put off the Body of Sin, but such that are
the true Subjects of it, by virtue of Christ's holy Institution, which are only
Believers, such who before baptized have received the Spirit of God so to do:
But you, without any Warrant from Christ, would put this hard Obligation on
your poor Infants, whereas you know nor whether ever God will give them his
Spirit or Grace, to enable them so to do: And as one Pedo-baptist lately says,
If they do not discharge this Obligation, viz. their Baptismal Covenant, they
are guilty of Perjury, and it is the damning Sin.

O cruel Parents! you list your Infants into the Spiritual War by your
pretended Baptism, and arm them not. The Graces of the Spirit are the Believers
Spiritual Armor and Weapons, these they have when listed, I mean baptized; but
Infants, as such, have not this Armor on when baptized: Alas! poor Babes they
have too much Guilt upon them naturally! O the Weight that lies upon them! but
you Pedo-baptists add to it by your Tradition of a Baptismal Covenant, that God
never appointed them to come under.

Therefore you object, How can Children be bound to that which they are
ignorant of? You answer, They were ignorant of the Bond of Circumcision, and
yet were bound over to the Law to take him to be their God, and to depart from
the ways of Sin, etc.

Answ. Because God obliged and bound over the Jews by Circumcision in their
Infancy in that Legal Covenant, to love the Lord their God with all their
Hearts, to take him to be their God, and to depart from all the ways of Sin,
nay to keep the Law perfectly, (which showed the necessity of Christ's
Righteousness and Merits) which was nevertheless upon this respect a Yoke of
Bondage, which Yoke by Christ we and our Children are delivered from: Will you
adventure to bring your poor Children under another like Yoke of Bondage?
Christ's Yoke is easy, and his Burden is light, because he gives all that are
to be baptized his Spirit, and a changed Heart to love God, and cleave to him,
and serve him; but you make his Yoke as hard as the Yoke of Circumcision, by
putting Baptism on your poor Infants, to oblige them thereby to be regenerated
and love God with all their Hearts, before Grace in the Habit of it is infused
into them, and all this without the least Authority from Christ or the Gospel.
O cruel Parents! Sirs, who has required this at your Hands? You shall hear
more of this hereafter.

You do intimate, that it is true Circumcision did oblige to keep the Law
perfectly since the Law, but from the beginning it was not so; for, say you,
Circumcision was not of Moses, but of the Fathers, Joh. 7. 22.

Answ. Was not the Moral Law from the beginning? and were not those that were
circumcised bound to keep the Moral as well as the Ceremonial Law? How then
dare you say, and prove it not, that from the beginning it was not so, i. e. It
did not bind Abraham's Natural Seed exactly to keep the Moral Law, that is, to
love God with all their Hearts, and their Neighbors as themselves, yea to
leave and loath all Sin?

Circumcision I have proved was no Seal nor part of the Covenant of Grace, but
of, and part of the Covenant of Works; so that you run into a dangerous S^are,
and deceive the People unwarily by your Ignorance of the two Covenants made
with Abraham, and not distinguishing Circumcision from being a Seal to
Abraham's Faith, and not a Seal in common to all his Children. It was a Sign to
them in their Flesh, but no Seal of the Covenant of Grace. You further run a
Parallel between Circumcision and Baptism, as some others before you have done:
Pray take my former Answers to all you say here which I have given to other
Pedo-baptists upon this foot of account.

1. Others formerly have (as well as you do now) affirmed, That Baptism comes
in the room of Circumcision. 2. They run a Parallel between Circumcision and
Baptism, and would have them both signify the same thing in an exact Analogy.
(...):
(...) Say they, which you seem to affirm also, If Baptism succeeds in the room
of Circumcision, then as the Jewish Infants were circumcised, so the Infants of
Christians may and ought to be baptized: But Baptism succeeds in the room of
Circumcision: Therefore as their Children were circumcised then, so may ours be
baptized now.

Answ. 1. There is no necessity that a Gospel-Ordinance must succeed in the
room of a Legal or Jewish Ordinance. What if I affirm, that no Ordinance
succeeds in the room of Circumcision? Were there not many other Rites and
Ordinances under the Law, or Old Testament, besides Circumcision? and yet you
cannot find, or once imagine any Gospel-Rite or Ordinance to come in the room
of them respectively, for that then it would follow, there would be as many
Christian Rites, Precepts and Ordinances, as there were Jewish Rites, Precepts
and Ordinances, which, as one observes, were more than three hundred.

2. Besides, as Dr. Tailor observes, If Baptism came in the room of
Circumcision, you must baptize your Children always on the eighth day, and you
must not baptize your Females at all, because none but Male Infants were then
circumcised.

3 And whereas you say that Baptism signifies the same things that Circumcision
did, it is not true, as will appear to all understanding Men, if they consider
these Particulars following, which are so many Disparities, viz.

(1.) Circumcision was a Shadow of Christ to come; Baptism is a Sign he is
already come, was dead and buried.

(2.) Circumcision was a Sign of the Covenant made with Abraham and his Natural
Seed; Baptism is a Sign of the peculiar spiritual Privileges made to Saints, as
such, and no others.

(3.) Circumcision was a Domestic Action, i. e. to be done in the House;
Baptism an Ecclesiastic, belonging to the Gospel Church.

(4.) Circumcision was to be done by the Parents in that respect; Baptism is to
be done only by Gospel Ministers.

(5.) Circumcision was the cutting off the Foreskin of the Flesh, which drew
Blood; Baptism is to be done by dipping the whole Body into the Water, without
drawing of any Blood.

(6.) Circumcision belonged to Male-Children only; Baptism belongs to Males and
Females also.

(7.) Circumcision was to be done precisely on the eighth Day; Baptism is not
limited to any precise Day.

(8.) Circumcision made a visible Impression on the Body, which the Party might
perceive when he came to Age of Understanding; Baptism leaves no Impression on
the Body.

(9.) Circumcision belonged to Abraham's House, to his Male-Infants only, or
such who were bought with his Money, and not the Male-Infants of any other
Godly Men in his days, unless they join themselves to his Family; Baptism
belongs to Believers in all Nations.

(10.) Circumcision bound those who came under that Rite to keep the whole Law
of Moses; Baptism signifies we are delivered from that Yoke of Bondage.

(11.) If Circumcision signified the same things, and consequently,
particularly the sealing the Covenant of Grace, then those that were
circumcised needed not to be baptized, because sealed before with the same
Seal, or that which signified the same thing; but Christ and all his Apostles,
and many others, who were circumcised, were nevertheless baptized.

(12.) Circumcision signified the taking away the Sins of the Flesh, or the
Circumcision of the Heart; but Baptism signifies the Death, Burial and
Resurrection of Christ, which Circumcision did not.

(13.) Circumcision was to be a Partition Wall betwixt Jew and Gentile; but
Baptism testifies that Jew and Gentile, Male and Female, Barbarian and
Seythian, Bond and Free, are all one in Christ Jesus.

Therefore there are diverse Disparities and different Significations between
Circumcision and Baptism.

4. And what tho we should grant that Circumcision was then the initiating
Ordinance, and Baptism is so now in Gospel Times, i. e. an Ordinance of
Initiation; yet Circumcision initiated none into the Jewish Church, but such
who were by express and positive Command of God to be circumcised, who were
only Male-Infants (for the Females were initiated without it); even so Baptism,
tho it be an initiating Ordinance, yet none are to be initiated thereby, but
only those who by the express Command are required to be baptized, and they are
only such who believe, or make Profession of their Faith. Sir, Precepts that
are merely positive, greatly differ (you know well enough) from Precepts that
are purely Moral in their own nature. Laws that are of mere positive Right,
wholly depend upon the absolute Will and Pleasure of the great Legistator; and
in all Cases and Circumstances we must keep to the express words of the
Institution, we must venture to do no more, nor less nor do any thing in any
other manner than God has commanded, as appears in Nadab and Abihu and Uzzah's
Cases; the first for offering of strange Fire, which thing God commanded them
not (tho God in express words no where forbid them so to do) were cut off,
Levit. 10. 1, 2.

When God commanded Abraham to circumcise on the eighth day, did he not
virtually forbid him to do it on the seventh or ninth day? Therefore this sort
of reasoning of yours is merely sophistical, and you do but darken Counsel with
Words without Knowledge. Again, it is affirmed by you and other Pedo-baptists,
That God has no where declared that Infants should be excluded; you mean, he
has no where forbid in express words the baptizing of Infants: No more, say I,
has he forbid Honey, Wine, Oil, Salt, and Spittle to be used in Baptism; the
former was used by some of the Ancient Fathers, and the latter is still in the
Romish Church: Where are we forbid to baptize Bells, and consecrate Water, as
the Papists do to make it holy Water? Also where are Infants excluded from the
Lord's-Table? If therefore any thing may be done in God's Worship which you
suppose is not forbid, and bears also some proportion in Signification with
Jewish Rites, all Popish Rites and Ceremonies may be let in at the same Door:
For the Pope, Miter, Popish Vestures, Candle and Candlesticks, etc. they no
doubt will tell you are of like Signification with the High Priest under the
Law, with the Priest's Vestures, and other Ceremonies among the Jews. Whither
will this lead you? it is dangerous to be led by such a Guide.

But to proceed, we will come to that grand Proof for Infant Baptism you
mention, i. e. That Baptism does come in the room of Circumcision, which is in
Col. 2. 11, 12. In whom also ye are circumcised with the Circumcision made
without Hands, by the Circumcision of Christ; buried with him in Baptism, etc.
It is affirmed, That the Design of the Apostle here is to take the Colossians
off from the old Sacrament of Circumcision: He informs them that there was no
Reason why they should be fond of it, because they were complete without it,
Christ having substituted a new Circumcision in the room of it, namely,
Baptism; and accordingly Christians may now be said, by Baptism, to be
spiritually circumcised, as the Jews were said to be spiritually baptized.

Answ. This Exposition of this Text there is no ground to admit of; the Apostle
speaks of the Power or Virtue of Christ's Circumcision: His Design is to show
we are complete in Christ, and have him on; he mentions Faith as well as
Baptism, or such a Faith that should always attend Baptism; and therefore
Infant Baptism from hence cannot be proved, or inferred, nor the least ground
for such a bold Conclusion from hence, viz. That Baptism came in the room of
Circumcision.

1. For first, the Apostle it is true excludes Circumcision, but it is upon
another account, viz. by showing Circumcision was a Figure of the Circumcision
of the Heart, as Romans 2. 28, 29. Phil. 3. 3. and since they had the same
signified thereby, the Rite or Sign ceased. And as I have formerly replied in
Answer to this Text, so I must say to you, all that can well be asserted from
this Scriptare, where the Apostle brings in Baptism, is no more than this, viz.
That where Baptism is rightly administered, upon a proper Subject, it represents
the Spiritual and Mystical Circumcision of the Heart, i. e. That the Soul is
dead to Sin, or has put off the Body of the Sins of the Flesh, by the
Circumcision of Christ; which may refer to the Power of his Death in the
blessed Effects thereof, by the effectual Sin-killing Operations of the Spirit
on the Heart. And as being dead to Sin, we are buried with Christ in Baptism,
both in Sign and Token of Christ's Burial, i. e. covered all over in the Water,
which is a clear Symbol of his Burial; also in Signification, i. e. that we
being dead, and buried with Christ in Baptism, so are to rise with him by the
Faith of the Operation of God; and both these are held forth in true Baptism.
The Apostle does not mention Baptism to come in the room of Circumcision, but
to show that these believing Colossians had through Christ by the Spirit
obtained the Antitype thereof, or thing figured out in the Circumcision of the
Flesh, which Baptism did clearly represent. But since this is so strenuously
urged afresh, tho so often answered, I will be at the trouble to transcribe
once more what Dr. Tailor, late Bishop of Down, has said to this Argument of
yours, and others before you, about Circumcision, viz. That Baptism is the
Antitype of it, or that it came in the room thereof.

The Argument (says he) from Circumcision is invalid upon infinite
Considerations: Figures and Types prove nothing, unless a Command go along with
them, or some thing express to signify such to be their Purpose; for the Deluge
of Waters and Ark of Noah were Figures of Baptism, says Peter. If therefore
the Circumstances of the one be drawn to the other, we shall make Baptism a
Prodigy rather than a Rite. The Paschal Lamb was a Figure of the Eucharist,
which succeeds the other, as Baptism does Circumcision: But because there was
in the Manducation of the Paschal Lamb no Prescription of Sacramental Drink,
shall we conclude from hence the Eucharist is to be administered in one kind? To
which let me add, Because Children, Servants, and all in the House might ear of
the Passover, must our Children and all in our House eat of the Eucharist, or
Supper of the Lord? But says the Doctor, In this very Instance of this
Argument; suppose a Correspondency of the Analogy between Circumcision and
Baptism, yet there is no Correspondency of Identity; for tho it be granted both
of them did consign the Covenant of Faith, yet there is nothing in the
Circumstances of Children being circumcised, that so concerns that Mystery, but
that it might well be given to Men of Reason, because Circumcision left a
Character in the Flesh, which being imprinted upon the Infants, did its Work to
them when they came to Age; and such a Character was necessary, because there
was no word added to the Sign. But Baptism imprints nothing that remains on the
Body; and if it leaves any Character at all, it is upon the Soul, to which the
word is added, which is as much a part of the Sacrament as the Sign it self;
for both which Reasons it is requisite that the Party baptized should be
capable of Reason, that he may be capable both of the Word and of the
Sacrament, and the Impress upon the Spirit. Since therefore the Reason of the
Parity does wholly fail, there is nothing left to infer a necessity of
complying in the Circumstance of Age any more than in the other Annexes of
Types. The Infant must also precisely be baptized upon the eighth day, and
Females must not be baptized at all, because not circumcised. But it were more
proper, if we would understand it aright, to prosecute the Analogy from the
Type to the Antitype, by the way of Letter and Spirit, and Signification; and
as Circumcision figures Baptism, so also the Adjuncts of the circumcised shall
signify something spiritual in the Adherents of Baptism: and therefore as
Infants were circumcised, so spiritual Infants should be baptized, which is
spiritual Circumcision; for therefore Babes had the Ministry of the Type, to
signify that we must, when we give our Names to Christ, become Children in
Malice, and then the Type is made complete.

Thus, as I have formerly said, the worthy Doctor has given you a full Answer
to all you have said concerning your Arguments for Baptism coming in the room
of, or being a Figure of Circumcision. But to proceed.

5. If Baptism and Circumcision were both in full force together for some time,
then Baptism is not the Antitype of, nor came in the room of Circumcision.

But Baptism and Circumcision were both in full force together for some time;
therefore Baptism is no Antitype of, nor came in the room of Circumcision.

The Minor is undeniable: Was not Baptism in full force from the time that John
received it from Heaven, and administered it on the People? And did not Christ
by his Disciples baptize many Persons, nay more Disciples than John? as it is
said John 4. 1, 2. and was not Circumcision then in full force too, and so
abode till Christ took it away by nailing it with all other Jewish Rites to his
Cross?

And as to the Sequel of the Major, that cannot be denied: for if one thing
cannot come in the room and place of another, till the other is actually and
legally removed, and took out of the way, which is plain; then since these two
Rites had a Being together, the Major is undeniable. A Type can abide no longer
than till the Antitype is come, therefore Baptism is not the Antitype of
Circumcision, or came not in the room and place thereof; the Antitype of which,
or that which came in the room of the Circumcision of the Flesh, is the
Circumcision of the Heart, not in the Flesh but in the Spirit, whose Praise is
not of Men, but of God.

6. And indeed how one thing that was a Figure or Shadow should come in the
room, or be the Antitype of another thing which is a Figure or Shadow, no wise
Man can see Reason to believe. And thus your great Text, Col. 2. 11, 12. is
plainly and honestly opened, according to the scope and main drift of the
Spirit of God therein, and your great Pillar for your Scriptureless Practice of
Babes Baptism, razed and utterly overthrown.

I have met with an Answer given to the like pretended Proof for Pedo-baptism,
written by a most Learned and Reverend Author. The Argument and Answer I have
been at the pains to transcribe, which take here as follows.

The Argument runs thus, viz.

To them to whom Circumcision did agree, to them Baptism does agree; but
Circumcision did agree to Infants; therefore also Baptism, etc.

The Major he endeavors thus to prove, i. e. If the Baptism of Christ succeeds
in the room and place of Circumcision, then Baptism belongs to them that
Circumcision belonged to: but the Antecedent is true, therefore the Consequent.
The Minor he says is proved from Col. 2. 12. it is said the Colossians were
circumcised because baptized.

Answ. This Argument supposes Baptism to succeed in the room of Circumcision,
which may be understood many ways.

1. So as that the sense be, that those Persons may be baptized, which
heretofore by God's Appointment were to be circumcised, and in this sense the
Argument must proceed, if it conclude to the purpose: but in this sense it is
false, for Females were not circumcised, which yet were baptized, as Acts 8.
12, 13, 14. and 16. 14, 15. and Believers out of Abraham's House, as Lot,
Melchisedec, Joh, were not to be circumcised, but believing Gentiles are
universally to be baptized.

2. It may be so understood as if the Rite of Baptism then began when the Rite
of Circumcision did, or was to end: but this is not to be said; for John
Baptist and Christ's Disciples baptized, Joh. 4. 1, 2. before Circumcision of
right ceased.

3. It may be understood as if Baptism did succeed in the place of Circumcision
in respect of its Signification, which is true in some things, but not in
others. First, both might signify the Sanctification of the Heart, and this is
all may be concluded out of that place alleged, Col. 2. 11, 12. to which I
think meet to add, that if that Text be looked into, the Apostle speaks not of
Circumcision, but of Christ; because in him we are complete, and by whose
Circumcision we are said to put off the Body of the Sins of the Flesh: nor does
the Text say we are circumcised, because we are baptized, but that we are
complete in Christ, because we are circumcised in him, and buried with him in
Baptism; in which, or in whom ye are also risen together, through the Faith of
the Operation of God that raised him from the Dead.

In some things Baptism does not succeed in the place of Circumcision, in
respect of Signification. For,

1. Circumcision did signify Christ to come of Isaac according to the Flesh,
Genesis 10. 11. but Baptism does not signify this, but points at his Incarnation,
Death and Resurrection.

2. Circumcision was a Sign that the Israelites were a People separated from
all Nations, Romans 3. 1. but Baptism signifies, that all that believe, whether
Jews or Gentiles, are one in Christ, Gal. 3. 28.

3. Circumcision signified, that Moses his Law was to be observed, Gal. 5. 3.
but Baptism does signify, that Moses his Law is abolished, and the Doctrine of
Christ established.

4. Circumcision signified the Promise of the Land of Canaan, but Baptism
Eternal Life by Christ.

And indeed, says he, if this Argument be not warily and restrainedly
understood, an Egg is laid, out of which manifest Judaism may be hatched: but
if it be taken restrainedly, it no more follows thence, but that Baptism and
Circumcision in some things hold forth the same, which is more plainly said of
Noah's Ark, 1 Pet. 3. 21. and of the Red Sea and Cloud, 1 Cor. 10. 2. and yet
we say not that Baptism succeeded in their place, much less do we infer any
Rite to be instituted in their stead, respecting the same Persons; yea verily
it is to be seriously thought on,

1. That by such Arguments drawn from Analogies not conceived by the Holy
Ghost, but drawn out of our Wit, a new kind of instituting Right (viz. from
Analogies) is brought in, besides our Lord's Precepts and the Apostles Examples.

2. This being once said, by a like Parity of Reason and arguing, it will be
lawful to bring into the Christian Church under other Names and Forms, the
whole Burden of Jewish Rites, yea almost out of what you will, to conclude,
what you will; for who shall put a Bound to Men's seigning Analogies, when they
go beyond the Lord's Precepts, and the Apostles Examples? It is well known that
the Divine Appointment of Tithes to be paid, and many other things in the
Writings of Divines are asserted by this kind of Argument, beside the Rule of
the Lord's Precepts, and the Apostles Examples.

3. Thereby will the Opinion of the Papists be confirmed, who affirm the
Sacraments of the Jews to be Types of the Sacraments of Christians, which is
rejected by those Divines that dispute against Bellarmine.

4. This manner of arguing will countenance the Arguments of the Papists for an
universal Bishop, because the Jews had such, and justify a Linen Garment at
Mass, because there was such among the Jews, and for holy Water, Purification
of Women, Easter, Pentecost, etc. for which the Papists do in like manner
argue, as appears out of Durandus's Rationals and other Interpreters of Rituals
among the Papists. Yea what hinders but we may give Children the Lord's Supper,
if we argue this way, since Samuel, Jesus Christ, etc. under Age, were
Partakers of the Passover? and of right all the Males were thrice in the Year
to appear before the Lord; and therefore it is certain they did eat the
Passover: and it shall be afterward showed, 1 Cor. 11. 28. the place will not
avoid this Inconvenience, if the Text, Mat. 28. 29. may be shifted off, as
Pedo-baptists use to do. Lest any M^n take this for a light Suggestion, I will
add that Grave, Godly and Learned Men have often warned that we are to take
heed, that we do not rashly frame Arguments from Analogy: Among others in their
late Writings in the English Tongue, John Paget in his Defense of
Church Government, Part 1. cap. 3. p. 8. and elsewhere. John Ball in his Reply
to the Answer of the New England Elders unto the nine Positions, Posit. 2. p.
14.

Lastly; It is to be considered again and again, how by these Argumentations
the Consciences of Men may be freed from the danger of Will Worship, and
polluting so remarkable an Ordinance of Christ as Baptism is: Especially the
Care lies on them, who by Prayer, Sermons, Writings, Covenants and Oaths, do
deter Christians from Human Inventions in God's Worship, diligently, and it is
to be hoped sincerely.

We further object, That there was a Command for Circumcision of Infants, but
there is no Command for the baptizing of them.

You answer,

The New Testament mentions but little of Infants, because so much mention is
made of them in the Old Testament, which says plainly, that the Children of
the Faithful are in God's Covenant, and that the Seal of the Covenant belongs
unto them.

Neither the Old Testament only, nor the New Testament only (say you) but both
together, comprehend the Rule of Faith and Obedience. The Jews deny the New
Testament, and some Christians among us (say you) deny the Old Testament in
respect of Infant-Privileges.

Answ. 1. You seem here to deny Infant Baptism to be found in the New
Testament, therefore would have us go to Genesis 17. for it: Strange case! that a
pure Gospel-Ordinance that is of mere positive Right can be found in the Old
Testament.

2. Sir, tho the Old Testament and New together is a Rule of Faith and
Obedience in many things, especially in pure Moral Precepts; yet, Sir, in
Precepts merely positive, I deny the Old Testament is any Rule to us: we are
not obliged to Circumcision, the Passover and Sacrifices, etc. by virtue of the
Old Testament, because they only belong to the Old Covenant-Time; and as to
Baptism and the Lord's Supper, they that lived under the Old Testament were not
obliged to them, because these are pure Gospel-Precepts; and the New Testament
only is our Rule, and a perfect Rule too upon this account. If therefore you
cannot find Infants Baptism in the New Testament, you and your Childish Baptism
is gone for ever.

3. The Old Testament does not say the Children of the Faithful, as such, were
in the Covenant of Grace, tho they were in the Legal Covenant; but we have
proved if they were, yet that does not prove they ought to be baptized, because
the Covenant of Grace, as such, gives no right to Baptism, but Christ's
positive Command.

Now these things being considered, what signifies all Mr. Owen has said
concerning Circumcision, tho it signified some things that Baptism also does
signify, if they differ in so many respects, and there is no Institution of
Christ for Infant Baptism, as there was for the Male Children of the Jews to be
circucmised; Circumcision or Baptism being neither of them moral, but mere
positive Precepts? But since Mr. Owen says in his next Chapter, he shall show
that there is a Command for baptizing Infants; we will see how he proves that.

CHAP. VIII.
Proving that Jesus Christ has not commanded Infants to be baptized; in Answer
to what Mr. Owen affirms in the sixth Chapter of his Book, concerning Christ's
Commission, Mat. 28. 19, 20.

YOU begin with the words of Christ's Commission, Mat. 28. 19, 20. thinking
that he has there commanded Infants to be baptized. We will read the words of
the Commission, viz. Go ye therefore, and teach all Nations, baptizing them in
the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: Teaching them to
observe all things that I have commanded you, etc.

In these words, you say, Christ commands, 1. To teach the Nations. 2. To
baptize them. 3. To teach them.

Here is; say you, a twofold Teaching, one before Baptism, the other after
Baptism, unto the Adult among the unbelieving Gentiles: Teaching precedes
Baptism, but to the Children of such Baptism preceded Teaching; in the same
manner as Abraham, being the Father of the Gentiles, was taught before
circumcised, but his Children were circumcised before they were taught.This
yousay is the Signification of the word, as appears.

Answ. 1. I answer, you would have the form of the Commission to run according
to your Scriptureless Practice of baptizing of Infants, as you call Sprinkling;
but that the Commission is wrested and abused by you to serve your turn, will
appear,

1. They that are the only Subjects of Baptism according to the Commission,
are, first to be taught, or, as the Greek word is, discipled, or made
Disciples, and then baptized: and I will appeal to your Conscience, whether
they are not the same Persons that were to be taught before baptized, that our
Lord commands to be taught afterward all other things that he has commanded
baptized Believers to observe and keep. You would have the Parents converted
from Heathenism to be taught before baptized, but the Teaching afterward not
to refer to them, but to their Children baptized before taught, or in their
Infancy. O what abominable Abuse is this of the great Commission of our blessed
Savior!

1. The Commission runs, Teach them in all Nations, whether Jews or Gentiles.
2. Baptizing them that are taught, or made Disciples by teaching. 3. Teaching
them, i. e. the same them that were Disciples, baptized.
Dare you invert, nay subvert the sacred Commission, and so make void the
Command of God to uphold your own Tradition? Sir, tremble at the thoughts of it!

Answ. 2. That this which we say is the true Purport of the Commission, is
acknowledged by Mr. Perkins, Mr. Baxter, and other Pedo-baptists. Take Mr.
Perkins's own words, First of all, says he, it is said, Teach them, that is,
make them Disciples by teaching them to believe and repent: here, says he, we
are to consider the Order which God observes in making a Covenant with Men in
Baptism. First of all, he calls them by his Word and Spirit to believe and
repent; then in the second place, he makes a Promise of Mercy and Forgiveness,
and thereby he seals his Promise by Baptism: They, says he, that know not, nor
consider this Order which God used in covenanting with them in Baptism, deal
preposterously, overslipping the Commandment of repenting and believing, which
is the cause of so much Profaneness in the World.

Doubtless he said right; for you who baptize Infants that are not capable to
repent nor believe, make a multitude of profane Christians in the World, as
they are called: Who knows which of the Infants you baptize God will call, and
savingly work Grace in, which should indeed be wrought in all, before they are,
according to the direct Order or From of the Commission, or ought to be
baptized? O what profane Wretches does your Practice bring into your Church, if
all you baptize you make Members thereof in their Infancy! Mr. Perkins
doubtless did not foresee how by his honest Exposition of the Commission he
overthrew his Infant Baptism and Church Membership. Moreover, take Mr. Richard
Baxter's words, speaking of the Commission Christ gave to his Disciples, Mat.
28. 19, 20, viz.

Their first Task (says he) is to make Disciples of them, which are by Mark
called Believers.

The second work is to baptize them, whereto is annexed the Promise of
Salvation.

The third work is to teach them (that are baptized Believers) all other things
which are after to be learned in the School of Christ. To contemn this Order
(says he) is to contemn the Rules of Order; for where can we find it if not
here? See Mr. Baxter's Right of Baptism, page 144, 150.

This Man, tho a Pedo-baptist, yet durst not be so bold as to invert the Order
of the Commission, nor do as you do, viz. affirm the Teaching mentioned after
Baptism, refers not to Believers baptized after they are made Disciples, but to
their Infants baptized, of which the Commission speaks not one word, nor can it
by any color of Reason or Consequences be drawn therefrom. But to prove your
false Exposition of the Text, you proceed to do it, First from God's Promise to
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, that in their Seed should all the Nations of the
Earth be blessed, Genesis 18. 18. and 22. 18. Christ came, say you, to confirm the
Promise unto the Fathers, that the Gentiles might glorify God for his Mercy,
Romans 15. 8, 9. If God is not a God to the Gentiles and their Seed, according to
the Promises made to the Fathers, then, say you; Christ weakeneth and not
confirms the Promises: God forbid we should think so, etc.

Answ. 1. God forbid that you should rest always under such dark and cloudy
Conceptions of the Covenant and Promises made to the Fathers touching the
Gentiles; for the Covenant and Promises made to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob were,
that the Gentiles, through Faith in Christ, should be Fellow-heirs with the
Jews that believed in him, and with the ^s that b^ed also. And thus runs the
Covenant of Grace to Abraham, etc. and thus it runs to believing Gentiles, that
all of them, and their Children that believe, or are in the Election of Grace,
shall be saved: And it is thus that all the Nations of the Earth are blessed in
Christ, whether Jews or Gentiles, i. e. all such in all Nations that believe,
and are called by the preaching of the Gospel.

2. But because Christ's Church does not now in Gospeldays take in whole
Nations and whole Families, as the Jewish Church under the Law did take in the
whole Nation of the Jews, and all their Families, does Christ weaken the
Promises? Sir, that external Legal Covenant erected a Typical Church, which
Church ceased at the Establishment of the Spiritual Church, which is only
Congregational under the Gospel, as I fully proved before.

But furthermore; You say, the Apostles understood Christ's Command unto them
in this sense, and therefore they have preached Salvation to those that
believed, and all theirs, etc.

Answ. The Apostles understood Christ's Command and Commission no doubt, but it
appears you understand it not. Did they preach Salvation to Believers, and to
all their Children, as such, whether elected or not, called by the Word or
Spirit, or not? For this you must prove, or you say nothing; and how absurd
would that be should you affirm any such thing? Peter speaks of no Promise made
to Jews nor Gentiles, and to their Children, but to such of them that the Lord
our God shall call. And it is directly said that the Jailer and all his
believed; therefore if you will still affirm, that the Apostles applied, as you
intimate, Abraham's Covenant among the Gentiles unto the Seed, the fleshly Seed
of Believers, as such, you do assert an Untruth, and cast a Lie upon the
Apostles through your Ignorance. Prove, if you can, they were to baptize any
Person, Adult or others, that believed not, or made not a Confession of their
Faith. Children, you say, are part of the Nations; for if the Apostles were to
baptize all Nations, then they were to baptize Infants also, for Children are a
great part of the Nations, near one half.

Answ. 1. It Is evident that our Savior in his great Commission, enjoineth no
more to be baptized but such who are first taught, or made Disciples, and this
agrees with his own Practice; John 4. 1. He made and baptized more Disciples
than John: he first made them Disciples, and then baptized them; nor were there
any in the New Testament baptized, but such who first made a Profession of
Faith in Christ. Do you read that those Jews, Acts 2. that believed and were
baptized, were commanded to baptize their Infants, or that any other baptized
Believers among either Jews or Gentiles were commanded so to do? or have we no
perfect Rule left us in the Gospel? for so it will follow if the Infants of
Believers ought to be baptized.

2. If the Commission be so extensive as you affirm, then all the Heathens and
Pagans in all Nations that believe not, are to be baptized, and all their
Children too, and all Unbelievers Children in Christian Nations. Sir, are not
these part of the Nations? Noble Britains! see the nature of the Pedo-baptists
Consequences and Inferences for baptizing Infants. This Inference proves that
all People and Nations in the whole World ought to be baptized from the
Commission: But I will, as I once did to another Minister, appeal to Mr. Owen's
Conscience, as he will answer it at Christ's Tribunal, Whether he believes the
Commission authorizeth Christ's Disciples to baptize any but such who are first
taught, and made Disciples, whom St. Mark calls Believers, repeating the words
of the same Commission, Mark 1^. 16.

3. Sir, are the Infants of Believers near one half part of the Nations? I am
afraid you are mistaken, this is the way to make Christ's Flock a great Flock;
but the truth is, you have as much Reason to assert all the Infants of
Heathens, Pagans and Unbelievers are to be baptized from the Commissions, as
the Infants of Believers, and then it may be as you say, viz. they may be near
one half of all Nations. But to proceed. Sir, you say,

When God threatens to cut off the Nations from before the Israelites, the
Children were included; for the Children were not spared any more than the
Fathers. On the other side, say you, when Christ commands to baptize the
Nations for their Salvation, he means the Children as well as their Parents.
If a Man would command a Shepherd to shear all his Sheep, and to set on them an
Ear-mark to know them from other Sheep; although the Shepherd had sheared the
Sheep and marked them, if he leaves out the Lambs without marking of them, he
performs not his Duty: If he says to the Master, the Lambs were too young for
shearing, true says the Master, but they were not too young for marking, you
ought to mark them, for they are a great part of my Flock.

If little Children, say you, cannot receive Instruction, they can receive
Christ's Mark, even Baptism, by which Christ's Sheep are divided from the Goats
of the Devil: The Church of Christ is his Flock, is there no Lambs in this
Flock? Christ is the good and faithful Shepherd, who gives his Life for his
Flock, John. 10. 11. and will he not care for his Lambs and Weaklings of his
Flock? yea certainly he shall gather the Lambs with his Arms, and carry them in
his Bosom, etc.

Answ. 1. I answer; it is a bold Assertion from your Inference and absurd
Consequence, drawn from the Commission (as I have showed) to affirm, when
Christ commands to baptize the Nations, that he means Children, viz.
because they are part of the Nations, but I have answered that already; when
Children do believe, they ought from the Commission to be baptized, but not
till then.

2. As to your Similitude, it is much the same with that Mr. Burkit, a
Pedo-baptist, has in his Book which I lately answered. I will recite my Answer
to him, which fully answers you both, and all others who talk after this ra^e;
he argues from the Commission as you do. Take his Words and my Answer in order,
viz.

The true Reason, says he, why Christ bid his Disciples first teach and then
baptize, was because he was sending his Apostles forth among the Heathens to
convert them to Christianity; in which work we all know, that preaching of the
Word must go before the Administration of the Sacraments.

Should, says he, the King of England send his Ministers into Foreign
Plantations to convert the Indians to Christianity, they ought not to be
baptized before they are taught and instructed; but when the Parents are
proselyted, and make a visible Profession of their Faith, their Children may be
baptized, and afterward instructed; as the Children of the Jewish Proselytes
were first circumcised, and then taught: For tho Abraham was first taught and
then circumcised, yet Isaac was first circumcised and then taught: so that the
sense of our Savior is this, Teach such as are capable of teaching, and
baptize such as are capable of Baptism.

Answ. 1. I answer, first, how inconsistent is this with the words of the
Commission? By virtue of the Commission none ought to be baptized but such that
are first taught, or do believe; and therefore some Pedo-baptists pretend that
Infants have Habitual Faith, Faith in semine, etc. but you plead they may be
capable of Baptism without Faith, and also contradict the Order of Words in the
Commission. Do you not confess by the Order of the Words in the Commission,
Teaching ought to go before Baptizing? Sirs, it is a sign of a very bad Cause
that puts you thus to try your Wits, and after all confound your selves.

2. I ask you how Abraham (whom God commanded to be circumcised, as a Seal of
the Righteousness of that Faith HE had before circumcised) could know he ought
to circumcise his Son Isaac, etc. who had no such Faith, had not God given him
an express Command to do it? Besure if he had, he had sinned in doing that
which God commanded him not. So, and in like manner, since our Lord Jesus
expressly in his Commission, commanded none to be baptized, but such who are
first taught, unless he had added, as in Abraham's case, viz. when an Heathen
is converted to the Christian Faith and baptized, you may baptize his Infants
also; How dare you make such Additions to Christ's Commission without his
Authority, and so make the World believe, if you could, our blessed Savior
gave forth an imperfect Commission to his Disciples, which all Men must confess
is the only Warrant and Rule of all Ministers to act by in the case of
baptizing to the End of the World? And does he not say, Add thou not to his
Word, lest he reprove thee, and thou art sound to be a Liar; by fathering that
on Christ which he never said nor intended?

When a King, say you, by his Charter or public Writing sets at liberty the
Inhabitants of some Town, are not the Children Partakers of the Charter although
their Names be not particularly in it? So, it is here, the King of Heaven is
through the Charter of the Gospel, making of us, that were Strangers and
Foreigners, to become Fellow-Citizens with the Saints, Ephesians. 2. 19. and to that
end commanding to receive all Nations through Baptism into the Liberty and
Privileges of the City of God; and will he not receive the Children into the
Privileges of their Parents?

Answ. I answer, if it be so, as you say, in all National States, Governments
and Constitutions, and Civil Societies, what does this prove touching the case
in hand, unless you dare undertake to affirm, the Gospel Church is National and
not Congregational? Does the Constitution of the Spiritual Gospel Church run as
in Human and National Constitutions? Prove it, for I utterly deny it. Besides,
if your Infants, as such, are Fellow-Citizens with the Saints, and are to
partake of all the Privileges of the City of God, why do you deny them the
Lord's Supper? your Similitude proves no more their right to Baptism, to one
Privilege than another. I never yet could understand what Spiritual or Temporal
Privileges any Infant receives in Baptism: What good does that do them that
have not the Things signified in Baptism? There are great Benefits received in
such a Grant you speak of in an external Charter; but as God has not commanded
Infants to be baptized, so not any Benefits can be proved they receive thereby.
In this you argue as Mr. Burkit has done before you. Reader, take his
Similitude, viz. I demand, says he, whether, according to the Mind of God
gathered from the words of the Commission, the Remedy prescribed should be
administered only to grown Persons, because they only are capable of
understanding and believing the Virtue and Efficacy of it? Sure every Rational
Man among you would conclude his Child capable of the Remedy as well as
himself, although ignorant of the Virtue that is in it, and only passive in the
Administration of it; and that it would be Cruelty, yea Murder in the Parent to
deny the Application of it to all his Children.

Reply. I stand amazed at such Ignorance and Folly! Does it follow, because
Children are capable to receive a Medicine against the Plague, or Bodily
Distemper, are they therefore capable of Baptism and the Lord's Supper? If
capable of one, say I, of the other also: For as a Man is required to examine
himself, and to discern the Lord's Body in the Lord's Supper, so he is required
to repent and to believe in Christ that comes to Baptism.

I would know how they prove Baptism to be the Medicine appointed to cure the
Soul of the Plague of Sin (or, as Mr. Owen says, for their Salvation)? Is not
this to blind the Eyes of the poor People, and make them think that an external
Ordinance saves the Soul? if not thus, how can it be Cruelty, yea Murder in
Parents to deny the Application of Baptism to their Children (as Mr. Burkit
says)? The Ancient Fathers from that in John 6. 53. Unless a Man eat the Flesh
of the Son of Man, and drink his Blood, he has no Life in him, gave Infants
the Lord's Supper, thinking our Savior (like as the Papists do) meant that
Sacrament, when indeed he meant only of seeding by Faith on Christ crucified.
But however, their Argument for giving Infants one Sacrament, was as good as
yours for giving them the other. But when they are as capable to repent and
believe, and are helped so to do, as they are, and do eat Bread, or receive a
Medicine for a Bodily Distemper, let them have both Baptism and the
Lord's Supper; and till then, if God's Word be the Rule of our Faith and
Practice, (and not our own Fancies) they ought to have neither: yet the Remedy
or Medicine, which is Christ's Blood, we deny not but dying Infants may be
capable of, tho the way of its Application we know not as to them, that is a
Secret as to us. You know the Church of England positively affirms, Repentance,
whereby a Person for sakes Sin; and Faith, whereby he stedsastly believes the
Promise of God made to him in that Sacrament, are required of those that are to
be baptized, nay and of little Babes too; therefore the Sureties answer for
them, that they do believe and repent, or forsake the Devil and all his Works,
etc. the Child answers by Proxy. The Church of England baptizes no Child but as
a Believer, and a true Penitent Person. All that are proper Subjects of Baptism
are comprehended in the Commission, and must be as such, whether Adult or
Infants, who profess Faith and Repentance. But you, it may be, foresaw the
Snake in the Grass, viz. That Godfathers and Godmothers is a Tradition, and
none of God's Appointment; nor are they able to perform those things for the
Child which they promise for him, and in his Name: And therefore make use of
another Argument, and would have them baptized without Faith, or upon their
Parents Faith, of which the Church of England speaks nothing.

As to your Comparison it is not worth mentioning: Baptism, as I have told you,
does not cure the Soul of Sin, or save any Person, but it is the Blood of Christ
applied by Faith. Not that we say no Child can have the Benefit of that
Sovereign Remedy, because not capable to believe, by reason Men and Women must
receive it by Faith, or perish.

God, as Dr. Tailor observes, may have many ways to magnify his Grace, through
Jesus Christ, to them, which we know not of, who die in their Infancy; yet have
we no Authority to baptize them any more than to give them the Lord's Supper.

Pedo-baptists talk at a strange rate, as if they regarded not what they say or
affirm, while they bring Similitudes to teach People to believe Baptism is the
Balm to cure the Contagion of Sin, and as if the Application of it saved a
little Babe from Hell, and they guilty of murdering the Souls of their Children
who deny to baptize them. I had thought they would not have laid greater Stress
upon Childrens Baptism, than on Childrens Circumcision, since they would fain
have them run Parallel-wise.

Pray, what became of the Jews Female Infants, were they damned? and what
became of their Male Infants, who died before eight days old? for they broke
God's Law if they circumcised them (tho sick and like to die) if they were not
full eight days old. Let such blush for the sake of their precious Souls, and
take more care for the time to come, to what they write and preach.

I am grieved to see my blessed Master's great Commission thus inverted and
abused. Suppose the King should send you with a Commission into a remote
Plantation, and command you to act and do exactly according to the express
words of the Commission, not to add to it nor diminish from it, on pa^ of being
cast out of his Favor, and incuring his Wrath and Curse, durst you do
otherwise in any thing, under pretense it was his meaning; whereas he plainly
and fully in his Commission expressed in the Affirmative, how and what you
should do in all Matters and Things, and forbad you to add thereto? Read Rev.
22. 18. For I testify unto every Man that hears the words of the Prophecy of
this Book, If any Man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him all
the Plagues that are written in this Book. Who told you what you say is the
sense of our Savior? Can any Man once think, since the Commission of Christ is
a pure Gospel-Commission, and contains mere positive Laws and Rules, no ways
referring to, nor depending on the Law or Command God gave to Abraham, that
what you say can be true, and the Conclusion safe, certain and warrantable? May
not another say, with as good Authority, that our Savior commands his
Disciples to baptize all Nations both Parents and Children too, whether they
will or not, whether they believe or not, whether Jews or Gentiles, Turks or
Pagans? I wonder you are not afraid who take liberty after this sort, to sport
(as it were) and play with, invert, alter and add unto the sacred Commission of
the jealous God, and great King of Heaven and Earth!

1. You confess Christ's Sheep came up from the washing, whereof every one bear
Twins, and there is none barren among them; Cant. 6. 6. Let therefore the
Lambs, say you, be washed, as they are a great part of the Flock.

I answer; Infants, as such, by your own words cannot be Christ's Sheep, nor
Lambs; for all his Sheep and Lambs that are washed are fruitful, and none are
barren among them. Are Infants fruitful to Christ? Can they bring forth Twins?
Sir, Metaphors go not on all four, (as we used to say); the Lambs of Christ,
viz. weak and young Christians, may be as fruitful in Holiness as Sheep, viz.
old experienced Christians. But how can you prove Baptism washes your Infants
from Sin? actual Sin they have none: Does it wash away Original Sin? dare you
say that? The ancient erring Fathers that brought it in, affirmed that Baptism
did wash away Original Sin in Infants; but do you believe that they spoke Truth
in so saying? Christ's Lambs, you say, are capable to be fed by the Word and
Sacrament. Are Infants capable to hear the Word, and partake of the Sacraments?
If of one, of both. Sir, Christ's Lambs are new born Babes, not new born by
Natural Generation, but by Regeneration, as I have showed.

You say, that the Gentile Church should not come short of the Privileges of
the old Jerusalem, or Jewish Church; and that the desolate has more Children
than she that has an Husband, Gal. 4. 27. and hence affirm, if Children of the
Christian Church enjoy not the Privilege of their Fathers, she has many less
Children than the old Jerusalem-Church had.

Answ. I answer; the Gentile Church according to God's gracious Promise may be
more than the Jewish was, when the Fullness of the Gentiles are come in, and yet
no Infants Members of it.

Nay, there is ground to believe in the Primitive Times there were more
converted among the Gentiles, than were amongst the Jews; but still I find you
harp on the old String, i. e. that if the Gospel Church be not National, and
enjoy as many outward and external Privileges as the Jewish did, her Privileges
are less: but you consider not the Nature, Quality and Glory of the
Gospel Church, and wherein her Privileges excel the Legal Church of old
Jerusalem.

You say, when Christ commands to teach all Nations before baptized, and
after that their baptizing, his meaning is, teach and baptize to plant the
Church, and baptize and teach to continue the Church planted among the
Gentiles.

Answ. 1. I am grieved to think how bold you are in asserting that to be
Christ's meaning which you affirm, which can no ways be gathered from his
Commission, but it is directly contrary to the express words thereof, and also
to the Nature of the Gospel-Church's Constitution. But you affirm what you
please, and prove nothing.

2. It appears by your words, the Gospel Church in its first Constitution, or
first planting, was by Regeneration, consisting only of believing Men and
Women, baptized on the Profession of their Faith, or after they were made
Disciples; but after its first Constitution, or first Plantation, it was to
consist of the Fleshly or Carnal Seed, and so made National, yea and to be made
up of whole Nations. Pray, Sir, since the great Commission, Mat. 28. 19, 20.
proves nothing of this, nor has the Lord Jesus given out another Commission to
nullify his first; What ground have you to affirm so presumptuously any such
thing? Dare you add and diminish to God's Word, nay alter Christ's last Will
and Testament in his grand Commission? Tremble at the thoughts of what you
endeavor to do! Sir, the New Testament about Church-Constitution, etc. is a
perfect Rule to the End of the World; and as the first Gospel Church after
Christ's Ascension at Jerusalem, was constituted, so ought all Churches to be
constituted, and so to continue unto the second coming of Christ. The
Ordinances are to be kept, as to the Subject and Mode of Administration, as
they were first delivered to the Saints: See 1 Cor. 11. 2. Now I praise you,
Brethren, that you remember me in all things, and keep the Ordinances as I
delivered them to you.

Therefore in direct Opposition to what you say in the close of your sixth
Chapter, I affirm from the Authority of Christ's Commission, and from the
nature of the Constitution of the Gospel Church, that as Teaching went before
Baptizing for the planting of the Church in the Primitive Time, so Teaching is
to go before Baptizing in planting and continuing of the Church unto the End of
the World; and that the Teaching that is mentioned in order of Words in the
Commission after Baptizing, does not refer to Infants of Believers, or any
other Infants; but, as Mr Baxter observes, to such baptized Believers, who,
after they were baptized, ought to be taught all other things in the School of
Christ, which he commanded his Disciples to observe, and to which, if they thus
act, he subjoined his gracious Promise, Lo, I am with you always, to the End of
the World; Mat. 28. 20.

CHAP. IX.
In Answer to Mr. James Owen's seventh Chapter: proving that the Children of
the Faithful ought not to be baptized, because they are said to be holy;
wherein 1 Cor. 7. 14. is examined, and clearly explained, with the sense of
many learned Men, both Pedo-baptists and others, on the said Text.

MR. James Owen thus begins in his seventh Chapter, viz. If the Children of the
Faithful are holy, then Baptism appertains unto them; for all confess that
Holiness gives Right to Baptism, if they allow that Faith gives Right, which is
the Root of Holiness in the Adult.

Answ. We do deny that Holiness (I mean true Gospel-Holiness) simply in it
self, without Christ's Command, gives right to Baptism. No, Sir, you go too
fast; Holiness did not give right to Circumcision, but the mere positive
Command of God to Abraham: for if it did, Lot, Job, etc. had as much right to
Circumcision, and their Male Infants, as Abraham and his Male Infants; but that
Holiness gave no right to Circumcision, simply considered in it self, appears,
because, as I have before showed, all the Male Infants of those wicked Persons
that sprang from Abraham's Loins by Natural Generation, had as undoubted right
to Circumcision, by virtue of God's Command to Abraham, as had those holy Men's
Male Children that were of his Natural Seed. Moreover, it is neither Faith, the
Seed, nor Holiness the Fruit, that gives right to Baptism, simply considered,
but the positive Command of Jesus Christ, which, I affirm, indeed runs to such
who have Faith, Repentance, and true actual Holiness, but not a Civil or
Matrimonial Holiness, as this is of which the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 7. 14. as
will appear by and by; Else were your Children unclean, but now are they holy.

But how will it appear that they (i. e. that Children) are holy, say you? the
Holy Ghost says so in 1 Cor. 7. 14. Else were your Children unclean, but now
are they holy. The Apostle in these words, say you, answers a Question
proposed by the believing Corinthians, Whether it was lawful for them to live
in the State of Matrimony with those that were Infidels? they questioned this
not without Cause, because Ezra commanded both the Idolatrous Wives and
Children to be cast off, Ezra 9. 1, 2, 3, 4. Paul, say you, answers, that
they ought not to do the like; because the unbelieving Husband is sanctified by
the believing Wife, and the unbelieving Wife is sanctified by the believing
Husband.

2. You say that Children born in such a State are holy, as if both were
believing; and this you deny to be Legitimation, or not being Bastards, but
that it is a Federal or Covenant-Holiness. Such that were not in God's Covenant
you intimate were unclean, Isa. 52. 1.

Answ. 1. Prove your Infants, as such, are in the Covenant of Grace. We deny
not but all Elect Infants are decretively in that Covenant; but are your
Infants, or Infants of the Faithful, as such, in the Covenant of Grace? If not,
they are not in this sense holy.

2. Are there not many Children of Unbelievers elected? If so, are they not
holy also? and if so, why not baptized as well as your Infants, by your
Argument from hence?

3. Prove, when you write again, if you can, that there is any External,
Relative, Federal Holiness of Persons or of Things in the times of the Gospel,
as there was under the Law; we deny it. I affirm all External, Relative and
Federal Holiness was but a Ceremonial Typical Holiness; and will you bring in
Ceremonial Relative Holiness into the Gospel Church? The Gentiles and their
Children being not circumcised under the Law, we grant, were in that sense
unclean: But will you call all Unbelievers Children unclean now; for the
Unbelievers Children you deny to be Subjects of Baptism.

You say they are unclean that are excluded from the Privileges of the Church
of God, it was not for any unclean Person to come into the Congregation, although,
say you, their Uncleanness was but Ceremonial.

Answ. Sir, God showed Peter that Jews and Gentiles are now all one in
Gospel Times: Circumcision nor Uncircumcision renders Persons clean or unclean.
None now are cleansed or accounted clean, but such who believe, or have Faith
in Christ. All that you say about unclean Persons, and things under the Law,
signifies nothing to the purpose in hand, because the Holiness under the Law
was either Ceremonial or Typical, which none can or dare plead for under the
Gospel Dispensation, seeing the Substance and Antitype is now come.

1. Now in Gospel Times there is no Ceremonial Uncleanness of Persons; and
therefore in that respect no Holiness of Persons. The Leper was unclean, and he
that touched a dead Corpse was unclean, etc. Swines Flesh was unclean, and many
other Beasts, that are not so now. The Firstborn was holy then, but not so now.

2. There was Pollution or Uncleanness of Places; the House of a Leper was
unclean, and his Garments unclean. So there was Holiness of Places, the
Sanctuary was holy, the Temple was holy, which were either by external
Consecration, or typically so: But now there is no Place so unclean nor holy.
In Gospel Times there is no such Consecration of Places, Persons or Things.

3. Vessels were unclean, and Vessels were holy, but not so under this
Dispensation.

4. All the whole House of Israel was holy by way of Legal Separation, or
Consecration to the Lord, tho they were wicked Persons in respect of Spiritual
Sanctification; but no Member of the Gospel Church that is a false Professor,
is accounted holy, or called holy by the Lord, holy now, because not allowed by
the Gospel to be a Member. They are not consecrated to the Lord, or set apart
as Members of a Congregational Church under the Gospel, tho such were, if
Israelites, and of the Jewish Church, called holy by the Lord. Then these
things being so, as indeed and in truth it is acknowledged to be, and that by
our Godly Brethren, whether Presbyterians or Independants, what is become of
your Exposition of this Text?

You say, little Children are unclean by reason of natural Corruption, but by
God's Covenant and washing with Water, etc. they shall be clean.

Answ. 1. True, all that are born of Women are spiritually polluted; and no
doubt but such Infants that die, who are saved, God does, through the Blood of
Christ, sanctify them in some mysterious way not known to us, but not by
Baptism. Prove that Baptism washes away Sin either in old or young if you can;
Who dares to affirm that, when Peter says Baptism washes not away Sin, or the
spiritual Filthiness of the Flesh? 1 Pet. 3. 21.

2. If God in a Covenant-way by Baptism washes away the Uncleanness of your
Infants, then they were not holy or clean by being born of believing Parents;
and if holy because they are their Seed, then no need of Baptism to wash them.

3. And how come they to lose that Holiness afterward, or is it only the
Defilement or Uncleanness of Actual Sin that lies upon your Children who are
polluted, when grown up? for if Baptism washes away any Corruption of Sin in
your Infants, it is Original Corruption; and does that return again to them
afterward, so as to be charged upon them? All Sin in true sanctified Persons
by Faith in Christ's Blood is washed away, and pardoned, as touching the Guilt
and Filth thereof, and shall never so return as to be charged upon them to
their Condemnation. Is it thus with your baptized Infants in respect of
Original Sin? Speak, Sir, your Mind freely the next time; for, God willing, I
shall be ready for you. O when will you cease to corrupt the Word of God by
your Tradition!

You say, Mr. Tombs says, If Children are Members of the visible Church, they
ought to be baptized.

I do not remember Mr. Tombs says so, and if they are Members of the visible
Church before baptized, they cannot be made Members by Baptism. It Is absurd to
say to a Man, Come into this House; or to say, Bring such a Child into the
House, that is in it before.

For Baptism, say you, is the Door through which we come into the Church of
God: Those that say they are not Members of the Church of God, ought, you say,
to show us a plain Scripture for their casting out, if they can, of one Church
since Adam until this latter Age, of which little Children were Members, etc.
And again, you say, if they were cast out, how comes it to pass that there is
not one word in Scripture mentioned of it? call for a Scripture from those that
would shake your Faith concerning this Prerogative.

Answ. 1. I have answered this already. We say and prove that Infants were
never received at all into the Gospel Church, therefore cannot be said to be
cast out of it.

2. We deny what you affirm without any Proof, viz. That Infants were always
Members of the Visible Church since Adam: Prove, if you can, they were received
as Members before that Typical Church State which was constituted in Abraham's
Family.

3. The Firstborn of Israel were holy, the Priests Sons had a right to the
Ministry, or Priesthood; show when they were cast out, and lost both those
Prerogatives: and that very way you must take to answer will serve to answer
your self in respect of Infants Church Membership: The Answer must be this, the
National Church, and Church Membership, and Priesthood of the Jews are
dissolved, and taken away, and thereby all those external Rites and
Prerogatives the Jewish Children had, are gone.

4. These were as Legacies left in the old Will, in the old Testament: but
there is a new Will made, or Christ has made his last Will and Testament, and
in this his last Will and Testament, none of these external Rites or
Prerogatives (as you call them) are left to Infants. Sir, there is no need in a
new Will, in the last Will and Testament, to mention Negatives, that is not
usual; not what is not left, but only in the Affirmative, what is left:
therefore in vain is this Flourish, it will do your People, who are shaken in
their Belief of your Tradition, no good.

5. You bid them call for a Scripture from those that oppose their Practice in
the Negative, i. e. that forbid Infants Church Membership, or speak where they
were cast out. O how dangerous is your Doctrine! May not the Papists say to
them also, Where do you read holy Water and holy Garments are forbid? Moses
commanded the People to be sprinkled with Water, and many other Rites that were
among the Jews. We say the Papists call for Scripture where those things are
forbid which they have among them, or when God cast them out of the Church?
What Human Tradition may not be let into the Church at this Door?

You say, the unbelieving Jews would have stumbled if Paul had cast out their
Children from the Church, and put them in the same Condition as the Children of
Infidels.

Answ. It Is your mistake, he told them plainly, that the Children of the Flesh
were not the Children of God, i. e. of the Promise, or of the true
Gospel Church, as such, Romans 9. 5, 6, 7. yet they stumbled not; nay, showed
them they and their Children had no external Privileges above the Gentiles, and
that Circumcision availed them nothing; and yet the believing Jews stumbled not
at his Doctrine. Sir, no doubt when the Jews are called they will not be of
your mind, to plead the old Covenant-right of their Children, being Members, as
such.

You say, That we judge the Adult holy, because they are separated unto the Lord
in a Profession of Holiness, although it be too often an Hypocritical Profession,
and shall we not (say you) judge the Children of the Faithful to be holy whom
God so called? etc.

Answ. 1. God called the whole House of Israel holy, because he separated them
to himself, both Parents and Children, in a legal Church State, whether the
Parents were Believers, or faithful Persons, or real Saints, or not; but God in
the Gospel has separated none to be Members of the Gospel Church, but such
that are Adult Persons, Believers in ^ued with real Holiness. There is, I tell
you again, no Fleshly Relative Federal Holiness under the Dispensation of the
Gospel spoken of, disprove it if you can.

2. As to the Holiness of Infants born in lawful Wedlock, they are by the Lord
called holy, or a Godly Seed, Mal. 2. 15. And did he make one? (i. e. one Wife)
yet he had the residue of the Spirit; and wherefore one? that he might seek a
Godly Seed, that is, a godly or holy Seed by Legitimation; whether the Man or
the Woman joined together in holy Matrimony, are Believers or Unbelievers,
their Seed is a godly or holy Seed in this respect; and not only the Seed of
the Faithful, as you intimate, but the Seed of Unbelievers also, and so not a
Federal or Spiritual Holiness, as you would have it.

The Seed born to the Faithful, say you, in lawful Wedlock are a godly and holy
Seed; God calls such his Children that were born to them, Ezekiel. 16. 20, 21.
As it was formerly, even so it is under the New Testament, those that are
separated unto the Lord by Baptism are called a holy Nation.

Answ. It follows then by your Argument that the Children of Unbelievers born
in lawful Wedlock are not a holy Seed, that is, they are Bastards or
Cast-aways; but you must first prove their Marriage unlawful, and the Holiness
here mentioned such you speak of, before you carry this Point.

2. All the Children of the whole House of Israel were typically and federally
holy then in that National Church: you confound typical federal Holiness, and
Matrimonial Holiness together, which are quite remote in their nature.

3. We say all Believers baptized under the Gospel are spiritually holy, and
are called, 1 Pet. 2. 7. a holy Nation, a Royal Priesthood; but this holy
Nation consists of none but Adult Persons that believe, who are called lively
Stones building up a spiritual House, 1 Pet. 2. 5, 6. not a National Church
consisting of Parents and their Fleshly Seed, as such, as under the Law. But if
for Argument-sake we should grant all that were in the Gospel Times received as
Members in the visible Church, should be called holy in Charity from that
Profession they made, yet this will do you no good, until by God's Ordination
you can prove that the Infants of Believers were received as Members into the
Church in Gospel Times, as they were into the National Church of the Jews under
the Law.

You say, that Paul calls the Christians in his Epistles to the Churches of
the Gentiles, Saints, Romans 1. 7. a Cor. 1. 1. because they were separated by
Covenant, and the Obligation of Baptism to be the Lord's; and not only the
believing Parents, but the Children also are Saints: and for this you cite this
Text, 1 Cor. 7. 14. But now are they holy.

Answ. Prove that the Infants of Believers were comprehended amongst the Saints
Paul wrote unto, and that they were Church Members; we utterly deny it, and
must People believe it on your bare Testimony? In whose Authority and Power
then must stand their Faith in this matter? Sir, you bring the Text in
Controversy only to prove your Assertion. Is this to act like a wise and
learned Man? If the Holiness in the Text renders Infants to be Saints, prove
your Exposition from some other Scripture, which if you cannot do, give up the
Point, and confess your Mistake and Ignorance; for no Scripture is of any
private Interpretation, i. e. but that it may be confirmed by some other place
or places of sacred Scripture.

And now because Mr. Burkitt, a learned Pedo-baptist, in his late Book for
Infant Baptism, argues from this Text as you do, and I have fully in answering
him answered you both, I shall here repeat his Arguments, and my Reply: he
says, Paul in these words answers the Corinthians Scruple; you say the Apostle
in these words answers a Question proposed by the believing Corinthians, viz.
Whether such as had Heathen and Infidel Wives ought to put them away with their
Children, as in the days of Ezra? The Apostle resolves them that they ought
not: For, says he, the unbelieving Wife is sanctified by the believing
Husband. How sanctified? Not in her Name, but in her Use, says Mr. Burkitt, so
as that they might lawfully cohabit and converse together. And for your
Children they are holy, not with an Inherent, Internal, Personal Holiness; for
the holiest Man-child is born in Sin, and by Nature a Child of Wrath; but with
an External, Relative, Federal Holiness, they are not common and unclean, like
the Children of Infidels, but fit to be partakers of the Privileges of the
Church, which the Children of Infidels are not. Thus Mr. Barkitt.

Now I answer, as I have answered him, you cannot be ignorant, but that you know
well enough this Text has been fully opened by diverse learned Men as well
Pedobaptists as Anti-pedobaptists, who prove the Holiness here spoken of, is no
such External Relative Federal Holiness you dream of. In the first place, you
speak right, it was about that very matter that the Corinthians wrote to St.
Paul, viz. Whether the believing Husband might live or cohabit with the
unbelieving Wife? etc. So that the Scope and Coherence of the Text opens the
matter, and shows what Holiness it is the Apostle intends, viz. a Matrimonial
Holiness; for should he make their Marriage void, their Children would be
unclean or illegitimate, i. e. Bastards: for tho (...) true, the case was not
as Mr. Burkitt says concerning Men and Whores, but about Husbands and Wives,
yet he honestly says it was about the Lawfulness of their Marriage, as in
Ezra's time, when some were commanded to put their Wives away, because their
Marriage was unlawful. Now such, say we, as is the Sanctification or Holiness
of the unbelieving Wife or Husband, is the Sanctification or Holiness of the
(...), and that Mr. Burkitt grants to be a Matrimonial Sanctification, so as
that they might lawfully cohabit together a Man and Wife. And indeed if the
Children had from hence an External Relative Federal Holiness, it would follow
also that the unbelieving Husband and Wife had such an External Relative
Federal Holiness likewise, and that would open the same Door to baptize the
unbelieving Husband or Wife. For may not another Person argue thus, The
unbelieving Husband is holy or sanctified by the believing Wife, and therefore
by virtue of her Faith may and ought to be baptized? Mr. Burkitt reads [to] the
believing Husband, and indeed I find the Greek word is elsewhere so rendered.

Let us consider how the Apostle speaks, viz. with respect to a thing present
or past, therefore he uses the Preterperfect Tense (...), has been
sanctified: Yea in probability he speaks of Sanctification even when both were
Unbelievers, or Infidels, for he says (...) thrice in the Preterperfect Tense,
and he mentions the Unbeliever distinctly, but the Believer without the
Expression of his Faith, under the Title of Husband or Wife, and says your
Children in Discrimination, with Difference, as well those they had before one
was a Believer, as since; and if so, then the Children born to them whilst both
were Unbelievers, were as holy as such born after one became a Believer, and
what Holiness was in the Children then think you? even no other than what is in
all Children born in lawful Wedlock, whether their Parents are Believers or
Unbelievers. And this sense is the more confirmed in that (...) Sanctification
is the same with Chastity, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 7. so that the sense is, the unbelieving
Husband is sanctified to his Wife, that is lawfully or chastely used as a
Husband, without Fornication in respect of his own Wife, whether Believer or
Unbeliever, and therefore not to be refused. And this sense only serves for the
Apostle's purpose. The Words are a Reason why they might lawfully live
together; the Reason must be taken from that which was not contingent but
certain. Therefore let them live together, for tho one be an Unbeliever, yet
Marriage continues still, they are Husband and Wife, and sanctified to each
other in respect of their chaste Enjoyment of each other, and it is no Sin in
them to company together, notwithstanding the Unbelief of one Party: for
Marriage is honorable among all, even Unbelievers, and the Bed undefiled, Heb.
13. 4. and Holiness and Honor are Terms (as one observes) of like sense in
this matter, 1 Thessalonians. 4 7. Now this being granted, which indeed must of
necessity, then the Uncleanness must be understood of Bastardy, and the
Holiness of Legitimation, as Mat. 2. 15. for no other Holiness necessarily
follows to their Children, in that their Parents Marriage is lawful: See the
Apostle's Conclusion, Else were your Children unclean; you leave out [Else] for
you mention Children as another Doubt which was in the Corinthians about them,
which cannot be gathered from the Text nor Scope of it; but [else] were your
Children unclean, is brought in a an Argument to prove that which he says
last, as the Particle (...) shows; for the terms (...) elsewhere are
Argumentative as much as Quoniam, because th^n used. So 1 Cor. 15. 14. 29. Romans
11. 16. to prove that which went before; and here the Argument is ab absurdo,
from an Absurdity which would follow if the thing to be proved were not
granted; and the Speech must needs be Elliptick, and somewhat is to be repeated
to make the Speech full; as when it is said, Romans 11. 6. (...), to make up the
sense, you must add, (...), because of Work; and so here (...); for if the
unbelieving Husband has not been sanctified to his Wife, your Children, etc.
So that this Argument of the Apostle is entire, viz. If the unbelieving Husband
were not sanctified by the Wife, then were your Children unclean; but they are
not unclean; Ergo, the unbelieving Husband is sanctified to the Wise. Now the
Major of the Syllogism is a Contradiction, the Sequel of it were not true if
this Proposition were not true: All the Children of those, whereof the one is
not sanctified to the other, are unclean. Now if the Sanctification be here
meant of a Matrimonial Sanctification, as I have proved it must, and the
Uncleanness be meant of Federal Uncleanness, so as to exclude them out of the
Covenant, whether of saving Grace, or Church-Privileges, the Proposition were
most false, since the Children of Parents, whereof one was not Matrimonially
sanctified to the other, but came together unchastly, as Pharez and Sarah,
Judah and Tamar, Jepthah of Gilead, and many others were within the Covenant of
saving Grace and Church-Privileges: Therefore to make the Proposition true
(without which, the Apostle speaks that which is most false) it must be
understood of Uncleanness by Bastardy; for it is true of no other Uncleanness;
that all Children of those Parents, whereof the one is not sanctified to the
other, are unclean, but now are they holy: The Particle (...) but now, is not
an Adverb of Time here, as Beza rightly speaks, but (...) elsewhere: So (...)
but [now] is a Particle of Reasoning used in the Assumption of Arguments, which
shows it is the Assumption of the Apostle's Argument, and therefore it must be
understood of Holiness opposite to the Uncleanness mentioned; but that being no
other than Bastardy, the Holiness can be meant of no other than Legitimation.
Nor is this any more an unlikely Sense, since Bastards were reckoned among
unclean Persons, Deuteronomy. 23. 2. and the Apostle's Expression is allusive to the
Jewish Speaking and Estimation, and why it should be thought strange that Holy
should signify Legitimation I know not, whenas Mal. 2. 5. (...) a Seed of God,
is rendered by some Pedo-baptists a Holy Seed, which were such Children (you
cannot deny) born in lawful Marriage. And that we are not alone touching this
sense of the Words and Matter, pray take the Testimony of diverse Learned Men,
who yet held Infant Baptism, but found this Text remote to the business of
proving it.

Jerome, as I find him quoted by a Learned Man, says, because of God's
Appointment Marriage is holy.

See Chamier, who says, Sic Ambrosium, Thomam, Anselmum exposuisse, and tum
Suarez appellat literalem sensum That Ambrose, Thomas, Anselm so expounded it,
and this Suarez calls the literal sense.

Melancthon in his Commentary upon this place says thus, Therefore Paul
answers, that the Marriages are not to be pulled asunder for their unlike
Opinions of God. The impious Person does not cast away the other: And for
Comfort, he adds as a Reason, the unbelieving Husband is sanctified by the
believing Wife. Meat is sanctified; for that which is holy in use, is granted
to Believers by God: things prohibited under the Law, as Swines Flesh, and a
Woman in her Pollution, were called unclean. The Connection of the Argument is
this, If the use of Marriage should not please God, your Children would be
Bastards, and so unclean; but your Children are not Bastards, therefore the use
of Marriage pleases God: and how Bastards were unclean in a peculiar matter,
the Law shows, Deuteronomy. --. Thus far Melancthon gives the same sense, as Chamier
observes.

Musculus in his Comment on the place, confesses that he had formerly abused
this place against the Anabaptists.

Camera on the place says, [For the unbelieving Husband has been sanctified]
an unusual change of the Tense, that is, sanctified in the lawful use of
Marriage: for without this, says he, it would be that their Children should be
unclean, that is, infamous, and not legitimate; whosoever are holy (that is, during
the Marriage) are without all Blot or Ignominy.

Erasmus upon the place says thus, Infants born of such Parents, as one being
a Christian, the other not, are legitimately holy; for the Conversion of either
Husband or Wife does not dissolve the Marriage which was made when both were in
Unbelief.

Nay, I find a very learned Divine to affirm, that the Ancients expounded this
place no otherwise. None, says he, that ever I met with expounded it of
Federal Holiness, till the Controversy of the Anabaptists in Germany arose.

And since Mr. Burkitt is so ingenuous as to confess, that the unbelieving
Husband is sanctified in respect of Conjugal Relation to the Wife in a way of
Marriage, in which so far he agrees with those Learned Men; this being so, how
comes he to assert it is Federal Holiness that is said to be in the Children?

And by what we say, it appears, it is not a racking of the Scripture o
maintain a private Opinion; and tho the word [holy] refers here to what we
affirm with others, yet the Apostle speaks truly; tho it is granted the
Children of Heathens born in lawful Wedlock, are no more Bastards than the
Children of Christians For if the Marriage were made voi^, it would render
their Children to be unclean, or base born. And what tho the Greek word does
signify in so many places, as Mr. Burkitt says, spiritual Sanctification and
Separation to God; yet show us, say I, where it signifies External, Relative,
Federal Holiness in the New Testament: yet as one observes, the word is not
bound up to that sense as he seems to intimate; for (...) is used for
Castimoni^m ser^^, as Stephanus in his Thesaurus observes out of Demosthenes,
(...), where a Priest of Bacchus speaks thus, (...), I am holy and pure from
the Company of Man: and the words (...), chaste, to be chaste, to make chaste,
Chastity, coming from the same Root with (...) holy, whether (...) to
reverence, or (...) to admire, as Grammarians conceive, are used for Holiness
very frequently, both in Scripture and in all sorts of Greek Writers: So that
what he says as to the Signification of the word (...) holy, that it cannot be
taken for [legitimate] is fully cleared, and we justified from the
Pedo-baptists unjust Accusation, viz. that we wrested the word to favor our
private Opinion. And now to conclude; But if it does signify Holy, as you and
your Brethren say, why might not the Children of such as the Apostle speaks of,
be said to be holy, as well as the Infidel or unbelieving Wife is said to be
sanctified? What is the difference between holy and sanctified?

Mr. Owen says, If the Children of the Faithful are not Members of the Church
of God, then they are Members of the Kingdom of Satan, who is the Prince of
this World: If they are without the Church, what hopes of Salvation have they?
there is no Salvation out of the Church, Romans 9. 4.

Answ. 1. I hope my Antagonist is a Protestant; but I must assure my Reader, he
here maintains a Popish Doctrine, which all our worthy Protestant Divines have
protested against. How! is there no Salvation out of the Visible Church? God
forbid. I doubt not but there are many gracious Persons who shall be certainly
saved, and who do truly believe in Christ, that are not Members of any true
Gospel Church. Will you exclude all from Salvation that are not Members of your
Church? I cannot think you own the Church of England to be a true
Gospel Church, and will you exclude all that are of that Communion from the
Kingdom of Heaven?

2. But as to Infants, they are born Children of Wrath, and actually in Satan's
Kingdom, till God is pleased to sanctify them; and those who die in Infancy
that are saved, no doubt he does sanctify their unclean Nature, but not such as
live and remain in Satan's Kingdom, until they are regenerated by the Word and
Spirit of God, after they are grown up to Understanding.

3. Therefore some Infants may be Members of the Invisiole Church, or Mystical
Body of Christ, (tho not Members of the Visible Church) and of this sort there
may be among the Children of Unbelievers, as well as among the Children of
Believers; for the Election of Grace runs not only to the Seed of the Faithful,
say what you please, as I said before.

4. Therefore you do not well to call Children Dogs, if they are not in the
Pale of the Visible Church.

You say, the Promises are the Inheritance of the Church, not to those that are
without; and therefore, say you, if the Children be without, they are among
Dogs, and what Promise belongs to them? Rev. 22. 15. and where there is no
Promise, there is no hope of Salvation, etc.

Answ. 1. I answer, the Promise runs to Christ, and all that the Father has
given him, but we do not know who they are until they believe.

2. The Promises are not the Inheritance of all that are Members of the Visible
Church, for they may not belong to some that are in it, and they may belong to
some others that are not in it. You darken Counsel with Words without Knowledge.
For, (1.) You distinguish not between the Visible and Invisible Church. (2.)
Also you distinguish not between who are the Lord's decretively, and who are
his actually. (3.) Moreover, you distinguish not between external Privileges,
and true internal spiritual Privileges. No external Privileges, or outward
Church Membership gives any Man a Right to Salvation, nor puts him under the
Promise thereof.

3. There is hope and ground of hope touching the Salvation of dying Infants,
tho they are not in Gospel Times of the Visible Church; because Christ says,
of such belongs the Kingdom of Heaven. But pray, Sir, take heed of what you
say: You cannot prove that our blessed Savior spoke those words only with
reference to the Children of Believers. I know no cause why unbelieving Parents
should doubt of the Salvation of their dying Infants. They may (so far as I
see) have as much ground to hope God's Election may reach their dying Infants,
as any Believer can have it may reach to theirs. What if I should exercise so
much Charity as to hope that God has comprehended in his electing Love all the
dying Infants both of Believers and Unbelievers, and that through the Blood and
Merits of Christ they are sanctified, and shall be all saved?

My Opinion, were it so, could not justly be condemned by any; but I say secret
things belong to God, and I shall forbear to pass any Judgment in the case, but
leave it to God; but I am sure no Child shall be damned for the Parent's Fault.
Can Parents by baptizing their Infants save them? Or are they Dogs, and must be
damned if their Parents baptize them not, and dare not do it because Christ
has not commanded them to baptize them?

4. Sir, what if a Man and his Wife when they were both vile and ungodly
People, as bad as any that live on Earth, should beget many Children, and
afterward they both believe and become good Christians, is the State of those
Children begotten when they believed good, and they holy? and are the Children
they had when they were vile and wicked Persons, bad, nay so bad as they are to
be counted Dogs? O that God would open your Eves! Nay, if it were as you
intimate, it may be queried, Whether it be not a sinful, a wicked, and an
unlawful thing for two ungodly, unbelieving, unfaithful Persons to marry, since
they can beget no Children but such as you call Dogs; for you will not say
their Children are holy, or ought to be baptized, nor are in the Pale of the
Church.

But to conclude with this Chapter; let me speak a word to you that are
Believers, and also a word to you that are Unbelievers, and I shall pass to the
next Argument.

1. To you that are Believers and have Children; if they are holy and Heirs of
Heaven, as they are begotten and born of your Bodies, as Mr. Owen, and other
Pedobaptists assert, then you need not trouble your Thoughts about your dying
Infants, tho they are not baptized; for it is not Baptism makes them holy, by
Mr. Owen's Concession, but because they are your Children; it is by your Faith
they are holy, as he blindly supposes.

2. And since Baptism does not belong to them, Christ no where having commanded
you to baptize them, nor can it add any thing to their Salvation; I charge you
in the Fear of God baptize them not.

3. But do not believe Mr. Owen, nor any other Man in what he says, unless he
can prove it from God's Word. I tell you from Christ's own Words you have
ground of hope touching the State of your dying Infants, but not because they
are your Children, but because of such belongs the Kingdom of Heaven, and they
may be in God's eternal Election of Grace: For, as Dr. Tailor says, and I
mentioned before, God may have many ways to apply the Blood of Christ to save
and sanctify dying Infants, which we know not of; but we are not any more
required to haptize them, or to give them one Sacrament, than we are required
to give them the other, viz. the Lord's Supper; and this he will one day know
to be a Truth, tho now he sees it not.

O! says Mr. Owen, cast them not out from the Church of God, out of the
Covenant of Salvation; they are your dear Children, Children of your Bodies, of
your Vows. O, show them the Mercy of God! the Church of God is willing to
receive them: O rent them not from the Mystical Body, of which they are
Members. See page --

Answ. You Godly Parents take heed what Doctrine you receive, you cannot cast
your Infants out of the Invisible and Mystical Body of Christ, if they are in
it, nor cast them out of the Covenant of Salvation: No, no, that is not in the
Power of Mortals: We cannot receive them or bring them into the Covenant of
Salvation, nor make them Members of Christ's Invisible and Mystical Body. None
can do that but God himself, Christ himself; it is preposterous Stuff, strange
Doctrine this poor Man troubles you with. Good Men may in some things be
blinded and misled: Try his Doctrine, search the Scriptures, take nothing upon
trust without trial.

As to your bringing of your Children into the Visible Church, so as to be
Members thereof, and to have right to the holy Sacraments, they must come in at
the Door of Regeneration, not by Generation; even at the same Door you came in
at if you are true Members thereof: and O therefore pray for your Children,
they are dear to you, bring them up in the Fear of God, command them to seek
after the Knowledge of their Natural State, and to know and believe in Jesus
Christ, and set them a good Example. I know not what better Counsel to give you
concerning your Children.

Secondly, To you that are Unbelievers who have Children. Do not fear the State
of those dear Babes of yours that die in Infancy, you have no cause to doubt of
their Happiness, but your Children may be saved that die in their Infancy, as
well as the Infants of faithful and godly Parents. Also the Infants of Godly
People are no more holy than yours, if your Marriage was good and lawful; for
Marriage is honorable in all; it belongs to Unbelievers, and is God's holy
Ordinance to them as well as it is to Believers. But O let it be your Care and
chief Business to get true Faith in Jesus Christ; for Matrimonial
Sanctification in your selves, or the Holiness of Legitimation in your Children
will add nothing to yours or their Salvation; but till you and your Offspring
do believe and are spiritually holy, and sanctified by the Blood of Christ,
through Faith of the Operation of God, neither you nor they have any right to
the Sign, which is Baptism: for as we deny the Infants of Believers, as such,
have any right to Baptism, so be sure your Children have no right thereto; yet
the Promise is to you and your Children, or Offspring, whenever the Lord is
pleased to call either you or your Children by the preaching of the Word, etc.

CHAP. X.
Proving, in Opposition to what Mr. James Owen says, that Children have no
right to be baptized, although Christ blessed them.

MR. Owen quotes Mark 10. 13, 14, 15, 16. And (...) brought little Children to
him, that he should touch them, that he would put his Hand upon them, and pray.
Mat. 19. 13. And his Disciples rebuked those that brought them; but when Jesus
saw it, he was displeased, and said, Suffer little Children to come unto me,
and forbid them not, for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven, etc.

Says Mr. Owen,

Let us consider in this remarkable Scripture who were those that were brought
to the Lord Jesus; the Text says they were little Children, suchas were taken
up in Arms, as we translate the word (...) therefore, says he, it being
evident that those Children brought, as it is probable, by the Godly Parents
unto Christ, were very little, they themselves were not of Age to come unto
him, nor profess Faith in him.

2. Why were they brought to Christ? that he should put his Hands on them and
pray. They that brought them to Christ did believe they could receive a
Blessing by laying of Hands, and Prayers of Christ; although the little Children
understood not at present what Christ had done to them. As, says he, Parents
brought their Children to christ to bless them, so do we bring them to Christ
by Baptism to receive a Blessing. Why cannot they receive a Blessing from him
now, as in the days of his Flesh? Are his Bowels straightened toward them?

Answ. What does this prove touching the Lawfulness of Infant Baptism? we
acknowledge and readily grant that they were little Children that were brought
to Christ, and that he (...) his Hands upon them, and blessed them; but is this
a Warrant for us to Baptize our little Children?

You say As those Parents brought their Children to Christ to bless them, so do
you bring them to Christ by Baptism.

Answ. And with shame you may speak it, unless you had Authority to Christ so
to do: Who has required this thing (...) our Hands? May you not, as the
Ancient Fathers did, by the some Argument bring little Children to the Lord
Je^us by bringing them to the holy Sacrament of the Lord's ^upper? Also you
have as much ground from God's Word to do that, as to bring them to the
Sacrament of Baptism

No doubt they were brought to Christ to be healed of some Bodily Distemper,
for the Lord blessed and healed Diseases by laying his Hand on the Sick; and we
all know that they are capable of that Blessing, (...) not of the holy
Sacraments, which al^ne belong to Adult Persons that believe, and are able to
examine themselves. True, Christ's Bowels are not straitn^d now he is in Heavan
to young or old, but what o^ the Wisdom did not lead him to baptize little
Children,, and he knows how to let out his Bowels toward them without your
reaching him. Will you direct the Almighty, or have Christ to bless an Human
Invention? Were i^ his Appointment he would no doubt bless it to little
Children, but that you will never be able to prove; and it argues you have a
bad Ca^se in hand, in that you make use of such Childish Arguments to prove it;
and bring Texts so remote from the Business.

You say, Christ prayed for them whom the Father had given him, John 17. 9. and
if the Children of the Faithful not of the World, but are Christ's, we should
suffer them to come to him, and receive his Mark which is Baptism.

Answ. 1. Are all the Infants of Believers given unto Christ, and so not of
this World? Do you believe it? Sir, all that the Father has given to Christ,
shall come unto him, and every Soul of them shall be saved. Now do all the
Children of the Faithful come to Christ, and shall they all be saved? or are
you not to be rebuked and sharply reproved for what you write, to blind the
Eyes, and deceive the Children of the Faithful, to make them think their State
is good and safe, when perhaps they are in the Gall of Bitterness, and Bond of
Iniquity? Had not Abraham an Ishmael, Isaac an Esau, and David an Absalom? O,
and what ungodly Persons do daily still proceed from the Loins of Godly
Parents! And how gracious do many Children of wicked Parents prove when grown
up!

2. You know not whether these little Children were the Children of Godly
Parents or not, nor who they were that brought them to Christ; their Parents
might be ungodly as far as we know, and yet some of their Relations, Kindred,
or Neighbors might believe that Christ would bless them, and heal them;
therefore they might bring them to Christ.

3. You say Baptism is Christ's Mark; but I have showed the foolishness of that
Assertion: Baptism is not distinguishing Mark that God's Children have on them,
but his Mark and Seal is his holy Spirit, and his holy Nature or Image stamped
upon the Soul.

4. You say, that Christ was very angry with his Disciples for forbidding
little Children to come unto him.

Reply. From hence we may gather, it was not the Command of their Master that
they should be baptized, or come that way unto him; for if it had, besure the
faithful Disciples of our Lord would not have once attempted to forbid them to
be brought to Christ.

Moreover, it is thought the Reason why the Disciples forbid them to bring
little Children to our blessed Lord, might be, left by their crying they might
disturb him, for that we see little Children in a Crowd of People are subject
to do.

But you insist to show what great Bowels Christ manifested to these little
Children, and fain would have it, because he knew they were in God's Covenant,
etc.

Answ. By this you seem to intimate, that all Infants are in Covenant with God;
for, I say again, you cannot prove that these little Children were Children of
faithful and holy Persons. However I will add here what I have said in Answer
to Mr. Burkitt on this Argument, to which, or any other of my Answers he has
not attempted to give any Reply; but, as I am informed, is resolved to let it
rest in silence, and write no more on the Subject. Take his Argument from this
Text, which is in substance the same that you further insist on about Christ's
Bowels and Love to those little Children.

If Infants, says he, be capable of Christ's Blessing on Earth, and of his
Presence in Heaven; if they be Subjects of his Kingdom of Grace, and Heirs of
his Kingdom of Glory; then they have an undoubted right to the Privilege of
Subjects, among which the Seal of the Covenant is not the least.

Answ. 1. We answer, and argue thus to the first part of the Proposition, viz.

In many of the Jews and others who were ungodly Persons, were capable of
Christ's Blessings, i. e. of being healed of their Bodily Diseases, they were
Subjects of Baptism: Is this sound arguing? What farther Blessing Christ
vouchsafed to Infants, when he laid his Hands upon them, we know not, for that
was the way Christ took oftentimes in the healing the Sick, and so blessed many
Persons that never were baptized, as we read of.

2. We (as I have before told you) do deny Infants are Subjects of the Visible
Church; therefore if by the Kingdom of Grace any intend not that, they beat the
Air: Alas! such ^o arguing beg, and prove not; besides, it does not follow, I
say again, tho Infants may be Heirs of the Kingdom of Glory therefore they have
an undoubted right to the Privileges of the Subjects of God's Church; for then
it would follow they have right to one Privilege as well as to another, and are
to have Fellowship with the Saints and Household of God, as well as Baptism.

Mr. Burkitt argues further thus, viz. Those whom Christ invites to him, and
are received by him, his Ministers may not refuse, nor put from them: But
Infant ^re by Christ invited to him, and were received by him, therefore the
Ministers of Christ may not, ought not, durst not refuse them into Communion
with them.

Take my Answer.

Answ. 1. Christ invited Multitudes to come unto him, and he received them so
far as to feed them with Barley-Loaves and Fishes, and to the Blessing of
healing them of their Bodily Distempers: But may his Ministers therefore
receive all such into their Communion?

2. In the days of Christ when he was upon Earth, there were many who are said
to come unto him, whom he might receive into his Presence and Company, yet his
Ministers might not baptize them, nor receive them into their spiritual
Communion; nor indeed you dare not so receive infants, I mean into your
Communion of the Lord's Supper. We read of some Pharisees and Lawyers that came
to Christ, and he received them into his Company, who, it appears, came to
tempt him. Also the Sadduces are said to come unto him, who said there was no
Resurrection; may Christ's Ministers baptize such, and receive them into their
Communion? Therefore in Opposition to what Mr. Burkitt says in his Book, I
affirm, there were then other ordinary ways of coming to Christ than by
Admission into his Church: Christ invited the worst of Sinners unto him, who
nevertheless did not receive him. Therefore there are some who must be excluded
whom Jesus Christ graciously inviteth.

Mr. Burkitt's Appeal for Proof of this Argument to St. Mark 10. 3. Suffer
little Children to come unto me, for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven, does not
his Business; they do not belong to the Kingdom of Grace, i. e. the Church; for
if they did belong to that, or were of the Visible Church, as such, then he
need not by Baptism make them belong to it. If Christ owns them Subjects or
Members of his Visible Church, then Pedo-baptists need not add them thereto by
Baptism: For if, as they are the Seed of Believers, they are already (fide
foederis) not only in Covenant with God, but also belong unto his Kingdom or
Church upon Earth, all the World may see that Mr. Burkitt goes about to give
them that very Right or Privilege which they had before and without Baptism.

Does Christ (says he) take Children into his Arms, and shall his Church cast
them out of her Embraces?

Answ. May I not argue thus, i. e. Does Christ receive all Persons into his
Arms of Mercy, to heal their Bodily Distempers, of which perhaps some were
wicked and ungodly? And shall the Church refuse to receive all such into her
Embraces? Besides, all those pretended Consequences make no more for Infants to
be baptized, than for their receiving the Lord's Supper, and all other
Privileges that belong as well as Baptism to Adult Persons who believe or are
Disciples.

Does Christ, says he, own them for Subjects in his Kingdom, and shall we allow
them no better standing than in the Devil's Kingdom?

Answ. Does Christ own Infants to be Subjects of his Kingdom, and yet did not
baptize them? (for that he did not) and shall we attempt to baptize them, as if
we were wiser than he? I must again turn the Edg of the Sword upon this Man: If
little Children were brought to Christ and he did not baptize them, then we
must not; But little Children were brought to Christ and he did not baptize
them, therefore we must not. Here is both Truth and Reason in this Argument, as
Dr. Tailor confesses, but none of either in his.

It is confessed by Mr. Burkitt himself, That Christ did not baptize those
Infants that came to him, and whom he took in his Arms and blessed, because
with his own Hands he baptized none at all, John 4. 1, 2.

Therefore since Christ who was God, foresaw what Contention would arise about
the baptizing of Infants, had it been his Will they should be baptized, would
he not at this time put the Matter out of doubt, and have baptized them, or
have given Command to his Disciples so to have done?

If therefore Infants be in so good a Condition as he says, i. e. Subjects of
Christ's Kingdom of Grace, let us let them alone, for we cannot by baptizing
them put them into a better State than they are, without any Warrant from
Christ; and by baptizing them not, we cannot put them into any worser State or
Standing than they are in without it.

Many Pedo-baptists are angry with us, because we say we know not but that the
Children of. Unbelievers and Infidels may be in a good Condition as well as
Children of Believers, tho we deny not but that the Children of Believers have
a greater Advantage than the Children of Unbelievers namely, by the Prayers,
good Education, and the good Example of their Parents, etc.

But says Mr. Burkitt, Can any wise or good Man believe, that our Savior
would speak such favorable words of Infants, and his outward Gesture manifest
so much good Will toward them, only with an Intent to ensnare and deceive us?
doubtless it was to encourage his Ministers to perform all charitable Offices
toward them.

Answ. 1. He mistakes, our Savior speaks very little concerning Infants, and
that which is said of them was accidentally spoken, being occasioned by those
who brought little Children to him, which the Disciples forbad, and from hence
he spoke what he did. Moreover, the cause why our Savior spoke those words,
might be more for the sake of Parents, that they might not be afraid touching
the Condition of their dying Babes, than to show any Ordinance belonged to
them; for had it been so, doubtless the Disciples would not have for bad those
People to bring little Children to Christ. It Is therefore an Argument against
Infant Baptism, and not for it, because the Disciples were appointed by their
Master to be the Administrators of that Ordinance on such to whom it did of
right belong; and had Infants been the Subjects, would they have forbid People
to bring Infants to him?

2. We therefore may rather conclude, had they been the Subjects of Baptism,
Christ, by not hinting any such thing in the least on this occasion, might
rather have left us in a Snare, in speaking nothing of it neither here nor at
any other time.

3. Therefore Christ speaking so favorably of Infants, and yet baptizing them
not, may teach us to judge favorably of them, and do any charitable Office
toward them, but not to presume to give them holy Baptism without Christ's
Warrant no more than any other Gospel-Ordinance. It Is no matter what Calvin
spoke, it is no Sin to keep such out of Christ's (visible) Fold, whom he has
given no Authority to take in: Nor have any People a more charitable Opinion of
the State of dying Infants than those styled Anabaptists.

4. Those who are capable of some kind of Blessings of Christ, we have showed,
are notwithstanding not capable of Baptism. We read not the Disciples baptized
these little Children, nor any else.

Object. To this he, as you do, answer, Perhaps they were baptized before: But,
says Mr. Burkitt, it does not follow, that the Apostles did not baptize those
Children, because no mention of it: The Scripture no where tells us that the
Apostles themselves were baptized; shall we conclude therefore they were never
baptized?

Answ. It Is no matter whether we read or read not, that the Apostles were
baptized, since we find it was Christ's Precept and Practice to baptize
Disciples, or such who did believe in him: We read of multitudes of Disciples,
that were baptized, and we know the way of Christ was one and the same; that
which was the Duty of one Disciple, as a Disciple, was the Duty of every
Disciple. We read but of two or three Churches who broke Bread, or celebrated
the Lord's Supper. Could any Pedo-baptist but show us a Precept for
Infant Baptism, or but one Example or Precedent where one Infant was baptized,
we would not doubt but those little Children might be also, but this they
cannot do.

And whereas Mr. Barkitt and you say, That there is not the same Reason why
Infants should be admitted to eat the Lord's Supper, as there is for them to be
admitted to Baptism.

I answer; We deny it utterly. What tho the one be a Sacrament of Initiation,
and the other of Confirmation? Yet pray observe, that Repentance and Faith is
required of them that are to be baptized, even actual Faith and Repentance, as
well as actual Grace and Examination, etc. to discern the Lord's-Body, in those
who are to receive the Lord's Supper. If all that were to be circumcised, had
been required to repent and believe as in the case of Admission to Baptism,
something had been said, but the contrary appears. Male-Infants, as such, had a
right to that, but have no such right to this.

You say, Christ did not lay his Hands upon little Children to heal them of
Sickness, because the Apostles would not have been so cruel as to hinder them
to come to Christ to heal their Distempers, etc.

Answ. Is it then greater Cruelty to hinder little Children of the Blessing of
being healed of Bodily Diseases, than to hinder them of Convenant-Blessings,
Spiritual Blessings? How absurdly do you argue!

You add also, Christ baptized them not at that time; for, say you, they were
baptized before by John the Baptist, and Christ laid his Hands upon them to
bless them; say you, laying on of Hands followed Baptism, Acts 8. 17. Heb. 6.
2. many of the Anti-pedo baptists own it, for they lay their Hands on those
they baptize, you say rebaptize.

Answ. We rebaptize none: Rantism is not Baptism, etc. but you should first
prove John the Baptist did baptize any Infants, for that you have not done, nor
ever can do. We shall see what Proof you have for what you say by and by. As to
laying Hands on baptized Believers, the Scriptures you mention prove that an
Ordinance of Christ, but not upon Infants; the Apostles never taught or
practiced any such thing, tho it is true it is a Popish Rite: for as the Baptism
of Believers is corrupted and changed to Infants, so laying on of Hands on
baptized Believers is corrupted and changed by the false Church to Infants also.

You say, The Kingdom of God under the Gospel is made up of Children, and of
such that are like to them.

Answ. If by the Kingdom of God you mean the visible Church, it is utterly
denied; when you write again prove it, that the visible Church under the Gospel
is made up of Infants, tho we deny not that the Gospel Church is made up of
such, who like little Infants are meek, humble and harmless Persons; in Malice
all Believers should be as little Children.

CHAP. XI.
In Answer to Mr. James Owen's 9th Chapter and sixth Argument; proving, that
Infants ought not to be baptized, although the Gentiles were grafted into the
true Olive, when the Jews were broken off; containing a true Exposition of Romans
11. 15, 16, etc.

ROMANS 11. 15, 16, 17. For if the first Fruit be holy, the Lump is also holy:
and if the Root be holy, so are the Branches. And if some of the Branches be
broken off, and thou being a wild Olive Tree, were graffed in amongst them, and
with them partakest of the Root and Fatness of the Olive Tree, etc.

In this remarkable Scripture the Apostle, you say, shows,

1. That the Jews, while they were God's visible Church, were a holy Nation;
not only the Parents, but the Children also, all the Branches were holy,
because the Root was holy; the Root was Abraham, and others of the Fathers,
Romans 11. 28. Isa. 51. 1, 2. because they were in Abraham's Covenant, the
Parents and the Children were holy, being separated a peculiar People unto God:
In this sense they were holy; because the first Fruit, even Abraham, was holy,
the whole Lump also was holy. Abraham believed and received God's Covenant to
him and his Seed, being the first Fruit of the Jews: even as the first Fruits
offered to the Lord, Levit. 2. 3, 9, 10, 17. so did the Faith of the first
Parents sanctify the whole Nation of the Jews, not with true Holiness in the
Heart, for many of them were wicked, but with a federal Holiness, because they
and their Seed were separated to the Lord in an external Covenant.

2. You say; They that received the Gospel continued to be holy Branches upon
the same holy Root; they and their Seed were in Abraham's Covenant, even as
before, nor one Branch was cut off, neither small or great, until they refused
the Lord Jesus, they that were broken off were cut off by reason of Unbelief,
Romans 11. 20. Because of their Unbelief they were broken off; therefore they
that believed in Christ were not cut off, and if they were not cut off, then
they were in Union with the Root, as being Partakers of the Fatness of the
Root, as before they and their Children were Partakers of their old Privileges,
being holy Branches not broken off. The Anti-pedo-baptists do cut off the
Branches whom God never cut off, viz. the Seed of the Faithful; they lop off
the fruitful Tree in the Vineyard, and lay the Ax upon the Root, and upon the
Branches thereof in a presumptuous manner.

3. You say the Jews refused the Grace of God in the Gospel; God refused that
Nation, not only the Parents but the Children also. God spared not the Natural
Branches, but has broken them off, Romans 11. 17. not from the invisible Church,
of which the unbelieving were not Members. None are Members of the invisible
Church saving the Elect. God refused none of the Parents, Romans 11. 2. 2 Timothy 2.
9. God has not cast away his People which he foreknew; the Foundation of God
stands sure: therefore they were cut off through Unbelief from being the
visible Church, of the which they and their Children were Members.

The Gentiles, were graffed in their room, Romans 11. 17. they and their Children
were broken off, and the Gentiles and their Children shall be graffed in, for
they were received into the same Privileges which the Jews had -- the same
Privileges belong unto them in the same Latitude, for they were graffed into
that Root from which the Jews were cut off, etc.

Answ. 1. I answer; you had need be a good Expositor of a Metaphorical Place of
Scripture, that ground so great an Argument upon it; we used to say Metaphors
serve for Illustration, but are not Argumentative, they do not prove a Truth,
tho they may illustrate it; therefore it is strange you build an Institution, an
Ordinance, nay a Sacrament, as it is called, upon a Metaphorical place of
Scripture.

2. Many things in Metaphorical and Parabolical Scripture run not parallel with
that they are brought to illustrate, therefore run not on all four, as Divines
observe.

3. We will however examine your pretended Argument from this mysterious place
of Scripture. It was well if you had minded what St. Paul speaks in the 25th
Verse, For I would not, Brethren, that you should be ignorant of this great
Mystery, lest ye should be wise in your own Conceits, etc. But that you are
ignorant of this mysterious Text, and Matter contained in it, I doubt not but
to make appear, and it is to be feared from thence you are wise in your own
Apprehension. But to proceed, if all the Branches, viz. the Children of the
whole House of Israel, were holy, then the Children of the unbelieving Jews
were holy also, who were of that Lump you speak of; and if so, why do you argue
from hence for the federal Holiness of the Children of Believers? Sir, under
the Law there was a Federal and Typical Holiness, but the Children of Godly
Parents now, or the whole Lump, you say, is holy, by reason of the Covenant
made with Abraham; tho not spiritually holy, yet federally holy, because all
that were in that external Covenant and Church State of the Jews were holy. If
by Federal Holiness, which was in the Jewish Church, you mean no more than
external Church Membership, not spiritual Holiness and spiritual Privileges,
then their Loss by being cut off is not so great as the Apostle intimates, nor
is the Fatness of Abraham's Covenant and true Olive so sweet as you elsewhere
affirm, nor is it so great a Blessing for the Gentiles to be graffed into such
a Root or Olive Tree that affords no better Oil. What signifies Federal
External Holiness without true Spiritual Holiness? it will do us nor our
Children no more good than the same External, Federal or Covenant Holiness did
do to the wicked Jews and their Children under the Law, no nor so much neither;
for they had by that external Covenant many Earthly or External Blessings, as
they were possessed by that Covenant of the Land of Canaan, and Commonwealth
of the Jews, as a National Church; which external Privileges believing nor
unbelieving Gentiles and their Seed have not under the Gospel, therefore that
is not true which you affirm, viz. The same Privileges belonging to the
Gentiles and their Children, in the same Latitude, for they were graffed into
the same Root.

Sir, have we Gentiles a Worldly Sanctuary, a holy external Temple, a Land
flowing with Milk and Honey, a Political Government and Governors from among
our selves as we are a Gospel Church by God's Ordination, as the Jews had? Are
we under the Promises of heaping up Gold and Silver, and if we are obedient to
live in Peace, and to be saved from our external Enemies, for many such like
Privileges and Promises the Jews and their Children had under the Law? The
truth is, your External, Federal Holiness, Root and Olive Tree will-afford but
little Fatness either to our selves or Children, considered distinct and apart
from Spiritual Blessings and Holiness. What is a simple external Profession
good for, without true Grace and a saving Interest in Christ, and Assurance of
Eternal Life? What more does it serve to do than to blind and deceive the Souls
of such external and carnal Professors? What is an Ordinance without the God of
the Ordinance? What is the Sign without the Thing signified? What is the Lamp
without Oil, or a Cabinet without the Jewel, or a Shell without a Kernel, or
the Name of a Christian without the true Nature of a Christian?

You say, The first Parents sanctified the whole Nation of the Jews, not with
true Holiness in the Heart, for many of them were wicked, but with a Federal
Holiness, because they and their Seed were separated to the Lord in an External
Covenant.

I am glad to see you open the Eyes of your People, now they may see what
little good that federal Holiness, and the Covenant with Abraham can do to
their Infants, it is but only to give them a Name that they may be called
Christians. Is this the Promise that belongs to the Faithful and their
Children? Is this the Blessing of Abraham that is come upon the Gentiles? Are
they not Spiritual Blessings? Is it not Spiritual and Heart-Holiness? Is it
only to be in an external manner, by an external Covenant, and visible
Profession, separated to be the Lord's, and called his, when indeed and in
truth, spiritually and savingly they are not so? Is this that Covenant
confirmed by the Oath of God, that gives you such strong Consolation touching
your Infants, as such, as before you pleaded for?

4. Moreover, do you not own by what you here affirm, that there were two
Covenants made with Abraham, since that Covenant which was made with the whole
Lump, or whole House of Israel, was, as you positively assert, not a spiritual
but an external Covenant? Sure I am you do believe there was a spiritual and an
eternal Covenant of Grace made with Abraham and all his true spiritual Seed,
and that he was a Root spiritually holy, by virtue of that spiritual and true
Gospel Covenant God made with him; and as the whole Lump were all federally
holy in a Spiritual Sense, as himself was, and as he had first Fruits given to
him, who were spiritually and truly holy also, so there are many Branches still
that daily spring out of that Spiritual Root and Spiritual Covenant, that are
federally and spiritually holy as the Root was holy. Sure there was a Covenant
made with Abraham, and of which he is considered as a common Root, or common
Head, and from which Root and Olive Tree it is impossible any one of his
Spiritual Seed can be cut off; for if not so, How is the Promise sure to all
the Seed? Romans 4. 16. and how is that Covenant a ground of strong Consolation
to all the Heirs of the Promise? as Heb. 6. 17, 18, 19.

5. But the truth is, the purport of your Exposition of this dark Text, all may
see is to prove the Gospel Church to be as extensive, wide and large, or every
way of the same Nature and Latitude with the National Church of the Jews; and
therefore you plead for the Fleshly Seed, as such, to be received as Members
thereof.

Sir, I know you not, but I thought you had held for the Congregational Way;
but the truth is, Infants Church Membership is only calculated for a National
Church, and therefore best suits with Presbyterism and Episcopacy.

You say, the Jews and their Children were broke off, and the Gentiles and
their Children were received into the same Privileges which the Jews had, etc.

Answer 1. If you would prove that the Gospel Church is National, consisting of
whole Parishes, Families and Kingdoms, you must bring Proof for this
Constitution from the New Testament: Show, where Christ instituted or ordained
such a Church State, or what whole Gentile Nations, consisting of Believers and
their Children, and Unbelievers or ungodly Persons professing Christianity, and
their Children, were constituted by the Apostles a Gospel Church; for evident
it is, all believing or godly Jews and their Children, and all ungodly Jews who
owned the Jewish Religion, and their Children, were Members of the National
Church of Israel under the Law.

2. Also prove, that if such a Gospel Church Constitution can be proved out of
the New Testament, that therefore all the external Privileges and Rites of the
Jews, must belong unto such a Gentile Nation, and Gospel Church, that did
belong to the National Church of the Jews. Must they have the same Rites and
Privileges, and yet not the same? Is Baptism Circumcision?

3. If it came, as you dream, in the room of it, then it would follow that
Baptism belongs only to Male-Infants; if not so, it is not the same Privilege,
but differs greatly: you must have therefore some word of Institution, or some
good Authority from Christ to enlarge this Privilege, so far as to allow it to
Females also.

4. And why this Privilege only? had not the Jews and their Children many other
external Privileges besides Circumcision? Why must not the Gentiles and their
Children that are grafted in, as you suppose, in their room, receive all the
Privileges as well as one or two? You have done your Work by halves.

5. Besides, what you say, that the first Parents sanctified the whole Nation
of the Jews, is false. It was not they that separated or sanctified them but
God himself, i. e. by his absolute Command and holy Institution; therefore you
must prove the like Command and Institution for such a National Church under
the Gospel as was under the Law. Sir, I desire no better Task than to prove the
Gospel Church consists of none, by Christ's Appointment and Institution, but
only Adult Persons believing and professing Faith in Jesus Christ, incorporated
together in a holy Covenant. And when you write again, lay down your Arguments
to confute what I here say, and I shall, God sparing my Life, be ready, through
his Assistance, to give you an Answer, which will utterly throw away your
Infant Church Membership. And since the old Covenant, and old Covenant
Church State is taken away and dissolved, by the establishing of the
Gospel Covenant, and Gospel Church, you must bring your Arguments and Proof
from Christ's last Will and Testament, or all you do will signify nothing.

Now, Reader, having showed thee that the Exposition Mr. Owen has given of
this Metaphorical Scripture, is false, and inconsistent with the Truth as it is
in Jesus, I shall give thee my Thoughts of the true Purport of it; and in
regard I have once done it already in my answering of Mr. Burkitt, I shall
proceed to lay down his Argument and my Answer, and that will bring me to the
Business directly. The Argument which Mr. Burkitt, and with him other
Pedo-baptists, raises to maintain their Scriptureless Practice of Babes-Baptism
from this Text, is this, viz.

If (says he) the Infants of Christian Parents are federally holy, then they
are Subjects qualified for Baptism: But the Scripture pronounces such Children
federally holy; therefore they are qualified for Baptism, and may be admitted,
Romans 11. 16. If the Root be holy, the Branches are also holy, etc. Where by the
Root, says he, we are to understand Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and by the
Branches, their Posterity, the People of the Jews. Now forasmuch (says he) as
the Jews, the Natural Branches, are for their Unbelief broken off, and the
believing Gentiles are graffed in their stead, and succeed in their Privileges,
in the sense that they were holy, not with an internal and inherent Holiness,
passing by Natural Generation from Parent to Child, but with an external
Relative Covenant-Holiness, grounded on the Promise made to the Faithful and
their Seed.

Answ. 1. I deny the Major, and say, If Children of Believers were federally
holy under the Gospel, yet they are not qualified for Baptism, because it is not
that which gives them right thereto, or qualifies them for it, but what Christ
has ordained and appointed, as the alone proper and meet Qualification, which
is not that External, Relative Covenant-Holiness he talks of, which the New
Testament speaks nothing of, as I shall show by and by, but actual Faith,
Regeneration, or inherent Holiness, which is the Thing signified by Baptism;
therefore a thousand such Arguments will do no good, since Baptism is of mere
Positive Right. It Is Christ's own Law must decide the Controversy, viz. What
Qualifications are required of such, who by his Authority and Law ought to be
baptized. Let any Pedo-baptist prove, if he can, that such an External Federal
Holiness qualifies any Person for Gospel-Baptism; for if such Federal and
External Holiness qualifies Persons for Baptism, then the Jews, before cast
off, might have been admitted to Baptism, since they had then such a kind of
Federal Holiness, which kind of Holiness none can prove Believers Children are
said to have under the Gospel; but if it qualified them not for Baptism, it
cannot qualify our Children for Baptism: And that it did not qualify them, is
evident, see Mat. 3. 9. where some of the Branches of this Root came to John
Baptist to be baptized, and he refused to admit them, with these words, i. e.
Think not to say within your selves, We have Abraham to our Father: For I say,
God is able of these Stones to raise up Children to Abraham. Ver. 10. And now
also is the Ax laid to the Root of the Tree. From whence it plainly appears,
that that External Relative Holiness, which qualified under the Old Testament
Persons for Circumcision, and Jewish Church Membership, will not qualify Old
nor Young under the New Testament for Baptism, and Gospel-Church-Membership.

2. I also deny his Minor, and say, the Scripture of the New Testament does not
pronounce the Children of believing Parents federally holy: The Text Romans 11.
16. speaks not one word of Infants, nor one word of such a kind of federal
Holiness. Dr. Thomas Goodwin, who was a very Learned Man, urging that Text, 1
Cor. 7. 14. (tho a Pedobaptist) In the New Testament (says he) there is no
other Holiness spoken of, but Personal or Real by Regeneration; about which he
challenged all the World to show to the contrary.

And Sir, with your favor, if you cannot from any place of the New Testament
prove there is any such Holiness spoken of, you are to be blamed for bringing
in a private and an unwarrantable Interpretation of that Text. I find there are
various Interpretations of what is meant by the Root in that place.

1. Some understand it of the Covenant. 2. Some of Christ. 3. Some of Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob. 4. Some of Abraham only.
What if I agree with the last, and say Abraham is the Root? But what Root?
why, the Root of all his true Spiritual Seed: And if so, the Holiness of the
Branches was real in word and spiritual; for such Holiness as is in the Root,
is in the Branches: and indeed for want of Faith, or of that Real and Spiritual
Holiness in many of his Natural Branches (for he was a twofold Root, or Father,
as I have before proved) they were rejected or broken off for their Unbelief,
and the Gentiles by Faith were graffed in, they having obtained the Fatness of
the Root, or the Faith and Righteousness of their Father Abraham, who was the
Root or Father of all that believe. The truth is, as Mr. Tombs observes, The
Holiness here meant is, first, in respect of God's Election, Holiness personal
and inherent in God's Intention, Ephesians. 1. 4. Secondly; It is also Holiness
derivative, not from any Ancestors, but Abraham, not as a Natural Father, but
as a Spiritual Father, or Father of the Faithful; and so derived from the
Covenant of Grace made with Abraham.

And thus it appears you have darkened this illustrious Scripture, thinking to
prove a Holiness that the New Testament knows nothing of, applying the Holiness
in the Text to Federal Relative, etc. Holiness in respect to outward
Dispensation only in the visible Church, which is meant of saving Graces, into
the invisible, and make every believing Parent alike Head or Root to his
Posterity with Abraham to his Seed, which we deny.

But let the Jews Covenant and Standing before they were broken off be what it
would, I am sure no Gentile is graffed into Christ, but by actual Faith; nor
can any be graffed into the Gospel Church without the Profession of such Faith,
therefore you do but beat the Air.

The Jews, it is true, were broken off by their Unbelief, and were also no more
a Church; nor is there any such kind of Church constituted under the Gospel as
theirs was, viz. a National Church; for they amongst the Jews, who were the
true Spiritual Seed of Abraham, receiving Christ by Faith, were planted into
the Gospel Church, and between them and Gentile Believers: Now there is no
difference, Jew and Gentile stand in the Church now by Faith, not by external
Covenant, Privilege, Right or Holiness. Thou stand by Faith, O Believer,
Mark! not by Birth-Privilege, but by Faith (says one) yet not thy Seed by thy
Faith, but thou thy self by thine, and they by their own: Faith is that by
which thou standing (and not thy Seed) have right to stand in the Church, and
not they: But if thy Seed have Faith, and thou have none, then they have right
in the Church, and thou shall be excluded. And tho under the Law we deny not,
but that the Natural Seed or Progeny of Abraham were all holy, with an
External, Ceremonial or Typical Holiness; and consequently they were admitted
to an external Participation of Church-Privileges; yet now it is otherwise, old
things are past away: now we know no Man after the Flesh, 2 Cor. 5. 16. That
Church State is dissolved, and manner of Admission into it, by external
Birth-Privilege, and that this Text does not help you. I shall further open
this place of Scripture.

1. It Is evident the Apostle is in the 9th and 10th Chapters to the Romans
treating of the Election of Grace, and of that Covenant of Grace God made with
Abraham; these were his People which he had not cast away, Chap. 10. 1. and of
this sort God had 7000 in Eliah's days, ver. 4. Even so, says he, at this
present time also there is a Remnant according to the Election of Grace, ver.
5. Hence he says, What then? Israel has not obtained, etc. but the Election
has, etc. ver. 7. He further shows, that abundance of the Natural Seed of
Abraham were broken off. How are they broken off? Why by their Unbelief, they
not receiving Christ, but rejecting the Gospel and new Church State, were
broken off. But that the Gentiles might not boast over them, the Apostle shows
there is ground left to believe all those that belong to the: Election of
Grace, shall in God's due time be brought in, and so partake of the Blessings
of the Gospel Covenant, or Covenant of Grace made with Abraham; and to prove
this, in ver. 16. he lays down an Argument, For if the first Fruit be holy, the
Lump is also holy; and if the Root be holy, so are the Branches, ver. 16. by
the Root I understand is meant Abraham, Root and Father signifying here the
same thing, Abraham being the Root or Father, as God represents him, of all the
Elect, or of such who believe, or the Root of all his true Spiritual Seed.

2. By the first Fruits may be meant Isaac, Jacob, and the Holy and Elect
Patriarchs, for they were given as the first Fruits to Abraham of that Covenant
and free Promise of God, and these were holy, with a true Spiritual and
Internal New Covenant Holiness.

3. By the Lump he may mean the whole Body of the Elect, or the Spiritual Seed
of Abraham, from the time the first Fruits were given him, until the
Gospel-day, or whole Body of the true Israel of God, who were holy, as the Root
and first Fruits were holy.

4. By the Branches, may be meant the true Elect Seed that were living then in
that present time, as ver. 5. and these were holy too, even as all the rest,
both as the Root, First Fruits and whole Lump or Body were holy: That is, all
the true Spiritual Seed of Abraham were like himself, viz. holy in a spiritual
sense. And now observe, he speaks of some Branches that were broken off; these
seemed to be Branches, or the Children of Abraham, and so they were according
to the Flesh, but were like those Branches in Christ who bear no Fruit, and
therefore taken away, John 15. 2, 3, 4. he alludes to the Natural Seed of
Abraham, to whom he stood not as a Spiritual Father, or Root, but as a Natural
and Legal Father, as they were a National Church, and sprung from him; and
these Branches were all broken off, viz. for rejecting Christ. (1.) Not broken
off from the Election of Grace, for to that they did not belong. (2.) Nor were
they broken off from the Gospel Church, for they were never graffed into that.
But, (3.) broken off from being any more a Church or People in Covenant with
God, the whole old State and Constitution being gone; and they not closing in
with Christ in the Gospel Dispensation, Grace and Church State, are said to be
broken off as a lost People, because not replanted or implanted into Christ,
and the true Gospel Covenant; the old being gone, quite removed and taken away,
they have now no Root to stand upon, having lost their Legal Privileges as
Abraham was their Father, upon that foot of Account, and they not appearing to
be the true Branches or Seed of Abraham, as he was the Father of all the Elect
Seed, or of all that believe in Jesus Christ, they must of necessity from hence
be broken off from being the People of God, or belonging to any Head or Root,
in any Covenant Relation to God at all, the Dispensation being changed, Old
things being gone, and all things being now become new. But these new
State-Blessings, Rights, Church and Church-Privileges are rejected; and thus
were some of the Natural Branches broken off, and the Gentiles, who were wild
by Nature, i. e. never were in any visible Church state with God, nor in any
sense related to Abraham, as a Root, were graffed into the true Olive Jesus
Christ, and into the true Gospel Church, and so Partakers of the Sap and
Fatness of the Root, and of the Olive, that is, of the Spiritual Blessings and
Privileges of Abraham, and of the Covenant of Grace made with him, and of the
sweet Blessings and Privileges of the Gospel Church; and this they receive and
partake of, as being first graffed by saving Faith in Christ, and so united to
his Mystical Body. But since there are a greater Number of the old Natural
Branches that are beloved for their Father's sake, that is, for the sake of
Abraham, as the Roo^ and Father of all the Elect Seed, they shall in due time
be graffed in again, and so become a People visibly owned of God, and in
Covenant with him, as all the true Seed now are, and formerly were. And if this
be considered, what does this Text do to prove the Natural Seed of Believers,
as such, are in the Gospel Covenant? for if the Natural Seed of Abraham can lay
no Claim, not have any right to Gospel-Privileges, but are gone or broken off,
what ground is there for us to think that on Natural Offspring, (as such)
should be taken in? The Apostle speaks not of such Br^s, or of being holy with
an excernal federal Holiness, but of such a Holiness as was in the Roo^, viz
Abraham, who believed in God; and thus all his true spiritual Seed (who are
actually Branches and in Goven^, being grafted into Christ by Faith) are holy;
and also all the Elect ^eed of Abraham, not yet called, are decretively, of in
God's sight so, who calls things that are not, as if they were; they are all
holy and beloved for their Father Abraham's sake, with whom the Covenant of
Grace was for himself, and all his true Spiritual Seed. And it is from this
Argument the Apostle argues for the calling of the Jews, and the graffing of
them in again, who belong to the Election of Grace; they therefore who would
make every believing Parent to be the Root to his Natural Offspring, as
Abraham was to his true Spiritual Seed or Offspring, or a common Head or Root
of their Natural Offspring, as he was to his, know not what they say or
affirm; for then there would be so many common Roots and Fathers, like as
Abraham was called a Root and Father; and then also there would be a Knowledge
still of Men after the Flesh, which the Apostle Paul disclaims, 2 Cor. 5. 17.
Moreover, the Jews who were broken off, are still the Natural Seed of Abraham;
and if therefore this Holiness was an External Relative, Federal Holiness, they
are in that sense holy as much as any Children of a believing Gentile can be
said to be; but this, it is evident, is not that Holiness of which the Apostle
speaks, nor is there any such Holiness under the Gospel Dispensation spoken of.

Thus, Reader, I have examined Mr. Owen's Exposition of this Text, and have
found it to be a false Exposition, and a palpable Abuse of the sacred Text, and
have opened the Text, I hope, truly. It therefore follows from what I have said
in Opposition to what Mr. Owen says in the Close of the ninth Chapter, as here
follows:

1. That by the Natural Branches that receive Virtue and Fatness from the Root
before Christ came, were not meant the Natural Seed of Abraham, as such,
because no ungodly Person did, or does, or can receive the Virtue and Fatness
of the true Olive Tree, or saving Blessings of the Covenant of Grace God made
with Abraham. What Virtue or Fatness is in a simple, external, federal
Profession or Holiness, either in the Jewish or Christian Religion, as it
respects only a Separation to visible Church Membership?

2. It appears also that the Jews that believed in Christ, tho they were not
broken off of the Covenant of Grace God made with Abraham, yet they and their
Children stood no longer in that Legal and External Covenant of Peculiarity
which God made with Abraham and the whole House of Israel, but that that old
Covenant is dissolved.

3. That those Jews that believed not, and their Children, are broken off from
being any more in any Covenant Relation to God as his People, and that for
their Unbelief.

4. It also appears that none of the Gentiles are received or graffed into
Christ, and into the true Olive, or into the Covenant of Grace God made with
Abraham, but only such that believe; not them and their Fleshly Seed, as such,
but they themselves and their Children also that do believe, even none but such
who by Faith partake of the Fatness; that is, the best of Blessings that
appertains to the Covenant of Grace, not external Blessings and Privileges
only: no, no, they are not the Fatness, i. e. the best and the choicest of
Covenant-Blessings, but Union with Christ, Justification, Pardon of Sin,
Adoption and Eternal Life; in these things consists the Fatness of the true
Olive, which Believers Seed, as such, partake not of, nor any but the Elect and
called ones of God, according to his Eternal Purpose only.

5. It also appears, that those Jews that shall be called and graffed in again
into their own Olive Tree, shall be none but the Elect, and that their own
Olive Tree does not refer to the external Privileges of the Covenant of
Peculiarity God made with Abraham's Natural Seed, as such, but shall receive of
the Fatness of their own Olive Tree, which is the Covenant of Grace; for that
primarily was made with Abraham's Natural Seed, that believe, and belongs to
all God's Elect also as their own and proper Olive, whether Jews or Gentiles.
So that when the Jews are called, we may be sure they will plead no external
Privileges of their old dissolved Covenant, but come in upon the Terms of the
Gospel, with their Children that believe and none else: And if the Controversy
of Infants right to Baptism and Church Membership cease not till they shall
be called and come in, who will then renounce the old Federal Right, and all
Old Testament external Privileges, be sure it will cease then.

CHAP. XII.
In Answer to Mr. Owen's 10th Chapter and 7th Argument viz. that the Infants of
the Faithful, as such, ought to be baptized, because they can partake of those
things prefigured in Baptism.

TAke Mr. Owen's 7th Argument which runs thus, viz. If the Children of the
Faithful can partake of the Blessings figured in Baptism, they ought to be
Partakers of Baptism also; if the invisible Grace belongs unto them, the
visible Sign cannot be denied unto them, etc.

Answ. If we should grant that the Children of the Faithful, as such, can and
do partake of the Blessings figured in Baptism; yet it does not follow they
ought to be baptized, because there is no Precept or Example for it in the New
Testament.

For may not I argue thus, viz. If the Children of the Faithful can partake of
the Blessing prefigured in the Lord's Supper they ought to partake of the
Lord's Supper; if the invisible Grace belongs to them, the visible Sign cannot
be denied unto them? This Argument is therefore as forcible to bring our
Children to the Lord's Table as it is to Baptism.

Baptism signifies three things, which (you say) little Children can partake
of.

1st. (You say) it signifies Remission of Sins through the Virtue of the Blood
of Christ, Mark 1. 4. Acts 2. 3, 8.

This you say belongs to little Children in two manner of ways.

1. They have need of pardoning Grace. 2. Many of them receive Remission of
Sin, for many of them that die go to Heaven.
Answ. 1. Your first Argument has as much in it for the baptizing of Infidels
and their Children, as for the Children of Believers, for do not they need
pardoning Grace?

2. As to your second Reason, Do all the Children of Believers that die go to
Heaven? and do none of the Children of Unbelievers go thither? Dare you affirm,
that all Unbelievers Children that die are damned? if not, why may they not be
baptized as well as the Children of Believers.

3. But do you baptize no Children of Believers but such that die? do not many
of them live and prove ungodly when grown up, that you baptize?

Two things you must prove, if you say any thing here to the purpose.

1. That all dying Infants of Believers are elected, and so shall (...) saved.

2. That all they that go to Heaven, or shall be saved, ^ay, nay ought to have
both Baptism and the Lord's Supper administered to them: Nay, and it follows
also, that you ought only to baptize those Children of Believers that died, or
such that you have ground to believe are elected to Salvation, according to
your own Argument. But let me tell you, if you knew what Children of Believers
or Unbelievers are elected, yet you ought no more to baptize them, than to give
the Lord's Supper. It Is not Election, I tell you again, that gives any a right
to Baptism, but the positive Command of Christ: Might not M^lchisedec or Job
have said, our Children do need what was prefigured in Circumcision, therefore
we will circumcise them? would that have justified them if they had presumed to
have done it without God's Command? for the Command and mere positive Precept
to circumcise was only given to Abraham, and it only extended to himself, and
his Male Children, or such that were in his House or Family, or bought with his
Money.

Therefore all this arguing of yours is weak and groundless.

In vain therefore is that which you say to sinful Parents, that delivered
Corruption to their Children, that they should administer Medicines unto them,
and so give them the Ordinance of Baptism, which Christ has appointed for that
end, that they might not fall into the bottomless Pi^.

Answ. 1. You must prove Christ has appointed Baptism for Children, do that
and your Work is done.

2. Prove that Baptism is the Medicine to cure the Disease of Original Sin, and
to save Children (or Adult Persons either) from falling into the bottomless Pi^.

You seem to frighten Parents into the Belief of your Tradition: Can any thing
save either young or old from Hell, but the Blood and Merits of Christ through
the Sanctification of the Spirit? which Baptism can be but a Figure of, ('it is
not the Medicine) nor is it appointed to any to be a Figure of that, etc. but
to Believers only, who certainly have the things signified.

2dly. Baptism (you say) signifies the pouring forth of the Holy Ghost, Acts 2.
38. Tit. 3. 5. and it is certain that little Children can receive the Holy Ghost
from their Mothers Womb, Luke 1. 15.

Answ. We deny that Baptism signifies the pouring of the Holy Spirit, the
Scriptures you cite prove no such thing. It signifies, as I have showed, the
Death, Burial and Resurrection of Christ, with our Death unto Sin, or
Mortification of Sin, and rising again to a new Life.

What tho the Promise is made to Christ and his Seed in Isa. 44. 3. and 59. 11.
Are Infants of Believers, as such, the Seed of Christ, and in the Covenant of
Grace?

The Promise of pouring forth of the Spirit is only made to Believers, and to
such of their Seed that believe, or to all the Elect of God: Prove that Infants
of Believers, as such, in the Gospel-days received the Holy Spirit; God can,
it is true, give his Spirit to a Babe in the Womb, and may be to one or two
Babes he might do it; so he once also opened the Mouth of an Ass, must all
Asses therefore speak with Man's Voice? You say,

3dly. Baptism signifies Regeneration; and it is possible (say you) that
Children may be regenerated: What can hinder the unspeakable Grace of God's
working upon their Hearts? Jeremiah was sanctified in his Mother's Womb.

Answ. I answer, Pagans and Infidels may be regenerated it is possible, what can
hinder God's working upon their Hearts? Nay, and it is probable too God will do
it when he affords the Gospel to them, and when they are regenerated let them
be baptized; when they have the thing signified, let them have the Sign also.

Mr. Baxter says, Baptism is a (...) of present, not future Regeneration;
Baptism was not appointed of Christ to be a Sign of that which might, or might
not be in the true Subject of it hereafter, but of that Regeneration that was
certainly wrought in the Person before baptized: If thou believe (if thou
have true Faith, or art a converted Man) thou ^st, Acts 8. not if that
hereafter thou may be a Believer, ^ut if thou art now one that do believe.

(You say) God can easily give holy Qualities to the Souls of Children: Cannot
God restore his own Image to little Children? I do not say, all the Children of
the Faithful receive the Grace of Regeneration in their Infancy, it is evident
to the contrary, many of them being wicked; but on the other hand, the Work of
Grace appears very early day by day in others of them.

Answ. If this he so, your Cause is gone: How? Are not all the infants of
Believers regenerated, and in Covenant with God? Why then do you baptize all,
even such that have not the thing signified when baptized, nor ever after till
they die? Worthy Britains! see here Mr. Owen does acknowledge that the Infants
of Believers, as such, are not in Covenant, for all that are in the Covenant of
Grace and have a right to the Seal of it are regenerated; alas, what is the
Seal but a Seal of Regeneration, and so of eternal Salvation! Ephesians. 1. 13, 14.
Chap. 4. 30.

But (you say) In others Regeneration appears very early, day by day, that is
in some little Children.

Answ. 2. But are not some Children of ungodly Parents as early wrought upon
and born again as the Children of the godly, why then may not their Children
also be baptized? You say Mr. Eliot in his Book called, Tears of Repentance,
speaks of two Indian Children who were converted before three Years old: Sir,
these were not the Children of Godly Parents.

3. Admit that to be true, and that God sometimes does regenerate Children at
three or four Years of Age.

Such Children I can baptize by the Authority of Christ's Commission, or by
Virtue of his holy Precept, and none but such Children that do believe have any
right thereunto. You say Solomon was very young when the Lord loved him.

Answ. No doubt but the Lord loved his Elect before they were born, even from
Everlasting, but what of this? yet when they are called and regenerated, and
not till then, they ought to be baptized.

In a word, that which renders Persons capable of Baptism are the Prerequisites
of Baptism, or those things that are required by Christ to be in the true
Subjects thereof, which are Faith and the Profession of it, or Faith and
Repentance. You may be capable of being made a Justice of Peace, but you must
not exercise that Office without a lawful Commission: So let our Children be
capable of what they will or may, yet without a Warrant from God's Word they
ought not to be admitted to Baptism, the Lord's Supper, nor to any other
Gospel-Ordinance.

God can give sacred Habits and Qualities to a Child we deny not, but till he
does it you are not to give them the Signs of those gracious Qualities; and if
there be no visible Signs or Demonstrations of those sacred Qualities in such
Infants you baptize that render them Believers, it is at best but a mock Baptism.

Object. If we knew that little children are regenerated, we would baptize them
This is your Objection against your self, as if we argued thus.

Answ. No, Sir, you mistake us; if we did know little Infants were regenerate,
which is impossible for us to know (...) I doubt not but that those Infants
that go to Heaven are made holy in some secret way unknown to us, because no
unclean ^ng can enter into Heaven) yet we durst not baptize them, because we
want Authority to do it.

Put to come to your Answer.

That (say you) cannot be certainly known of the Adult, therefore by this
Objection none can be baptized. It Is sufficient in this case, that the Promise
of God belongs to the Infant^ of the Faithful: They are Members of the visible
Church through which the Line of G^ Election runs, Romans 9. 4, 5. and Chap.
11. 7.

Answ. 1. (...) answer, tho we cannot, as the apostles could not, certainly or
in^ know who were truly regenerated, or are true Believers, yet they baptized
none but such in whom they saw such Signs of Grace, that made them in Charity
to believe, or hope they were Believers; they made a (...) and (...) ession of
their Faith: but in little ^bes there appear no Signs of Grace, nor can they
make any Confession of their Faith; where there is no Knowledge, there can be no
F^

2. And whereas you say they are Members of the visible Church under the
Gospel, it is false, the Gospel Church does (...) consist of whole Nations and
Families, as did the Jewish Church under the Law in a natural way. The Gospel
Church is a Spiritual House, not consisting of Babes in a way of Generation,
(...) of Spiritual Babes in a way of R^, (...) (...). 2. 5, 6.

3. Nor does the Promise run to any but to them whom the lord shall call, Acts 2
39, even to Jews and their (...) that are called, and so to the (...) that
sometimes were a^ar off; Ephesians. 2.

4. As touching Election, it is strange to me that you should affirm, that that
runs in the Fleshly Line of Believers and their Seed, as such, and cite that
Text to prove it, Romans 9. 4, 5. in which St. Paul proves directly the contrary,
(...). e. Not as tho the Word of God has taken none Effect; for they are not
all Israel that are of Israel; ver. 6. Neither because they are the Seed of
Abraham are they Children: but in Isaac shall thy Seed be called; ver. 7. That
is, they which are the Children of the Flesh, these are not the Children of
God: but the Children of the Promise are counted for the Seed; ver. 8.

Sir, tho the Covenants and Promises did belong to the Israelires, yet you may
see how the Apostle does explain it, even to none but to the Elect, or only to
such that God by his Spirit, through the Power and Virtue of the Promise,
should regenerate and cell by his Grace.

Therefore in Opposition to what you say, none were accounted Abraham's Seed
and Children of the Promise, but such that were in Christ, Gal. 3. ^lt.

(You say) all the Children of the Faithful are under the Promise, but God
administreth the Grace of the Promises to the Elect only, and to many of them
in their Infancy. But because we know not upon whom the Election falls, it is
the Will of God that we should baptize all that are under the Promise.

Answ. 1. If all the Children of the Faithful are under the Promise, they are
all elected, because the Promise, to whomsoever it is made, is sure to all the
Seed; see Romans 4. 16. If it be the natural Seed, as such, it is sure to all
them, and not one of the Seed of Believers shall perish; but if it be meant
only of the true spiritual Seed, then it is sure only to them; for those to whom
the promise is made it is confirmed unto by the Word and Oath of God, that so
the Heirs of the Promise might have strong Consolation; Heb. 6. 18. Therefore
those to whom the Promise belongs, the Grace therefore or Blessing of that
Promise God will bestow upon, or else his Promise is made void and of none
Effect. Prove that there are any who are under the Promise, or are Children of
the Promise, and yet God does not administer the Grace of the Promise unto
them; are any the Children of the Promise and not elected?

2. But whereas you say the Grace of the Promise is given to some in Insancy,
we deny it, except to such that die in Infancy; and do you disprove us if you
can. But,

3. The worst of all comes at last. Sir, where is it written what you so boldly
affirm, viz. Because you know not upon when the Election falls, it is the
Will of God that you should baptize all that are under the Promise? And you
affirm that all the Children of Believers are under the Promise. I argue thus,
If it be God's Will that all the Children of the Faithful should be baptized,
it is revealed in his Word; but this is not revealed in his Word, no nor that
any one of them whilst Infants ought to be baptized, therefore it is not his
Will they should.

4. May not we by your Argument baptize Unbelievers in whom no Grace appears,
because we do not know how the Election runs? they may be under the Promise and
in the Election as far as we know. What a preposterous way of arguing is this
of yours? But no more to your 10th Chapter, and 7th Argument for your Childrens
Baptism.

CHAP XIII.
In Answer to Mr. James Owen's 11th Chapter and 6th Argument, concerning those
Baptisms that were under the Law; proving that Christ's Ordinance of Baptism is
a pure Gospel-Institution, and that it was not in being tell he appointed it in
the Gospel-days.

(...), what you have said in your 11th Chapter, which contains your 8th
Argument, tho it may seem new to some, I shall show it is nothing at all to the
purpose.

You say, the Form of Baptism was before the Law, and under the Law; and from
thence infer that Children ought to be baptized under the Gospel.

Answ. 1. You may infer from the same Ground and Argument, that Clothes, Pots,
Tables and Vessels ought to be baptized under the Gospel, as an Ordinance of
Christ, because they were dipped, washed or baptized before and under the Law.

2. Moreover, you may infer as well that Unbelievers, yea the worst of Men and
Cattle also, ought to be baptized under the Gospel, because Noah and his
Children were baptized in the Ark, among which was cursed Chan: you intimate
that Cham was baptized upon his Father's Faith; so that it appears the Father's
Faith will not only save the Infant Seed of Believers, but save them when they
are Adult Persons also.

But were not the Beasts and the Fowls baptized and saved by the Ark as well as
Noah and his Children, and his Son Cham? But as touching that Text 1 Pet. 3.
10. how the Ark of Noah might be a Figure of Baptism, I shall speak to that
more fully by and by.

3. Because all sorts of Washings or Dippings are in the Greek Tongue
Baptizing, does it therefore follow that all sorts of Baptisms, Dippings, or
Washings, are formally Christ's Ordinance of Baptism?

Mr. Burkitt, a great Pedo-baptist, and all other learned Men, assert, that to
the true Form and Requisites of Gospel-Baptism these several things are
necessary.

1. The Person baptizing, or the Administrator ought to be a lawful Minister,
one authorized and commissionated by Christ so to do. 2. The Party baptized
must be a Subject fitly qualified for Baptism. 3. The Element in which the
Party is baptized must be Water. 4. True Gospel-Baptism must be administered in
the Name, or into the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost.
Now, Sir, was there any Person either young or old, before the Law or under
the Law, thus baptized?

(You say) that Jacob received little Children into God's Covenant by Baptism,
because he said unto his Household, Put away the strange Gods that are among
you, and be ye clean, and change your Garments? Genesis 35. 2.

Answ. 1. Was this Command given to his little Children, or had they corrupted
themselves with Idolatry, or by worshipping strange Gods, or who did he appoint
to baptize his Babes?

2. What tho the Hebrew word signifies cleansing or washing with Water, was it
therefore formally the Ordinance of Baptism? Did ever any Man argue after this
manner before? it is a sign you want Proofs for your Childish Baptism in the New
Testament that you go to Genesis for it, and to such, a remote Text that
includes nothing of the Controversy.

But (you say) Circumcision was abominable in the sight of the Gentiles,
because the Children of Jacob made it to be an Ordinance of Mortality unto the
Sichemites, Genesis 34. and the greatest part of Jacob's Household were Gentiles,
therefore Jacob received their Wives and Children into God's Covenant through
washing of Water, or Baptism; and according to the Example of Jacob they used
to baptize all the Gentiles that received Circumcision; for their wise Men sp^
thus, None are Proselytes until circumcised and baptized. Light^. vol 1. p.
210. And they baptized the Children with the Parents; little ones are to be
baptized according to the Ordinance of the Counsel. M^^n. in Light.

Answ. 1. If this be so, that the Baptism of Children was among the Jews, or in
the Jewish Church from the beginning, why do you plead for Baptism to come in
the room of Circumcision? it appears your Infant Baptism is near or altogether
as old as Circumcision it self, therefore it could not come in the room of that.

2. I have read, I must confess, in some Authors, that the Jews did receive
their Proselytes both by Circumcision and Baptism; but you seem to intimate
that old Jacob was so wise to dismiss Circumcision to his Gentile Proselvtes.
(because Sim^on and Levi made it so odious) and did contrive or institute
Baptism in its room, as the only Rite to receive them into God's Covenant. I
must confess Jacob had many Failings, but I never heard him thus charged, and
rendered guilty of such an Abomination before.

How, Sir! could he lay aside God's holy Ordinance of Circumcision at his Will
and Pleasure, and that too because his Sons had brought a Reproach upon it; and
did he devise a new Ordinance, namely Baptism, in its room? What an abominable
Innovation had he been guilty of should he have done this thing, which you seem
posicively to affirm?

3. Nay, and this is not the worst of Jacob's Sins neither; for it appears by
your plain words, that you suppose that the Jews from this Example of Jacob,
used to baptize all the Gentiles that received Circumcision, tho it appears the
Jews did not follow the Example of Jacob in throwing Circumcision away, and
exchange it for Baptism, yet by Jacob's Example did baptize all their Gentile
Proselytes, whether Men, Women and children; so that he caused them to set up,
or add a Tradition of his own devising to God's Institution: For I challenge
you or any Man under Heaven, to prove that God commanded Jacob or any
Patriarch, or Jewish Rabbis, to baptize any Proselyte either young or old when
received into their Church.

4. Behold, you Pedo-baptists, the Rise and Foundation of your Infant Baptism
according to Mr. Owen's Conceit! Why? where have we it, even in Noah's Ark,
wherein the whole World were baptized! For let me thus argue, If all the World
in Noah's Ark both rational and irrational Creatures were baptized, then
Infants may be baptized. nay and all Unbelievers, and Cattle also; but the
former is true, Ergo. But if we have not the Rise of it here. we have in Genesis
35. 2. Then said Jacob unto his Household, and unto all that were with him, Put
away the strange Gods that are among you, and be you clean, and change your
Garments.

5. Now from Jacob's bidding them to be clean, Mr. C^ infers, he commands them
all to be baptized (but without any Authority or Command of God) even all his
Household, Jews and Gentiles, Men, Women and Children, Believers and Unbelievers.

Pray take the Consequence or Inference from hence ('it is better perhaps to
prove Infant Baptism, than from those whole ^ousholds said to be baptized in
the New Testament.)

Jacob commanded all his Household, and all that were with him to be baptized,
among which were Gentiles and their Children, therefore we Gentiles and our
Children may be baptized. Yea, and our Menservants and Maid Servants, tho they
be Negro's, whether they believe or not; for Jacob perhaps had some gross
Idolaters in his Household, therefore the worst of Men as well as little
Children may be baptized.

Honored Britains! you have seen but little of this Controversy in your
Language: But Mr. Owen, seeing the old Argument; which the Asserters of
Infant Baptism have brought, to be too weak to establish it to be of God, and
from Heaven, out of the New Testament; he has found out new ones never heard
of by me before, I mean this of Jacob's commanding his whole Household, and all
that were with him, to be clean, that is, says he, to be baptized all of them.
So that Infant Baptism has its Rise not from the Command of Christ, but from
the Command of Jacob, and that not from Circumcision, for Jacob laid that aside
because his two Sons had caused Circumcision to be odious and hateful to the
Gentiles, he therefore contrived Baptism in its stead. O when will this Man
cease to pervert the holy and righteous way of God in his Institution of
Believers Baptism!

6. I find also that Mr. James Owen has found out the first Rise or Original
of that human Tradition of the Jews in baptizing their Gentile Proselytes, both
Men, Women and Children. But I am very sorry it is fathered upon holy Jacob

Mr. Burkitt I must confess makes that Custom that was among the Jews a grand
Argument for Infant Baptism; and, as if the New Testament without the Old was
not a sufficient Rule for the Practice of Gospel-Baptism, but that we must have
recourse to the Old Testament as well as the New.

To which I answer; That tho in some Points of Faith and Practice the Old
Testament and the New together is the Rule by which we ought to walk, yet his
Trumpet and yours in this case gives an uncertain Sound: For in respect of
Practice, were there not many Laws and Precepts given to the People of the
Jews, which no ways in the least concerns us or God's Spiritual Israel under
the Gospel? If you explain your self no better, you may soon subvert the
People, and carry them away to Judaism with a witness; ^y and instead of
baptizing Children upon such a Childish and Erroneous foot of Account, make
them think they ought to circumcise them, as some of late here in England were
deluded to do. Therefore we say, as to all Precepts of the Gospel that are mere
positive Laws, the New Testament is our only Rule without the Old. Christ alone
is our Lawgiver, and him and not Moses we are only to hear and hearken unto;
tho as to matter of Faith the Old Testament may be useful to us in many
respects, and also all Precepts that are purely Moral in their own Nature; The
Old Testament is a Rule to us as well as the New, which I might show in many
respects, not only touching the Law of the Decalogue, but also about days of
Prayer, singing God's Praises, Fasting-days, etc. But for any to intimate in
the Case of Baptism, that the Old Testament is a Rule of Practice, or in
respect of Jewish Church Membership, such strangely betray their Ignorance, as
will further appear hereafter. For that Circumcision was a mere Legal or Jewish
Rite, I shall evidently anon fully prove.

You and Mr. Burkitt, with other Pedo-baptists, affirm, that so little is said
in the New Testament about baptizing Infants, because the Custom of baptizing
them was common, and the Practice constant in the Jewish Church, at and before
our Savior's time. Whilst Circumcision was the covenanting Sign, Baptism was
the purifying Ceremony among the Jews; for when any of the Gentiles were
admitted into the Jewish Church, both Parents and Children were first
circumcised, and then washed in token of cleansing them from the Filth of their
Heathenism: So that Baptism among the Jews constantly went along with
Circumcision till our Savior's time.

Answ. It Is a sign of a bad Cause when Men are forced to try their Wits after
such a ridiculous manner to make out what they have to prove. Pray, was that
Custom among the Jews of baptizing Infants, when any of the Gentiles were
admitted into the Jewish Church, commanded of God? Had God given the Jews any
such Law or Precept? Or was it one of their own Traditions, who in their own
Wisdom, without any Warrant from their great Prophet and Lawgiver, devised
that Ceremony, possibly to wash away the Filth of Heathenism, as your
Predecessors in like manner, without any Command or Warrant of Jesus Christ,
devised the baptizing of Infants to wash away the Filth of Original Sin? Does
not our blessed Savior say that they had made void the Commandments of God
through their Traditions? I do affirm, it was never given them as a Law or
Precept by the great God, nor do you attempt once to prove any such thing; for
there is not the least shadow of any such thing in all the Old Testament,
therefore it was a mere Human Tradition.

2. Can any wise Man who would do nothing in God's Service without a sufficient
Rule or Warrant from the Word of God, think this a good Argument for Infant
Baptism? I must tell you (as I have already told the Athenian, Society, with
whom I had to do in this matter) that a Popish Tradition is every way as good
as a Jewish one. You were better plead thus, the Romish Church without any
Warrant from God's Word, received Infant Baptism as an unwritten Ap^stolical
Tradition, and in some Councils early: Qui^que parvulos re^ens ab uteris Matrum
baptizandos esse (...), A^ma esto. Milev. Can 2. and anathemized or cursed all
who should deny that newborn Infants were to be baptized, therefore we may
baptize Infants. Why do you fly to the fabulous and idle Traditions of the
Jewish Rabbis for your Childish Baptism, since you have the Testimony of so
many Romish Doctors and General Councils, who positively affirm you ought to
baptize your children? Sure the Authority of the latter is as good as the
former.

3. But is it so indeed, did our Savior say nothing of Infant Baptism? or, as
you hint, leave so little of it in the New Testament, because it was the
constant Custom among the Jews to baptize the Children of Heathens before they
admitted them into their Church? What Dr. Hammond, Tailor, and Lightfoot have
said upon that account, is to their Shame and Reproach rather than to their
Honor, tho I know it was their last Refuge, when they saw your
Scripture-Proofs would not prove it to be a Truth of Christ. O how are we
beholden to the Jewish Talmud and J^wish Rabbis for our Infant Baptism! Nay,
which is worst of all, how is Christ beholden to them for that rare Invention,
who had said so much for it, and made it so common a Practice among them, that
it saved him the Pains to give the least Directions about it? But is not this
next to Blasphemy? Can any Man in his right Wits think our Lord Jesus should
confirm a Tradition and Innovation of the Jews? Or take his great Ordinance of
Baptism from the Superstitious, Fabulous and Erroneous Custom of their Doctors
and Rabbis? Besides, was Baptism to be preached or practiced by none but the
Jewish People? Does it not belong to the Gentiles too? Did not our Savior
command his Disciples to go into all Nations, and make Disciples, and baptize
them? etc. Was it in his Mind that Infants should be baptized, and yet say
nothing of it, because it was a common Custom and Practice among the Jews? But,
pray, what must the Gentiles do to know this to be their Duty? (I mean those
Gentiles who received the Christian Faith) viz. that they ought to baptize
their Children who did not know, nor ever heard of that Jewish Custom? Or dare
you say our New Testament is not authentic, or sufficient to teach us the
whole of Gospel-Duties, and Obedience, without the Jewish Talmud? You should
not ('it is plain) only have said the New Testament is not without the Old the
Rule of our practice; but also that the New Testament, and the Old, without the
Jewish Talmud, is not sufficient, and then you had done your Business at once.
Why are not Men ashamed thus to go about to blind and deceive the poor People?

Is not the whole Mind of Jesus Christ, even all his Laws and Precepts, or his
whole Counsel, plainly contained in his Blessed Word? But would you have
People be wise above what is written, and teach Men to reflect upon the Care
and Faithfulness of the Blessed Jesus, in leaving out of the Sacred Bible one
great Truth of God, and leave us to find it out by going to search the Jewish
Tradition?

4. If it was a Custom among the Jews, it must be a Sacred Custom, I mean a
Custom that God appointed and commanded them to observe, or else a Human
Tradition or vain Custom: And if it had been a Mosaical Rite, given by God
himself to the Jews, Christ then be sure abolished it, and nailed it to his
Cross, with all its Fellows, and it is gone for ever, since he has not given it
out a new.

Take this Argument,

That Custom among the Jews, that God never commanded, nor is any where given
by Moses unto them, who was faithful in all his House, was no Ordinance of God,
but a mere Human Tradition: But the Custom ^ng the Jews of baptizing the
Heathen and their Children (...) were admitted into their Church, was never
Comm^ of God, nor any where given unto them by Moses, who was faithful in all
his House.

Ergo, That Custom was no Ordinance of God, but a mere Human Tradition.

Lastly, Take what a Worthy and Learned Author has said in Confutation of
this foolish and absurd Argument for Pedo b^ptism, it is Sir Norton Knatchbul,
Knight. and Baronet. The Thing, says he, is uncertain, that it cannot be said of
the R^bbins, that there were not several among them who differed very much
about this matter; for Rabbi Eli^zar expressly contradicts Rabbi Joshua, who was
the first that I know of who asserted this sort of Baptism among the Jews; for
Rabbi Eliezar who was Contemporary with Ra^bi Joshua, if he did not live before
him, asserts that a Proselyte Circumcised, and not Baptized, was a true
Proselyte: for so we read of the Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, that
they were Circumcised, but not Baptized. But Rabbi Joshua affirms, that he who
was Baptized, not he that was Circumcised, was a true Proselyte. To whom shall
I give Credit, to Eliezar who asserts what the Scripture confirms, or to Joshua
who a^ms what is no where to be found in Scripture? But the Rabbis upheld
Joshua's Side, and what Wonder was it? For it made for their Business; that is,
for the Honor of the Jewish Religion, that the Christians should borrow their
Ceremonies from them. But when I see Men of great Learning in these Times
fetching the Foundations of Truth from the Rabbis, I cannot but he^ate a
little: For whence was the Talmud sent, as they are the Words of Buxtors, in
his Synagoga Judaica, that we should give Credit thereto, that from thence we
should believe that the Law of Moses either can or ought to be understood? Much
less the Gospel, to which they were professed Enemies. For the Talmud is called
a Labyrinth of Errors, and the Foundation of Jewish Fables; it was brought to
Perfection, and held for authentic five hundred Years after Christ: Therefore
it is unreasonable to rest upon the Testimony of it. And that which moves me
most, Josephus (to omit all the Fathers that lived before the Talmud was
finished) who was a Jew, and a Contemporary with Rabbi Eliezar, who also wrote
in particular of the Rites, Customs and Acts of the Jews, is altogether silent
in this Matter. So that it is an Argument to me, next to a Demonstration, that
two such Eminent Persons, both Jews, and living at the same Time, the one
should positively deny, and the other make no mention of Baptism among the
Jews. Besides, if Baptism, in the Modern Sense, were in use among the Jews in
Ancient Times, why did the Pharisees ask John Baptist, Why do thou baptize if
thou art not Christ, nor Elias, nor that Prophet? Do they not plainly intimate
that Baptism was not in use before, and that it was a received Opinion among
them, that there should be no Baptism till either Christ, or Elias, or that
Prophet came? So far Sir Norton Knatchbull, in his Notes printed at Oxford,
Anno Dom. 1677. with the License of the Vice Chancellor, a very Learned Man,
and a Son of the Church of England. Sir, What think you now of your Jewish
Custom of baptizing the Heathens, and their Children, who were admitted to
their Church? Do you think there was not need that Infant Baptism should be
mentioned in the Holy Scripture, had it been a Truth? Is this uncertain Story
of the Jewish Custom sufficient for you to build your Faith and Practice upon,
when the Truth of the Story, as to Matter of Fact, may justly be doubted? But
if it was true, it is but a rotten Foundation to build one of the great
Sacraments of Christ upon, viz. a vile, profane and Human Tradition of the
Jewish Rabbis.

You say, The Israelites and their Children were baptized in the Cloud, and in
the Sea, 1 Cor. 10. 2, 3. That Israel going under the Cloud, and through the
Sea; that was, say you, a Baptism unto them: The Cloud rained upon them, and
the Sea dropped upon them, which was as a High Wall round about them.

2. This Baptism under the Cloud, and in the Sea, signifies, in its Essence,
the same thing with the Baptism of the Gospel, viz. the Lord Jesus Christ and
his Blessings: The Spiritual Washings in the Sea, and the Spiritual Drink from
the Rock, signified the same thing; even Christ he was the Substance of all the
Types under the Law. The Pillar of Cloud, and the Pillar of Fire, did foreshew
the Baptism of Water, and the Baptism of Fire, or of the Holy Spirit; the
falling of the Water from the Cloud, signified the pouring of the Holy Ghost,
etc.

3. The Children were baptized with their Parents, with the Baptism of Moses,
they were all baptized unto Moses, etc.

Answer. Two Things are to be done to disprove what you say here.

1. That the Rain falling from the Cloud, was not that which was the Figure of
Baptism. 2. That this Text does not prove Infants to be the Subject of Baptism.
First, If Persons may be said to be baptized when it rains upon them, How many
times have you and I been so baptized? Besides, Do you think it never rained
upon the ^ites before they passed through the Sea?

And Secondly, Prove if you can it did then either rain upon them from the
Cloud, or that the Sea dropped upon them; it is but your own ungrounded
Supposition.

Thirdly, Prove that Rain falling upon them, can in any Sense be called a
Washing or Baptism.

Therefore let the Reader consider well what our Annotators speak on this
Place; see Mr. Pool's Annotations on (...) Cor. 10. 2, 3. Others, says he,
more probably think that the Apostle uses this Term, in regard of the great
Analogy betwixt Baptism, (as it was then used) the Persons baptized going down
into the Waters, and being dipped in them, and the Israelites going down into
the Sea, that great Receptacle of Water; though the Water at that time was
gathered on Heaps on either side of them, yet they seemed buried in the Water,
as Persons in that Age were when baptized. Thus spoke your Brethren who
completed Mr. Pool's Annotations. They tell you in what Sense the Fathers were
said to be baptized unto Moses, in the Sea, and under the Cloud. Here is
nothing of sprinkling, pouring, or raining on them; but they were, as it were,
buried in the Sea, and under the Cloud; and so it represents Immersion or
Dipping, which is Christ's true Baptism. We are buried (not sprinkled) with
Christ in Baptism, both in the Sign and also in Signification; to show he was
dead, buried, and rose again for us, and that we are dead to Sin and ought to
walk in Newness of Life.

But do not mistake, the Fathers being said to be baptized to Moses in the Sea,
and under the Cloud, was no real, but Typical Baptism.

2. This Place proves not that Infants are the Subjects of Gospel Baptism.

1. It Is said all our Fathers were baptized, but it is nor said their Children
were baptized unto Moses in the Sea, and under the Cloud.

2. But you intimate, there were many Children with them as they passed through
the Sea.

To which I answer, so there were many wicked Men also; all the Israelites were
not godly Persons, but many among them were profane and ungodly People:
Besides, there was a mixed People passed through the Sea with the Fathers also,
may be some of the Egyptians, and others of other Nations, and much Cattle
also; and these were all baptized as truly as were the little Children.

May we baptize such therefore? we have as much ground from hence to baptize
such, as you have to baptize your Babes, nay more ground, if the Rain falling
upon the Israelites was that which baptized them; it is a Question whether any
Rain might fall on little Babes, if it fell on their Parents, for the Parents
might cover them by holding some thing over their Heads and Bodies, etc.

3. The same Persons which the Apostle says were baptized in the Sea, and
under the Cloud, are also said to eat the same Spiritual Meat, and to drink the
same Spiritual Drink. Now did not the Children partake of the Lord's Supper, I
mean that Typical Lord's Supper? This Text therefore proves as strongly that
you may give them the Lord's Supper as Baptism, because they ate of the Manna
that fell from Heaven, and drank of the Water that came from the Rock.

4. The design of the Apostle here is, to forewarn the Saints at Corinth to
take heed lest they fell as the Fathers fell in the Wilderness; and to caution
them the more effectually, he shows them that the Fathers who fell (not the
Children) in the Wilderness, had like great Privileges with them, viz. a
Typical Baptism, and also a Typical Lord's Supper.

Therefore nothing of this matter concerned their little Babes, nor ours
neither. As to what you say of whole Households being baptized in the New
Testament in this Chapter, I shall refer my Answer to that Chapter of yours
where you particularly insist upon that weak Argument.

You say, the Parents and their Children were baptized, by giving of the Law
upon Mount Sinai, Exodus 19. 10. Go to the People, and sanctify them, and let
them wash their Clothes. Now the washing of their Clothes and the washing of
the Flesh went together, Lev. 15. 5, 6. wash his Clothes, and wash himself in
Water. Being thus washed, the Apostle says, that all the People entered into
God's Covenant by Baptism, Heb. 9. 19. For when Moses had spoken every Precept
to the People according to the Law, he took the Blood of Calves and of Goats,
with Water, and sprinkled both the Book and the People. The Apostle calls this
Sprinkling, Baptism, Heb. 9. 10. diverse Baptisms, etc.

Answ I answer, you have once already to your great Reproach, and I fear
contrary to the Light of your own Conscience, asserted that which is false; I
appeal to you, and all that can read the Greek, whether that word in Heb. 9.
10. (...), diverse washings, which I deny not may be read diverse baptisms, is
the same word in Heb. 9. 19. viz. (...), sprinkling the Book and all the
People, is it there (...), or (...)? Speak and confess your Ignorance, or else
acknowledge your Sin in going about to deceive the People, by making them
believe that sprinkling is in Greek Baptism or baptizing: For tho washing in
Heb. 9. 10. is Baptism or baptizing, yet in Heb. 9. 19. sprinkling both the
Book and People, you must needs know is in the Greek rantizing.

2. And what tho these diverse washings are called Baptisms, I have showed once
already from a Faithful and Learned Author, namely Mr. Henry Ainsworth, that
all those Legal Washings were by total dipping of the whole Body.

Take his Words again on Levit. 11. 32. All that are unclean, whether Men or
Vessels, are not cleansed but by dipping or baptizing in Water; and wheresoever
the Law speaks of washing a Man's Flesh, or washing of Clothes for
Uncleanness, it is by dipping the whole Body therein: and whether they be Men
or Vessels, there may not be any thing between them and the Water, to keep them
asunder, as Clay, Pitch, or the like, that cleaves to the Body or Vessel; if
there be, then they are, says he, unclean, and their washing profits them
not. Maim Mikvaoth, chap. 1. 12, 21.

Take heed what you affirm for the future: This Man, you and all know, was well
acquainted with Jewish Rites and Ceremonies; and what can be a more full
Confutation of what you affirm of Jewish Washings or Baptisms? But where we
read of sprinkling of Blood and Water, it is not baptizing, unless baptizing and
rantizing be both one and the same Word, and Thing, which we utterly deny.

3. What tho the People were washed, even all the whole Congregation, Was not
that a Typical Church, and did it not typify that all true Believers must be
washed in the Blood of Christ in Justification, and also washed by the Holy
Spirit in Sanctification? These Things were held forth thereby, and not
Baptism. You would make one thing that is a Figure or Shadow, a Type of another
thing that is also it self but a Shadow or Figure; for Baptism signifies
Christ's Death, Burial, and Resurrection, and our Death unto Sin, and
Vi^ification to a new Life. But those Types were Shadows of good things to
come, even of Christ, he was the Substance of them all; they must I say
prefigure a Substance, not a Shadow.

4. In a word, all your labor is here lost about those diverse Legal Baptisms
and Rites under the Old Testament, and of Children being in that Covenant,
because they were all Types; even that all the Elect, or all that believe in
Christ, should be washed in Christ's Blood, or have his Blood sprinkled upon
them, and be sanctified by his Spirit: Also it was a legal external and Typical
Covenant, and an external Typical Church, holding forth the true Spiritual
Gospel Church; and that, like as Circumcision and those diverse washings, did
belong to the whole House of Israel, whether Godly or not.

So all the true Israel, under the Gospel Dispensation, should have the
Substance and Antitype of them; and when any have attained to Faith in Christ,
and have what is signified in Baptism, then and not till then they ought to be
baptized: but this not simply because they are in Covenant, or have the thing
signified in Baptism, but because of the express and positive Command of
Christ. I say again, nothing can give being to an Ordinance that wholly depends
on a mere positive Rite, but the express Will and Command of the Lawgiver.

To conclude with this, I infer,

1. From the whole, in Opposition to what Mr. Owen says, it plainly appears
that the sprinkling of Water is not Baptism.

2. That God receives all into the Covenant of Grace and Gospel Church, through
the Spiritual washing of Regeneration and Sanctification of the Spirit; and
that such only by Christ's positive Command ought to be baptized.

3. That there was no Gospel-Baptism, no Baptism of Christ under the Law, but
that it is a pure positive Command and Institution of our Lord Jesus in the
Gospel.

4. That God received none of his People under the Law into Covenant, through
Baptism, or through sprinkling of Water and Blood: And that the sprinkling of
Blood was a Figure of the Atonement of Christ's bloody Sacrifice, and the
sprinkling of Water of the sanctifying Virtue of the Spirit in Sanctification,
and not that Gospel-Baptism was signified thereby.

5. That it is only the mere positive Command of Christ in the New Testament,
that gives being, and a just Right, to Gospel-Baptism.

6. That tho the Children with their Parents were taken into the Legal or
Typical Jewish Church, by God's positive Command, that being a National and
Typical Church, yet no Children or Parents are by the positive Command of
Christ in the New Testament to be received into the Gospel Church, but only
those of them that believe and are washed in the Blood of Christ, and
sanctified by the Sacred Water of the Holy Ghost; since the Church of God now is
not National, but Congregational, not consisting of the Fleshly, as such, but
the Spiritual Seed of Abraham.

And since there being no Precept nor Precedent in all the New Testament, that
any one Infant was baptized or taken into the Gospel Church, it follows it is an
Human Tradition.

7. That the Covenant on Sinai, and the Ceremonial Law, was not the Covenant of
Grace, tho given in subserviency thereunto, and the latter a clear Figure of
the Covenant of Grace, and held it forth to all such who by Faith could see
beyond those Sacrifices to the Antitype of them.

Lastly, Mr. Owen says, If Children were baptized formerly into Covenant,
ought they not to be baptized into his Covenant now, especially because the
Grace of the Covenant being enlarged under the Dispensation of the Gospel, and
the Privileges being more extensive?

I answer, He does but beg the Question, asserting that which he proves not,
nor is ever able to prove, viz.

(1.) That Children were baptized into the Covenant under the Law; What
Pedo-baptist ever asserted this before? And in vain does he affirm it now,
especially since he cannot prove sprinkling is Baptism.

(2.) That all Infants were received into Covenant with God by Legal
sprinkling, and not till then; but certainly all the Infants of the Jews were
born Members of that National Church, therefore not received into that Church
and Covenant by Circumcision (which most of the Assertors of Childrens Baptism
do affirm); much less not by sprinkling Blood and Water upon them: Yet that
sprinkling of Blood and Water might, I deny not, be a Sign that they, and the
whole House of Israel, were God's Legal Covenant People; and so the Type of the
whole Spiritual Israel, who should be washed in the Blood of Christ, or Blood
of the New Covenant, and sanctified by his Spirit, as is said before.

2. Moreover evident it is, that tho the Covenant of Grace, in the Dispensation
of it under the Gospel, is enlarged, and the Spiritual Privileges more
extensive than were the Privileges of the Legal Covenant and Legal Church; yet
the external Privileges are less and not so extensive now as was theirs: How
many outward and earthly Privileges had the Jews and Ministers of God under the
Law more than the Saints and Ministers of Christ have now? Many of which I have
reckoned up in the beginning of this Treatise. Thus I close with your Eighth
Argument.

CHAP XIV.
Proving that Children have no Right to Baptism, from John the Baptist's
Administration of Baptism; in Opposition to what Mr. James Owen says, in his
12th Chapter: That John baptized no Infants, neither according to the Practice
of the Jewish Church, nor by virtue of any Commission he had from God that sent
him. Containing an Answer to Mr. Owen's 9th Argument for Pedo-Baptism.

MR. Owen says, If John baptized Infants, Baptism does always belong unto
them; for the Baptism of John and the Baptism of the Apostles were the same in
the Substance of it: He baptized in the Name of Christ to come, and they
baptized in the Name of Christ that was come.

Answ. If you can prove John baptized Infants, you do your Business indifferent
well.

Now say you,

What we are to prove in this Chapter, is, that John baptized Infants; to
manifest this, let it be considered,

1. John the Baptist came not to nullify the Covenant of Abraham, but rather to
fulfill it; and the Covenant of Abraham was, that God would be a God to his
People, and to their Seed; all the Visible Church of the Jews were in this
Covenant: John warns them that they trusted not in the Privileges of this
Covenant, by living ungodly Lives; he does not in any Place make void this
Covenant, but rather confirms it, saying, God will raise other Children to
Abraham, if the Jews brought not forth Fruit meet for Repentance; he came to
baptize the Seed of Abraham, which were all of them in the Covenant of God, not
only the Parents but the Children also: Therefore their Children had the same
right to Baptism as their Parents had.

Answ. 1. I deny not but the whole House of Israel were in Covenant with God,
both Parents and Children, and so abode till the old Covenant and old
Covenant-Seed were cast out; but What says the Scripture? Cast out the
Bondwoman and her Son, Gal. 4. 30. Now the Apostle tells you, by the
Bondwoman is meant the Sinai Covenant, and by her Son the natural Seed of
Abraham as such, Gal. 4. 22, 23, 24, 25.

2. This Grant of yours proves that the Jewish Covenant, which took in all the
People both Parents and Children, was not the Covenant of Grace; because but a
final number of the Jews were in God's Election, and so in the Covenant of
Grace.

See Dr. Owen on the Hebrews, 3d Vol. Page 256. The Covenant of Grace in Christ
is made only with the Israel of God, the Church of the Elect. Page 291. The new
Covenant is made with all, who effectively and eventually are made Partakers of
it; and if they are not so with whom the New Covenant is made, it comes short
of the Old in Efficacy, who were actual Partakers of the benefit of that, that
is, of those external Benefits.

3. Nor does that which you mention help you, viz. that in that Covenant made
with Abraham and the whole House of Israel, it is said God would be their God,
or a God to Abraham and to his Seed in their Generations. For,

First, God may be said to be the God of a People diverse manner of ways, as Dr.
Bates observes.

1. Upon the account of Creation, thus he is our God and Father; O Lord thou
art our Father, we are the Clay, and thou art our Potter, and we are all the
works of thy Hands, Isa. 64. 8.

2. Says he, By external Calling and Profession, there is an intercurrent
Relation of the Father and Son between God and his People: Thus the Posterity
of Seth are called the Sons of God, Genesis 6. and the entire Nation of the Jews
are so called; When Israel was young, I called my Son from Egypt, Hos. 11.

Dr. Batesin his Sermon on Mr. Baxter's Funeral.

Secondly, God may be said to be the God of a People by way of special
Interest, by Election, Regeneration and Adoption; thus he was not a God to the
whole House of Israel, both to Parents and Children without exception: Yet we
grant God was their God by entering into a visible and external Covenant with
them; and as so considered he was said to be their God, and an Husband to them.
Jer. 31. 32. Which Covenant they broke, although I was an Husband to them, says
the Lord. But pray observe, the New Covenant is said not to be according to
that Covenant which God made with this People, when he took them by the Hand
and brought them out of the Land of Egypt.

Thirdly, Now if that Covenant, in which God is said to be their God, was the
Old Covenant, or the Legal Covenant which God has took away, to establish the
Second, What does that signify which you affirm here?

Certainly, John would not go about to establish that Covenant which he knew
his Master was ready to take away, viz. the Covenant of Peculiarity God made
with Abraham and his Natural Seed, as such.

We deny not, but the free Promise that God made with Abraham is the Covenant
of Grace; but that belongs not to Believers Seed, as such: For some of
Unbelievers Seed may be in the Covenant of Grace, and some of Believers Seed
may not, i. e. the Children of the Promise, or Covenant of Grace, or the Elect
of God may lie amongst the Unbelievers Children, as well as amongst Believers
Children: Tho I doubt not but more of Believers Seed are called than of others,
and have greater Privileges, i. e. by the Instruction, Prayers, and good
Example of their Parents, etc.

Fourthly, Tho John did not nullify the external Covenant, yet he, being to
prepare Christ's way, gave the Jews a clear Intimation of the repealing of it,
or the period thereof, and that now it would stand them in no stead; they
indeed made this which you say an Argument to come to his Baptism, namely
because of that Covenant with Abraham, or their being his Children: But what
did John say? Think not to say within your selves, we have ^braham to (...)
Father. As much as if he should say, your being the Seed of believing Abraham,
according to the Flesh, will give you no Right to Gospel-Baptism nor other
Gospel Ordinances and Privileges, tho it gave you right to Circumcision and
Legal Privileges.

You say, He does not make void the Covenant with Abraham, but rather confirms
it; saying, God could raise other Children to Abraham, if the Jews brought not
forth Fruit meet for Repentance.

Answ. Tho he did not make void that Legal Covenant, yet he explained the
nature thereof to the Jews, and showed them their great Error and Mistake about
it, clearly intimating that the Covenant of Grace God made with Abraham and
with his Spiritual Seed did differ, and was of another Nature with that
Covenant which God made with him and his Natural Seed, as ^u^h; (for says he,
God is able to raise up of these Stones C^ to Abraham, meaning the Gentiles, as
Expositors give it) If the Covenant of Grace made with Abraham ran only to his
Fleshly Seed, as such, Why did John say God could raise up others to be his
Children? even such that were not of his Natural Seed. And also, Why did he
refuse them, who were his Natural Seed, That did not bring forth Fruit meet for
(...), or did not believe, and so showed themselves not to be the true
Spiritual Seed of Abraham?

Fifthly, From hence therefore it follows, in opposition to what you say, That
Gospel-Baptism is not of the same extent with Circumcision.

As the whole Country, say you, were under Circumcision, so does John receive
them to his Baptism, he refused none that came to his Baptism, but received
Publicans, Sadduces, Pharisees, viz. the Generations of ^ipers, Matthew. 3. 7, 8.
And can it be thought he refused little Children?

Answ. I wonder you should affirm that John received all the Country to his
Baptism, and refused none, no not the Generation of Vipers: This I deny, and
you have no shadow of Reason to assert it, since he rebuked them when he saw
them coming to his Baptism, and bid them bring forth Fruit meet for Repentance.
Prove, if you can, that he baptized one Soul but such only that were penitent,
and demonstrated the truth of their Repentance by bringing forth of the Fruits
thereof.

It Is very strange to me that any Man should assert that John the Baptist
(whose Doctrine and Ministry by all Divines is looked upon to be very severe
and sharp) should baptize all, even the worst of Men, yea such whom he called a
Viprous Generation. But what is the purport of this Argument of yours for
Infant Baptism? Certainly all may easily see it: Does it not tend to prove that
all ungodly and unbelieving Men and Women are to be baptized as well as Infants?

Let me but justly infer upon you, and from what you say here, after this
manner, viz.

If John Baptist baptized all that came to him, even all the ungodly Jews, as
Publicans, Sadduces, Pharisees, yea those Generations of Vipers; then
Unbelievers, yea the worst and vilest of Men, are as true Subjects of Baptism
as Believers. It Is no matter whether they believe or not, repent or not, or at
present bring forth Fruit meet for Repentance or not; John took their Word,
their Promise that they would do those things afterward.

What Notions do you impose upon your unwary Readers? I thought all Adult
Persons (according to the avowed Principle of the Pedo-baptists, as well as
Anti-pedobaptists) must believe, and manifest true Repentance before they ought
to be baptized. Reader, see Mr. Baxter's Book, Confirmation and Restoration,
printed 1658. He affirms, viz. That a personal believing is the Condition of
the Title of them at Age, is far past doubt. Page 16.

1. Says he, The Promise it self does expressly require Faith of our own, of
all the Adult. He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved, Mark 16. 16.
What does hinder me to be baptized? And Philip said, if thou believe with all
thine Heart, thou may. These two Scriptures and many more Mr. Baxter quotes.

His 2d Argument is this, If a Profession of Faith were not necessary, coram
Ecclesia, to Men's Church Membership and Privileges, then Infidels and Heathens
would have Right.

His 3d Argument runs thus, viz. It is a granted Case among all Christians,
that a Profession is thus necessary; the Apostles and Ancient Church admitted
none without it. Page 17, 21.

Again he says, Page 24.

We find when John Baptist set up his Ministry, he caused the People to confess
their Sins: -- And whereas some say that John baptized them that he calls a
Generation of Vipers; I answer, says he, we will believe that when they prove
it: It seems rather that he put them back, as to those Acts 2. 37. Says he, It
is plain that they made an open Profession, if you consider,

1. That they were openly told the Doctrine which they must be baptized into,
if they did consent.

2. It is said they that received the Word were baptized.

3. It is as certain therefore, that they first testified their glad reception
of the Word.

4. We may not imagine that Peter was God, or knew the Hearts of those
thousands, and therefore he must know it by their Profession, that they gladly
received the Word.

5. Their own Mouths cry out for advice in order to their Salvation.

6. It had been absurd for the Apostles to attempt to baptize Men that had not
first professed their Consent.

7. The Scripture (says he) gives us not the full Historical Narration of all
that was said in such Cases, but of so much as was necessary.

8. The Institution and Nature of the Ordinance tells us, that Baptism could
not be adminisired, without a Profession, to the Adult; for they were to be
baptized into the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: Therefore were to
profess that they believed in the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, etc. Page 25.

9. The constant practice of the universal Church, has given us by infallible
Tradition, as full assurance of the order of Baptism, and in particular of an
express Profession and Covenant then made, as of any Point that by the Hand of
the Church can be received. Page 26.

10. And it was in those days a more notorious Profession to be so Baptized,
and to join in the Holy Assemblies then now it is, when the Profession of
Christianity did hazard Men's Liberties, Estates and Lives, to be openly then
Baptized, upon covenanting with God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, etc.
Moreover says he, it is said of all that were Baptized, (being then at Age)
that they first believed, and how could the Baptizers know that they believed,
but by their Profession, page 26.

Yea, it is said of Simon Magus, that he believed, and was baptized, which
though he might really have some historical Faith; yet implies, that he openly
professed more then he indeed had, or else he had scarce been baptized, which
has caused Interpreters to judge, that by Faith, is meant a profession of
Faith. And if so, then sure a profession of Faith is still necessary. p. 27.

Yea (says he) Christ in his Commission, directs his Apostles to make
Disciples, and then baptize them; promising, that he that believes and is
baptized, shall be saved. And who can tell whether a Man be a Disciple, a
Believer, or an Infidel, but by his Profession.

How was it known but by their Profession, that the Samaritans believed
Phillip, preaching the things concerning the Kingdom of God and the name of
Jesus Christ, before they were baptized, Acts 8, 12.

Phillip caused the Eunuch to profess, before he would baptize him, that he
believed that Jesus Christ was the Son of God, etc.

Saul had more then a bare Profession before baptized, Acts 9. 15, 17.

Also Cornelius and his Company had more then a Profession, for they had the
Holy Ghost poured on them, speaking with Tongues. And it was such a Gift of the
Spirit, that caused the Apostle to conclude, that God had granted the Gentiles
Repentance unto Life, Acts 11. 8.

The Converted Gentiles, Acts 13. 48. showed their belief and gladness. p. 27.

Gods Order is (to the Adult says he,) first to send Preachers to proclaim the
Gospel, and when by that Men are brought so far as to profess or manifest their
Eyes are opened, and that they are turned from darkness to light, and from the
power of Satan unto God, then they must be baptized for the remission of Sins.

As their Sins are not forgiven them till they are converted, Mark 4. 12. so
they must not be baptized till they profess themselves converted, seeing to the
Church, none esse, and none apparere, is all one; Repentance toward God, and
Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ, is the sum of that preaching that makes
Disciples, Acts 20. 21. and therefore both these must by profession seem to be
received before any at Age are baptized, p. 30. 31.

If as many as are baptized, are baptized into his death, and are buried with
him by baptism into his Death; that like as Christ was raised from the Dead,
then we should walk in newness of Life.

Then no doubt, but such as were baptized did first profess this Mortification,
and consent to be buried, and revived with Christ, and to live to him in
newness of Life, Romans 6. 3, 4, 5, 6.

For Paul was never so much for Opus Operatum above the Papists, as to think
that the baptizing of an Infidel might effect these high and excellent things,
and he that professes not Faith, nor never did, is to the Church an Infidel.

In our baptism, we put off the Body of the Sins of the Flesh, by the
Circumcision of Christ, being buried with him, and rising with him through
Faith, quickened with him, and having all our Trespasses forgiven, Col. 3. 11,
12, 13. And will any Man, (says he,) yea will Paul, ascribe all this to those
that did not profess the things signified, or the necessary Condition? Will
baptism in the Judgment of a wise Man, do all this for an Infidel, (let me add,
or to an Infant) or one (says he,) that professes not to be a Christian.

Baptism is said to save us, 1 Pet. 3, 21. and therefore they that will be
baptized, must profess the qualifications necessary to the saved, p. 32.

The Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven are put into the Churches Hands, and they
that are loosed on Earth, are loosed in Heaven; (if the Keys do not err); and
therefore pastors of the Church must absolve none by Baptism, that do not by
profession seem absolvable in Heaven, they must profess to have the old Man
Crucified with Christ, that the Body of Sin be destroyed, that henceforth they
might not serve Sin, Romans 6. 5, 6, 7, 8.

As many as have been baptized into Christ, (says he,) have put on Christ
Jesus, and are Abraham's Seed and Heirs according to the Promise, Gal. 3. 27,
28. This speaks the Apostle of the probability grounded on a credible
Profession, and therefore it is clear, that the profession was presupposed that
might support this charitable Judgment.

Our baptism is the solemnizing of our Marriage with Christ. And its a new and
strange kind of Marriage, where there is no profession of Consent. Worthy
Britains, see how Mr. Richard Baxter, has out down Infant Baptism with his own
Sword; can Infants show their consent to be married to Christ, or profess Faith
in him.
The baptized are in Scripture, called Men washed, Sanctified, Justified. They
are all called Saints, and Churches of Saints, all Christians are called
sanctified ones, or Saints, therefore it is certain, that they professed
themselves such.

Thus far Mr. Richard Baxter.

Sir, I thought fit to confute you in your bold Assertion, viz. that John the
Baptist baptized all that came to him, even those Pharisees, that he called a
Generation of Vipers, by making use of the Sword of Goliath; Reader, how this
Pedo-Baptists, Mr. Baxter, has not only overthrown Mr. Owen's argument here
for Infant Baptism, but utterly has overthrown Infant Baptism it self.

1. For (he says) the Commission directs Christ's Apostles to make
Disciples, and then baptize them, p. 27.

2. (He says,) the sum of that preaching that makes Disciples, is repentance
toward God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ, p. 30, 31.

Where then is the Commission to baptize Infants, Baptism cannot make them
Disciples, nor their Parents Faith neither; no, it is the preaching of the word,
he that has not Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, is no Disciple of Christ's.

You must have a new Commission to baptize unbelievers or Infants either,
before ye ought to do it.

6. You say John came to prepare the way of the Lord, the end of his baptism
was to bind all the People to believe in the Lord Jesus, which was to come.
Faith was not the condition of John's Baptism, but the end thereof; his Baptism
laid a particular obligation on all the Seed of Abraham to receive Christ,
Childred as well as others, were bound to receive him when they came to Age,
because Baptism was a sign of that obligation, etc.

Answer. Could you prove what you say, it was something to your Business, viz.
that John baptized all, even ungodly Parents as well as Children, which Mr.
Baxter from God's word has fully confuted.

2. Also then it must follow, that the baptism of John, and that baptism
administered by the Apostles, differed in an essential part, which you your self
but a little before, do utterly deny, and affirm that they were both
essentially, one and the same baptism, only one unto him that was to come, and
the other into him that was come, Dead, and Risen again: Now, was not Faith and
Repentance the condition of that Baptism administered by the Apostles; did not
they require Faith, and a profession of Faith of all they admitted to Baptism;
the Scriptures, Mr. Baxter cites in the aforementioned Book of his, fully
proves they did, and that those things were prerequisites of it, therefore
Baptism as administered by John, and by the Disciples of Christ, was not only to
the end, they should be obliged to believe and repent, but Faith and Repentance
was the condition or qualification of all they baptized. For John (nor the
Apostles neither) would take a bare verbal profession of Repentance of those
that came to Baptism; John commanded them to produce the Fruits of Repentance,
or to bring forth Fruit meet for Repentance, and this was his way to prepare
the way of the Lord, or to prepare a People for the Lord's Spiritual Building;
he preached, Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand. That Vow or Promise
in Baptism that you dream of, prepares no Man for Christ, nor fits any for his
Church; no. no, it must be Conversion, Faith, and Regeneration it self.

7. You say little Children were Members of the Church of God in the time of
John, none can deny that, because Circumsion, the Seal of the Covenant, was
upon them, all the Seed of Abraham were at that time God's visible Church, and
they were his only Church upon Earth; they were not out of the Church before
they were baptized, neither were they received into the Church of God through
Baptism, as those that were out of it before, but the whole Nation were
baptized, because they were Members of God's visible Church; and because little
Children were Members of the visible Church, the Baptism of John appertained
unto them.

1. Answer, I answer, we deny not but the Jewish Infants were Members of God's
legal Church; but I ask you whether John's Baptism was a legal Ordinance, or a
pure Gospel Ordinance, as Circumcision was, prove it; we deny it, and say it
was Evangelical, and did not appertain to the Jews, or the Seed of Abraham,
according to the Flesh as such.

2. If you should prove it was a legal Ordinance, yet it does not follow,
Infants of the Jews ought to be baptized as their Males were to be Circumcised,
because there was a clear politive command to circumcise them, but none to
baptize them.

3. If you argue from the right of Circumcision, then it follows, that none but
their male Infants ought to be baptized. What authority had John to baptize
females, whether the adult or Infants, as I said refore.

4. I am troubled to see how you confound your Peoples understanding, was the
Jewish Church or the Visible Church of God under the Law, and the visible
Gospel Church, formally and materially one and the same.

Had the Jews a right to all Gospel Ordinances and Privileges, because they
abode his legal visible Church till the Death of Christ; we grant the invisible
Church of God under Law and Gospel, is but one and the same; but does not the
Gospel Church in its Ordinances, Administrations, Rights and Piviledges, vastly
differ from the legal, was not the visible Church of God under the Law, a
National Church made up of the Jewish People only, and is the Gospel Church not
congregational, consisting of both Jews and Gentiles that believe, or are born
of the Spirit.

5. What, though John did not make void the Covenant of peculiarity God made
with Abraham, yet he laid the Ax at the Root; and being to prepare matter for a
new Church State, and his Ministry being Gospel, and the Ordinance he
administered a Gospel Institution, he told the Jews and Pharisees, that their
being Abraham's Seed, or having Abraham to their Father now, was no good Plea
or Argument for them to plead, as a right to this new Administration. John's
Doctrine did in part, finish the Law and the Prophets, or old covenant
Dispensation, though the full period of it was not come till the death of
Christ.

Hence our Savior says, the Law and the Prophets were until John, and from
that time, the Kingdom of Heaven began to suffer Violence, and Men strove to
press into it, though its full and perfect beginning was not till our Lord had
broken down the middle wall of Partition, and nailed the legal Rites and carnal
Ordinances to his Cross, and removed that enmity between Jews and Gentiles,
making both one new Man, and so a new Gospel Church; pray take what one of your
own Brethren, a Pedo-Baptist says, of John's Ministration, it is Reverend
Cotton of New England.

Who speaking of this Text, Mat. 3. 10. Now also the Ax is laid to the Root of
the Trees. The first (says he) is the Root of Abraham's Covenant, which these
People trusted upon, and of that it is which John the Baptist speaks, now is
the Ax laid to the Root of the Trees; think not to say within your Selves, we
have Abraham to our Father, so that all their Confidence that they had in
Abraham's Covenant, Temple and Tabernacle and such things, are burnt up, and so
they have no Root left them to stand upon, and this is one thing intended by
the Root. Again he says, the Lord has cut us off from hope, in the
righteousness of our Parents, and from boasting of Ordinances; again says he,
this we read of, Mal. 4. 1. it is spoken of the ministry of John the Baptist,
which did burn as an Oven against all the Scribes and Pharisees, and left them
neither the Root of Abraham's Covenant, nor the branch of their own good Works,
he cutteth them off from Abraham's Covenant, etc. and by cutting them off from
the Root, he leaves them no Ground to trust on, Cotton on the Covenant, page
177, and p. 21, 22.

How direct is this to the purpose, and it as fully othroweth all that you
speak in this Argument; this Reverend Author Concludes, that Abraham's Covenant
made with his natural Seed as such, was cut down by John, though the Tree was
not yet removed, nor the Chaff blown or fanned away; but you would make the
People believe, John confirmed that old Covenant right, and baptized all the
Jews upon the Authority of Abraham's Covenant; as if instead of cutting the
Tree down at the Root, he was about to plant it afresh, or uphold its standing,
which had it been so, he would have rather said, think to say within your
selves, we have Abraham to our Father, for upon that foot of Account, I am to
baptize you all, you being all in God's Covenant, though you be a Generation of
Vipers.

But how directly contrary to this Doctrine of yours did John preach to them',
and clearly took them off of any such a pretended right to Baptism, viz.
because they were in Covenant with Abraham.

You say John did not cut down one Branch of that Covenant. Mr. Cotton says, he
cut down the Tree at the Root; you say, he baptized Infants upon that foot of
account, but since, God's Word speaks not one word of any such thing, It Is
plain, you assert your own Fancies, or groundless suppositions.

There is no doubt, say you, but that Parents brought their Children with them
to the Baptism of John, for God commanded them to bring their Children with
them into the Congregation, Deuteronomy. 29. 10, 11, 12, etc. their Zeal was great for
their Children, Acts 15. 12. and 21. 20. therefore say you, if John refused
their Children, they would not so willingly have come to his Baptism.

They brought their Children to Christ; therefore they brought their Children
to the Baptism of

John.

Ans. I answer, you say no doubt but they brought their Chldren to John's
Baptism, but without doubt they did not, say I; because if they had, it would
without doubt have been written, but since it is no where written that they did
do it; nor of John's baptizing one Infant, there is no doubt but we are in the
right, viz. John baptized no Infants, nor any but penitent Persons, because he
required Repentance, and the Fruits of it in all that came to his Baptism.
Moreover,

2. Because all Israel, their little ones, their Wives and Strangers, the hewer
of Wood, and drawer of Water, entered into that legal Covenant with God, Deuteronomy.
29. 10. 11. 12. does it follow; that we in the Gospel times must bring all our
Children and Servants to Baptism and the Lord's Supper; they had a command from
God to do what they did, and that old Covenant Church state required them so to
do; but God has no more required us to bring our Infants to Baptism, then he
has required us to Circumcise them, or give our first born to the Lord, which
was God's command to them under the Law.

Baptism, I tell you again, being of mere positive Right, you can draw no such
Conclusions for what you plead for, it is only their Duty to be baptized, that
Christ commanded to be baptized, and that is those that are made Disciples by
the word preached, or those that believe in Christ, or that profess Faith in
him; and it is the New Testament only, must inform us who are the subjects of
Gospel Ordinances that depend only upon Laws merely positive, according to the
Sovereign Pleasure of the institutor of them, or holy Lawgiver Jesus Christ.

You say they brought their Children to Christ, therefore they brought them to
John's Baptism.

Answer, If John had wrought Miracles and healed the Sick, I doubt not, but
they would have brought their Children to him to have them healed, as well as
they brought them to Christ, but John wrought no Miracles; also our Savior was
a healing the Sick when they brought Children to him; and it may fairly be
inferred, they brought little Children that were distempered to him, to have
him lay his Hands upon them, which was his way in healing the Sick, as I have
said before.

You say Infant Baptism was an usual thing in the Jewish Church, several
hundred years before the time of John, and tell us a story of Moses Ben Maimon,
who colected the Rites of the ancient Jewish Church.

Answer, I have answered that already, you having urged that argument before.

It Is evident it was no other but a Jewish hamane Tradition, if it be as you
say; for God never commanded the Jews to baptize Infants, though you before
would make your unwary Reader think that Jacob invented it. I am sorry to see
such stuff from a Man of Learning.

What credit is to be given to the Jewish Talmud, what one Jewish Rabbi
affirms, concerning this matter, I have showed, another seems to deny, Rabbi
Joshua confesses that the Jews baptized Infants, after the order of the
Counsel, not by any Authority from God by Moses, or any of his Holy Prophets,
but shall we think John Baptized Infants by virtue of any human Tradition that
was among the Jews.

Sir, a popish Tradition is of as good authority, as a Jewish one; you may
affirm, the Papists for many hundred years baptized Infants, but where is it
written in God's Word, that God commanded the Jews to baptize their Proselites,
or that Christians ought to baptize their Infants: to the Law and Testament,
the sacred Scripture is a perfect Rule.

You say John baptized little Children, for he baptized the whole Nation in
general, whereof Children were a great part; he refused none that came, or were
brought to him, Mat. 3. 5, 6. then went out to him Jerusalem and all Judea, and
all the Regions round about Jordan, and were baptized of him in Jordan. Now say
you, if John baptized all Jerusalem and all Judea, and all the Regions round
about Jordan, and all the People; it is certain he baptized Infants, unless we
think there were no Children in Jerusalem, etc.

Answer, I answer, now you think you have done your Business; but Sir, does not
this Argument of yours as strongly prove, that all wicked and ungodly people
may be baptized also, ye Swearers, Whoremongers, Murderers, yea the worst of
Men, for can we think there were none such in Jerusalem, Judah, nor in all the
Regions round about, yea that we may baptize Pagans and Infidels, for no doubt,
but there were some of all Nations at Jerusalem.

2. You affirm that John baptized the whole Nation of the Jews, even every Man,
Woman and Child, or else I mistake you; now if this were so, how it is said,
that Christ made and baptized more Disciples then John, John 4. 1. John 3. 26.
it is said that Jesus baptized, and all Men came to him. How did John baptize
all, and Christ baptize more of the People then John; what think you, were they
rebaptized; certainly, you will make them all proper Anabaptists; besides, if
John baptized all the Jews, where were those three thousand that St. Peter and
the other Disciples baptized, Acts 2. 40, 41, 42. were they not dwellers at
Jerusalem, and notwithstanding Christ baptized more Disciples then John; yet
it is said, Acts 1. 13. that the number of the Disciples that were at Jerusalem
were but about one Hundred and Twenty.

3. I have showed, that according to Scripture Rhetoric frequently by a
Synecdoche a part is put for the whole, and sometimes the far lesser part also.
It Is said, All the Cattle in Egypt died, Exodus 9. 6. that is, all that were in
the Field: Also Christ says, When he was lifted up he would draw all men unto
him, Joh. 12. 32. Does that intend all universally? So Paul says, All seek
their own: And Christ says, Ye shall be hated of all men for my name sake. See
these Scriptures, Exodus 32. 3, 26. Jer. 6. 3. 1 Cor. 10. 7. Isa. 2. 2, 3. Acts
2. 5. See Glassius Illiricus, and other Tropical Writers: Also read Philologiae
Sacra, and our last Annotators on the Holy Bible, called Pool's Annotations, on
this Text. The Term All, say they, here twice repeated, is enough to let us
know, that it is often in Scripture significative no farther than Many -- For it
cannot be imagined, that every individual Person in Jerusalem, and the Regions
round about Jordan, went to hear John the Baptist, but a great many.

From hence it appears, That it is no ground for Mr. Owen to affirm, that by
all Jerusalem, and all Judea, etc. must be intended every individual Person,
both Men, Women, and Children; but rather, some of all Sorts, Degrees, Sexes,
etc. It shows, that Multitudes went to hear him, and many were baptized by him
in Jordan, confessing their Sins with unfeigned Repentance.

But (you say) the Text does not tell us what manner of Confession this was,
whether in Words or Works: Their submission to Baptism, was an actual
Confession of their Uncleanness, and that they stood in need of Washing, it
cannot be thought that it was a Confession in Words; because one Man could not
receive a particular Confession from the whole Country if they made a
Confession in Words: It is like one made it in the Names of others, even as the
Priests did in the Names of all the People, Levit. 16. 21. Thus the Parents
might confess their Sins for themselves and their Children, etc.

1. Ans. Let Mr. Baxter's Arguments serve to confute you here; he tells you,
That from Scripture and the universal Practice of the ancient Church, That
Faith, and a Confession of Faith, yea a verbal Confession, was requirad oi all
that were baptized; With the heart man believes, and with the mouth confession
is made to salvation, Romans 10. 10.

2. Certainly you are strangely left to blindness of Mind about this Matter:
Did ever any Man, except your self, and one Mr. Excel, whom I answered lately,
affirm, That all ungodly and unbelieving Men and Women, that were willing to be
baptized, were proper and fit Subjects of Sacred Baptism? For all Men may see,
that this Argument of yours is for their Baptism, and as forcible to prove they
ought to be baptized, as it is to prove the Baptism of Infants: For, if John
baptized all the whole Country, even every individual Person, then Ministers
now may baptize all in all Nations, even all the World, let them be what they
will, Turks, Pagans, Infidels, Swearers, Drunkards, and Idolaters, Thieves,
Murderers, if they will but promise to turn from their Sins and repent,
whether they do it or no, yet, if your Argument be good, they ought to be
baptized: But how contrary to this is that which all your Brethren generally
assert? viz. That in the Primitive Times, when the Gospel was first preached
and? Churches planted, all that were first baptized were Believers, Saints, and
godly Persons, and upon their Faith their Children were (as they say)
baptitized also, which is that we deny; though they are right as to what
theyspeak in respect of Believers themselves; but, siuce we have so fully
refuted what you say of Baptizing adult Persons that are Unbelievers, I will
say no more of that in this place.

3. It Is evident what you affirm is false, viz. That John baptized the whole
Country, even every individual Person, and that by a plain Instance: Is it not
said, That the Pharisees and Lawyers rejected the counsel of God against
themselves, being not baptized of him, Luke 7. 30. That is, faith our
Annotators, not receiving John's Doctrine of Repentance, for the remission of
Sins and bringing forth Fruits worthy of amendment of Life, not submitting to
Baptism, as a Testimony of such a Repentance. For John's Baptism signifies his
whole Administration. See Pool's Annotations on that Place. All may see what a
kind of Confession it was, John's Baptism required; it was more than a verbal
Confession of Sin, even the Fruits of a changed Heart, and a new Life: And
where this Doctrine of his was not received, and these Fruits appeared not,
John would not baptize them.

And now to conclude with this Chapter, in opposition to what Mr. Owen says,
from the whole it clearly does follow, That John Baptist did not baptize the
whole Country, nor any one Infant, no not any one Person, but such who believed
and seemed at the least to bring forth Fruits meet for Repentance: And, as he
says, John's Baptism was the beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, it
follows, that no Infant ought to be baptized, and that the external
Privileges of the Gospel are restrained and not so large as were the outward
Rites and Privileges of the Jewish Church, though the Spiritual Privileges of the
Gospel are larger and more extensive than those of the Law were.

CHAP. XVI.
In which it is proved, That the Children of the Faithful, as such, ought not
to be baptized, because it is said whole Households were baptized: Being an
Answer to what Mr. James Owen has said in his 13th Chapter, and so a
Confutation of his Tenth Argument for Infant Baptism.

MR. Owen says, it was God's way from the beginning of the World, to receive
whole Households into Covenant, the Children were received in with their
Parents; even so Noah and his Family were in the same Covenant, for his sake
his Family was received with him into the Ark, and were baptized with him in
the Waters of the Flood: Abraham believed, and his whole Family was received
into God's Covenant with him, Genesis 17. Heb. 11. 7. 1 Pet. 3. 20, 21. Not
himself and his Seed, but his Menservants and Maidservants, and of the
Gentiles, that were willing to receive the true Religion, and their Seed, Genesis
17. 23. Exodus 12. 40. And so God's Covenant continued in the Families of the
Faithful, until the coming of Christ, for near four thousand Years. If any say,
that the Dispensation is altered, and the Members rent from the Head of
Families, let them show a plain Scripture for it.

1. Ans. I answer; As touching that Covenant God made with Noah and his Family,
it was not only made with him and his Family, but with all the World, for they
were the Representatives of all that should live on the Earth; nay, and not
only Mankind, but with Fowls of the Air and Beasts of the Field. See Genesis 9. 8,
9, 10, 11, 12. And God spoke unto Noah, and to his sons, Verse 8. And I, behold
I will establish my covenant with you, and your Seed after you, Verse 9. And
with every living creature that is with you, of the fowl, of the cattle, and of
every beast of the earth with you, from all that go out of the ark, to every
beast of the earth, Ver. 10. And I will establish my covenant with you, neither
shall all flesh be cut off any more by the waters of a flood: neither shall
there any more be a flood to destroy the earth, Verse 11.

Now to what purpose do you mention this Covenant, or the temporal Salvation of
Noah's Family in the Ark? May be Noah's Family, or some of them, were saved
with that external Salvation for his sake; yet this proves not that his Faith
extended to the Spiritual Salvation of the Souls of his Children, for he had a
cursed Cham to one of his Sons, his Faith could not save him.

2. As to the Ark being a Type of Baptism, or that his Family were baptized in
the Ark, this, as I have once before told you, does as much tend to prove that
all the World may be baptized, even the good, and bad, and Cattle also, as any
in particular; for all, in the Ark, were as truly baptized, as any that were in
it.

3. Had you said Noah's Family was a Type of the Gospel Church, you had spoken
something to the purpose; for so Expositors intimate, and not without good
Reason. And,

1. As all his Familily were received into the Ark, so all the Members of the
Gospel Church were by Faith to be received into Christ, the Antitype of the
Ark.

2. As Noah built the Ark according to the Commandment of God, so Christ built
his Church, and did every thing according to the Commandment of his Father.

3. Noah took many Trees well hewn and fitted to build the Ark; so Christ
takes many Believers, who are Spiritually well hewed and fitted by the Word and
Spirit, to build his Church, who are called trees of righteousness, chosen
People, as Noah built the Ark of such Trees or Wood, God himself chose.

4. As some clean and unclean Beasts were received into the Ark, yea and a Cham
who was an ungodly Person, so this might figure forth, that some unsanctified
Persons (though not by God's appointment) would get into, or be received into the
Gospel Church. And,

5. As all that were not received into the Ark perished, so all who get not
Spiritually into Christ by Faith, or are not Members of the visible or
invisible Church, shall be damned and perish eternally.

6. As Noah's Ark was sometimes, (no doubt,) overwhelmed or covered with Waves,
and those that were in it; so all true Believers, that are Members of the true
Gospel Church, ought to be dipped, baptized, or overwhelmed in Water. And, as
Sir Norton Knatchbal observes, The Ark was a Figure of the Resurrection.
(Speaking of that Text) Mr. Owen cites 1 Pet. 3. 20. (says he,) Baptism which
now saves us by Water, that is, by the assistance of Water, is Antipical of the
Ark of Noah, and it does not signify the laying down of the filth of the
Flesh, but the Covenant of a good Conscience toward God, while we are plunged
in the Water, which is to testify our belief of the Resurrection of Jesus
Christ; so that there is a manifest Antithesis between these words by Water,
and by the Resurrection: Nor is the Elegancy of it displeasing. The Ark of
Noah, not the Flood, was a Type of Baptism; and Baptism was the Antitype of
the Ark, not as if Baptism is a washing away of the Filth of the Flesh by
Water, wherein it answers not all to the Ark; but, as it is the Covenant of a
good Conscience toward God by the Resurrection of Christ, in the belief of
which Resurrection we are saved, as they were saved by the Ark of Noah; for the
Ark and Baptism were both a Type and Figure of the Resurrection, so that the
proper End of Baptism ought not to be understood as if it were a Sign of the
washing away of Sin, although it be thus oftentimes taken Metonymically in the
New Testament, and by the Fathers, but a particular Signal of the Resurrection
by Faith in the Resurrection of Christ; of which Baptism is a lively and
emphatical Figure; as also was the Ark out of which Noah returned as from the
Sepulcher to a new Life. Thus far Sir Norton Knatchbal in his Notes printed at
Oxford, 1677, who though a great Pedo-Baptists, yet denied sprinkling or
pouring to be Baptism.

Now this has teaching in it, and shows the Sent of the Apostle Peter's Words
very fully no doubt. ut to tell the World, because God saved, and covenanted
with Noah's Family; therefore God takes whole Families in Gospel times into
Covenant, argues great darkness.

2. As to Abraham's Family, we deny not but his Family was taken into Covenant
with God, even his natural Seed as such, but it was a covenant of peculiarity;
for simply considered, as a Family they were not taken into the Covenant of
Grace; because there where some godly Families that had no lot or part in that
Covenant, but we having fully opened the twofold Covenant God made with Abraham
at the beginning; I shall not renew the Argument again.

But worthy Britains, let this be well considered by you, that as Noah's
Family and Abraham's Family were taken into Covenant with God and other, whole
Households under the Law, and the whole House and Nation of Israel, so they were
Types of the Gospel Church, even as the whole House or Family of Abraham, (or
whole House and Family of Israel were typically relatively and federally holy;)
it did prefigure that true spiritual Holiness, that in Gospel times should be
in all the members of the true Gospel Church, and not of God's taking under the
Gospel whole Families into Covenant with himself, either into an outward
external Covenant, or into a spiritual or new Covenant relation with himself.

It Is true, God perhaps has sometimes called whole Families, both Parents,
Children and Servants, and converted them all; but alas, how many Families are
there, where may be, but one is called, and in sacred Covenant with God, may be
the Husband and not the Wife, the Wife and not the Husband, the Child, and not
either of the Parents are so called and taken into Covenant with God. Pray
worthy Britains, consider well what God speaks of his Promise under the
Gospel. I will take one of a City, and two of a Family, and will bring you to
Zion. Jer. 3. 14. Not in Gospel times whole Families, no no, this God may do,
but it is more then he has promised; or as to matter of Fact is so; he does
frequently speak in another I may speak here as the Apostles speaks in another
Case, you see your calling Brethren, how not many whole Families are called.

3. Because God made a Covenant with Abraham, and his natural Seed, as such, as
a Covenant of peculiarality, and also with him made or renewed the Covenant of
Grace, setting him up as a covenanting Head on a double respect; does it
follow, that every believing Man is set or placed by the Lord, as a like
Covenant head to all his natural Offspring: Till Mr. Owen has proved this, he
says nothing to the purpose.

In the Covenant of Circumcision that appertained to all Abraham's natural
Seed, were many external Privileges and Promises made, of which Circumsion was
given as a Sign or Token, as particularly the Land of Canaan, etc.

But what Privileges and Promises has God granted to Believers Children, as
such, in Gospel times which Baptism gives them an assurance of; the sign is
nothing without the substance or thing signified; Believers have the substance
or the things signified in Baptism, so have not Infants in their pretended
Baptism, nor many of them ever after.

4. Whereas you call for a plain Scripture to prove that the Children of the
Faithful are rent from the Head of the Family; you mistake the Business; you
must prove that in the Gospel Dispensation, Children and Servants, or whole
Households are taken with the Heads of those Households into Covenant with God:
What whole Nation is taken into Covenant with God, as the whole House or Nation
of Israel was under the Law; prove, that there is such a Nation, and we will
grant, that all the Families in that Nation, are also in Covenant, for in that
universal Family all particular Families must needs be comprehended.

You proceed to the Gospel times, and mention Zacheus, who as soon as
converted, the Lord Jesus said, this day is Salvation come to this House, for
as much as he also is a Son of Abraham, Luke, 19. 9 10.

1. Ans. I answer, you do your Business effectually, if you can prove, that so
soon as the Father believes, Salvation comes to belong to all that are in his
House; I thought you argued for some external Privilege, only for the Children
upon their Parents Faith; but it appears, it is no less then Salvation it self,
even eternal Salvation; for it was such a Salvation that came to Zacheus that
day. O happy Children of Believers if this were true! For then it follows, that
all the Children of the faithful must of necessity be saved, whether they in
their own Persons believe or not; nay, and happy Servants too, for they must
all be saved, because part of the Family; but what credit is there to be given
to a Man that talks after the manner as you do, is this true or false? for what
do you mean less then what I say and does; Eternal Salvation come to all in
that Family or House, when the Head of it does believe, you ought to repent for
spreading such grand errors among the People.

Christ you say, explaineth Abraham's Covenant, in Genesis 19. which God made with
him and his Family, or his Seed, because he was a Son to Abraham; as if he
should say, though this Man has been a great Sinner, and though he has been
chief Publican, yet because he did repent, and receive the mediator of the
Covenant of Grace, Abraham's Covenant, and the Privileges thereof do belong
unto him, and to his Household. He is a Son of Abraham, therefore Abraham's
Covenant belongs to him, in the same Latitude to him and his Seed; many judge
that Zacheus was one of the Gentiles, for usually such were Publicans, and this
they gather from these words of Christ, (...) so much as he also is a Son of
Abraham; he also, though he is not a natural Seed to Abraham, yet he is one of
his Spiritual Seed, and therefore Abraham's Covenant belongs unto him and his
Household, etc.

Ans. I answer, your own explanation of this Text overthrows all you strive to
prove, were it but considered.

1. For you grant he was not one of the natural Seed of Abraham; now we say,
that all that do believe are the Spiritual Seed of Abraham, and so such to whom
the Covenant of Grace, God made with Abraham, (and consequently eternal Life)
does belong; for the true Spiritual Seed of Abraham cannot miss of eternal
Salvation, the promise is sure to all the Seed, Romans 4. 16. Now then if your
Eyes were opened, you might quickly see that Abraham was a twofold Father, and
that he had a twofold Seed; you know that all Abraham's natural Seed, and the
natural Seed of Believers, are not the Spiritual Seed of Abraham, nor have the
promise of Salvation sure to them.

2. From hence it appears, Salvation could not come to Zacheus Children, (if he
had any) unless they as well as himself did believe, and receive by Faith the
Blessing of the Covenant of Grace God made with Abraham; because none are
Abraham's Sons or Spiritual Seed, but Believers only, whether Jews or Gentiles,
if you be Christ's, then you are Abraham's Seed.

3. Therefore if Salvation came to every individual Person in Zacheus Family,
they all did believe as well as himself, though it be not expressed. But,

4. Salvation might be said to come to his House, because the Savior and means
of Salvation was that day come to his House.

5. Salvation might be said to come to his House that day, though it came only
to Zacheus himself, it coming to the head of the Family, it may be said to come
to his House, and yet not to every particular Person in that House, but you
bring in this Objection, viz. but what is this to Baptism.

You answer, if Salvation came to his House or Family, then Baptism belonged
unto them.

2. It is probable, that Zacheus and his Household were baptized before by John,
for the Publicans came to be baptized of him, Luke 3. 12. and 7. 29.

1. Ans. I answer, you may be sure when Zacheus believed in Christ, he was a
proper Subject of Gospel Baptism, so were all that believed who were in his
House; but the Text does not say, that every particular Person that were in his
House believed, or that Salvation came so to his House, but if it did, no doubt
they were all upon their believing baptized.

2. But you may well say, what is this to Baptism, since he and all his House
were baptized before, even when he was in his Sins, and a notorious Sinner, the
chief of the Publicans; it is probable say you, sure Sir, it is more then
probable, it was impossible, that Zacheus and his Family should escape Baptism,
when John had baptized all the whole Country before, all, yea every individual
Person that dwelt in Jerusalem, Judea, and all the Regions round about: The
truth is, this is very impertinently brought in to prove Infant Baptism; what
does it signify, that Salvation was come to Zacheus that day, and not until
then, seeing John's Commission was to baptize all, whether Godly or Ungodly,
Believers or Unbelievers, whether Salvation was come to them or not; let the
Reader observe, what darkness and ignorance this Man shows.

Peter, (say you) when he first planted the Christian Religion among the Jews,
exhorted them saying, be baptized every one of you, for the promise is to you,
and to your Children.

Ans. This of the promise being unto them and to their Children, we have fully
already answered; but why does Peter command these Jews (who doubtless dwelt at
Jerusalem) to be baptized, seeing John Baptist had baptized them and their
Children before, as you have positively asserted; what must they be all
rebaptized, what inconsistency is there in your arguing?

2. The latitude of this Command, be baptized every one of you, is no further
then to all them that he commands to repent, nor is the promise to any of their
Children, but such that the Lord our God shall all the Parents right and
interest to the promise of the Holy Spirit, Remission of Sins, and eternal
Life, spring from their Interest in Christ by Faith, and at that Door comes in
the right and interest of all their Children or Offspring that are called by
the effectual operations of the word and spirit of God, it is the promise made
to all the true spiritual Seed of Abraham, but are the natural Seed of Abraham,
and the natural Seed of Believers, as such, or as so considered the spiritual
Seed of Abraham?

3. the promise here meant, and the duty of being baptized are as you say of
the same Latitude; thus you argue, viz. be baptized you and your Children, for
the promise is unto you and to your Children, we so are to understand the
Words; the Promise, and the Duty, being of the same Latitude, if the Promise
belongs unto them and their Children, then bap^^^^^

Ans. I answer, what is the promise but the Holy Ghost and eternal Life, and
such that receive this Promise, viz. the holy Spirit as an earnest of eternal
Life, we deny not are to be baptized, and if no Child has any other right to
the Duty, but such who have received the same Promise through Faith, ziz.
remission of Sin, and of the Holy Spirit, then no Children but such that repent
and believe ought to be baptized, seeing the Promise and Duty runs to the
Children or Offspring as it runs to the Parents.

In the same manner, you say, when Peter planted the first Church among the
Gentiles, as might be gathered from the words of the Angel to Cornelius, being
the first Fruits of the Church of the Gentiles, Acts 11. 13. send Men to Joppa
and call for Simon, whose Surname is Peter, who shall tell thee words whereby
thou and all thy House shall be saved; the Gospel brings Salvation to him and
to all his House; Cornelius well knew the meaning of the Words, for he being a
proselite to the true Religion before that time, though uncircumcised, yet
received the severe Commandment of Noah, the substance of which might be seen,
Genesis 9. 1. God's Covenant was with Noah and his Seed, etc.

1. Ans. I answer, it is said Peter should tell Cornelius words, whereby he and
all his House shall be saved, but it must be such of his House that could hear
and understand those Words Peter should tell them; he shall tell thee, and tell
all thy House Words whereby you shall be saved, but not unless he and they of
his House believed; and pray observe, is it not said he was a devout Man, and
one that feared God with all his House, Acts 10. 2. all his House, the
Holy Ghost here intends, were such who were of understanding, and did fear God
as well as himself, also Cornelius said to Peter, now we are all here to hear
what things are commanded thee of God, all his House were capable to hear, etc.
Moreover, is it not said, while Peter yet spoke these words, the Holy Ghost
fell on them, which heard the word Verse 44. and all these were commanded to be
baptized, viz. that had received the Holy Ghost for their reception of the
Holy Ghost, is that argument the Apostle uses to command them to be baptized,
Verse 47 can any Man forbid water, that those should not be baptized which have
received the Holy Ghost as well as we, and he commanded them to be baptized in
the name of the Lord, Verse 48, them that did believe? them that had received
the Holy Ghost them that spoke with Tongues and magnified God; and if it was
every individual Person in his House, let it be so, the greater Grace of God
was manifested, but here are no Children mentioned in Infancy that were
baptized.

2. Besides, I wonder at you, it is said Peter should tell Cornelius words,
whereby he and all his House should be (...), sure you do not believe what you
seem to plead for; pray answer, when the Parent believes, and is saved, or
assured of Salvation, are all his Children and whole Family by his Faith
brought into the like stars of Salvation, shall they all be saved also Through
his Faith? the external Privileges of the Covenant that your Brethren talk of
(that is something, but I know not what) by virtue of their Parents Faith, it
is not however that which you plead for; you tell us when Cornelius heard words
whereby he came to be saved, all his Family through his Faith were saved also,
if you do not this, I profess I know not what you mean, by what you have
written; but if this be your meaning, I hope no Body will believe you, because
all know it is utterly false.

3. But the greater wonder comes at last, viz. it appears Cornelius and his
Household because a Gentile, had right to Baptism by the Covenant and
Commandment of God to Noah, not by virtue of Abraham's Covenant; the Truth is,
one is as good an Argument for Baptism as the other, but was the Covenant God
made with Noah the Covenant of Grace; if it was, all the World are in the
Covenant of Grace, and not Mankind only, but the Fowls of the Air, and Beasts
of the Field, and it had a Sign or Seal also to confirm it to all, viz. the
Rainbow, now your argument from hence must be this because the Sign or Seal of
the Rainbow belonged to Noah and his Sons, to confirm the Covenant Blessings,
therefore Baptism belongs to all Gods Noah's, and their Sons and Daughters; and
you may extend the inference further if you please, but perhaps it is rather the
command of God to Noah; you cite Genesis the ninth Chapter and first Verse, and
that was given to Noah and his three Sons, Shem, Ham and Japheth, and in them
to all the World; well but what is this Command, take the words, and God
blessed Noah and his Sons, and said unto them be fruitful and multiply and
replenish the Earth; I know not what this is brought for, nor what Cornelius
could draw from thence, unless it was to stir up his Sons and Daughters to
marry and beget Children, which certainly is one thing if not all that God
commands, Genesis 9. 1. to Noah and his Sons, that so the World might be a fresh
increased and multiplied with People after the Flood.

2. You say, he could no less then know the rest of the Proselytes who received
Circumcision, that they and their Children were in Abraham's Covenant, and also
he at this time by his receiving the Gospel, should come into the same
Covenant, so that he and his whole House should be the first Fruits of the
Gentiles. Thus Peter founded the Christian Church of the Jews and Gentiles in
Households, according to the ancient practice from the beginning of the World.

Ans. I answer, it is a great abuse of the sacred History, to say Peter founded
the Christian Churches in particular Households, for the first Church consisted
of Three Thousand, and there is no mention made of any particular Household; but
perhaps two of a City, and one of a Family, as God promised, were at that time
brought into God's Gospel Sion; also here were many gathered together at
Cornelius's House, as appears Verse 33.

2. Why, do you not distinguish between the Covenant made with Abraham's
natural Seed, as such, and the Covenant of Grace God made with him, etc. you
think that those blind and unbelieving circumcised Proselytes were as truly in
the covenant of Grace, even in the same covenant God made with Abraham's
spiritual Seed, as Cornelius was after he believed in God and Jesus Christ; why
then does Paul say, and if you be Christ's, then are you Abraham's Seed and Heirs
according to the promise, Gal. 3. 29. besides the Covenant of peculiarality
made with Abraham's natural Seed, as such did not entitle the Proselyte
stranger to the inheritance of the Land of Canaar. Oh! that the Lord would take
this Vail from off your Eyes, every Soul must reckon from Christ, not from
being Abraham's natural Seed, that would be one of Abraham's spiritual Seed,
and an Heir according to the Promise.

Paul you say, planted or founded Churches among the Gentiles, even in the same
manner as Peter did, when the head of the Families believed he did baptize the
whole Family,

1. You say, he planted the Church of the Philippians in Households, Acts 16.
14, 15. a certain Woman named Lydia which worshipped God, heard us, whose Heart
the Lord opened, that she attended unto the things that were spoken off by
Paul, and when she believed, she was baptized and all her Household. You note on
this Text three things; first, that Lydia was a Proselyte before to the Jewish
Religion, and the Proselytes of the Gentiles and their Children, were in God's
Covenant through Baptism and Circumcision; and here you tell us the story over
again of Moses the Son of Maimon, about baptizing Proselytes, that they
baptized Proselytes among the Jews, by command of the Council, etc.

Ans. I answer, you will have I see all these to be rebaptized also; I cannot
see but you are truly a grand Anabaptists in your Judgment, and such an one
that I never met with before; first you intimate they were baptized by a Jewish
humane Invention, and the second time baptized by virtue of Christ's command,
let who will be your Proselyte, I will not; who thus contend for, and mix the
Traditions of Men with Christ sacred Institutions.

2. Had Lydia and her Family a right to Baptism because a Proselyte? I thought
your Brethren always asserted her Childrens right thereunto by virtue of her
Faith.

Secondly, you note as soon as she believed, she and her Household were
baptized. -- according to the order of Gods covenant to receive the faithful
and their Seed, etc.

1. Ans. I answer, then Baptism it appears is no mear positive command of
Christ, but wholly depends upon Gods Covenant with Noah, or else his Covenant
with Abraham.

2. You ought first to prove she had any Seed, either Sons or Daughters, and if
she had, whether any of them were Infants.

3. Prove, that because her Household is said to be baptized, every individual
person in her House was baptized, seeing we read of a whole House went up to
offer unto the Lord, but not all, two of the House went not up, 1 Samuel 1. 21.
22.

4. Prove that Paul planted a Church in her House, if he did, I shall make it
appear, that they were all adult Persons, and such that did believe in Christ;
and as to your argument, that in the New Testament whole Families received the
Gospel, it is not denied, but some whole Households then did believe, or the
major part of them, and so now adays, but not many such, but would you
therefore have Churches to consist only of private Families. This a is new way
to prove national Churches.

You say after the same manner, the Apostle offered Salvation to the keeper of
the Prison and his Household, if he only believed, Acts 16. 30, 31. and he
said, believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved and thy House.

Paul explaineth unto him the Covenant of God to the Faithful and their Seed,
saying unto him, believe, and thou shall be saved and thy House, he does not
say, thou shall be saved and thy House if ye believe, but believe thou, and thy
House shall be saved with thee, the promise of Salvation belongs to the
Household, if he believed who was the head of the Family, etc.

Ans. Sir, I positively charge you for writing and publishing false Doctrine,
and acquit your self of it as well as you can; I appeal to the Consciences of
your Brethren, and to all understanding Men, whether this be a truth or not,
viz. that when the head of a Family does believe in Christ, that all the whole
Family shall be saved; I must confess that this is a new and easy way for all
in such Families to be saved, but does not Christ say, he that believes shall
not be damned, Mark 16. 16. let them dwell in what Family they will, you do not
speak of any external Covenant right to Baptism, but of Salvation it self.

2. You do not speak of Infants as such, but of all in the Family or Household,
viz. comprehending adult Sons and Daughters, Men Servants or Maid Servants;
adult persons it appears from hence, in the primitive times were baptized, by
virtue of the Parents Faith as well as Babes; nay, and were saved also by the
Faith of the head of the Family.

3. Does it not also follow, that your ignorance of God's Covenant with Abraham
is very great, for if it be as you say, then all Abraham's Seed according to
the Flesh must be saved, because he as the Head of his Family believed; but
does not the Scripture say in opposition to this, that though the number of the
Children of Israel be as the Sand of the Sea, yet but a Remnant shall be saved.

4. May not this Doctrine of yours also corrupt and tend to ruin many poor
Souls, both Children and Servants, who live in Families where the Heads of
those Families do believe, and are Godly; may not they say we shall be saved,
though we believe not, because we dwell in a Family where the Head, viz. our
Father, our Master does believe; Mr. Owen assures us, we shall all be saved,
because our Father or Master believes, be astonished, Oh ye Heavens! is this
your proof for Infant Baptism. Worthy Britains, this may sufficiently show you
that the Covenant that God made with Abraham, namely, the Covenant of
Circumsion, which was made with him and his natural Seed as such, was no
Covenant of Salvation, and so not the Covenent of Grace; it is so plain you need
not doubt of it, because multitudes that were in that Covenant perished, though
Circumcision was a Seal of Abraham's Faith, yet not a Seal of the Covenant of
Grace to his Seed, as such, because if it were it would have Sealed to them
all, the righteousness of Faith and eternal Life, which we know it never did to
multitudes of them. But very remarkable it is, to see how Mr. Owen does in the
very next place both conhimself, and overthrow his Argument, as to the purport
of it, he brings in this Objection,

Object. All his Family believed, verse. 34. Take his Answer.

Ans.

I answer, (says he) so were the adult; the whole House sometimes signifies
those of the adult in a Family, it is said of Sampson, that all his Fathers
House buried him, that is (says he) those that were of age in his Fathers
House, for the little Children could not go into the Land of the Philistines to
bury his Body, etc.

It is said (says he) of Cornelius that he was a devout Man, fearing God with
all his House, that is, all the adult in his Household, so the Jailer believed
with all his Household, viz. all that were of age to believe.

2. And we are not to think (says Mr. Owen) all these Households to be barren,
which were baptized by the Apostles; there were not many Households in those
Ages, without Children in them, for the greatest part of their Riches was their
Bond Servants, and the Children born of them, and those Children were in God's
Covenant, even as freeborn Children, Genesis 17. 13, 23. so are they also under
the Gospel, they are Abraham's Seed through the Faith of their Parents and
Heirs as before, Col. 1. 12. Gal. 3. 29.

Ans. 1. I need give no further Answer touching this argument, concerning what
you say of whole Households, you have effectually answered your self; you affirm
that by whole Households or Families in the Scripture, sometimes none but the
adult are comprehended or meant, and that Instance of Sampson does sufficiently
prove it, little Children could not go to bury his dead Body; though it is said
all his Fathers House buried him. So say we by whole Houses that were said to
be baptized, none are meant but those adult Persons who believed.

2. You say and confess, that Cornelius and all his House feared God, and that
the Jailer and all his House believed, that is all the adult (say you)
believed, or that were at age to believe; this may serve to clear up the matter
touching all the other whole Households that were said to be baptized, God
constrains you to speak the Truth here, though it be to overthrow your whole
Argument.

2. But what you speak in the next place is not true, viz. that Parents and
their Children, and Bond Servants, and their Children, were under the Law, and
under the Gospel times; also in the Covenant of Grace, through the Faith of
their Parents: For notwithstanding the Bondmen and their Male Children were
commanded to be Circumcised that were in Abraham's Family, and that were as
Proselytes received into other Families of the Jews under the Law, yet they
were not Heirs of the Land of Canaan; none but the natural Seed of Abraham
could have any possession therein, according to that Covenant of peculiarality
God made with the fleshy Seed of Abraham as such, which typified forth that
none but Believers, or the elect of God, who are the true Spiritual Seed of
Abraham, were the true Heirs of the Promise, and of the Heavenly Canaan; will
you say that all the natural Seed of Abraham and Bondmen and their Children as
such, and also all the natural Seed of Believers as such, are the true
Spiritual Seed of Abraham; sure God will take of this Vail from your Eyes, and
open your understanding if you look to him by Prayer, and search the Scripture
with a canded desire after the knowledge of this matter.

3. You will find a great difference between the Covenant that peculiarly did
appertain to the natural Seed of Abraham as such, and the Covenant of Grace
made with Abraham and his true Spiritual Seed as such.

4. I have proved that neither Abraham's Faith nor the Parents Faith intitles
any of their natural Seed as such, to the inheritance or blessings purchased by
Jesus Christ, viz. Justification, Adoption, Pardon of Sin, and eternal Life,
no, no, the Children of the Flesh, (as such) these are not the Children of God,
but the Children of the promise are counted for the Seed, viz. those that are
the elect of God only, Romans 9. 6, 7, 8, 9. are the Children of the premise, and
Heirs of Glory; the promise runs Gal. 3. 16. not to Seeds as of many, but to
thy Seed which is Christ, i. e. Christ personally considered primarily, and
then to Christ mystically considered, that is all that are spiritually united
to him; therefore the Apostle says, Verse 29. if ye be Christ's, then are you
Abraham's Seed and Heirs according to the promise, or according to the Covenant
of Grace God made with Abraham.

5. This must be so, because the Covenant of Grace is well ordered in all
things and sure; see once again, Romans 4. 14. for if they which are of the Law
be Heirs, Faith is made void, and the promise of no effect, no need of Faith,
if the legal Covenant can save any Man; but if a personal Obedience to the Law
could not save the Parent, besure the Faith and Obedience of the Parent cannot
save the Child. But observe, verse. 16. therefore it is of Faith, that it might
be by Grace to the end, the promise might be sure to all the Seed. Now consider
well the promise is eternal Life, this all understand here, and this says Paul
is sure to all the Seed; it is confirmed not only by the word of God, but by the
Oath of God also, Heb. 6. 13 for when God made promise to Abraham because he
could swear by no greater, he swore by himself; to show the Heirs of the
Promise, the immutability of his Counsel, he confirmed it by an Oath -- that so
the Heirs of the promise might have strong Consolation, verse. 17. 18. all that
are the true Heirs or spiritual Seed of Abraham must be saved, for it is
impossible for God to lie, or fail in his Promise, to any one of the true Seed
of Abraham; therefore if all the natural Seed of Abraham were in this Covenant,
and all the natural Seed of Believers, it is impossible that any one of them
should perish eternally, or miss of eternal Life.

They are all born of God, and Heirs as Isaac was, they are all chosen from
Everlasting to Salvation, they are all given to Christ, and all Members of his
mystical Body, or are but one mystical Christ, and are even Flesh of his Flesh,
and Bone of his Bone, and therefore this Covenant and free promise of God,
cannot appertain to Abraham's natural Seed as such, nor to the natural Seed of
Believers as such, for alas! how many of them do perish eternally? For though
the number of the Children of Israel be as the Sands of the Sea, yet but a
remnant of them shall be saved, as was hinted before.

But say you, if the keeper of the Prison had no Children, or if they were the
adult, it is the same thing, the Apostle offers Salvation to him and to his
Household, even to little Children, if there were such with him, and that is
sufficient to confirm the present matter, i. e. that by this Household, we are
to understand principally his Children, as the word frequently is taken in
Scripture, Genesis 30. 30. and 45. 19. Number. 3. 15. 1 Timothy 5. 8.

Ans. It appears, you question whether the Jailer had any Children or not,
beside you tell us, that whole Households comprehend the Adult only some times;
from whence I infer according to the Scripture, whole Households may be said to
be baptized, when none but the Adult in those Households are baptized.

2. If the Apostles offering Salvation to People, gives them a right to
Baptism, then all the World may be baptized, because all the World ought to
have Salvation offered to them, go into all the World and preach the Gospel to
every Creature, Mark 16. 15. but this offer gives none a right to Baptism
simply in it self; no none but such that believe as the next Words prove, he
that believes and is baptized shall be saved, verse 16. they must first
believe or be made Disciples, and then be baptized, the Parents must believe,
and the Children must first believe, not the Parents for the Children, but the
Children must believe for themselves, before they ought to be baptized,
according to the Commission, and the nature of the Administration of Gospel
Baptism.

3. It Is strange the Apostles should preach to little Children, over Christ to
them, what preach Christ to the Infant in the Cradle? that knows not its right
Hand from it, ^t.

But say you, the Children are the chief part of every Household; therefore when
Paul says to the Keeper of the Prison, believe on the Lord Jesus, and thou
shall (...) saved and thy House; it is as much as if he should say, if thou will believe in Christ, the Covenant o^ Span^d and the Seal of Baptism,
appertains to thee a^ Children, etc.

Ans. (...) Children, I grant, are part of those (...) there are Children, but
not of every (...) because there are many Households wherein (...) no Children
in nonage, and they cannot be part of those Households, in which there is no
Infant.

2. Believe on the Lord Jesus and thou shall be saved; that is, do thou
believe, and thy whole House that are capable to believe, let them believe
also, and you shall all be saved; no more is intended, for according to your
own argument, the Servants and Adult Children were under the same promise with
his Infants, if he had any; now will you say that his Servants and Adult
Children could be saved by his Faith, I tell you again, the Covenant of
peculiarality God made with Abraham's natural Seed as such, was gone and
abolished when Paul preached to the Jailer, and the Covenant of Grace or
Covenant of Salvation God made with Abraham, I have proved appertained to none
but the elect only, or his true Spiritual Seed.

3. Besides if the Parents believing brings the Children into the Covenant of
Salvation; then it will follow, that the Parents non-believing keeps the
Children out of the Covenant, and so hinders them of Salvation, and if so, the
Children may be damned for their Parents Sin in not believing.

You proceed and say, the Apostle planted the Church of the Corinthians by
baptizing whole Households, 1 Cor. 1. 16, 17. as the House of Stephanas and
Crispus, and the Jews with one accord rose up against Paul at Corinth, and
accused him that he persuaded Men to worship God contrary to the Law, verse 13.
by how much the more would they have accused him, then (say you) for casting
out their Children from the Covenant of Abraham if he had so done, etc.

Ans. I answer, how do you know but that might be one thing which they charged
upon him, no doubt Paul according as John Baptist did, did declare, that their
being the Children of Abraham according to the Flesh as such, now availed them
nothing; he it is plain denied their Childrens right to Circumcision, to give
them a right to Baptism; he received none of them to Baptism who professed not
their Faith in Christ, the Covenant of peculiarality with Abraham's natural
Seed as such being abolished. Moreover Paul told these Corinthians, all things
were now become anew; a new Church, and a new Church Membership, and a new
right to that Church Membership, and now there is no knowing of Men after the
Flesh, this Doctrine he preached to these Corinthians, 2 Cor. 5. 16. 17. and
you force me to urge this matter often, wherefore henceforth know we no Man
after the Flesh, yea, though we have known Christ after the Flesh, yet now
henceforth know him no more, what does the Apostle intend here by these words
but this. viz. now henceforth or from the establishment of the dispensation of
the Gospel, we know no Man after the Flesh; know, to know here, is to prefer or
to esteem no Man above others, upon the account of their fleshly descent from
Abraham in a lineal way by Generation, or in respect had to any Covenant God
made with him or his fleshly Seed as such, that Covenant and Covenant right
being taken away, he took away the first that he might establish the second,
Heb. 10. 9. for the Priesthood being charged, there is made of necessity a
change also of the Law, Heb. 7. 12. there is therefore now no knowing or
esteeming of Persons after that old Covenant manner, the new Covenant being
quite different, or not according to the old, which run to Abraham's Fleshly
Seed as such; they must now believe, and their Children must believe, before
admitted as Members into the Gospel Church, therefore if any Man be in Christ,
he is a new Creature, old things are passed away and all things are become new,
2 Cor. 5. 17. if any Person be grafted into Christ, or into the Gospel Church,
he must have Faith and be a new Creature, or be of the New Creation as the
Greek word holds forth; ^ay, (says he) though we have known Christ after the
Flesh, that is a Son of the Jewish Church, or esteemed him upon that account,
Yet henceforth we know him, or prefer him in that respect no more; this was
that Doctrine (...) preached, and it is very probable it was as much from hence
that they charged him, for persuading Men contrary to the Law, as upon any
other Consideration whatsoever; therefore all your flourish on this respect is
vain, but since you make so great a stir about the baptizing of whole
Households; I shall add something farther to clear up this Matter, and I argue
thus, viz.

1. If there were no Families or Households, but in which there are some
Infants, you might have some pretense for what you infer from hence; but how
palpable is it, that there are every where many whole Families, in which there
is no Infant or Child in nonage, and this being so, what certain Conclusion or
Consequence can he drawn from hence?

2. Besides you know by a Synecdecha, a part is put for the whole, as Isa. 7.
2, 5, 8, 9. the Tribe of Ephraim is put for all Israel: it is said, all
Jerusalem and Judah went out to be baptized by John in Jordan. In 1 Samuel 1, 21.
22. the Text says, The Man Elkanah, and all his House went up to offer unto
the Lord, yet in the next Verse it is said expressly, That Hannah and her Child
Samuel went not up; nay you have showed us a Family or whole House that were
said to bury the Body of Sampson, and yet you tell us the little Children were
not included in that Expression, all his House.

3. As touching the Goalers House, it is positively said, Paul preached to him,
and to all that were in his House, do you think he preached to his Infants (if
he had any?) but to put the matter out of doubt, it is said he rejoiced,
believing in God with all his House, as well as it is said, he was baptized and
all his.

4. Touching Lydia, we say it is uncertain whether she was a Maid, Widow or
Wife, but if she was Married and had Children; it is very unlikely (if Babes)
that they were at that time with her, because she was far from her proper
dwelling, nay many Miles from it, for she was of the City of Thiatira, verse
14. but when Paul preached to her, she was at Philippi, where she was
Merchandising, being a seller of Purple. Can we suppose she carried her little
Babes so far to Market? Besides those of her House were called Brethren, who
were baptized with her, therefore sure Children cannot be here meant; will you
build your Practice of baptizing little Babes from such uncertain Conclusions,
when it is doubtful whether she had any Children or no? Or if she had, whether
they were with her at that time or not; our denying of it is as good as your
affirming of it, yet it is plain she had Servants, or some who are called her
Household, therefore what you say is impertinent upon this account.

And thus it appears to all impartial Persons, that there is nothing in this
argument touching the practice of the Gospel Church; hears no mention made in
baptizing whole Households of one Infant baptized, nor the least color of reason
to conclude there were.

Mr. Burkit is so unreasonable as to put us upon searching the Scripture to
prove a Negative, i. e. that there were none baptized in Infancy; we might as
well have desired him to give proof that there never was any Infant ordained an
Elder, or Pastor of a Church; or how can we prove they did not make use of
Honey or Oil in Baptism, which some of the ancient Fathers used, as Mr. Perkins
Notes, or Salt or Spittle, which practice is still in the Romish Church? Where
is the extreme ^unction forbid, or auricular Confession, or the use of Beads in
Prayer, and a hundred more such Romish Fopperies? May these things be therefore
done, because we read not that they are forbid, I thought adding to God's Word
was forbidden, Rev. 22.

But says Mr. Burkit, search the Scripture, and produce me any one instance if
you can from the time of St. John the Baptist, to the time of St. John the
Evangelist, which was more than threescore Years, during which time many
Thousands of Infants were grown up to maturity, and make it appear there were
not any baptized in their Infancy, or that their Baptism was deferred till
riper years, or that there is any divine Command for the delaying the baptism
of Children of Christian Parents, until they are grown up, and I will frankly
yield the Cause. Bravely spoken.

Ans. I must retort this argument back again on him, and must say, it is a
great argument against Infant Baptism, and not for it; for, say I, let it be
considered, that since there was such a long space of time as 60 Years and
more, between John Baptist and the Death of John the beloved Disciple, or John
the Evangelist, during which time many Thousand, of Infants were born of
baptized Believers, both of Jews and Gentiles, yet we read not of one Infant of
them that was baptized.

Reader, observe Mr. Burkit, says in the Gospel day, and when our Savior sent
his Disciples first to preach, they were to teach or make Disciples of those
they baptized; but upon the Parents believing and being baptized, he says,
their Children were admitted to Baptism also. Now say I, since many Parents
thus taught and baptized, had multitudes of Infants born to them; how comes it
about that we read not of one of their Infants that were baptized, no not from
the time of John Baptist, to the Death of John the Evangelist? Can any Man
think, had any Infants been baptized, that God would not have left some account
of it, to put the matter out of doubt, especially since it was never taught
Doctrinally nor Commanded? Certainly, it could not stand consistent with the
Care, Wisdom and Faithfulness of Jesus Christ, to have hid and concealed such a
Practice, had there been one Infant by his Authority or Allowance baptized. But
since the Scripture is silent in it, we may assure our Selves it is not the will
of God, Infants should be be baptized. Also if those who were to be baptized
were first to be taught, were first to repent and believe, Then it follows
clearly, that Baptism must be deferred till Children were ofripe Years, and
able so to do, and did not Mary delay the baptizing of the Holy Child Jesus-

As to the House of Crispus, you your self acknowledge, they all believed,
these are your words, viz. it is true, all the House of Crispus were Believers,
viz. Adult Persons, but say you, were all the Households of the Faithful Barren,
etc.

Ans. No doubt but in some of those Households were Children, they might not be
all Barren without Children, yet their Children might be grown up to maturity;
but you your self have proved that whole Houses may be said to be baptized, and
yet none but the Adult in those Households might be baptized, seeing the
Scripture you quoted, says, that Sampson was buried by all his Fathers House,
yet none of the little Children in that House could be concerned in that matter.

As to the House of Stephanas you say well, they are called the first Fruits of
Achaia. I beseech you Brethren, ye know the Household of Stephanas, that is the
first Fruits of Achaia, and that they have addicted themselves to the ministry
of the Saints, 1 Cor. 16. 15. that you submit your selves to such, verse. 16.

Ans. They, that is the whole Household gave themselves up to administer to the
Saints, but besure little Babes could not do that, nor ought the Adult to
submit themselves to little Children, or esteem and reverence them for acts of
Charity.

You bring in this Objection, viz. we do not read of any Infant that were in
those Households, to which you answer, if the Households of the Corinthians when
the Apostle baptized them were so barren, what need had the Apostle to write
unto them that their Children were holy, 1 Cor. 7. 14. it is more than
probable, that Children were in every Household that was baptized.

Ans. Now you go over again with your former argument, and repeat the same
things which I have again and again answered, about the Child's being in
Covenant, after the Head of the Family or the Parents do believe.

2. I say, it is very probable there might be no Children in nonage in those
Households, because it is said, the whole House had believed.

3. If there were yet by your own grant, all the House might be said to be
baptized, and yet no little Children baptized that might be in those Households,
because all is often taken but for a part.

4. But will you said I build an Ordinance upon a probability and on uncertain
Consequences; nay one of the sacred Institutions of the Gospel, called one of
the two great Sacraments thereof; that Text, 1 Cor. 7. 14. we have already
answered. Now from the whole, we shall draw Conclusions in opposition to yours.

1. That the Covenant that God made with Noah and his Family, was a Covenant
made with all the World, and so not the Covenant of Grace, though there was
Mercy and Grace contained in it to all Mankind, and to the Fowls of the Air,
and Beasts of the Field also.

2. That God's taking all Abraham's Family or Household into Covenant as such,
it was only a Covenant that peculiarly appertained to his natural Seed, and it
had many Temporal Blessings and Privileges attending it, which no Household
under the Gospel can pretend unto, and of this Covenant Circumcision was a
sign, and that Circumsion was only given to be a Seal of the righteousness of
Faith to Abraham only, and not to little Children.

3. That the whole House of Israel as such, or the whole Nation of the Jews,
under the Law were all as so considered then, the Church of God, and that the
Gospel Church consists not of whole Households or any one whole Nation, it
being not of an National Constitution, but Congregational only, consisting of
none but of believers, baptized upon the profession of their Faith who are
called the Household of Faith.

4. That the whole House of Israel was a typical Church, who were holy with a
Ceremonial and Typical Holiness, signifiing that all the Members of the Gospel
Church, should be spiritually and savingly Holy.

5. That God in the Gospel times, (though now and then he is pleased to call by
his Grace, all or the greatest part of whole Families, yet contrary to the old
Covenant) he usually now takes but two of a City and one of a Family, and
brings them into his true Gospel Sion.

6. That the first Churches were only planted of such that believed, some out
of one Family, and some out of other Families, and that out of the Jewish
Church, and such that were called of the Gentile Nations.

7. That the Parents Faith saves none of his Household, either Children or
Servants, nor gives them any right to Gospel Baptism.

8. Lastly, one would think these things to be clear enough to give
Satisfaction to all that desire Satisfaction about Infant Baptism, and that
there is not the least shadow of proof for it from what our Brethren argue,
from whole Families who were said to be baptized, if we compare Scripture with
Scripture, for as we find, no Precept nor Example for Infant Baptism, so not
any Consequence for it, that is naturally drawn from any Text of Holy
Scripture, to which the Pedo-Baptists do refer,

CHAP. XVII.
Proving that Children ought not to be Baptized, because they were baptized in
diverse Centuries or Ages under the Apostasy of the Church, when most of Christ's
Institutions were corrupted; wherein it is also proved, that for the two first
Hundred Years after Christ, no Infants were baptized, containing an Answer to
Mr. James Owen's 14 Chapter and 11 Argument, to prove Infant Baptism.

THus Mr. Owen begins in his 14th Chapter of his Book, viz. the Children of the
Faithful were baptized in every Age of the Church of God since the Apostles
time until this latter Age, as I can prove at large if it were profitable for
the unlearned Reader, I shall set down some Examples.

Ans. 8. Your argument is, that Children ought to be baptized, because they
were baptized in every age of the Church since the Apostles time.

Ans. 1. Give one Instance if you can, out of approved History, of one Infant
baptized in the first or second Century, but pass by Two or Three Hundred Years
after Christ, and many errors besides this of Infant Baptism crept amain into
the Churches. But pray remember, now you are without Book, you are forced to
quit the Holy Bible, the Sacred History, and great Charter of the Church; and
therefore all your proof out of Humane History, which may be true, or may not
be true, signifies nothing. But you had best take heed, lest we carry the cause
against you here too, i. e. for the first Centuries; we will examine your
Authors and humane Testimonies.

The first is Calvin a latter Writer, I know not but Ireneus and Cyprian might
be both had out of him: I do confess, Ireneus lived not above Two Hundred Years
after Christ; or in the second Century, thus he and many others cite him, viz.
Omnes venit Christus per semet ipsum salvare, omnes qui per eum renascuntur ad
Deum Infantes, and parvulos Juniores and Seniores. In English thus: Christ
Jesus came to save all by himself, all who by him are born again unto God,
Infants and little ones, Young and Old.

Ans. Reader, pray observe, here is not a word of one Infant baptized; but this
Man infers it from his Words, so that we have nothing but Consequences, neither
from God's Word, nor the words of Man. Christ, no doubt, came to save some of
all sorts of Men, and who doubts but he came to save Infants, and little ones,
Young and Old? But why must these Words [who are born again] be applied to
Infant Baptism. The scope of Ireneas in that Chapter, is to refute the
Gnostics, who said that Christ did not exceed One and Thirty Years of age;
against whom Ireneus alleged that Christ lived in every age, i. e. of Infancy,
Youth, and old Age, that by his Age and Example he might sanctify every age.
So that here Ireneus speaks not of being born again in Baptism; for he says,
Omnes inquam, qui per eum renascuntur in Deum; i. e. I say, all which are born
again by him to God, i. e. by Christ, not as if he had baptized Infants, but
because he (i. e. Christ) was an Infant, that by the example or virtue of his
Age, he might sanctify Infants, as the whole Discourse in Latin plainly shows,
viz. Magister ergo existens, Magistri quoque habebat atatem, non reprobans, nec
super grediens hominem, neque solvens suam legem in se humani generis, sed
omnem etatem sanctificans per illam, etc.

2. As to Cyprian, he lived as I find it in History, about 248 or 300 Years
after Christ; and should I tell the Reader what Corruptions and Errors were let
in about that time, he would not wonder to hear Infants were allowed Baptism:
Yet we have Cyprian against Cyprian. It is true, as far as I can gather in his
time, Infant Baptism was first introduced, without any Ground or Warrant from
Christ; and it was as strongly opposed, which appears by the Debates and Doubts
about it.

3. The third humane Authority that is brought by Mr. Burkit, is that cursed
decree of the Milevetan Council, that all who denied Infant Baptism should be
Anathema, accursed. If he comes but a little lower, he has proof enough in the
Popish Councils, Decrees and Canors. But it is to be observed, that those
Fathers pleaded for Infant Baptism, as that which took away Original Sin, and
gave Children the Eucharist too, in the first Sacrament abusing that Text, John
3. 5. and in the other, that in John 6. 53. These are all the humane Proofs
from the Churches, after the primitive Apostolical days which Mr. Burkit
brought, and I doubt not but to give better and more Authentic Authors of the
ancient Fathers against Infant Baptism, than has been brought for it, and some
of them nearer the Apostles days too. The first is Justin Martyr; though I have
him not, yet take his Words, as they are cited by Mr. Richard Baxters Saints
Rest, Chap. 8. Sect. 5. I will declare unto you, how we offer up our selves
unto God, after that we are renewed through Christ, those amongst us that are
instructed in the Faith, and believe that which we teach them is true, being
willing to live according to the same, We do admonish them to fast and pray for
forgiveness of Sins, and we also pray with them, and when they are brought by
us into the Water, and there as we were new born, are they also by the new
Birth received, and then in calling upon God the Father, the Lord Jesus Christ
and the Holy Ghost, they are washed in Water, etc. the Food we call the
Euchrist, to which no Man is admitted, but only he that believes the Truth of
the Doctrine, being washed in the laver of Regeneration for Remission of Sins,
and so lives as Christ has taught, this you see, says Mr. Baxter, is no new
way.

4. You cite Origin, who was you say famous in the year 230, who says, in Hom.
8 in Levit. de Infantibus baptizandis Ecclesia traditionem accepit ab
Apostolis, theChurch received infant Baptism by Tradition from the Apostles, we
have proved you say, before this was a Scripture Tradition, for the Apostles
baptized little Children.

Ans. We may cite Origin against Origin, so little credit is to be given to
History in this case about him, and some other of the Fathers, for I find
Origin says, viz. they that are rightly baptized are washed unto Salvation,
but so was not Simon Magus, he that is baptized unto Salvation, receives the
Water and the Holy Ghost, which Simon did not but Water only, Hom. 6. upon
Ezekiel. ^1. 6. v. 4. Mountanus, p. 36. 37. and in his Commentary upon Romans 6.
says the same Origin, such Baptism that was accompanied with crucifying the
Flesh, and rising again to newness of Life, was the approved Baptism; I must
confess that Dr. Tailor says, that Origin and Austin are the only Witnesses
that asserted Infant Baptism to be an Apostolical Tradition; but it appears by
Erasmus, that Origen's writings were greatly corrupted by Russinus, and made to
speak sometimes for Infant Baptism. See Jacob Merci^gus, p. 283. 291. and
Montanus p. 29. to 35, 42, 43. Sir, had you proved Infant Baptism from the
Scripture, and that the Apostles baptized Infants, you need not go to Humane
History that is so uncertain, and no Rule for us.

5. Gregory of Nazianzum, who you say was famous about the year 370, bears
witness for Infant Baptism; says he, omni aetati Baptisma convenit, Baptism is
answerable unto every Age. And again, da infantis custodiam, give Infants the
Baptism of the Trinity, and that will be a great and excellent Guard unto them.

Ans. I find a worthy Author that quotes this Gregory speaking quite the
contrary thing; in his third Oration, (says he) the baptized used in the first
place to confess their Sins, and to renounce the Devil and all his Works before
many Witnesses, and that none were baptized of old, but they that did confess
their Sins, and how dangerous it was headlong, and without due Preparation to
partake thereof. He therefore advises, that the Baptism of Infants be deferred
till they did not only make Confession of their Faith, but were to desire the
same, see Dr. Tailor, p. 239. Now worthy Britains, what signifies the citing
of such Fathers, when we cannot be certain that we have their true writings;
God has preserved his sacred Word from Corruption, but not the Humane History
of the Fathers.

2. But should this Father and St. Austine, and others that followed them, be
for Infant Baptism, what will this avail the asserters of Infant Baptism,
seeing the Church was before their times so greatly corrupted, and many grand
Errors brought in; the Tradition of God Fathers and God Mothers, one of the
Church of England has lately showed to be near as early in the Church as
Infant baptism, which Mr. Owen will not therefore receive to be an Apostolical
Tradition.

3. We readily grant, that Infant baptism is of great Antiquity, of more then
Thirteen Hundred years standing, so are many other abominable Errors, Practices
and corrupt Ceremonies; but from the beginning it was not so, viz. it is not to
be found in Holy Scripture, it is none of Christ's Institution; therefore an
Human Invention; nor was it practiced in the Two first hundred years after
Christ, as I shall now prove out of as good Authors, as any Mr. Owen has or
can produce.

1. It Is said Justin Martyr was Converted about 30 years after the Apostle
John; and by the Order then used in the Church, It appears there was no Infant
baptism thought of.

Walafrid Strabo, as I find him cited by a great Historian, says, that there
was no Children, but aged and understanding Persons Baptized in this Age; that
is to say in the Second Century. Wall. Strabo. Eccl. Hist. cap. 26. Vicecom. l.
1. c, 30.

Tertullian in his Book of Baptism speaking of that Text: Suffer little
Children to come unto me, says he, Indeed the Lord said, do not hinder them to
come unto me. Let them come therefore while they grow to Years, and while come,
let them be Taught; let them become Christians when they are able to know
Christ. Why does Innocent Age hasten to the Remission of Sins? Men will deal
more warily in Worldly affairs: So that they who are not trusted with an
Earthly Inheritance, are trusted with an Heavenly one: Let them ask for
Salvation, that thou may appear to have given it to them.

Dr. Tailor says, that the Truth of the business is, as there is no Command of
Scripture to oblige Children to the susception of it; so the necessity of
Pedo-Baptism was not determined in the Church, till the Canons that was made in
the Milevitan Council, a provincial in Africa, never till then. I grant, (says
he) it was practiced in Africa before that time, and they, or some of them
thought well of it. And though that is no argument for us to think so, yet none
of them ever pretended it to be necessary, nor to have been a precept of the
Gospel. St. Austin was the first that ever preached it to be necessary, and it
was in his Heat and Anger against Pelagius. Thus Dr. Tailor.

Ignatius in his Discourse about Baptism asserts, that it ought to be
accompanied with Faith, Love, and Patience after Preaching. H. Montanus p. 45.
and Jacob Dubois, p. 16. to 22. and Dutch Martyrology, where Ignatius's Letters
are mentioned to Polycarp, Tralensis to them of Philadelphia.

Dr. Tailor says in his Disswasive against Popery, p. 118. printed 1667, one
of his last pieces, Thus, viz. That there is a Tradition to baptize Infants,
relies but upon two Witnesses, Origin and Austin, and the latter having it from
the former, it lies upon a single Testimony, which (says he) is a pitiful
argument to prove a Tradition Apostolical. He is the first that spoke of it;
but Tertullian, that was before him, seems to speak against it, which he would
not have done, if it had been an Apostolical Tradition; and that it was not so,
is but too certain, if there be any Truth in the Words of Ludovicus Vives, who
says, that anciently none were baptized, but Persons of ripe Age.

Great Bazil in his Book of the Holy Spirit, Cap. 12. says. Faith and Baptism
are the two means of Salvation inseparably cleaving together, for Faith is not
perfected by Baptism, but Baptism is founded by Faith, and by the same Name
both things are fulfilled; for as we believe in the Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit, so also we are baptized in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit; and indeed there goes before a Confession, leading us to Salvation;
but Baptism follows, sealing our Confession and Covenant.

The same Churches Teacher (says the learned Dr. Du-Veil) in his Third Book
against Eunomius, speaks thus, viz. Baptism is the Seal of Faith, Faith is
the Confession of the Godhead; it is necessary we should first Believe, and
then be sealed in Baptism. Du veilon, Acts, c. 8. p. 278.

Zonaras says, the Babe will then need Baptism when it can choose it.

Gregory Nazianzen in his Fourth Oration, says Dr. Du-Veil,

Of those who dye without Baptism, gives us an Instance in those to whom
Baptism was not administered by reason of Infancy. And the same Nazianzen,
though he was a Bishops Son, being a long time bred up under his Fathers care,
was not, says the said Dr, baptized till he came to Man's Age. In like manner
(says he) Basil the Great that was born of devout Parents, and instructed from
his Childhood, was not baptized until a Man, p. 280. Also, says he, John of
Antioch, called afterward Chrysostom, was born of Christian Parents, as the
truer Opinion is, tutored by the famous Bishop Miletius, was not yet baptized,
till he was One and Twenty Years of Age.

Hierom, also Ambrose and Austin, who were born of Christian Parents, and
consecrated to Christian Discipline, even from their Childhood, were not
baptized before thirty years of age, as Dr. Tailor Bishop of Down asserts in
his Twelfth Section of the Life of Christ.

Now, Sir here are Examples enough that do prove in the primitive times,
Children of baptized Believers were not baptized, but had their Baptism delayed
till they themselves believed, and gave an account of their Faith. Had it been
the constant custom of the Godly to baptize Infants, would not these, think
you, have been in their Infancy baptized?

Grotius, as I find him quoted by Dr. Du-Veil, says,

The Primitive Churches did not baptize Infants, see Grotius's Notes on the
Gospel.

Nay, (says the same great and learned Author,) it does most plainly appear by
the right of baptizing in the Romish Church, for baptism is to be asked before
the Person to be baptized do enter into the Church, which the surety does in
the Infants Name, a clear distinct confession of Faith is required, which the
same surety rehearses in the Infants Name, i. e. a Renouncing of the World,
its Pomps, the Flesh, and the Devil.

We may by this perceive from whence the Original of our old Church Catechism
came. But this is a clear Argument, says the Dr. to prove of old, the Persons
who were to be baptized, themselves asked Baptism in their own Name, and of
their own choice, and professed their own Faith.

In the Neo-Cesarean Council it was framed thus. As to those who are big with
Child, they ought to be baptized when they will, for in this Secrament there is
nothing common to her that brings forth, and that which shall be brought forth
from her Womb, because in that Confession, the Liberty of every ones Choice is
declared.

Whence we may infer, 1. That in that age, there seemed to be that aversness
from baptizing Children, that they were not willing to admit Women great with
Child to Baptism, lest it should be thought that the Child was baptized with
them.

2. That in those times in the Confession of Faith, in the Death, Burial, and
Resurrection of Christ, which was done in a Public and Solemn manner in their
Baptism, a liberty of Choice and Consent was required as preparatory to it; for
the incapacity of the Infant in the Womb, to declare this Choice and Consent,
is the reason why they conclude that the Infant was not baptized with the
Mother.

3. That it was then judged necessary to have the Consent and Choice of those
who were to be baptized.

Dr. Du-Veil, citing the same Synod on this passage (viz. that concerning the
Baptism of a Woman with Child, that her Baptism concerns not her Child, for
every one is to give a demonstration of his own Faith and Confession) says,
however the interpreters draw it to another purpose; it does appear that the
Question was made of a Woman big with Child, because it did seem that the Child
was baptized together with the Mother, which notwitstanding ought not to be
used, nor to be baptized, except of its own proper Election and Profession.

Dr. Barlow, Late Bishop of Lincoln, in his Letter to Mr. T. says, I believe
there is neither Precept nor Example in the Scripture for Pedo-Baptism, nor any
just Evidence for it, for above 200 Years after Christ. Tertullian condemns it
as an unwarrantable Custom, and Naziarzen a good while after dislikes it: Sure
I am, (says he) that in the primitive times they were Cat^cum^ni, then
Illuminati or Baptizati, and that not only Pagans, and Children of Pagans
Converted, but Children of Christian Parents. The Truth is, I do believe
Pedo-Baptism, how or by whom I know not, came into the World in the second
Century, and in the third and fourth began to be practiced, though not
generally, and was defended as lawful from the Text, John 3. (...). grossly
misunderstanding it, upon the like (...). (...) 6. 53, they did for many
Centuries both in the Greek and Latin Church Communicate Infants, and gave them
the Lord's Supper; and I confess, they might do both as well as either, etc.
Thus Bishop Barlow.

(...) says, Pedo-Baptismus duobus primis a Christo (...) (...) fuit
incognitus, etc. Pedo Baptism was unknown in the two first Ages after Christ,
but in the third and fourth it was approved of by a few; in the fifth and
following Ages it began to be generally received. And therefore (as afterward
he says) the right in indeed observed by us as an ancient Custom, but (...) an
Apostolical Tradition.

The same learned Author, says, De peccato Orig. Numb. (...). says Morem
Infantes Baptizandi non capisse (...) Seculum, etc. That the custom of (...)
infants, did not begin till the Third Age (...) Christ, but in the two former
no footsteps of it appear. And afterward says Sine ipsius [Christi] (...); it
was introduced without the command of Christ.

Athanasius in sermon 3 contra Arianos, says,

our Savior did not slightly command to baptize, but first of all said, Teach
and then Baptize, that true Faith might come by teaching, and Baptism be
perfected by Faith.

Haimo in Postilla upon the Text, Go teach all Nations, Fol. 278. In this
place, (says he) is set down a Rule rightly how to baptize, that is, that
Teaching should go before Baptism; for he says, teach all Nations, and then he
says, and baptize them, for he that is to be baptized, must be before
instructed; that he first learn to believe that which in Baptism he shall
receive; for as Faith without works is Dead, so Works when they are not of
Faith, are nothing worth.

Idem in Annatationibus in mar. The Apostles were commanded first to Teach and
then to baptize: The Jews were brought by Ceremonies to the Knowledge of the
Truth, but Christians must learn to know them first.

Beda says,

all those that came to the Apostles to be baptized, were instructed and taught
concerning the Sacrament of Baptism, then they received the Holy Administration
thereof.

Rabanus, the Catechi, which is the Doctrine of Faith, must go before Baptism,
to the intent that he that is to be baptized, (i. e. Catechamenus) may first
learn the Mysteries of Faith.

Arnobius, Thou art not first (says he) baptized, and then beginnest to effect
and embrace the Faith; but when thou art to be baptized, thou signify unto the
Priest what thy desire is, and make thy Confession with thy Mouth.

Jerome upon Matt. says, The Lord commands his Apostles that they should
first instruct and teach all Nations, and afterward should baptize those that
were instructed into the Mysteries of the Faith; for it cannot be, (says he)
that the Body should receive the Sacrament of Baptism, till the Soul have
received the true Faith.

Sir, What think you now of the Testimony of the ancient Fathers, and of the
practice of the Churches after the Apostles days? Sure the Reader must needs
conclude, we have the advantage here too, and you must yield whether you will
or no, and give up the Controversy.

But to proceed, Your first Demonstration to prove Infant Baptism in the days
after the Apostles is this, viz. because that Children had Hands laid upon them
in their Minority.

Ans. This signifies nothing, for as the Fathers changed the Ordinance of
Baptism from believing Men and Women to ignorant Babes, so they changed
imposition of Hands (which I own to be a principle of Christ's Doctrine, Heb.
6. 12) to such young People, who in their Minority had learned the Articles of
the Christian Faith. But clear it is, in the primitive Apostolical times, none
but baptized Believers were admitted to that Ordinance of laying on of Hands,
as Acts 8. 14. and 19. 6.

But your Brother Mr. Burkit acknowledges, that formerly there were such
called Catechumeni, Persons taught or instructed, and afterward baptized.

He says further, that there were two sorts, the last he brings for his
purpose, but I know not where he has his Testimony, and therefore pass it by.

So much to your first Demonstration from the Fathers.

Your second Demonstration to prove Infant Baptism is this, viz. because in the
primitive times Infants were admitted to the Lord's Supper, therefore you
conclude they were admitted to Baptism.

Ans. And they had (say I) as much Ground for the one as for the other, and
there is the same parity of reason to conclude, as they erred in one, so they
did in the other.

Why does you not from hence give Infants also the Lord's Supper? The Reason
you give I have before proved insignificant.

As to his third Demonstration, it is not denied but that Infant Baptism was
received in the Church in the third and fourth Century, with many other
Fopperies, but that does him no kindness; the Church was adulterated from the
true Apostolical Faith and Practice, in many Respects in those and after times
downwards.

His fourth Demonstration is this, viz. If it was a gross Error in the
Primitive Fathers to admit Infants to Baptism, then they in suffering such an
Error to pass uncensured and uncondemned, were guilty of the greatest Impiety,
etc.

Answ. What then? I ask him and you, or any other of our Opposers, whether ye
do not believe for several Centuries those Fathers who admitted Infants to the
Lord's Supper without censuring or condemning it, were not guilty also of as
great Impurity? Besides, did not the same Fathers hold other Errors? See Mr.
Perkins Demonst. of the Problem, page 488. These are his Words, viz.

And whereas some Fathers, viz. Ireneus, Justin, Clement, Tertullian, held that
the Law of Nature had power to save the Gentiles without Christ. And again he
says,

The Fathers have Errors, yea and sometimes gross ones. Does not History tell
us the Fathers used other Rites also, and that in Baptism? See Perkins, p. 549.
The Fathers, says he, used some other Rites and Ceremonies which are now
omitted, as Kissing of the Child, which was baptized, in Cyprian, l. 3. ep. 8.
use of Milk and Honey, use of Milk and Wine, Hierom in Is. c. 55.

It was an use for the Baptizer to blow in the Face of the Baptized; and the
Party baptized used to Exuffiate the Devil, whom he renounced. What Credit is
to be given to such Fathers?

Mr. Owen says, That Infant Baptism was so generally in the Church of God,
that the Pelagians could not deny it, tho they denied Original Sin, against the
which it was a Medicine. And that Bernard, who lived between the Year 1091, and
the Year 1153, declares it was the Practice of the Church in those Ages.

Answ. We deny not, but readily grant, that the Baptism of Infants was in the
Church long before that time: And remarkable it is, that about 1091 or 1100,
Popish Darkness was at its greatest height. And was it any wonder those Fathers
gave Baptism to Infants when it was the Practice of those times before Bernard,
to give Infants the Lord's Supper also, as well as Baptism? Which Mr. Owen
knows well enough, if he has read any thing of History.

2. Bernard, Mr. Owen says, Censured those who opposed Infant Baptism, etc.

1. From whence it appears there were some Christians who opposed
Infant Baptism even in the darkest time of Popery.

2. What Wonder is it to hear that such in those corrupt times, who denied
Infant Baptism, were censured, when we who do deny it now, are so unrighteously
censured by you and your Brethren, notwithstanding such clear Light in these
days is broken forth?

Mr. Owen also endeavors to prove, that the Waldenses were for
Infant Baptism.

And he seems to charge Mr. Tombs and Mr. Danvers for asserting the contrary.

Answ. To which I answer, I see no reason why he should condemn Mr. Tombs or
Mr. Danvers in this matter; for according to some Histories it appears, that
the Ancient Waldenses and Albigenses, as also the Ancient Britains, were for
the Baptizing of Believers: see D. Balthazar Lidius, in his History of the
Church, p. 2. col. 2. out of Renarius, and G. Bildas in his Book called De
Historia Aurelii Ambrosii.

And the Learned Usher, in his Book of the State of the Christian Church, as
Mr. Danvers observes, p. 237. shows, that they desended Believers-Baptism in
opposition to that of Infants: see Moreland, Book 1. c. 4. p. 67. yet no doubt
but some of the Waldenses might be for Infant Baptism. Yet Mr. Owen confesses
that Bernard acknowledges that History does speak of the Waldenses denying
Infant Baptism, tho he would fain have it from what the said Bernard says, to
be a Slander cast upon them by their Enemies the Papists. Let it be how it will
concerning them, know, Noble Britains, that we build not our Faith about
Baptism upon the Practice and Custom of Men, Fathers, General Councils,
Protestant Reformers or Churches; but upon the Word of God.

To conclude with this Argument: From hence we infer, that the practice of the
Church under the Romish Apostasy of Infant Baptism, in every Age, since the
first Centuries unto these Times, is no good Proof for it. What tho Calvis and
Luther, two famous Protestant Reformers, and many other Modern Divines were,
and many Godly and Learned Men are now for this Tradition; Must it be therefore
a Truth? Must our Faith stand in the Wisdom of Men in this matter, or in the
Power of God, and in the Authority of his Sacred Word? Our first Protestant
Reformers were raised up to restore those Grand Fundamentals of Faith, more
than to reform Matters of Discipline, and about this Rite of Infant Baptism and
some other Ceremonies. The Path of the Just is as a shining Light, that shines
more and more to the perfect Day, Prove. 4. 18.

You Hint, that not one questioned the Privilege of Children to Baptism, until
the Adversary came while Men slept, and sowed Tares among the Wheat.

Answ. Sir, you mistake, it was while Men slept that the Enemy first sowed the
evil Seed of Babes-Baptism in the Church. Moreover, the Baptism of Believers,
in opposition to Infant Baptism, I have proved is no part of those Tares the
Adversary has sowed, but it is Seed which Jesus Christ himself sowed, or it is
(I mean) his own holy Institution.

You tell us a Story of one John Smith, a Minister of the Church of England,
who went into Holland, and united with the Church of one Mr. Ainsworth, and in
the end being cast out of the Church, he baptized himself, and the^ rebaptized
others.

Answ. I could tell you of many evil and foul things and practices done by some
Presbyterians, but should I brand the whole Brotherhood from thence? Do you not
show an evil and detracting Tongue, by casting such Odiums upon the whole Body
of gracious Christians, falsely called Anabaptists: For we are not for
Rebaptizing, or Baptizing again such who have been truly and rightly Baptized,
that were the proper Subjects of that holy Ordinance.

2. But may be this may be a false Story too, and wrote in prejudice by such
who loved not the practice of baptizing of Believers, nor the People who so
practice.

For what need had he to baptize himself, were there none called Anabaptists in
Holland nor Germany before that time? it is much we have not the Munster Story
of John of Leydon. I perceive you have malice enough against us, the Lord give
you Repentance if it be his Will.

CHAP. XVIII.
Showing that Infant Baptism is no excellent way or means to plant the
Christian Religion, but a sinful thing; and therefore in opposition to what Mr.
James Owen says, They ought not to be baptized: being an Answer to what he
has wrote in his 15th Chapter, and twelfth and last Argument.

YOU say, Infant Baptism is an excellent means which God has ordained for to
plant and continue the Church of God: Christ thus commanded his Apostles to
gather Churches among the Gentiles, by teaching and baptizing them in the Name
of the Father, etc. Mat. 28. 29.

Answ. I answer: The way it appears that Christ commanded his Apostles to
gather Churches among the Gentiles, is first to teach them, and then baptize
them; you say right whilst you repeat the Text, but God has not commanded to
baptize Infants, and that way to plant his Church.

You add, It is an excellent means for this end, making Children to be
Disciples of Christ; let none marvel at this, because Infants are of the number
of Disciples: Acts 15. 11. Why tempt ye God, to put a yoke on the necks of the
Disciples? Those Disciples were, say you, the Faithful and their Seed.

Answ. This is not true: The Disciples, in the Text you cite, refer only to
Believers among the Gentiles; those false Teachers would have the Brethren be
circumcised, and they were they only that are called Disciples.

These Brethren being Gentiles, were never circumcised; and therefore these
false Teachers taught them so to be, see Acts 15. 1.

2. Sir, I will appeal to your Conscience in this matter, Is not a Disciple one
that is taught or instructed, and can Infants be called Disciples, who are not
capable of being taught?

Mr. Baxter says, Such that are made Disciples by teaching, are the Subjects
of Baptism according to the Commission; and he is in the right.

3. Does the baptizing of Infants make them Disciples? Does Christ say baptize,
and so make them Disciples? Or is it not, make Disciples, and baptize them?
Mathetusate, disciplize, and then it follows, baptize them.

You say, Christ knows how to administer a secret Doctrine to Infants,
according to his promise, Thy Children shall be all taught of the Lord.

Answ. 1. No doubt but Christ is able to do it: But does he in a secret way
administer Instruction to Infants? prove it, and also how you come to know it;
for they must be known Disciples, visible Disciples that are to be baptized.

2. Are they little Infants that Promise refers to, i. e. Thy Children shall be
all taught of God? They are Sion's Children, or such that are born of God that
are under that Promise, not Infants, or our Children as such; for are all
Believers natural Offspring taught of God when Babes, (or adult either?) O
abominable abuse of the holy Text!

Baptism (say you) sets little Children under a particular obligation to be
the Lord's; doubtless they can receive such an obligation now as formerly they
did, Deuteronomy. 29. 11, 12. And it is as certain that this Bond is a great advantage
to make them willing when they come to age, God has presented them by the
Grace of his Covenant, etc.

Answ. 1. It Is you pretend to lay them under an obligation, but not by Christ's
authority, prove he has commanded you so to do.

2. Does Baptism confer Grace? you seem to assert this, for else how has God
by Baptism prevented them? Your sprinkling them with water does not, cannot
prevent them. I affirm therefore it is an obligation of man's devising, for you
cannot prove it is of God's appointment; therefore to refuse to bring them
under such an obligation is no fantastic thing, as you intimate it is. You say
the mark of the Spirit is upon them.

Answ. Baptism is no mark of the Spirit to any but to such who have the Spirit;
and what a Mock-Baptism is it to give the Sign, where appears no demonstration
of the thing thereby signified?

(You say) on the other side, Satan has not such an advantage against those
that are baptized in their Infancy.

Answ. How does it appear that Satan has not such an advantage against your
Children (as he has against ours that were never baptized, as you call
Rantism) I am sure our Children generally are as sober, and helped to escape
Satan's snares as far forth as yours generally are. Will God own or bless an
humane Tradition? The Woman that Luther mentioned, no doubt might think she was
obliged to fear God by that sort of Baptism she had when she was an Infant, yet
God never obliged her to come under that obligation, but may be she was
baptized when a Believer.

However the Papists may argue for their voluntary Vows after the same manner,
viz. it is a great help and an advantage to them to preserve them from sin, and
temptations of the Devil.

Infant Baptism is an excellent means (you say) to plant the true Religion, and
to continue the Church, by giving an advantage for the Ministers of the Gospel
to reason with such when they come to age, far better than they can with those
that are not baptized, that they might call them to remembrance of their
baptismal Vow, etc.

Answ. This is certainly a grand mistake; for instead of its being an advantage
to Ministers to reason with such that were baptized in their Infancy, to
remember their baptismal Vow, and so to believe and turn to God, it is apparent
it may ^inder them; for if those persons when grown up, do call to remembrance
what you Pedobaptists have taught and told them, touching those Blessings and
Privileges they then received, it may rather take them off from seeking after
either Faith or Repentance.

1. For you tell them when their Parents believed, and were saved, they were
made partakers of the same Privilege and Blessing also; if so, what need they
concern themselves about getting personal Faith? you believe and teach them the
Doctrine of final Perseverance; no doubt such who are in a state of Grace, can
never finally fall out of it.

2. The Obligation and Vow that lies upon baptized persons according to the
Scripture, is not that they seek after Regeneration, no, for it necessarily
supposes that they had that before baptized; but it does bind or oblige them
to persevere in Holiness, that as they have been buried in Baptism, as persons
dead to sin, so they should walk in newness of life, Romans 6. 3, 4. Now you
would have your Baptism to oblige your baptized Children to become dead to sin,
they were not it appears dead when buried with Christ in Baptism, but you bury
them alive, (if you baptized them.) To show them they must die, Sir, God never
ordained Baptism to such an end, or to oblige persons thus to do, see Romans 6.
3. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Col. 1. 12, 13.

3. The Church of England says, That the Child which they baptize is thereby
(that is in Baptism) regenerated, and made a Child of God, a Member of Christ,
and an Inheritor of the Kingdom of Heaven. And what you say implies as much;
for it must needs be thus, if when the Parents believe and are regenerated and
saved, the Child partakes of the same privilege, then the Child believed and
was regenerated, and saved also. Now if this be so, what advantage can
Ministers have from the Consideration of Infants Baptism to press Regeneration,
or the Performance of Repentance upon them when they come to age, above what we
have to press these great Duties upon our Children, when grown up that never
were baptized? What need is there to press that on the Consciences of your
Children when they come to age, which they had wrought in them when they were
in their Infancy? No, your Work is rather to press them as Saints and renewed
Persons, to live holy Lives, and improve those Divine Habits which they
received when their Parents believed, or those inspired Habits that were
plauted in their Souls, when in Infancy they were baptized and regenerated.

4. Certainly your Children when they come to age may think that they received
some mighty Privilege in their Infancy, by being in the Covenant of Grace with
their Parents, and so in a State safe enough; for you tell them there is no
final Falling from a State of true Grace. We and you too know that, and declare
that the Covenant of Grace is sure to all the true Seed or Spiritual Seed of
Abraham: of which Seed you declare all your natural Offspring as such are a
part. This being so, it is evident that Ministers have no Advantages; but the
contrary, in pressing the necessity of Repentance and Conversion on your
Children when at age, we have the greater advantage far in preaching to our
Sons and Daughters, who tell them that our Faith did not, cannot profit them,
or save them, no, but that they were born in sin, and were Children of Wrath by
Nature, and so remain till true actual Faith and Regeneration do pass upon
them, or they do believe in Christ.

5. Besides, the Baptismal Vow you brought them under being not by God's
Appointment, what Blessing can you expect from thence? Will God own and bless a
voluntary Vow, or approve of an Humane Tradition?

6. The Papists (as I hinted before) may expect as well, and from as good
Ground and Authority, as great advantage to press Holiness and Chastity upon
those that they bring under their voluntary Vows and Covenants in their
Nunneries and Fryaries.

7. Besides, your Children entered not into that Baptismal-Covenant you talk of
by their own consent; they knew nothing of it, and can find no Authority from
God's Word you had to bring them under it; and therefore what power is that
like to have upon their Consciences? Had you not better bring them under a
solemn Vow to become good, and to repent as soon as they come to age; nay,
bring them under an Oath, or cause them to enter into a solemn Covenant so to
do, and set their Hands unto it? But you will say, you have no Command nor
Warrant from God's Word to do that; no more, say we, have you any Command or
Warrant from the Word of God to bring them under any such Baptismal Vow, ^o
forsake Sin, the Devil, and all his Works, etc. in their Infancy.

Infant Baptism is so effectual to continue the true Religion, and the Increase
of the Church of God at this time, as Circumcision formerly had been: It
pleased God to continue true Religion among the Jews by bringing their Children
under the Bond of the Covenant: He left them not to their own liberty, etc. and
let none take upon them to be wiser than God by leaving Children at this time
to follow their own Fancies, to choose their own Religion, without having God's
Covenant upon them, for Humane Nature is as corruptible at this time as
formercy, etc.

Answ. 1. I answer; Circumcision was God's absolute and positive Command in the
Jewish Church, which was national; but God has not commanded Infants to be
baptized into the Gospel Church which is not National, but Congregational: if
therefore there was the like Authority from God for the one as there was for
the other, we would contend with you no longer.

2. It Is you that would seem wiser than God, whose Wisdom has not led him to
erect his Gospel Church of such Materials, or of such Matter, and in such Form
now, as it was his Wisdom to build the Jewish or Legal Church: Must the fleshly
Seed as such be taken into the Gospel Church by Baptism, because the
Male-Infants were circumcised under the Law? Who tells you so? where is it
written? Will you be wiser than God? Did not John Baptist say, Think not to say
within your selves we have Abraham to our Father? Now the Ax is laid to the
Root of the Tree. Now the case is altered, as if he should say; Now we know no
Man after the Flesh, 2 Cor. 5. 17, 18.

3. Has not God freely left us and our Children to choose to be his Servants,
or to choose our Religion? Are not the Saints to be all Volunteers? Will Christ
accept of Prest-Souldiers into his Service? Or have you any power to force, or
compel your Children to be of what Persuasion in Religion you please? God, it
is true, has no more left Children now than formerly, to follow their own
Fancies; no, God forbid: But he has commanded them to believe and be baptized;
and not to follow the Fancies of their Parents any more than to follow their
own Fancies, nor Ministers who teach them contrary Doctrine to that which the
Word of God does.

4. As to the Corruption of our Nature, it is true that is as bad as ever; but
your Sprinkling your Children in Infancy has no Virtue or Power in it to
change or purge out that Corruption; your Children receive no benefit by that
you call Baptism: Say what you will, I am sure you cannot prove they receive
any profit thereby.

5. I affirm God has not commanded us to bring our Children into the Bond of
the Covenant by Baptism until they believe, and you can never disprove us while
you live from God's Word.

You say, the Lord has blessed the Baptism of Infants to be a Means for the
continuing of the true Religion, and of the Christian Church: From the days of
the Apostles even to this very day, the Lord bestows his particular Blessings
but upon his own Ordinance; he imprinteth not the Seal of Heaven upon earthly
Inventions; none can deny but that there are thousands baptized in their
Infancy that feel in themselves the Virtue of their Baptism.

Answ. 1. I answer; You cannot prove that God has any manner of ways owned or
blessed Infant Baptism: for because God has continued a Seed to serve him in
every Age since the Apostles time, will you attribute that to Infant Baptism,
which is only to be ascribed to the rich and sovereign Grace of God, and Power
of his Spirit?

2. As to the true Church, for many years she was hid, and in the Wilderness
she fled from the face of the Romish Beast and cruel Dragon, Rev. 12. I must
confess Infant Baptism has in part been a means to keep up the name of the
Christian Religion in the Church ever since the Apostasy; and it was contrived
no doubt to make the Church great and large, i. e. to make whole Families,
Parishes, and Nations the Church, this is evident; and if this be the way to
continue and enlarge the Church, the Lord deliver the true Church from such a
Practice and Invention of Men.

I look upon Infant Baptism to be one of the chief Pillars of the Romish
Church, and of all National Churches and Constitutions in the European World;
this is that Christendom that is so cried up, and the way of making and
continuing the pretended Christian-Name; in the Antichristian Church, and
World, all are made Christians in their Infant Baptism: And thus the
Inhabitants of the Earth are cheated, and deluded with a Shadow and empty Name
that signifies nothing, and certain I am, until Christendom (as it is called)
is Unchristianed of this pretended Rite, or Christendom, and the Inhabitants of
the Earth become new Christianed, there will never be a thorough Reformation: I
mean until they see that Christianity, or Christian-Name, which they received
by their Infant Baptism, signifies nothing, but throw it away as an Human
Innovation, and labor after true Regeneration, or a likeness to Christ, and so
believe and are baptized upon the profession of their Faith, according as in
the Apostolical Primitive Church: It Is Infant Baptism that tends to uphold all
National Churches, and deceives poor People who think they were thereby made
Christians.

3. Does it follow, because many Thousands that were baptized (as you call it)
when Infants, were after they come to Age truly converted? That that blessed
work of Grace upon their Hearts was by virtue of their Infant Baptism, or from
any Motive that arose from thence? Or was it not wholly done by the Power of
God's Word preached to them, through the mighty Power and Operations of the
Holy Ghost upon their Souls? God has showed his Mercy, I grant, to such
Christians who were Rantized or Sprinkled, in Infancy, in a gracious manner:
But this is not to be ascribed to his owning and blessing that Invention of
Pedo-Baptism; be sure God will never own as you well say, an Earthly Invention;
and I have clearly proved that Infant Baptism is nothing less or more than an
Earthly or Human Invention, therefore God never blessed that. O how few are
converted or truly regenerated that have in their Infancy been (as you say)
baptized, nay of the Seed of the Faithful! What a Multitude remain ungodly, and
so live and die, notwithstanding their Parents Faith, and their Reception of
their Infant Baptism! The Lord open the Eyes of you Worthy and Noble Britains,
and send true Light among you as to this matter.

Infant Baptism prevents (Mr. Owea says) the shameful Neglect of Baptism: if
Children had been left unbaptized, it would be so difficult to persuade many
good People to receive Baptism, as at this Time it is to persuade them to
receive the Lord's Supper. The Nature of Man is very unwilling to undergo
narrow and spiritual Obligation: We read in the History of the Primitive Church
that several good Men, that turned from Paganism, delayed their Baptism until
their Latter Days.

Constantine being very Aged before he was Baptized, and fallen into a Disease
of which he died.

Theodosius was not baptized until he was fallen sick, as Socrates, p. 5. 6.
And we are not to think (say you) that People would be more ready to receive
Baptism in these Days, than they had been in those that are past.

1 Answ. I Answer; it is a shameful thing indeed to see how many good People do
neglect Christ's Holy Ordinance of Baptism; and to see how difficult it is to
persuade them, though they do truly believe, to be baptized, and so orderly come
to the Lord's Table: But what is the reason of it? is it not because you, and
such as you, have strove to deceive them, and blind their Eyes, by telling them
that Sprinkling or Rantism, is Baptism or Baptizing, and that they were
baptized in their Infancy? they are, alas, too ready to build their Faith
herein upon their Teachers; The Teachers of my People (says the Lord) cause
them to err: And (say they) such a learned Man, such a worthy Doctor and
Minister is for Infant Baptism; Can they be mistaken? Sure, if it were an
Error, they must needs know it.

2. It Is not very hard to persuade our Children, when God converts them, to be
baptized; they readily submit to it; and, until then, they have no more right
to Baptism than they have to the Lord's Supper.

3. Will you to anticipate your Children, in fear they will not be baptized
when they come to Age, contrary to the Word of God, baptize them when in their
Infancy? I must tell you by the same parity of Reason, since some of them you
find are so hard to be persuaded to receive the Lord's Supper, you may (as the
Ancient Fathers did) give them the Lord's Supper in their Infancy also; you
have as much Authority for to do the one as the other.

4. Do you not implicitly on this Occasion grant and confess, that Baptism of
Right belongs to the Adult; but that politically it has been contrived to
baptize Infants, for fear they should not be persuaded to be baptized when they
come to Age? And you are willing to continue the Practice, because it is in
these Days by you and your Brethren rendered to be a very odious thing to be
dipped or baptized when they come to Age and do believe. The Truth is, this
Ordinance calls for great Abasement, and much Self-denial; it is a hard thing to
come under the Baptismal Covenant and Obligation, in Adult Persons, when we are
rendered as bad as Adulterers and Murderers who baptize Men and Women
according to Christ's Commission that are Disciples. And it is hard also when
the baptized Person knows (he being come to Understanding) what he is bound and
obliged to do by his Baptismal Covenant, viz. to mortify the Remainders of Sin,
and to walk in Newness of Life, Rom 6. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Therefore since you
fear they will not freely and voluntarily list themselves under Christ's
Banner, or become his Spiritual Soldiers when they come to Age; you will, and
that unknown to them, force them into these Wars in their Infancy without
Christ's Authority or their Consent, under this specious Pretense, viz. you
fear they will not do it when they are grown up.

5. What you speak concerning those Christians, who in the Primitive Times
delayed their Baptism until the latter part of their Lives, makes directly
against you; for those Christians who were converted from Paganism to
Christianity, did not only delay their Baptism, but many Godly Christian
Parents, I have showed, in the last Chapter, did delay the baptizing of their
Children until they came to Age and did believe: And the Error of that long
Delay arose from that great Mistake that Baptism washed away Sin; therefore
some delayed Baptism until such time they thought they were ready to go out of
the World.

6. But what of this? Because some have erred, in staying too long before they
were baptized, Will you make too great haste, and bring in little Babes to be
baptized, without any Ground or Authority from the Word of God? So much shall
suffice to your Twelfth and Last Argument.

Now, Sir, we have heard all your Proofs for the baptizing of Infants; you
have, it seems, impannell'd for your Jury, to Sit, Hear and Determine this
Grand Cause, Just Twelve; and if they could speak, they would (being all
agreed, the Cause being also fully opened) give their Verdict on our Side, and
against your Infant Baptism; but let them rather be so many Witnesses of your
summoning the Statute Book, and great Charter of the Church, viz. God's Word,
having been opened,
and the Matter cleared. We will appeal now to our worthy Reader, particularly
to the Ancient and Noble Britains, to make Judgment for themselves: For in
matters of Faith, and Things that concern our Souls, every Christian is to judge
for himself.

Impartial Reader, weigh well the matter: Consider this, we must all be judged
by the Word of God: If you can find you are commanded to baptize your Children
by Jesus Christ in the New Testament, or can find any Precept or Precedent for
it, you may do it: Or if what Mr. Owen has said has convinced you, that
Baptism does not belong to Believers, by good Authority he has showed from the
Holy Scriptures, but that Infants are the only Subjects thereof; and that
Baptism is nor dipping or burying the Body in Water, but only sprinkling or
pouring a few Drops of Water on the Person's Face; then continue in your
former Practice till God shall open your Eyes. But if you are otherwise
persuaded, that Mr. Owen is in an Error, then I exhort you that believe in
Christ, to arise and be baptized: But lest Mr. Owen should say it is too soon
for you to make Judgment yet, pray stay till we have heard his Answers to our
Objections, and also all what he has further to say.

CHAP. XIX.
Containing an Answer to Mr. James Owen's 16th Chapter, proving that our
Objections against Infant Baptism are very weighty, and his Answers to them
very impertinent and defective.

MR. Owen begins with his Sixteenth Chapter after this manner, viz.

Thus have we proved by the Scripture (says he) and by several Scriptural
Arguments, that the Children of the Faithful ought to be baptized: if we look
upon this Truth in the Light of the Scriptures Above, the Objections of
themselves will vanish away; yet for the sake of the Weak, I shall lay down the
strongest of them.

1. Object. There is neither a Command nor Example in the Scripture for the
baptizing of Infants.

To this Mr. Owen answers, viz.

There is not one particular Command, totidem verbis, naming Infant Baptism,
and that is not necessary; but there is an Universal Command to baptize all
Nations, of which Children are a great part.

If there is a Command for the baptizing of the Parents, then there is a
Command for the baptizing of Infants; for the Children are included in the
Parents, even as Parts of them, being Partakers of the Privileges of good
Parents, and of the Judgments of the wicked Parents.

1. Answ. I answer, Whether you have or have not proved, by the Holy Scriptures
and Arguments, that Infants ought to be baptized, is now upon a fair Trial
committed to the Judgment of the Impartial Reader.

2. We do not require you to bring a Command, in totidem verbis, or in so many
Words, Let Infants be baptized: But your Inferences are not good; for, as you
have no Precept, no Command, or any Precedent to baptize them, so you can draw
no fair and good Consequences for it from any Text of Scripture.

You bring the Words of the Great Commission, Matthew. 28. 19, 20. Go baptize all
Nations. Sir, Why dare you leave out part of the Words? Is it not Go therefore,
teach all Nations, baptizing them, etc.? We have showed in our Answer to you
already, that the Commission requires none to be baptized but such who are
first taught or made Disciples; which Disciples St. Mark calls Believers, He
that believes and is baptized, Mark 16. 16. They are, Reader, the Words of the
same Commission, tho differently expressed by these two Great Evangelists, and
hold forth the same thing, viz. That the Gospel is to be preached in all
Nations, or to all the World, and that those that are discipled by preaching,
or that do believe, ought to be baptized, and none else.

3. Whereas you say that Children are a great part of the Nations, and may
therefore be baptized; this is a fallacious or deceitful Consequence: For may
not I (as before) argue thus? Unbelievers, i. e. Turks, Infidels, Pagans and
their Children, are a great part of all Nations, therefore may be baptized.
Sir, I appeal to your Conscience, Whether this Inference is not as good and
true, from the Premises, as yours.

3. But you ask whether there is a command for the baptizing of Parents, no
doubt of this, we and you agree, that there is a command to baptize Parents,
that believe in Christ, and to baptize Children too that believe in Christ;;
but say you then, there is a command to baptize Infants, because they are
included in the Parents, even as parts of them; now this is utterly false, and
also very ridiculous, it is for any Man to assert it.

1. For if this was so, it follows, whatsoever God commands the Parent, he
commands the Child, then when God commanded Abraham to offer up, or slay his
Son, he commanded the Son to slay himself; it would also follow, That

2. When God commands the believing Parent to partake of the Lord's Supper, he
also commands all his Children to partake of the Lord's Supper, because they
are all included in their Parents.

3. If Children are thus a part of their Parents, then certainly, if the
Parents go to Heaven, all their Children must go to Heaven likewise; for the
whole of Believers shall be saved, and not a part of them only.

4. Also if the Children are included in their Parents, and are a part of them;
why may not the Parents Baptism serve for the Child, and then it would also
follow, that no Man is a complete and perfect Man without his Children; was
ever such Stuff by a Man of Parts and Learning, published to the World?

5. Sir, will your Feeding, or eating your Food, feed your Children; besure, as
much as your believing and being baptized will feed the Souls of your Children.

6. Moreover, why do you say the Judgments of wicked Parents fall on their
Children, did not God say that Proverb should be used no more in Israel, but
the Soul that Sins shall die: If Children partake of the punishment of their
Parents, it is when they are alike wicked, and walk in the same steps their
ungodly Parents walked in. But you proceed and say, that there is no particular
command for the baptizing of Women.

Answ. Male and Female are all one in Christ Jesus, and Women are called
Disciples, and so are not Infants.

2. We have plain presidents, that Women were baptized, which is all one with a
Command, Acts 8. 12. When they believed Philip Preaching the things concerning
the Kingdom of God, and Name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized both Men and
Women; And also that Lyd a was baptized, Acts 16. Do but show us one like
president where any Infant was baptized, and we will say no more.

You say we have not a particular Command for keeping the first day of the Week
as an Holy Sabbath to the Lord.

Answ. We have a command to keep the Seventh part of time, as a Sabbath to the
Lord, Exodus 20. and plain presidents in the New Testament, That on the first
day the Saints did meet to Worship God, Acts 20. 7. 1 Cor. 16. 1. The first day
of the Week, as the Christian Sabbath was also confirmed by the first
miraculous appearance of Christ after his Ascension into Heaven, which was the
day of Pentecost, Acts 2. 1, 2. give like proofs for your Infant Baptism.

You would have us to show what Scripture we have for re-baptizing.

Answ. I shall answer, that by and by, when I come to your next Chapter, where
we have it again, we do not own it Lawful to baptize them Again, who have been
once rightly baptized, but Rantism is not Baptism, nor are Infants the true
Subjects of it.

You say you have showed already, That there are many examples in the Scripture
for Infant Baptism, which are plain unto them that understand the agreement,
and the consequences of Scripture.

Answ. I answer, let the Reader judge in this case, now we have examined all
those Texts you draw your examples from, whether your consequences are clear
and plain, or not.

Obj. The Scripture calls upon some to believe before they are baptized, He
that believes and is Baptized, shall be saved, Mark 16. 16. and according to
that Rule the Apostles did not baptize any until they believed, Acts 2. 38.
This is the Second Objection Mr. Owen brings, against what he has wrote, take
his Answer, viz.

(Says he) when the Scriptures says that he that believes and is baptized.

1. It mentions Adult Persons, viz. the unbelieving, Gentiles unto whom
Christ sent his Disciples, Mark 16.

15. Mat. 28. 19. and not the Children of the Faithful; Christ sending them
into all the World to preach the Gospel into Pagan Nations, and saying, He that
believes and is Baptized, shall be saved, Mark 16. 15, 16. shows that neither
Baptism nor Salvation belongs unto them, until they believe in the Lord
Jesus, if we were to preach unto such, we should baptize none until they would
believe. But what is this to the Seed of the Faithful, of whom Christ
mentions not.

1. Answ. I answer, Reader observe, that here Mr. Omen has given away his
cause for ever, for he says Christ speaks not of the Children of the Faithful,
but of the Adult: Now consider, that these two Texts which he here Quotes, viz.
Mat. 28. 19, 20. Mark 16. 15, 16. does contain the great and only Commission
and Warranty given by the Lord Jesus, the only Lawgiver about Baptizing; and
if Infants are not mentioned nor intended here, there is no Warrant at all to
Baptize them; for if by virtue of the great Commission, all persons must first
believe before they are baptized, farewell for ever to Infant Baptism.

2. The Objection well says, That according to this Rule or Commission, the
Apostles did not baptize any until they believed which is true and he cannot
refute it.

3. Consider that the Commission, Mat. 28. 19, 20. Mark 16. 15, 16. did not
only authorize the Apostles to go and make Disciples among the Gentile or Pagan
World, but also among the Jews, that were the Seed of Abraham, nay they were
commanded first to begin (or open their Commission) to preach to them at
Jerusalem, moreover the words of this Commission is all the Commission and
Warrant, the Disciples and Ministers of the Gospel have to administer Baptism
to all the Christian Nations to the end of the World. There are not two
Commissions given by Christ about baptizing, one to go to the Pagan or Gentile
World, and another to be believing Christian World, or to believers and their
Seed. Now there is but one Commission, and only Rule we have to baptize,
therefore Mr. Baxter says well, i. e. Christ in his Commission directs his
Apostles to make Disciples, and then baptize them, promising, that he that
believes and is Baptized, shall be saved, Baxt. Confirm. p. 27. And in another
place, he says, speaking of this only Warrant or Commission of Baptizing, if
we have it not here, where have we it. Shall any one think Christ's Commission
short and defective.

4. Mr. Owen says, if we were to preach unto such that is to unbelievers or
Heathens, we should baptize none until they believed. Now pray consider that
this is his Commission to baptize, if he be a true Minister of Christ, let him
preach to whom he will, or come where he will, he must do all things according
to this Commission, as it is here given, neither baptize Young nor Old, neither
Jew nor Gentile, Parent nor Child, until they believe, or profess their Faith
in Jesus Christ; if he does, he Violates and acts directly contrary to his only
Commission, and therefore if he does, he sins, Should any Commissioner of an
Earthly King, act contrary to the very express words, and purport of his
Commission, he certainly would be condemned, as a false and unfaithful Servant,
and be turned out of his Masters Service. Mr. Owen says, That the Seed of the
faithful, Christ mentions not, that is in his great Commission, Mat. 28. 19,
20. Mark 16. 15, 16. therefore such he must not Baptize, unless he has from
Christ received a new, or any other Commission that does authorize him so to do.

5. And observable it is to see how Mr. Owen contradicts himself here, in
respect of what he said before, when he mentioned the same Texts and Commission
of Christ, he told us that Children are part of the Nations that Christ
commanded to be Baptized, but now he says, The Seed of the Faithful, Christ
mentions not, and besure now, at this turn he speaks the Truth: and if none
of the Seed of the Faithful ought to be Baptized by virtue of Christ's
Commission, but such only of them that do believe, then no Infant; for Teaching
is making of Disciples, so that they are to be taught so as to believe before
they are to be Baptized, and that in all Nations, whether Heathens or
Christians, and that also to the end of the World, teaching them to observe all
things whatsoever I have commanded you, and lo I am with you all ways to the
end of the Word. Mat. 28. 20.

It is certain, says Mr. Owen, that this Scripture mentions not of Children,
if it does they must needs be damned, for want of Faith which cannot be
actually in them.

Ans. I answer, it is very true, that Christ in his Commission neither means
nor mentions Infants; he has given no Commission to baptize Infants, because
the words of the Commission runs to such who are capable to be taught, to be
made Disciples by Teaching and so to Believe, which Infants Mr. Owen says,
cannot actually do.

But he adds, the Apostle says in 2 These. 3. 10. says he, if any would not
work, neither should he eat would not that Father be unnatural, who would take
an occasion from this Scripture to starve his little Children, because they
cannot work; so when Christ says, he that believes and is baptized; it does
not follow, that none ought to be baptized until they believe.

Answer. 1. I answer, this seems strange, when Christ in the Affirmative
declares, who he would have baptized; does it not follow that in the Negative,
none else ought to be baptized. In other cases you would not argue thus, as for
Example, when God commanded Abraham to Circumcise his Male Infants, does he not
implicitly forbid the Circumcising of his Female Children, and when he
commanded him to Circumcise his Male Infants on the eighth day, does he not
implictly forbid him to circumcise them on the seventh or ninth day, and when
Paul says, let a Man examine himself, and so let him eat, does he not forbid
Infants to partake thereof, and all to come to the Lord's Supper, that do not
so examine themselves, or who do not discern the Lord's Body. Moreover,

2. Are not all those Persons that a testator in his last Will and Testament
leaves out, or expresses not, excluded from having any Legacy in the said
Will; now the great Commission, Mat. 28. Mark 16. is also Christ's last Will and
Testament, about the right of Baptism, viz. who are right subjects, and they
are expressed by their qualifications, viz. Disciples, or Persons Taught, or
such that believe, are not therefore all unbelievers, all Pagans, and ungodly
persons, and ignorant Babes, that are not capable to believe, excluded from
Baptism, according to Christ last Will and Testament; it signifies nothing to
find Infants right to Circumcision under the Law, nor other the external
privileges of the Seed of the Faithful then, for that was a Legacy given in
the Old Will and Testament, which is abolished by Christ, making his New and
last Will and Testament; in which the Infant Seed of Believers, are left out as
touching any right they have now in Gospel times to be Members of the Gospel
Church or to Bapt^sm, etc.

3. As to that Text you mention, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 10. If (...) will no^ work,
neither let him eat. I answer, Mr. Bur^ in that Treatise of his for Infant
Baptism, which I answered, and he has made no reply since, brings in the very
same Text upon the like account; take his words, and my answer. Must Children
be starved because they cannot work, thus (says he) Children lie under a
Natural inc^pacity of professing actual Faith, therefore the first Text (that
is Mark 16. 16.) does not concern them any more then the latter, 2 Thessalonians. 3.
10. now take our answer, viz.

You have given away, say we, your Cause for ever, for if this Text, Mark 16.
16. does no more concern Infants then that in 2 Thessalonians. 3. 10. then be sure they
have nothing to do with Baptism.

You and Mr. Burkitt say, that in Mark 16. 16. the Adult only, are intended, we
say so too, whether then shall we go for your Infant Baptism, we can prove from
many Texts, that Infants ought to Eat though they cannot Work; but how will you
prove that Infants ought to be Baptized by any other Scripture, if it be not in
the Commission, though they do not believe, or have actual Faith. Mr. Burki^
says, Children have Mortal Bodies, therefore they must be Fed at their Parents
Table, and they have Immortal Souls, and from ^hence he argues they ought to be
Baptized, to which I answered: As Infants have mortal Bodies, and must
therefore be Fed at their Parents Table, though they cannot Work, so because they
have Immortal Souls (he might as well have said) they ought to be Fed at the
Lord's Table though they cannot believe, nor discern the Lord's Body. The Apostle
says, Let a Man examine himself, and so let him eat, etc. but this say I, is
spoken of the Adult; but Infants, who are capable to receive Spiritual Benefits
by Christ's Death, must have the Ordinance that figureth it out, namely the
Lords Supper. There is the same ground and reason therefore to conclude Infants
are included, in 1 Cor. 11. 22, 23. about receiving the Lord's Supper, as there
is to conclude, that they are included, in Matthew. 21. 19. Mark 16. 15, 16. In
the Commission to Baptize, the one says, Let a Man examine himself, the other
says, He that Believes, etc.

You say you have proved, That the Apostles Baptized not only the Adult, when
they believed, but the Children of such also.

Answ. I have I hope to the satisfaction of all that are willing to be informed
disproved what you say, and proved that the Apostles Baptized no one Infant by
far better Arguments than you have brought to prove they did.

Obj. Infants do not understand what is done, and therefore what profits
Baptism unto them; this Objection; Mr. Owen answers as follows.

This Objection, says he, is not only against Baptism, but against
Circumcision also; yet the Ordinance was profitable unto them. A little Child
may receive a great gift, etc.

1. Answ. I answer Circumcision was God's Command, Infants had aright to it,
but God has not Commanded Infants to be Baptized, God's Ordinance shall have
that effect on its proper subject, which he designed by it, no doubt had it
been the Will of Christ to have given Command to Baptize Infants, but it should
some ways or another been profitable to them; but since he has not Commanded
it, it can no way profit them.

2. A little Child may receive a great Gift no doubt, but they must not have
that given to them, that God never appointed for them. When God gave out the
Commission of Circumcision, he Commanded Abraham as an Adult Person to be
Circumcised; and also at the same time Commanded him to Circumcise his Male
Children; that was by a positive Law, a gift given to all the Male Children of
Abraham, and to all the Male Children by Isaac in their Generation, whether
their Parents were godly or wicked; but Baptism in Christ's Commission, is only
given to Believers and to all that Believe, and therefore no Gift given to
Infants, we must not be Wiser then God, nor add to his word.

4. Obj. Mr. Owen adds another Objection against his Doctrine, viz. Christ was
about Thirty years of Age when he was Baptized, Luke 3. 23.

1. His answer is, though he was not Baptized until he was Thirty years of Age,
yet he was Circumcised when he was eight days Old, Luke 2. 21.

2. He delayed not his Baptism, because not fit to receive it, for he was
perfectly Holy from the Womb, and therefore if we are bound to imitate his
example in this thing, none of those that do believe ought to be Baptized,
until they be Thirty years of Age, but the Antipedobaptists walk not according
to this Rule, and therefore they do think this example binds them not.

Answ. I answer, no doubt, if any Babe was a fit Subject of Baptism, it was the
Holy Child Jesus, if purity and inherent Holiness, gave to the Subjects thereof
the proper right, but it is not Holiness primarily and simply considered in it
self, that gives any person a right to Baptism, but the mere positive Command
of God, and the positive Command of God, only runs to such Persons that
believe, and therefore not to Infants, though we grant the positive Command of
Circumcision, required Male Infants to be Circumcised under the Law, which Law
Christ came to fulfill, and obey in every thing, therefore Christ when an Infant
was Circumcised according to the Tenor of the Law, and Order thereof; and he
was Baptized also when an Adult Person, according to the Tenor and Rule of the
Gospel: No doubt had it been the mind and will of God, That Infants should have
been Baptized, Jesus Christ as an example to others would have been Baptized in
his Infancy.

2. But say you, if we are to imitate our Savior in his Baptism, we must not
be baptized until we are Thirty years of age.

Answer, This is an absurd and an idle Dream, because the Holy Ghost by
mentioning the time of Christ's Age when he was Baptized, and that he was about
Thirty years Old, holds forth no doubt not less then this, That all persons
ought to come to a mature age, or to ripeness of understanding, before, they be
Baptized, for the Jews looked upon that Age to be a perfect and mature age. The
Priests did not till about that Age enter into the exercise of their Office;
and therefore in opposition to what you say the Antipaedobaptists do walk
according to Christ's Rule, i.e. the example of Christ in the point and time of
Baptism, viz. That all persons must delay their Baptism, until they come to
such ripeness of Age, as to be grown up to maturity so as to understand what
baptism signifies, and to be capable to believe in Jesus Christ, which some
arrive unto sooner then others; for some have the understanding of Men when
very Young, may be, have more wisdom at Twelve years of Age, then some others
have at Thirty, but they that arrive not to understanding by the Thirtieth year
of their Age certainly never will attain to the wisdom and knowledge of Men of
understanding.

2. Besides it is evident, that our Savior did not enter upon his Ministry
until he was baptized, to show that no Gospel Minister should undertake to
preach the Gospel, or become a pastor of a Church, that is, an unbaptized
Person; and the Holy Ghost mentioning the Age of our Savior when he was
baptized, does no doubt show us, that the proper Subjects of Baptism, are only
adult Persons, so far it is our rule as an Example.

But say you, many Actions of Christ are for our instruction, which are not to
be imitated, and such was his Baptism, when he was thirty Years of Age, he
being willing to bear Witness to the Ministry of John, who began to baptize a
little before, as his Example of taking the Ministry upon him, when he was
thirty years of Age, and not before, binds not all others to follow him, so
is his Example of being baptized in the same Year, no rule to all others.

Ans. I answer, though we grant that many Actions of Christ are for our
instruction, which are not to be imitated by us, yet we say in contradiction to
you, in this we are so far to imitate him, as not to admit any to Baptism,
until they come to a competent degree of understanding; for had not Christ
designed so far as to leave us an Example in this matter, no doubt, his Age
when baptized, had not been left upon Record; nay, and had Infants been the
proper subjects of Gospel Baptism, we may be sure Christ (as I said before) had
been Baptized as well as he was Circumcised, when an Infant; but he being God
as well as Man, foreseeing how this Ordinance in after times would be
corrupted, and the proper subjects thereof changed, even from Believers, or
adult Persons to Infants, thought it necessary no doubt to leave upon record
the very time of his Age, when baptized, to all Generations, to put an end to
this Controversy.

For this is said, by the pedobaptists, viz. in the first age of the Church, or
when baptism was first given forth Believers were Baptized, but where do you
find, say they, that any Believer in all the New Testament that was baptized,
did delay to Baptize his or her Child, until they come to a ripe Age.

We answer, That we do find such an Instance in respect of our Saviors
Baptism, for all must confess, that the Blessed Virgin, or Mother of Jesus, and
Joseph his supposed Father, were both eminent Believers, and Baptized too,
(none doubt of that) and yet they delayed or referred the Baptizing of the Holy
Jesus until he became an Adult Person.

Obj. But if any should Object that John, who was the firsh that received a
Commission to Baptize, was but a little Older then our Savior; and therefore
was not capable to Baptize Jesus Christ when he was a Babe.

I answer, though this be true, yet God being a free Agent, and not tied to one
Man more than to another, could not he have given Commission to any other
person to have Baptized the Blessed Child Jesus, or have sent John sooner into
the World; what is his pleasure to have done, he wanted not Instruments or
Ministers to do; therefore it follows plainly it was not his Pleasure or Will,
that Christ should be Baptized, when an Infant; to convince us that Infants are
not the proper Subjects of Gospel Baptism.

4. This shows also in opposition to what Mr. Owen said before that Baptism by
Gods Command, was not in the Jewish Church before John received Commission from
Heaven to Baptize.

5. As to that you speak, of Christ's not entering upon his Ministry till Thirty
years of Age, that that is no example for others. I answer that he was oblidged
to fulfill both the Precepts of the Law and the Gospel; and therefore in
compliance to the Law, (that the Jews might not Quarrel with him) he entered not
on his Ministry until that time of his Age, which the Priests and Ministers
under the Law did, for he was made under the Law, and was to be subject to all
the Laws and precepts thereof; and in that he is, it is true, no example to
Gospel Ministers, but Baptism being a pure Gospel precept, in that he was by us
to be Imitated so far, as we ought not to be Baptized, until we become Adult
Persons, and do believe in him, he has left us an Example how we should follow
his steps.

Mr. Owen brings in his Fifth Objection against his Doctrine and practice of
Infant Baptism, viz. If Infant Baptism belongs to Infants, why do not you give
them the Lords Supper.

Take his answer, Because, says he, the Apostle Commands those that receive
the Lords Supper to examine themselves, and to discern the Body of the Lord,
which little Children cannot do.

Answ. I answer: And as the Apostle Commands all that receive the Lords Supper
to examine themselves, and to discern the Lords Body, so likewise John Baptist,
the Lord Jesus and his Apostles too, Commanded all that received baptism to
believe and repent, and to bring forth Fruits meet for Repentance, which little
Babes cannot do. Repent and be Baptized every one of you, Acts 2. 37. If thou
believe with all thy Heart thou may, Acts 8. 37. that is, be baptized.

2. You say, Baptism is the Sacrament of our Regeneration, and of our Admission
into the Church of God; the Lord's Supper is a Sacrament of our Growth and
Spiritual Food.

1. I answer, this quite overthrows your Infant Baptism, unless you
Presbyterians do believe as the Church of England does, or at leastwise, what
they affirm, viz. that Baptism does regenerate the Child, is Baptism an
Ordinance or Sacrament of Regeneration, i. e. to regenerate Persons, or to hold
forth that regeneration, or the New Birth is wrought in such that are baptized,
why then do you baptize Infants, who are not the Subjects of Regeneration? Can
they die to Sin, and are they raised up out of the Water new Born Creatures, to
walk in newness of Life.

2. If your Infants are new born, or born again by Baptism, no doubt the Food
of the new Creature, viz. the Lord's Supper ought to be given to them. The
first Sacrament holds forth, it is clear, a Person born again, or a Babe of
Grace; the other is Food, fit and proper for that New born or Regenerated
Person, that he may grow thereby, therefore they belong both to one and the
same Subjects, and neither of them it appears from hence do belong to Infants,
but

3. Are all the Infants that you baptize, let in as Members of your Church, are
they absolutely Members of your Congregations, as having the Ordinance of
Admission, is the Door of God's House opened to them? How can you then (say I)
deny them the privilege of true and lawful Members, shall your little Members,
your Lambs in Christ's Fold being New Born be starved, what shall the
regenerated Babe not be fed with the Food of their Fathers House?

4. But if thus, what number of Members have you in your Churches, that have
not their Names in your Church-book, nor perhaps, never looked after when grown
up, nor cast out, though profane and Wicked? for do you cast out or exclude
all such Children you baptized, when grown up, if not, what polluted Churches
are yours. Infant Baptism was doubtless contrived to increase National
Churches, or to make national Churches, and it does tend indeed, to increase
and continue that Christian Religion that is in Name only, and not in Power;
you have, its true in England, by mere necessity lost your National
Constitution, and are become Congregational, whether you will or no, but Infant
Baptism will not accord with a congregation Constitution, nor do such Churches
so constituted that are for Infant Baptism, own their Babes to be proper and
true Members of their Churches so far as I can learn, what then signifies your
Sacrament of Admission, if they are not in truth admitted and owned as Members,
and allowed the Food and Privileges of such.

3. You say it was formerly, though Circumcision belonged to Infants, yet the
Paschal Lamb belonged not but to the Adult.

Answ. I answer, this is denied, prove if you can, that the little Children in
the Jewish Church were not admitted to eat of the Passover, it is positively
said, Exodus 12. 34. That the whole House were to eat thereof, even a Lamb for
an House, and I find a great Writer asserting the same thing, that little
Children did eat thereof, they were to bring their Children once or twice a
Year before the Lord; and I see no ground you have to say that none but Adult
Persons did eat thereof.

2. But let that be as it will, that which was or might be the right of Jewish
Church Members or not their right, is no rule for us in the Gospel Church, as I
have sufficiently proved; and besure all baptized Persons who are regular
Members of a Gospel Church, cannot be denied the Lord's Supper without Sin. So
much to your Answers to our Objections, you might might have brought twice as
many more.

CHAP. XX.
In Answer to Mr. James Owen's 17 Chapter, wherein the Antipedo Baptists are
cleared of those foul Charges he has cast upon them; and it is proved, that to
deny Infant Baptism is no Sin, nor are those guilty of Murder nor Adultery
that baptize or dip Men and Women in Water, in the Name of the Father, Son, and
Holy Spirit; (as Mr. Owen charges them) but contrariwise it is proved, that to
Baptize or Rantize Infants, is an unlawful Practice and very Sinful.

YOU say, you shall demonstrate in this Chapter, how great the Sin is of those
that are tempted to deny the Baptism which they receive in their Infancy, and
that suffer themselves to be baptized again; there are many People that know
not the nature of their first Baptism, and are perverted to renounce it,
thinking that they do please God in so doing, but they fall into Temptation and
the Snares of the Devil, who is the Author of Errors and Father of falsehood.

Answ. I hope by this time, the Reader may discern how great an error it is to
call Rantism or Sprinkling Baptizing, and that Infant Baptism is also an error,
being a mere human innovation, this I have proved, and theresore it is so far
from being a Sin to disown it and cast it away, that it is every good
Christians Duty so to do, that would in all things walk by the rule of God's
Word. And for Mr. Owen to charge our People after this manner, as if we were
perverted and ensnared by the Devil, in denying our Infants Baptism, is just as
the Papists used to charge the Protestants that disowned the human Traditions,
and the vain Fopperies of their rotten Church, and thundered out their Bulls
against them.

1 You say they are guilty of great Sin, insomuch that they neglect to make a
right use of their first Baptism, Infant Baptism puts them under continual
Vow to the Lord, and they are bound to renew their Vows, to take the Lord to be
a God unto them, as soon as they come to age.

Answ. It Is true, you brought them under an Obligation or a Vow, to take the
Lord to be their God in their Infancy, but why did you do it, unless you had
any Warrant or Authority from God; for to do such a thing in his Name without
his Authority, is Sinful.

2. You might better have stayed till they came to Age of understanding, and if
you would bring them under a Vow, have caused them then to have entered into a
Covenant to take the Lord to be their God, and no doubt your Children might
more dread to break such a Vow they consented to and freely made, then a
Covenant or Vow you caused them to enter into in their Infancy, to which they
never consented; but perhaps you will say, you have no Ground nor Authority
from Gods word to do that, as much every way as you have in Infancy to baptize
them, which we say is no Baptism at all, much less Christ's true Baptism,
therefore God thereby obliged them not to do what you speak, but it is their
Duty when grown up, if God gives them Faith to cast it away as an humane
Tradition, and to enter into God's Holy Baptismal Covenant as Believers,
according to Christ's great Commission.

3. Christ's Baptism, or the Baptism of Believers was not ordained to oblige
Persons who are in their natural State (whether young or old) to be come the
Lord, or to be regenerated, or to die to Sin, etc. but as being his, or
regenerated before baptized, their baptismal Covenant obliges them to walk as
the Lord's People in newness of Life; so that it appears, that Infants
baptismal Covenant, is directly repugnant in the end and design of Christ's
true Baptismal Covenant, (as I have more fully e^ence^ in the Epistle to this
Book, Dedicated to all Godly Pedo-Baptists) to which I refer the Reader.

You say you see the greatest part of Children when they come to Age, be either
ignorant, or inconsiderate of their Baptismal Vows, etc. for which you blame
Ministers and Householders in not Catechizing and Teaching them, and thus say
you, Satan tempts them to cast the Blame upon their Baptism, etc.

Ans. You may see what a vain thing an human invention is, what impression can
that make on the Conscience of Persons when Grown up, that God never Commanded
nor promised to bless.

2. But take heed you do not father that upon the Devil which is done by Jesus
Christ, it is not Satan that tempts us to cast a slight on Infant Baptism, or
makes us loo^ upon it as an insignificant thing, but it is through Christ's
gracious influences, by opening our Eyes to see it is a mere humane rite, and
invention of Man's own Brain, therefore we threw it away, and entered into a
new and true Baptismal Covenant, and many others also do day by day.

You (say you) appeal to the Consciences of those that are rebaptized, is not
the thing thus? Let their Consciences dictate and reprove them, say you, of
this sinful Carelessness, that they never made a right use of their first
Baptism, if they had received profit from the first, they would not have at all
renounced it.

Ans. 1. I will take this appeal to be made to me, though never rebaptized,
even to my Conscience; and I do solemnly declare, I doubt not but all my
Brethren can speak the same thing, that the reason why we cast off our Infant
Baptism or rather Rantism, was because we were fully convinced it was no
Ordinance of Christ, and therefore knew it could be of no (...) to us.

2 You mistake it seems, as if you dreamed, that the most of those that cast
off Infant Baptism were People of (...), and also seem to intimate, as if such
of your People when grown up that are pious, who do choose the Lord to be their
God, do it by virtue of their Baptismal Vow; no no, that had no such effect
upon them, it is only the Grace of God in them, it is by virtue of his Spirit,
and evident it is, that the persons generally that first doubt about the truth
of Infant Baptism, are persons of Religion and Piety therefore it is not for
want of Religion or Zeal for God, they throw away Infant Baptism, but it is
from their Religion and Love to God, and Zeal to his Name, that so they may not
be guilty of adding to his Word, or taking that for Christ's true Baptism,
which is none of it. Is it a Sin to cast off Men's inventions?

2. They are guilty; you say, of great Sin, by profaning the Ordinance of
Christ; is it a small thing to profane Sacred Things, although some do so
through ignorance, Baptism is a sacred thing which ought to be received but
once, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism; Ephesians. 4. 4. therefore those that renew
their Baptism, take, the name of God in Vain, etc.

Answ. I answer, is it not a great Sin to change the Holy Ordinance of Christ
from Baptism to Rantism; or in English, from dipping the whole Body in Water,
to the sprinkling a little Water on the Face, and to change the true Subject
from a Believer to an Infant; is not this to profane a most holy Ordinance and
a sacred Thing? and it is no doubt a great Evil, though done ignorantly, because
you sprinkle them into the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, without his
Authority, God never commanded it at your Hands; is not this to profane his
most Holy and Sacred Name, and since it appears there is but one Baptism in
Water; and you cannot deny, but do own Believers Baptism was at first
instituted and appointed of Christ; it plainly then follows, that Infant
Baptism is none of Christ's Institution, it is no Baptism of Christ, it is not
that one Baptism he appointed and ordained, we own but one Baptism, and that is
the Baptism of Believers; if you have got another, look you to that, for there
is but one Lord, one Faith, and one Baptism, Ephesians. 4. 4.

3. They are (you say) guilty of unbelief, unless God tells them in totidem
verbis, baptize your Children, they will believe not, Faith looks upon every
beck of the Lord, the least appearance of his Will, the Woman which had the
bloody Issue believed, if she could but touch the Garment of the Lord Jesus,
she should be whole, though she had neither a Promise, nor Command, nor a
particular Example provoking her in so doing, etc.

Ans. I answer, will you charge us with unbelief, because we cannot believe
that to be a Truth, for which we have neither Command nor Example, nor for
which there can be no good Consequence nor Inference drawn from any Text of
Scripture, nor in doing of which we have no promise, nor are they which do it
under any threatening in all the book of God? this seems very strange, must we
believe Infant Baptism, because you and others say it is a Truth, by the same
argument we must or may believe all Popish Rites, divised Fables and
Ceremonies, what innovations may not your Faith take hold of according to what
you speak here, is there no difference in believing in Christ in things
respecting matters of Faith, which directly lie under his Promise, and
believing things which are matter of Practice, which depends wholly upon
Christ's mere positive Command? we must have some Ground or Foundation from
God's Word to believe it is a Truth, which you blame us for not believing; and
we declare that we see we have no Ground, no Foundation to build our Faith nor
Practice upon, in the case of Infant Baptism, and are we guilty of unbelief
from hence, what Divinity is this you preach and publish to the World, you
would have us act upon an implicit Faith, or believe as the Church believes,
do you not talk like a Son of the Church of Rome?

2. Find the Woman that had the Issue of Blood no Command no Example, nor no
Promise to believe Christ would ^er? Do you believe what you seem to affirm did
the never see nor hear of any Person that Christ had cured, sure you cannot
imagine any such thing; the could not have believed unless she had some good
Ground, did she not know the power of Christ was great, if we had but heard of
one Infant baptized by Christ or his Apostles upon the Faith of their Parents,
as we find some Children were healed by the Faith of their Parents, we should
not be such unbelievers as we now are about Infant Baptism.

You say the Woman of Canaan comes boldly with her Child unto Christ for to
receive benefit, though she was not invisible Covenant with God, and Christ
commended her Faith, and received her Daughter, her Faith breaks through all
impediments, Mar. 15. 22. 28. Her Faith was great, who against Hope believed in
Hope; is not thy unbelief great, who destroyest the foundation of Hope touching
thy Children. O question not the promise of God through unbelief, but be strong
in Faith giving Glory to God.

1. Answ. Must we boldly bring our Children to Baptism without any authority
from Christ, because the Woman of Canaan come bodily to him, to have her
Daughter healed of her Boldly Disease, she had ground for her Faith, but we
have none for such a Practice.

2. Do we destroy the foundation of our Hope, about the State of our Infants,
because we dare not baptize them without a word from Christ, or without
Authority from him? No Sir, we have ground to hope our Children that Die are as
happy as yours, though never Baptized; and that from Gods word. Has not Christ
said, Of such are the Kingdom of Heaven, no doubt God has comprehended Infants
in his eternal electing Love that Die, for whom he also gave his Son, and in
some secret way does Sanctify them, or makes them meet for glory above; and we
have as much ground to hope, that God will give Grace to those Children of ours
that live, as you have to hope he will give Grace to yours. Does your Baptism
save your Infants? Will you say with the Old Erroneous Fathers, and Blind
Papists, that Baptism washes away Original Sin? Your expressions look that way,
I am afraid of you.

Ought we not to believe (say you) for our Children, that Christ will receive
them? Is he more unready to administer Spiritual Blessings, than he was in
administering Temporal Blessings to the Children of the Faithful?

Answ; Let Christ receive whom he pleases, He will have mercy upon whom he will
have mercy, And receive and Bless, whom he will receive and Bless; no doubt his
Sovereign Grace is extended to many of the Children of the Faithful now as
formerly, but what of this, because he healed some little Children in the days
of his Flesh, of their Bodily Distempers, Will you therefore baptize them
without any Authority received from him, you may if you please as well argue
thus, viz. Jesus Christ Fed many little Children with Temporal Food, when he
Fed the multitude, therefore they must come to the Lords Table, and be fed with
Spiritual Food: Is this to argue like a Man of Wisdom and Learning.

3. They are guilty (you say) of Pride, thus you charge those that deny Infant
Baptism. The humble submits to every Revelation of the Will of God; (say
you) God has left diverse things obscure in the Scripture, that we might search
them, and judge humbly of our Selves, who know things only in part, seeing
through a Glass, in a parable; Is it not great pride, that a simple Man should
take upon him to teach God, how to speak in his Word, let the Lord speak his
Mind clearer about Childrens Baptism, or else we will note believe him, say
some, is not this a proud reasoning of the Heart of Man? The humble Heart
searches the Scriptures, and considers the agreement of one Scripture with
another, believing the consistency of the Old Testament with the new, and
fearing every untrodden Path, there be great Truths as secret Treasure in the
field of the Scripture, which the Humble searches and finds, but the Proud
despises and comes short thereof.

Answ. I answer, Is it Pride in us not to believe that to be a truth, that is
no where revealed in Scripture, or is it not folly in you to believe such a
thing to be of God's appointment; and yet upon the most diligent Search that
can be made into God's Word, nothing can be found therein to prove it so to be.

2. Because some things that are matter of Faith (I say again) or some Truths
of the Gospel do lie obscure, and in dark parables in the sacred Scripture,
does it follow that one of Christ's great Gospel Institutions, nay one of the
great Sacraments (as they are called) does lie so dark and obscure therein
also? this is strange, Moses who gave out the Laws of the Old Testament from
God as a Servant, made every thing plain, that is, he showed them plainly what
the command and precept was, so that he that run might read it, and will any
Man think that our Lord Jesus who was as faithful as a Son over his whole
House, would be less faithful, and leave an Ordinance so dark and obscure, that
there is not any Precept nor Example in all the New Testament for any such
thing, did Christ ever give forth Gospel Precepts in dark Parables, Wonder O
Heavens.

8. We say Infant Baptism is not laid down in the Scripture obscurely or
darkly, but do affirm in the holy fear of God, that it is not at all to be
found therein; and it may appear to all that you cannot prove that it is, if
God never so darkly had declared it, we would receive it, but because he has
neither plainly nor obscurely revealed, That it is his Institution, we do reject
it, and we shall not be charged with Pride in so doing; it is I fear too evident
that you are left in this Case by the Lord to believe a lie, and may be because
you will not believe nor receive the plain Revelation of the baptism of
Believers, though no one Truth lies more clear and plain in God's Sacred Word.

4. Is it pride in you, because you will not own the Common Prayer, and the
Rite of crossing in Baptism, and Godfathers and Godmothers, these things (you
may be) believe not, but not because they are left darkly in the Scripture, but
because they are merely human inventions, or not at all to be found in the
Scripture.

You say we will not believe, unless you show us some Command or some clear
example for Infant Baptism, that it is of God, but if there had not been any
Command or Example (although both be for Infant Baptism) if there be Scripture
Consequences, showing they ought to be baptized, That is sufficient to satisfy
the humble searcher, did not Christ shut the Mouths of the Sadducees about the
Resurrection by Scriptural Consequence? Mat, 22. 32.

1. Answ. I answer, are we not to be commended for not believing that to be a
Truth, for which there is neither Command nor example? Why do you not use
Crossing in Baptism, nor Oil nor Honey as the Papists do? Is (...) not because
you find no Command nor Example for any such things.

2. It seems strange you have both Command and example for Infant Baptism in
the Holy Scripture; and you cannot find either, or else none can find them, but
your selves.

3. But could you produce as fair Consequences from any Text for it, as our
Savior did to prove the Resurrection we would receive it readily: But I have
showed all your Consequences are nothing to the purpose, but if you (...)
Truth, you need not fly to far-^etch'd Consequenced

4. These Antipedo baptists, say you, which receive rebaptization, are guilty
of great uncharity: Charity is the fulfulfilling of the (...), 1 Timothy 1. 5. and
love also is the fulfilling of the Gospel; and therefore we ought to be jealous
of every Opinion that destroys Charity; God is Love, and those Truths that are
of God, are agreeable to Charity, but this Opinion which denies Infant
Baptism, is a very uncharitable Opinion which casts our Children from the
Household of God, of which they were Members for some Thousand of Years, is it
not an uncharitable opinion which excommunicates them out of the Church of God.

1. Answ. I answer could you prove Infant Baptism to be a Truth of God, you had
cause to charge us, but that the Reader may see, you cannot do.

2. Nor can you prove Infants were ever received as Members of the Gospel
Church, therefore it is a false Charge to say our Opinion casts them out or
Excommunicates them out of that.

3. Take heed least it be found one day that you are a Man that wants Charity
toward Christ himself, who is the only builder of his Gospel Temple, and who
did not in his Wisdom think good to take in the fleshly Seed into the Gospel
Church as they were received into the Typical and legal Church of the Jews.

You intimate that we have Excommunicated them, and that without a Cause,
before they had done any thing for to merit this hard Judgment, is not this
(say you) an uncharitable Opinion which denies them the same place in the
Covenant of Grace under the Gospel, as they had under the Law, is not that an
uncharitable Opinion which makes their condition worser, since the coming of
Christ then it was before? in short, is it not (say you) an uncharitable
Judgment, which deny s them a share in the promise, Acts 2. 39. is not God a
God unto the Seed of the Faithful, what, hope then can we have of their
Salvation.

1. Answ. It was not for the sin or demerits of Infants that God has not
received them as Members of the Gospel Church, only it was his own Sovereign
Will and Pleasure not so to do, nor can you prove that this is any spiritual
loss unto our Infants.

2. God has as much cast out the Sons of his Gospel Ministers (as such) from
having any part in the Ministry, which you know they had under the Law: For
every Son of a Priest, when grown up, was of the Priesthood, and this is denied
to our Sons as such. Another may say, what Sin have our Sons committed, that
this great privilege is denied them, since Christ came? Also, why should not
our Children have the promise of an External Canaan, as the Jewish Children had
under the Law, what have they done to procure this loss.

3. We do not deny Infants the same privileges and place in the Covenant of
Grace, which they ever had, no God forbid; our Children have every way (no
doubt) like place in that Covenant which the Children of the faithful had under
the Law, even them and all them of our Children, that have the saving blessings
of Christ Merits, and of the said unchangeable and eternal Covenant, but we say
they are not in the Covenant of peculiarity God made with Abraham's Natural Seed
as such; and so partake not of the external Rites and Privileges of the Gospel
Church, or New Creation, until they do believe or are called by the Lord
according to that promise you cite, Acts 2. 39.

4. What a noise do you make about your Infants great loss by our Opinion; alas
you cannot prove or make it appear they have any real Spiritual loss, hereby,
our Children have the same spiritual blessings now as ever, and God is as much
the God of our Seed in a spiritual sense, as ever he was to the Seed of the
Faithful; all that we say is this, that our Infants have no right to the
external Ordinance of Baptism nor any but believers only; and pray what wrong
is this to them? Is there no hope therefore left us of the Salvation of our
dying Infants? what is it to give our Infants as such, the sign, who have not
the thing signified thereby, you would have them have the Shell that have not
the Kernel, and because we will not give them the one, till God gives them the
other, we are censured as uncharitable, What good did Simon magus his Baptism
do him? Will Baptism save your Infants? and if all the Seed of the Faithful are
(as you say) in the Covenant of Grace, they are safe enough whether they are
baptized or not, we cannot bring them into that Covenant, nor cast them out of
it.

5. And now Sir, pray do you attempt for once to do more then all your brethren
have done before you, viz. prove what Spiritual or Temporal benefits your
Children do receive by their pretended Baptism, Mr. Burkitt made assay to do
this, but he is answered, and says no more, and I purpose for the sake of the
Ancient Britains, for whom I have always had great love, and an honorable
esteem of, to take a little pains to transcribe Mr. Burkitts arguments in this
respect, and my answers by and by.

6. It Is evident that baptism does not infuse Grace into them, nor the habits
thereof, it does not change their Hearts; it does not take away Original Sin.
God can do it, it is true, nay, and God does no doubt, change the Hearts of such
dying Infants that are saved; but prove if you can, their baptism does this,
and then. 2. what external privileges of the Church do your Infants (as such)
receive, that are as, you say, baptized, you will not own them for Brethren and
Sisters, until they are Converted, you will not give them the Lords Supper
until they are converted, they are not by the Lord's appointment brought under
any Obligation by being baptized; and then as few of your Children, it is plain,
become godly as of ours, pray show us when you write again, what blessings or
privileges your Infants do receive by their Rantism, or Baptism as you call
it? What uncharitableness is it then in us to deny our Infants that thing,
which you cannot prove if they had it, would do them any manner of good.

Nay Sir, I shall prove before I have done with you that it may do them much
hurt.

5. Those that are against Infant Baptism; and for renewing of it (you say) are
guilty of a great ingratitude toward God, we know that ingratitude is a great
Sin against the Lord: Unthankfulness for Temporal blessings provokes him to
Anger, Romans 1. 21. Luke 17. 17, 18. how much more for Spiritual blessings and
privileges. -- Is it not great ingratitude in us to despise our birthright?
The Scripture puts a reproachful Character upon Esau, etc.

Answ. All this is to no purpose, it is but begging the Question, viz. That
Infant Baptism is God's Ordinance, and a birthright privilege which we utterly
deny, for though Baptism be a privilege by Christ's positive Command, it only
belonging to the Second Birth, not to the First.

Thou art guilty of a great Sin (say you) by making a division in the Body of
Jesus Christ, there is one Body and one Baptism, Ephesians. 4. 4, (...) And they
cannot be divided, whereas by denying of the first Baptism thou breakest the
Unity of that Body, to the which Christ is Head, thou breakest thy self off
from the Vine, and witherest as an unfruitful Branch, which will not be better
although it be Watered again; thou breakest thy self off not from this
Congregation or another only; but from the Universal Catholic Church in every
Age and Country upon the Face of the Earth, which is cleansed with the washing
of Water through the Word, Ephesians. 5. 26. and continuing in the Union of Baptism.
Can thou think this to be a small sin for thee to rent thy self from the Body
of Christ, though stolen Water be sweet at this time, and Bread eaten in secret
be pleasant. Know and see that it will be evil and bitter in the end, for thee
to cast thy self out of the Church of the Living God, the Pillar and ground of
Truth.

1. Answ. I answer until I came hither in your Book, I did not fully perceive
your bitter Spirit. O that God would appear and give you a better temper of
Heart: Who is uncharitable now, if Charity be the Bond of perfectness? How
imperfect is my Brother Owen? Must we all who deny Infant Baptism, be Condemned
as utter cast aways, and not be looked upon so much as Members of the Universal
Church? It Is well, it is not in your power to reprobate us and our Children.

2. But stay a little, are all that own Infant Baptism, or have been baptized
in every Age and Nation of the Earth, the Body of Christ, and Church of the
living God? Do you indeed own the Popish Church, or is not the Church of Rome
in your Judgment, however part of the Body of Christ? And are not you in Union
with that Church, and all Churches that own Infant Baptism in the World? it
follows it must be so. I think it is time for you, most Worthy Britains, to
have a Jealous Eye toward this Man, for if he be not in actual Communion with
the Church of Rome, yet his principles lead him out so to be; for he seems to
own all the Churches to be the Body of Christ, who were and are baptized in
Infancy, nay, and that those Churches, and none but them to make up the whole
Mystical Universal Church of God. He seems to reprobate all those Christians
that deny Infant Baptism, or are disjoined from his Universal Catholic Church
of baptized Infants. I know his Reverend Brethren in London, are Men of more
Charity, and abhor such positions as he now lays down. I cannot think that his
principles allow Salvation to any that are not in Union with the visible
Universal Church that own Infant baptism, it is time to thr^w this Idol away.

3. Is it a sin to divide from the Church of Rome, or from the Church of
England, or not to continue of their Communion? Are not you one that have
separated your self from both, and more immediately from the last: But I
suppose you own them both to be true Churches, tho you have separated your
self, but if so, how can you clear your self of abominable Schism, for you have
made a division in that Body, which you declare is the Body of Christ, and
Church of the living God? Can those things for which you have made this
division, justify your Sel^^m? Sir, tho we believe there are many Holy and
Gracious Christians of the Communion of the Church of England, and that they
are Members of the Invisible Universal Church, yet we do not believe the Church
of England, nor any National Church, is an orderly true Constituted Visible
Church of Jesus Christ and therefore we separated from them, but this it
appears is not your belief.

4. Your Judgment is, it appears, that no Person can be a Member of the
Universal Catholic Church, that was not baptized, and so United to her in
Infancy, or Sprinkled when an Adult Person, i. e. he must own Infant Baptism.
Sir I never met with a Man like your self, as I can remember of less Charity;
and yet you cry our against us for want of Charity.

5. I do affirm that, that one Baptism that Unites to the Visible Church (not
to the Universal Church) is the Baptism of Believers, and not that of Infants;
And to prove it, take this argument. If that Baptism the Apostles administered,
and on which they received all Persons into the Visible Church, was the Baptism
of the Adult, or that of Believers only; then the baptism of the Adult, or that
of Believers only, is that one and first Baptism; but the baptism which the
Apostles administered, and on which they received all Persons into the Visible
Church, was the baptism of the Adult, or that of Believers only. Ergo, The
Baptism of the Adult, or that of Believers, is that one or only Baptism of
Christ's Visible Church; for those Members of the visible Church in the
Primitive times, that were washed in Baptismal Water, professed themselves
washed also in Christ's Blood, and they that were sincere had the thing
signified, as well as the Sign when they were baptized, but Infants never made
any such profession, therefore Infant Baptism was not the first and one Baptism
that Christ left in his Church.

6. It is true that those that deny Infant baptism, deny the Communion of the
National Church, of which perhaps they were once Members, but this is not to
make a division in the Mistical Body of Christ; nor in a true Constituted
Gospel Church. It Is a duty to come out from every false Church, Come out of
her^ my People, Rev. 18. 4.

7. If baptism be that Ordinance that Unites us into the true Visible Church,
and Christ's baptism be that of Believers, then Mr. Owen in denying of believers
baptism, (which I have proved is that one baptism) is as much guilty of Sin in
hindering that Union (by obstructing as much as in him lies, Believers to be
baptized, and so Unite them to the said true Visible Church of Christ) as those
that divide from it; and is this a small sin, but Believers baptism is that
Uniting Ordinance, without baptism upon profession of Faith, no Person
according to the rule of the Gospel can be United to a true Visible Church of
Christ, It is a dangerous thing to hinder persons from Joining with a true
Church, as renting from it, but so it is not for leaving of a false Church.

8. From hence also it appears that our separation from those Churches that are
Constituted upon Infant Baptism, do but divide from such Churches that are not
orderly gathered or Constituted according to the rule of the Gospel and
Institution of Jesus Christ, and therefore no sin so to do.

9. Nay, and evident it is that the greatest Body of Mr. Owens Universal
Catholic Church, is Antichristian: For I think none question but the Popish
Church, which is founded on Infant baptism, is for Number more then the
Protestant Churches; however the Roman Church must be by what he intimates one
great part of the Catholic Church, or Church of the living God.

10. And lastly, Mr. Owen mistakes, the Waters we drink of, who maintain
Believers Baptism, are not Stolen Waters, but Waters lawfully come at, being
taken out of the Fountain of Gods Word, and are part of the Waters of God's
Sanctuary; and therefore they are sweet to our Souls, and our Bread is from our
Fathers Table, being no other than what all the Children of God did feed upon
in the Apostolical Primitive times: and his Stolen Water of Infant Baptism may
prove bitter at the end, notwithstanding his vain boasts, but let him see to
that, may be God may open his Eyes, and cause him to Vomit it up by Repentance,
which I shall rejoice to hear.

you say, this division is very much alike unto that of the Ancient Donatists,
who were for rebaptizing because they accounted them sinners that first
baptized them, etc.

A^sw. We are, I tell you again, as much against rebaptizing as you can be, but
you want the essentials of Baptism, both in respect to the form of baptism, and
the subjects thereof. Sprinkling is not baptizing, and Infants are not the true
Subjects of Christ's baptism, but Believers only.

You proceed to give out of History the opinion of the Ancient Fathers about
rebaptizing.

Thus says (say you). Optatus. Et quid vobis visum est non post nos sed post
trinitatem baptisma geminare? Why do you rebaptize not only after us, but after
the Trinity. Opt. Lib. 5. p. 51. Opt. Lib. 5. page 61. Quicunque a vobis se
rebaptizari, etc. Whoever consents to be rebaptized by you, he arises up
certainly but naked, because he has permitted you to deprive him of his
Wedding Garment.

Austin says, Revera enim fieri potest ut sceleratior sit Rebaptizator totius
hominis quam solius corporis interemptor Aug. ad Eleusium Ep. 163. It being
possible for him who baptizeth the whole Man to be worser then him, who kills
the Body only. Again, Rebaptizare haereticum hominem omnino peccatum est
immanissimum. It is a sin to rebaptize an Heretic, but to rebaptize a
Catholic, or one in Unity with the Universal Church, is a dreadful Sin. Aug.
de unico Bapt. cap. 13. If any (say you) judge these are words too harsh, let
them consider that they are Austin's words and not mine, I set them down for to
show the Judgment of the Old Primitive Church about rebaptization.

Answ. I answer, these Instances hurt not us, for it appears in both these
Quotations, that the Persons rebaptized were Dipped first when baptized, and
might be Believers also, for in the first, that word implies no less, viz.
rises up, denoting he was buried in the Water. Your Infants when baptized (as
you call it) cannot be said to rise up; and Austins words imply plainly the
baptizing the whole Body, who baptizeth, says he, the whole Man, but you only
Sprinkle, and not the whole Body, but the Face only. These Instances make
against your Rantism or Sprinkling, but since you make such a stir in charging
us with rebaptization, and fain would have us be what we are branded with, viz.
Anabaptists. I shall now show you the opinion also of some of the Ancient
Fathers and Modern Divines, about reiterating of baptism.

Gregory says l. 1. Ep. 7. That that is not said to be reiterated, which is
not certainly demonstrated to have been rightly and duly done, and in another
place says, if there be an offense taken at the Truth, it is much better that
offense be taken than that the Truth should be deserted, the Custom of the
Churches ought to submit to the words of Christ, not the words of Christ to be
wrested to the Custom of the Church, in regard the words of Christ, are the
foundation upon which all Customs are to be build. hom. 7. in Ezechiel.

Cyprian says, It being more proper for the wise, and and those that fear God
to obey the manifest and open Truth, freely, and without delay, then
obstinately, and pertinaciously to resist it. Cyprian Epist ad Jubian. See Dr.
du Veil on Act. cap. 2.

Scotus says, (Dr. du Veil) having alleged the Judgment of Alexander the
Third, touching the baptizing of those of whom it was doubted whether they were
baptized or no, takes an occasion to recommend three Maxims, the

First, is where there is a possibility, the safest way is to be chosen,

Secondly, Where there is no possibility, the next, to the safest way is to be
made use of.

Thirdly, When Impossibility ceases, every thing is to be supplied, which
Impossibility would not admit.

These Maxims are so agreeable to reason, (says the Learned Dr. Du Veil)
whoever intends to follow, will never question, but that they ought to be
baptized, if they have not received that baptism Ordained by Christ, but only
Rhantism that is, the Sprinkling substitued (says he) in its room by a vulgar
use, or rather abuse, as Luther calls it. thus Dr. Duveil in Historical expost,
of Acts. cap. 2. page 86.

That famous Divine John Forbes says, Nor is it to be doubted but that they
again ought to be baptized, who before have only received a Vain Washing, and
not the true Sacrament of Baptism: And though it be not so great as the Papists
imagine, yet the necessity of this Sacament is very great, and the profit and
advantage very considerable. See Dr. du Veil Act. 2. page 87.

Tertullian says, Whatsoever savours contrary to Truth is heresy though it be
an Ancient Custom.

Thus you see the Learned, though they own not rebaptization, where baptism at
first was duly administered, yet such who at first received only a pretended
baptism, ought to be truly baptized; to baptize a Believer again, is sinful and
very unlawful thing, but since yours is no Baptism but only Rhantism, our
practice is no rebaptization, for as you do not the Act, so it is not done on
the proper subject.

7. They are guilty, say you, (that is; such as deny Infant Baptism) of a great
sin, by giving offense to many that were baptized in their Infancy, tempting
them to think that they are not under any vows unto God, and that their baptism
binds them not to a new course of Life, if People judge themselves free from
their baptismal Obligation. O! How naked come they to Satan's Temptations, etc.

Answ. I answer, if you take an offense at us, because we cast away an humane
Tradition, we cannot help that, ought we to obey Man rather then God, Judge ye.

2. It Is the force of Scripture arguments, or the power of Gods Word, that
provoked us, and many Thousands more to throw off the Innovation and sinful
practice of Infant Baptism; and dare you say it was Satan that tempted us, no I
fear it is Satan or worldly profit, or to free themselves from reproach, that
tempts some of the pedobaptists to continue the practice of that devised
Custom. It Is not Satan's use, nor interest to tempt Men to own Christ's blessed
Institutions, and cast off Men's Inventions, but endeavor to keep them Ignorant
of the first, and to hold up the second, which was let in us in the time of the
Apostasy of the Church, which it is evident is a Pillar to uphold National
Churches, and not only Popish, but some Protestant Constitutions also.

3. We are not tempted by Satan, but persuaded by the Lord, and through the
Power and Authority of his Word, to believe that God brought us not under that
Vow or Obligation in Infancy, though you it is true do it, and so do the Papists,
bring People under Vows and Obligations to live a single Life, and do other
things, all tending to Piety and Holiness, (as they tell you,) but God never
brought them under any such Vows or Obligations.

And though an human Obligation may have some force on the Conscience, especially
when People think it is Gods Covenant, yet ought not the blind People among the
Papists to be told that those Covenants are Human, and not Covenants God
brought them under? Has not God ways enough, and such that are sufficient to
Oblidge our Children to die to Sin, and live a new Life? but does he need Man's
Supplements, shall man teach God? and will you Father your Baptismal Obligation
on God, as that which he requires Infants to come under without the least
Shadow of proof from his blessed Word. I must tell you all voluntary Vows are
by Christ in the times of the Gospel forbid, Mat. 5. 33, 34. You ought not to
bring your selves nor Children under any such voluntary and promisory Oaths,
Vows, or Obligations; you must see you are Commanded to do it, or have clear
Authority from the Lord to do this thing before you do it. God does require
Believers and their Children when they believe, to come under a baptismal Vow
or Obligation, but not till then.

But do not think the purport of our Doctrine herein, is to open a Door for
young People to Sin, God forbid; the Obligations which God in his Word, and
godly Parents, and Ministers by the authority of God's Word lay upon them are
sufficient, when the Lord works with them to oblige them to repent, believe,
and lead a new Life, without your volunrary and unwarrantable Obligation laid
upon them in Infancy, that you have no ground to believe God will ever bless,
to the end you design it, unless he had commanded it; will you do Evil that
Good may come on it.

8. Baptizing by dipping the whole Body into cold Water (as you say) in these
cold Climates, is a breach of the sixth Commandment. Thou shall not kill, for
it is certain, that many tender and sickly Bodies cannot suffer to be dipped in
cold Water in the time of Winter, without being pernicious to their Lives,
especially when it is Snow and Frost; we are not to tempt the Lord, thinking
that God will do Miracles for the saving of our Lives, he works ordinarily
through appointed means, in such an occasion as this. Mr. Cradock judged, that
the chief Magistrate should hinder People to be dipped, least it should be
pernicious to the Subjects. Lib. page 108.

Ans. I answer, this is a high charge, you accuse us of Murder directly, in
breaking the Sixth Commandment, but you forget how hereby you positively break
the Ninth Commandment, Thou shall not bear fase witness against thy Neighbor,
Exodus 20. 16. prove what you say, or else with deep sorrow confess your
abominable and false accusation; Do you know for certain that any one Person,
either Man or Woman, was ever killed, or came to any hurt, that was baptized,
that is dipped, in the Name of the Father, Son and Holy Spirit, in cold
winterly weather? you must produce your witnesses, or you are horribly guilty
in the sight of God and Man; you say, It Is certain that many tender and sickly
Bodies cannot suffer to be Dipped in cold Water, without being pernicious to
their Lives, etc.

Sir, I have my self baptized many hundreds of Men and Women, and some at all
times of the year, yea in times of bitter Frost and Snow, when the Ice was
first broken, and Persons that were of a weak sickly Constitution, and Women
big with Child, and others near Seventy years Old, yea some near Eighty years
Old, and I never knew any to suffer the least harm thereby, but many have found
their Health better afterward: Yea I heard a Reverend Minister very lately say,
that he knew an Ancient Woman in Kent that was Bed-ridden for some time, who
could not be satisfied until she was baptized, and baptized she was, and upon
it grew strong and went about, and lived some years after in Health and
Strength according to her age; also for the space of forty years, I have heard
of, or known some Thousands baptized at all Seasons of the year, of both Sex,
and never heard of any that received the least prejudice to their Health
thereby, much less that it cost them their Lives: Therefore palpable it is you
are guilty of slander, backbiting, and abominable calumny, bearing false
Witness against your Innocent Neighbors, and it is well if it be not out of
malice, and that not only to us, but also to Christ's Holy Ordinance of Dipping
Believers in his Name.

2. But the worst is behind, who is it you cast this reproach upon? Is it upon
us? Or is it not upon Christ himself? Did not our Lord Jesus Institute this
Ordinance of Baptizing, i. e. of dipping the Bodies of Men and Women in water?
Sir were not those Men and Women that were Baptized in the Apostolical times
Dipped? Do you descent from all the Ancient and Modern Divines; I have Quoted a
multitude of them in this Treatise, who positively assert this matter, to which
Chapter I refer my Reader.

Ambrose says, water is that wherein the Body is plunged.

Chrysostom says, That the Body baptized is burried in the Water. Basil the
Great, and Dr. du Veil says same.

Bernard says, Immersion is a representation of Death and Burial.

The Assembly in their Annotations say, That the Ancient manner of Baptizing
was, to Dip the Party baptized, and as it were, bury them under the Water.

See Pools Annotat. On Mat. 3. 6. and were baptized of him in Jordan, that is
(says he) Dipped in Jordan, and on Romans 6. 34. he says, The Ancient manner of
baptizing in those warm Countries was to Dip or plunge the party baptized.

Cajetan, Daille On the Fathers, Tilenus, Luther, Calvin, Perkins, Zanchy,
Paraeus, Dr. Cave, Dr. Sharp. Dr. Fowler, Dr. Sherlock, the Three last are yet
living, and many more I have Quoted, do all say Baptizing is Dipping.

Dr. Tillotson late Bishop of Canterbury says, That anciently those who were
baptized put off their Clothes, and were immersed and buried in the Water. Read
the Table of the Authors at the beginning of this Book.
Now Sir, if to baptize by Dipping be Murder, do not you charge the occasion
of this Murder upon Christ, who Ordained baptism or dipping Men and Women in
Water what work have you made for Repentance?

Obj. May be you will object, and s^y that you own that baptism was dipping in
those warm Climates.

1. Answ. Did not our Savior send his Disciples into all the World, or to
Teach all Nations, baptizing them, that is Dipping them in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost.

2. Did he send them with this Commission only into warm Climates or Countries,
and not into cold Countries, God forbid, for there is no other Commission given
by Christ to make Disciples by Teaching them, and then to baptize them, but
this only, does not this Commission reach England, were all cold Countries
excluded?

3. Did Christ give out two Commissions, one for warm Climates, and to Dip
them, etc. and another for cold Countries to Teach and Sprinkle them, or rather
Sprinkle them, and then Teach them; for so your practice inverts the Order of
Christ's great Commission; did Christ say go into Hot Countries, and Teach and
Baptize Disciples, and go into Cold Countries and Teach and Rantize them? What
an imperfect Commission does your practice render the Commission of Christ to
be.

4. Who gave Men power to change his Commission, Baptizing into Rantizing or
Sprinkling? What an account can you give to him of this at the great Day? Or
has the Church or Ministers, power to alter Christ's great Commission? and so
alter, or add too, and diminish from the words of his Book; Sir, tremble at the
thoughts of these things, See Rev. 22. 18.

As to Mr. Cradock it seems, if he has wrote as you intimate, that he was
under great temptation; but it is no marvel, we can tell you of some Men; and of
as great a Name as he that would have the Anabaptists; and Independants too, to
have no liberty to meet together, to Preach nor write Books, and would have the
chief Magistrate to Imprison and Banish them, etc.

Obj. Where as you bring in this as your Objection, they may tarry until Summer.

1. We answer, there is no need of that, because what you speak of the danger
of baptizing in Winter is absolutely false. 2. I know not, but there may be as
many or more baptized in the Winter than in the Summer.
You say, as soon as they are made Disciples, they are commanded to be
baptized, Acts 24. 41. and chapter 8. 38.

Answ. This is our practice, but why do not you stay till then, i. e. until
your Children are Disciples, it is evil to stay longer then the time, and no
evil to do it sooner then the time Christ* has appointed.

9. This form of Baptizing by Dipping of the People naked, or near naked, you
say, is a breach of the Seventh. Commandment, Thou shall not commit adultery,
Mat. 5. 28. This Commandment prohibiteth not only the Act of Adultery, but
every occasion and provocation thereto; every immodest and unreverend Action,
is a degree of Adultery, the Heart of Man is deceitful and desperately wicked,
Jer. 17. 9. therefore we ought to take heed of every occasion of Sin. David
fell into Adultery by beholding Bathsheba washing, etc. 2 Samuel 11. 2. Thus we
see that God would not have his People be naked in the Congregation, or half
naked, for there is but little difference between both, Exodus, 20. 26. and chapter
28. 42. but they that rebaptize by Dipping the People in public, put off the
greatest part of their Clothes; the re-baptizer, and He or She that is baptized
is near naked, which might be a temptation to him that is the Baptizer, and to
the Spectators, if the temptation will not take hold on the Minister, who is
but Flesh and Blood as others are, such a behavior before a mixed Congregation,
brings him under a reproach, and makes the worship of God contemptible.

1. Answ. I answer, I am grieved that a Minister, and I hope a godly Man,
should be thus left to himself, or be under no better conduct about this
matter, but thus to add sin to sin, whilst he writes about divine things.

2. Pray Mr. Owen, what is the purport of your Charge now in recriminating and
vilifying the Sacred Ordinance of Dipping or Baptizing of Believers, this Odium
must fall as well on the Primitive Churches and Holy Apostles as upon us, you
see all your Brethren generally as one Man, nay the whole assembly of Divines
affirm that in the Primitive times the manner of baptizing, was by dipping of
the Body all over in Water, though they would restrain it to those Hot Countries.
Will you charge the Holy Apostles, and all the Ministers of the Primitive
Churches with Adultery? Or do you think we in these Cold Climates have not
convenient Clothes to put on People that are to be baptized, as they had in
those Warm Countries.

3. But if this was all, it were not so sad altogether; for it was our Lord
Jesus, worthy Britains, who Ordained and appointed Men and Women, who are
Believers to be Dipped in the Water in his Name; and it is a hard case there is
no way to answer this holy Command and Ordinance, but the People that do it
must be guilty of Adultery; must we go into the water naked or half naked? Is
their a necessity for it? Are there no Clothes to be had, or no modest Garments
for Men and Women to be provided to cover all their nakedness, even Hands and
Feet also if it be needful? sure Sir, you must suppose somewhat of this kind,
or there is no room left for you to cast contempt and reproach upon the
Ordinance it self, but to blame the people they do not provide convenient
Garments on purpose, that so they may not commit Adultery when they come to be
Baptized.

4. Sir had you seen our People baptized you, had not been guilty of bearing
false witness the Second time. Reader pray take notice that we provide comely
Clothes for the Administer, both from Head to Foot; and our Men also that are
baptized have Clothes provided for them; and for the Women, Gowns and
Petty-coats are made on purpose, and they go into the water dressed more decently
perhaps, then many Women come into Christian assemblies; therefore this is a
most unworthy Charge Mr. Owen casts upon us, though he does but follow the steps
of Dr. Featly and Mr. B. but it is worse in him at this time of the Day, then in
them then, because our use and practice here, is now more generally known: And
these things being so, how can we in Dipping or Baptizing of Women be guilty of
Adultery or any of the Spectators?

Cannot you take a Woman dressed in modest and decent Clothes by the Hand,
without having an unclean thought in your Heart? you may as well charge some
Tradesmen in the Exercise of their Trades with Adultery; indeed did we as Mr.
B. -- once falsely said, baptize Women naked, or as you say, near or half naked
(which are both notorious untruths) there might have been some color for what
you say; but if there be need to Dip the whole Body (say you) as they say there
is, what rule have they in the Scripture to baptize the Clothes with the Body,
the few Clothes they have about them are dipped before the Body is dipped.

1. Answ. All Men may perceive of what a contentious, contradicting quarelsome
Spirit you are of, one while you strive to expose Christ's Sacred Ordinance to
reproach, and us with it, as if we baptized Persons naked, and then presently
seem to allow that we do not so, but that they whom we baptize have Clothes on,
but now the Clothes are baptized, and then ask what Scripture we have for this.

2. It Is enough Christ Commanded Dipping in his Name, and we are required to do
all things decently. It Is no matter, so that the Body is buried in the Water
it is not the Clothes that we say we baptize, but the Person. Christ's Ordinance
of Baptism in one essential part lies in the words of Administration, Do you
never Sprinkle some drops of Water on the Child's Fine dresses, if you should,
what does that signify? you have wrote hard words, and Christ is coming to
convince all of their ungodly deeds, and of all their hard Speeches spoken
against him, Jude 15. I pray God this Sin be not laid to your Charge. Thus I
have been helped to take off that reproach and vile slanders cast upon the
baptizing Believers, and have proved it is not re-baptization; therefore let
Mr. Owen cast of his slanderous clamarous Pen, and Infants Rhantism, and repent
and return to the Baptism, which Christ Instituted, and left in his Church to
the end of the World; and now to make appear the evil and sinfulness of Infant
Baptism, take what follows, which I have transcribed out of my answer to Mr.
Burkitt's Book that he wrote for the Baptizing of Children two or three years
since.

CHAP. XXI.
Showing that there is no Blessing to be expected in Baptizing Infants, but
rather the displeasure of the Jealous God, demonstrating contrariwise to what
Mr. James Owen has said (also Mr. Burkit and Mr. Daniel Williams, and all
other pedobaptists,) that it is avery sinful and an unlawful practice.

AS Mr. Owen has labored in vain to show the usefulness of Infant Baptism, so
Mr. Burkit a Learned Minister of the Church of England, who in his late
Treatise for Infant Baptism also did, see page 35, 36, 37, 38. of his Book.

1. Mr. Burkitt says Children are hereby Interested in all the prayers of the
Church.

1. Answ. If you pray for them as Members of the visible Church, what ground
have you so to do from Gods word, since God in the Gospel times had not made
them Members thereof.

2. Cannot we pray for our Children, though as yet they are not Members, that they
may become Members thereof.

2. He says, by virtue of this admission, they have interest in the special
providence of God.

Answ. No doubt but God does exercise his special Care and Providence over all
Elect Infants, but not the more for your baptizing them without his authority,
or Command, much less Infants of Believers as such.

3. He says, Hereby the Church stands nearer to them then to the rest of
mankind, etc. mentioning that Text, Ifa. 54. 13. Thy Children shall be all
taught of God.

1. Answ. Neither you nor Mr. Burkitt nor any pedobaptists in the World can
bring Infants nearer to God, nor his Church by any act done by you without any
rule left by Christ.

2. Does that Text, Isa. 54. 13. refer to Infants of Believers as such, or to
those godly and new re-born Children, who being born in sin, are indeed her
Spiritual Children.

4. He says, Irfant Baptism, is an act of Dedication, etc.

Answ. Who commanded you this way to Dedicate your Children to the Lord? Will
you Teach the Almighty, or are you wiser than he? Does he in his word require
you so to do.

2. May not the Papists say as well, that those Persons they bring under their
voluntary Vows, are thereby Dedicated unto God?

5. Mr. Burkitt says, It Is great advantage to Infants, as it is an Act of
restipulation, that is, says he, a Child at baptism enters into Covenant with
God.

Answ. I answer, Poor Babes, it is without their knowledge and consent, or God's
appointment, which is worst of all, or they being able to perform it then, nor
many of them ever after, God never giving them his Grace so to do. But woe to
them if they do not perform this Covenant, if Mr. Burkitt and Mr. Daniel
Williams say true; he Mr. Daniel Williams in his Book called the vanity of
youth. page 131.
says in his Catechism as follows, That those Children who perform not their
Baptismal Covenant do.

1. They reject Christ. 2d. They renounce the Blessings of the Gospel. 3dly.
that it is Rebellion against their Maker. 4thly. That it is ingratitude and
perjury against their Redeemer. 5thly. Gross injustice to their Parents. 6thly.
That it is self-killing Cruelty to their own Souls. 7thly. It Is (he says) a
damning Sin, nay its the heart of all Sin.

Is this indeed the love you Pedo-baptists have to your poor Infants. What
bring them into such a Covenant, without their knowledge and consent, or God's
appointment, and then threaten them if they break it, with Hell and Damnation,
and what not?

Do you know they are all Elect Persons, and so such that God will in time
call, give grace to, and so change their evil and depraved Natures? if not, do
you not heap up a multitude of evils upon them, and hereby make their condition
worse, or aggravate their Sin and misery for ever.

I know not whether you be of this Pedo-baptists mind, or not, but I think Mr.
Williams Worthy of blame as well as Mr. Burkit.
this Doctrine does not fit a Christian Catechism? If God had required Infants
to enter into such Covenant, some reason he might have thus to speak; But since
neither he nor you can prove it; This to me seems a daring boldness in a
Minister of the Gospel to assert, (who I hope is a good Man) God (I grant)
expects, that all true believers should perform their Baptismal Covenant, but
then know, they are required of God actually to enter into it, and they freely
of their own choice enter into it; also they are such God has given habitual
Grace to perform it; And he has promised them also a farther supply of Grace
to enable them so to do; but nothing of this you can prove in Infants
Covenanting in their Baptism, (but more of this by and by) nor will their
Sureties help the matter; for if they cannot perform those things they promise
for themselves, how should they be able to do it for others? besides it is an
humane Invention, and not appointed of God.

But truly Mr. Williams's Doctrine afflicts my Mind: Strange! is this Sin the
damning Sin? I thought the damning Sin (by way of eminency) had been the Sin of
unbelief. Suppose your own Child should not believe, he is bound by virtue of
that Baptismal Covenant you brought him into, but when grown up, disowns that
(you call) Baptism, etc. for his not believing it is a Truth of Christ, must he
be damned?

But to proceed;

Mr. Burkitt having showed the advantages of Infant Baptism, without giving one
Scripture Text to prove what he says is true; he in Page 38. comes to show,
that Baptism is more useful and beneficial to a Child in Infancy, then to omit
it till riper Age; because no Infant Membership is capable of Hypocrisy, which
Persons grown up are.

1. Answ. Then give them the Lords Supper also, for doubtless if they receive
it, they will not eat and drink their own damnation, as may be some that have
it given to them, do. I tremble at what you dare to say and write, in which you
seem to arraign the Wisdom of the ever blessed Jesus who he has appointed
believers or Adult persons, who are gracious to be Baptized, and none else; and
do you say, the Ordinance better suites with the Ignorant Babes? should you
dictate to your Earthly Prince, would he allow it? much less to contradict or
Correct him, as if your Wisdom were more then his.

2. Mr. Burkitt says, it is more advantageous to Infants, than those of riper
years; as it is a pre-engagement upon them to resist Temptations.

Answ. He may after this rate bring them under an hundred Engagements and
Covenants, which may be more plausible ones too: may you not when they know
what they do, make them take a Solemn Oath? or enter into Bonds upon pain of
severe Punishment, that they shall not yield to Temptations, and pretend it is
God's Law they should do so, which if you can deceive their Judgments, they
will dread as much, (nay it may be more) the breaking those Oaths and
Covenants, then this you bring them into, without any authority from Jesus
Christ.

3. Mr. Burkitt says, Baptism in Infancy is more advantageous then at riper
years, as it is an early remedy against the malady of Original sin.

Answ. Speak, Does Baptism take away Original sin, or free them from that
Malady or not? you know some of the Ancient Fathers were carried away with such
a dream; how comes it to pass then, that this contagion appears so soon, and to
be as strong in your Children as in ours, who never were Baptized at all? But
does not St. Peter tell you (1. Pet. 3. 20.) Baptism washes not away the filth
of the Flesh; Or is not Original Pollution a filth of the Flesh? What stuff is
this you would force upon us and the World? we affirm Infants are no more
capable of this Ordinance then any other. Why do you say of no Right but this?
we challenge all the World by God's Word, to prove that they are capable of
Baptism, any more then of the Lords Supper.

4. He says Baptism Administered to Infants has this advantage, it puts the
Christian upon more bitter mourning for actual Sin, from that consideration of
that shameful Perjury and wilful Apostasy that is found in such Persons sins.

Answ. He is I find one of Mr. Wiliams's Brethren, i. e. he is of his belief
The danger of Infants Baptismal Covenant laid open.
it seems, but tremble at the thoughts of the Consequences of your Doctrine.
Have not your Children whengrown up, enough sins to mourn for and bewail before
the Almighty God, but you must bring them into a Covenant which you know they
would break when they come to riper Age? and such is the pravity of Human
Nature, that there is no avoiding of it without a supernatural work of Grace;
their Burden is heavy enough, you need not add to it.

2. Is it not sad, that Men should give cause to their Children to think they
are guilty of Perjury? when in truth they never were, nor of Apostasy from God
upon that account. Our first Apostasy was bad enough, you need not go about to
make them guilty of another. Alas! their pretended baptism never brought them
one step nearer to God, then those Children are, who were never Baptized in
their Infancy at all, where then is the Apostasy he speaks of.

3. You hereby bring them under necessity of committing the Sin of Perjury, and
of Apostasy, at leastwise in your own conceit, and in others too, if they can
believe what this Man says, and so to cause them to mourn for that, or those
sins most, which may be (if all things were rightly con^'d) are no sins at all.
I do not mean that any of t^ actual transgressions may not be sin; but that
they are not guilty of Perjury and Apostasy, by breaking that you call their
Baptismal Covenant: For if God brought them not into that Covenant, nor into
any Covenant relation with himself thereby, I cannot see how there should be
such a sting in the Tail of it, as he affirms, and indeed, had they themselves,
of their own accord and consent, entered into an unlawful or an unwarrantable
Covenant which they were no ways able to perform, it may be doubted whether it
would be Perjury in them if they kept it not, besides, I hope they have not
forsworn themselves, how then is it Perjury?

4. Moreover, I desire all those Parents who baptize their Children, and you
also, to consider in the fear of God, the natural tendency and Consequences of
your bringing poor Babes into such a Covenant.

1. That you force them to enter into this Covenant without any Authority or
Command from God; for I challenge you and all pedobaptists in the World to
prove God has any where directly or indirectly, required any such thing at
your Hands.

2. Consider that it is not only a reformation of Life, or a bare refraining
from the gross acts of sin, that you assert, is comprehended in this Baptismal
Covenant, you cause Infants to enter into; but it is Regeneration it self, i.
e. a change of Heart, and savingly to believe in Christ; this you oblige your
poor Babes to perform. Now what Arminianism is here fomented, if once you say
or think, they are capable to perform this Obligation? but if they do not do
it, woe be to them.

Moreover what guilt do those of the Church of England bring their poor
Sureties under, unless they stand obliged no longer then the Child abides in
Infancy; and if so, what need of their Obligation at all, if they intend no
more.

3. Consider, you brought them into this Covenant without their knowledge and
consent, they never subscribed to it, nor knew any thing of it, nor were they
capable so to do.

4. Consider, that whatsoever you think, that such is the pravity of their
natures, by means of our first Apostasy from God, or Original (...) that they
do and must of necessity break it, as I (...) before, unless God should by
supernatural Grace, change their Hearts and Nature, and remove the vicious
habits thereof, which you had not the least ground to believe he would do, or
leastwise to all or the greatest part of them, God having made no such promise;
and by woeful experience, we daily see many, or most of those Children, are
never converted, but from the Womb go astray, and are guilty of almost all
manner of abominable sins, and so live and dye.

As to the Adult.

1. Consider as I said before,

1. That all Believers, God himself does require or Command in his Word to
enter into this Baptismal Covenant.

2. And they before they enter into it, have a principle of divine life infused
into their Soul, or Grace implanted in their Hearts, having passed under the
work of Regeneration, being dead to Si^ (of which Baptism is a lively Symboll)
or is as your Church says, an outward sign of an inward spiritual Grace. Not as
Mr. Baxter observes, a Sign or Simbol of future, but of present Regeneration,
which is confirmed by what St. Paul Teaches, Romans 6. 3, 4.

2. How shall we that are dead to sin live any longer therein? not may be dead,
but are dead, and so Buried with Christ in Baptism, verse 3. 4. If you say all
Adult Persons Baptized are not Converted, I answer, they appear so to be, and
as such voluntarily enter into this Covenant: Besides God does not require them
without Faith to do it. Baptism does not only represent the Death and Burial of
Christ, but also signifies our Death to Sin, or that Blessed work of
Mortification or the remainder of the Body of Sin and Death, by which means
Believers who enter into this Baptismal Covenant are putinto a Gracious and
Meet Capacity to perform that Sacred Obligation; but so are not Infants.

3. That every true believer baptized, considers, ponders upon, and weighs with
all seriousness and deliberation Imaginable, the nature of this Covenant before
he Signs it. And

4. That he does it freely and voluntarily, and with his full liking,
approbation and Consent, neither of which do, nor can do those poor Infants you
force to enter into this Covenant. These things considered, it appears, as it
is a sinful Act in you to bring them into this Covenant (since it is done
without Command or Authority from God) so it is cruelty also toward your own
Babes, by making them to become guilty of Perjury, and thereby damning (as Mr.
Williams says) their own Souls.

5. Consider every true Believer that is listed under Christ's Banner, by
entering into this Baptismal Covenant, is by Christ completely armed, i. e. he
has the Christian Armor put upon him, Ephesians. 6. He has the Breast Plate of
Righteousness, the Shield of Faith, and for a Helmet, the hope of Salvation;
and the Word of God, like a Sword in his Hand, to cut down all his Enemies.
Thus by the help of these Sacred Graces of the Spirit, he is enabled to fight
against Sin, the World, the Flesh, and the Devil. But alas! you list your poor
Babes into this War, and make them Covenant and Vow to forsake the Devil and
all his Works, the Pomps and Vanities of this wicked World, and all the sinful
lusts of the Flesh, but Arm them not. Did Baptism confer Grace and Arm their
Souls, it was something, but who dares assert that? Or if he does, who will or
can believe him.

6. God has also promised to assist, stand by, help and enable all Believers
Baptized, with farther supplies of Grace, nay, they being actually United to
Christ, have his blessed influencies flowing to them, besides the promises of
God, the Death, Resurrection and Intercession of Christ, and the everlasting
Covenant of Grace, which is ordered in all things, and sure, firmly secures all
their Souls. But thus it is not with those poor Babes you bring into this
Covenant: You are like Pharoabs Taskmasters, Command the making Bricks, but
allow them no Straw.

4. Again consider, how hereby great part of the Nations are perjured. I will
appeal to the Consciences of all thinking and understanding People, whether
according to your principle and practice, it is not so. Mourn O England and
lament, sad is thy Case? If these Men speak right or truly, what a multitude in
thee have been made to enter into this Covenant, who never performed it. O
Perjured Nation, Perjured People, and Perjured Pastors, for so are all thy
Debauched, Drunken, Swearing and unclean Teachers, are not these Perjured also?
Have they kept their Vow and Covenant? Alas! instead of Mourning for this Sin,
we may conclude they never thought of it. But let them break off their sins by
Righteousness, I mean repent, and leave those gross acts of Wickedness, of
which many, both Priests and People are guilty, and get renewing Grace, and
never let them fear this new devised sin of Perjury: For if God's Word
convinces of all Sins, and does not convince of this sort of Perjury, this is
no Perjury; (I mean the simple breaking of that Covenant) though those sins by
which they are said to break it, are horrid Treason and Rebellion against the
God of Heaven, and provoke him to wrath every day. But God's word does convince
of all Sin, but does not convince of this sort of Perjury, as is affirmed. It Is
not this which is the Self killing Murder, the damnable Sin; No no, but it is
their unbelief, and contempt of God's Grace, or neglecting the great Salvation
offered unto us by Christ in the Gospel.

5. Baptism administered in Infancy, has, says Mr. Burkitt, this singular
advantage above that which is administered at riper Age, in that it gives the
pious Parent a good Ground and Hope that his Children dying in Infancy, are
certainly saved, it makes (say you) that Ordinance a Channel of Grace, etc.

1. Answ. This is like to the rest. But Sir, by what Authority do you assert
all these things? You know what wonderful Virtue the Papists say, is in many of
their Popish Rites, Ceremonies and Relics, i. e. in their crossing of
themselves, and in their Holy Water, especially in their Agnns Dei. But how do
they prove it? Even as well as you do, what you speak here upon this account,
and we have the same reason to believe them, as to believe you in what you
speak, without Proof or Authority from God's word.

2. Pious Parents! But alas, how few are there of that sort? but what hope have
the Impious, Profane, and ungodly Parent of the Salvation of his dying
Children? But Sir, I thought all the Pious and Believing or Godly Parents
Children, were born in Covenant with God, that their Parents Faith would have
secured them, whether Baptized or not, were not the Jews Female Children saved?
they were not Circumcised; And were not their Male Infants saved, who dyed
before the Eighth Day?

3. From what Scripture is it, these Pious, though Ignorant and deceived
Parents, may have hope that their Children that dye in their Infancy shall be
saved, and none but theirs that are Baptized, or rather Rantised.

4. Will Pedo-Baptists make Baptism their Savior? Can Baptism save them, And
is it so indeed? Is it in the power of Parents to save or damn their Children?
And how came Baptism to have such power in it? or who made that a Channel of
Grace to dying Infants? Do you not place that Virtue in an external Rite, that
only belongs to the Blood of Christ, and sanctifying Grace of God's Spirit? Mr.
Perkins Perkins on Gal. c. 3. p. 256.
says, That Baptism indeed saves, but says he, that is not the Baptism of
Water, but the stipulation of a good Conscience by the Resurrection. Again he
says, the outward Baptism without the inward, is no mark of God's Child, but
the mark of a Fool, that makes a Vow, and afterward breaks it.

5. May not this Doctrine of theirs, clearly tend to scare and affright poor
Parents with fear, that all their Babes that dye in their Mothers Womb, or
before baptized, are damned? And Oh, in what a sad Condition are all the
Children of the ungodly and impious Persons, whose little Babes you dare not,
cannot Baptize, if you are true to your own Principles? But that Text may give
us better ground of Hopes a Thousand times, concerning the well being of our
dying Infants, where our Savior says, for of such are the Kingdom of Heaven;
and that also which you mention, I shall go to him, he shall not return to me;
together with the infinite Mercy of God, through the virtue of Christ's Blood,
who can convey help and healing to dying Infants and Idiots, in ways we know
not of, nor are we to trouble our Selves about such secret things that are not
revealed.

6. Mr. Burkitt says, the practice of Infant Baptism appears most beneficial,
because it prevents such shameful and scandalous neglects of Baptism, to the
blemish of Christianity.

Ans. Is it then a shameful scandal to neglect a Tradition of Man? (For so I
have proved Infant Baptism to be) Where is the shame that ought to be in
Christians, that Christ's Laws and Precepts are neglected, and his precious
Ordinance of Baptism exposed to Contempt and Shame, as it is by you and
Thousands more, whilst the Statutes of Omri are zealously kept and observed, as
the Prophet of old complained; I mean humane Rites and Traditions or Statutes,
(like those of Omri; instituted by him and Jeroboam) which the Wisdom of your
Church, and many corrupt Churches have been zealous for to this day; and thus I
have run through and examined Mr. Burkitts Six particulars, which he brought to
prove the usefulness of Infant Baptism, above the baptism of Believers, which
our Blessed Savior Instituted; and now shall show you further that Infant
Baptism is so far from being more useful then that of the Adult, that it is a
palpable error, and therefore of no use at all, but the contrary, viz. a very
sinful thing.

Reader, can that be useful, or any ways beneficial which Christ never
Commanded or required to be done in his Name, but is unrighteously Fathered
upon him, to the utter making void his own Ordinance of baptizing Believers?

2. Can that have any usefulness in it, that brings guilt upon the Parents in
doing it, making them guilty of Will, Worship, or of a humane Tradition?

3. Can that be useful that brings Babes into such a Covenant, which Christ
never Ordained them to enter into, and to which they directly nor indirectly
consented nor approved of; and which they are utterly unable to keep; and which
gives them no strength to perform; nor is there one promise of God made to
assist or help them to do it, and yet for not keeping of it, they are charged
with Perjury, with self Murder, nay, with Hell and Damnation?

4. Can that be of use to Infants that may basely beguile and deceive them,
causing them when grown up, to think they were thereby made Christians, and
become the Children of God, Members of Christ, and Inhabitants of the Kingdom
of Heaven, nay, Regenerated; and from hence never look after any other work of
Grace nor Regeneration, but conclude all is well with them?

5. Can that be an usual thing, which the doing of it is a palpable alteration
of the words of Christ's Commission, and so inverts that Holy Order left by him
for baptizing, who requires none to be baptized before they be first Taught and
made Disciples?

6. Can that be of any use to an Infant which you, nor no Man else can prove
from Gods Word, to have any use and Blessing in it to them?

7. Can an humane Rite or Tradition, think you, save poor Children, or a little
Water sprinkled on the Face, wash away Original Sin? Or will God bless a
Tradition of Man.

8. Can Water beget Children to Christ, or can that be useful to them, which
they have only the bare sign of, and not the thing signified, viz. the Sign of
Regeneration, but not Regeneration it self, a sign of Grace, but not Grace it
self? you give them the Shell, but no Kernel; the name of a Christian, but no
nature of a Christian, making that you call Christ's Baptism, (as Dr.
Taylorsaith,) a sign without effect, and like the Fig Tree in the Gospel, full
of Leaves, but no Fruit.

9. Can that be useful that tends to make the Gospel Church National, (and
confounds the Church and the World together) which ought to be Congregational,
a holy and separate People, like a Garden enclosed?

10. Can Baptism be more useful to Infants then adult Believers,
notwithstanding the Scripture says, that the Person baptized, does not only
believe, but call upon the name of the Lord, Acts 22. 16. Can Infants do that?

11. Can Infant Baptism be more useful then that of Believers, and yet Baptism
an Ordinance of the Souls Marriage with Christ? and is not that (as Mr. Baxter
says,) a strange Marriage, where there is nothing signified of consent? and
are Infants able so to do?

12. Can Infant Baptism be more useful then that of Believers, and yet Baptism
called the Answer of a good Conscience? Can a little Babe answer a good
Conscience by being baptized in Obedience to Christ, and to show forth his
Death and Resurrection?

13. Can Infant Baptism be more useful then that of Believers? Whereas the
first has no promise of God made unto it, and yet the other has many, as Acts
2. 36, 37, 38. Mark. 16. 16.

14. Can that be an useful thing that frustrates the Sacred and Spiritual ends
of Baptism? which we have showed are many, but as administered to poor Babes,
it is rendered wholly of none effect, and an insignificant thing.

Mr. Perkins hints that Baptism signifies two things, (1) our Union with
Christ, (2) our Communion with him, now how does this appear in Infants as
such, as it does in Believers; Perkins on Gal. p. 265.

16. Is not that an absurd Doctrine and Practice that renders the fruitful Womb
of a godly Woman, more advantageous to increase, the Church of Christ, then a
fruitful Gospel.

17. Is it not a very absurd thing to say, that Abraham could by his Money,
purchase and bring Strangers and proselyted Gentiles into the Covenant of
Grace, and if Abraham could buy them and bring them into the Covenant of Grace
with Silver and Gold, what need was there of Jesus Christ to buy or purchase
them with his own Blood?

18. Is not that an absurd Doctrine and Practice that holds forth, that godly
Parents have power to bring in their Children into the Covenant of Grace, or
keep them out of it? for if you by baptizing them do not bring them into the
Covenant of Grace, but you do believe they were in the said Covenant by being
born of Believers, by being begotten by you according to the Flesh, then it
will follow, if we are Believers, our Children are in as good a Condition as
yours, though they were never baptized.

CHAP. XXII.
Answer to Mr. James Owen's 18th. Chapter, wherein be shows the Duty of
Parents to their Children, proving in opposition to what he says, that Parents
ought not to consecrate their Infants to the Lord by Baptism.

YOu say, if Parents would perform their Duties toward their Children, and how
to make a right use of their Baptism, there would be more Godliness and
Sobriety in the Country, and few would be the number of them that deny their
Baptism, etc.

Answ. If Parents did generally take more care of their Childrens Souls, and
instruct them in the Principles of the Christian Religion then they do, no
doubt Sobriety and Godliness would more abound then now it does every where.

2. But as to the right use of their Baptism, you your Selves cannot tell what
use that can be to them, because it is not appointed of God.

3. Did Parents instruct their Children according to the word of God, viz. to
believe and get Union with Christ, and not baptize them till they desired it,
according to the Scripture, Infant Baptism would soon vanquish.

(1.) You say look to your own right in the Covenant of God, if God is not a
God to you, he is not a God to your Seed, etc.

1. Answ. Suppose then that some of those Parents whose Children you baptize,
should not be in Covenant with God, what right had their Children to Baptism,
is not that Baptism a nullity; it was not thus in the case of Circumcision, if
the Parents were Abraham's natural Seed, whether Godly or wicked, they were to
Circumcise their Male Children.

2. Though it is true, an adult Person has no right to Baptism that is not a
true believer, yet if he profess Faith in Christ, and a Minister not knowing
his Heart; but sees no cause to doubt of the reality or truth of his Faith, he
may baptize such; but you have no Warrant to baptize a Child upon the
profession of its Parents Faith, though his Faith be sincere.

2. When they are Born prepare to Present and Consecrate them (say you) to the
Lord through the Sacred Ordinance of Baptism, there are many that baptize all
their Children as matter of Ceremony, and mere Custom without looking to the
Lord, etc.

Answ. By whose Authority must they thus do, viz. As soon as their Children are
Born, Consecrate them to the Lord. It Is not by the Authority of God's Word,
therefore a piece of Will Worship. Parents would do well to pray over their
Babes, as soon as they are Born, but unless required by Christ to baptize them,
they must not do that.

2. Whoever therefore Baptize their Infants, do it only as a Ceremony divised
by Man though not in their intention, their Consciences being missed.

You ought (say you) to be serious about their Baptism, as we should be about
our own baptism; that which the Child ought to do, if he had been at Age and
Understanding, must be done by you for them, even as Mothers when their
Children be Sick, take Physic themselves, which the Children ought to take, so
that the Child may have the Medicine in his Mothers Milk, even so do ye that
which the Child ought to do, if he had been of Age before Baptized.

1. Answ. Some of the Papists are very serious about their divised Ceremonies,
but this makes it in no wise the more acceptable to God. But

2. Do you not here seemingly acknowledge it is the Duty of the Child when it is
at Age to be baptized, but you would have its Parents do it for the Child; but
how do you prove that God will accept that at the Hands of the Parent which the
Child ought to do when at Age.

I have showed you that in an early Council they would not allow a Woman big
with Child to be Baptized least it should be thought the Child was baptized
with the Mother.

3. Does the Mothers Faith and Holiness avail and profit their Child's Soul, as
her Milk may avail and profit the Body of her Child, what kind of Doctrine is
this? but it may be so if what you said before be true, i. e. that the Child is
part of the Patent.

3. Bless the Lord for the Covenant of Grace (say you) and for Christ the
Mediator of the Covenant, and for Baptism the Seal of that Covenant; Is the
extent of the Covenant, a small thing in thy sight, that the living God binds
himself to thee and thy sinful Seed? Is it a small thing that he should pity
them when they were polluted in their blood, that he washed them and entered
into a Covenant with them, Ezekiel. 16. 5. 6.

1. Answ. We have all cause to bless the Lord for the Covenant of Grace, and
for Christ the Mediator, both in respect of our selves, and for our Children,
but you affirm' that which you cannot prove, viz. that baptism is the Seal of
the Covenant of Grace, for has the Covenant of Grace any other Seal, that
Seals to us all the Blessings of that Covenant, save the Holy Spirit only, the
Spirit of God is called a Seal, Ephesians. 1. 13, 14. Chap. 4. 30. but so is not
baptism called any where.

2. If all your Children have the Seal of the Covenant of Grace, or all the
blessings thereof, sealed up to them, shall they not be all saved? all know a
Seal confirms and gives an assurance of all the Privileges, Blessings, and
Profits, that are contained in that Covenant, to which it is prefixed.

3. You falsely also apply that Text in Ezekiel. 16. 5, 6, 7. that is not
applicable to our Infants as such, but to God's Israel or Believers, who were
once like that wretched Infant cast out in its Blood, but God entered into
Covenant with us, and washed us, etc. But are all believers Children washed in
the Blood of Christ, no doubt they are in the Covenant of Grace that go to
Heaven, that die in Infancy; but the rest remain polluted, in their Original,
and actual pollution until they believe in Christ Jesus, and are negenerated by
Divine Grace, though they are baptized, for that washes them not.

4. Set time a part (say you) for earnest praying, praying to the Lord for to
forgive the Sins of your Child to Sanctify his Nature, and bless the Ordinance
of Baptism unto him, etc.

Answ. Prayer is good, and a great Duty it is to pray for our Children, but take
heed how you pray their baptism may be blessed, since Christ did not appoint
any Baptism for them in Infancy; has he promised any blessing to that, or will
he bless an Invention of Men?

5. When the Minister does baptize thy Child, do thou act Faith in God's
Covenant, for thy self and thy Child, etc.

Ans. How can you act Faith in doing that which God has made no promise unto
you, or to your Children believers that are baptized may act Faith indeed.

1. Because Christ commands them to be baptized, Mat. 28. 19, 20. Acts 2. 37.

2. Because he has promised unto them great blessings in Baptism, Mark. 16.
16. Acts 2. 37, 38. but there is neither a precept for nor promise made unto
Infants Baptized.

1. Speedily do it, stay not as Moses did to Circumcise his Child, Exodus 4. 24.
the which had like to cost him his life, it is true God binds us not at this
time to the Eighth day as he did the Jews, yet we ought not to delay. Vid.
Cypr. Fidem Ep. 59.

Answ. Make not more speedy have then good speed, or more have then God
directs you, why not delay, since God no where says on the Eighth Day, nor
at a year Old nor three years Old, but when they believe, then they ought to
rise indeed and not tarry, and be baptized, but since you have no Scripture for
this advise, you Quote Cyprian, who would not have the Adult delay if he speaks
it of Infants, he is no rule for us, the Ordinance was corrupted in his time,
where is it written in Gods Word, Moses had a command to Circumcise his Son on
the Eighth Day, therefore he ought not to delay longer, but what is this to
your case.

2. Cheerfully as one Marries his Child with the Lord Jesus Christ.

Answ. Cheerfully do it, no do it not at all on your peril. For it is as Mr.
Baxter says, a strange Marriage where there is nothing of consent.

3. Publicly (say you) before the Congregation.

Answ. And yet not ashamed, show your authority first.

Your other advice seems tolerable good, save what you speak concerning your
Infant Baptism, in Teaching your Children, the knowledge of the Holy
Scriptures, and giving them good examples; and in putting them into godly
Families; in doing thus you may expect a blessing from God, but none of these
things will add any virtue to their Infant Baptism, to make that any ways
effectual to them, so much only shall suffice as toy our 18th. Chapter.

CHAP. XXIII.
In answer to Mr. James Owens 19th Chapter wherein he gives advice to Children,
with an answer to his Queries, that he would have the Antipedobaptists to reply
unto.

CHildren, bless the Lord for the privileges of your Baptism, God has taken
you into Covenant (say you) with your Parents, he has prevented you with the
blessings of goodness, and made you nigh, who being by Nature a far off, ye are
no more Strangers and Foreigners, but fellow Citizens with the Saints and the
Household of God, Ephesians. 2. 19.

1. Answ. Must they bless God that their Parents deceived them with false hopes
of privileges, which neither they nor your selves know what they are, or for
putting a cheat upon them to make them think their State is better thereby, and
yet cannot prove it from Gods Word so to be. How does God prevent them with
blessings of Goodness, by your Rantizing them? does your pretended baptism
insuse grace or gracious habits unto them, or what to (...), or is ^t the
blessings of that Vow you brought them under voluntarily, without any authority
from God.

2. Are you not afraid to affirm that Children by their baptism are by the Lord
made near unto him, and made thereby Children of God, who were by Nature
Children of Wrath, and no more Strangers and Foreigners, etc. If this was so,
shall they not be all Saved? Can any thing bring Children near to God, and make
them fellow-Heirs and Citizens with the Saints, but a Sacred Work of God's
Spirit upon their Souls, and does your Baptism do this.

2. Can such that are no more Strangers to God, etc. ever perish? Is there a
possibility of Final falling from a State of true Grace; and if it be thus
ought not your Children to have all the privileges of the Household of God, the
Lords Supper, etc.

3. Will you attribute those High and Sublime Privileges that belong to
believers, who are only born of the Spirit, to your poor Babes that yet remain
Children of Wrath and unrenewed by the Grace of God, is not this a ready way to
blind the Eyes of your Children, and ruin their Souls if they should believe
you herein.

You are under that Gracious Providence (say you) which watches over the
Church, etc.

1. Answ. You must first prove them Members of the Church; and not only
Members, but all of them elected Persons, for they are such Members, that the
special Providence of God is over.

2. You say they have a share in the daily prayers that are put up for the
Church of God. Psalm 72. 15. Prayers shall be made for him, and daily shall he
be praised. Psalm 51. 13. Do good in thy good pleasure to Zion and build the
Walls of Jerusalem Gal. 6. 16. As many as walk according to this rule, peace on
them, and mercy on the Israel of God. If you had been without baptism, you
should have been without, and so without any share in these prayers.

Answ. I have put some of the Texts of Scripture down at large that you cite,
and does that Text in Psalm 72. 13. not relate to Jesus Christ personally
considered, if not only so, yet Christ mistical, viz. the elect Seed, and not
to all the Members of the visible Church as such, and so also in the other
Scriptures, and dare you thus abuse the Sacred Scriptures, applying these
prayers and promises to all your Infants.

2. Do your Children as such, walk according to that Rule Gal. 6. 16. are they
all new Creatures, read the Context or do you not falsely apply and interpret
these Scriptures.

3. And if all unbaptized Persons be without any share in those prayers, you
your self are without them, for you was only Rantized. But what stress do you
lay upon Baptism? Are none Membes of Gods Mystical and Spiritual Sion, but such
who are baptized.

4. Also how do you go about to blind, and deceive the Souls of your Children
in causing them to believe they are Members of Gods Sion, and have part in
those prayers, when it may be it is false, or no such thing, they being (some of
them when grown up,) wicked or ungodly.

3. (Say you) as you are Members of the Church of God, you have a particular
right unto the promises, the inheritance of the Church are the promises, they
belong unto her, and not to others, as formerly the promises belonged to the
Visible Church of the Jews, so now to the Visible Church of the Gentiles, Romans
9. 4. Gal. 4. 23.

1. Answ. I have proved that our Children as such, are not Members of the
visible Church; no, nor ought any of the Children of Believers to be taken into
it, but such that believe that repent, or that are born again.

2. If any others, viz. such that are not regenerated are taken into the
visible Church, whether Infants or Adult Persons, it is not by God's
appointment, and therefore such have no right to the Special and Spiritual
promises of God, which are the peculiar inheritance of the elect of God.

3. The visible Church of the Jews as so considered, had many external promises
belonging to them, that is not denied, which the Gentile Church has no right
unto; but the whole Jewish Church, or all her visible Members had not a right
to the Spiritual Promises of God, They are not all Israel that are of Israel,
Romans 9. 6. neither because they are Seed of Abraham, are they all Children,
verse. 7. that is they are the Children of the Flesh, these are not the Children
of God, but the Children of the Promise are counted for the Seed, verse. 8. You
mention the 4 Verse, but mention not the Verses I have cited, which open the
4th verse, and thus you go about to give a false Exposition of the Scripture,
and deceive the understanding of your poor Children, and others also.

But say you, though the whole Members of the visible Church, be not partakers
of the Grace of the Promises, Heb. 4. 1. which are given to the elect only, yet
all the Members of the visible Church have more right to this Grace then others
that are without, it being their own Fault if they refuse it.

Answ. You in the first place speak right here, but what you speak in your next
Words are utterly false.

1. You say the whole Members or all the Members of the Visible Church be not
partakers of the grace of the promises; this is right, but why do you say that
all the Members of the Visible Church have more right to the promises then
those poor Souls who are enquiring the way into the Visible Church in all
sincerity of Heart. It Is I fear dangerous for people to set under such a
Teacher. I affirm that the State of such that are let into the Visible Church,
who are unsound or carnal Persons, is worse then the State of others: neither
are they under the promises of grace above others: for

1. First, they conclude perhaps all is well with them and that they are
converted, because the pastor of the Church, nay, and the Church her self so
judges of them, and from hence they look not after regeneration or true
Convertion, but look upon themselves to be Holy, or Saints of God; now the
promises of Grace do not run to these, as they do to those, that see themselves
lost and undone Sinners, being far from God, and out of the pail of the visible
Church, therefore you do your Children great Mischief and hurt, in taking them
into your Churches, unless they are Converted and truly gracious, it is no
blessing nor benefit to be false Members of the visible Church? but what do you
mean by the last Clause, is it the Sinners sault if he is not elected, or can
Men obtain Grace if they will. True, they ought not to refuse God's Call.

(Say you) your baptized Children seek a clear understanding of that
Obligation, and the Vow of your baptism, Learn of your Parents and Ministers to
know the signification, and need of your Baptism, ye are given unto Christ, and
are not your own, ye are bound to renounce the Devil and all his Works, to
renounce the pomps and vanity of this wicked World, to renounce the pleasure,
and lusts of the Flesh, you are bound to take God the Father to be your God and
chief end, taking the Son to be your Lord and Savior unto you, and God the
Holy Ghost to be your Sanctifier, etc.

1. Answ. Those that are baptized should understand the Nature of that
Obligation before they enter into that Covenant.

2. The end of Baptism was Ordained by Christ to show that the Person baptized
is born again, is dead to sin, not that he ought, or is bound afterward to be
Born again; no no, but after he is baptized he is obliged thereby to walk in
newness of life. You by baptizing Infants invert the design and end of Baptism;
how should your Children understand this Obligation, when their Parents and
Ministers are so ignorant about the nature of that Obligation themselves?

3. Believers do thus take God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost in baptism, to
be their God, but so do not Infants by any appointment of God.

4. It appears that you approve of the Church of Englands Catechism, if so all
your Baptized Infants are according to your Doctrine in Baptism regenerated and
have thereby renounced the Devil and all his Works, etc.

3. As soon as ye come to Age and Understanding renew your Covenant with God,
the Lord has received in his Covenant the Faith of your Parents for you in
your Infancy, but now ye are of Years, if ye your selves will not believe and
repent, and take God to be a God unto you, your baptism will not longer benefit
you, etc.

Answ. I answer if it be thus your Children are not much beholding to their
Parents Faith, nor to Covenant Grace, you tell them when their Parents believed
and were saved, all their Children were saved, and in covenant with them; but
it appears now this only served for their Infant State, they may fall out of
the Covenant of Grace, and be damned, notwithstanding their being once in the
covenant of Grace, and saved with their Parents; unless they do actually
believe, etc.

2. But if they had dyed in their Infancy, perhaps they would have perished,
had not their Parents believed, is this your meaning; certainly if they are
such that are Elected they shall be Saved, though they had dyed in Infancy, though
their Parents believed or not believed, does the Parents believing procure
their Salvation, and the Parents not believing obstruct their Childrens
Salvation, and so bring on them Damnation, if so the Salvation and Damnation of
their Children in Infancy, is put into the hands or Faith of their Parents.

3. And if this be so, woe to the poor Babes of unbelievers, must they be all
Damned? Cannot Christ save such Children by his Merits and Righteousness, nor
Sanctify them that die in their Infancy, unless their Parents do believe, and
baptize them; and dare you say he will not, what strange Doctrine is this; and
by what authority do you assert those things which your Doctrine leads you out
to do.

4. True, all our Children are Obliged by the Lord, when they come to Years of
understanding, to remember their Creator, and to Fear, Love, Believe and Serve
him, by the Authority and Command of his Blessed Word, but not by virtue of any
Baptismal Vow he has appointed for them in Infancy, to come under, or enter
into, the State of Children in Infancy, may through Christ's Merits be fast
enough, if they Die then, whether their Parents believe or not, and it apppears
the Privileges and Blessings of their Parents Faith does them no good any
longer, but only whilst they continue in Infancy.

4. You bid your Children that are grown up to live answerable to their
Covenant.

5. Say you, give not place to Temptation, in denying your First Baptism.

Answ. Let your Children take heed that they are not blinded by your pretended
baptismal privilege, so as to think they are any ways the better for that.
Young Men and Women, it is not your Patents Faith will interest you in the
Covenant of Grace, there is a twofold being in that Covenant.

1. Decretively. 2. Actualy all Gods Elect ones are Decretively in the Covenant
of Grace, but no one Soul, either Man or Woman, is actually in it, until they
have by Faith Union with Christ. O! labor after this Union, you are all the
Children of Wrath by Nature, and your Infant Baptism alters not your State, nor
had you any right to baptism when you were Infants, but if you do believe you
may and ought to be Baptized by virtue of Christ's Commission or Authority of
God's Word. Let not your Faith stand in this matter in the Wisdom of Men, but
in the Power and Authority of the Word of God; to walk according to the Rule of
the Holy Scripture herein, is not to give way to Temptation; but to the
dictates of God's Spirit, let Mr. Owen say what he will.

You bid your Children to ask such, who deny Infant baptism these following
questions.

1. Say you, ask them, Can they prove from the Scripture that the Children of
the Faithful were cast out from the Covenant of Grace. Let them show us a plain
Scripture for that: for if they are not cast out of the Covenant of Grace, then
baptism, the Seal of the Covenant belongs unto them.

1. Answ. Young Men and Women, pray ask Mr. Owen, whether all the Children of
the Faithful (or their Children as such) were, and are in the Covenant of Grace.

2. If he says they all were, and still are in that Covenant, ask him whether
then it does not follow that they shall all be saved, because the Everlasting
Covenant of Grace is well ordered in all things and sure, 2. Sam. 23. 5. and
the promise of the eternal. Life sure to all the true Seed of Abraham, Romans 4.
16. confirmed by the Promise and Oath of God. Heb. 6. 13. to the 19th. verse.

3. Ask him, whether the true Spiritual Seed of Abraham, are not all Elected to
Salvation, or the Elect of God.

4. Ask him whether there is any final falling away out of the Covenant of
Grace, or possibility for one of God's Elect, eternally to perish.

5. Ask him if God did not make a Covenant with Abraham's fleshly Seed as such,
that peculiarly appertained to them, in which the whole House of Israel were
taken into an External, Legal, and Typical Church State, and so was a National
Church, and had many External Privileges, which our Children have not.

6. Ask him whether the whole House of Israel, both Parents and Children, were
all in the Covenant of Grace, and so God's People by way of Special Love and
Eternal Election.

7. Ask him whether the Carnal Seed of believers as such, are to be taken into
the Visible Church in the times of the Gospel, as they were under the Law. If
so, ask him why John the Baptist did refuse them.

8. Ask him how he can prove that the fleshly Seed of believers as such, are
the true Spiritual Seed of Abraham.

Tell him that Mr. Airsworth, a Man that he Quotes, and a Man of great
Learning, and though a a peao-baptist, says, on Genesis 12. 7. (thy Seed) That is
all the Children of the promise, the Elect, who only are accounted Abraham's
Seed, Rom, 9. 7, 8. And in Christ, and Heirs according to the promise, Gal. 3.
29.

And tell him that Dr. Owen in his Book called, The Doctrine of the Saints
perseverance. cap. 4. says that the effectual Dispensation of the grace of the
Covenant, is peculiar to them only, who are the Children of promise, the
Remnant of Abraham, according to Election, with all, that in all Nations, were
to be blessed with him, and in his Seed, i. e. Jesus Christ, Ishmael tho
Circumcised was cast out. Thus Dr. Owen, and say I, as Ishmael was cast out
though Circumcised, so Paul says the bondwoman and her Son is now cast out,
that is, the Old Covenant and Carnal Seed of Abraham as such, See Gal. 4. 30.

Tell him that Amelius de spraedest. chap. 8. Sermon 6. A Learned Man says,
There are many of the Seed of Abraham, to whom the word of promise did not
belong then, the rejection of many Jews, who are of the Seed of Abraham does
not make void the word of promise; from whence, may we not safely conclude,
That if the Natural posterity of Abraham were not within the Covenant of Grace
by Virtue of the promise, Genesis 17. 2. then much less are our Natural Posterity,
but the former is true, therefore the latter.

9. Ask him whether the Covenant of Grace, simply in its self gave right to
Circumcision, if so why was not Lot and Melchisedec Circumcised, were they not
in the Covenant of Grace?

This being so, ask him if he can prove that the Covenant of Grace, simply
considered in its self gives any a right to baptism, since it is a mere positive
Command of Christ.

10. Ask him whether ungodly Parents that spring from Abraham's Loins by
Isaac-in their Generations, were not as much obliged by God's positive Command
to Abraham to Circumcise their Male Children, as the Faithful and Godly Parents
were obliged to Circumcise theirs, this being so;

11. Ask him why all ungodly persons and unbelievers ought not now to Baptize
their Children, as well as believers, should baptize theirs.

2. You bid your Children ask such that deny Infant Baptism, can they prove
from Scripture that Christ came in to the World to make the condition of
Children worser then it was before.

Ans. Tell Mr. Owen he has had this Question answered in this Treatise, over
and over, viz. Tell him, the Spiritual Privileges of Children now are more
then theirs were under the Law: So that our Children lose no Divine and
Spiritual blessings or privileges, which the Children of the Faithful once
had. God has the same love to, and care of our Children under the Gospel, as
he had to theirs under the Law; but the Temporal blessings of the Jewish
Children, and their External or Earthly privileges, then were more then our
Children have in Gospel times, the Gospel Church being established upon better
promises, theirs were under the promise of heaping up Gold and Silver, and
possessing outward peace, and to enjoy a Land that flowed with Milk and Honey.

True the external or outward dispensation of the Gospel Covenant, which our
Children are under, far exceeds theirs for the clearness of Light and
Revelation of Christ, and for other Spiritual privileges ours excells: Besides
no doubt, but the Children of believers under the Gospel far exceed the
privileges of unbelievers by the blessings of a Godly Education and the like.
But we say it was not the Covenant of Grace that gave right to Circumcision
under the Law, but the positive Law and Command of God, so it is not the
Covenant of Grace that gives right to baptism, but Christ's positive Command,
which runs not unto our Children until they do believe; and bid Mr. Owen prove
that Infant baptism does make the condition of Children, any ways better then
the condition of our Children, who never were baptized.

3. Were not little Children (say you) the first Martyrs that lost their Lives
for the sake of Christ, Mat. 2. 16. If God Honored them to be the first
Witnesses for Christ, being baptized in Blood, will he deny them water Baptism.

1. Answ. Were they only the Children of Believers that Herod Murdered, how
will you prove that? but suppose it was so, does it follow from thence, that we
ought to baptize them without a Command; why do you not say, and will not
Christ allow our Children the Ordinance that holds forth the Shedding of his
Blood, as well as Baptism, that holds forth he was Buried, etc.

4. If the Baptism of Infants be evil, why does the Devil (say you) Tempt
Witches or Sorcerers to deny that Baptism? And what is the reason that Satan
cannot have any power over them, until they renounce their Baptism, and after
that they have not any strength to resist him any longer, as several of them
confessed. Park. of Witches Vol. 3. page 640.

1. Answ. Ask Mr. Owen, why the Devil does not love, nor cannot endure Popish
Holy Water, or is such a fearful enemy to that as the Papists say it has often
been manifest? is the Consecration of Water therefore of God's appointment. Why
may we not give credit to the Papists, as well as unto Witches and Sorcerers?

2. Because he cannot prove Infant Baptism from Arguments from Heaven will he
go for Arguments to prove it to be Christ's Ordinance taken from Hell?

3. The Devil is a crafty and subtle Adversary, does not he do this to make
People love and approve of their Infant Baptism, which no doubt Christ never
appointed.

4. However this Testimony is given only by Witches and Sorcerers, and what
ground have we to believe them?

5. Ask them will they give you assurance that you will be better Christians,
by receiving of their baptism, if they say you will be the better, answer them,
that you see several of them growing worse after their re-baptization.

1. Answ. Ask Mr. Owen, whether there are not more People that were Baptized,
or rather Rantized in Infancy, that prove vile and ungodly, then among them
that were baptized upon the profession of their Faith.

2. What assurance can he give to Infants, or to their Parents that the
Children they baptize shall be better Christians thereby? Also how will he
prove that the Children of believers who were baptized in Infancy, prove
generally better Christians then the Children of those Believers that did not
baptize them in their Infancy.

3. Ask him if the baptism of believers upon the profession of their Faith (as
Christ commanded) be the worse because some, like Simon Magus, take it up, and
prove ill Members and scandalous in their Lives.

1. Say you, though they are Members of a Congregation, walking by the Rule of
the Gospel, before they had their re-baptization, they after break the Unity of
the Body they were Members of, by separating themselves, Baptism is an
Ordinance of Unity, but re-baptization is the breaking off the Unity of
Churches.

1. Answ. Why do you use such Tautologies and needless repetitions, you had
this before, and I have answered it, we deny our baptism to be re-baptization,
and have proyed your Rantism is no Baptism at all.

2. Infant Rantism, it is true, Unites National Churches, and Churches Built
upon that, or the like Constitution, and so it Unites many false and
Antichristian Churches I must confess, as the Church of Rome, and some others
in the World, much of the same nature; but it is the baptism of Christ, viz.
that of believers that Unites together, according to the order of the Gospel,
all the Members of a true Gospel Church; and the denying of Infant baptism, and
being baptized upon a profession of Faith, does but break the Union of Churches
of the Saints, that are formarly true and orderly gathered, according to the
Institution of Christ, and the rule of the Gospel: For was not the first Gospel
Church at Jerusalem, gathered out of the National Church of the Jews, of
Persons that repented, believed, and upon the profession of that Faith
Baptized, that is Dipped in Water, in the Name of the Father, Son and Holy
Ghost; also the Church in Samaria, Acts 8. and that in Acts 10. and that at
Corinth, Acts 16. and that at Ephesus, Acts 19. and ought not all Churches so
to be gathered to the end of the World? ought we not to separate from such
Churches, that do not hold the Ordinances that appertain to Church
Constitution, as they were first delivered to the Saints, and from such who are
guilty also of an Human Innovation, ought we to partake of other Men's Sins, or
ought we not to keep our selves pure, Touch not, Taste not, Handle not, which
all are to perish with the using after the Commandments and Doctrines of Men,
Col. 2. 21, 22.

2. You say, before they had their re-baptization they we more Charitable in
their Judgment, but afterward they are usuall^ of a strict and narrow
Judgment, Judging hard and uncharitably of them that are not of their
persuasion; therefore this Opinion that quenches Love, is not of God, 1 Cor.
13. I do not say of them all, that their Love to the Brethren waxes colder,
when they are baptized, but of the greatest part of them, the virtue of the
Grace of God, overcomes the virtue of this Opinion, and keeps them from
falling into the same Temptation of uncharitableness with others.

1. Answ. None of us were ever rebaptized, pray cease your hard and
uncharitable Pen and Tongue.

2. Our Charily is greater far then that Man's, whose Opinion about Infant
Baptism, leads him to cast all out of the Holy Catholic Church, who disown
Infant Baptism, and are baptized as Believers.

3. We have so much Charity to all godly Christians that are pedo-baptists,
that we own them to be our Brethren and Members of the Mystical Body of Christ,
and have the like Love to them as to those who are of our own persuasion in the
point of Baptism, even to all where we see the Image of God.

4. If any among us are too uncharitable, yet assure your self it is not this
Ordinance of Christ, which they own that naturally leads them forth so to be,
but it is from the corruption of their own hearts, therefore you do very ill to
Father it on their Opinion.

5. But as to Communion at the Lord's Table, we believe we are limited and
bounded therein by the rule of God's Word, and it is not for want of Charity to
your Churches we cannot have Church Communion with you` (though all other
Communion of Saints we can have with you) but it is because we would walk
orderly as God directs us in the Gospel, and I should be sorry to hear any of
my Brethren to be of another mind, I am for Catholic Communion, and Charity
with all Saints, though not for Church Communion with any that are unbaptized, as
I believe you all are that have only had Infants Rantism.

3. There are others since their re-baptization, (say you) go further, and have
fallen from one delusion into another, some set up free will, others denying
the Christian Sabbath, others against Catechizing of Children, etc.

1. Answ. It Is very uncharitable in you to reflect upon the whole party of
Baptized Believers from the errors of some that are of our Opinion in respect
of Baptism.

2. You may see a Confession of our Faith, and a late Narrative of the result
of a General Assembly of Pastors, Ministers and Messengers of 107 Churches, in
which we Testify against free will, and do abhor that Notion, and own the
Christian Sab^, viz. the first day of the Week, and vindicate the Catechizing
of Children, have also published a Catechism to that end, and do bewail the
neglect of that great Duty where ever it is found to be neglected, either among
us, or others.

2. But are there no free-willers nor Baxterians among you, whose principles
are much the same, if not something worse, why then do you thus reflect on us?

Require plain Answers (say you) from them unto these Questions, and cause them
to prove all from the Holy Scriptures, the God of all Grace settle you in the
present Truth, that ye might bring forth Fruits meet to your Baptism. Thus you
end your Book.

Answ. You have had plain Answers unto all your Questions, and many other
Questions for you to Answer, and we have proved all we say from the Scriptures,
from whence you will never prove your Practice of Infant Baptism whilst the
World stands. And now the good Lord open your eyes; and the eyes of your Sons
and Daughters, to see their Error, and show you the Ancient Footsteps of the
Flock, that you and they may feed besides the Shepherds Tents, and increase
Love and Charity among us all, which is too much wanting. O where is the power
of godliness. Many can spy the Mote in their Brothers Eye.

CHAP. XXIV.
Containing some brief practical use of the whole precedent Treatise, with
seasonable Counsel to Parents, etc.

NOw Reader, from what thou have heard or read, in this Treatise, and answer to
Mr. James Owen,

1. I may infer that all those who have only been Sprinkled or Rantized, who
are afterward Baptized when they Believed, are not rebaptized, as Mr. Owen
does affirm, nor do they renounce their Baptism, though they do renounce the
practice and Human Tradition of Sprinkling of Infants or Adult Persons.

2. We may also infer that it is a hard thing to restore a lost Ordinance, or to
reform about a long standing Custom and Tradition of Men.

1. Do all you Pious Parents bless God for Christ and the Gospel, and for all
those privileges he has bestowed upon you, and upon your Children, who when
they are grown up, set under the precious and clear Preaching of Christ
Crucified. Be sure, improve these blessings and take heed that you walk in all
things according to the rule of God's Word, and do not follow a Multitude to do
evil, (though some of them are good Men.)

O tremble to do any thing in God's Worship without lawful authority from him,
I mean precept or example from his Word, do not adventure to Baptize, much less
to Rantize your Children any more, whatever Mr. Owen (or any Man on Earth
says) unless you can find it written in your Bibles. God has not commanded
you to bring them into a baptismal Covenant in their Infancy, nor made any
promise of blessing to assist them in performing that Covenant, if you do bring
them into it of your own Head voiuntarily.

If you do, and will do this thing, notwithstanding you have no authority from
God's Word to do it; Pray consider what I have said in this Treatise about this
devised and unwarrantable Covenant, by which you may heap up much guilt upon
your selves, and lay such a Load and Burden upon your Children, that you are
not aware of: Mr. Williams's frightnes them with the Sin of Perjury, who
violate this Covenant, may not this tend to drive them into despair, and God
will never charge them with Perjury, since he never commanded them to enter
into any such Covenant: Your Children who when grown up if wicked and ungodly
have too much guilt, both Original sin, and Actual sin, lying upon them, there
is little need to add to their Burden; for their want of Light, and by Reading
of such Men's Books, they may perhaps thus charge themselves. Mr. Dan. Williams
says, it is the damning sin: no no, the Damning sin is the breach of God's Law,
and particularly the sin of unbelief.

Nay, and does not his words Imply that when your Children are grown up, and
they by Light received from God's word, should be couvinced they were never
baptized at all, and so cast off and renounce their Infants Rautism, that they
hereby become guilty of Perjury, and must be Damned, for he speaks not of those
sins forbidden in God's Word, but the violation of this baptismal Covenant,
which he says is Perjury, and the Damning Sin, and Root of all Sin. O! what
want of Charity is here in these Men, and what New and strange Doctrine do they
Teach!

2. Train up your Children in the fear of God, and set them a good example, and
pray for them, and over them and give them good Instruction, godly Counsel and
Admonition: And see that you neglect not to Catechize them daily, that so they
may understand early, the main Grounds and Principles of Religion; but dread to
Baptize them in Infancy, or before they believe and have the inward and
Spiritual Grace signified in true Baptism.

You have had it proved from God's Word, that there is no Ground nor Authority
from thence to baptize Infants, and know it is not in the power of Man by
external Rite, to bring Children into the Covenant of Grace, nor to make them
Members of his Visible Church: neither Baptism nor the Lords Supper are Bread
for Infants; but for Christ's New Born Babes, 1 Pet. 2. 1, 2, 3, 5. not for
your Children as such, but such only that are the true Children of God, who are
born of the Spirit.

3. Do not go about directly nor indirectly to deceive your Children, by making
them believe they are in a good condition, by reason they are the Seed of
believing Parents, and Baptized as these Men call Sprinkling, and so that way
made Christians, and so from hence perhaps look for no further or other work of
Grace, or regeneration; but think they by this pretended baptism are the
Children of God, Members of Christ, and Inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven;
when it is in Truth no such thing, nor have you any cause to doubt but that your
Infants, who die though not baptized are happy, as appears from what we have
said, neither be you so ignorant to believe that baptism can save your Infants,
or the Adult either; nor let poor Children cry out against their ungodly
Parents, as some of these pedo-baptists intimate they may do. Pray see what Mr.
Burkitt says in his Book. page 62. Before your Children are born, make sure as
much as in you lies, that they may be born within the Covenant, and under the
promise, by your being in Covenant with God Your selves; see that the Lord be
your God in Covenant with you, and then you may comfortably hope he will be the
God of your Seed.

Answ. This Doctrine implys, that it is in the power of Men and Women to bring
their Children into the Covenant of Grace, and as also it denotes that the
Children of believers are not Born Children of Wrath by Nature, for are those
that are born in the Covenant of Grace, born Children of Wrath? O ye Parents,
know that you may be in Covenant, and your Children never in it whilst they
live, nay die out of Covenant, as doubtless many Children of the Faithful do.
Nor has God made any such Covenant with any believer, and their Natural Seed
as such, as he made with Abraham, who was the Father of all that believe, but
so are not you nor I, though we are believers and in Covenant with God, and walk
in Abraham's Steps. Those that are in the Electiof Grace of your Seed, never
fear, but God will in due time bring into the Covenant of Grace, and give all
the Covenant Blessings and Privileges, but if any of them are not comprehended
in the Election of Grace, their being born of your Loins, will not, cannot
bring them into the Covenant of Grace, nor give them a right to the Seal
thereof, viz. the holy Spirit; nor can baptism bring any into it, which is only
an outward Sign of our being in that Covenant, or of that divine and spiritual
Grace we received, before we were baptized as I have proved.

Your business and your Childrens also, is to make your own Election sure, by
special and effectual calling.

It Is not the first birth, but the second that brings either you or your
Children into the Covenant of Grace, so that we and they may have God to be our
God by way of special Interest.

But mark Mr. Burkitts next words, page 62. O! were but Infants capable of
knowledge, how much would they dread being born of wicked Parents? make it your
endeavor before your Children are born to sanctify your poor Children, this
is done by prayer, etc.

1. Answ. This is enough to set the Children against their ungodly Parents, nay
to hate them in their Hearts: Alas! the Children of wicked Parents, I see not,
but they may be in as good a Condition as many Children of believers (though I
doubt not but God does let out his infinite Grace generally more to the seed of
the Faithful when grown up then to others) but God will not certainly destroy
poor Children for the fault and unbelief of their Parents. Therefore as your
begetting them in the first birth, though gracious cannot save them, so your
begetting them, though wicked cannot damn or destroy them.

There is no reason says Mr. Perkins, that the wickedness of the Parents
should prejudice the Children in things pertaining to eternal Life. Perkins on
Gal. 3. p. 264.

2. However if it be as Mr. Burkitt and Mr. Owen say, that when believers are
in Covenant their Children are in Covenant also; Doubtless they are in a safe
condition, whether baptized or not, that does not bring them into Covenant.

3. But may not this Doctrine of theirs, put a just rebuke upon unbelievers or
ungoly persons, for once attempting to Marry and beget Children that are in such
a sad condition, by reason their Parents were not in Covenant with God, ought
they, nay may they lawfully Marry, this being considered, and such dreadful
effects following, upon their poor Babes; besides, how far does this Covenant
blessing and privilege extend? If my Grand Father, was in Covenant, though my
Father and I too, are wicked and ungodly Persons, are not we still in Covenant
with God. The Covenant of Peculiarity God made with Abraham, viz. that of
Circumcision, extended not only to his immediate Seed or Offspring; but to all
his Natural Seed successively in their Generations, until Christ came and put
an end to that external Covenant, and Covenant Right.

CHAP. XXV.
Containing several Queries for Mr. Owen to answer, since the Athenian Society
have not done it, who some time since did attempt it.

Sir,
I Having wrote a few Queries lately about Infant Baptism, for the Athenian
Society, to answer upon their bold Challenge; and since they are too hard for
them to do it, having said nothing at all to the purpose; I shall expect to see
them answered by you, when you answer this reply to your Book, I shall not
trouble you with all, but only with a few of them.

Query, 1. Whether the being the Children of Abraham, as such, gave them a
right to Circumcision, or rather the mere positive Command of God to Abraham?

To this they gave no Answer.

Query 2. Whether Circumcision could be said to be a Seal of any Man's Faith,
save Abraham's only, seeing it is only called the Seal of the Righteousness of
his Faith, and also of the Faith which he had, being yet uncircumcised?

To this the Athenian Society answer, amongst the Ancient Heretics, they never
met with such a strange position as this, viz. that the Seal of the
Righteousness of Faith was the privilege of Abraham only. Is this an answer?
Besides they mistake, it is not a Position, but a Question. Furthermore it is
said that Abraham received the sign of Circumcision, not only as a Seal of the
Righteousness of that Faith he had, being yet uncircumcised, but also (Mark)
that he might be the Father of all that believe. Was this the privilege of any
save Abraham only?

Query 3. What do you conceive Circumcision did, or Baptism does seal, or does
make sure to Infants, since a Seal usually makes firm all the blessings and
privileges contained in that Covenant it is affixed to?

The Athenians answer. It Seals and did seal to all that did belong to Christ,
Life and Salvation, but to such as do not, it Seals nothing at all.

To which I reply. How dare any Man Seal the Covenant of Salvation to such, who
have not that Faith Abraham had, before he received that Seal? It was not a
Seal of that Faith he might have, or might not have afterward, but of that
Faith he had before he received it. Secondly I affirm Baptism is no Seal at all
of Salvation, for if it was, and of God's appointment, all that are Sealed
would be saved; even Simon Magus, but many who are Baptized, may perish
eternally, and do no doubt.

Query 4. I demand to know what those external privileges are, Infants partake
of in Baptism, seeing they are denied the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, and
all other external Rites whatsoever? If you say when they believe, they shall
partake of those privileges and blessings; so say I shall the Children of
unbelievers, Turks and Pagans as well as they.

The Athenian Society answer. We insist not upon external privileges; it is
foreign to the Matter.

1. Ans. If you insist not on internal privileges nor on external privileges,
that are Sealed to Infants that are Baptized, what does their Baptism signify?
Just nothing; but which is worse; it is a profanation of Christ's Holy
significant Ordinance of Baptism, and this indeed is worst of all.

Query 5. If the fleshly Seed, or Children of believing Gentiles, as such, are
to be counted the Seed of Abraham; I Query whither they are his Spiritual Seed,
or his Natural Seed? if not his Spiritual Seed, nor his Natural Seed, what
right can they have to Baptism or Church Membership, from any Covenant
Transaction God made with Abraham?

The Athenians answer. They are his Spiritual Seed Visible, for so far only
belongs to us to Judge; and therefore they have a right to the Seal of that
Covenant.

Reply, What they say cannot be true, because the Scripture positively says,
that such who are the spiritual Seed of Abraham, have the Faith of Abraham, and
walk in the Steps of Abraham, and are Christ's, Gal. 3. ult. But Infants of
Believers, as such, cannot be said to have the Faith of Abraham, nor to walk in
Abraham's Steps, etc.

2. Such who are Abraham's Spiritual Seed, are in the Election of Grace, and are
always his Seed, not for so long, but for ever, we can judge none to be
Abraham's Spiritual Seed, but such only in whom these Signs appear before
mentioned; but none of those Signs appear, nor can appear in Infants; therefore
we cannot judge they are his Spiritual Seed, to whom the Seal of the Covenant
of Grace of right does belong.

Query 6. Whither the Children of Believers are in the Covenant of Grace
absolutely, or but conditionally, if only conditionally, what further
privilege have they above the Children of unbelievers.

Query 7. Whither those different Grounds upon which the right of Infant
Baptism, is pretended by the Ancient Fathers of Old, and the Modern Divines,
does well agree, with an Institution, that is a mere positive right, wholly
depending on the Sovereign will of the Legislator, and whether this does not
give just cause to all to question its authority?

1. Some Pedo-baptists asserted, it took away Original Sin; and such who denied
it were Anathematized.

2. Some affirm that Children are in Covenant, and being the Seed of Believers
are Faederally Holy, therefore to be Baptized.

3. Another sort of Pedo-baptists, say they ought to be baptized by virtue of
their Parents Faith.

4. Another sort Baptize them upon the Faith of their Sureties.

5. Others say by the Faith of the Church, as Austin, Bernard, etc.

6. Others say they have Faith themselves, i. e. Habitual Faith; and therefore
must be baptized.

7. Some say it is only an Apostolical unwritten Tradition, But others deny
that, and say it may be proved from the Scripture.

8. Others say it is a Regenerating Ordinance, and Infants are thereby put into
a savable State: Others say, the Infants of Believers are born therefore safe
before in Covenant with their Parents.

To this Query they say nothing, pretending they had answered it before.

Query 8. Whither that can be an Ordinance of Christ, for which there is
neither precept nor example, nor plain and undeniable Consequences for it in
all God's Word, nor promise made to such who do it, nor threats pronounced on
such as neglect it?

Their answer is there, About Women's Receiving the Sacrament, etc.

Query 9. Whether in matter of mere positive Right, such as Baptism is, we
ought not to keep expressly and punctually to the Revelation of the Will of the
Lawgiver?

They answer, yes.

Reply. Then your Cause is lost, for God's Word expressly directs us to Baptize
only such who are first Taught, or made Disciples by Teaching, or who make a
profession of their Faith; and Dipping is the express Act of Baptizing, as
practiced in the New Testament, which a great Clound of Witnesses testify.

Query 10. Whether the Baptism of Infants be not a dangerous Error, since it
tends to deceive poor Ignorant People, who think they are thereby made
Christians and Regenerated, and so never look after any other Regeneration or
Baptism, that represents or or holds forth the inward work of God's Grace?

They answer, They never tell them they are made Christians thoroughly, etc.

Then I Appeal to all Men, who have Read the Old Church Catechism. -- In my
Baptism, wherein I was made a Child of God, a Member of Christ and an Inheritor
of the Kingdom of God.

11. Since we read but of one Baptism in Water, and that one Baptism is that of
the Adult, i. e. such who profess Faith, etc. How can Infant Baptism or rather
Rantism be an Ordinance of Christ.

12. Whether there is any Covenant appointed by Christ for Infants to enter
into, unto which no promise is made of assistance to perform it, nor Blessing
promised if it be kept, nor one threatening if cast off and disowned?

13. What should be the reason that our Translators of the Holy Bible should
leave the Greek word Baptism, or Baptisma, untranslated: seeing the Dutch have
not done so; but contrariwise Translate for John Baptist John the Dipper, and
for he Baptized them, he Dipped them.

The Athenian Society answer, They are the best Judges themselves, and if we
can understand them it is enough.

Reply. No, though the Learned in the Greek do know what the word Baptizo and
Baptisma is, yet the unlearned in that Tongue do not know that it is to Dip or
Immersion, ^refore it is not enough.

14. Whither such who have been Sprinkled, ought not to be deemed unbaptized
Persons, since asperson is not Immersion, or Rantizing not Baptizing, seeing
the Greek word signifies to Dip; and though sometimes to Wash; yet such a Washing
as is by Dipping, as the Learned confess.

To this they say, Those that doubt may be of the surer side.

15. Whither the Ancient Church, who gave the Lords Supper to Infants as well
as baptism might not be allowed to do the one as the other; since Faith and
Holy Habits, yea to believe with all the Heart, is required of them that are to
be Baptized, as Faith, Examination, and to discern the Lord's Body, is required
of them that partake of the Lord's Supper, and since also all that were
baptized into the Apostolic Church, were immeditely admitted to the Lord's
Supper; and also seeing the arguments taken from the Covenant, and because
Children are said to be Holy, and belong to the Kingdom of Heaven, are as
strong for their being admitted to both the Sacraments as one, and there being
no Command nor example for either, and Human Tradition carrying it equally for
both for several Centuries.

16. Whither Nadab, Abihu and Uzzah's Transgressions were not as much
Circumstantials; and so as small Errors, as it is to alter Dipping into
Sprinkling, and from an understanding believer, to an Infant that understands
not its Right Hand from its Left; and whether to allow the Church a power to
make such alterations be not dangerous, it being an adding and diminishing from
God's Word, see Rev. 22. 18. and does not this open likewise a Door to any
other like innovation?

17. Whither there is any just cause for Men to vilify and reproach the
Baptists with the Name of Anabaptists, for their Baptizing Believers, seeing
aspersion is not baptizing, and in regard also, that they have the direct and
positive Word and Command of Christ so to do, and not only the Commission, Mat.
28. Mark 16. but also the constant use of the Apostles, and Ministers of the
Gospel, all along in the New Testament, who baptized none but such who made a
profession of their Faith in the Gospel time; observable it is also, that the
Church of England also says, that Faith and Repentance are required of such
who are to be baptized.

18. Whither if our Translators had Translated the Greek Word Baptizo, from
^^pto, they must not have Translated it, Dipping or to Dip from the Native and
Genuine signification of the word, and whether they have done well to leave
those words in the Original Tongue, without giving the plain meaning in the
English?

19. Seeing the Greek Church uses Immersion to this Day, and not aspersion or
Sprinkling, may not it be a great argument against Sprinkling, seeing also that
they disown the Baptism of the Latin Church, because they do not Dip: For
doubtless the Greeks best know the genuine, literal and proper signification of
that Word, that Tongue being their own Natural Language, in which the New
Testament was Originally written.

20. What reason can be given why Nazianzen an Eminent Greek Father should
Counsel the deferring the Baptism of Infants until the third or fourth year of
their Age (except in danger of Death) if it were in Nazianzen's time, as some
suppose it was, the Opinion of the whole Church, as also his own, that Infants
by an Apostolical Tradition, were to be baptized as such, that is as soon as
born.

21. Whither all the Fathers of the Third and Fourth Century, both of the Greek
and Latin Church, who have wrote any thing about Infant Baptism, do not
unanimously give this as the reason why Infants should be baptized, viz. for to
wash away Original Sin, or the putting them into a capacity of Salvation; and
some of them, particularly St. Austin sentencing Infants to Damnation if not
Baptized.

22. If so, whether the Fathers might not be mistaken in the Right of Infant
Baptifm, as well as in the Judgment of most Protestants they, were touching the
reason why they should be baptized.

23. Whither God has allowed or enjoined Parents to bring their little Babes
of Two or Ten days Old into a Covenant with him by Baptism, since it is not to
be found in the Holy Scripture, that he either has allowed or enjoined them so
to do, there being neither Command nor Example nor the least intimation given
for them to do it?

24. If it cannot be proved he has required any such thing at theit Hands,
whether that Covenant can be said to bind their Conscience when they come to
Age, especially since they gave no consent to do it, nor were capable so to do?

25. And if this pretended Covenant was not of God's appointment, I Query how
those Children who refuse to agree to the said Covenant, when they come to Age,
can be guilty (as Mr. Daniel Williams says) 1. of rejecting Christ. 2. Of
renouncing the blessings of the Gospel. 3. And that it is Rebellion continued
against their Parents. 4. That it is Ingratitude and Perjury to their Redeemer.
5. Gross injustice to their Parents. 6. That it is self-killing Cruelty to
their own Souls. 7. The damning Sin. I Query whether this is good Divinity or
not, or rather is it not a strange Doctrine, and whether those unwarrantable
Articles of Faith taken out of the Jewish Talmud or Turkish Alcoran, may not be
of as good Authority or whether it be fit to put such positions into a
Christian Catechism, as these are.

Pray be pleased to Answer these plain Queries when you write again, or Reply
to this answer of your Book.

CHAP. XXVI.
Containing Diverse Arguments to disprove Pedo-Baptism, and to prove the Baptism
of Believers, which Mr. Owen is desired to Answer when he writes again.

Arg. 1. IF none are to be Baptized by the Authority of the Great Commission of
our blessed Savior, Mat. 28. but such who are first Taught or made Disciples
by Teaching, then Infants who are not capable to be taught, ought not to be
baptized. But none are to be baptized by the Authority of the great Commission
of our Blessed Savior, but such who are first Taught or made Disciples by
Teaching. Ergo, Infants ought not to be Baptized.

Arg. 2. If Infant Baptism was never Instituted, Commanded, or Appointed of
God, Infants ought not to be Baptized. But Infant baptism was never Instituted,
Commanded or Appointed of God; Ergo they ought not to be baptized.

As to the Major; if one thing may be practiced as an Ordinance without an
Institution, or Command of God, another thing may also; and so any Innovation
may be let into the Church.

As to the Minor; If there is an Institution for it, etc. It Is either contained
in the great Commission, Mat. 28. Mark 16. or somewhere else. But it is not
contained in the great Commission, nor any where else, Ergo, etc.

The Major none will deny.

The Minor I prove thus. None are to be baptized by virtue of the Commission,
but such who are Discipled by the Word, as I said before, and so the Greek word
(...) signifies.

If any should say Christ Commanded his Disciples to Baptize all Nations, and
Infants are part of Nations, therefore ought to be baptized, I answer,

Arg. 3. If all Nations or any in the Nations ought to be Baptized before
Discipled; then Turks, Pagans, unbelievers and their Children may be Baptized,
because they are a great part of the Nations, but Turks, Pagans and
unbelievers, and their Children ought not to be baptized, Ergo, etc.

Besides, That Teaching (by the Authority of the Commission) must go before
baptizing, we have proved; which generally all Learned Men do assert: If the
Institution is to be found any where else, they must show the place.

Arg. 4. Faith and Repentance are required of all that ought to be baptized;
but Infants are not required to Believe and Repent, nor are they capable so to
do, Ergo, Infants ought not to be baptized.

The Major is clear, Acts 2. 8. 10. 16. Chapters, and its also asserted by the
Church of Ergland. What is required of Persons to be baptized? that is the
Question. the Answer is, Repentance, whereby they forsake Sin; and Faith,
whereby they steadfastly believe the promise of God made to them in that
Sacrament.

The Minor cannot be denied.

Arg. 5. That practice that tends not to the Glory of God, nor the profit of
the Child, when done, nor in aftertimes when grown up, but may prove hurtful,
and of a dangerous Nature to him, cannot be a Truth of God, but the practice of
Infant Baptism tends not to the Glory of God, nor (...) profit of the Child,
when Baptized, nor in aftertimes when grown up, but may be hurtful and of a
dangerous Nature to him, Ergo, See Levit. 10. 1, 2. Where Moses told Aaron,
Because his Sons had done that which God the Lord Commanded them not, That God
would be Sanctified by all that drew near unto him; intimating that such who
did that which God Commanded them not, did not Sanctify or Glorify God
therein. Can God be glorified by Man's Disobedience, or by adding to his Word;
by doing that which God has not required? Mat. 16. 9. In vain do you Worship
me, Teaching for Doctrine the Commandments of Men. And that that practice does
profit the Child, none can prove from God's Word. And in after times when grown
up, it may cause the Person to think he was thereby made a Christian, etc. and
brought into the Covenant of Grace, and had it sealed to him, nay thereby
regenerated, for so the Athenian Society in their Mercury, December 26. plainly
intimate, and that Infants are thereby ingrafted also into Christ's Church. Sure
all understanding Men know the Baptism of Believers is not called Regeneration,
but only Metonymically, it being a Figure of Regeneration. But they Ignorantly
affirm also, that Infants then have a Federal Holiness, as if this imagined
Holiness comes in by the Parents Faith, or by the Child's Covenant in Baptism,
which may prove hurtful and dangerous to them, and cause them to think Baptism
confers Grace, which is a great error. How can water (says Mr. Charnock) an
external thing, work upon the Soul Physically? nor can it (says he) be proved
that ever the Spirit of God is tied by any promise to apply himself to the Soul
in a gracious operation, when Water is applied to the Body. If it were so, then
all that were baptized should be saved, or else the Doctrine of Perseverance
falls to the Ground. Some indeed (says he) say, that Regeneration is conferred
in Baptism upon the Elect, and exerts its self afterward in Conversion. But
how so active a Principle as Spiritual Life, should lie dead and a sleep so
many years, etc. is not easily conceived. On Regen. page 75.

Arg. 6. If the Church of England says, that Faith and Repentance are required
of all that ought to be baptized, and in so saying, speaks truly, and yet
Infants cannot perform those things; then Infants ought not to be Baptized. But
the Church of England says that Faith and Repentance are required of all such,
etc. and speak truly, and yet Infants cannot perform these things, Ergo,
Infants ought not to be baptized.

Obj. If it be objected, That they affirm they do perform by their Sureties.

Ans. If Suretiship for Children in Baptism is not required of God, and the
Sureties do not, yea cannot perform those things for the Child, then Suretyship
is not of God, and so signifies nothing, but is an unlawful, and sinful
undertaking; but Suretiship in Childrens Baptism is not required of God, and
they do not, cannot perform what they promise, Ergo, etc.

Do they, or can they cause the Child to forsake the Devil and all his works,
the Pomps and Vanities of this wicked World, and all the sinful Lusts of the
Flesh? In a word, can they make the Child, or Children, to repent and truly
believe in Jesus Christ? for these are the things they promise for them and in
their Name. Alas! they want power to do it for themselves, and how then should
they do it for others? Besides, we see they never mind nor regard their
Covenant in the case; and will not God one day say, who has required these
things at your hands?

Arg. 7. If there be no president in the Scripture, (as there is no precept)
that any Infant was baptized, then Infants ought not to be baptized; But there
is no president that any Infant was baptized in the Scripture, Ergo.

If there is any precedent or example in Scripture, that any Infant was
baptized, let them show us where we may find it.

Erasmus says, It Is no where expressed in the Apostolical writings, that they
baptized Children. Union of the Church, and on Romans 6.

Calvin says, it is no where expressed by the Evangelists; that any one Infant
was baptized by the Apostles. Instit. cap. 16. lib. 4.

Ludovicus Vives says, None of Old were wont to be baptized but in grown Age,
and who desired and understood what it was. Vide Lud.

The Magdeburgenses say, That concerning the bap^ing the Adult, both Jews and
Gentiles, we have sufficient proof, Acts. 2. 8, 10. 16. Chap. but as to the
baptizing of Infants, they can meet with no example in Scripture. Magdeb. Cant.
l. 2. page. 469.

Dr. Tailor says, It is against the perpetual Analogy of Christ's Doctrine to
baptize Infants: For besides that Christ never gave any precept to baptize
them, nor ever himself nor his Apostles (that appears) did baptize any of them;
so all that either he or his Apostles said concerning it, requires such
previous dispositions of baptism, of which Infants are not capable, viz. Faith
and Repentance. Lib. proph. page 239.

Arg. 8. If whatsoever is necessary to Faith and practice is left in the Holy
Scripture, that being a complete and perfect Rule, and yet Infant Baptism is
not contained, or to be found therein, then Infant Baptism is not of God; but
whatever is necessary to Faith and Practice is contained in the Holy
Scriptures, etc. but Infant baptism is not to be found therein, Ergo.

That the Scripture is a perfect Rule, etc. we have the consent of all the
Ancient Fathers, and Modern Divines.

Athanasins says, The Holy Scriptures being Inspirations of God, are
sufficient to all Instructions of Truth. Athan. against the Gentiles.

Crysostom says, All things be plain and clear in the Scripture; and
whatsoever are needful, are manifest there. Chrysostom. on 2 Thessalonians. and 2 Timothy 2.

Basil says, That it would be an Argument of Infidelity, and a most certain
Sign of Pride, if any Man should reject any thing written, and should Introduce
things not written. Basil in his Sermon de fide.

Augustine says, In the Scriptures are found all things which contain Faith,
manner of Living, Hope, Love, etc. Let us, (says he) seek no farther then what
is written of God our Savior, l^st a Man would know more that the Scriptures
witness. Augustine in his 198 Epistles to Fortunatus.

Theophilact says, It is part of a Diabolical Spirit to think any thing Divine
without the Authority of the Holy Scripture. Lib. 2. pasch.

Isychius says, Let us who will have any thing observed of God, search no more
but that which the Gospel does give unto us. Lib. 5. cap. 16. on Levit.

Bellarmin says, That though the Arguments of the Anabaptists, from the defect
of Command or Example, have a great use against the Lutherans, for as much as
they use that Rite every where, and having no Command or Example; theirs is to
be rejected; yet is it of no force against Catholics, who conclude that an
Apostolical Tradition is of no less authority with us than the Scripture, etc.
This of baptizing of Infants is an Apostolical Tradition. Bell. Lib. de Bapt.
1. cap. 8.

Mr. Ball says, We must for every Ordinance look for the Institution, and
never stretch it wider, nor draw it narrower than the Lord has made it, for he
is the Institutor of the Sacraments, according to his own pleasure; and it is
our part to Learn of him, both to whom, how, and for what end the Sacraments
are to be administered. Ball in his answer of the New England Elders page 38, 39.

And as to the Minor it is acknowledged by our Adversaries, it is not to be
found in the Letter of the Scripture And as to the Consequences drawn
therefrom, (we have proved,) they are not Natural from the premises; and though
we will admit of Consequences and Inferences if Genuine, yet not in the case of
an Institution respecting a practical Ordinance that is of mere positive Right.

Arg. 9. If Infant Baptism was an Institution of Christ, the Pedo-baptists
could not be at a loss about the Grounds of the Right Infants have to Baptism:
but the Pedo-baptists are at a great loss, and differ exceedingly about the
Grounds of the Right Infants have to Baptism, Ergo it is no Institution of
Christ.

As touching the Major, I argue thus; that which is an Institution of Christ,
the Holy Scripture does show, as well the end, and ground of the Ordinance, as
the subject and manner of it; but the Scripture speaks nothing of the end and
ground of Pedo-baptism, or for what reason they ought to be baptized, Ergo, It
is no Institution of Christ.

The Minor is undeniable; some affirm as we have already showed, that it was to
take away Original Sin; others say it is, theirs right by the Covenant, they
being the Seed of Believers; others say, Infants have Faith, and therefore have
a Right; others say, they have a Right by the Faith of their Surety. Some
ground their Right from Apostolical Tradition; others upon the authority of
Scripture: Some say, all Children of professed Christians ought to be baptized,
others say none but the Children of true believers have a Right to it, sure if
it was an Ordinance of Christ, his word would soon end this Controversy.

Arg. 10. If the Children of believing Gentiles, as such, are not the Natural
nor Spiritual Seed of Abraham they can have no Right to Baptism, or Church
Membership, by virtue of any Covenant Transaction God made with Abraham; but
the Children of Believing Parents, as such, are not the Natural, nor Spiritual
Seed of Abraham, Ergo.

Arg. 11. If no Man can prove from Scripture that any Spiritual benefit
redounds to Infants in their Baptism, it is no Ordinance of Christ; But no Man
can prove from Scripture, that any spiritual benefit redounds to Infants in
their Baptism, Ergo.

Arg. 12. That cannot be an Ordinance of Christ, for which there is neither
Command, nor Example in all God's Word, nor promise to such who do it, nor
threatening to such who neglect it. But there is no Command or Example in all
the Word of God for the Baptizing of little Babes, nor promise made to such who
are Baptized, nor threatenings to such who are not, Ergo.

That the Child lies under a Promise who is Baptized, or the Child under any
Threatening or Danger who is not Baptized, let them prove it, since it is denied.

Arg. 13. If no Parents at any time, or times, have been by God the Father,
Jesus Christ, or his Apostles, either Commended for Baptizing their Children,
or Reproved for neglecting to Baptize them, then Infant Baptism is no Ordinance
of God; But no Parents at any time or times have been by God Commended for
baptizing of their Children, nor reproved for neglecting to baptize them etc.
Ergo Infant Baptism is no Ordinance of God.

This Argument will stand unanswerable, unless any can show who they were that
were ever Commended for Baptizing their Children, or Reproved for neglecting
it, or unless they can show a Parallel case.

Arg. 14. If Men were not to presume to alter any thing in the Worship of God
under the Law, neither to add thereto, nor diminish therefrom, and God is as
strict and jealous of his Worship under the Gospel, then nothing ought to be
altered in God's Worship under the Gospel; but under the Law Men were not to
presume so to do, and God is as strict and jealous under the Gospel, Ergo.

The Major cannot be denied.

The Minor is clear from Exodus 25. 40. See thou make all things according to
the Pattern showed thee in the Mount. and Lev. 10. 1, 2. See how Nadab and
Abihu, sped for presuming to vary from the Command of God, and Uzzah, though but
in small Circumstances, (as they may seem to us.) How dare Men adventure, this
being so, to change Baptism from Dipping into Sprinkling; and the Subject, from
an Adult Believer, to an Ignorant Babe? Add thou not unto his word, etc.

Arg. 15. Whatever practice opens a Door to any Human Traditions in God's
Worship, is a great Evil, and to be avoided; But the practice of Infant Baptism
opens a Door to any Human Traditions in God's Worship, Ergo, to Sprinkle or
Baptize Infants is a great Evil, and ought to be avoided.

The Major will not be denied.

The Minor is clear, because there is no Scripture ground for it, no Command or
Example for such a Practice in God's Word, and if without Scripture Authority,
the Church has power to do one thing, she may do another, and so ad infinitum.

Arg. 16, Whatsoever practice reflects upon the Honor, Wisdom and Care of
Jesus Christ, or renders him less faithful than Moses and the New Testament in
one of its great Ordinances, nay Sacraments, to lie more obscure in God's Word,
than any Law or Precept under the Old Testament, cannot be of God; But the
practice of Infant Baptism reflects on the Honor, Care and Faithfulness of
Jesus Christ, and renders him less faithful than Moses and a great Ordinance,
nay Sacrament, of the New Testament, to lie more dark and obscure than any
Precept under the Old Testament, Ergo, Infant Baptism cannot be of God.

The Major cannot be denied.

The Minor is easily proved: For he is bold indeed, who shall affirm Infant
Baptism does not lie obscure in God's Word. One great Party who assert it, say,
its not to be found in the Scripture at all, but it is an unwritten Apostolical
Tradition: Others say, it lies not the Letter of the Scripture, but may be
proved by Consequences; and yet some great asserters of it, as Dr. Hammond and
others say, those Consequences commonly drawn from diverse Texts for it, are
without demonstration and prove nothing. I am sure a Man may Read the Scripture
a Hundred times over and never be thereby convinced, he ought to baptize his
Children, though it is powerful to convince Men of all Christian Duties.

Now can this be a Truth, since Christ was more Faithful than Moses; and
delivered every thing plainly from the Father? Moses left nothing dark as to
matters of Duty, though the Precept and Eternal Rites of his Law were numerous,
even two or three hundred Precepts; yet none were at a loss, or had need to
say, is this a Truth or an Ordinance, or not? for he that Runs may Read it.

And shall one positive precept given forth by Christ, who appointed so few in
the New Testament, be so obscure; as also the Ground and End of it, that Men
should be confounded about the Proofs of it, together with the End and Grounds
thereof? See Heb. 3. 5, 6.

Arg. 17. That Custom or Law which Moses never delivered to the Jews, nor is
any where written in the Old Testament was no Truth of God, or of Divine
Authority. But that Custom or Law to baptize Proselytes, either Men, Women or
Children, was never given to the Jews by Moses, nor is it any where written in
the Old Testament, Ergo, it was no Truth of God, or of Divine Authority; and
evident it is, according to that Forementioned and Worthy Author Sir. Norton
Knatchbal, that the Jewish Rabbis differed among themselves about it; for,
says he, to Cite his very words again, Rabbi Eleaezer expressly contradicts
Rabbi Joshua, who was the first I know of, who asserted this sort of Baptism
among the Jews; for Eleazer, who was contemporary with Rabbi Joshua, if he did
not live before him, asserts, that a Proselyte Circumcised and not Baptized was
a true Proselyte.

Arg. 18. If Baptism is of Mere positive Right, wholly depending on the Will
and Sovereign Pleasure of Jesus Christ, the great Legislator, and he has not
Requi red or Commanded Infants to be baptized; then Infants ought not to be
baptized; but Baptism is of mere positive right, wholly depending on the Will
and Sovereign pleasure of Jesus Christ, the great Legislator, and he has not
required or Commanded Infants to be baptized, Ergo, Infants ought not to be
baptized.

This Argument tends to cut off all the pretended proofs of Pedo-baptism, taken
from the Covenant made with Abraham; and because Children are said to belong to
the Kingdom of Heaven, it was not the Right of Abraham's Male Children to be
Circumcised, because they were begotten, and born of the Fruit of his Loins,
till he received Commandment from God to Circumcise them. Had he done it
before, or without Command from God, it would have been Will Worship in him to
have done it; Moreover, this further appear^ to be so, because no godly Man's
Children, nor others in Abraham's days, nor since, had any Right thereto, but
only his Children, (or such who were bought with his Money, or were proselyted
to the Jewish Religion) because they had no Command from God so to do, as
Abraham had.

This being true, it follows, that if we should grant Infants of believing
Gentiles, as such, were the Seed of Abraham, which we deny, yet unless God had
Commanded them to baptize their Children, they ought not to do it; and if they
do it without a Command or Authority from Christ, It will be found an Act of
Willworship in them.

Arg. 19. All that were baptized in the Apostolical Primitive times, were
baptized upon the profession of their Faith, were baptized into Christ, and
thereby put on Christ, and were all one in Christ Jesus, and were Abraham's
Seed and Heirs according to the promise. But Infants, as such, who are
baptized, were not baptized upon the profession of their Faith, nor did they
put on Christ thereby, nor are they all one in Christ Jesus, and also are not
Abraham's Seed and Heirs, according to Promise. Ergo, Infants ought not to be
baptized.

Mr. Baxter confirms the substance of the Major, these are his words, i. e. As
many as have been baptized have put on Christ, and are all one in Christ Jesus,
and are Abraham's Seed, and Heirs according to the promise, Gal. 3. 27, 28, 29.
This speaks the Apostle, says he, of the probability grounded on a credible
profession, etc. Baxters Confirm Reconcil. page 32.

The Minor will stand firm till any can prove Infants by a visible profession
have put on Christ, are all one in Christ Jesus, are Abraham's Seed and Heirs
according to the promise. Evident it is, none are the spiritual Seed of
Abraham, but such who have the Faith of Abraham, and are truly grafted into
Christ, by a saving Faith. If any object, we read of some who were baptized,
who had no saving Faith but were Hypocrites, I answer, had they appeared to be
such, they had not been baptized, nor had they a true Right thereto.

Arg. 20. Baptism is the Solemnizing of the Souls Marriage Union with Christ,
which Marriage-contract absolutely requires an actual profession of consent;
but Infants are not capable to enter into Marriage Union with Christ, nor to
make a profession of an actual consent. Ergo, Infants ought not to be baptized.

The Major our opposites generally grant, particularly see what Mr. Baxter
says, Our Baptism is our solemnizing of our Marriage with Christ. These are
his very words. page 32.

The Minor none can deny, no Man, sure in his right mind will assert, that
little Babes are capable to enter into a Marriage Relation with Christ; and to
make profession of a consent; and the truth is, he in the next words gives away
his Cause, viz. and it is (says he) A a new and strange kind of Marriage where
there is no profession of consent. page 32.

How unhappy was this Man to plead for such a New and strange kind of Marriage,
did he find any little Babe he ever Baptized (or rather Rantized) to make a
profession of consent to be Married to Jesus Christ. If any should object he
speaks of the Baptism of the Adult; I answer his words are these, Our Baptism
is, etc. Besides will any Pedo-baptist say, That the Baptism of the Adult is
the solemnizing of the Souls Marriage with Christ, and not the Baptism of
Infants. Reader, observe how our opposites are forced sometimes to speak the
Truth, though it overthrows their own practice of Pedo-baptism.

Arg. 21. If the Sins of no persons are forgiven them till they are Converted,
then they must not be baptized for the forgiveness of them, till they profess
themselves to be Converted; but the Sins of no Persons till they are Converted
are forgiven; Ergo, no Person ought to be Baptized for the forgiveness of them,
till they profess they are Converted.

Mr. Baxter in the said Treatise, lays down the substance of this Argument
also, take his own words, i. e.

As their sins are not forgiven them till they are Converted, Mark 4. 12. So
they must not be baptized for the forgiveness of them, till they profess
themselves Converted, seeing to the Church non esse and non apparere is all
one. Repentance toward God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus, is the Sum of
that Preaching that makes Disciples, Acts 20. 21. Therefore, says he, both
those must by a Profession seem to be received, before any at Age are baptized.
page 30, 31. and evident it is, say I, from hence that none but such at Age
ought to be baptized.

Philip caused the Eunuch to profess before he would Baptize him, That he
believed that Jesus Christ was the Son of God. Saul had also, says he, more
than a bare profession before Baptism, Acts 9. 5, 15, 17. page 28. The Promise
it self, says he, does expressly require a Faith of our own, of all the Adult,
that will have part in the Privileges; therefore there is a Faith of our own,
that is the Condition of our Title, Mark 16. 16. page 16.

He might have added by the force of his Argument; therefore Infants should not
have the privileges: For I argue thus, viz.

Arg. 22. If there is but one Baptism of Water left by Jesus Christ in the New
Jerusalem, or but one condition or manner of Right thereto; and that one
Baptism is that of the Adult; then Infant Baptism is no Baptism of Christ; but
there is but one Baptism in Water left by Christ in the New Testament, and but
one Condition and manner of Right thereto, and that one Baptism is that of the
Adult. Ergo, Infant Baptism is no Baptism of Christ.

Mr. Baxter says, Faith and Repentance is the condition of the Adult, and as
to any other condition, I am sure the Scripture is silent, The way of the Lord
is one, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, Ephesians. 4. 4.

If profession of Faith were not necessary, says Mr. Baxter, Coram Ecclesia,
to Church Membership and Privileges, then Infidels and Heathens would have
Right, also, says he the Church and the World would be confounded. He might
have added, but Infidels and Heathens have no Right to Church Membership, etc.
Ergo.

It Is a granted case among all Christians, says he, that profession is thus
necessary, the Apostles, and Ancient Church admitted none without it. page 21.
And if so, why dare any now a days admit of Infants, who are incapable to make
profession? He adds,

Yea Christ in his Commission directs his Apostles to make Disciples and then
Baptize them, promising, He that believes and is baptized shall be saved, Mark
16. 16. page 27. Furthermore he says,

If as many as are baptized into Christ, are baptized into his Death, and are
Buried with him by baptism into Death, that like as Christ was raised from the
Dead, so we also should walk in newness of Life, etc. Then no doubt, says he,
but such as were to be baptized did first profess this mortification, and a
consent to be buried, etc. In our Baptism we put off the Body of the Sins of
the Flesh, by the Circumcision of Christ, being buried with him and raised with
him through Faith, quickened with him, and having all our Trespasses forgiven,
Coll. 2. 11, 12, 13. and will any Man, says he, yea will Paul ascribe all this
to those that did not so much as profess the things signified? Will Baptism in
the Judgment of a wise Man, do all this for an Infidel, (or, say I, for an
Infant) that cannot make a profession that he is a Christian. page 31, 32. he
proceeds.

Arg. 23. The baptized are in Scripture called Men Washed, Sanctified,
Justified; they are called Saints, and Churches of Saints. 1 Cor. 1. 2. all
Christians are Sanctified ones, page 33. now let me add the Minor.

But Infants are not in Scripture called Men Washed, Sanctified, Justified;
they are not called Saints, Churches of Saints, Christians, nor Sanctified
ones, Ergo, Infants ought not to be baptized. If any should say why did you not
cite these assertions of Mr. Baxters whilst he was living? I answer, more then
Eighteen years ago, I did recite and Print these assertions, and many other
Arguments of his to the same purpose, to which he gave no answer.

Arg. 24. If there is but one way for all, both Parents and Children to be
admitted in the Gospel Church, to the end of the World, and that it is upon
profession of Faith to be baptized; then both Parents and Children must upon
the profession of their Faith be baptized, and so admitted, etc. But there is
but one way for all, both Parents and Children to be admitted into the
Gospel Church to the end of the World, and that is upon the profession of their
Faith to be Baptized, Ergo.

Arg. 25. That cannot be Christ's, true baptism wherein there is not, cannot be
a lively Representation of the Death, Burial and Resurrection of Jesus Christ,
together with our Death unto Sin, and vivification to a New Life; but in the
Rantizing or Sprinkling of an Infant there is not, cannot be a lively
Representation of Christ's Death, Burial and Resurrection, etc.

Arg. 26. That pretended Baptism that pretends to frustrate the glorious end
and design of Christ in his Instituting of Gospel Baptism, or cannot answer it,
is none of Christ's Baptism; but the pretended baptism of Infants tends to
frustrate the glorious end and design of Christ in Instituting of Gospel
Baptism, Ergo.

The Major will not be denied.

As to the Minor, all generally confess the end and design of Christ in
Instituting the Ordinance of Baptism, was in a lively Figure to represent his
Death, Burial and Resurrecton; with the Persons Death unto Sin, and his rising
again to walk in newness of Life, that is baptized; as the Sacrament of the
Supper was ordained to represent his Body was broke, and his blood was shed.
But that a lively Figure of Christ's Death, Burial and Resurrection, appears in
Sprinkling a little Water on the Face, I see not, (and as done to an Infant)
there can no Death to sin, and rising again to walk in Newness of Life be
signified; and therefore Christ's design and end therein is frustrated.

Arg. 27. If Baptism be Immersion, as to the proper and genuine Signification
of the word Baptizo as also of those Typical and Metaphorical Baptisms, and the
Spiritual Signification thereof; then Sprinkling cannot be Christ's true
Baptism. But Immersion is the proper and genuine signification of the word
Baptizo, and also of those Typical and Metaphorical Baptisms spoken of, and the
spiritual signification thereof, Ergo, Sprinkling is not Christ's true Baptism.

1. That the proper and genuine signification of the word Baptizo is Immersion,
or to Dip, etc. We have fully proved, which is also confessed by all Learned in
that Language.

2. That the Typical Baptism, viz. that of the Red Sea, wherein the Fathers
were buried, as it were unto Moses in the Sea, and under the Cloud, appears
from Pools Annotations. 1 Cor. 10. 2.

Others, (says he) more probably think that the Apostle uses this Term, in
regard of the great Analogy betwix^ Baptism (as it was then used) the Persons
going down into the Waters, and being Dipp^d; and the Israelites going down
into the Sea, the great receptacle of water, though the water at that time was
gathered on heaps on either side of them; yet they seemed buried in the water,
as Persons in that Age were when they were baptized, etc. The second was that
of Noah's Ark; See Sir Norton Knatchbul, who I before Quoted, and shall here
again recite his words.

The Ark of Noah, and Baptism, (says he) were both a Type and Figure of the
Resurrection, not the Sign of the washing away of Sin, though so taken
Metonymically, but a particular signal of the Resurrection of Christ. Of this,
Baptism is a Lively and Emphatical Figure, as also was the Ark of Noah, out of
which he returned as from a Sepulcher, to a New Life.

3. Metaphorical Baptism is that of the Spirit, and of affliction: The first
signifies not a Sprinkling of the Spirit, but the great Effusion of the Spirit,
like that at Pentecost, Acts 1. 4, 5. Shall be Baptized, etc, On which words
Causabon speaks thus: See Dr. Du Veil on Acts 2. The Greek word (...) is to Dip
or Plung^, as it were to die Colors, in which sense, (says he) the the
Apostles might be truly said to have been baptized, for the House in which this
was done, was filled with the Holy Ghost; so that the Apostles might seem to
have been plunged into it, as into a large Fish Pond. Also Decumentus on Acts
2. says, A wind filled the whole House, that it seemed like a ^i^h-Pond,
because it was promised to the Apostles, that they should be baptized with the
Holy Ghost. And the Baptism of afflictions are those great depths or
overwhelmings of afflictions, like that of our Saviors (magnis componere
parva) no part free, Mat. 20. 22. where you have the same word (...), and like
that of David, who says, God drew him out of deep waters.

4. The spiritual signification thereof is the Death, Burial and Resurrection
of Christ, and of our Death to sin, and vivification to a New Life.

This being so, it follows undeniably that Sprinkling cannot be Christ's true
baptism; it must be Immersion and nothing else.

And in the last place, finally, to confirm that (...) is to Dip, both from the
^teral and spiritual signification thereof, as also from those Typical and
Metaphorical Baptisms mentioned in the Scripture. I might add further that this
evidently appears from the practice of John Baptis^, and the Apostles of
Christ, who baptized in Rivers, and where there was much water; and also
because the Baptizer and Baptized, are said to go down into the water (not down
to the water) and came up out of the water. John Baptist is said to baptize
them into ((...)) ^ordan as the Greek renders it, which shows it Dipping and
not Sprinkling. Would it be proper to say, he Sprinkled them into Jordan. The
Lord open the Eyes of those who see not, to consider these things.

Sir, I expect your answer to these Arguments particularly if you make any
reply to what I have said in confutation of your Treatise, and see you do your
business better the next time, for as yet you have not proved Infant Baptism to
be, from Heaven, as I hope the unprejudiced Reader will conclude: I shall say
no more at present; but leave all I have said to the blessing of God, hoping in
a little time he will vanquish by the light of his sacred word, your Scripture
less practice of Infant Baptism out of the World clear up the Truth of his own
despised Ordinance, That Wisdom may (...) of her Children, and God may be
Honored, to whom be Glory now and for ever more.

Amen.
FINIS.

