An Advertisment from the Bookseller.
THe Impartial Reader desiring Information into the Principle of Baptizing
Believers, may be furnished with the following Treatises, bound together, or
severally.

A Treatise of Baptism; wherein that of Believers, and that of Infants is
Examined by the Scriptures, with the History of both out of Antiquity. A Reply
to Mr. Wills, in Defense of the said Treatise. A Second Reply to Mr. Baxter, in
Defense of the same. A Rejoinder to Mr. Wills his Vindiciae; with an Answer to
his Appeal; all by Mr. Henry Danvers. A Treatise concerning the Covenant and
Baptism; wherein is showed, that Believers only are the Spiritual Seed of
Abraham; with a Reply to Mr. Whistons Answer to Mr. Danvers, by Mr. Edward
Hutchinson: With a Letter [of Reproof] to Mr. Obed. Wills by T. B.
The Baptists Answer to Mr. Obed. Wills, his Appeal against Mr. H. Danvers.
SIR,
WE have seriously considered your Appeal against Mr. Danvers, and have also
heard, and carefully weighed the Defense he makes thereto; and in order to give
an Impartial Judgment, as you call us to, have desired some of our Number
diligently to examine the Authors cited by you both; and though it appears to
us, that Mr. Danvers, has earnestly endeavored an accommodation, in a more
private and friendly manner, betwixt you and him, so to rectify mistakes on
any hand, which (had it been accepted of) might have saved this trouble; and
that the Method you have used in this Appeal be unusual, and unlike the Pattern
you seem to take; an Appeal in these Cases being then only proper, when the
Party appealed against, appears to be so contumacious, and stubborn, as to
reject, and stand out against just conviction and admonition; which we find not
to be justly chargeable upon Mr. Danvers, and whether it be not rather your own
oversight, we hope you will in time be sensible of; yet we say, we shall not
insist upon that Consideration; and to give you, and the World that
satisfaction expected from us, some of us whose names are subscribed, have
examined the Particulars you charge him with, and find some mistakes and
escapes on Mr. Danvers side, which he ingeniously acknowledges; and we hope may
be to your full satisfaon as it cannot (in justice) but be to ours, since (as
you seem to hint) a public owning, is what you expect.

Some of the Particulars in your Appeal, we find to be so trivial, and
insignificant, that they deserve not to be mentioned, and deem his Answers
returned to them respectively, sufficient to satisfy the Reader.

Others of your Charges he traverses, and joins issue with you at the Bar you
have brought it to, and the most material of these we now remark to you; so
that what he acknowledges, and what is inconsiderable, and what is here further
examined, comprehends your whole Appeal.

And we must observe to you, that you lie obnoxious to the Return you made to
Mr. Danvers, when he charged you with leaving out part of the Sentence of
Nazianzen, viz. Si aliquid periculi immineat, calling it, p. 7. of your Vind. A
frivolous Charge; excusing your self after such a manner as you will not be
satisfied with from others; therefore if we say many of your Charges are
frivolous, your Reason in your own behalf will Justify us, you being Judge.

I. And therefore 1. we desire you to consider, whether the stopping your
Translation out of Calvin, where you did, p. 162. Appeal, be not unfair, and a
misleading an English Reader.

II. You charge Coll' Danvers Appeal, p. 166. to add the words, [for it cannot
be, that the Body should receive the Sacrament of Baptism till the Soul has
before received the truth of Faith] and say, they are not Jeroms Words, but of
Mr. Danvers Adding: But upon Examination of that place [ Mat. 28. Tom. 9. Edit.
Paris. An. 1546.] we find them to be Jeroms Words Verbatim, as Mr. Danvers
Cites them. And we observe in your Quotation of Mr. Danvers, in that place you
add, [Magd. Cent. 4. c. 6. 418.] as if Mr. Danvers had particularly Quoted the
Magd. there, which indeed he does not; but only Jerome upon Matthew, which Double
Injury we conceive deserves your Double Consideration, in order to a Candid
acknowledgment.

III. You charge him, p. 169. With abusing Calvin, fathering Estius's Words
upon him, though he has owned it a mistake in his Reply, But we observe also,
That he Quotes Estius Annot. Genesis 17.7. at the end, which you leave out, though
you took all his words to that, and yet reprove him so often for the same,
which seems neither ingenious nor fair.

IV. You charge him with abusing Dr. Hamond, p. 107. in affirming, That (...)
signifies an Immersion, or Washing the whole Body, answering the Hebrew (...)
whereas you say the Dr. tells us, (...) signifies the washing the whole Body,
and answers to (...) etc. We have examined the Doctor's Book, Printed for R.
Royston, Anno 1653 and find Mr. Danvers quoted his words truly, and the mistake
to be yours, which we hope will convince you of the untrue and unjust reproach
you subjoyn, That he understands not English Authors, etc.

V. You charge Mr. Danvers for affirming from Walden, That the Wicklevians, in
agreement to the Doctrine of Pelagius and others, denied Infant Baptism, he
acknowledges it to be his mistake to allege, That it was agreeable to Pelagius
and others, (said to be for Infant Baptism) but if Walden be to be believed, it
appears, That the Wickliffists judged Eccsesiastical Baptism unprofitable to
little ones, in these words [ nostri Wiclivistae Baptismum Ecclesiasticum
inutile judicant parvulis contra omnes praedictos] against all the aforesaid,
viz. Pelagius, Vincentius Victor, and those that Baptized Children, as born of
Believing Parents. And we must remark to you, that in your Quotation, p. 172.
Appeal, you leave out [parvulis] the principal word there, and with what design
or end we leave you to consider.

VI. You charge him, p. 179, 180. for adding the Words [it is our Will, That
all that affirm, That Young Children receive Everlasting Life, albeit they be
not by the Sacrament of Grace or Baptism renewed] to the Milevitan Decree. We
have examined that 4th. Tom. in Collect. Reg. and find the Canon quoted by Mr.
Danvers in p. 559 of it, taken out of a very ancient Copy, immediately
following the Words you Cite, thus, Item placuit, ut siquis dicit ideo dixisse
dominum; In domo patris mei mansiones multe sunt, ut intelligatur, quia in
regno Coelorum erit aliquis medius, aut ullus alicubi locus, ubi beat vivant
parvuli, qui sine Baptismo ex hac vita migrarunt sine quo in regno Coelorum
quod est vita aeterna intrare non possunt, Anathema sit, An. Christi 424. Now
for you to affirm, that the said Clause was of Mr. Danvers's own adding;
whereas, as he says, Here is an express Anathema against those that affirmed
Children might be saved without Baptism, is an Instance (to give the most
favorable conjecture of it) that you have made but a lame search: So that it
is very just for us to acquit Mr. Danvers of this Charge. We presume you know,
that the Magdeburgs give an account when they speak of that Milevitan Synod, of
some that affirmed Infants Salvation without Baptism, as by the Instances Mr.
Danvers gives from them, undeniably appears; And in opposition to them was that
Anathema enacted, and every Circumstance concurs to evidence it as genuine as
the other Canons: And therefore upon a review of the place we question not but
you will be satisfied here is no forgery or prevarication in Mr. Danvers in
this Particular.

VII. Under the Head of his fathering upon Authors that which they say not, you
charge him with abusing Basil. Appeal p. 181. in fathering those Words upon
him, [must the faithful be sealed with Baptism? Faith must precede, and go
before] whereas you say, there is no such Speech in what the Magd. repeat of
Basil, contra Eunom. which we conceive to be a very weak ground for your
Charge. For must it follow, that the Words are not Basils, because you find it
not in the Magdeburgs? we have searched Basil, and find his Words to be lib.
3. p. 84. contra Eunom. to the sense he is Cited by Mr. Danvers, viz. (...), i.
e. It is necessary first to believe, and afterward to be signed with Baptism.
So that this is also your own error and oversight.

VIII. You charge him with a notorious untruth, p. 185. for affirming from the
Magd. That Gulielmus added the Virgin Mary to the form of Baptism. We have
examined the Magd. Cen. 13. p. 419 Cap* 4. Edit. Basil Anno 1574. and find the
words, Male Gulielmus ad formam Baptismi addidit Mariam Baptizo te in nomine
patris omnipotentis, and filii and spiritus sancti, and Beat Marie Virginis,
as Cited by Mr. Danvers; and therefore for you to affirm the contrary is a
gross mistake.

And thus, Sir, we have given a true and impartial representation of the
Particulars as we find them, being, as we conceive, the principal matters under
our Cognizance, omitting the less material, and do recommend them to your
Christian consideration, hoping that your serious review of them, will discover
them to be your errors. And as Mr. Danvers has publicly owned what of mistake
he is convinced of in his Answer to your Appeal: So it is justly expected, you
will also, according to your promise in the Preface to your Appeal, do the same
in these Particulars.

And since your Charges do not appear to be true to the satisfaction of all
impartial persons; but on the contrary great mistakes on your side, you will
not, we hope, think it unjust if we acquit him, and reflect the blame of the
Charge upon your self, as you desire, in case you be found in the error.

The Particulars Mr. Danvers owns in his said Answer to your Appeal, we bring
not under our discussion or censure, concluding it to be enough that he
acknowledges them.

And such petty Charges as he sufficiently answers, and are indeed of little
weight, save to inhaunce the number of your Particulars, as also things
controverted, and only collateral to the grand Proposition in dispute, (as are
those things you call strange Doctrins, etc.) we think do not so properly offer
themselves to our Considerations. And therefore we conclude we may be excused
if we wave them.

And lastly, we propose, That if the Return we give to your Appeal should be
deemed insufficient by you, or short in any thing, (which we are not conscious
of) and that thereupon you take your self concerned to appear any further in
this Controversy, you would be persuaded, that things may be transacted in an
amicable and friendly way; which we hope may tend to our mutual satisfaction in
the clearing up of Truth, and to Cherish that love, that all that fear the Lord
should bear each other, though differing in some things, which is our very
earnest desire; and to promote which, we shall endeavor to contribute the
utmost we can.

London the 13th. of the 5th. Month 1675. Hans. Knollys. Will. Kyffen. Dan.
Dyke. Jo. Gosnold. Hen. Forty. Tho. De Laune.



