ADVICE TO CHILDREN.

BY James Kirkwood, Rector of Astwick in Bedfordshire.

The Second Edition Corrected and Enlarged.

LONDON, Printed for John Tailor at the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard, and
John Everingham at the Star in Ludgate Street, near the West End of St. Paul's.
1693.

ADVICE TO CHILDREN.
THERE is scarce any thing wherein all Nations, and Men of all Religions, do
more agree, than in the Common Duties of Children to their Parents: Neither is
there any thing that tends more to the comfort and happiness, the beauty and
strength of Society, than for Children to perform all those Duties which they
owe to their Parents. And yet how sad is it to think, that a great many
Children, who have not only all the advantages which Natural Religion affords,
but likewise the assistance of Divine Revelation, do nevertheless carry
themselves in that manner toward their Parents, as if they either understood
nothing of their Duty, or were most prodigiously perverse, and resolved to
rebel against the Light, to trample upon all the Principles both of Natural and
Revealed Religion.

The Design of this short Treatise is to show what the Duties of Children are
toward their Parents, and to suggest some Considerations to excite them to do
their Duty.

1. Duty of Children, to honor their Parents: and how they are to honor them.
First, Chlidren are bound to honor their Parents; which imports, First, That
they should entertain respectful and reverend thoughts of them, as being under
God the Authors of their Life and Being; they must not think slightingly, and
undervaluingly of their Parents, whatever be their weaknesses and
Imperfections: They ought to hate and abhor their Vices, every thing in them
that is evil, dishonorable to God, and contrary to his Laws and Commandments;
but still they ought to love and honor their Persons: And if at any time
disrespectful and irreverend thoughts arise in their minds, they ought to check
them, to accuse and be angry with themselves for them; and to call to mind what
God has commanded them to do, when he says, Honor thy Father and thy Mother,
that thy days may be long upon the Land which the Lord thy God gives thee. Ex.
20.12.

Secondly, This imports that they ought to express their inward Reverence and
esteem by all the outward marks and demonstrations thereof, in their Words and
Deeds, their looks and gestures; these things are the Picture of the Mind, they
ordinarily represent the temper and disposition thereof; so that if there be
any thing of real esteem and regard toward any body in the heart, it will
discover it self by some of those outward expressions. When Joseph came before
his Father, with his two Sons, he did not omit the utmost respect, though at that
time Jacob was blind with Age, and could not see what Joseph did. The Text
says, He bowed himself with his Face to the Earth, Genesis 48.12.

We see likewise how Solomon carried himself toward his Mother, 1 Kings 2.19.
Bathsheba went unto King Solomon to speak unto him for Adonijah: And the King
rose up to meet her, and bowed himself unto her, and sat down on his Throne,
and caused a seat to be set for the King's Mother, and she sat on his right
hand. Children are more apt to carry themselves irreverently and slightingly
toward their Mother, which is the reason, as some think, that she is set down
first, Lev. 19.3. Ye shall fear every Man his Mother, and his Father.

Thirdly, This imports that they ought to cover the infirmities and weaknesses,
the imperfections and indiscretions of their Parents; to do as Shem and Japhet
did, Genesis 9.23. when Noah their Father was drunken, and was uncovered within
his Tent, They took a garment, and laid it upon both their shoulders, and went
backwards, and covered the nakedness of their Father, and their faces were
backward, and they saw not their Father's nakedness.

The Blessings promised to Shem and Japhet, and to their Posterity, upon this
occasion, show how acceptable what they did was unto God.

Children are not to publish the faults and follies of their Parents; but ought
to conceal them, all that they can. However, there are two things very
consistent with this Duty: First, Children may and ought to do all that they
can, by their private, modest, and humble Advice, to reclaim their Parents from
their sinful practices. Secondly, if they find it not so fit for them
immediately to advise their Parents; or if what they say has not the designed
effect, then they may recommend this charitable Office to the care of some
other body, who is a wise and kind, a pious and serious Friend, who may have
some more influence than themselves toward the reclaiming their Parents. This
is the greatest expression of true kindness, honor, and respect to them, when
their Chlidren sincerely endeavor, in the discreetest manner, to be the happy
instruments of their Conversion and Reformation, of turning them from Satan
unto God: This is to be, in some sort, the Fathers in Christ, to those who are
their Parents by Nature. O how happy are the Parents of such worthy Children!
How may they rejoice and bless God, who has bestowed on them so great a
Blessing?

The Poverty of Parents does not exempt Children from this Duty.
As to the abovementioned Instances of Honor and Respect due from Children to
their Parents, it is to be remembered, that no alteration of the outward Estate
and Circumstances of Parents, does exempt Children from their Obligation to pay
them all manner of Respect. And though Children be raised to greater Honors and
Dignities than their Parents, yet they must still pay them all that regard and
observance that is due to the Authors of their Being. How great an Example of
this Filial Respect, was Joseph: When he was raised to the greatest Power and
Honor that the King of Egypt could confer upon him, yet still he retained a
due Sense of his Obligation to Honor his Aged Father, his Mother then being
Dead: He was not ashamed to own him before Pharaoh, though his Trade and
Employment in the World was such as was an Abomination to the Egyptians. See,
Genesis 46.31,32. etc. And, Chapter 47.1,2. etc. In like manner we see that David,
after he was Anointed to be King, did not forget his Duty toward his Poor
Distressed Parents, he was not ashamed to own them before the King of Moab; he
brought them before him, and recommended them to him, 1 Samuel 22.3,4.

Against those who dishonor their Parents.
If Children are thus obliged to Honor their Parents; what shall be said of
those who dishonor, despise, and slight them, all that ever they can; who
undervalue them in their thoughts; who speak of them with great contempt and
disdain; who speak to them with great insolence; who mock and scorn them; who
laugh at them, and make mouths at them, and point at them with the finger; who
reproach and revile them; who break indecent jests upon them; who make them the
Objects of their sport and pastime; who take pleasure in publishing their
weaknesses and indiscretions, that others also may laugh at them, and despise
them; who, when their Parents grow old and poor, (...) when themselves come to
have more Wealth and Honor in the World than their Parents have, do
thenceforth turn their backs upon their poor Parents, are ashamed to own them,
and will not any longer take notice of them?

How dreadful and terrible are the Curses and Judgments, which God has in
store against such wretched Children? Deuteronomy. 27.16. Cursed be he that sets
light by his Father or his Mother. Prove. 30.17. The Eye that mocketh at his
Father, and despises to obey his Mother; the Ravens of the valleys shall pick
it out, and the young Eagles shall eat it. That is, he who is a mocker and
scorner of his Parents, who despises and slights them, shall die a shameful
death, and remain unburied, and shall be exposed to the Birds and Beasts of
prey, to be eaten of them. It does not follow from hence, that all perverse
wretched Children come to such a shameful and untimely end: Only it shows what
ofttimes happens, and is very usual, to wit, that such mockers and despisers
of Parents are punished remarkably by the Justice of God in this World, and are
made Examples to all others, who will open their Eyes to consider the hand of
God against such ungodly Children.

As for Instances of the Divine Justice against Mockers of Parents, all Ages
and Countries are full of them. Cham was made an Example of this, Genesis
9.22,24,25. And Cham the Father of Canaan saw the nakedness of his Father, and
told his two brethren without: And Noah awoke from his wine, and knew what his
younger son had done unto him. And he said, Cursed be Canaan; a servant of
servants shall he be unto his brethren. In which words, the, Canaan the Son of
Cham is only mentioned, yet Cham is not exempted from the Curse; his punishment
is hereby made so much the greater, because he is not only pronounced accursed
in his own person (which is necessarily to be supposed, he having committed the
sin which caused the Curse) but also in his Posterity, which could not but
increase mightily his grief, and make his punishment lie more heavy upon him.

Ezekiel reckons this Sin, of contemning and dishonouring Parents, as one great
cause of the dreadful Judgments which God inflicted upon the Jews, Chapter 22.7. In
ye have they set Light by Father and Mother.

2. Duty, to obey their Parents, and to hearken to their Instructions.
Secondly, Children are to obey their Parents, to do what they bid them. See
this in the Example of Joseph, when Jacob sent him to his Brethren, Genesis
37.13,14. And Israel said unto Joseph, Do not thy brethren feed the flock in
Shechem? Come, and I will send thee unto them: And he said to him, Here am I.
And he said to him, Go, I pray thee, see whether it be well with thy brethren,
and well with the flocks, and bring me word again: so he sent him out of the
vale of Hebron, and he came to Shechem.

See likewise the Example of David, 1 Samuel 17.17, 18,20. Jesse said unto David
his Son, take now for thy Brethren an Ephah of this parched Corn, and these Ten
Loaves, and run to the Camp to thy Brethren: And carry these Ten Cheeses unto
the Captain of their Thousand, and look how thy Brethren fare, and take their
pledge. And David arose early in the Morning, and left the Sheep with a Keeper,
and took, and went as Jesse had Commanded him, etc.

The Commands of Parents are either about the same things which God has
commanded, or they are about things indifferent, or about things unlawful.
First, if they are about the same things which God has commanded, they are so
much the more to be obeyed; as being the will and pleasure both of their Father
in Heaven, and of their earthly Parents. In this case the obligation to
obedience is double, Ephesians. 6.1. Children, says the Apostle, Obey your Parents
in the Lord, for this is right, that is, it is agreeable to all Law, to the Law
of God, of Nature, and of Nations; It Is that which is due to the place of
Parents; It Is their right to be obeyed by their Children.

Secondly, If their Parents Commands are about things indifferent, that is,
which are neither commanded, nor forbidden by God, Children are likewise to
obey them: God has made it their Duty so to do, Col. 3.20. Children obey your
Parents in all things; for this is well pleasing unto the Lord. Agreeable to
this was the Sense of wise Heathens. See A. Gell. l. 2. c. 7.
This Obedience is very acceptable to him; he takes great pleasure and delight
in it, to see those obeyed and submitted to, whom he has appointed to be, as
it were, in his own stead; whom he has clothed with some beams of Divine
Power; whom, with relation to their Children, he has made, in some sense,
sacred persons; whose Will ought to be a Law unto them, though only in the Lord.
For, Thirdly, if the thing commanded be plainly unlawful, they are to refuse
compliance therewith; because they are bound to obey God rather than Man,
rather than Father or Mother, rather than all the World: In this case they
ought to hearken to what our Savior says, Luke 14.26. If any Man come to me,
and hate not his Father, and Mother, etc. he cannot be my Disciple. In which
Words, Our Savior is far from encouraging Children to hate, or to disobey
their Parents; for we see how zealously he vindicates the Authority of Parents
upon other occasions. But his Design, is, to teach Children, when the Will of
God and the Will of their Parents stand in Competition, that then they ought
always to give the preference to the Divine Will, and to choose rather to incur
the displeasure of their Earthly Parents, than to offend and provoke their
Heavenly Father. They ought to consider, their Obligations to God are much
greater than to their Parents; he is the Maker both of them, and of their
Parents; They live by his Bounty; the Earth they tread on is his; the Air they
breathe in, the Heavens that cover them, the Food they eat, the Water they
drink, the Garments that Cloth them, and all other things which they enjoy for
their benefit and comfort in the World, are the Lord's: He is their great
Master, who appoints them their business in the World, and assures them of a
reward; He also will reckon with them, and either reward, or punish them,
according to their Works; and therefore his Commands are to be preferred to
those of all others.

But even in this case, Children are to express, in their very denial and
refusal of obedience, all that Honor and Respect to their Parents, that is
possible; that they may see it is not stubbornness, but the fear of God, which
makes them disobey. By this means Parents may perhaps be convinced, and made
sensible of their Sin, and prevailed with to shun those evil things, which they
see their very Children do so much hate and abhor, and wherein they refuse to
obey.

Against stubborn and disobedient Children.
If Children are thus bound by the Laws of Heaven, to obey their Parents; what
shall be said of those, who make no account of their Parents Commands, but set
at naught all their Admonitions and Counsels; who will not follow their
Directions, and be governed by them for their own good; but do follow their own
humor and fancy, and the Examples and Customs of others like themselves? They
think themselves too wise to need Instruction, and are ready to say, That they
should do a great deal better, if their Parents would let them alone, let them
take their own way in every thing, and never trouble their Heads about them. So
little regard have some to what their Parents say to them, That they have not
patience to hear them speak, but run out of their presence when they begin to
talk seriously to them; or if they are in an humor to hear them a little
while, yet they hear as if they heard not, they trample upon all they say, and
never lay it to Heart. What a sad mark is this of approaching ruin, and of
heavy Judgments, which hang over the heads of such ungodly Children, as you may
see in the Sons of Ely, 1 Samuel 2.25. of whom it is said, that they hearkened
not unto the voice of their Father, because the Lord would slay them.

By the Law of Moses, the stubborn Son was to be put to death, Deuteronomy.
21.18,19,20,21. If a man have a stubborn and rebellious son, which will not
obey the voice of his father, or the voice of his mother, and that when they
have chastened him, will not hearken unto them: Then shall his father and
mother lay hold on him, and bring him out unto the Elders of his City, and unto
the gate of his place: And they shall say unto the Elders of his City, This our
son is stubborn and rebellious, he will not obey our voice: He is a glutton and
a drunkard. And all the men of his City shall stone him with stones, that he
die: so shall thou put evil away from among you, and all Israel shall hear and
fear.

In ancient times, in most Countries, Parents had an absolute power over their
Children, to punish them as they thought good, for their disobedience and other
faults: And when amongst the Romans they lessened this power, yet they did it
at first only in part; The Father was enjoined to present his disobedient Child
to the Judge, that he might be punished; and the Judge was to pronounce such a
Sentence as the Father thought fit. This came somewhat near the Law of Moses.
By which it appears, what the sense of Mankind was concerning the exceeding
greatness of the crime of stubbornness and disobedience in Children to Parents.

3. Duty of Children, to be Faithful to their Parents, and not to dispose of
their Goods without their Consent.
3. Duty, to be Faithful to their Parents, and not to dispose of their Goods
without their consent.
3dly. They ought Faithfully to serve their Parents, to be careful to promote
their Temporal Welfare and Happiness, and to be as useful and helpful to them
in their Worldly Concerns, as is possible. Not only Duty, but Interest should
excite Children to do this; for, their Happiness and Prosperity does in great
measure depend upon that of their Parents. It Is not often that Children thrive
and flourish in the World, when their Parents are reduced to Misery and
Poverty. And therefore, a regard to their own Interest and Advantage, ought to
make them careful to do their Parents the best Service that is in their power.

But besides this, Gratitude ought to prevail with Children, faithfully to
serve their Parents, and to be useful to them, so far as they can. Are Parents
the Authors of their Life and Being? Have they nourished and sustained them for
so many Years? Have they been at so much pains and cost, and endured so much
pain and travel to bring them up, and to make them capable to do some Service
in the World? And shall not they reckon it their Happiness and Honor, to have
an opportunity to serve them, and to be helpful to them, and by their care and
pains, and faithfulness toward them, to witness a due sense of Gratitude, for
all that they not only have done, but endured also for them, and that for a
great many Years, when they could not do any thing for themselves? The
consideration of these things, cannot but be of great force with all Ingenuous
minds.

Against unfaithful and treacherous Children.
But, alas! How far are a great many Children from doing this Duty to their
Parents? Instead of doing them faithful Service, they prove false and
treacherous to them; instead of being careful of those things they entrust them
with, they cheat and deceive them; they rob them; they dispose of their Goods
without their knowledge and approbation; they make use of them to serve their
Vanity and Folly, and to gratify their Wild and Youthful Inclinations: Yea,
and how apt are some, to glory in this, as if they had done a very brave and
worthy action, when they have had the good Fortune, as they reckon it, to
defraud their poor Parents?

As Children, when they are disposed to rob their Parents, are of all Thieves
the most dangerous, being in their Parents Bosom, and thereby having
opportunity to cheat them the more successfully; so their crime is the most
heinous in its kind, it is attended with very aggravating Circumstances; it is so
great, that there is no name bad enough to express it by, and to represent it
in all its deformity. How sensible was Jacob of this, when he was pursued by
Laban his unrighteous Father-in-Law, and accused by him of having stolen his
Idols? With whomsoever, says he to Laban, thou find them, let him not live,
Genesis 31.32. We see what a severe Censure the wise Man passes on such Persons,
Prove. 28.24. Whosoever robs his Father and his Mother, and says, It is no
Transgression, the same is a Companion of a Destroyer; that is, he is to be
looked on, as no better than one of those who rob and murder on the Highway,
as a Man desperately wicked, who is disposed to act any sort of Villainy and
Impiety, who will stick at nothing in pursuit of his mad and wretched designs,
that may gratify his Lusts and Passions.

4. Duty of Children, to be determined by their Parents as to their Calling.
4thly. They are to be determined by them, as to their Calling and Employment,
if it be an honest and lawful one. Their Parents are to be supposed ordinarily
more wise and prudent to choose for them, than they are to choose a Trade for
themselves: They have more experience, and know the World better than their
Children do; and no doubt, they have kindness enough for them to wish them
well, and to design their advantage, and not to press them to any Trade or way
of Life, which they believe is inconvenient, and like to be hurtful to them:
But if Parents should be mistaken, as to the fitness of the Employment, to
which they design their Children; and supposing the Children to be sensible of
the great inconveniences thereof, which the Parents, through prejudices and
partialities, do not see; in this case Children may, with all due modesty,
meekness, and humility, represent to their Parents what their thoughts are, and
tell them what objections they have against such a Calling; that their Parents
may be prevailed upon, by their Reasons, to alter their resolutions: or if they
be not so fit themselves to discourse their Parents upon such a subject, they
may do it by some wise and discreet Friends. And if, after all, Parents be
wilful in their intention and design; Children are not, upon the account of
uncertain, or probable inconveniences, to oppose themselves to the Will of
their Parents; they ought to submit themselves to their Judgment, if the Trade,
or manner of Life, to which they design them, be not dishonest and unlawful;
for then there is no farther question to be made; the case is clear: The Will
of God is always to be preferred to the Will of Man. He that loves Father or
Mother more than me, says Christ, is not worthy of me, Matthew. 10.37. But if
there be nothing of dishonesty or unlawfulness in such an Employment, they are
to enter upon it with all the cheerfulness that is possible; leaving all events
unto God. It will afford great peace and comfort to their minds, whatever
afterward falls out, when they consider, that they did what was their Duty to
do; they submitted their own opinion to the Judgment of their Parents, whom God
has commanded them to obey. Whatever may be their temporal loss, they are sure
of spiritual gain. God will plentifully reward their humble obedience, and
ready compliance with the Will of their earthly Parents.

Against Children who neglect this Duty.
From what has been said on this Head, we may see how much they are to be
blamed, who are so far from being determined by their Parents, in the way and
manner of their living in the World, that they either wholly give up themselves
to idleness, and waste their time in vain and foolish Company; or they choose
some way of living, that is either dishonest, or very inconvenient for them in
many regards; or if they comply with their Parents, so far as to enter upon
some honest way of living, yet they do not keep at it, but leave it, and become
Prodigals; they spend their substance in riotous living; they waste and consume
what their Parents bestow upon them, in drinking, gaming, and whoring, and such
like extravagancies, whereby as they occasion a great deal of sorrow and grief
to their Parents, so they bring upon themselves sudden Destruction.

5. Duty, not to suffer themselves to be bestowed in Marriage against their
Parents Will.
5thly. As to their Marriage, they are not to suffer themselves to be bestowed,
without their Parents consent, in whom there is a right invested to dispose of
their Children in Marriage in due time, as appears from Deuteronomy. 7.3. Neither
shall thou make Marriages with them: (to wit, with the seven Nations of Canaan)
Thy Daughter thou shall not give unto his Son; nor his Daughter ^alt thou take
unto thy Son. And, 1 Cor. 7.36,37,38. the Apostle Paul does very positively
assert this power of Parents, to dispose of their Children in Marriage, when
they see it fit and needful so to do.

We see how dutifully Samson carried himself toward his Parents in this
matter, Judge. 14.1,2. And Samson went down to Timnath, and saw a Woman in
Timnath, and he came up and told his Father and his Mother, and said, I have
seen a Woman in Timnath of the Daughters of the Philistines, now therefore get
her for me to Wife. We see what Isaac gave his Son Jacob in charge, when he was
to go to Haran, Genesis 28.1,2. Thou shall not take a Wife of the Daughters of
Canaan: Arise, go to Padan-Aram, to the House of Bethuel thy Mother's Father,
and take thee a Wife from thence of the Daughters of Laban, thy Mother's
Brother. In like manner Abraham directs his Servant what Wife to choose for his
Son Isaac, Genesis 24.3,4. Thou shall not take a Wife unto my Son of the Daughters
of the Canaanites, but thou shall go unto my Country, and unto my Kindred, and
take a Wife unto my Son Isaac. And of Ishmael it is said, Genesis 21.21. That his
Mother, Hagar, took him a Wife.

How very just and reasonable is it, that they who are under God, the causes of
their life and being in the World, whose Goods and Possession Children are,
should be acknowledged and advised with by them, and depended on in the
settling of themselves in the World, in such a state of Life, which will prove
either the foundation of great happiness or of great misery? To give themselves
away, without their Parents Consent, is a kind of theft; it is to invade the
right of others; to rob them of that which God has given them; for, Children
are not their own, they are the Goods and Possession of Parents, to whom God
has given them as an Inheritance, Psalm. 127.3. and therefore Children have no
more power to dispose of themselves, than to dispose of their Parents Goods
without their consent.

We see how great the Power of Parents was, by the Law of Moses, Numb.
30.3,4,5. To disanul the rash Vows of their Children before Marriage. If a
Woman also vow a Vow unto the Lord, and bind her self by a Bond, being in her
Father's House, in her youth, and her Father hear her Vow and her Bond,
wherewith she has bound her Soul, and her Father shall hold his peace at her:
Then all her Vows shall stand, and every Bond wherewith she has bound her
Soul, shall stand: But if her Father disallow her in the day that he hears;
not any of her Vows, or of her Bonds, wherewith she has bound her Soul, shall
stand: And the Lord shall forgive her, because her Father disallowed her. Now
if it be thus in a Father's power, to disanul his Daughter's rash Vow which she
made to God, how much more may we reckon it in his Power, to disanul her rash
and indiscreet promise made to Man, of bestowing her self without her Parents
allowance? Can there be any thing more unjust, more unkind, more unthankful,
and more unnatural, than for Children, who have been brought up, nourished, and
cherished by their Parents, for whom all their care and pains have been
bestowed, to dispose of themselves in the most important affair of their lives,
without their knowledge, or against their Will? What a grief and trouble of
heart must this needs be to their poor Parents? As we see it was to Isaac and
Rebekah, Genesis 26.34,35. And Esau was forty years old when he took to Wife
Judith, the daughter of Beeri the Hittite, and Bashemath, the daughter of Elon
the Hittite, which were a grief of mind to Isaac, and to Rebekah. As to such
undutiful Children, who do thus bestow themselves against their Parents will
and consent, it is very remarkable, that they seldom live happily and
comfortably; they bring upon themselves very often a great deal of sorrow and
trouble, lasting Misery and Woe: They live to eat the fruit of their foolish
doings; and wish, when it is to little purpose, that they had never done so mad
and wicked a thing.

6. Duty, to submit to their Parents Reproofs and Chastenings.
6thly. They are meekly and patiently to submit to their Reproofs, to their
Chastenings and Corrections. It is a Power that God has given Parents over
their Children, to correct and chasten them for their Faults: This is necessary
for Childrens good; and therefore, when Parents do correct them, they ought not
to be angry with them, or grumble at their severity which they use for
reforming of them; much less are they to resist and rebel against them. Heb.
12.9. We have had Fathers of our flesh, which corrected us, and we gave them
Reverence. Yea, though Parents sometimes exceed the bounds of Prudence and
Discretion in chastising their Children, though they indulge a little to their
own Passion; yet Children are bound patiently to bear and suffer their
Corrections: They are not to fly out into indecent and irreverent words and
actions, but with all the submission and respect that is possible, ought to
endeavor to mitigate the wrath and passion of their angry Parents; and
afterward they are to study all that ever they can, to prevent their anger and
displeasure, by a most humble, reverend, and dutiful carriage.

Against Rebellious Children.
How much may this serve to reprove those, who are so far from taking in good
part their Parents correcting and chastening of them, that they refuse to
submit thereto? They resist them, and rebel against them. Can there be any
thing more unnatural and monstrous, than to see those who owe their being to
their Parents; who have been brought up by them; who have met with so many
testimonies of a tender care, and of great kindness; to rise up against them?
To fly into the faces of those who are the Authors of their being? to lift up
their hand against them? This is a Sin of so crying a Nature, that he who was
guilty thereof, was to be put to Death, by the Law of Moses, Exodus 21.15. He
that smites his Father or his Mother, shall be surely put to Death. So
sensible were some amongst the very Heathens of the greatness of this Sin, that
to show their abhorrence of it, they were wont to punish those who were Guilty
of it, in the following manner; They sewed them in a Sack with a Dog, Cat,
Viper and Ape, and so drowned them all together. Hereby they singnified, that
such Persons were not any longer to be accounted Men, or the Children of Men,
but were to be reckoned with the vilest and basest of Beasts and Vermin, and
in that Quality were to be cast out of the sight of all living.

How greatly does it aggravate this Sin, when Children have met with no severe,
nor unmerciful dealing from their Parents? But have been treated by them, with
all that gentleness and kindness that was possible. And yet for such Children
to rise up against their Parents, is a Crime of so black a Nature, that it is
no wonder if the hand of God appear against them for it, in a very signal
manner; as it did in the case of Absalom, for whom his Father David had so
great a fondness: This unthankful and unnatural Son rose up against him, and
endeavored by force and violence to pull him from the Throne, and to usurp the
Royal Dignity. See how the hand of God appeared against him, 2 Samuel 18.9. And
Absalom met the Servants of David; and Absalom rode upon a Mule, and the Mule
went under the thick Boughs of a great Oak, and his Head caught hold of the
Oak, and he was taken up between the Heaven and the Earth, and the Mule that
was under him went away. And, ver. 14. it is said, that Joab took three darts
in his hand, and thrust them through the heart of Absalom, while he was yet
alive in the midst of the Oak. And, ver. 15. Ten young Men that bare Joab's
Armor, compassed about, and smote Absalom, and slew him. And, ver. 17. They
took Absalom and cast him into a great Pit in the Wood, and laid a very great
heap of Stones upon him. This was done as a lasting Monument of Absalom's sin
and shame, and of God's righteous Judgment upon him.

7. Duty, to love their Parents, and how they are to express their Love.
7thly, Children ought to love their Parents; and to express it by all those
Offices, which are in their Power to do for them; by serving them readily; by
studying ways how to make them well pleased: by sympathizing with them in all
their troubles; by assisting them, and doing all they can to make their Lives
joyful and comfortable; by shunning every thing that may grieve them, or make
them uneasy: They ought to refuse no labor, nor pains to do them service,
especially when they are sick and weak, oppressed with the Burden of Old Age,
or poor and indigent, under any sort of necessity whatsoever; then ought
Children to be very ready to help them, to comfort and to encourage them, to do
what in them lies to make their lives easy to them, and to lighten their
Burdens. This is called, 1 Timothy 1.4. A showing Piety at home. It is an act of
Religion and Worship, which God is well pleased with. We see how Joseph
nourished his Father and his Brethren, and all his Fathers Household with
Bread, Genesis 47.12. How worthy of Praise was that Excellent Moabitess Ruth, who
not only gleaned for her poor Mother-in-Law Naomi, but did also, when Food was
given her by Boaz for her own Refreshment, reserve part of it, and give it to
her Mother. See Ruth 2.18.

It was an old Roman Law Senec. Controv. l. 1. Cont. 1.7. and 19.
. Let Children relieve their Parents or be put in Prison. Which shows what
was the Sense of that wise People, concerning this Important Duty of Children
toward their Parents; they looked upon them as unworthy of Liberty to converse
amongst Men, and to enjoy the common Privileges of Society, who were so far
void of Humanity, as not to relieve and assist their poor Parents. 'Twas
likewise an Athenian Law, Diog. Laert. in Solone.
That if any did not relieve their Parents, they should be esteemed base and
ignoble.

How many Examples have there been amongst the Heathens, of Eminent Piety
toward Parents? Such was that Act of her, Valor. Max. l. 5. Cap. 4.
who when her Old Father was condemned to be put to Death in Prison, visited
him often, and gave him suck, and so preserved him alive, who otherwise must
have dyed of Famine.

The like instance we meet with in the same Author, Valor. Max. ibid.
of a worthy Roman Daughter, who did in the same manner preserve her Mother in
Prison, being Condemned to dye. When the Keeper of the Prison, to whom the
charge of putting her to Death was committed, found after some time, that her
Daughter kept her alive by giving her suck, he was so affected with the
greatness of the Daughter's Compassion and Tenderness to her Mother, that he
made it known to those in Power, who were likewise so mightily touched with
such an unusual instance of tender Affection; that they pardoned the Mother, as
the greatest Reward they could bestow on the Daughter for her mavelous
Affection.

What can there be more just and reasonable, than for Children thus to
endeavor to requite their Parents, for their great care and kindness toward
them, when they were not able to help themselves? The time was, when their
Parents were as Eyes, and Hands, and Feet to them; they did every thing for
them, they not being capable to do any thing for themselves: How ready
therefore should they be to serve their Parents, to assist them by all good
Offices, when their condition requires it?

This is a Duty to which Children are so strictly obliged, (to wit, the
assisting and relieving of their Parents) that no pretense is sufficient to
absolve them from the Obligation thereof. The Pharisees thought they had found
out an Exception from this Rule, which was this; that if Children gave away
their Wealth to Pious and Charitable uses, they were freed from the Obligation
of relieving their Parents: They taught them in this case, to tell their
Parents, It is Corban, that is to say, a Gift, by whatsoever thou might be
profited by me, Mar. 7.11. And by saying this, they made People believe, that
they were sufficiently freed from all Obligations to take care of, and provide
for their Parents. But our Savior reproves them severely, telling them, that
this was no other than the making void the Commandments of God by their
Traditions.

Against unkind and unnatural Children.
We may see from this, what Judgment to make of such unkind, undutiful, and
unnatural Children, who do wholly neglect their Parents, especially in their
old Age, and in their poor and low Estate; who show them no more pity, and
express no more love nor tenderness toward them, than if they were not their
Parents; who grudge them the least supply; and take all the wicked courses that
they can, to starve them to death, that they may be rid of them; who wish and
long for, and rejoice in the Death of their poor Parents. O what a horrid
Barbarity and Inhumanity is this! Shall not many Pagans rise up in Judgment
against such Children, and Condemn them? How little do they deserve the Name
of, Christian Children? Their true Name is, Unchristian, and unnatural
Children. As Solomon bid the Sluggard, go to the Ant; so may we bid such
hard-hearted and unmerciful Children, go to the Stork, of whom it is told, S.
Basil. in Hexaemer. Homil. 8. Ambros. Hexaem. l. 5. c. 16.
that when the old Dams cannot feed themselves, their little ones feed and
nourish them; when their Feathers fall from them, they cover them with their
Feathers; and when they are not able to fly, they couple themselves together,
to carry them upon their Backs. Let uncompassionate Children go to this
compassionate Creature, and consider her ways and be wise; Let them learn from
her, to be more kind and affectionate, and tenderhearted toward their
Parents, and not any longer to harden their Bowels against them.

8. Duty, to pray for their Parents.
8thly, Because all that Children can do is not sufficient to requite the Love
and tender care of their Parents; therefore they ought to pray to God, that he
would reward them, and preserve them, and keep them alive; that he would supply
all their wants, and comfort them in all their troubles, and requite their
Love, their tender care, and their great cost and pains they have been at to
bring them up, and to educate them. How happy are the Parents of such Children,
who are supplicants and intercessors, at the Throne of Grace, for good things
unto them? Such Children are the strength of their Parents; they are a great
blessing unto them.

Against Cursers of Parents.
If it be the Duty of Children, thus to pray to God, in behalf of their Parents;
what shall we say of those, who neither pray for them, nor themselves, but live
like the Beasts that perish, and mind nothing that is good? And if their Crime
is great, who do not at all pray for their Parents; how dreadful is their
Guilt, who Curse them? What dreadful Judgments may such Monsters of wickedness
expect? Prove. 20.20. Who so Curses his Father or his Mother, his Lamp shall be
put out in obscure darkness; that is, he shall be reduced unto a sad,
afflicted, and miserable State; his prosperous condition (which is compared to
Light, or to a Lamp) shall be turned into Adversity and Misery, and that very
great, which is expressed by [obscure Darkness,] he shall be made very
miserable; his state and condition in the World shall become most
uncomfortable; as it is for a Man who walks in a way that is full of Light,
where he beholds a great many Objects, which afford him pleasure and delight,
suddenly to be deprived of all this, and to find himself all alone in obscure
Darkness, without all help and comfort. By the Law of Moses, such ungodly and
unnatural Children were without any pardon to be put to death. Exodus 21.17. He
that Curses his Father or his Mother, shall surely be put to Death.

The Duties of Children toward their deceased Parents.
The Duties of Children toward their deceased Parents.
Besides the Duties which Children owe their Parents whilst they are alive,
there are some things likewise for them to do after their Decease; Particularly,

1. Duty, they ought to bury them decently.
First, They ought to bury them decently according to their Quality, so far as
the present Circumstances of their Estate will permit: They ought on the one
hand to avoid whatever looks like Baseness and Covetousness, and which is not,
in some measure, answerable to their Parents Estate and Place while they lived;
and on the other hand, they ought to avoid an over-lavish Sumptuousness, they
must do nothing above their Estate, or above their Rank and Quality. A great
many, out of a vain and foolish humor of Solemnizing their Parents Funerals in
a sumptuous and splendid manner, have so far weakened their Estate, as scarce
ever to be able to recover themselves again. Children therefore ought, in this
matter, to govern themselves, by the Advice and Example of Prudent and Discreet
Persons of their own Rank, in the World; but especially, they are herein to
govern themselves by the Will of the Dead, so far as it was made known to them
or others: Thus, we see, Joseph and his Brethren did to their Father Jacob when
he died; he charged them to Bury him with his Fathers, in the Cave that is in
the Field of Ephron the Hittite, Genesis 49.29. And accordingly his Sons did as he
commanded them, Genesis 50.12,13.

2. Duty, to fulfill their last Will.
2dly. They are likewise to show the greatest readiness that is possible, to
Obey their Parents in every other thing which by their last Will they appointed
and Ordered to be done; for Example, the Payment of Debts and Legacies, the
giving so much Money for some Excellent and Pious Design, or for the Relief of
some Persons in Distress and Want, etc.

The Will of the Dead has, in all Ages, and amongst all People, been reckoned a
thing most Sacred and Inviolable: Now, if the Will of the Deceased be
Obligatory unto any, it must certainly be so in a special manner to Children,
whom both the Laws of Natural and Revealed Religion require to Obey their
Parents in all things.

3. Duty, to call to mind their good Advices, and to follow their good Examples.
3dly. They ought to call to mind often their Parents good Advices, and to
follow their Pious Examples. If whilst they were alive, they neglected, or, at
least, did not observe, so well as they should have done, their Admonitions and
Instructions, and did not make very great account of their good Examples; they
ought (now they are gone from them, and to return to them no more) to endeavor
to be so much the more careful to follow their useful Directions and Examples.
There is no such way as this, to keep the Memory of Parents fresh and green.
There can no Monument be erected comparable to this, when Children imitate
their Parents Virtue and Piety. The good Kings which came of the Stock and
Lineage of David, made the Memory of their Father David to be still sweet and
flourishing, when his Body was rotten in the Grave. Thus it is said of Solomon,
1 King. 3.3. He walked in the Statutes of David his Father. And of Asa, it is
said, 1 King. 15.11. And Asa did that which was right in the Eyes of the Lord,
as did David his Father. And of Josiah it is written, 2 King. 22.2. He did that
which was right in the sight of the Lord, and walked in all the ways of David
his Father, and turned not aside to the right hand, or to the left.

'Twill be an Act of Justice, as well as a Testimony of due Respect and Love to
your Deceased Parents, now and then to make Honorable mention of them, to talk
of their good Advices, their useful Sayings, and their good Customs and
Examples. But this is not to be done too often, nor in all Companies; only
amongst those who will bear it, and at such times when it is most likely to do
good.

4. Duty, to do what they can Lawfully to suppress evil Reports concerning them.
4thly. They ought to do all that they can Lawfully, in a calm and prudent
manner, to suppress evil Reports, which are spread abroad of their Parents
after their Decease. The Credit and Honor of Parents ought to be very dear to
Children: And therefore, when their good Name is wounded, and when they, by
Death, are incapable to vindicate themselves, it is the Duty of Children, who
are, as it were, their living Images, to do their utmost to preserve their Name
from injurious Reports. If what is said of them be manifestly false, Children
ought to make known the naked truth, so far as is fit; which will be the best
and surest Vindication. But if what is said against their Parents be true, and
of that Nature as to admit of no excuse or extenuation, the best thing that
Children can do in such a case, is, to avoid such wicked things themselves as
their Parents were Guilty of. They who follow the Evil Example of Parents,
cause them to stink more and more. The posterity of Jeroboam, who followed his
wretched Example, made his Evil Name to be the more remembered, and caused this
blur to continue in his Character, from one Age to another, Jeroboam which made
Israel to Sin.

5. Duty, to retain a firm kindness for their Friends.
5thly. They ought to retain a sincere and firm kindness and esteem, for all
those who witnessed a true and constant Christian Friendship to their Parents,
who were always faithful to them, ready to serve them, and to do them all good
Offices, according to their ability: Such Persons, it may be very reasonably
presumed, will not be treacherous and unfaithful to the Children, who have
testified a lasting and faithful Friendship to the Parents. Thy own Friend,
says Solomon, and thy Father's Friend, forsake not, Prove. 27.10.

Against Children who neglect these Duties.
Now, if it be the Duty of Children, to express their Love and Regard toward
their deceased Parents, in the abovementioned manner, what shall be said of
those who run a course quite contrary to all this? No sooner are their Parents
dead, but they begin to rejoice and triumph, and to bless themselves, that at
last they are delivered from those restraints they were formerly under, and
that now they have the liberty to give themselves the swing, and to gratify
every Lust and Passion, as much as ever they can. As to their Parents Will,
they take no care to fulfill it; henceforth they know no other Will but their
own; as to that of their Parents, they think they had too much to do with it,
when they were alive, and now that they are dead, they reckon themselves
absolved from all Obligations to them. As to their Debts and Legacies, etc.
They make no Conscience to pay them, unless a necessity of submitting to the
Laws force them to do their Duty. As to the Credit and good Name of their
Parents, so little regard have they thereto, as to be ready to give ear to
those who speak ill of them; yea themselves are apt to blaze abroad such things
as tend to their Reproach and Disparagement. As to their Advices and
Admonitions, they laugh at them, they look on them as fit only to be list'ned
to by melancholy dull Souls, who have no relish of Manly Pleasures: They have
no mind to be interrupted in their Mirth and Jollity, and therefore farewell
any Advice or Council that looks like serious. As to their Example, they slight
and despise it; they look on themselves as too wise to be led either by Precept
or Example, but according as they suit their own Humor and Inclination. As to
their Parents Friends, they turn their Backs upon them, they break off all
Correspondence with them, and keep them at the greatest distance, as if they
were afraid of them; they know that they are of the same Temper and Principles
with their Parents, and therefore they cannot endure them, for fear of being
told by them some thing or other, that does not agree with their vain and
wicked Practices, and with their rash and foolish Designs. In a word, they
study a perfect Opposition to their Parents in all things; they pull down
whatever they built, they root up whatever they planted, they hate what they
loved, and love whatever they hated. So unlike do they render themselves to
their Parents in all their Manners and Customs, that all who see them must
needs call them a degenerate Seed, Cursed Children, unnatural Plants, ready to
be hewn down and cast into the Fire.

From what has been said, Children may see what their Duty is, which they owe
to their Parents; which that they may perform, there are several things which
serve as powerful Motives and Arguments to excite them.

Motives to excite Children to do these things.
1 Motive, from the divine Commandment.
First, It will tend mightily to move them to Honor their Father and Mother,
if they consider who requires this at their hands. This Law proceeds not from
Men, but from God; It is a Law made by him who is their Maker; and therefore by
right of Creation may require their Obedience: It is a Law made by their
faithful preserver, and rich provider; and therefore by Virtue of his daily
care over them, and kindness to them, may command them what he thinks good:
This is the will of their Father in Heaven, of their Lord and King, of him who
will call them to an account, and render to them according to their Works; of
him who is their greatest and best Friend, if they do his Will and keep his
Commandments; but will be their most dreadful and terrible Enemy, if they do
not obey his Voice: If therefore Children have any sense of God on their Souls;
If they consider his infinite greatness, Power, Wisdom, Justice, Truth,
Faithfulness, Mercy, and Kindness; they cannot but endeavor to perform what he
requires, when once they know what is his holy will and pleasure. Now, as to
what I speak of, to wit the Duty of Children to Parents, it is plain and clear,
not only from those Laws which are contained in Holy Scripture, which were
revealed from Heaven to Holy Men, whom God made use of to be the publishers
thereof to the World; but likewise from the Laws of Nature, those clear
impressions which God has made on the Minds of Men in all places, and in all
Ages; whereby they are taught that Children ought to honor and obey their
Parents, to love them and to relieve them, and provide for them, if they stand
in need of their help See Simplicius upon Epictet. Cap. 37. and Arrianus l. 2.
c. 10.
. These have always been the calm and sober thoughts of all Men; and when any
were so wicked as to violate this sacred Law, they were hated and abhorred by
all others; and in all well governed States, were punished according to the
demerits of their Crime, and the degree of their disobedience and perverseness,
either immediately by the Parents, or by public Judges, upon complaint made by
Parents. The Sense of all this ought to move Children to honor their Father
and Mother, that they may approve themselves to God, who requires them to do
so, and that upon the severest Penalties, if they shall dare to dishonor them,
and disobey them.

2. Motive, from the Divine Promise.
Secondly, To encourage Children to perform their Duty to their Parents, God
has been pleased to add a gracious promise. That thy days may be long Or, that
they, i. e. Thy Parents, may prolong thy days, to wit, by their Prayers and
Blessing.
upon the Land which the Lord thy God gives thee. He might only have commanded
them to do this, by Virtue of his absolute Power and Sovereign Authority, which
he has over all Men, without proposing any Reward; but such is his infinite
Bounty and Goodness, that he has added a Promise to the Command, thereby to
make Childrens Duty the more easy.

As to the Promise it self, it is not to be understood absolutely, as if all
good Children should live long; promises of Temporal Blessings are made
conditionally, that is, so far as God sees such things best and fittest for us:
So that as to this promise of long life. God will bestow it, if it be most for
his own Glory, and the good and Benefit of Children. Oftentimes he does
lengthen out the years of pious and dutiful Children; whereas the years of
wicked and undutiful Children are shortened by their profane and wicked
courses; so that some of them are cut off immediately by the hand of God; and
others are put to death by the hand of Man.

As for those Children who live not to a great Age, though they are very dutiful
and obedient to their Parents; God does make up what is wanting in the number
of their Years here, with an everlasting Life, and Glory in Heaven. In which
case there is no cause to complain, as if Cod did not fulfill his promise to
them. For as there is no reason for a Man to complain, who is employed to work
for so much a day, if his Master see it fit to free him from his Work, and pay
him all his Wages before the third part of his time is out: Even so, if God
think fit to set his Children at Liberty, from the toil and labor of this
life, and to bestow upon them Glorious and Eternal Rewards, while they are in
the Morning or Noon, as it were, of their Age, there is no ground of
complaining upon his doing so, but rather great matter of Praise and
Thanksgiving unto him, whose Mercy and Love is infinitely great.

But besides this Reward in the other World; there are Temporal Blessings which
God will bestow on those who keep this Commandment. My Son, says Solomon,
Prove. 1.8,9. Hear the Instruction of thy Father, and forsake not the Law of thy
Mother. For they shall be an Ornament of Grace unto thy Head, and Chains about
thy Neck. That is, if thou art obedient to the Commands of thy Parents, this
will make thee very amiable not only in the sight of God, but even of Men, who
cannot but love and esteem such Children, who carry themselves as they ought to
do toward their Parents.

But further, to encourage Children to honor their Parents, there is a promise
of Prosperity added to that of long life, Deuteronomy. 5.16. That thy days may be
prolonged, and that it may go well with thee, etc. The same Promise is
repeated, Ephesians. 6.3. with this difference only, that it is prefixed to the
promise of long life, that it may be well with thee, and that thou may live
long on the Earth. When God does prolong the Years of his Children, he often
affords them more or less of Temporal Prosperity also, as he sees it will turn
to their good, that so their long life may be the more sweet and comfortable to
them.

How acceptable and pleasing to God was the Obedience of the Rechabites unto
their Father, though his Commands seemed very hard and severe, to wit, That they
should drink no Wine, nor build House, nor sow Seed, nor plant Vineyard, nor
have any, but should dwell in Tents, Jer. 35.6,7, etc. And ver. 18. Jeremiah
said unto the House of the Rechabites, Thus says the Lord of Hosts, the God of
Israel, because you have obeyed the Command of Jonadab your Father, and kept
all his Precepts, and done according to all that he has Commanded you:
Therefore thus says the Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel, Jonadab the Son of
Rechab shall not want a Man to stand before me for ever. Which words import,
that he would take a particular care of them, that he would be mindful of them,
and have them in his Eye; that he would preserve them, and show them his favor
and love, and continue unto them those Offices and Privileges which they
enjoyed, which some think were, of being Scribes and Doctors of the Law, and
having some Charge in or about the Temple.

3. Motive, from the Example of our Blessed Savior.
Thirdly, Besides the Command of God, and the Reward which he has promised to
them who honor their Parents, how strong an Argument ought it to be unto all
Children, to excite them to this, when they consider the Example of their
Blessed Lord and Master, their King and Savior, Jesus Christ? of whom it is
said, that he was subject unto his Parents, Luke 2.51. And if he, who was so
much greater than his Parents, who was their Lord, their King, their Maker,
their Savior, and Redeemer; if he, who was the Son of God, and thought it no
Robbery to be equal with God, I say, if he was subject to his Parents, ought
not all Children to be so to their Parents? and to esteem it their Glory to
imitate their Prince and Savior, as in his other Virtues, so in his Obedience
and Subjection to his Parents? Shall any Man think himself too good to do this,
when Christ did it before him? Can it be too mean for a Worm to do that, which
a Man, a great Man, and a mighty Prince has done? Shall vile Sinners think
themselves abased and dishonored by doing that which was done before by him,
who knew no sin, and in whose Mouth there was found no guile, who was holy,
harmless, and undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher than the
Heavens, Heb. 7.26.

As our Blessed Lord was a great and Noble Pattern to us in other things, so
particularly in his love to his Parents. When he was upon the Cross, a little
before he gave up the Ghost, he expressed how great his love was to his Mother,
and how tender a care he had of her. John 19.25,26,27. Now there stood by the
Cross of Jesus, his Mother, and his Mother's Sister, Mary the Wife of Cleophas,
and Mary Magdalene. When Jesus therefore saw his Mother, and the Disciple
standing by whom he loved, he says unto his Mother, Woman, behold thy Son.
Then says he to the Disciple, behold thy Mother. And from that hour, that
Disciple took her unto his own home. He commends his Mother to John ( Joseph in
all probability being dead) that he might take care of her, as of his own
Mother. Though he was at this time in the midst of great pain and anguish, though
his hands and his feet were nailed to the Cross, though his Head was Crowned with
Thorns, though he lay under the most insupportable Burden that ever Man lay
under, yet, as if the sight of his Mother had made him forget all his
Sufferings and Torments, he affectionately recommends her to the care of
another, who he knew would perform all the Offices of a loving Son unto her. He
knew how great an affliction it would be to her, to be deprived of the Comfort
of his presence in the World; he knew to how many necessities and wants, she
should be exposed by his leaving of her; and therefore he gives it in charge to
the beloved Disciple, to do the Duty of a Son unto her, to be to her in his
stead, to honor her, to love her, to serve her, to take care of her, and
provide whatever might be fit for her. This shows all Children what is their
Duty toward their Parents, to wit, that they ought to take care of them, so
long as they live, and are able to do it; they ought with all respect and
kindness, to perform unto them all those Offices, which the Laws of Nature and
Christianity require.

4. Motive, from the Examples of some Heathens.
Fourthly, May not the Examples of some Heathens, which have already been
mentioned, excite Christian Children to perform their Duty to their Parents?
There are a great many more Instances might be added to this purpose; I shall
only mention a few. The first is, Valor. Max. l. 5. c. 4. and Plut. in Coriola^.
of the brave Coriolanus, that Great Roman Commander, who being very ill used by
his Countrymen, fled to the Volscians, who were at that time at War with the
Romans. Within a little time after his coming amongst them, he was made General
of their Forces; in which Service he had great Success against the Romans,
gaining several Victories over them, whereby he was encouraged to approach to
the very Walls of Rome: His Contrymen were terribly alarmed with this; so
that they were forced to make humble Addresses to him, to deprecate his
displeasure, but to no purpose: They sent their Priests in their Sacred
Vestments, but to as little Effect: But no sooner did his Mother, attended with
his Wife and Children, come to him, but he submitted himself to her. "Now, says
he, you have overcome me indeed, when the entreaties of my Mother are added to
yours; though Rome deserve my hatred, yet for my Mother's sake I will spare it;"
and immediately he withdrew his Army.

A second Example, is that of the Worthy Athenian Captain Cimon, Val. Max. ibid.
who not being able to redeem the Corpse of his Father, which was Arrested for
Debt, sold himself, and became a Slave, that his Deceased Father's Body might
be freed from that Arrest that was upon it, and so might have Honorable
Burial. This great Man was famous for his Noble and Valiant Exploits, for his
great Courage and Excellent Conduct in Military Affairs; but there was not any
thing for which he was so much admired and loved, as for this wonderful
instance of Affection and Respect to his Father.

A Third Example, is, Sen. l. 1. Controversiarum. c. 1.
of a Son, whose Father and Uncle were at great variance. It happened that the
Uncle, during this Contention, fell into great want. His Brother was so madly
and wickedly set against him, that he not only would not relieve him himself,
but also forbad his Son to do it. The young Man considered his Uncles Case to
be such, as obliged his Father and himself both, to help him all they could:
But if his Father, through his violent Passion and Prejudice neglected his
Duty, which the Laws of Nature and Humanity required, yet he judged himself
bound to do him all the Service he could, and not to suffer him to starve for
want, when it was in his power to support him. The Father being enraged against
his Son, because he took pity upon his Uncle, disinherited him; which the young
Man bore very patiently. His Uncle seeing how unjustly he was dealt with,
adopted him, and made him his Heir. After some time the Uncle grew very Rich,
having got a good Inheritance; but the Father grew poor, and was not able to
maintain himself without relief from others. The Uncle continuing still in his
bitter Enmity against his Brother, forbad the young Man to help him: But such
was his Love and Dutifulness to his Father, that notwithstanding his former
Injustice and severity against him, and notwithstanding the Commands of his
Uncle, he took care of him, and did not suffer him to want for any thing, that
he was able to afford him. The Uncle was so provoked, by his Adopted Sons
kindness to his Natural Parent; that he likewise disinherited him. But the
pious Son, continued to do what he thought his Duty, amidst all the
Discouragements he met with.

May not such shining Patterns amongst the Pagans, make many Christians
ashamed, who come so far short of them, in their Duty and Obedience to their
Parents? Shall not they rise up in Judgment and condemn Christians? who, though
they have a more excellent, complete, and perfect Rule, though they have a great
deal more Light to direct them in their Duty to their Parents; and though they
have much greater assistances to enable them to perform their Duty; do
nevertheless carry themselves so undutifully, and unchristianly, as if they had
never heard of the Gospel of Christ, yea, as if they had been born without any
impressions of Natural Religion on their Minds, whereby all Nations are so far
instructed and enlightened, as to acknowledge, that to honor, obey, love,
serve, and assist our Parents, are Duties of unquestionable and indispensible
Obligation.

The Conclusion, showing how Children ought to improve what has been said.
From what has been said, Children may see how great reason they have to
perform all those Offices of Love, Honor, and Subjection to their Parents,
that God requires of them. It remains that they seriously and impartially
consider, what their practice has been, and whether they have done those things
which God requires them to do toward their Father and Mother.

That you may do this to good purpose, it is fit that you employ some time in
looking back on your Lives, in considering how you have honored, loved, and
obeyed your Parents; that you may see, whether you have carried your selves
toward them, in words and deeds, as became good Children, who have a sense of
Religion; or whether you have not dishonored, neglected, and disobeyed them.

If upon Examination of your selves, you find that you have done your Duty;
that you have sincerely endeavored to obey them in all things; that you have
loved them heartily, and paid them that Respect which you knew was due unto
them: Bless God, who has given you to will and to do according to his good
Pleasure. But because there are defects and imperfections, which cleave to our
exactest performances, therefore it is needful that you beg of God to forgive
you, wherein soever, through Ignorance, you have been faulty or defective in
those Duties you owed them.

But if upon inquiry into your Hearts and Lives, you find that you have
wilfully neglected to do what you ought to have done; if instead of honoring
them, you have dishonored them, you have slighted and despised them, you have
mocked and scorned them, you have reviled and reproached them; if instead of
obeying them, you find that you have been stubborn and disobedient to them, you
have refused to follow their Counsels and Admonitions, you have done your own
Will, and followed your own vain humor and fancy, in contempt of their Will;
if instead of submitting to their Corrections and Chastenings, you have refused
submission to them, and perhaps have rebelled against them; if instead of
loving them, you have hated them, and wished, and desired their Death; if
instead of relieving them in their wants, and supplying them with what was
necessary for them, you have wasted their substance by your riotous and
extravagant Living, you have put off all bowels of compassion and tenderness
toward them; if, I say, you find that you have thus carried your selves
toward them, in a way so contrary to your Duty, how ought you to lament and
mourn for your wickedness and folly? How ought you to accuse your selves for
your great iniquity, and to aggravate your Crimes by all just and fit
considerations?

You may in this manner expostulate the case with your selves: What a sad and
unworthy Wretch am I, who have thus dishonored, hated, and disobeyed my dear
Parents, who are under God the Authors of my Being in the World, to whom I owe
that I am! who have proved so undutiful to them who took care of me, when I
could not take care of my self; who fed and clothed me, who were at so great
pains and charge for me, who have employed so much of their time and strength
to provide for me all necessary things; and yet that I should prove so wicked
as to despise them, to disobey them, and hate them, not to submit my self unto
them, what base and wicked ingratitude is it! That I, who should have been a
Blessing to them, should prove a Curse! That I who should have been a Comfort
to them, should he the cause of their grief and sorrow! That I who should have
been a help unto them, should be so great a hinderance! That I who should have
been the stay and support of their Old Age, should prove their ruin, and the
cause of the spending of their days in anguish and trouble! What a prodigious
impiety is this! What a wretched and abominable Creature am I, who have been
guilty of such horrid wickedness! Who have had so little regard to those who
are to me in God's stead here in the World! What punishment do I not deserve!
What a wonder is it that God has spared me and pitied me, and has not cut me
off in the midst of my disobedience, neglect, and contempt of my dear Parents!
That he has not made me an Example to all others, and a standing Monument of
his just displeasure! That he has not bound me hand and foot, and cast me into
utter darkness, and given me my portion with Hypocrites and Sinners; but has
lengthened out my years, and given me time and place to repent.

Having thus in your own minds expostulated the matter with your selves, you
may in the next place adore and bless the Divine Goodness, the infinite Mercy,
and astonishing Kindness of God toward you, in having spared and pitied you;
in not dealing with you after your sins, nor rewarding you after your
iniquities; but that he has been pleased to wait to be gracious to you. Humbly
confess your faults and offenses unto him; with great shame and confusion of
face, and with true grief and sorrow of heart ackowledge your iniquities; make
particular confession, so far as you remember, of your stubbornness and
disobedience to your Parents, of your contempt and neglect of them, of your
hating them, and wishing Evil to them, of your speaking irreverently and
wickedly to them, or of them, of your not submitting to their Corrections, of
your not heeding their Admonitions and Counsels, nor regarding their just
Reproofs, etc. Beg of God, for Christ's sake, to have mercy on you, and to blot
out your Sins, and to make you what you ought to be.

After this, it is fit to form sincere and hearty Resolutions of doing your
Duty, in all respects, to your Parents, for the time to come; of loving,
honoring, obeying, and serving them, as you ought to do. Resolve to amend
whatever has been amiss and defective either in your thoughts, words, or deeds,
with relation to them. Beg of God, to strengthen you in your Resolutions; to
fortify you against all Temptations; to inspire you with his Fear and Love; to
guide you by his good Spirit; and that he would never leave you, nor forsake
you.

If the Example and Society of other wicked Children has been an occasion of
making you so bad, and of hardening you in your Contempt, Stubbornness, and
Disobedience; resolve to break off your Familiarities with them; let them and
all others know, and see, that you are sorry for your Disobedience to your
Parents; for your having dishonored, slighted, and neglected them; and that
you are resolved to do so no more; but will, by the help of God, approve your
selves Dutiful, Kind, and Obedient Children.

Not only must you in this manner make your Humble and Penitent Confession to
Almighty God, your Heavenly Father, whom you have provoked, as by your other
Sins, so particularly by your disobedience to your Parents, and by your
dishonouring of them; but you must likewise confess unto your Parents the
Crimes whereof you have been guilty against them; you must say as the Prodigal
did, I will arise, and go to my Father, and will say unto him, Father, I have
sinned against Heaven, and before thee; and am no more worthy to be called thy
Son, Luke 15.18,19. Let your Parents see that you are heartily sorry for your
Offenses against them by Word or Deed; beg of them to forgive you, and desire
them to pray to God that he would forgive you.

You are to be careful after this, to fulfill your Purposes and Resolutions, and
to perform all those Duties of Love, Honor, and Obedience to your Parents,
wherein you were formerly so defective. For this end it is fit, daily and
earnestly to beg of God, that he would direct and assist you by his Holy
Spirit, to do what is well-pleasing in his sight. It is necessary for you to be
very jealous of your deceitful and desperately wicked Hearts; to watch over
them carefully, lest they turn aside toward your former crooked Ways; lest you
return with the Dog to the Vomit. Watch against all those Temptations, whereby
you are most in danger of being seduced, and entangled again in your former
perverse Practices and Customs.

As you have been formerly very negligent and defective in Honoring and
Obeying your Parents, endeavor for the future so much the more, to perform all
those Duties which you owe unto them, with great care and exactness.

As you have been great Examples of Disobedience, strive to be so much the
greater Patterns of Obedience. Endeavor to do all that you can, that they who
have been, by your Counsels or Examples, corrupted, and made stubborn, and
disobedient, may be reformed, and rescued from their Sins and Wickedness; that
as you have been Instruments to promote Satan's Kingdom, so you may be zealous
for the glory of God, for promoting Piety and true Virtue in the World, whereof
this is no inconsiderable part, that Children Honor their Father and Mother,
and do all those Duties with cheerfulness unto them, which God requires.

This is the way to obtain the divine pardon, to turn away his Wrath, and to
keep off those heavy Judgments which are threatened against stubborn Children,
and such who mock and scorn their Parents: Or if God see it fit to punish you
here, he will make your Corrections and Punishments, and all other things, work
together for your good; and after he has tried you, he will bestow upon you
rewards of everlasting Life and Glory.

As for those who are so perverse as to despise all Counsel and Advice, who
refuse to hearken to any Instructions, who are resolved to go on in their
stubbornness and disobedience to their Parents, in slighting and vilifying
them; let them remember what the Wise Man says, Eccles. 11.9. Rejoice, O young
Man, in thy Youth, and let thine heart cheer thee, in the days of thy youth,
and walk in the ways of thine heart, and in the sight of thine Eyes: But know
thou, that for all these things, God will bring thee into Judgment.

An Appendix concerning the Duties of Children to their Step-Parents.
The Duties of Children to their Step-Parents.
HAving spoken of the Duties of Children to their Natural Parents, I shall add a
few things concerning their Duties to their Step-Parents.

Children ought to honor their Step-Parents, to carry themselves Respectfully
toward them, and to avoid every thing, either in words or deeds, which has an
appearance of Neglect and Contempt.

They ought to Obey them, and to show great readiness to serve them, in any
thing that is in their power to do for them; and to avoid whatever looks like
stubbornness, especially in such things, wherein their Natural Parent requires
them to be Obedient to their Step-Parent.

They ought to carry themselves kindly and lovingly toward them, and to avoid
whatever looks like Hatred or Malice.

They ought to submit to their Reproofs, and to their Chastenings, especially
when their Natural Parent desires the Step-Parent to reprove or correct them
for their faults.

They ought to hearken to their Admonitions, to follow their good Counsels and
Examples, and to be thankful for whatever they either do or say for their
benefit and advantage.

They ought to bear patiently with my thing, in their humor and temper, that
is not so sweet and pleasant; and to beware, lest they be thereby provoked, to
do or say what becomes not Children, toward those who are in the place of
Parents to them.

As to these particular Duties, I thought it needless to say much, having
treated of them more fully in the preceding Discourse, about Childrens Duties
to their Natural Parents: I shall therefore in the next place propose

Some Motives to stir up Children to be Dutiful to their Step-Parents.
Some Motives to stir up Children to be Dutiful to them.
The first thing which should prevail with Children to carry themselves
Dutifully toward their Step-Parents, is the regard that is due to the Laws of
God, whereby it is declared that Man and Wife are no more twain, but one Flesh;
They are, by Marriage, united in the nearest and closest manner that can be.
From whence it follows, by a very Natural Consequence, that it is the Duty of
Children to carry themselves in the most respectful and loving manner, that is
possible, toward those who are, by Marriage, made one with their Natural
Parents.

2dly. The Respect and Love that Children owe to their Natural Parents, oblige
them to show the utmost Respect, and all sincere Affection, to those whom they
have taken into so near a Relation with themselves. We see what the Laws of
Friendship do amongst Men, who are very careful to show all possible Respect
and Kindness to those, for whom their Friends have a great Value and Affection.
How much more ought Children to love, honor, and serve those whom their
Parents have made one with themselves, by choosing them into so near and close a
Relation and Union.

3dly. Does not even Prudence oblige them to all this? Is not this the way to
engage their Step-Parents to be respectful, kind, and serviceable to them, and
ready to do them all good Offices? Though there are some Step-Parents of so
barbarous and Savage a Temper, that nothing can oblige them, or work upon them;
yet there are but few, in comparison, who will not be affected and prevailed
upon with Kindness, Respect, and good Offices, especially when they are not for
a short time, but of long continuance.

4thly. Does not Self-Love likewise oblige Children to do these things? This is
the way for them to make their lives easy and comfortable, to enjoy a great
deal of Peace, and contentment of Mind: When they reflect upon their having
done what is suitable to the Laws of Religion, to the Rules which the Wisdom
from above lays down, it must needs afford them a very sensible Pleasure and
great Satisfaction; whereas, by carrying themselves undutifully, they bring
upon themselves a great deal of Vexation and Trouble; they not only alienate
more and more the Affection of their Step-Parents, but they likewise provoke
their Natural Parents to be less kind to them, if not quite to turn their Backs
upon them.

From what has been said, it appears how great reason Children have to carry
themselves with great Respect and Love, and with all possible Dutifulness
toward their Step-Parents. Against those who are undutiful toward their
Step-Parents.
How greatly therefore are they to be blamed, who make no Conscience of doing
their Duty toward them? There are many who make it their business to vex and
torment their Step-Parents, to affront them, and to disgrace them: They are
very ready to aggravate all their Weaknesses and Imperfections, and do thereby
endeavor to cause others to hate and to despise them; they invent too often a
great many things which they charge them with, that so they may by any means,
though never so wicked and unjust, render them odious and infamous. And, which is
worst of all, they do all that ever they can, by the most impious arts that
malicious and Devilish Wit can contrive, to alienate from them the affections
of their Natural Parents, and to set them together by the ears; by which means
very dreadful and Tragical Effects do oft-times follow, when Husband and Wife
are inflamed one against another. Where Envying and Strife is, says St. James,
Chap. 3. v. 16. there is Confusion and every evil Work. How often do such
Discords and Divisions end in the utter Ruin and Destruction both of Parents
and Children? Every House divided against it self, says our Savior, Mat.
12.25. shall not stand. And therefore, let all those who have any regard to the
Honor of God, who have any thing of sincere Affection to their Natural
Parents, who desire to live in Peace, who wish well to the Families to which
they belong, and are willing to prevent their utter Ruin and Desolation, let
all such, I say, as have any sense of these things, be careful to behave
themselves with all due Respect and Love toward those who are in the place of
Parents to them. By doing whereof, as they will gain the Love and Respect of
all who are wise and good, so they may be assured of obtaining from God great
and lasting Blessings, which he never fails to bestow on all those who
sincerely endeavor to Obey his Laws, and who seek his Glory.

A DISCOURSE About the RIGHT WAY Of Improving our TIME.

By James Kirkwood, Rector of Astwick in Bedfordshire.

The Second Edition Corrected and Enlarged.

LONDON, Printed for John Tailor at the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard, and
John Everingham at the Star in Ludgate Street, near the West End of St. Paul's.
1693.

Ephesians. V. 16. Redeeming the time, because the days are evil.


The Introduction.
OF all the outward Blessings, which God bestows upon us, there is none so
valuable and precious as our Time. God bestows upon us his other Blessings in
great variety and plenty; but in this he seems to be more sparing, for it is
given us not in large proportions, but as it were drop by drop, one minute
after another; never two minutes together: whenever he gives us one, he takes
away another. And yet how strange is it to think, that a great many spend their
time in Vanity and Folly! Time is to many like a dead Commodity; they cannot
tell what to do with it; they are ready to throw it away for nothing, or for
that which is little better: instead of improving and using it in virtuous and
profitable actions and designs, they waste it in trifling and vanity, which is
an Argument of the greatest Folly; as on the other hand, the right husbanding
of Time, is a great Instance of true Wisdom.

The Text explained.
The Apostle having exhorted the Ephesians to walk circumspectly, not as fools,
but as wise, he immediately subjoins [Redeeming the time.] Intimating thereby,
that there is no better way for us to show our selves wise, than by employing
our time to good purpose, Redeeming and buying it; or, as some read the words,
Buying the Opportunity, or a fit occasion and season for doing good. It is a
Metaphor taken from Merchants, who, when they have a great likelihood and
probability, of making considerable gain and advantage in buying and selling,
part with their pleasures, or lesser cares and concerns, that they may make a
good bargain, and purchase that which they greatly desire. So the Christian,
the Man that is good and wise, ought to deny himself in his Pleasures and
outward delights, or even in his ordinary affairs and concerns, when he has any
great prospect of doing somewhat considerable, for the glory of God, the good
of his Neighbor, and the benefit of his own Soul.

The reason which the Apostle uses, is, [Because the days are evil] that is,
either bad and sinful, full of wickedness and folly; so that it is very hard
and difficult then to be good, when sin, like a violent and impetuous Torrent,
carries all down before it: This ought to make you redeem all occasions of
doing good, that you may fortify others in Virtue and Piety, that you may
rescue those that are carried down the stream by bad Example, and may build up
your selves in Holiness, and that you may be made strong in the Lord, and in
the Power of his Might. Or [Because the days are evil] may relate to the danger
you are in through the fury and malice of your Enemies, who are ready to do you
all the mischief that is in their power; the sense whereof should make you
improve all occasions of doing good, not knowing how soon you may be deprived
of your present happy opportunities and seasons for working.

The design of this Discourse, is, to show you; 1st, How you are to redeem your
Time: And, 2dly, To propose some Considerations to excite you to do so.

How Time is to be redeemed.
1. Time to be redeemed from sleep.
First, YOu are to redeem your Time from excessive and immoderate sleep. It is
necessary for all Men to refresh their Bodies with sleep and rest; and the
state of some Men's Bodies requires a great deal more than others; so that no
exact Rules can be given about the proportion of sleep that is proper for every
one: Only in general, it is fit that all Persons redeem as much time from
sleeping, as the health of their Bodies can permit; that so they may employ
part of that time to some good and useful purpose, which they were wont to
waste in the shadow of Death, as it were; whereof sleep is the picture and
representation.

In the ancient Church we find, many were wont to rise up in the night to pray,
that so they might day and night keep alive in their Souls Divine impressions;
that they might preserve a relish and taste of heavenly and spiritual things;
that excellent Objects might not be removed too far out of their sight. This is
a practice, which, perhaps, very few in these cold Countries are able safely to
imitate; especially at some times of the year. The weakness and tenderness of
some bodies makes it to them impracticable; because it would render them unfit
at other times, not only for religious performances, but for the other
necessary Actions of life. Some likewise have so little time allowed them for
their repose in the Night, that they cannot do this, in their present
Circumstances. As for such who are capable, without any sort of inconvenience,
to follow this ancient Practice, let them do it: They want not sufficient
Encouragement thereto, if they consider that thereby they have the opportunity
of flying, as it were, from these Regions of darkness and misery, of sin and
folly, unto those glorious Regions of light and happiness, of purity and
perfection; there to converse with God their chiefest Joy; to behold his Face,
the light of his Countenance; to taste and see how good he is; to walk with
him; to be satisfied with his Salvation; to drink of those Rivers of unmixed
pleasure, which are in his Presence, the streams whereof make glad the City of
God.

As for those, who are not able to deny themselves of their repose in the night
season; all that I shall say to them, is this; When at some times it pleases
God to take away their sleep, and to keep them awake, let them redeem a few
moments from vain thoughts, by lifting up their Souls to God, darting up some
pious thoughts and fervent desires Heaven-wards; reflecting on the Goodness and
Love of God; admiring his glorious Perfections; calling to mind, and
considering his gracious Providence; longing for, and breathing after that
happy State when they shall be placed above all the infirmities and frailties
of the flesh, above outward necessities, above Sin and Satan, and all their
Enemies: And after this, they may again compose themselves to sleep. This is a
means to keep the Soul awake, to entertain it in a way worthy of it, to
accustom it to the contemplation of excellent and divine Objects, to keep
Heaven always near its view; and not to suffer the things of another life, to
be removed too far out of sight. We see in what temper of mind the Spouse was,
Cant. 5.2. I sleep, but my heart waketh. Even amidst her repose and sleep, her
thoughts were running after her desirable and beloved Object, which possessed
her heart, and filled her thoughts when she was awake. And so it is with pious
Souls sometimes, when their thoughts have been much employed and busied about
spiritual and heavenly things in the day time, they dream of them in the Night
season. Though they sleep, yet their heart waketh.

This watchful temper is an Excellent means to enrich the Soul; whereas
slothfulness, and giving up ones self to drowsiness and sleep, causes
spiritual beggary. An idle Soul (says Solomon, Prove. 19.15.) shall suffer
hunger. And, Prove. 20.13. Love not sleep, test thou come to Poverty: Open thine
Eyes, and thou shall be satisfied with Bread. Then was it that Samson lost his
Hair, wherein was his strength, when he was asleep. Judge. 16.19.

As it is a fault at any time to waste our precious hours in this sluggish and
lazy manner, so especially when God affords very favorable opportunities of
doing some great good to our selves or others. He that sleeps in Harvest
(says the wise Man,) is a Son that causes shame; Prove. 10.5. that is, he
makes his Father and Friends ashamed of him, and brings shame and disgrace on
himself.

Now is the day of Grace, now is the acceptable time, now is the season of
gathering the Fruits of Righteousness, and of making sure an Harvest of
everlasting Glory. And therefore, let us not sleep, as do others; but let us
watch and be sober, 1 These. 5.6.

2. Time to be redeemed from dressing the Body.
Secondly, Redeem time from dressing and adorning the Body: Let not more time
be spent that way than is meet and fit. Let your first care every day be to
dress and adorn the better part, to put on the true Ornaments, to cloth your
selves with Humility, Meekness, Patience, Charity, and with all other Virtues,
which are of great price in the sight of God. Put off the Works of darkness,
and put on the Armor of Light. Raise your Souls toward Heaven, by some short
and fervent Ejaculations. Read the Word of God with great attention and
humility, with an earnest desire to know his Will, and with a sincere purpose
to do it. Endeavor to feed and nourish your Souls by serious Meditation. Call
on God, by humble and earnest Prayer, to pardon you, to bless you, to direct
and prosper you in all your ways, and to save and preserve you from all Evils,
Ghostly and Bodily. Form good purposes and strong resolutions, to do what is
good and right. Set the Lord always before you. Resolve to seek his Glory in
all things, whether you eat or drink, or whatever else you do.

After having done those things which are needful for the Soul, you may next do
what is fit and decent as to your Attire and Clothing, according to your
Circumstances in the World. Beware lest you pride your selves in your Apparel:
Do not therein gratify your Vanity, to go beyond others of your Rank and
Quality, to make your selves be taken notice of more than others. Too great
care about adorning the outward Man, gives just cause to suspect that the chief
business is neglected.

Consider what it is that you deck and adorn with so much care and cost; even a
poor, vile, sinful Body, that is full of rottenness and corruption; consider
that within a little while it will become a very ugly, deformed, and stinking
Carcass, and be food to the Worms.

If they who bestow so much time every day in painting and patching, and such
like things, would but bestow a few Minutes in thinking of the Grave, and what
the Body will become within a very little time, so vile and loathsome, that even
they who do love it most dearly, will then avoid it, and be glad to have it
removed out of their sight; and that their face, which now they themselves
admire so much, and which they are ready to think every body else admires
likewise, shall within a short time be eaten thorough by vile Worms, and wasted
and made ugly with Rottenness and Corruption, and that all its Beauty shall be
marred: I say, if vain Persons would sometimes think of these things, and
behold themselves now and then in this Glass, how would it humble them, and
make them less addicted to such vain Employment, and be more busied in things
of greatest consequence! This would turn their thoughts another way, and make
them bestow a little more pains to wash away the Impurities of their Souls.
Consider what is written against those who are guilty of this vanity and
extravagance in Apparel and Ornaments. Isa. 3.16. and 17. Moreover the Lord
faith, because the Daughters of Sion are haughty, and walk with stretched forth
Necks and wanton Eyes, walking and mincing as they go, and making a tinkling
with their feet; Therefore the Lord will smite with a Scab, the Crown of the
Head of the Daughters of Sion, etc. And verse 24. It shall come to pass, that
instead of sweet smell, there shall be stink; and instead of a Girdle, a Rent;
and instead of well set Hair, Baldness; and instead of a Stomacher, a girding
of Sackcloth, and Burning instead of Beauty.

3. Time to be redeemed from eating and drinking.
Thirdly, Redeem time from eating and drinking, from pampering the Body: Spend
no more of your time that way than what is fit. Make not your Belly your God;
eat and drink that you may live, that you may be able to perform the necessary
actions of life; but do not live so as if you had nothing to do, but to eat and
drink, and to make provision for the flesh, to fulfill the Lusts thereof. Live
soberly at all times, and use abstinence and fasting sometimes. Take not too
great delight in gratifying your Palate and Appetite. God allows you the free
and liberal use of his good Creatures, for your health and refreshment; but not
to abuse them to gluttony and drunkenness, or any other sort of excess and
extravagance. It is fit to use all those perishing things with great
moderation; because,

First, They are apt to be a great Snare, and to lead Men to a great deal of
Sin and Folly. The Apostle rekons up first Gluttony and Drunkenness, and then
Chambering and Wantonness, etc. Romans 13.13. Intemperance being as the Mother of
the rest. It is often the occasion and cause of them. The Sin of Sodom was
occasioned by their fullness of Bread, and abundance of Idleness. Ezekiel. 16.49.

Secondly, This renders the Soul unactive, and unfit for those excercises,
which chiefly belong to it to perform. The Spirits are thereby made dull and
sleepy, and incapable to be attentive and serious. Watch and be sober must go
together. If we are not sober and temperate, we are not fit to Watch. And
therefore our Savior says, Luke 21.34. Take heed to your selves, lest at any
time your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness, and so that
day come upon you unawares. So long as the Soul lodges in the Body, it depends
much upon the state and temper of it, so that the Body, when it is clogged and
oppressed with meat, or drowned with drink, is a very unfit Tool for the Soul
to manage; yea thereby the Soul is, as it were, chained up, and cannot freely
move and act. So we see that Men at such times, when they are guilty of excess
and intemperance, are rash and imprudent in their Counsels and Resolutions,
whereof they are ashamed afterward when they grow sober.

Thirdly, The uncertainty of these delights of Sense should dispose us
sometimes to deny our selves, and not to enslave our selves unto them, and come
under the tyranny of a curious and dainty Palate. A change in our outward
estate will be the less surprising to us, when in time of plenty we now and
then restrain and deny our selves in those pleasures, which we have the
opportunity to pursue in our eating and drinking.

4. Time to be redeemed from Gaming.
Fourthly, Redeem time from Gaming and Recreations. Sometimes they are very
needful to the Body, for your health, and to render you more fit for action and
business. But you must take care that your Divertisements and Recreations be,

First, innocent and lawful, and not contrary to the Rules and Principles of
Christianity; that they be not hurtful to your selves or others, nor scandalous
and offensive. Let them not be such as those of wicked Men, of whom Solomon
speaks, Prove. 10.23. to whom it is a sport to do mischief; and who make a mock
of sin; whose delight and divertisement is, in saying things that are wicked
and profane, to the hurt and grief of one or other. The Philistines called for
Samson, (when he was their Prisoner) to make them sport, Judge. 16.25. The
Babylonians required a Song and mirth of the poor Captive Jews, saying, Sing us
one of the Songs of Sion, Psalm. 137.3. They made it a sport to insult and to
triumph over others in their distress; they made themselves merry with the
miseries of others.

2dly, Let your Divertisements and Recreations be used with moderation: give
not your selves liberty to go beyond due bounds, neither as to time, nor yet as
to the proportion of money you play for. Beware of falling into the Habit of
Gaming; when Plato reproved a young Man very sharply for playing at Dice Diog.
Laert. in Platone.
, the young Gamester answered him, Do you reprove me so much for so small a
matter? But said Plato, Custom is no small matter.

There is unspeakable hurt and prejudice, that comes from suffering your selves
to be too far carried away by the fancy and humor of Gaming, and following
your Sports and Pastimes. This does insensibly expose you to the danger of
Poverty, as Solomon tells us. He that loves Pleasure shall be a poor Man,
Prove. 21.17. This renders you unfit for all Sacred and serious Performances,
the mind being thereby filled with the images and reflections of what you said
and heard, of what you and others did at your Games: Your hopes and your fears,
your joys and your uneasiness, your victories and losses, your surprises and
disappointments, your little debates and contentions, your indignation and
resentments, and a great many other things, too common at Gaming, so distract
and fill your mind for a great while afterward, that when you would be
serious, and employ your selves to better purpose, you cannot bring your minds
to that fixedness and stayedness that is necessary; you remain, as it were,
drunk with your Pastimes and Divertisements; your thoughts reel to and fro, and
cannot settle; you have a great desire of returning again to your Recreations,
that you may gratify your fancy, and may gain more profit, or praise and
applause.

That you may not fall under those inconveniences, your best way is to keep
out of such Company as makes Gaming their Business. And if at any time it be
fit for you to indulge your selves a little in Gaming, it will not be amiss
that you set Bounds to yourselves; both as to your time, how long to play; and
as to the quantity of money you intend to play for; that you may not either in
one or the other respect, exceed those limits which Christian Prudence requires.
It is very advisable either not at all to play for money (which oft-times
occasions great strivings and quarrellings, or great uneasiness of thought;) or
to play for so very little as may be next to nothing, which may not afterward
occasion any uneasy reflections and dissatisfaction of mind. And if at any
time you be disposed, and find it expedient to play for a little more than
ordinary, (still observing the Rules of discretion and Christian Prudence) it
would not be unfit to make it a condition in your Game, that the Winner apply
what he gains to some charitable use, which you may either then expressly
determine, or you may resolve to give the money which shall be gained, to some
discreet and charitable Person, who will be sure to bestow it to good purpose.
As this would afford a great pleasure and joy to those who reap some fruit and
benefit by your Recreation and Pastime; so it would afford your selves a
greater delight and satisfaction, than otherwise you could expect by your
Divertisements. And besides, this would prevent covetous desires, and other
evil passions and dispositions, which usually attend those who game only, or
chiefly, for profit and advantage.

As for those who are apt in gaming to be transported into violent passion, and
to break out into indecent heats, it is necessary for such Persons to give over
all such Divertisements, as use to cause this excessive fermentation of their
Spirits, and which put them upon the fret. Or if at any time they think good to
play at some Game, they ought to do it in the presence of those, who by their
Authority are able to restrain them from every thing that is indecent and
extravagant, that by degrees they may get the Victory over themselves, and may
habituate themselves to mildness and gentleness of Spirit, and may be preserved
from all the sad consequences of unruly passions.

5. Time to be redeemed from Visiting.
Fifthly, Redeem time from Visiting. Too many throw away their time in making
vain and unnecessary Visits, employing themselves on these occasions in vain
and impertinent chat, and foolish talking and jesting, which are not
convenient; in making their Observations, and passing their Censures upon the
Words and Actions, the Modes and Customs of others; in slandering and
backbiting; in sowing vain and false Reports; in causing Jealousies and
Contentions, and doing other such like bad Offices.

Visiting is either good or bad, according as it is managed. In some cases it
is very fit and necessary to visit your Friends and Neighbors, to keep up
thereby a friendly and neighbourly Correspondence, to offer your help and
service to them when there is need of it, to sympathize with them when they are
in any sort of trouble or distress, and to assist them to bear their burdens,
whether of Body, or Mind, or outward Estate.

Sometimes the Laws of Civility and Discretion require, that you visit those
who have witnessed great Civility and Respect toward you. Sometimes the good
Offices and generous Favors of some Persons to you, require that you should
express your grateful sense of their kindness and generosity, by all possible
instances of affection and esteem, and particularly by visiting of them now and
then, which is a very easy and a small return for those Obligations they have
laid upon you.

You must beware of visiting or frequenting the company of those who are very
lewd and wicked, by whose conversation you are in great danger of being
corrupted, whose example is ready to infect you. When you see a House marked
for the Plague, you are careful not to go into it, you keep your selves at a
good distance from it, that you may not run the hazard of infection. The Love
which you have for life makes you do all you can to preserve it. Ought you not
then to be as careful to keep out of the company of profane persons, whose
Throat is an open Sepulcher, whose Mouths are full of Blasphemy and Cursing,
whose Breath is very infectious, whose Words and Actions are full of most
deadly Poison, whereby your Souls are in danger of being corrupted and
destroyed for ever? Enter not into the path of the wicked, says Solomon, and
go not in the way of evil men. Avoid it, pass not by it, turn from it, and pass
away, Prove. 4.14,15. And Chap. 5.8. He advises young men to remove their way
far from the strange woman, and not to come nigh the door of her House.

As you ought to avoid all sorts of Debauched Company, so especially of those
who are Mockers of Religion, who scoff at all that is called Sacred, or looks
like serious. They who sit in the Seat of the Scornful, are mentioned by the
Psalmist, Psalm. 1. as the chief of Sinners, the highest Rank of them. Such
Persons are Satan's principal Instruments and Ministers: Their scoffs and
flouts do unspeakable mischief to Religion. A great many, who have stood firm
against Arguments and Persuasions, have proved too weak to hold out against the
Impious Raillery, and Profane Jesting of such, whose business is, to turn the
most serious things of Religion into Ridicule. You ought to beware of such
Wretches, as the very pests of Mankind.

It is true, sometimes your necessary Affairs, and your Relation wherein you
stand to some Persons, may make it your Duty to be often in the company of
those who are very wicked, but then you ought to be, First, possessed with a
great abhorrence of what is evil in them, and in no manner to approve their sin
and folly. Have no Communion with their unfruitful works of darkness, but
rather reprove them, Ephesians. 5.11. Follow the Psalmist's Example, whose Eyes ran
down with Rivers of Tears, because they kept not God's Law, Psalm. 119.136.
Remember also how Lot's Righteous Soul was vexed with the filthy Conversation
of the wicked amongst whom he lived, 2 Pet. 2.9,10. Secondly, You ought to make
use of all favorable opportunities, to endeavor to make them better, and to
rescue them from their evil ways and doings.

If you observe these things, you are not partakers with them in their Sins,
and therefore God will not lay them to your charge. But if you entertain
unnecessary Company, and hold a delightful Familiarity, with Persons of a
profligate Life, it is too certain a mark that your Religion goes not very deep.
You cannot justly be supposed to have much love to God, if you take pleasure in
the Society of his professed Enemies. All Flesh consorteth, says the Son of
Sirach, according to kind, and a Man will cleave to his like. What Fellowship
has the Wolf with the Lamb? so the Sinner with the Godly? Ecclesiasticus
13.16,17.

If at any time Atheistical and Profane Persons follow after you, and thrust
themselves into your Company, beware of them, and shake off their Society,
unless you converse with them with a design to reform them, and to bring them
off from their evil Practices, and have ground to hope that you may do them
good. But when after having tried twice or thrice to make them better, you find
you only cast Pearls before Swine, and that there is more danger of getting
hurt by them, than of doing them good, it is fit that you deal roundly and
plainly with them, and that you let them know, that so long as they are no
better, you desire to be excused, if you do not keep company with them. Though
plainness is very necessary in this case, yet it is fit that it be tempered
with all the discretion and sweetness that is possible, otherwise it may do more
hurt than good. Endeavor to make such Persons sensible that you are only an
Enemy to their Vices, and that as for their Persons you will be always ready to
do them all good Offices.

Secondly, As you ought carefully to avoid the company of those who are
Profane and Atheistical Persons, so it is your Interest, as well as Duty, to
visit those who are good and Religious. They who feared the Lord (says
Malachi, Chap. 3.16.) spoke often one to another. When you have the opportunity
of enjoying the company of such Persons, make the best use of it that you can.
Consider one another to provoke unto love, and to good works, Heb. 10.24.
Exhort one another daily, Heb. 3.13. Admonish, comfort, and, in a friendly and
loving manner, reprove one another, as there is need. Make use of one another
Counsel and Advice, in any thing that is doubtful and difficult. By all
discreet and prudent ways, endeavor to learn some good and useful thing from
good and wise Persons, with whom you have occasion to converse. Counsel in the
heart of a man, says Solomon, is as deep waters; but a man of understanding
draws it out, Prove. 20.5. Counsel, that is, a skill and dexterity to give good
Advice and Counsel, and to talk of things which tend to make men wiser and
better. This in the heart of a wise man is like deep waters, that is, it makes
no great noise (the wisest men being also the modestest) and is not come at
without some pains, and some prudent Arts and Methods: But a man of
understanding draws it out, that is, by discreet and seasonable questions and
other fit ways, he gives his wise Friend an opportunity to discourse, to
communicate his thoughts, and to discover his wisdom and experience.

Beware lest in good Company your Discourse vanish into air and smoke; lest it
be too trifling, and about things vain and impertinent. Let your words be
seasoned with salt, ministering grace to the bearers, Col. 4.6. Endeavor to
receive benefit from the Society of those who are good and wise, and to do them
good, so far as you can, by your Society. As every Man has received the Gift,
says St. Peter, even so Minister the same one to another, as good Stewards of
the manifold Grace of God, 1 Pet. 4.10.

It is true, it is not only lawful, but sometimes very convenient and
necessary, when virtuous and excellent Persons meet together, that they
recreate and divert themselves a little by cheerfulness and innocent mirth,
that thereby their minds may be made more fit for serious and sacred things.
Such is the state and condition of Man, while in the body, that his Soul cannot
be always employed about those things which are of a Divine and Spiritual
Nature: This vigor and strength of Soul is not, perhaps, attained to by any on
this side the Grave. However, our care must be, that the bent and inclination
of our Hearts be toward those things that are good and useful. This must be our
business, our way, and course, to be good, and to do good: And as for our
Recreations and Divertisements, they must only be subservient to the other.

6. Time to be redeemed from worldly Business.
Sixthly, Redeem time from your ordinary cares and worldly business, that you
may do some great good for the glory of God, and benefit of Mankind.

In the ordinary course of your Lives you must mind the business of your
Calling, according to your settled and usual Method: But then you are still to
remember, to let the concerns of your Soul take place and be preferred. First
seek the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness, Mat. 6.33.

At some times it is fit to deny your selves in the affairs and concerns of
this Life, to leave off your ordinary work and labor, when your great Lord and
Master affords you some extraordinary opportunity for doing good to your
Christian Brother, or to your own Souls: Then you must sell things of lesser
value, that you may buy time for doing that which will make you rich in the
true Riches; that you may edify your Brother, and build up your selves in true
Virtue.

The great matter is to know when you are to do so. You must not every time
when a sudden thought arises in your mind, moving you to leave your Plough, or
your Trade and Calling, and to give up your selves to some Acts of Religion and
Devotion; you must not, I say, presently set on this the stamp or seal of a
Divine Inspiration, and a Call from Heaven. This, if not taken heed to, may
lead you into great mistakes and errors, and very dangerous delusions.
Sometimes Melancholy, or other bodily Distempers, may give occasion to a great
many warm fancies and imaginations: Therefore you are not to follow those
private motions and inclinations, if you are not some other way determined
thereto, by some concurring evidence of the hand of God. For Example, if, when
you are moved in your own mind to do some very good and pious work, there
happen about the same time an outward Call to do the same thing, you may
conclude there is somewhat extraordinary in this to determine you. By an
outward Call, I do not mean any extraordinary Voice from Heaven: That Is not to
be expected; but a Call by some good, wise, and discreet Person, who
unexpectedly desires and invites you to do that, which before his speaking of
it to you, you found your own heart moved and inclined to. In which case you
have a very mighty encouragement, both from the goodness and usefulness of the
thing it self, and from the Call and invitation which you have had from
another, of whose Wisdom and Piety you are sufficiently assured. Though there be
no more but this Call from Man, it is of great weight to move you, and to
determine you in this manner to redeem your time from your ordinary labor,
when there is some extraordinary occasion of doing somewhat for the honor of
God, or the good of Men. Thus if at any time you are invited to comfort one
that is in any great trouble of Body or Mind, or in any other great distress
and affliction; if there be any thing in your power to do for the comfort and
encouragement of such a Person, you ought to show your readiness to do your
utmost for his help and support. You know not but the Lord may make use of you
(however weak and unfit you may think your selves) to serve the designs of his
Mercy and Love. Likewise, if you are called to reconcile those that are at
variance; to see if you can awaken a Person from his sin and folly, especially
when the Lord's hand is upon him; to give your Counsel and Advice in some
extraordinary case, where it is judged needful for you so to do: In these and
the like cases you ought cheerfully to Sacrifice your private gain and
advantage, and to let your lesser cares give place to those of a more public
and considerable Nature.

These things you are only to do, so far as the necessity of your own occasions
will permit. They who are settled in a Calling, and have a Family, are under a
very strict obligation to take care of their Family, and to mind their Calling
and Employment; they must not neglect those necessary Duties which God has
given them to do in their several stations. The Scripture accounts them worse
than Infidels, who provide not for their House, and those of their own Family.
But if the Circumstances of your affairs will permit you to comply with the
Opportunities of performing some eminent acts of Piety and Zeal, you ought not
to neglect them: God will not fail plentifully to reward your Love to him, and
your Zeal for his Glory. Short and fervent Ejaculations, even in Time of
Business, recommended.
Though a great many cannot spare much time from their Worldly Business, for
extraordinary Exercises of Piety and Charity; yet there are none, who may not
redeem some time from their Business, by lifting up their Hearts, now and then,
unto God, by short and fervent Ejaculatory Prayers or Thanksgivings, by earnest
desires and breathings, by humble Groans and secret Sighs, by serious Acts of
Adoration, by frequent Acts of Love, of Hope, of Trust and Confidence, and of
Resignation to the divine Will. There is great necessity for such short and
fervent Acts of Devotion sometimes, amidst your affairs and business,
considering the doubts and difficulties, the hazards and dangers, and the
snares and temptations, which you are often exposed to, as also the many
unexpected and kind providence you meet with, when you are employed in the
Duties of your Calling. By observing this Course, you do not hinder or
interrupt your Business; on the contrary, this is the readiest way to do it
successfully, and most to your own comfort and satisfaction. We see what
Nehemiah did, when he waited upon Artaxerxes, as his Cup Bearer: The King
having said unto him, Neh. 2.4. For what do thou make Request, it is added, So
I prayed to the God of Heaven. He knew how great need he had of God's Direction
and Assistance, and therefore, by a secret fervent Prayer, or Ejaculation, he
lifted up his Heart unto the Lord; And the Lord heard him, and both assisted
him to present his Petition to the King, and inclined the King's Heart to grant
his Request? v. 8.

Amongst other Advantages which attend this Religious Course, there is this;
thereby you keep alive in your Hearts that sacred Fire, which was kindled in
the time of your more solemn Devotions. This is the way to have your
Conversation in Heaven, to walk with God, and to be continually with him; this
is to live like Citizens of the new Jerusalem, like Men whose Hearts are in
Heaven, whose Treasure is there, and whose Love is fixed and settled on God and
upon divine things.

7. Time to be redeemed from Idleness.
Seventhly, Redeem your time from idleness, and an useless way of living in the
World. A great many do not waste much time in sleep, in dressing and adorning
of their Bodies, in eating and in drinking, in gaming, or in visiting, and yet
they waste their time: But how? In doing nothing, in entertaining themselves
with the vain imaginations of their foolish minds, feeding on the Wind,
pursuing dreams, and catching at shadows, building Castles in the Air, and
sporting themselves with their own vain conceits and foolish fancies. Their
Eyes are, as Solomon tells us, in the ends of the Earth, Prove. 17.24. They mind
those things most which concern them least. They busy themselves about what
others say and do, but do nothing themselves to any good purpose. Some Men are
full of vain and useless contrivances, wherewith they do indeed busy
themselves: But to what end? When all their designs and vain contrivances are
accomplished, they are but as so many Spiders Webs, only sit to catch flies.
This is to be busy in Trifles, to be employed in doing as good as nothing.
Thus there be some who pursue a studious Life night and day, with a wonderful
diligence; but their studies being only in impertinent Books, and about designs
of no use, or perhaps of very bad use, they gain nothing thereby; yea so far
are they from reaping any benefit by their great pains and labor, that they
are unspeakable losers; they lose their time, and sometimes they lose their
Wealth, and their Health, if not their Reason and Understanding.

Consider, first, how unworthy this sort of Life is of Men and of Christians?
God has made you to be useful, to glorify him, to do good in the World, to
become daily more and more holy and religious, to grow in grace, and to perfect
holiness in his fear; and not to be like an useless Log, or an insignificant
Cipher; not to be barren and unfruitful in his Vineyard. Strive therefore to
live up to the end and design of your being in the World, to improve your
selves in Piety and Virtue, to do somewhat that may be of real advantage to the
Souls and Bodies of others.

Secondly, Consider how dangerous a thing it is to live an idle, vain, and
unuseful life. God has promised Men his protection, only when they are in the
way of their Calling, when they employ themselves in that state of life,
wherein by his Providence he has settled them in the World. So the Psalmist
instructs us, Psalm. 91.11. He shall give his Angels charge over thee, to keep
thee in all thy ways; that is, in all honest and lawful undertakings, and in
all actions that belong to your Calling. So that if you are idle, and give up
your selves to a lazy and useless manner of living in the World, doing nothing
that is profitable to your selves or others, you put your selves out of God's
protection, and thereby you give the Devil advantage over you, and you lay your
selves open to all his Temptations. When was it that David fell into those two
foul Sins of Adultery and Murder? Was it not, when he yielded, for a short
time, to ease, and lived idly at home? And if so excellent and holy a Person,
was so soon corrupted by Ease and Idleness, have you not great Reason to avoid
this Vice, which is deservedly called, The Mother of all Evils, and the
Step-Dame of all Virtues?

Thirdly, Consider that the end of this idle and useless life is very sad. Cast
the unprofitable Servent into utter darkness, there shall be weeping and
gnashing of Teeth, Math. 25.30. Not only shall wicked Servants be cast into
utter darkness, but also unprofitable Servants, who hide their Talents in a
Napkin; that is, who do not employ to any good purpose those Gifts which God
bestows upon them, who stand idle all the day long in the Vineyard.

8. Time to be redeemed in sacred performances, by doing them in the best
manner.
Eighthly, Redeem time in your sacred and religious Duties, and Performances,
by endeavoring to do them in the best and perfectest manner you can. When you
read, and pray, and meditate, and examine your selves, and hear the word of God
preached, and sing his praises, and partake of the Holy Sacrament, and perform
other acts of Religion and Piety, in a lifeless, dull, unconcerned and formal
manner, you lose your time; and therefore when by due reflection upon your
ways, you find that you do so, endeavor afterward to redeem it, by greater
watchfulness and seriousness; otherwise you may go on a great while in a course
of Devotion to very little purpose, if you do not stir up your selves to do the
best that is in your power to do, by God's help.

Thus when you find that you have read the Word of God in a careless and
negligent manner, without considering whose Word it is, and for what end it is
written, and without those dispositions of mind that are necessary; you must
afterward endeavor to redeem the time, by being more careful to read that
Sacred Book with greater Reverence and Seriousness, and with greater Pleasure
and Delight. Pray to God more heartily, for the direction and assistance of his
Holy Spirit. Meditate more attentively on what you read, and lay it up in your
hearts, that it may be always in a readiness for your use, as the rule of your
lives.

If you find that you have lost your time in Prayer, by not making your
Addresses to God with a deep humility and reverence, with unfeigned Faith, and
fervent Love, and with great earnestness, sincerity, and importunity; endeavor
afterward to pray with all possible humility and reverence, with greater faith
and confidence, and with a mighty earnestness and fervency of Spirit: Study to
have your Souls possessed with a deeper sense of your wants and necessities,
that you may beg supplies of all needful things from him who can help you to
the utmost. Be more sensible of the greatness of your sins, and of the many
heinous aggravations that attend them, that you may make humble confession of
them with true sorrow and contrition. Consider the danger to which your
Hypocrisy, or Formality and Lukewarmness in Religious Duties do expose you,
that you may with great integrity and uprightness of Soul, make your Addresses
to the Searcher of Hearts, and Tryer of the Reins, who takes pleasure in the
hearty and cheerful services of those who draw near unto him. Be possessed with
more lively impressions of the Divine Power and Greatness, of the Justice,
Holiness, Goodness, Mercy, and Faithfulness of God, that the sense thereof may
make you adore him, and call upon him in such a manner as is suitable to so
Glorious a Majesty.

If you find that the time you have set apart for Self-Examination has been
lost, by a negligent performance of this Duty, by your not being in good
earnest, when you pretended to call your selves to an account: Endeavor to
redeem the time, by searching your hearts, and enquiring into your ways with
greater care and exactness. Examine and try your selves, as in the sight of
God, as Men that are in good earnest to save their Souls from Everlasting
Condemnation. Deal impartially with your selves; do not extenuate your own
faults, but aggravate them by all just and fit considerations: Endeavor to be
deeply touched with hearty Contrition and real Grief and Sorrow for them; let
your Repentance in all regards be more sincere, and unfeigned, and your
purposes and Resolutions more strong and steady.

If you find that you have reflected on God's Mercies and Favors to you,
without that grateful sense which you ought to have had thereof, and without
making suitable returns, so far as you were able by his Grace, for his great
and undeserved goodness; endeavor afterward to employ your thoughts on so
delightful a subject, as is the Divine Love and Goodness, with greater
pleasure, and with a more lively sense thereof than you have been wont. Let the
consideration of the love and goodness of God, powerfully move you, and prevail
with you to do somewhat which may testify the reality of your gratitude,
somewhat that may be of real benefit to the Souls or Bodies of others.

If you find that you have been very formal and careless in performing what
relates to the public Worship, endeavor to redeem the time, by being more
sincere and devout. For Example, if you have heard the Word of God read and
preached, in a trifling and unconcerned manner, without those dispositions of
mind which were requisite in a Christian Hearer, and in an humble Disciple of
Jesus Christ; if you have attended on such occasions, more out of compliance
with Custom, and the Example of others, than out of Conscience, and from
Principles of true Religion and Devotion: Consider that this is to lose time,
and, under an appearance of Religion, to remain without any thing of it in
reality. You must therefore afterward endeavor to hear the Word of God in
another manner, to wit, as the Law and Rule of your Lives, as that which is
given you of God to make you wise and good, and to fit you for everlasting
Happiness and Glory; you must, as new born Babes, desire the sincere Milk of
the Word, that your Souls may grow thereby. You must hear it with great
reverence and attention, and with humble and tractable minds; you must study to
have it ingrafted in your Hearts, that it may abide there as a Scion in a
stock, and may grow and bear fruit unto everlasting life. You must reflect on
what you hear; when you leave the Church, you must not lay aside all further
thinking on what has been read or preached to you; you are to talk a little
with your own hearts about those things, and to call to mind any thing you
heard, which tends to make you wiser and better: Endeavor to have it deeply
imprinted on your Souls, that it may prove unto you the Power of God unto
Salvation, the savor of life unto life.

If you find that you have been too often guilty of singing the Praises of God
with your mouths only, without any melody in your Hearts, without any real
sense of the greatness and power, of the kindness and love, of the patience and
long-suffering, of the truth and faithfulness of him whom you praise and
celebrate: Endeavor to be more devout and serious in that part of Worship;
sing unto God, not only with your Voice, but with your Heart, which is the
chief thing that God looks to. Study to raise your Souls to him, as well as to
lift up your Voices, when you sing his praises. Stir up all within you to bless
his holy Name, who forgiveth all your Iniquities, and heals all your
diseases, who crowns you with loving kindness and tender mercies, who
prevents you every Morning, and follows you all the day long, with many signal
instances of his Fatherly care and love, giving you richly all things to enjoy
for life and godliness.

If you find that you join in the Public Prayers without any due Sense of God
upon your Souls, and without any real impression of those things to which you
say Amen; if you find that you repeat some words as do others, but in the mean
time your minds are busy in pursuing shadows, in thinking of your Trades, your
Sports and Pastimes, etc. be ashamed that you do thus lose your precious time,
that you are guilty of such trifling in the most serious and sacred action:
Endeavor to be more affected with a right sense about what, you do, that you
may offer up unto God the Sacrifices of broken and contrite Hearts, that you
may pour out your Hearts before him, and may worship him with all your Soul and
Mind. Bid farewell to your Worldly Cares, and to your Pleasures and Vanities,
when you come into his presence, to pay your homage to him. Serve him with your
best affections, with the strength and vigor of your desires, and with all
your power and might. If you do this, you may then expect, with great assurance
and confidence, that God will give ear unto you, and satisfy your longing
Souls with good things, he will make you taste and see how good he is. But if
you pray without being in good earnest, your Sacrifices will be an abomination
to him, he will not regard your Prayers, nor take any notice of you: He will
answer you according to the multitude of your Idols.

If you find that you lose time by your communicating in a careless and formal
manner, without considering the end and design of that holy Institution, and
without endeavoring to prepare your selves as you ought to do, that you may
eat and drink worthily at the Table of the Lord; study to redeem this loss, by
partaking of this Sacrament for the time to come in a more devout and religious
manner: Be careful to approach with greater love and gratitude unto the Table
of your Lord, who not only allows you to come, but kindly and lovingly invites
and encourages you to do so. Come with your Souls burning with love to him who
dyed for you, and who appointed you this Sacrament, that therein you might
remember his wonderful love, and his astonishing compassion and mercy, which he
has testified in laying down his life for sinners, that he might purchase to
them everlasting Life and Glory, even to as many as repent and believe the
Gospel. Come with your Hearts deeply wounded and pierced with sorrow for your
sins and follies, which were the cause of so shameful, so painful, and so
cursed a death to your dearest Lord and Savior. Come with your Souls full of
sincere and hearty purposes and resolutions of being new Creatures, not to live
any more unto your selves, or unto the World, but to him who dyed for you. Come
with your Souls likewise enlarged with thoughts of kindness, and unfeigned
Charity to all Men, with your minds delivered from all bitterness and wrath,
from all malice and envy, that you may eat and drink at this Feast of Love,
with suitable dispositions of universal Love and Charity. Come with a great
desire to obtain strength from the God of your Salvation, that you may be able
to fight the good fight of Faith, and may at last lay hold on Eternal Life.

In this manner you ought to endeavor to redeem the time, by doubling your
care and diligence, in all those Duties of Religion, in the performance whereof
you have been formerly faulty and defective.

Thus you are to do likewise in every other Action which you perform to the
glory of God. When you find that you have been too formal and careless in what
you have done and said for God; for Example, in admonishing others, in
instructing them, in reproving them, in comforting them, etc. endeavor to
redeem time, by doing those things with greater sincerity and zeal, with a more
pure regard to the Glory of God, with a greater desire to approve your selves
unto him, who gives you the opportunity of doing somewhat for his Honor, and
with greater Charity to the Souls of Men.

Depend on God for a Blessing in all your endeavors, beg of him that he would
direct and assist you to do that which is good and well pleasing unto him; and
that he would so dispose the hearts of those whom you admonish, instruct,
reprove, or comfort, that what you speak to them may not be lost, but may have
the desired effect, for the glory of God, and their happiness and welfare.

From what has been said, you may see how you ought to redeem your time: The
next thing which I proposed to speak to, was, to suggest to you some
Considerations to excite you to do so.

Some Motives to excite you to do these things.
1. Motive, from the shortness of your Time.
First, Consider how short your time is. Your life is compared to a Vapor,
which appears for a little time, and then vanishes away, Jam. 4.14. It makes a
little show and appearance for a while, and then it is gone. It is compared to
a Post, to the Swift Ships, and to the Eagle that hastes to the Prey, Job
9.25,26. And to the Wind, and to a Weaver's shuttle, Job 7.6,7. All which
Comparisons serve to express how short and swift our time is, how suddenly it
flies away and is gone. Man that is born of a Woman (says Job, Chap. 14.1.) is
of few days. And Jacob, (when he was a great deal older than Men live to be
now, even 130 years old) told Pharaoh, saying, Few and evil have the days of
the years of my life been. What are 40, or 60, or 80 years, when a Man lives so
long, and looks back upon them all? They appear to him but like a Shadow, or as
a Dream, or like a Tale that is told. Ought not this to move you to be good
Husbands of your short time? If it were in your own power to dispose of it,
according to your own humor and fancy, you might then be pardoned to delay
your great Work and Business till you thought good: But now that it is not in
your power to lengthen out your time one Minute, what a madness is it for you
to put off and neglect your greatest and chiefest Concern? Therefore be so
wise, as to make good use of your present opportunities and occasions of doing
good, that you may work out your Salvation with fear and trembling, and may
make your calling and your Election sure. Work while the day lasts, for the
night comes wherein you cannot work.

If a Man who is guilty of Treason, or Rebellion against his Prince, or of any
other great Crime which deserves death, were allowed a few days to sue out his
Pardon, that he might secure his Life and Estate, would he not improve with
great care and diligence that little time? To be sure he would not lose one
moment of it: And though perhaps at other times, he was wont to give up himself
to his pleasures and pastimes, and to mind little else, but the gratifying his
Lusts and Passions, and his Vanity and Folly; yet now that his Life and Fortune
lie at the stake, you should see such a man changed in a moment: You should see
him, with great application of mind, with the utmost diligence employing his
time, running from place to place, from one person to another, according as his
great and important business and concern required. How readily would such a
Person redeem his time, not only from Idleness, from Gaming, from impertinent
Visits, and from dressing and adorning of his Body, and the like, but even from
eating and drinking, and from his rest and repose in the night? The desire of
preserving his life would so fill his thoughts, as to make him forget almost
every thing else. What would you think or say, if you should see a man in such
circumstances wholly unconcerned and careless, spending his time in Gaming, or
Idleness, in making impertinent Visits, in rioting and drinking, and the like,
and doing nothing at all to obtain his pardon, and to secure his life and
fortune? Doubtless you would look upon such a man as void of common
understanding, fit only for Bedlam, or not worthy to live, who knew no better
to make use of his short time, to preserve his life, which Nature teaches all
Men to do, by all honest and lawful means.

It is easy for you to make application of all this to your selves. You are by
your Sins Enemies to God, Rebels against your Lord and King, whereby you are in
danger of everlasting death and destruction. But God in his infinite mercy
gives you time to sue out your Pardon, which he offers you upon the most just
and reasonable conditions; only believe and repent, and you shall be saved; he
will have mercy upon you, and blot out your iniquities. Be therefore so wise,
as to husband well this short time, which God bestows on you for this purpose:
Redeem it as much as you can, from all vain and unnecessary things, that you
may obtain forgiveness of Sins, and the assistance of the Holy Spirit, to
enable you afterward to walk in newness of life.

But if instead of minding this great and important concern of your Souls, you
give up your selves to sin and folly, and indulge your selves in your mad and
wicked practices, and thereby provoke God yet more and more against you, how
just will your Judgment and Condemnation be? if you will not be saved, if you
will not turn to the Lord that you may live, if you will not believe, repent,
and amend; what remains? you shall certainly dye, and be miserable for ever.
They that will not be happy, shall not be happy. The wrath of God shall abide
upon them.

2. Motive, from the uncertainty of your Time.
Secondly, Consider that as your time is very short, so it is most uncertain.
What do you know whether your Sun shall decline leisurely, or whether it may
not go down suddenly, when you think it is not yet come to the Noontide of the
Day? You are not sure to live till you come to a good old Age. How many
sicknesses and distempers, and how many sudden accidents are there in the way,
which may shorten your day, and cause your Sun to set, when you think it shines
with its greatest force and luster? Sometimes a Candle is blown out by the
Wind, or snufft out undesignedly, when it is not yet half burnt. And so the
life of Man is often extinguished by outward accidents, when by the course of
Nature, it might have been prolonged much further.

How many come forth into the World, and give great appearances of making a
very considerable figure in it, by their Wisdom and Sagacity, their good
Conduct, and Address, their Excellent Parts and useful Learning, their Courage
and Valor, their Charming Eloquence, and clear and distinct Reasoning, or by
their shining Piety and burning Zeal? But do not you see how suddenly they are
gone? they are hurried away by death, and you neither see them nor hear of them
any more.

There is nothing certain as to your time, but its shortness and uncertainty.
Nothing can secure you against an unexpected blow by death, when God sees fit
to give charge to the King of Terrors to knock you down. Youth and strength
cannot do it; for how many die when their Breasts are full of milk, and their
bones are moistened with marrow? Too great abundance of Blood and Spirits does
sometimes oppress and stifle the life of Man.

Wealth and Riches cannot secure you: How many great and wealthy men have been
suddenly carried away as with a Flood, when their Coffers were full of Silver
and Gold, when they had all that heart could wish? Even their Wealth proved the
bait which allured idle, covetous, and desperate Persons, to break into their
Houses, and rob them, not only of their Treasure, but of their Lives.

Greatness of Power and earthly Honor and Dignity, are not able to do it:
Crowns and Scepters, Castles and Palaces, a wise Council, and great Armies, are
not able to protect Princes, from the violent and desperate attempts of Men,
who are prodigal of their lives. How many of those who have been most famous in
the World for their Power and Greatness, have been very unexpectedly removed by
a violent and sudden death? When they have been in their greatest height, at
the very top of Earthly Felicity, and full of the deepest Projects and Designs;
when they made account to make the Earth, as it were, to tremble; to humble and
to mortify their Enemies, to enlarge their own Dominions, or to enslave their
Subjects, even then Death gave them a sudden blow, and so there was an end of
them and their designs together.

But may not Wisdom and Understanding, great Learning, and Skill in various
Arts and Sciences, do somewhat to secure Men from the sudden blow of Death? No,
all this cannot do it: We see even Wise Men suddenly and unexpectedly removed
from us by Death, as well as others. In the midst of their useful Studies, and
excellent contrivances, and designs, the King of Terrors puts a stop to them,
and in the twinkling of an Eye they are gone, and all their thoughts are laid
asleep. So vain a thing is Man, and even the wisest Man; and so uncertain is
his time.

Consider that Death can enter by a thousand doors. Every pore in your Body is
a Gate wide enough for Death to enter in at. Do not you see what a small thing
makes way for Death? The prick of a Thorn, or a Splinter of Wood does it
sometimes, by occasioning a Fever, or a Gangrene. How quickly are some removed
by violent and unexpected Distempers, and sometimes on a sudden are struck
dead, you cannot tell how? Have not some dyed through an excess of joy, and
others through immoderate grief; some by excessive laughter, and others by too
much mourning and weeping? Some have died with a fright or sudden fear: some by
the violence of their anger and wrath, and others by an excess of Love. How
many have been killed with over much care, and too great watching? and others
have occasioned their own death by idleness, and too much sleep: Some have
killed themselves with eating and drinking, and others have done it by too
great abstinence and fasting. Have not some died while they have been at Meals,
by a Crumb, or a little Bone, or some such very small matter? When they were
thinking to repair their strength, and to fit themselves for going on with
their business and work; that which they did to save and lengthen out their
lives, did shorten them, and put an end to them. May not this instance alone
show you the great uncertainty of your time, and how necessary it is to redeem
it?

But besides all this, consider that when you go abroad, you are in danger from
innumerable accidents. You may be killed by the noisome steams of the Earth, by
some infectious quality in the Air, by the Beasts of the Field, by the teeth of
mad Dogs, by the horns of enraged Oxen, or by the heels of wild Horses. You are
likewise in danger from the winged Creatures, the least of whom have Weapons
sufficient to destroy you, if God by his Power and Justice arm them against you.

How remarkable was the manner of the death of Aeschylus, an ancient Poet in
Sicily, Valor. Max. lib. 9. cap. 12.
who as he sat in a Sunny place without the Walls of the City, was killed by a
Tortoise, which an Eagle let fall on his head.

And no less memorable is the Story which is mentioned in the Book of Martyrs,
of one Burton, Bailiff of Crowland in Linconshire, who pretending to be a
Friend to the Reformation in King Edward's time; after the King's death began
to set up the Popish Mass again, and would have beaten the Curate, if he had
not complied with his design: But see how the Lord's hand overtook him; as he
came riding from Fenbank one day, a Crow flying over his head, let fall her
Excrements upon his face, the noisome scent whereof so annoyed his stomach, that
he never ceased vomiting till he came home: And after falling deadly sick,
would never receive any meat, but vomited still, and complained of that stink,
cursing the Crow that had poisoned him; and in a few days he died.

Besides the danger you are in from unreasonable Creatures, are you not also
sometimes in hazard from Men, who are mad either through the distemper of their
Brain, or through their violent Malice and Envy? Let a Bear robbed of her
Whelps (says Solomon) meet a Man rather than a Fool in his folly, Prove. 17.12.
And not only are your Lives in danger from unreasonable Creatures and from Men,
but likewise from the Spirits of Darkness, unless restrained by the mighty
Power of God. These are Enemies of great Power, and of as great, yea greater
Malice. But your heavenly Father keeps them as it were in chains, and sets
bounds to their rage and fury, that they cannot hurt you so much as in a hair
of your head, without the Divine permission.

But further; so uncertain is your time, that there is not a stone, nor a block
in your way, but it may be an occasion of your stumbling, and falling into the
snares of Death. And sometimes when there is no such block in your way, you are
not secure from danger: One foot may prove a stumbling block to the other, and
an occasion of your falling into the hands of Death. When you walk in the
streets either for Business or Divertisement, and have not the least
apprehension of any danger, even then Death may hang over your Heads: Every
Tile on the House-tops, may by its unexpected fall, as you pass by, beat out
your Brains, and so put an end to all your Thoughts and Motions.

And more than all this; in how great danger are your Lives from Fire, and from
Water, from Heat and Cold, from Storms and Tempests, from Thunder and
Lightning, and many other things, the stroke whereof you cannot prevent nor
foresee? God has in store the Sword, the Famine, and Pestilence, and
innumerable Judgments and Plagues, whereby he can cut you off, and shorten your
Lives.

When you are in your houses, and think your selves in safety, you know not but
that Death is even there, and that your Grave is ready for you: By a sudden
Wind, by an Earthquake, or by a decay in the Foundation, or some other part of
the Building, the House may fall down about your ears, and prove your burying
place.

So true is it what Solomon says, Eccl. 9.12. For Man also knows not his
Time; as the Fishes that are taken in an evil Net, and as the Birds that are
caught in the Snare: So are the Sons of Men snared in an evil Time, when it
falls suddenly upon them.

From all which you may conclude, that your time is the most uncertain thing in
the World. Ought you not therefore to make good use of it while it lasts, not
knowing how soon and suddenly it may be at an end?

3. Motive, from the greatness and difficulty of the work you have to do.
Thirdly, Consider how great and difficult a work you have to do; a work that
requires a great part of your time, and worthy of all your time. How hard is it
to work out your Salvation, to make your Calling and Election sure; to strive
to enter in at the strait Gate; to be born again; to be made new Creatures; to
be renewed in the Spirit of your mind; to put off the works of darkness, and to
put on the armor of light; to add to your faith, virtue,; and to virtue,
knowledge; and to knowledge, temperance; and to temperance, patience; and to
patience, godliness; and to godliness, brotherly kindness; and to brotherly
kindness, charity? To have the image of God renewed in your Souls; to be made
partakers of the Divine Nature, to escape the corruptions which are in the
World through lust; to be conformed to the Example of your Blessed Lord and
Master, in those Virtues wherein you ought to imitate him; to learn of him who
was meek and lowly; to go about as he did, doing good to the Souls and Bodies
of Men; to be zealous for God; and holy as he who called you is holy in all
manner of Conversation?

How great a work is it to overcome your selves? To become vile and base in
your own eyes, to think meanly of your selves, and to be willing that others
should think so of you too; to be content with every state and condition of
life, wherein God does by his Providence place you; to bear wrongs and injuries
with meekness and patience; not to be overcome with evil, but to overcome evil
with good; to mortify your sinful desires and sensual appetites; to crucify
the flesh with the affections and lusts; to purify your selves from all
filthiness of the flesh and spirit; to cleanse your Hearts from all manner of
wickedness, that they may be fit Temples for the Spirit of God to dwell in; to
govern your eyes, that you may not thereby betray your Souls into the hands of
your Enemies; to govern your Lips, to take heed to your ways, that you offend
not with your Tongue; to put away from you all lying, flattery, and
dissimulation, all evil speaking, whispering, and backbiting, all foolish
talking and jesting, which are not convenient; to be sober and temperate in all
things; to be just and sincere in all your dealings, doing to others what you
would have them do to you?

How great a work is it to overcome the World? to despise its Pomps and
Vanities, not to be allured and charmed by its smiles, nor yet frighted and
cast down by its frowns; not to suffer your selves to be possessed with the
love of Riches; to entertain just and fit opinions of the things of this World;
to consider them as vain, uncertain, and unsatisfactory enjoyments, which are
not capable to make you happy, which are only so far to be desired, as they are
necessary in order to your accommodation and more easy subsistence in the
World? How hard is it to overcome the temptations of earthly pleasure and
outward delights, and not to suffer your minds to be too far transported by the
love of them; but to use even the most innocent pleasures with great
moderation, lest they lead the Soul Captive, and render it unfit for the true
pleasures? How hard is it to live in the World as Pilgrims and Strangers ought
to do, to pass through this Wilderness without much regarding it, but fixing
your eyes on the happy Land, the heavenly Canaan, which you ought to look on as
your only Country? How hard is it to escape the danger of the evil Manners and
Customs which are in the World? The many temptations which you have to vanity
and folly, to pride and passion, to gluttony and drunkenness, to luxury and
sensuality, and to other Vices, by the bad Examples of your Friends,
Neighbors, and other Acquaintances?

How great and difficult a work is it to resist the Devil, to quench his fiery
darts, to reject his suggestions, to discover his wiles and stratagems, to
watch against all his assaults, and vigorously to oppose his temptations, that
you may overcome him and triumph over him? Now, this is the work you have to
do: For we wrestle not (says the Apostle, Ephesians. 6.12.) against flesh and blood,
but against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness
of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places. How hard and
dangerous a Warfare must it needs be, that makes it necessary for you to take
the whole Armor of God, that you may be able to withstand in the evil day, and
having done all, to stand?

How hard a work is it to read, and hear, and meditate, to examine your selves,
to pray to God, and to praise him, to partake of the holy Sacrament, and to
perform all other Acts of Devotion and Piety, as you ought to do?

How great a work is it to love God above all things, to love him with all your
Soul and Heart, and with all your strength and might, and to keep your selves
in the Love of God, that it may be in you a powerful Spring and Principle unto
all good actions, that you may be thereby sweetly constrained to do and to
suffer whatever is his holy Will and Pleasure?

Is it not a great work to perform aright all those Duties which you are bound
to do in your several relations and capacities? To instruct, to admonish, to
reprove, and to comfort others, and to do every thing you can for the good of
Men's Souls and Bodies? Let no Man (says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10.24.) seek his
own, but every Man another wealth. And, Chap. 13.5. Charity seeks not its
own, that is, not only its own; it seeks not its own to the prejudice of
another; but it endeavors to promote the happiness and welfare of others. The
charitable Person has an eye to the good and benefit of other Men, as well as
his own gain and advantage.

And besides all this, you ought to ^ave so much Zeal for the Glory of God, and
the good of Souls, as to endeavor to do somewhat which may ^ave a lasting
effect and influence not only in the present time, but in the time to come: You
ought to contrive by all means to propagate Religion, to do somewhat which may
bear fruit for the honor of your Maker and Redeemer, when you are laid in the
Grave.

From all which you may see what a great and difficult work you have to do in
the World, and how great need you have to redeem time, and to lose as little of
it as is possible. How necessary is it for you to begin your work betimes, and
to be constant in the pursuit of it, In the Morning to sow your Seed, and in
the Evening not to withhold your hand? What a madness is it to have your work
to begin when your time is almost at an end, when there are but a few sands in
your Glass? You who have so long a Race to run, and so much bad Way to pass
through, and who are so weak, and have so little strength to stir one foot, to
do, or say, or think any thing that is good, have you not great need to set out
in good time, and to continue unwearied in your course, all the day, that you
may at last receive the glorious prize? Ought you not (forgetting those things
that are behind, and reaching forth unto those things which are before) to
press toward the mark, for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ
Jesus, Phil. 3.13,14. Arise therefore from your sloth and laziness, and run and
be not weary; and walk, and do not faint. Pray to God to hold up your goings in
his paths, that your footsteps may not slide, to strengthen your weak hands,
and confirm your feeble knees, to draw you that you may run after him, and
follow him fully. Beg of him, that he would be at your right hand to direct and
defend you, that he would perfect his strength in your weakness, and would give
you in all things both to will and to do, according to his good pleasure; that
when you meet with enemies in your way, he would teach your hands to war, and
your fingers to fight; and that his Grace may be sufficient for you.

4. Motive, from the Account you must give how you spend your Time.
Fourthly, Consider that you must give an account of your time, how you spend
and employ it. God has appointed a day wherein he will judge the World in
Righteousness, by his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, who is to come from Heaven
very unexpectedly and suddenly, in a most dreadful and terrible manner, with
Power and great Glory, in the Clouds of Heaven, in flaming fire, with ten
thousands of his holy Angels, with a shout, with the voice of the Archangel,
and with the Trump of God. He shall send his Angels, and they shall gather
together his Elect from the four Winds, from one end of Heaven to the other.
The Throne shall be set, and all Nations shall be gathered before him. The
Books shall be opened, and the hidden things of darkness shall be brought to
light; the counsels of the heart shall be made manifest; and every work shall
be brought into Judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good or bad.
There shall be no need of Witnesses against the guilty, nor of Racks and
Tortures to extort their Confessions: Every Man's own Conscience shall be
instead of a thousand Witnesses. Then shall the Judge pass Sentence on every
Man according to his works. The righteous shall be absolved, and shall receive
the reward of everlasting Life and Glory: They shall be made partakers of a
Crown of Glory which fades not away, and of a Kingdom that cannot be shaken.
But the wicked shall be cast into utter darkness, where there is weeping and
gnashing of teeth, where the Worm dies not, and where the fire shall never be
quenched: Where they shall continue for ever deprived of the Favor and Love of
God, and exposed to the insupportable load of his anger and displeasure.

You profess to believe these things, and therefore ought you not so to live,
and so to husband your time, that when the Judge comes, he may not find you
idle, nor doing such things as are to his dishonor?

You may by the following Similitude, conceive somewhat concerning the
different thoughts of good and bad Men, upon such a sudden appearance of the
Judge. Suppose a Prince going into a far Country, should call together his
Servants, appointing them severally their work till his return (which he tells
them will be unexpected) and promising great rewards of Houses, and Lands, and
honorable Employments, to the faithful and obedient Servants; but threatening
severe punishments, and torments, and a terrible death, to the unfaithful and
disobedient. If after his departure some of the Servants mind their business,
observing, as well as they can, what their Master required them to do: Others,
without any regard to his Commands, take no thought of their business, but are
idle, and eat and drink with the drunken, and smite their fellow Servants, and
both by their words and deeds dishonor their Lord. You may easily imagine how
differently these Servants will be affected when he returns suddenly and
unexpectedly. The good Servants will be glad and rejoice at his coming, and
will meet him with great cheerfulness and confidence, as expecting the
accomplishment of his Promises, and being conscious to themselves of having
done their Duty honestly and faithfully, of having carried themselves, as they
ought to have done, during his absence: But the naughty and wicked Servants,
must needs be filled with shame and confusion upon the Coming of their Lord, so
as not to be able to look him in the face; There is no other thing which they
can do, but to endeavor to fly from his presence, that they may not fall under
the weight of his terrible displeasure.

In this manner our Lord and Master Jesus, before he left the World, gave Rules
and Commands to his Servants how to employ themselves, and what to do till his
return. He promised Rewards to all who should believe and obey; and threatened
the unbelievers, and the disobedient with heavy Punishments, and most dreadful
Judgments. When he comes again in the great Day to judge the World, the godly
shall meet him with great hope and assurance, of obtaining the end of their
Faith, even the Salvation of their Souls. But the wicked and unbelievers shall
be full of horror and confusion, and shall cry, though in vain, to the Mountains
to fall on them, to hide them from the face of their Judge, who will be a
consuming Fire to all the workers of iniquity, and will in no wise clear the
guilty.

Now do you desire heartily and sincerely to escape everlasting Condemnation,
and to obtain a glorious Reward in the Day of your Accounts? Then you must
study to redeem the time, and to make use of all opportunities of doing good:
You must not be slothful in your great business, but fervent in Spirit, serving
the Lord, knowing that your labor shall not be in vain in the Lord.

You see how the Men of the World bestir themselves, when there is but a small
appearance and probability of gain and advantage. The Merchants make use of
every favorable opportunity to buy and sell; they go early to Market, that
they may not lose a good occasion; and yet after all, they may be, and are
frequently disappointed, and make a very bad bargain. But the Christian, who
redeems his time to buy Wisdom, is sure to find it. They who seek me early,
shall find me, Prove. 8.17.

The Mariners wait for a favorable Gale, a fair and seasonable Wind, to go to
Sea: And when it blows accordin to their wishes they are sure not to lose one
moment. Their desire of gain, and their hopes of a prosperous Voyage, makes
them venture. And yet after all, they may, and often do suffer shipwreck, and
lose their goods and their lives too. But the Christian who redeems his time,
is in no such danger; he is sure to arrive safely at the Harbor of everlasting
Rest, after all the storms and tempests, which he meets with in the boisterous
Sea of this World.

The Husbandmen wait for a good season to Plough, and Sow, and to do all other
things belonging to their Employment; and when the time is favorable, they are
sure to make use of it. The desire and hopes they have of a Harvest, of a
fruitful Crop, quickens their endeavors, and excites their industry. And yet
after all, they may be disappointed. Their Corn may be drowned by violent
Rains, or scorched and burnt up with violent Heat, or eaten up and consumed by
Insects, Fowls, or Beasts. But the Christian who sows in tears, shall reap in
joy, Psalm. 126.5,6.

You see that Men, who run a Race, strive with great earnestness to gain the
Prize, to obtain that, which ofttimes is of no very great value. And yet some
of those who run come behind, and are disappointed of their hopes. But the
Christian runs not uncertainly; he is sure to obtain not a corruptible Crown,
but an incorruptible, 1 Cor. 9.25.

Again, you see that Men who besiege a City or a Castle, wait for all
advantages, and are sure not to neglect a favorable occasion of making an
Assault, and surprising the Enemy The hopes of getting rich Spoils, of gaining
Honor and Renown, makes them resolute and valiant. And yet it often happens,
that they lose their lives in the Attempt; or are taken Captive by those whom
they did hope to overcome and subdue. But he who fights the good fight of
Faith, is sure to lay hold on eternal Life. He who fights under Christ's
Banner, and who has him for his Captain, is sure to obtain the Victory over all
his Enemies.

The Conclusion.
I shall conclude this Discourse with what is written by St. Peter, 2 Epist.
Chap. 3. verse. 10,11, etc. The day of the Lord will come as a thief in the
night, in the which the Heaven shall pass away with a great noise, and the
Elements shall melt with fervent heat, the Earth also, and the works that are
therein, shall be burnt up. Seeing then that all these things shall be
dissolved, what manner of Persons ought you to be in all holy Conversation and
Godliness; Looking for, and hastening unto the coming of the day of God,
wherein the Heavens being on fire shall be dissolved, and the Elements shall
melt with fervent heat? Nevertheless we, according to his promise, look for new
Heavens, and a new Earth, wherein dwells righteousness. Wherefore (beloved)
seeing that ye look for such things, be diligent, that ye may be found of him
in peace, without spot, and blameless.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS OF Advice to Children.
THE Introduction. 1 1. Duty of Children, to Honor their Parents. And how they
are are to Honor them. 2 The Poverty of Parents does not exempt Children from
this Duty. 6

Against those who dishonor their Parents. 7

2. Duty of Children, to obey their Parents, and hearken to their Instructions.
10 Against stubborn and disobedient Children. 14

3. Duty, to be faithful to their Parents, and not to dispose of their goods
without their consent. 16 Against unfaithful and treacherous Children. 18

4. Duty of Children, to be determined by their Parents as to their Calling. 20
Against Children who neglect this Duty. 22

5. Duty of Children, not to suffer themselves to be bestowed in Marriage
against their Parents will. 23 Against those Children who neglect this Duty. 26

6. Duty of Children, to submit to their Parents Reproofs, and Chastenings. 27
Against Rebellious Children. 28

7. Duty of Children, to love their Parents; and how they are to express their
Love. 31 Against unkind and unnatural Children. 35

8. Duty of Children, to pray for their Parents. 36 Against Cursers of Parents.
37

The Duties of Children toward their Deceased Parents. 38 1. Duty, they ought
to bury them decently. 38 2. Duty, to fulfill their last Will. 40 3. Duty, to
call to mind their good Advices, and to follow their good Examples. 40 4. Duty,
to do what they can lawfully, to suppress Evil Reports concerning them. 42 5.
Duty, to retain a firm kindness for their Friends. 43 Against Children who
neglect these Duties. 44
Motives to excite Children to do these things. 1. Motive, from the Authority
of him who commands them to do these things. 46 2. Motive, from the Promise
made to those who do their Duty. 49 3. Motive, from the Example of our Blessed
Master. 53 4. Motive, from the Examples of some Heathens. 56
The Conclusion, showing how Children ought to improve what has been said. 60
The Duties of Children to their Step-Parents. 70 Some Motives to stir up
Children to be Dutiful to them. 72

Against those who are undutiful toward their Step-Parents. 74


THE CONTENTS OF The Discourse about the Right Way of Improving our Time.
THE Introduction. 79 The Text explained. 80 How Time is to be redeemed. 1.
Time is to be redeemed from sleep. 82 2. It is to be redeemed from dresing and
adorning the Body. 86 3. It is to be redeemed from eating and drinking. 90 4.
It is to be redeemed from gaming. 92 5. It is to be redeemed from visiting. 97
6. Time is to be redeemed from Worldly Business. 105 Short and ferv^nt
Ejaculations, even in Time of Business recommended. 109

7. It is to be redeemed from idleness. 111 8. It is to be redeemed in sacred
and religious Perfomrances, by doing them in the best manner. 114.
Some Motives to Excite you to do these things. 1. Motive, from the shortness
of your Time. 125 2. Motive, from the uncertainty of your Time. 129 3. Motive,
from the greatness and difficulty of the work you have to do. 138 4. Motive,
from the account you must give how you spend your Time. 145
The Conclusion. 152
FINIS.

